The true and perfect copy of a godly Sermon, preached in the Minster at
Lincoln, by the reverend Father in God, Thomas L. Bishop of Lincoln the. 28.
of August. ANNO. 1575.

Imprinted at London by Henry Middleton for Rafe Newberie, dwelling in
Fleetestrete alitle above the Condite.

To the Reader.
When I perceived the earnest good will of some, which took pains very
busily to get this sermon so exquisitely penned, as it was pithilie spoken,
and had therwithal had the view of the half (and as it were the maimed copy)
of the same more zealously then skilfully collected: I (into whose hands by
the means of a friend this true and perfect copy came) thought my self to
be blame vvorthie, if I should deny to further the honest desire of welmeaning
christians. The excellency of the thing made many men to request it, and the
desire of many made me to print it, hoping that among many some vvil take
profit by it* fare well.

A Sermon no less godly then necessary, preached in the Minster at Lincoln
by the reverend Father, Thomas Cooper, Bishop of Lincoln on the xxviii. day
of August, 1575. Treating on the xvi. Chapter of Matthewe verse. 26. 27. as
follows.
QVid prodest homini si totum Mundum lucratus fuerit and animae suae iacturam
etc. The last day (dearly beloved) you heard how sweetly gently and lovingly
our savior Christ spoke unto us, and with most tender and ^inde heart called
us to follow him, and assured us to have care John. 14. 15.
of our salvation. If you love me (said he) keep my commandments: assuring
us withal of his singular graces and benefits of his holy spirit, and that he
would not only teach us, and be our guide, but that he and his Father would
come and dwell in us, and so make our frail bodies, as it were, the Temple of
the blessed Trynitie, And not only that he would make his dwelling place in us,
but also abide with us for ever, that we might by him enjoy eternal life.
These sweet allurements should not only move the heart of Christians to piety
and godliness, but also cause us to have an earnest and careful consideration
of our souls health and not to neglect this time of grace whereinthe long
suffering of God does mercifully call us to repentance. But lamentable it is,
and it would make any true Christian heart bleed to consider, that the most
part of us are not only so careless and negligent, but so dull of hearing, and
so heard hearted, as we take no heed of gentle speech, we be not moved with
sweet allurements, yea, we be so a sleep in security as no sound or noise of
Gods mercy will wake us out of our deadly flomber.

Wherefore seeing mercy and mildness will not prevail with our careless
minds, seeing sweet and gentle speech will not waken our sleepie and sluggish
hearts, we must be contented this day to hear him make terrible proclamation
of his justice, and to put us in mind of that dreadful danger, that we shall
fall into, unless we speedely have regard unto our souls. What does it avail
a man (says he) if he win the whole world and loose his own soul, for it
shall come to pass that the son of man etc. The sum of Christ's speech is
this. The son of man assuredly shall come with mighty power to judge the
world, and give to every man according to his deserts: therefore it behooves
you to have care of your souls. This short argument comprehends great and
ample matter, of some part whereof I mean at this time by Gods sufferance to
speak, and first of the Antecedent, and then of the conclusion. First therefore
I will let you understand that the day of judgment shall be, and that
speedely. Secondly how and after what sort it shall be. And then will I add the
conclusion, how we should have care of our souls and prepare our selves for
the coming of that day.

That there shall be a judgment, If there were no more places in the whole
scripture, this one might be sufficient, especially if we consider who it is
that speaks it, that is, Christ our Savior, Matt. 16.
the Son of God and truth it self. It shall come to pass (says he) that
the son of man shall come in the glory of the Father with his Angels, and
then shall he give to every man according to his doings. But beside this
testimony the holy Ghost in sundry places of the Scripture bears witness to
the same. Now (says S. Paul) God denounces to al men in all places that Act.
17.
they should repent, because he has set a day wherein he vvil by that man,
whom he has appointed, judge the world in righteousness. And again: we
al shall appear before the judgment seat of Christ that every man Romans 14.
may yield to God an account for him self. And to the Corinthians: we must 2.
Cor. 5.
al appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive
the works of his body according to that he has done, be it good Dan. 7.
Zach. 14 Mat. 25. 26. John. 5. Apoc. 1. 2. Pet. 3. 1. Cor. 15.
or badde.

But what should I stand in rekoning up of many testimonies seeing the holy
Scriptures are full of them? And therefore the Apostles of Christ, and after
the^ the holy Fathers of the first Church have laid it down as a necessary
article of Christian faith, the denying or doubting whereof must needs subvert
al Christian religion, and make us the most miserable of al men.

Wherefore Christians that have feeble and wavering faith, in these miserable
and dangerous days, must seek by all godly means to strengthen their
consciences herein, Whereunto this reason following must be of great weight and
importance with all them that have any sense of God.

The Prophets of God many hundred years before Christ came in flesh, denounced
unto the world, that the true Savior Christ Jesus should be sent to work
the redemption of mankind, and descriueth his Conception, his Nativity, the
place and manner of his birth, his state and condition in the world, finally his
death, his resurrection and ascension. All which things we see have infallibly
come to pass many years since. Therefore those things, that they have
prophesied of the last day, and of his coming to judgment, must also prove as
true, and as certainly in due time come to pass. But happily many be so far
gone in heathenishe infidelity, that they believe not the Scriptures, yea they
will scoff and scorn at this talk, and think it is no better tha^ a bug to
fear babes withal. Yea and these happyly shall be in no small place and
countenance in the world. For the world is so great with them, that they forget
God altogether. Of these speaks S. Peter. There shall come (says he) in 2.
Pet. 3.
the latter days scorners, vvalking after their own lust, and saying, where
is the promise of his coming? For since the fathers slept, all things continue
a like from the beginning of the creation. Who hears not such voices spread
commonly among the ioliest sort of men in this world, or if many do not hear
the^, who is it, y^ by the obstinate contempt of Gods holy word, the disdain
of his messengers, and by the unbridled looseness of men's lives, may not
justly gather, that this opinion is in the hearts of very many? But I will
answer them as S. Peter in effect does immediately following, that is, that
heaven and earth does so long remain, because they are preserved by the word
of their almighty Creator and maker, who as by his word he made it of
nothing, so, when he shall appoint the time, it shall end and perish, for the
same word, that had power to make the world of nothing: has also like power,
when it shall seem good, to dissolve it. For pro^e here of: the world
continued from the first creation, until the general deluge of Noah, being
appointed by the determined decree of Gods holy providence that it should so
do, and when the same almighty word of God had said, that for sin he would
destroy the whole world with water, it was without stay performed. Therefore
seeing the same providence by his holy spirit has said also that in the end
it shall be consumed with fire, the same word shall as assuredly be veryfied.
For Mat. 5.
heaven and earth shall perish and pass away in vanity, but the word of God
shall not perish, but that every jot thereof shall be performed. But, as I
have said, these men make small account of Gods word, I will therefore leave
Christians, and turn my self to Heathens and Paganes, for such are these
scorning and loose Epicures of whom S. Peter speaks, although they hide
themselves under the cloakes of Christians. I ask them therefore, whether they
believe there is a God or no? If they will say no: For the foolish has said
in his heart, there is no God: Then will I, will them to behold the whole
world, and the marvelous workmanship thereof. The Sun, the Moon, the
stars and planets, with the wonderful moving and course of the same, the
earth, the water, the air, and all the beautiful furniture thereof, beasts,
trees, plants, fowls, fyshes, rain, hail, thunder, lightning, with the
residue of Gods marvelous works in his creatures, and the manner of growing,
breeding, and increasing of the same, and undoubtedly the almighty power, the
exceeding wisdom and inestimable goodness that shall appear in these
things, must needs convince them in their own consciences that there is a
God, which in so exceeding and goodly manner has framed them. Yea, if he be
worthy the name of a man, let himself consider but the framing of a little babe
in his mothers womb, from seed to skin, sinews, veins, arteries, bones,
flesh, life and reasonable soul, and very reason it self will tell him, that
it is an everlasting power that does it. For the weighing thereof has
co^uinced the consciences of great learned Philosophers, that have striued to
persuade them selves the contrary. Oh will they say, these are done by course of
nature.

Why, and what is that they call Nature? or what is it, that does direct that
course? is it any thing else then the finger of God working in his creatures?
Seneca an heathen Philosopher can witness so much. Seeing then there must
needs be a God, let them reason thus with themselves. If there be a God, he
must needs be a just God, and the office of justice is to reward them that be
good, and to punish them that be evil. For this direction the same God by
nature has imprinted in us. But in this life, although God oftentimes show
some notable examples of his justice, in rewarding the good, and punishing the
evil, yet most commonly the wicked do prosper and flourishe, as David in
sundry places complayneth, and co^trarywise the faithful and godly are
afflicted. In so much that S. Paul 2. Tim. 3.
says, who so ever will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall be sure to suffer
persecution, and therefore it is truly said, Crux comes euangelij, the cross
is the usual companion of the Gospel. Yea such is the misery and trouble of
good men in this world that Saint Paul says, if there be not a resurrection
of 1. Cor. 15.
the dead, and another life after this, Christians are of all other most
miserable. Christ him self in many places tells his faithful and blessed
Apostles, and under their names all other true Christians, that they should
not in this world be so sure of any thing as of affliction, trouble, and
persecution. Wherefore it must needs follow as a most necessary consequent,
that after this life there must be a judgment, in which men according to the
infallible justice of God, must receive as Christ says in this place,
according to their doings, be it good or bad. This reason has persuaded the
most part of ye heathen Philosophers, that the soul of man is immortal, and
receives after this life either reward or punishment. Yea, in persuasion
hereof, some with their own hands have dispatched them selves out of this
life, as it is written of Cato Vticensis, and other: And a great number upon the
same hope of a better life after this, have constantly contemned death, and
cherefully received the same. Seeing then heathen persons that never had the
true knowledge of God, by the very leading of humane reason have grown to an
assured persuasion, that after this life there should be a judgment for the
rewarding of the godly, and punishing of the wicked: What a dreadful
in^idelitie is it in Christians to seem any thing to doubt of the same?

Seeing therefore it is by Gods holy word, and by reason convinced that there
shall be a judgment after this life, it remains that we as certainly
understand, that it shall come to pass very shortly. And for proof hereof let
us first call to mind the similitude and borrowed speeches, that the holy Ghost
uses in the scriptures, to declare the sudden coming thereof.

Christ himself and S. Paul compares it to a thief that comes suddenly in
the night, when the master and family thinks of no danger, but that they may
quietly take their rest. If the Matt. 24.
householder had knovve^ (says christ) at what hour the thief would have
come, he vvoulde have vvatched and not suffered his house to have been broken up.
VVatch you therefore and be ready, for the son of man vvil come you know
not at what hour. S. Paul resembles the coming of the last day not only
to the sudden assault of a thief in the night, but to the throws of a woman
traueiling with child. For this he says: When they shall say unto you peace,
peace and all is well, then suddenly shall destruction come upon them as the
panges of a woman in travail, and they shall not escape it.

In which words he notes ye quietness and secure peace of confidence and good
estate y^ men shall have at the later day. Christ Matt. 24. co^pareth it to a
flashe of lightening coming from the East unto the West, then which, you know
nothing can be more sudden, for it is done in the twinkling of an eye.
Therefore, Derely beloved, you must be assured that in a moment, yea, even in
the twinkling of an eye, when you be in most security, the last day shall
oppress you. And therefore no man is hable to assign the day, the month or
the year, as some presumtuously have Act. 1.
taken upon them. For Christ himself says, it is not known to the Angels of
heaven, no nor the son of man in that he is man: but to his Godheade nothing
is unknown. The wisdom of God has kept this secret from all men, thereby to
stir up the faithful always to be in a readiness. For such is the
frowardness of our corrupt nature that if we understand of any delay, we
abuse the patience and long sufferance of God to our own further condemnation.
We ought therefore so to frame our selves in all godliness as if every day
should be the last day of the world, or at the least the last day of our life.

And although the hour, day or year of Christ's last coming be to us
unknown, yet has he given us certain tokens whereby we may assuredly know
when it approaches or draws nigh. For thus he writes: Learn a Mat. 24. Mar.
13. Luke. 19.
parable of the fig tree when his branche is yet tender, and the leaves
sprung, ye know that summer is nigh. So likewise when ye shall see these
things come to pass, be ye sure that it is nere even at the doors. And
truly, dearly beloved there is nothing mentioned there by Christ to come
before the last day, or by the holy Ghost in any other place of the Scriptures
but it is evidently even to the eye of al faithful people fulfilled, so that
for any thing that we know to the contrary, we may look for it even this year,
even this month, even this day, even this hour, and I beseech almighty God
deeply to impresse this cogitation into our hearts, that we may say with S.
Hierome Whether we eat or whether we drink, or whatsoever we do, we
may seem to hear Matt. 24. Mar. 13. Luke. 19.
this voice of the Archangel continually sovvning in our ears, Surgite mortui
venite ad iudicium. Arise ye dead and come to judgment. In the Gospel Christ
first notes these signs and tokens that shall appear before the later day,
in the sun, the moon, the stars and planets, in the air, in the water, in
the earth, in the Church, in the state of principalities and kingdoms, in the
life and behavior of me^, which if I should stand to rehearse particularly,
and for proof add the testimony of times and witness of histories in this
latter age, an whole day would not suffice for ye declaration thereof. Have we
not had within this few years above an hundred eclypses of the Sun and of the
Moon? have we not seen many Cometes and other strange and wondrous fiery
impressions in the air? have we not had many horrible tempests of wind,
rain, hayle, snow, thunder and lightening* to the great hurt of man and
beast? What shall I say of the greatdeluges of water, at Naples, at Rome, in
Germany, in Flaunders, in England? snow has fallen twenty Cubits deep,
the Sea about Pontus has been frosen to the thickenesse of thirty cubits,
Earthquakes, in Italy diverse, in Greece, in Asia, in Barbary, in Spain, in
England and many other places. As for monsters both by sea and by land, of men
and of beasts, a marvelous number* ^^^ mainie of which are recorded and put in
writing with the note of their times, places and signs, and of these manner of
figures before spoken sundry have lighted here with us in this Realm, so that
we can not say but God forewarneth us by the as deeply as he has done a^^e
Nation. But these things are passed away with slight consideration, because
they have causes Incident to nature whereby they may be thought to come. But
christians ought not so lightly to let flippe those signs and forewarninges
which our merciful Lord and gracious Savior the trueest Prophet that ever was
has given us to stir up our faith and expectation of his last coming, that
our master when he comes suddenly may not find us as lewd servants
sleeping in security, and contempt of God and godliness, and so being taken
be cast into that place, where shall be weping and gnashing of teeth, for ever to
continue in y^ portion of hypocrites. Who is ruler of that nature? and disposer
and governor of those second causes, unto which they attribut these
extraordinary events? is it not our Lord and God maker of heaven and earth,
who guydeth al things that be done, not only by nature, but suchs also as
seem to us to fall by chance? For if a sparowe fall net, or a little worm of
the earth creep not, or a rude Ass wander not without his certain
providence, much more ought we to believe that so strange things as I have
spoken of before, are not disposed by any other power to fall in these or those
days but by his only, to veryfie the promises, threatenings and forewarnings,
that his son our Savior has given us of his last coming to judgment. By
the like contempt and misinterpreting of those signs and wondrous tokens that
God sent before the destruction of Jerusalem, the stubbourne Jews by gods
just judgment, hardened their hearts, and foaded forth themselves with vain
hope until the very day that the wrath of God in most dreadful manner did
light upon the^, with the utter destruction of their city and desolation of
their people. There appeared a Comet and other fiery impressions, but they
assigned the causes to nature as we do. A man seven years together never
ceased crying, VVo be to Jerusalem, vvo be to Jerusalem, and they imputed it to
madness.

The great brazen gate of the temple which twenty men might scant open, being
fast barred and locked, without hands sundry times rushed open, and they
said it was a sign of Gods favor and of great prosperity to come unto them,
but in the end, as I have said, they were surprised with most miserable
desolation. Christians should beware by their folly. For surely I think that
the end of the people of the Jews, and the destruction of their city and
Temple is a type and figure of the last day, and of those things that shall
then happen in the Church, as I could more largely declare if time would
suffer me. But because this kind of signs is so neglected with mante, and
find such shifts in man's reason to avoid the signification of them, for the
assured proof of the approaching of the last day, I will rest only upon three
or four places of the word of God, which shall bring so evident testimony
thereof, as no man that has any sense of a true christian, and is not
altogether carried away with the love of the world, and luftes of the flesh can
with safe conscidence deny it. The first is Daniel. To whom when it pleased
God in a vision Dan. 7.
to declare that state of the world that should be even to the end thereof, by
the figure of the four beasts, he described y^ four Empires, that should
follow one the other before the end. The Babylonians by a lion, which should
be destroyed and eaten up by the Bear of the Persians, and that consumed and
wasted by the four Leopards of the Gretians, and that rent and torn, and
trampled under foot by the terrible monster of the Romans, after which there
is no mention made of any other Empire but only that little horn, that grew
out of the Romans Empire to great might and power, by which is meant the king
dome of Antichrist that shall fight against the Saints of God in the latter
end of the world. Which kingdom of Antichrist now this many years has
shown it self in the power of the Turk and of the Pops. Now derely beloved
weigh these things. The Empire of the Babylonians continued not long after this
vision, but was subdued by the Persians. The Empire of Persia continued. 231.
years and was conquered by Alexander and the Gretians. The Gretian empire in
Alexander and his successors divided into four kingdoms prospered about 300.
years, and after great and long wars was consumed by the Romans which in
growing and declyning has now continued above a thousand years and an half
and is come even to the last pinche, even to the feet and toes mixed with
brass and claye as the same Daniel descriueth it Chap. 9. to note the
weakness and small strength thereof in the end. For who sees not now y^
the empire is almost nothing, and consists only of a few free Cities in
Germanye? For all the residue, it has left unto the world, as all men may
see, the power of the Turk and of the Pope which both have risen, and
continued very near about one time. For Mahomet in Arabia, and the Pope in
Rome began their usurpation within twelve years together. Now immediately in
the end of the Roman Empire and power of Antichrist, Daniell describes the
coming of Christ to judgment. And I beheld (says Daniell) Dan. 7.
until the thrones were set up, and the ancient of days did sit, and so
forth, in such sort as you shall after hear in the description of the last
judgment. Seeing therefore experience of times has taught us the truth in
the former part of this prophecy, touching the rising, succession, and decay
of other kingdoms, we must needs believe, if we have any Christian faith in
us, y^ the same spirit of God will perform the like truth in the residue, and
that the end of the world, and the last judgment shall follow upon the
decay of the Roman Empire, and by the coming of our Savior Christ, utterly
destroy and pull down the power of Antichriste.

The second testimony of the holy Scriptures, for the aproching of the last
day, in S. Paul to the Thessal. Let no man deceive you, says he, by 2. These.
2.
any means. For the Lord shall not come, except there come a falling away
first, and that the man of sin be revealed first, the son of perdition.
what does S. Paul mean think you by falling away? undoubtedly a great and
wonderful reuolting, and falling from the faith of Christ.

Now call to your remembrance that within a mean number of years after
Christ's ascension, all the three parts of the world submitted them selves to
the faith of Christ, as the hystories do evidently declare. All Asia, even to
the uttermost parts of the Indians. All Affrike, even to the extreme borders
of the Aethiopes. All Europe without exception of any part. Add also the Isles
about the main land, among which we of this Realm of England are. Conceive
well in your mind this general profession of Christian faith, that then was
over all the earth, and then view and consider in your minds, the state of
Christianity at this day, and undoubtedly you shall perceive a marvelous
reuolting and falling from the faith of Christ, to have been now a good many
years. The furthermost parts of Asia eastward, fallen again either to
heathenishe Idolatry, or to such superstition as does not much differ from it.
All the residue of Asia, together with a great part of Affrike, add also no
small portion of Europe under the Turk, revolted to the wicked blasphemy of
Mahomet: so that the countries of the world that now profess Christ, are not
the tenth part of them that before time have been christian. Yea and among them
that profess the christian religion in Europe, for the more part a number of
years have been carried away with the superstition and idolatry of the
Antichrist of Rome. In so much that if Christ do now come, in comparison of
the multitude of miscreants, he shall find true that he spoke in the Gospel:
when the son of man Luke. 18.
shall come, do thou think he shall find any faith in the earth? Seeing
therefore we see now y^ general apostasy and reuolting from the faith now in
our time fallen out, the want whereof principally S. Paul accounts in his
time to be the stay of Christ's coming, we must needs be persuaded that it
can not be far off.

As touching the latter part of S. Paul's words to the Thessal. Of the
revealing of the man of sin, the son of perdition, which is an adversary
and is exalted above all that is called God, so that he as God, sits in the
Temple of God, shevving him self that he is a God: because the full discourse
for the proof of the coming of this Antichriste would require a long
process, and more then this time would bear, for the trial thereof, call to
your remembrance this brief note. That since the declination and decay of the
Roman Empire, for the space of certain hundred years, you have seen even in
the church of God, even in Italy, even in the seat royal of the Empire of
Rome, a certain power, which under the pretense of holiness, has advanced it
self above al kings and princes of the earth, that has claymed the full power
of both swords, and to that purpose has showed it self in open procession,
the one day in his pontifical ornaments, and the next in armor like a prince:
that has also auaunted, that he has al power immediately from God, and all
kings of the earth by mediation from him: that has put the same in practice by
deposing princes, and altring of titles at his pleasure in Arragon, in Naples,
in Sicilie in England, in France, in the Empire it self, and welnere in all
places of Christendom: that has had Emperors, Kings, and Princes to hold
his bridle, to go at his stirrup, to kiss his feet, to stand at the gates
of his city whole days together barefooted, and could not have grace to come
to his presence, that has driven the noblest Prince in the earth, to put his
head under his feet, and he in the mean time with outrageous blasphemy,
caused this verse of the Psalter to be song: Super aspidem and Basiliscum
ambulabis, conculcabis Leonem and Draconem. As if he should have said, behold
here is that proud Antichrist, that the Scriptures witnesses, should tread
under his feet the most noble state of Emperors, and in the fare of the
world, apply unto him self that verse which the Prophet meant of the son of
God, and savior of the world Christ Jesu. Call I say further to your
remembrance, that you have seen this power show him self as proudly toward
God, as he has done to princes of the earth, that he has called him self the
head of the universal church, Christ's Uicar in earth, that he has taken
upon him for money and bryberie, to sell remission of sins, to dispense with
most horrible vices against the law of God, to deliver from hell, to dismiss
out of purgatory, to command the Angels of heaven, to alter the ordinances
and institutions of Christ. That has suffered his parasites to proclaim that
he has a divine power in him, above the nature of man, that he can not err,
that he is another God in earth, that he is neither God nor man, but a monster
between both. These properties I say call to your consideration, and compare
them with the discriptions of Antichrist, made by the Prophets and Apostles,
and then dout, if you can, whether the man of sin, the son of perdition, be
come into the world or no, and consequently, whether the end of the world, and
the coming of the last dreadful judgment, be even at hand or no.

The third testimony is taken out of the words of Christ, Luke. 17. where he
says, As it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the day of the
son of man, they did eat and drink, they married vviues and were married,
even unto the day that Noe went into the Arc, etc. Likewise also as it was
in the days of Loath, they did eat, they did drink, they bought, they sold,
they planted, they builded, until the same day that Loath went out of Sodom,
and sodeinly it rayned fire and brimstone from heaven and destroyed them. Even
thus shall it be in the day that the son of man shall be revealed. etc. Why
you will say unto me it is no offense to eat, to drink, to marry, to plant,
to buy, to sell, to build: and those things have been used in all ages. True it
is that you say, neither does Christ this to reprove those things in them
selves, but in those words he notes the great security that was among men at
those days, and the excessive delight that they had in these pleasures and
ornaments of the world, reposing such confidence in them, as though the world
should for ever have continued, and as if there had been none other heaven to
have rested in but this. And in the trust hereof did they neglect the
preaching, warning and calling to repentance used by Noe and Loath, even until
Gods wrath came upon them: and even in like manner does Christ signify that it
should be in the end of the world. And when I pray you was there, since the
world was first made, so great security in sin, such contempt of
godliness, such confidence in worldly prosperity, such feasting,
banqueting, and dainty feeding, such gorgeousness in apparel, such
sumptuousness in building, such unseasonable marrying, such planting, such
building, such buying and purchasing, such raking and scraping together of
worldly pelf, as if men did determine to abide still upon the face of the
earth, or as if every man did strive to pass other in riot and sensuality,
and when they have consumed them selves with monstrous excess in all pleasure,
then not contented with that they have, by hook or by crook they pull from
other, even from the ministers of Christ, even from the church of God, even
from the prechers of the Gospel, and poor servants of God, which even among
the heathens have always had their honorable portion left unto the^. Wherefore
how they do esteem the true worship of God in these days, men do show, when
they declare such impiety toward his ministers. And when they are reproved
for these enormyties, it is so far off that they do repent and amend, that
they scoff and ieste, they rail and slander, they taunte and reprove, as if
they were at defiance with God and his messangers, or as if they had made a
covenant with death and with hell, to be out of their danger. But when they say
peace, peace, all is sure, then suddenly, as Paul says, shall destruction
come upon them, as the Deluge did upon the sons of me^ in the days of Noe,
and fire from heaven upon Sodom, in the time of Loath. For ever before the
horrible plagues of God, obstinate security, and contempt of Gods calling,
has gone before as a messanger, and showed it self in the life of men.

The fourth testimony of the speedy coming of the last day, is the words of
Saint Paul. 2. Tim. 3. Know you this (says he) that in the latter days
shall be perilous times, for men shall be lovers of them selves, covetous,
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, ungodly
without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, ryotous, fierce,
despisers of them that are good, traitors, headie, high minded, lovers of
pleasures, more then lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying
the power thereof.

Who would not think that Saint Paul did in spirit, foresee the manners of
this time, and these days into which we are fallen, and those wicked vices,
wherewith the world is now overwhelmed. What state of men is there in which most
of these vices do not show them selves, and that in such manner, as never in
any age the like? what slack and corrupt government in Magistrates? what
stubbournesse and disobedience in subjects? what pride and self liking in the
rich and wealthy? what spite and envy in the poor and beggarly? what
looseness and wantonness in youth, what covetousness and waywardness in
age? what cockering and evil ensample of life in parents? what dnnaturalnesse
and unkindness in children? what headynesse and fierceness in masters? what
negligence and untruth in servants? what craft, subtlety, and deceyte, what
counterfayting and dissymuling, what false and unjust dealing, almost in all
men? Truth and sincerity is banyshed, cousoning and falshoode is esteemed
wisdom, and christian simplicity is counted peeuishe folly. A man would in
these days marvel to hear of that plain dealing that in old time has been.
I have heard that the gyuing of a man's hand, should have assured his heart,
and tied his faith and trothe, but now all the bonds that man's wit can
devise, will scantly hold that which one couenanteth with another. If there
were no other argument, but the ripeness that sin and wickedness is now
grown unto, it should sufficiently prove that the glory of this world must
shortly fall and decay.

There is an old saying of much credit among the ewes, and is called dictum
domus Eliae, the saying of the schole of Elias, and is attributed to the son
of the widow, which Elias raised from death to life. The sum of it is, that
the world should remain six thousand years, that is, two thousand before
the law, two thousand under the law, and two thousand under Messiah. The first
four thousand we see by just computation fulfilled before Christ, of the
last two, one and more then an half is passed, now if we call to our
remembrance, that Christ him self has promised that for his elect sake,
because of the exceeding trouble, misery, and wickedness, the latter days
should be shortened, we shall easily gather, that the world has not many years
to continue, and how few we know not, for how much or how little he will
abridge them, we are uncertain.

Now seeing the proofs be so evident, that the last day can not be far of
(for seeing the fig tree leaves be spread, Summer must needs be at hand)
the next is (the more to move our dull hearts) diligently to consider, how
and in what manner it shall be. The story thereof Christ briefly comprehends,
Mat. 25. When the son of man (says he) shall come in his glory, and all the
holy Angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne of his glory, and
before him shall be gathered al nations, and he shall separate them one from
another, as the shephearde deuideth his sheep from the goats, and he shall
set the sheep on the right hand, but the goats on the left, and so forth as
there follows. Christ's first coming was with all meekness, lowlines and
simplicity, according to ye saying of the Prophet, Behold thy king comes to
thee meek, and sits Zach. 9.
upon an Ass. He came then to save sinners, and therefore he showed him self
altogether in mercy and gentleness, but his latter coming shall be with great
power, majesty and glory, for then he comes as a dreadful Judge, to reward
in justice the unrepentant sinners, that contemned his great mercies offered at
his first coming. But let us examine the manner of his coming somewhat more
particularly. After those signs and tokens, that go before his coming
(whereof I have already spoken) there be other also joined with the very time
of his latter appearing. The sun shall be darkened, the moon shall lose her
light, the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be
moved, the earth shall burn, the firmament shall melt away, and the last
trumpe shall blow, and the voice of the Archangell shall be heard, summoning as
it were all people, and sounding in their ears, Surgite mortui and venite ad
iudicium, arise you dead and come to judgment, which Matt. 24. 25 26. Mar.
13. Luke. 19.
voice S. Hierome thought he heard ever ringing in his ears. Then shall the
son of man appear in the clouds with great Majesty as is said, and the
dead shall rise, and they that be living, in the twinkling of an eye shall be
changed, and carried into the air to appear before the Lord, who comes to
judge the world in righteousness.

This manner of Christ his coming beside his own words in sundry places of
the Evangelists, is witnessed 2. These. 1.
by S. Paul. 2. These. 1. When the Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed from
heaven with the Angels of his power in flaming fire rendering vengeance unto
them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The very place whence he shall be revealed gives a great authority
and majesty unto his coming to judgment from heaven, says S Paul, that is,
from the seat and habitation of the eternal and everliving God, where is al
power, wisdom and justice. From thence, says he in another place, do we
look for our savior, the Lord Jesu. And the Angel, to the Disciples at the
ascension Phi. 3. Act. 1.
of Christ, Why stand you, says he, gasing up into heaven, this same Jesus
which is taken from you into heaven shall so come even as you have seen him go
into heaven.

And therefore all christians in their belief confess that Christ is ascended
up into heaven, from whence, say they, he shall come to judge the quick and
the dead.

In the witness of the Apostle above rehearsed the power and end of his
coming is noted, with the Angels of his power, says S. Paul, and to this
end, That he may be revenged on them that know not God, nor have not believed
his Gospel. Which thing must needs be most terrible to the wicked, as it is
in the same place more precisely noted. But of all other the Prophet Daniel
most gloriously discribeth the manner of his coming. I beheld Dan. 7.
(says he) til the thrones were set up, and the Ancient of days did sit,
whose garment was white as snow, and the hairs of his head like pure
wool, his throne was like fiery flame, and his vvheles as burning fire. There
issued forth before him a fiery stream, a thousand thousand ministered unto
him, and ten thousand stood before him, the judgment was set and the books
were opened, etc. First the Prophet says the Thrones were set up, whereby it
may appear there be more Thrones then one, and that this Judge shall have a
great number of assistances to be as witnesses of his justice against the
wicked, and these shall be the number of his saints, as it is witnessed in
sundry places of the Scriptures Verily verily I say unto you, says Christ,
That when the son of man shall sit in the throne of his majesty, you that
have follovved me in regeneration shall sit also upon twelve seats iudgig the
twelve tribes of Israel. This judge is noted by Daniel to be An old man with
his hair as white as wool, Thereby to signify the reverence, wisdom and
experience y^ is in him, and that Mat. 19.
he ca^ not let pass any thing by ignorance, error, or follye: his garments
as white as snow declare unto us his security, vprightnes and integrity in
judgment, not respecting any person nor being corrupted with favor, hatred or
money. The fiery stream e y^ issues forth before him, and the flaming throne
that he sits in, signify the dreadful force and pearsing strength of his
judgment which no creature is able to resist. As fire consumes all things and
is consumed of nothing, so does the straight judgment of God consume all the
wicked of the earth, For God, as the Scriptures say, is a consuming fire.

And the Prophet Esaias says, The Lord shall comme in fire, and his Esaias. 66.
chariot shall be like a vvhirle vvinde, that he may recompense his vengeance
in his wrath and his indignation in a flame of fire. For the Lord shall judge
all flesh with the fire and with his svvorde. The assistance of an infinite
number of saints and Angels set forth unto us the wonderful majesty and power
of the son of God in judgment, for if one Angel in one night were hable to
destroy 185000* of the host of Senacherib, of what inestimable power is he,
which has a thousand thousand, that is an infinite number of Angels and
Archangels, of powers and principalities, and dominions attending on him at his
commandment to execute what soever judgment he shall appoint them? The Books
that are laid open do descriue unto us the detection of al men's faults, and
the opening even of their secret thoughts and deeds. For the justice of God
has kept, as it were, a perfect register of al things eue^ of our idle thoghts
and words so that our consciences shall be at that day straightly burdened and
charged with them al.

Not much differinge from these words of the Prophet is that description of
Christ's coming which S. John uses in his Revelation. And I Apoca. 19.
savv heaven open and behold a white horse and he that fate upon him was
called Faithful and true, and in righteousness he does judge and make battle,
his eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns, and he had
a name written, that no man knew but himself. And he was clothed in a
vesture dieped in blood, and his name is called the word of God. And the
armies that were in heaven follovved him upon white horses clothed with
white and pure raynes. In this description the white horse issuing out of
heaven is the pure and sincere doctrine of the Gospel sent from God in these
latter days before the last appearing of Christ. For by ye preaching of the
Gospel as by an horse or chariot Christ is carried. He that sits on this
horse is Christ himself beeinge faithful in all his promises and very truth
it self, who comes to judge the world in righteousness and in battle by
force of truth to overcome Antichrist and all his enemies. His eyes like
flaming fire, declares his wrath and vehement displeasure against the
adversaries of his truth. He has many crowns upon his head, to declare that
he is king of kings, and Lord of Lords, that al power both in heaven and earth
is given to him and that it is in his power with the crown of glory to reward
all his faithful servants that have constantly fought under his banner against
the devil and Antichrist. His garment dieped in blood signifies that the
conquest of his enemies consists in his passion and sheading of his most
precious blood, for thereby sin was taken away, and the power of Satan
overthrown. The armies of heaven follovving him on white horses and
apparelled in white and pure reins: Be the number of his saints and faithful
professors of his Gospel which in this vale of misery have constantly fought
against the enemies of his truth. The sword that issues out of his mouth is
the word of God, and principally that two edged sword of his sentence at the
latter day, by which he shall pronounce on the one side, Go ye blessed of my
father and inherit the kingdom that has been prepared for you since the
foundation of the world, and co^trariewise unto the wicked ones on the left
hand, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire which is prepared for the
devil and his Angels.

By this description of the last judgment left unto us by the holy Ghost in
the scriptures of god we may know that at that day we shall not have to do with
a common and frail man, but with a most dreadful Lord and terrible Judge, y^
knows the very secrets of men's hearts, and judges according to perfect
righteousness: Whom (as Augustine says) neither favor can pervert, nor mercy
bend, nor money corrupt, nor satisfaction and repentance at that day can aswage.

Whose beauty and brightness is such, as darkeneth even the stars of
heaven, whose might is so great as it melts mountains and the whole frame of
the world before him, whose wisdom is so perfect that by it the wisell of the
world are intrapped in their own craftiness, whose purity is so excellent,
that in respect of it all things are unclean, whose justice is so exquisite,
that the very Angels are not able to abide that straight measure of it. Before
this God I say, before this Judge shall the whole world at that day appear,
and yield a most straight account of all things that ever they have done,
spoken, or thought. Oh dearly beloved, let us follow therefore the counsel
of that good. father Ephrem the Syrian, Preparemus nos sine macula inueniri in
terribili illo Christi examine, etc. Let us prepare our selves that in that
dreadful examination of Christ, we may be found without spot. For then al our
thoughts words and deeds, shall be reproved and convinced of corruption, yea
our idle talk, our lose and uncomely gestures, and all our smallest offenses
shall be laid to our charge. Yea those things wherein in this life we did put
our greatest pleasure and glory, shall then be unto us our greatest grief and
torment. Let us therefore in time repent, and before hand enter into a
straight account with our self, for as the same father adds, omnia dura, and
aspera and amara occurrent hijs qui poenitentiae tempus perdiderunt. All
things shall be hard, grieuons and unpleasant to them that leese the time of
their repentance in this life. In that day, says Bernarde, for the wicked to
hide them it shall be impossible, though they desire the mountains and rocks
to fall upon them, and to appear before the Judge, it shall be intolerable.
For in so great distress their own consciences shall torment them, and the
secrets of their heart shall vex them, while their own hearts shall force
them to be their own accusers, and with trembling spirits they shall stand,
looking for that most grievous and dreadful sentence, Go you cursed into
ever lasting fire. If there be any so obstinat, wicked, and forlorn in sin,
as he trembles not at the cogitation of these things: Let him imagine that
which shall be most certemly true, that he hears that hydeous sound of the
last trumpe and voice of the Archangell, summoning all flesh to the judgment
seat of God, that he sees the heavens melting with fire, and the whole world
burning about him, that above him he sees the son of God, coming with the
glorious army of his Saints and Angels, that before him he sees laid open
the book of all his wicked thoughts, words, and deeds, that within him he
feels the worm of his conscience gnawing with perpetual torment, that
beneath him he sees hell mouth ready to swallowe him, that he sees in every
quarter the Angels of God gathering together his elect, and rejecting him as a
wicked reprobate, that on his right and left hand he beholds cruel fendes
watching upon the sentence of the judge, to carry him to that place where shall
be perpetual flame without quenching, weeping and gnashing of teeth without
ending, darkness without light, grief without ease, sorrow without comfort,
where death shall be wished for and never obtained, where shall be nothing but
lothsomnesse, horror, stench, and that of all other shall be most grievous,
endless sense of the wrath of that God and judge, before whom he stands.

This manner of judgment is, as you see, most terrible, the speedy aproching
thereof is very certain, the signs and tokens can not deceive us, they are
uttered by the Prophet of God, by the Apostles of Christ, by Christ our
Savior, by the spirit of God, by truth it self that can not lie, we
therefore may be well assured, seeing al things to be performed, that the year
of our account is nigh, that that dreadful Judge is coming, that the day of
Gods wrath is at hand, and even in our necks we know not how soon. Therefore
I most heartily pray you, and in the fear of God and love of your selves,
desire you speedily to cast away the care of the world, the love of the
flesh, the delight of sensual pleasure and iolytie, which holds your
minds in such wicked and detestable security. Set before your eyes the image
of his coming in such Majesty and terror, think you hear continually the
voice of the Archangell sounding in your ears. If fear of punishment may
drive you to it, he is a severe Judge: If assurance of reward may encourage
you, he is a bountiful Lord: If hope of forgiveness, before hand asked, may
comfort you, he is a merciful Savior. Delay not therefore, nor loose not this
time of repentance.

Seeing then it is most certain there shall be a general judgment, and that
the time thereof must needs be very nighe, and that before a Judge of so
great Majesty, and the examination and account so straight, to al them that
shall neglect the time of their repentance: It behooves all that have any sense
of God, to be careful for their souls, and to prepare them selves for the
coming of that dreadful day. Our preparance consists in these three
things, whereof Christ him self warns us, Mar. 13. Cauete, Vigilate, ^rate.
Beware, watch, pray.

The first is a caveat or a thing to take heed of, for fear of that danger
that may come thereby. And what it is Christ had shown a little before. False
Christ's (says he) and false Prophets Mar. 13.
shall rise, and shall shevve signs and wonders to deceive, if it were
possible, even the very elect. Sed cauete, but take heed, behold, I have
shevven you all things before. This is that we must beware of in these latter
days. Of the like Christ puts us in mind, when he says in another place:
Bevvare of false Prophets which come Matt. 7.
unto you in sheep clothing, but inwardly they are ravening vvoulfes. There
can no more mischief and danger come to the people of God, then by false and
corrupt doctrine, for without true faith and religion, no holiness of life,
seem it to the world never so glorious, can be acceptable in the sight of
God. Among these false teachers principally we have to take heed of the
Papist, and of those sheep skins wherewith he wrappeth him self, least we
be deceived by them, let us lift up his goodly apparel, and we shall see
underneath, the panche of a greedy woulfe, and the claws of a cruel Lion.
Be not abashed then nor astonished, when you hear the goodly names of the
Catholic Church, the great multitude of such as be of their opinion, the
long continuance of many years. For if these had been good grounds of men's
consciences, they might well have served for the Jews and false teachers,
against the true Prophets of God in old time, and after for Annas and Cayphas,
against Christ him self and his Apostles. For where were the Prophets stain?
where was Christ put to death? where were the Apostles persecuted and killed?
was it not in Jerusalem the city of God? was it not among the Jews the chosen
people, and in deed, the church of God? had not they among them the law of
God and his ordinances? did not they cry against Jeremie, the Temple of God,
the Temple of God is with us, we have the covenant that God made to our
forefathers, even as now the papists do allege that the Church of God, the
Church of God is with the^, they can not err, they have the promises of
Christ, that his Spirit should never fail them. The false Prophets had a
thousand, for one that did follow the true Prophets. Yea, Elias thought that he
had been left alone. The Scribes and Pharisees in the end had a great number,
and in deed a general consent in comparison of that little number and sinall
flock that followed Christ and his Apostles. Therefore take heed of these
things, y^ you be not miscarried by them, they are but lamb skins, wherein
the wolf of Rome hydeth him self to deceive thee. Remember that all which say
they have Abraham to their father, are not by and by the true seed of Abraham.
Remember that the Scribes and Pharisees sometime sit in Moses chair, and bear
the countenance of the law of God. Remember that Saint Paul tells thee and
does give thee warning, that the son of perdition, Antichrist himself should
in the latter days sit in the Temple, that is, the Church of God. Remember
that the same Paul tells for certeintie, that in the latter 1. Tim. 4.
days should come certain teaching, the doctrine of devils, having their
consciences marked with an hot iron, forbidding to marry and to eat such
meats as God has prepared to be received with thanksgiving.

Consider whether the Pope has forbidden Priests to marry, and denounced it a
grievous sin if men do eat flesh upon certain days, and then gather
whether they be the Church of Christ, or under that color in deed the
Synagogue of Antichrist. Oh say they the doctrine of the Gospel now taught is a
new doctrine never heard of in y^ Church before these late years. This is not a
sheep skin (good people) but it is a venomous tuske of a poisonous Bore with
blasphemous lying, stricken into the Gospel of Christ thereby to wound it,
and make it hateful. But the Gospel that we teach is the same Gospel that was
first from the beginning by the Spirit of God reueiled to the Patriarchs, and
Prophets, and after spread into the world by Christ himself and his Apostles.
So that our doctrine is as ancient as the Prophets, as Christ himself, as his
Apostles, yea, as the world is ancient.

For it proceeded from God himself at the beginning, when he spoke to the
Serpent and said, That the seed of the woman should break the head of the
Serpent, That is, that the true Messiah should come of the seed of the woman,
and destroy the kingdom of siune and Satan. This Gospel was renewed unto
Abraham, and confirmed with the seal of circumcision. When he said, In thy
seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed, etc. This Gospel was
preached by Father Jacob, in his death bed saying, This scepter Genesis 49.
shall not depart from Judah, etc. Until Silo come and he shall be the
expectation of the Gentiles. This Gospel preached Moses also, The Lord thy God
(says he) to the children of Israel, shall raise up to thee a Prophet out of
thine own Deuteronomy. 18.
people, and from among thy brethren and him shall thou hear. This Gospel was
renewed by God himself unto David most evidently, and afterward by all the
Prophets, Esaie, Jeremy, Ezechiel, Daniel, and all the residue. So that our
doctrine and the Gospel that we preach (as I have said) is as ancient as the
Apostles, as the Prophets and Patriarchs, as the world it self is ancient.

For our Gospel is none other but this, that we have remission of sins, and
are reconcyled to the favor of God only by Christ and by his death, that he
only is the mediator and intercessour between God and us. That he only is
propitiation and full sacrifice for our sins, that by him only we be made
the children of God, and heirs of eternal life. All doctrines agreeing with
this we receive, all doctrines repugnant to this we reiecte and say with S.
Ambrose, Quaecunque Christus non docuit iure damnamus: Whatsoever. Christ has
not taught we justly and worthily condemn. Therefore do we justly condemn
the most part of the papistical doctrine as new and fantastical, because it
does not agree with this ancient Gospel of Christ uttered from the beginning
by God himself, but rests upon the observation of men's traditions, and
unwritten verities, devised within the space of a few hundred years utterly
against and beside the word of God.

Satan in these latter days to work suspicion to the doctrine of the Gospel
at this time by Gods great goodness renewed, has raised also many other
perverse and wicked teachers, as the Arrians denying the deity of Christ. The
Anabaptists, beside many other errors improouinge the grace and strength of
baptism in infants. The Libert ines dissoluing all true confession of faith
and practice of godly life. The familiars of love in whom Satan turns
himself into an Angel of light, and under pretense of holy life brings in
most pernicious errors and heresies. Therefore, I say unto you of al these,
beware, and take heed that you be not seduced, and settle your consciences
upon that sure foundation and strong rock of Christ's Gospel whereof before
I have told you.

The next part of our preparance Mat. 24. 25. Mat. 13. Luke 12. 21. 1. Pet. 5.
1. Cor. 16. 1. These. 5.
is* Uigilate, which precept Christ, often and in sundry places repeateth. S.
Peter also Sobris estote and vigilate, Be sober and watch, and S Paul,
vvatch and be strong in faith, and to the These. Let us vvatch and be sober. To
watch is to be careful and diligent, utterly contrary to that security and
careless wretchedness wherewith the world at this day is overwhelmed, and
drowned as it were in the delights and lusts of worldly pleasures. We are
willed therefore to cast away this sinful security, and to have an earnest
care of our selves. Well says in Genesis c. 2.
Chrisost. Decet nos esse sobrios and vigiles etc. It becomes us to be sober
and vvatchful and to have a perpetual and continual care of our souls. For it
is the part of a Christian alvvay to stand in battle against the lusts of
the flesh, and that the lovers and preachers of our Lord and master should
alvvay ring in our ears. And again, Omnes vos vigilare and sobrios esse
oportet, etc. It behooves you al to watch and be sober and never to sleep in
security. Because there is no set time when our enemy vvil assault us.
Therefore let us alvvay be vvatchful, let us alvvaye In Genesis ca. 6.
be careful of our salvation and so we shall never be taken upon the sudden,

Christ our Savior teaches us Luke. 13.
how we should watch and after what manner we should be in readiness. Let your
loins be girded about you and your lights burning in your hands and ye your
selves be like unto men that wait for the coming of their Lord, when he
will return from the wedding, that when he shall come and knock they may
open unto him immediately. Happy are those servants whom, when the Lord
comes, he shall find waking. In that he says we must have our loins girded,
he speaks after the manner of the East coun^reyes where they use long garments
and when they go any journey, they girde themselves and trusse their garments
about them that they may journey more hastily and readily. By this therefore we
are taught that in this world and vale of misery we are but as pilgrims and
wayfaring men, and as Paul says, have no city nor place long to abide in,
For our country and dwelling place is in heaven, whence we look for our Lord
and Savior Christ Jesu. We be citizens of Heaven and of the household of God:
Where we believe assuredly for ever to dwell. We must therefore cast away the
love, the care, and y^ remembrance of this life, and daily go on in our way to
heaven there to enjoy the heritage of that kingdom where Christ our Savior
after his resurrection and ascension has taken possession to our behoufe. For
as he naturally, so we by adoption are heirs of Eternal life. So long
therefore as we be here going on our journey we must remember S. Paul's
counsel, that is, That the time of this life is short, and therefore 1. Cor.
7.
they which have vviues must be as if they had none, and they that weep as
though they wept not, and they that laugh as though they laughed not, and they
that use this world as though they used it not. Whereby it is meant that we
must use the things of this life only of necessity for the time, and that
neither adversity or weeping, nor prosperity and laughing nor marriage, nor
the pleasures and possessions of this life, should so occupy our hearts, that
they should make us to forget our countreye and kingdom unto which we are
passinge through the wilderness of this wicked and sinful world. Our
Conversation, as Paul says, should be in heaven, and our whole or principal
care should be upon heavenly things, neither must y^ immoderate love of this
world cause us over gredely to look back to the delights and pleasures thereof,
as Lots wife did to Sodom, least as she was turned to a Salt stone without
sense, So the just judgment of God d^e cast us of as reprobates and turn us
into stony hearts that shall have no sense of God and godliness, let us
therefore guide our selves and go on constantly in our purposed journey. But
we must have light in our hands, that is, we must have the knowledge of Gods
holy word and our minds must be diligently instructed therewith. For that is
the light that does teach and instruct us and in deed truly direct us which
way we shall take to heaven. Thy word (says David) Is a Lantern unto my feet
and a light unto my steps. By the word of God only we are directed the true
way. If we be guided by the duskie light of man's reason, undoubtedly we shall
wander out of the way, and take some bye path that shall lead us to eternal
perdition. This light of Gods word we may not carry in our mouths, nor set on
our heads, nor hang on our girdles, but we must carry it in our hands, that
is, it must appear in our lives and show it self in our works and doings
according Mat. 5.
to that Christ says, Let your light so shine before men that they may see
your good works and glorify your father that is in heaven. And surely if we
have the right use to feed the lamp it will undoubtedly burn and with fair
light show it self, that is if through Gods good spirit working in us by his
holy word we come in a right and true faith in the promises of God, certainly
it will shine in our life and with great brightness set forth the glory of
God. This oil because the holy virgins lacked, and had not in readiness,
when the Lord came suddenly in the night, the door of eternal Mat. 25.
life was shut against them, and they excluded unto perpetual darkness where
is weepinge and gnashinge of teeth. We ought therefore according to the
direction of this true light every man carefully to walk in his calling, and
as good and diligent servants with all obedience doing those things that the
Lord has appointed, as to look for his coming, because, as is before
declared, he will come suddenly at that hour that we think not, we must be
ready to open whenever he knocks. He knocks by the preaching of his holy
word and calling to repentance, he knocks by signs and tokens from heaven,
he knocks by troubles and afflictions, he knocks by sickness, and lastly
of al he knocks by death. Whenever he knocks to come in, and dwell in our
hearts, if we open not it is dangerous, but if we open not when he knocks
lastly by sickness and death, undoubtedly he then passes from us for ever,
and leaves us as the possession of Satan to eternal fire prepared for him and
his Angels. But it is exceeding perilus to defer y^ opening of y^ gates of our
hearts until that y^ last pinch, for little know we whether God will suffer us
then to be hable to open, seeing we have so often before either negligently or
stubburnly, and obstinately refused to open when he has by all loving means
tenderly and mercifully called and knocked to come in.

Our last preparation is to pray. Uigilate, says Christ, and orate, Watch
and pray least you enter into tentation. The world is flattering, the flesh
is frail, the devil ready and continually As a roaring lion going about and
seeking whom to devour. Seeing then our enemies be so strong and we so weak
and feeble, it behooves us continually to call for help where it is to be had,
But every good thing, and every gracious gift comes from above from the
father of lights. This father of lights is y^ eternal God y^ father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, of this father therefore we must by most earnest and
continual prayer desire assistance and the strength of his holy spirit to help
us that we be not carried away from the careful cogitation of our duties by
the allurements of the devil, the flesh, and the world. Woorthely says that
good father and Martyr Ciprian: Incumb amus gemitibus assiduis, Lib. 1. epi. 1.
etc. Let us be earnest with continual gronings and often prayers, for those
are the heavenly armor that make us to stand strongly and valiantly to
co^tinew, those are the spiritual weapons that do defend and save us. And
again, Let us ask and we shall receive, and if there shall be any delay or
tarying, Lib. 4. epi. 4.
because we have grievously offended, let us knock and the door of Gods
merciful goodness shall be opened, especially if we knock at the door with
prayers, groninges and bitter tears wherein also we must abide and
continvve. Let us therefore continually lift up the hands and arms of our
hearts unto God, as Moses did his arms in the battle between Israel and the
Amalachites: and then, in that strong battle that is within us between the
spirit and the flesh undoubtedly the spirit shall vanquish and overcome, but
if we faint and hold down our hands, surely our enemies will wa^ every day
stronger then other, and so at the last give us the overthrow. Let us not
fainte therefore but pray continually unto God, in the name of Christ Jesu our
Lord. Thus if we do as men well prepared, we shall abide, warily, watchefully,
and constantly lookinge for the last coming of our good Lord and Christ to
judgment. And then he that comes to the wicked as a dreadful and terrible
judge, shall come to us as a bountifuf Savior and redeemer, as in whose merit
and Passion we have always put our whole trust and confidence, though that day
be to the wicked so terrible as before I have descriued, yet it shall be to us
the day of our chiefest joy and comfort, and therefore our Savior Christ
wills us when the signe^ of that day be^come, to lift up our heads because
our redemption Mar. 13.
is at hand. For then we shall not only be delivered from all those
afflictions, troubles and dangers which in the continuance of this frail world
we have suffered, but also we shall be by him adjudged to the fruition and
enjoying of that heritage which he has purchased for us by his blood:
wherefore the greater that the majesty of his coming is, the greater
confirmation shall it be to our faith. For therein we shall both acknowledge the
truth of his word, who long before has told us it should be so, and also
we shall evidently see, that he is that mighty Lord and God, that, according
to his promise, is able to perform all that he has said, and utterly to
vanquish, subdue, and tread under foot, all these powers, whatsoever yt are
enemies to his elect and chosen flock. The world they see destroyed before
them: death ended and consumed, sin confounded, Satan and all his powers even
at the last cast, and looking presently to be thrown into that lake of fire,
that is prepared for him and for his angels. When we have then nothing to
fear, how should we not be in most perfect joy. All those things breed
comfort to the godly, that cause terror to other. Though the examination and
account be very straight, though Satan shall lay before us the book of our
own consciences to accuse us, we shall easily disburde^ our selves, by
acknowledging the things, and by confessing that there is in our selves no
justice in confidence, when we dare that day stand in judgment, and that our
whole trust and confidence, is in the innocent death of that immaculate Lamb,
that dyed to take away the sins of the whole world: and for assurance
thereof, we shall show acquittances of his most blessed promises, and upon
them with the hand of our faith, lay sure hold. For he has said, God sent
not his son into the world to judge the world, but that the world
should be saved by him. He that believes in him is not judged. And again. So
God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that who so ever
does believe on him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. And again,
He that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has life
everlasting, and comes not into judgment. but passes from death to life.
And if Satan shall lay any false thing unto us, or charge us with the weakness
of our faith: to our inestimable comfort, we shall see on our right hand as
it were the fruits of our faith, showed in christian charity, which the judge
him self shall not only testify to be done, but acknowledge them to be done
unto him self, by saying, I was hungry, and ye gave me to eat, I was
thirsty, and ye gave me to drink, I was a stranger, and you interteyned me,
etc. So often as you did one of these things to the smallest of your brethren,
I acknovvledge it to be done unto my self. And therefore we shall joyfully
look for that blessed and comfortable sentence: Come ye blessed of my father,
and enter into the kingdom that is prepared for you, before the beginning of
the world, there shall we still behold, as Basile says, the numbers of
Angels, the assembly of our first Fathers, the seats of the Apostles, the
thrones of the Prophets, the scepters of the Patriarchs, the crowns of the
Martyrs, the praises of the just. Yea, there shall we possess such joys, as
neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor tongue can tell, nor pen is
able to express, unto which endless joys, our Lord and Savior Christ bring
us, to whom with God the Father and the holy Ghost be al honor. etc.

FINIS.

