THE CHRISTIANS Daily Sacrifice: CONTAINING A daily direction for a settled
course of Sanctification.

The third edition corrected and enlarged with a thousand spiritual rules
tending to Perfection.

Divided into thre^ Books by TH. COOPER.

LONDON, Imprinted by N. O. for WALTER BVRRE, and are to be sold in Paul's
Church yard at the sign of the Crane. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND TRVELY NOBLE LAdies my very bountiful Patronesses:
the Lady LVCIE, Countess of Bedford, and the Lady HARINGTON, Barons of Exon,
grace and peace from God the Father through our Lord Jesus Christ, be
multipleed.
RIght worthy Ladies: As there is nothing that better becomes the righteous,
then to be thankful unto the Lord for his great mercies bestowed upon us. So
I am persuaded, in nothing more has our gracious God advanced his wonderful
goodness unto our sinful nation: Then in that great deliverance of our Prince
and people, from that hellish plot of the Gunpowder Treason. For as the
Redemption of mankind by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, has therefore the
privilege to be of all other benefits the most excellent, far exceeding our
Creation or any other blessing of God, because thereby mankind was restored to
a more excellent estate then it lost in Adam: so how soever the Lord in mercy
vouchsafed unto this Nation, as it were a new creation: by the Ministry of
good Queen Elizabeth of happy memory who restoring unto us the glorious Gospel
of Jesus Christ, we were thereby even plucked out of the fiery furnace of
Antichrist, and newborn again to the hope of eternal glory: yet because we
have not received the love of the truth, and did not gloryfie our blessed God,
in our obedience thereunto: therefore did we justly forfa^^^te our right in that
great blessing, and so deserved utterly to be deprived thereof. And was not
this our general fere, in those days when the Light of our eyes grew dim, and
the sun of our happiness was set in these parts, that together therewith the
light of the Gospel also should have been taken from us: surely if the Lord had
not them been on our side, when the arm of the flesh failed us. If he had
not reserved an ^^^^^^ly seed to stand in the gappe, we must needs have been
as Sodom and Gomorrha.

But blessed be the name of our God for ever, that in his eternal mercy had
reserved a Joseph for us, even a royal Branch of that holy seed to renew and
maintain our glorious light: And have we walked worthy of so great
salvation, surely if there were nothing else to condemn our unthankfulness
for so great a blessing: Even that accursed Powder Plot in steed of all other
arguments is sufficient hereunto. For as the unthankfulness of the Papists
was here no^^^o^^^iously discovered, that hereby intended the subversion of the
state, which had so graciously vouchsafed l^^^fe and peace unto the^. So did
this also convince the unprofitableness of the Protestant, who, for the abuse
of his Talent, was hereby summoned to his account, and in his own desert must
needs have been overtaken with this judgment: And therefore was it not the
free mercy of the Lord that we were not utterly consumed.

Were we not plucked even as a brand out of the fire? were we not wonderfully
redeemed even by the mighty power of God, from that horrible pit? Did not the
Lord thereby raise up a mighty salvation for us, even by his own immediate
arm that he alone may have the glory? And shall we not the^ take up the cup of
salvation, and give thanks unto the name of the Lord. Surely as there remains
no more sacrifice for sin, for such that do tread under foot the blood of the
Son of God. So I am persuaded that if we shall despise so great salvation, and
forget this wonderful work which our God has done for us, we shall in vain
hope of the like deliverance. The Lord will do no more such great works among
us because of our unthankful and unbelieving hearts And therefore seeing the
gracious Lord as he sanctified that deliverance unto me his unworthy servant
by a special deliverance from the malice of unreasonable men, which in the
very instant of our rejoicing had laid a snare to entrappe my soul: so he
has hitherto given me my life for a pray from many other extremities.

Can I do better then I have begun so still to employ it in the meditation of
Gods great mercies? Ought I not do my uttermost to awaken this secure age, and
provoke the Saints to an holy entertainment of so great salvation? Can I do
less then take occasion hereby to testify my thankfulness unto those that
have bin instruments for the maintenance of my life and studies? Surely, dear
Christian Ladies, as I must acknowledge my self hereby bound for ever unto
your Honors so accept I beseech you this unfeigned pledge thereof, and be
provoked herby to a wise redeeming of the time, that so you may be prepared to
a blessed eternity. Take these holy rules herein contained, as a true guide to
lead you safely in all occasions thereunto: and make account of my best
devotions and endeavor here after to further to the same. And so I commend your
Ladyships to the grace of God in Jesus Christ. Resting in him.

To your Honors ever devoted, TH. COOPER.

The Preface to the Christian Reader describing the occasion and several uses
of this Treatise.
THE many Greenham Perkins. Rogers. Downam, and Arthur Dent, etc.
excellent treatises and larger discourses concerning the power of godliness,
which it has pleased the Lord of glory to furnish his Church withal in these
later days, as they have made good the faithfulness of our God vno us of our
Church of England, and therein avouched against all schismatic spirits, that
yet there is an holy seed among us: so if they shall not be a witness against
us, do they necessarily require in the right use thereof, that we be
transformed into the same image from glory to glory. And therefore howsoever it
may seem both needless, and prejudicial, after so many grave, and
experimental rules concerning sanctification, to add any more in this kind:
yet seeing it has pleased God to direct me to a further labor herein: weigh
with me I pray thee in equity these reasons hereof:

First, I do hereby profess my thankfulness unto God for those excellent
labors of his Saints, that now rest from their labors and their fruits follow
them.

Secondly, I would have thee know that I am not ashamed of this foolishness of
preaching, and practicke Divinity, which is such a mystery to the world, and
stumbling block unto the wisdom thereof.

Thirdly, howsoever I do profess that I am not able to attain such
perfection, as I have here in conceived, yet I would have thee know further,
that I would rather have a rule to condemn sin in the flesh, and so to
confound the old man, that thereby the new man may follow hard after the mark:
then not to give testimony to that light, which has shined so graciously unto
me, then to conceal my judgment, though it may condemn my practice.

Fourthly, May it please thee to consider with me: Can a man walk in the Sun,
and not be warm, and where two lie together, will there not be heat? and can
the light be hidden, nay, ought it to be hidden? Ought we not, being converted,
convert our brethren: does not the light shine unto us, and can we hold our
peace? Is not the night coming fast on us when none can work?

5 Can we do less in these days, then convince a profane world?

6 Can we do better, then strengthen that which is ready to die?

(...) purging and trial. And is it not more then high time that we should
gather our selves before the decree come forth? Is it not certain that our
master will not long defer his coming and shall not that servant be blessed,
whom his master coming shall find so doing, even freeing himself and
departing from evil. Shall not the wise man see the plague and hide himself,
and the fool run on and be punished? Shall not the wise virgins prepare oil
in their lamps to meet the Bridegroom, whiles stripes are preparing for the
back of the scorner? Behold then the oil that thou must be furnished withal.
Shall not this be thy store house daily to furnish thee with means whereby
thou must walk fruitfully with thy God, in each duty of thy calling, whereby
thou may entertain each several occasion chearefully, that so while thou
have the light, thou may walk in it, that so thou may be found in peace
at thy masters coming. Do the times require in regard of the continuance of
plentiful means, that by this time thou should have bin a teacher of
others, and yet art thou to learn the grounds of thy faith? Behold here then
the grounds of Sanctification propounded and opened unto thee: that thou may
be soundly entered into the school of Christ Jesus, that thou may try thy
self whether thou have laid a good foundation or no? have thou built hay and
stubble upon the foundation? have thou gone a stray from that perfect rule, and
therefore had need to return back again?

Behold, The doctrine of repentance to sustain thy judgment aright: here
may thou try thy self, whether thou have repented or no, hereby may thou
approve thine interest in Jesus Christ. And to this purpose is the doctrine of
repentance proposed before the doctrine of faith. Not that it is or can be in
nature before it: for how can the fruit be before the tree? can we love God
unless he love us first? can we forsake our sins, unless the love of Christ
constrain us? must we not believe sin pardonable before we can forsake it: Is
not our sufficiency of God through Jesus Christ to subdue iniquity? Is not
Jesus Christ aswel-the author and finisher of our faith? And is it not sin
before God, though it seem never so glorious among men, whatsoever is not of
faith? And without faith is it possible to please God? Must we not first be in
Christ before we can be new creatures? and do we not live by faith in the Son
of God? And does not the death of Christ daily kill sin in us? do we not
daily rise up in him to newness of life? And do we not approve our selves
hereby living members of his body? Is it any more we but Christ that now
lives in us? Is not this to live by faith in the Son of God? Lo here our
repentance being a fruit of our faith in Jesus Christ, is also an evidence unto
our souls, that we are in the faith: and so our faith which in nature is
before repentance has, yet repentance in order acco^panying the same, and by
this lively fruit is discerned of us: and thus have thou in the next place a
gracious direction how to discern and revive thy most precious faith that so
thou may be sure that thou have not labored in vain.

Now seeing the work of Sanctification is begun in weakness, rather in the
purpose of the heart, then any constancy of outward practice, and hypocrisy
will be sure to mingle it self with our best endeauours if it be possible to
blast the the very blade.

Therefore art thou informed in the next place how to prepare thy heart in the
service of God, how to comfort thy self in the testimony thereof,
notwithstanding thy daily failings in the practice of weldoing.

And seeing the heart of man is deceitful above al things, and the cause of all
thy failings arises from the not guiding of thy heart. Therefore art thou
taught how to arm thy heart with that complete armor of a Christian soldier.
And so thou art instructed in the use of each several piece thereof, that so
thou may be ready at all assayes.

To this end in the next place are propounded unto thee, those two manner
occasions and employments of thy whole life: namely, to prosecute good, and
forsake evil: and so thou art instructed how to perform the one, and leave
the other, how to discern sincerity in either.

And because the true Christian life is a continual growth: therefore art thou
further informed how to discern this growth in grace, thou art furnished with
means, whereby thou may grow, and thou art comforted in the weakness and
hindrances of thy growth.

And seeing thankfulness is a special badge of our love unto Christ and a
principal means to renew our right in him, that so from him we may renew
strength and supply of grace to grow forward perfection: therefore art thou
taught also how to be thankful, thou art informed in the truth and right use
of this duty.

And as by these means thou art hastening to perfection: so art thou further
provoked to constancy and perseverance. And graciously informed how thou may
continue to the end, not only confirmed in thy greatest failing that thou
shall recover, but instructed also graciously how thou may hold out. Namely,

By holy watchfulness, and jealousy over thy heart and ways, that so thou
may prevent security and presumption, and graciously go on and persevere in
weldoing.

And that thou may not be overcome with the cares of the world, not be to
seek at any time of the present assistance of thy God: therefore thou art
informed above all things to make thy requests manifest unto God, and directed
so to ask that thou may receive.

And so thou art informed how to maintain thy peace with God, and to repose
thy self sweetly in the bosom thereof.

And m^^^ist thou not also learn hereby how to begin the day with God.

Art thou not instructed how to sanctify thy family by holy exercises, how to
sanctify the occasions by holy and fervent prayer.

Art thou not directed how to walk in thy calling? art thou not comforted in
the issue there of.

Art thou not further informed in the right use of thy diet, that so thou may
eat to live, and ^^^e to the glory of thy master.

Art thou instructed how to cloth thy self outwardly, that thy inward man may
still be decked with grace and holiness: that thou may be better fitted to
that clothing upon?

And seeing thou art natural sociable, and must of necessity converse with
others, therefore art thou also taught how to choose and use company, that so
thou may not return unto them, but cause them to return unto thee. And
seeing thou must have occasion sometimes to be alone, therefore have thou
directions how to be solitary, that so thou may never be excluded the
protection of thy God.

In a word, what estate can thou be in, wherein thou shall hence learn true
contentment how to behave thy self in every change how to raise profit to thy
self from every alteration.

Art thou in prosperity, and so have need of humbling to prevent pride of
wisdom, to manage thy estate, wise by that thou may lay up a good
foundation thereby against the day of Christ. Make use then in the name of God
of what to this end is here stored up for thee, and the Lord give thee
understanding all things.

Art thou in Affliction and have need of comfort to uphold thee, of patience
to lead thee through the extremity thereof, observe then what is here
commended to thee for this use, and thou shall bless God that he has
accounted thee worthy to suffer with Jesus Christ

Have thou still need of the assistance of thy God? have thou an account to
make for others, as well as for thy self? And is thy life uncertain? thou
know not when thou shall be called, and therefore it stands upon thee to be
ready upon every call. Take here then thy direction how to order thy family by
that perfect rule that so thou may give up a cheerful account for them. And
learn here how to make up thine own reckoning wisely, that so when thy
master comes thou may be found ready. And can thou then desire more then
to enter into to thy masters joy. And shall not thou be ever furnished for the
accomplishment of thy best desires. O then praise God for his mercy that has
renewed and incresed unto thee this light, and increase thy prayers unto God for
the continuance of our common light, that in this light thou may still see
light, and be prepared and hereby translated from this light of grace unto that
light of glory, to reign with Jesus Christ in eternal happiness, to whose
blessed protection I do most heartily commend thee, And so do rest

Thine in our common Savior. TH. COOPER.

The first part of the Daily Sacrifice is digested into three books. Whereof the
first contains the grounds of sanctification: As describing, First, The
object of our obedience namely God.

WHere first is proved, That there is a God. Chap. 1. 2 How this God is to be
known. Chap. 2. 3 Of the several attributes of God. Chap. 3. 4 Of the unity
of the Godhead. C. 4. 5 Of the knowledge of God in Trinity. Chap. 5. 6 That
this God is to be worshipped. Chap. 6. 7 Of the subject of divine worship
namely man. Chap. 7^ 8 Of man's Creation. Chap. 8. 9 Of man's fall. Chap. 9. 10
Of the redemption of man. C. 10. 11 Of the application of this redemption.
chap. 11. 12 Of the guide and special outward help for this application,
namely the word. chap. 12. 13 Of the power of the word expressed, in a daily
direction and practice to serve God. chap. 13. 14 Of this particular direction,
what it is, that it ought to be known, not impossible to be kept, nay most
necessary and convenient, and very profitable, and exceeding pleasant. chap.
14.
The second Book expresses the practice of sanctification in such daily
duties as belong to a Christian.

Where first of the parts of this Daily Sacrifice. Chap. 1. Whereof the first
is, to be humbled before the Lord in the sense of sin. Here 1 Of the
necessity of repentance. 2 The conscionable practice thereof. 3 Helps
hereunto. 4 Marks of repentance. 5 And benefits thereof. 6 Together with rules
to resolve the conscience herein.

cha. 2. A second daily duty is to renew our faith in Jesus Christ. 1 Where
some doubts are answered. 2 It is showed how faith is renewed in us. 3 The
degrees of this work are explaned. 4 The marks of particular assurance. The
Degrees thereof. And here 1 Of weakness of faith. How known. How caused.
Secondly, of strength of faith, how discerned and obtained.

chap. 3. A third duty daily to be performed, is the preparation of the heart
to the service of God. The necessity hereof, because the heart is a sleep. And
therefore. The heart is first to be awakened, and how. Namely by 1 Resigning it
into the hands of God. 2 By renewing of our vows.
Thirdly, the heart weakened must be examined and how. By a true rule. In an
holy mannner. To a right end
Fourthly, The heart examined must be established in the true worship of God.
And that 1 By an holy fear of it self, of which how it is discerned and
maintaind. 2 By entertaining the motions of the spirit, how this is done. 3 How
we may discern the spirit to be a sleep with the remedy. 4 How to discern
the beloved sin, and how to master it.

chap. 4. A fourth daily part, of the Christian Sacrifice, is the arming of the
heart Where, of this spiritual armor, the parts hereof. And 1 Of the girdle
of truth and it parts: Which are, 1 A rectified judgment. How discerned. How
put on. It benefit.
2 The sanctified conscience. How discerned. How obtained. The benefit thereof.
3 The sincerity of the will. How known. How obtained. It measure. The benefit
thereof.
4 The well ordering of the affections. How discerned. How furthered. And The
benefit of the same.
5 The sincerity of the tongue, wherein it consists, of speech. And 1
Preparation to it. 2 Matter of speech: here of persons. 1 How to speak of God.
2 How of our neighbor. What to be avoided and observed. 3 How to speak of our
selves In Praise and Dispraise.
Of things spoken here of the manner speech. And that 1 It must be gracious. 2
True. Here of the Evidences and Bonds of Truth. As 1 A Promise. 2 Oath, here of
the Lawfulness. Matter. Manner. Lawful swearer. End of an oath. Before whom.
Where. How an oath binds. The abuses of an oath. Of lying. Flattery. Concealing
of truth.
3 Imprecations, a third bond of truth How to be used.
A third grace of speech. Reverence, and that in regard 1 Of God. 2 Man. Here
To give holy names to Children. Reverence to superiors.
What to be avoided. Blasphemy. Abuse of Scripture, and of our selves.


A fourth grace of speech. Sobriety. This seen 1 In salvation, where




(...) The use of this knowledge. How far sin has taken hold on us. The
benefit of this knowledge. Gods providence in ordering sin. And the use.
Sin how to be avoided, and Prevented generally. How particularly to be
resisted. How to recover out of sin. 1 By viewing sin in the Law. 2 In the
Gospel. 3 By judging sin.

Chap. 6. Of growth in grace a sixth duty daily to be practiced. What it is.
How furthered. How tried. How discerned.
Chap. 7. A seventh duty daily to be performed, is thankfulness. Here 1 Of
the use. How to be practiced. What to be avoided. Helps hereunto. The benefit
thereof.
Chap. 8. Eighthly, we are daily bound to constancy and perseverance. The
necessity hereof. Helps hereunto. Remoueall of hindrances. As The fall of
the elect. How far. Difference herein between them and the wicked herein.
The use hereof.
chap. 9. A ninth duty of this daily sacrifice is watchfulness. The use
hereof. How performed. The helps thereto.
chap. 10. A tenth duty constancy to be performed every day, is Prayer, both
Public and private. Hereof 1. in general. It conditions. The benefit of the
same.
Chap. 11. The last duty daily to be practiced, is, to maintain peace with
God, to rise up and lie down with it. Here of lying down with this peace.
It necessity. How obtained. How performed.
Chap. 12. And so by way of Conclusion. Is propounded how we may profit by this
direction. Helps heereunto. Trial hereof: and The benefit of the same.
Chap. 13.
The third Book contains a direction how to entertain each several
occasion of the Day, where

1 Of preparation to each several occasion. Chap. 1. 2 Of arising with God,
and beginning the day with him. The necessity hereof. How performed. How
furthered.
Chap. 2. 3 Of Family and Private Prayer. It necessity. How performed, and by
whom. What to be avoided herein. Direction for the same. The benefit thereof.
Chap. 3. 4 Of Callings and following thereof. here. 1 That it is Gods
ordinance, And To be expected by ordinary means. The right use especially to
be aimed at: And How to use them aright. How to leave them. How to intermit
them. The benefit thereof. The trial of the right use.
Chap. 4. Of the right use of the creatures for food. The benefit and Trial
thereof.
Chap. 5. Of Apparel. How to judge aright thereof: How to use the same. The
benefit thereof. Helps hereunto.
Chap. 6. Of Company and it use, and necessity. 1 Here first of the profit
hereof. 2 How to discern of good and bad company. What company to be chosen:
How to be refused. How to carry our selves in good company, how to sort with
evil ones. The benefit of them. Differences of good societies. 1 Of Saboth
societies, and Rules for it, and benefit of private exercises. 2 Of Public
Thankesgiuings and Rules for them. 3 Of Public Fast. The authority of them.
The occasions. Manner of performance. Time. Ends.
4 Of private spiritual societies. In General. In particular, between
minister and people. Inferior and superior. Between Equals. Rules generally
for all. Trial of the right use* The benefit thereof.
5 Of accessorie meetings for religion, as Councels, Synods and their
appurtenances, as S^^^hooles and Religious Feasts, Contributions for the poor.
6 Of civil society. 1 In state Assemblies. 2 Corporations and brotherhoods. 3
Contracts and Bargains. 4 Suites and controversies. 5 Recreations, 6
Feastings, and with
Rules for all in general. And trial of the right use. Of occasional
meetings. How to sort with wicked men. The use of evil company. Rules hereunto.


Chap. 7. Of solitariness. Rules hereunto, and Cautions. Trial of the right
use.
Chap. 8. Of prosperity and it use. Danger thereof in the best. How to use it
aright. Considerations to the end. Trial of the right use. Helps hereunto.
Chap. 9. Benefit hereof. Of adversity, and 1.The necessity of direction
herein. Causes of afflictions How to discern between them. That we must be
prepared to them. Of voluntary afflictions. And rules for the same. Helps
hereunto. Trial of the right use. How to avoid necessary troubles. How to
foresee, and avoid a plague. How to discern a judgment standing at the door,
and escape. The benefits of afflictions. Of family exercises. The manner of
performance, and benefit thereof.
Chap. 11. Of the daily account. Why to be performed. Motives hereunto. How
practiced. The benefit hereof, and Trial of the same.
Chap. 12. Conclusion of the whole, with a preparation to such other Treaties
as are incident hereunto. Chap. 13.
Errata.
Page 19. line 3. read of whom. pa. 24. dele and. page 26. l. 25. r. they. p.
83 l. 21. r. emplied for implied. p. 87. l. 10. r. rest one for restore. page
108. l 23. r. immortal for mortal. p. 152. l. 12. r. deserve for defer. p.
172. r. exhibited for inhibited. p. 194. l. 14. r. affection for affliction. p.
239. l. 5. r. have for hearer. p. 367. l. 8. r. enoying for enjoying. page 411.
l. 4. r. place for play. p. 415. l. 25. r. stock for flesh. p. 455. l. 21.
sudden quame. p. 447. l. 24. r. ruin for run p. 510. l. 28. r. for we they.

(...) Thirdly, that He is to be worshipped.

CHAP. I. That there is a GOD is manifest:
FIRST, By the Light of Nature, And that by the goodly frame, and beautiful
order that is held in the world, Reasons of ^^^he Deity.
not possibly to be begun, or continued in it constant course, but by a most
wise and omnipotent Nature. Psalm. 81.9. Act. 1. Romans 1.

Secondly, The excellency of the mind of man euinceth no less, both in that
being so excellent, it must needs proceed from a more excellent cause then it
self, which must be GOD, and seeing no earthly thing can satisfy the same,
what other center can it have to rest in, then it blessed Creator. Job. 32.8.
Psalm. 94. Act. 17.

Thirdly, And whence can the notions of good and evil and differences between
them, proceed if not by chance, or from sense, or use? then surely by some
intelligent Nature, and perfect Good, Romans 2.15.

Fourthly, Nay, have not all Nations concurred in this Principle, that there is
a GOD?

1 Both by experience in the conscience,

2 By public confession, and

3 General consent Romans 1.19. so that what may be known of GOD, is manifest
to them; and why, even because GOD has revealed it unto them.

Fifthly, whence shall the terrors of conscience arise in men, that in regard of
their places need not fear man; if not from a superior Judge, that both
beholds the inward man, and smites it with this plague? Esaias 66.24. Deuteronomy.
4.24. Romans 2.15.

Sixthly, And are not the Mighty mightily tormented, and singled out in this
life to most exquisite and fearful torments, from an immediate Hand, which
can be (...) yet they would not worship.

Ninthly, And can we imagine that the wise and constant Government of Common
Wealths could otherwise be established and preserved, then by some Divine
Power, seeing Satan, the author of confusion, has always oppugned mankind,
especially labored the dissoluing of such Societies, Prou. 8.15.

Tenthly, What shall we conceive of those Heroical Instincts whereby with
extraordinary wisdom, and courage, great businesses have been undertaken,
and accomplished, exceeding the common capacity, as namely

1 The invention and polishing of Arts and Sciences, by Plato, Aristotle, etc.

2 The finding out of strange devises, and conceits.

3 The courageous acting of Great conquests in that speedy and happy manner.
Alexander.


Has not the ground of these been some Superior Power, inspiring and
prospering the same? Deuteronomy. 31. Esr. 1.1. Iud. 14.19.

Eleuenthly, And seeing that even the world has been acquainted with the
certain and clear demonstration of future events. Could this proceed from any
but from the All-seeing GOD, who in mercy has revealed these things for the
comfort of His Church, and confusion of His enemies? Esaias 41.23. Ezech. 12.21.

Twelfthly, And do we not see things graciously and certainly attain their
proper ends and uses, notwithstanding contrary means, and strong oppositions:
And is there any but the LORD that can bring light out of darkness? 2. Cor.
4.6. Is not this to be ascribed to some supreme Power?

Thirteenthly, Especially if we consider that the ends of causes and effects
are finite, must there not be some First and Principle cause either Immediately
or Mediately, producing the rest on whom all other causes may depend, and to
whom, as to their center, they may return again, Eccl. 1. even as the Rivers
unto the sea?

And therefore

Use.
1 As this shall be sufficient to make the Athiest without excuse. Romans 1.20.

2 So let it teach, not to despise the voice of nature; Natures use for the
knowledge of GOD.
because, though hereby we shall not attain to perfect knowledge, 1. yet
shall these notions both bridle much evil, 2. and also further the performance
of much moral good.

3 Yea, they shall advance the Justice of GOD in the government of the world:

4 And seeing they are insufficient: therefore shall they provoke to seek GOD
in the right means: And

5 Hereby shall such as are convicted, as by a general consent of witnesses,
be better confirmed in the truth thereof: And

6 Lastly, this ignorance shall hereby be acknowledged, and so Gods mere mercy
advanced in saving his Elect, especially; seeing this knowledge, if it be not
sanctified, is enmity against GOD, leading from obedience of GOD, even while it
leads to the knowledge of Him. Romans 1.23.24.25. 1. Cor. 1.20.

3 Let this comfort us, that what is impossible to Nature, the LORD has
revealed in His Word, And therefore

4 Here, let us search the knowledge of GOD: Let this be the Touchstone of
all the other means, let them all have their reference hereto, not resting in
them, or the effects thereof, but renouncing and condemning utterly the same,
that we may know GOD alone in JESUS CHRIST, by which we may attain Life
Everlasting, 3. Phil. 8.9. Ioh. 17.1.

5 Discerning herein the Insufficiency (...)

Use.
And we must conceive thus of GOD.

1 Least we conceive that which is unworthy of his Majesty

2 That we may renounce sense, in seeking of Him, and so

3 Seek Him in His Word and Works.

4 That we should not dare to represent Him by any bodily shape.

5 That we should not think Him sufficiently worshipped with the gestures of
the body, or members only, but with the mind and spiritual motion of the
heart. 1. Tim. 4.8.

6 And seeing the SPIRIT alone proceeds from Him, therefore 1. We should
acknowledge the gift both to proceed from Him, 2. Only seek the happiness of
the mind, from this Fountain: and 3. Wholly refer it to His Glory.

Intelli^^^ent.
Thirdly, t^^^is GOD is, Intelligent; as being:

1 The cause of the mind of man, and of all the notions therein: 2. And of
that order which is in the nature of things, and Commonwealths.

2 All Intelligence or Understanding of the creatures, comes from Him; both
Psalm. 94.9.

1 In respect of the Faculty, and also

2 The operation thereof.

And this serves

1 To condemn those that ascribe the variety and order of Nature, Use.
and things therein to proceed from it matter, and the inclination thereof to
it form:

2 To ascribe all knowledge and gifts natural, to be the mere gifts of GOD.

3 And so to use them for the glory of the Giver.

Fourthly, this God is Eternal. Eternal.


1 Neither having beginning, Ps. 30.2.

2 Nor ending, Ps. 48.13.

3 Giving eternity to Mankind, and that because He is

1 Absolutely, and Infinitely Perfect, and

2 Of power accordingly, yea

3 Infinitely good, and therefore He is everlasting in His Protection,
Covenant, Reward, etc.

And this serves

Use.
1 To reprove 1. The doctrine of doubting and despair: 2. the malice of the
world, that thinks to root out GODS Church, As also Psalm. 85.2.

2 Our infidelity, that complain as if GOD had forsaken us: Psalm. 22.

3 It teaches us to ground our faith, not upon present time, or things, but
Eternity 2. Pet. 1.8. Heb. 11.26. Ps. 119.

4 And comfort us in our greatest eclypses and decays, that once loved, and
ever loved: Ioh. 13.1. Ioh. 17. 2. Tim. 2.19.

Fifthly, this GOD is Other from all creatures:

1 Because He is the Creator of them.

2 He is of a different Nature without comparison, far excelling, as being

1 Perfectly Wise, whereas the world has many parts unreasonable.

2 Indivisible and Unchangeable, and therefore Immutable, and dimensiue
substances cannot be derived out of GOD, being indivisible.

3 There can neither be, nor imagined any similitude of a finite nature, and
an Infinite.

And this serves

1 To convince Philosophy, who will have Nature, Use.
or the world, to be GOD.

2 To condemn the Maniches and Seruetus, who hold that the creatures spring
from the Essence of GOD.

3 To exclude all profane, and idolatrous cogitations of GOD, as if He were
like the creature.

4 Hereby we are resolved

1 That though all things are said to be of GOD, It is not meant of His
Essence, but because He makes them of nothing. Romans 11.36. Romans 4.17.

2 Though the soul be said to be Divine, and we pertakers of the Divine
Nature; this is not to be understood of the communication of the Substance,
but of the similitude of Properties, as being adorned with heavenly gifts,
being but created qualities, though they be a certain shadow of the Divine
Nature 2. Pet. 1.3.

3 So are we to understand, when the Elect are said to be the sons of GOD,
and that it is not so by Propagation of the Essence, but by similitude of the
Properties. Ioh. 1.13. and 8.47.

4 So are we to conceive what is ascribed to the Saints, that they are one
Spirit with GOD 1. Cor. 6 17. 2. Pet. 1.4. to imply only our conformity with
GOD, and the inhabitation, by Grace, in us, of His blessed Spirit.

5 And so when CHRIST is said to be GOD, thereby is not meant a permutation of
the Divine Nature into the Humane, and so contrary? but an inseparable
conioyning of two Natures, reteining their Properties distinct, into one
Person, and a glorifying of the Humane Nature, which though it agreeeh to a
Nature which is Ruler and Governor of all things, yet notwithstanding it is
but Made and Created.

Sixthly, This GOD is incompresible. And that

1 In our cogitation, or the conceit of any creature.

2 In the vnmeasureablenesse of His Essence, not to be circumscribed in space
or place, or any limits.

And that

1 Because His Power is Infinite.

2 He is every where, and so must His Substance be, Ierem. 23.24.

3 In the Essence of His Diuintty, because there is one and the same whole
substance of the three Persons, Ioh. 16.32 and 3.13. and 14.10.

3 In the Communication of His Essence, seeing the Whole is in such sort common
to the three Persons of the Divinity; as not only it is in them as in the
creatures; But also, is Their very Substance, and yet remains still One, and
the very same.

And this condition is proper only to the Deity, and not to the creature. 1
Because it is impossible that any creature should be, or be made equal to
the Creator.

2 GOD Himself by this mark distinguishes Himself from the creatures,
Ierem. 23.14.

3 CHRIST proves His Divinity by this argument, Ioh. 3.13. that He is in
heaven, when His Body is on the earth.

4 The ancient Fathers have by this Argument, defended the Divinity of the Holy
GHOST, because It Substance is not limited as of the creatures; whom though the
Angels cannot be circumscribed by place, yet are they limited by the property
of their substance: But the Holy GHOST being in many, has not a limited and
finite Substance.

And this

1 Condemns those that would have the Holy GHOST to be a creature. Use.


2 Instructs in the difference between the Spiritual Nature of the Angels, and
the DEITY.

3 Confirms our Faith in the Providence of GOD, that He is with us in every
place.

4 Informs our obedience to do all things as in His presence, because He is
incomprehensible.

5 To moderate our pride of knowledge in searching into that which is
incomprehensible.

6 To comfort our want of comprehension, and weakness of faith, seeing,
though the DEITY be incomprehensible, yet we do and shall comprehend, nay
we are comprehended; and so it shall suffice so far to know, and believe, as
the Word reuealeth.

7 Adoring with reverence what we cannot conceive.

Seventhly, this GOD is most perfect in Himself.

1 Because he only has all things which may be desired unto perfect felicity.

2 And that in Himself and of Himself.

3 And that with sufficiency also, to replenish all other things.

And therefore

Use.
1 Though He made all things, yet this was not to aid Himself by them, but to
communicate Himself to them, Prou. 16.2.

2 Neither does He use the creature in the accomplishment of this work, as
needing, but honoring the creature therein.

3 And though we worship and give Him glory, yet this is our debt, and His due,
the issue and benefit being ours alone, nothing hereby being added to His
happiness.

4 Though He rejoice in our obedience, yet it is not as cause, but as an
object of His rejoicing.

5 And we are bound in Justice to perform the same.

6 And therefore are much more bound to GOD to accept our imperfect obedience
which otherwise does dishonor Him.

5 And comforted, that seeing it is for our good, therefore He will perfect it,
for His Glory.

Eighthly, this GOD is Unchangeable.

And that, 1. In His Essence, which can neither be augmented, nor diminished.

2 In His Will, which cannot be altered:

3 In place, because He is Immense and fills all things.

And the reason hereof is:

1 Because there is neither outward, seeing He is the first mouer, or inward
cause of His changing, in that He is not diuisible.

2 He cannot be changed neither to the worse, for then He were not perfect;
nor better, which is impossible; nor into a like estate with the former, for
this is needless.

3 He can neither be made greater, because He is infinite; nor less because
incomprehensible.

4 Neither can He move from place to place, as a creature, seeing by His
immensity He fills all places.

5 He is most Wise, and has most perfectly, from everlasting, decreed and
foreseen all things, and therefore they cannot, or need not, be changed.

Use.
And therefore though He be said to repent, yet this does not imply a change of
His Will, but because He entendeth the amending of the creature by repentance;
and so the LORD assumeth our affections to teach us the holy practice of them,
that hereby we may be conformable to GODS revealed Will and thereby be
pertakers of, His secret Will.

And therefore though the Promises and Threatening of the LORD, are not
performed, yet seeing these imply a condition, either expressed, Ier. 18.28.
(which though it be uncertain and changeable, in respect of man's will, yet
are they certain in the Counsel of GOD,) or necessarily understood; therefore
do they serve to the accomplishment of His secret Will; Namely, to bestow
happiness, upon the performance of the condition of Faith and Obedience, or
otherwise.

And though the LORD has changed many Precepts, and Ordinances, and Works, as
Moses (...) so we may attain to the end.

Comforting our selves that we are kept by the mighty power of God to
salvation, 1. Pet. 15. And therefore shall undoubtedly attain, because this
power is made perfect in our weakness, 2. Cor. 12.8.

Tenthly, this God is of everlasting wisdom. 1 Both in that he knows all
things perfectly in one act and view, for ever, with all circumstances.

2 And is the fountain of all knowledge and understanding to all his
creatures, Eccles. 3.1. Isa. 44.7. Job. 5. Psa. 147. Romans 11.33.

And therefore,

Use.
1 Howsoever Philosophy had some glimpse of this knowledge, yet was it darkened,
and maimed; and so must be renewed by the word: And without this heavenly
light, howsoever thy might apprehend general providence, yet could they never
conceive that especial wisdom, whereby the Lord saves his Church, Mat. 11.25.

2 Bless we God for Jesus Christ, the wisdom of his Father; that has
revealed these hidden things unto us, Math. 11. Esaias. 9.

3 And labor we to resemble our heavenly Father in this spiritual gift.

1 By diiscerning between things that differ. Phil. 1.10

2 Redeeming of time, Ephesians. 5.16.

3 Seeing the plague, and hiding our selves, Pro. 22.2.

4 Abounding in all good works. And

5 Therein watching and waiting for the appearance of our master, Math. 24. And

6 Hastening his coming, by converting our brethren, Dan. 12. And

7 Hastening our selves thereto, by casting away every thing that presses down,
and the sin that hangs so fast upon us. Heb. 12.1.

Twelfthly this God is righteous and perfectly just. And that

1 Both in regard of his General Justice and Righteousness, whereby he
wills and works unchangeably such things as he has commanded in his law.

2 In respect of Particular Justice, whereby he immutably disposes aright
rewards and punishments.

3 He is the Rule and Squire of righteousness in his creatures.

And therefore,

1 Though he does good to the evil, Use
and heapeth evils on the good, yet this is in great Justice, for the making of
the wicked inexcusable, and purging out his childrens corruption; as also to
try their faith, and confirm it in them. And this is not always, but for a
time, to fit them thereby to their several ends.

2 Though he punish not the wicked out of band, yet he deferreth so, as to
ripen their sin, that so they may be prepared to greater vengeance.

3 And therefore he does us no harm when he does correct us to make us better:
if we were perfect we should not be afflicted.

4 And if he seem to do somewhat contrary to his law, it is but an abridging
of somewhat from his general will by his special will.

5 Giving to each, what is no way their due, howsoever he give to men of equal
condition, unequal rewards.

6 Yea though he has promised, and promise is debt, and so due unto the^ even
in justice: yet is he not simply bound by man, but by his own will; and so,
though the promise of creatures may be debt, yet the Creators promise is not so.

7 And therefore learn we to be just in all our ways, as the Lord our God is.

8 And condemn we all injustice either in word or deed.

9 And comfort we our selves, that seeing our God is just, therefore having
laid the chasticement of our peace upon his Son, he has acquitted us from the
curse of the law, and having promised in Christ unto us happiness, he will
perform it, and give us patience to expect the same, Heb. 10.

Thirteenthly, this God is True.

1 Because he has the true and certain knowledge of all things. Heb. 4.13.

2 He neither wills nor speaks things repugnant, nor contrary. 2. Cor. 2.19.

3 He faineth nothing, nor deceives any man, Romans 3.4.

4 He never changes his mind, Psalm. 89.33.34.

5 He ratifieth his sayings by the event, Math. 24.35.

6 He loves and commands truth to be kept in all, John. 14.17.15.26. and
16.13. Pro. 12.22. Math. 24.51.

And therefore

1 This condemns Philosophy that acknowledges God to be true, but they are
to seek where to find this Truth.

2 This resolves that if God foretell what he means not to do, he does it
not but conditionally. Luke 24.28.29.

3 If he be said to deceive the Prophets, Eze. 14. It is not by infusing any
evil quality, but by giving them up in justice to be deluded by Satan. 1.
Reg. 22.22.

4 And therefore that we may not be seduced, let us obey the truth which we
know, and cleave alone to the word for our information therein, comforting our
selves.

3 That if the word be taken away, yet the spirit shall not be denied, if we
shall wait upon our God in conscionable obedience, even to lead and keep us
in all truth, and howseeuer

4 The world is full of fair words, yet our God will always ratify his word
by his deeds. 2. Cor. 1. And perfect the work he has begun in us.

Fouretenthly, our God is Chaste.

1 Because he is the most pure and undefiled husband of his Church. Ose. 2.19.

2 His nature is most pure and free from all mixture.

3 He is the lover and author of chastity. Malach. 2.

4 He does most severely punish all uncleanness, both inward and outward.
Leuit. 18 24.

5 Hereby he distinguishes himself from unclean spiris, and filthy devils.
1 Thessalonians. 4.

And therefore this

1 Condemns the Atheist and filthy person that co^ceiues irreverently of God,
and unseemly of his word. Psalm. 50. So do some of the Canticles, and other
places and plain speeches in the word.

As also those that justify fornication, and condemn chaste marriage. 1. Tim.
4.

2. It instructs to imitate God in this holy grace, and to use marriage as a
means thereto and an image thereof.

3 It con^^^meth us in our near communion and fellowship with God. Ephesians. 5.

4 And comfort us that this bond shall never be dissolved. Ose. 2.19.

5 And withal advises us to avoid all Idolatry and spiritual whoredom,
whereby especially we violate the divine chastity.

6 And resolves us why outward fornication and uncleanness, do abound, even
because of inward and spiritual whoredoms. Amos. 7.

Fifteenthly our God is merciful.

1 In that he will have all men to be saved, that are saved, and rejects none
but those that exclude themselves.

2 And therefore deferreth punishment, and inuites all to repentance. Eze. 33.
Exodus 35.

3 And to this end applies himself to our infirmities, both by inward and
outward supplies, as his Spirit, Word, Oaths, Sacraments and Miracles.

4 He embraces and delivers his Elect from sin and troubles. Revel. 7.17.
and 21.4. Isa. 49.15.54.

5 And to this end, when no other means could be found, gave his Son for us.
John 3.16.

6 And performs all his promises freely, notwithstanding our daily failings.
Exodus 33.19.

7 Yea, he is exceeding compassionate and bountiful even to his very enemies.
Romans 5.10.

8 And sanctifies the affliction of his children to their exceeding good. Romans
8.29.

9 Yea, brings light out of darkness. 2. Cor. 4. turning our very sins to
profit.

And therefore

Though this does not imply any carnal affection in God, but rather an
unspeakable liking or disliking of the Object: Use.
yet does it not challenge the Lord to be unmerciful, because he sometimes is
said to rejoice in auengement, seeing he only rejoices; not in the punishing
of the creature, but in the execution of divine Justice. Pro. 1.26. Isa. 1.24.

And though his Free and Great mercies be denied to the wicked, Psalm. 51.1.
Though his everlasting mercy does not belong unto them, yet is he more
merciful then they do deserve, yea, he is more patient and bountiful then
they do desire. Psalm. 73.7.

And howsoever he does not save all, seeing he might do it, yet is it his
mercy that he saves any, and his mercy must not hinder his justice, and
therefore he may not save all. Nay it is his mercy to offer means of
salvation, though the wicked may refuse them: because, howsoever, hereby they
shall not attain salvation, yet shall they be partakers of such outward
blessings whereby they measure chiefly the mercy of God, and wherein they do
repose their principal happiness.

Again, though the Lord accept none into favor, without the satisfaction of
his Son, and therefore it may seem he does it not freely: yet does he both
freely give us his Son, and also gives us faith to believe in him, yea,
freely continues us to bring forth more fruit, that we may be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing.

And therefore seeing our God is thus merciful: 1 Let the mouth of iniquity
be stopped that blasphemeth his mercy by conceiving it to be universal.

And rejects Gods mercy in rejecting the word, and means thereof.

Or abuses, and traduceth the mercy of God by presumption, and apish imitation
thereof, in sparing the wicked, becaue the Lord spares them.

2 Let the mouth of misery be opened to praise the Lord, in embracing his mercy
in the means and that in time when it is offered freely, let him approve
himself to have his portion therein, by loving the Lord, and showing mercy to
his brethren, yet by renouncing his righteousness, and so holding merely of
mercy. Let him measure Gods mercy not by time present, but eternity. And so let
him forget all present measure, in comparison of what is to come, that so he
may be partaker of Gods everlasting mercies. Yea let him freely love God, as
God freely loves him, not as an hireling for his wages, but as a son in
obedience, not for what God will give, but what he has commanded, that so he
may rightly entitle himself into the mercies of his God when he preferres his
glory, even above his own good.

3 Comforting himself, that he can be no looser, where the Lord gains glory.

Sixeteenthly, our God is bountiful. 1 Because he creates and governs all
things. Psalm. 95.

2 He is the only fountain of all good things, Zach. 13.1.

3 Even which befall to all Creatures.

4 Yea to his enemies. Math. 5.

5 And that of his own mere love, goodness, and free mercy to the creature.

6 But especially to mankind.

7 And among them especially to his Church.

8 And herein to Angels and the Elect principally.

9 Yea, even in his anger he is exceeding good, as aiming only thereby at the
defect and corruption of the creature to amend and purge it, still loving the
substance and nature it self.

10 And though he inflict many evils upon the creature, yet does he withal
sustain it, in those evils, and bestows many excellent blessings upon it to
inuit to repentance, and if it do repent remoueth the evils, and perfiteth the
good.

And therefore,

1 This reproves the profane person that despises the bounty of God by
continuing in sin: and also.

2 The proud person that challenges this bounty as due unto him.

3 And is not the weak Christian here taxed that doubts of, and distrusteth
this bounty of the Lord, especially in afflictions.

4 And this condemns the wicked, that measure Gods favor by prosperity. And
therefore condemn the generation of the just because of their afflictions, as
if God had forsaken them. Psalm. 71.11. Psalm. 7.3.

5 And also they are here justly reproved that complain of Gods bounty, and
condemn him of cruelty, as if he delighted in their destruction, and made a
sport at their torments, laying the falt on God that they are justly condemned,
seeing themselves are the choosers and executioners thereof.

2 This instructs to observe the bounty of God wisely in all his works, as
not to neglect it in the least, seeing the least may be an hand to lead us to
greater: and therefore we must often meditate on our creation and preservation,
and so especially to take notice of the works of his special providence in the
Church: and so to confirm our faith thereby as that we rest not so much upon
what is performed, neither measure the favor of God by any present or
particular action, but rather look forward, yea a far of, into that which is
promised: laboring if by any means we may attain the resurrection of the dead.
Pil. 3.13. 2. Pet. 1.8. Psalm. 119.

3 Hereby we are comforted.

4 That as all this bounty properly belongs to us, so we must live by faith
in the discerning and enjoying of the same, preparing our selves thereto, by
emptying our hearts of al s^^^fe-loue and co^ceite of our own righteousness,
and assuring our selves then to have the greatest measure when we have have
most need, when the world seeks most to strippe us thereof.

Seventhly our God is most Free,

1 Because his nature is free from all 1. misery, 2. bond, 3. subjection, 4.
constraint.

2 He does will and execute all things most freely and justly, when, as much,
and in what manner he will.

3 Neither can he be constrained by any law of others, nay his Will is the
Rule even of his own Law.

And therefore,

1 Though second causes work necessarily, Use.
yet

1 Because this necessity is not absolute, but conditional, according to the
good pleasure of God, therefore are they freely ordered from him, though
necessarily they work in themselves.

2 And though our God himself be necessarily good, yet is this necessity not
of constraint, (...) our minds we delight in the law of God: yet in the law of
our members we are still led captive unto sin; yet so, as that we daily
discern the weakening of this body of sin, and hunger daily the putting off
thereof, comforting our selves, that our head Christ Jesus is ascended up on
high, and shall in due time draw us up after him, that we may enjoy perfect
liberty in his glorious kingdom.

Lastly, our God is a Jealous God, hating sin, being angry against it, and in
his Justice will certainly punish the same both with temporal and eternal
plagues.

And therefore,

1 Though the wicked cannot discern hereof,

1 Because they neither can, nor indeed desire to know sin.

2 Neither are acquainted with that price of the blood of the son of God: yet
both do they for the present partake thereof, Romans 1.
in that they are Justly given up to a reprobate sense, and to their own
lasts, Psalm. 81.1
to commit sin with greediness, that so they may be prepared thereto, and
are not without some present pangues of conscience, and outward plagues
concerning their estate; and shall when sin is ripe, drink the full vials of
Gods indignation* by the worm of conscience, and those endless torments that
are prepared for them in hell.

2 Labor we therefore to discern the power of this wrath, Psalm. 9.10* even
in the death of Christ, that so we may hide our selves therein to avoid the
same.

3 And neglect we not the least checks of conscience within, or outward
strokes upon our selves or others, that so we may avoid the entrance thereof.

4 Assuring our selves, that seeing the anger of The Almighty is spent upon his
Son, therefore the weight thereof shall not lie upon us.

5 And therefore comforting our selves, that though our God may seem to be
angry with us if we measure him by such outward means, as are common to the
wicked; yet does he in anger remember mercy because mercy pleases him, yea his
tokens of anger are means to prevent the same, and so prove occasions to
prepare us to his mercy, to make us capable thereof.

6 Yea he does not in any thing more reveal his love unto us, then by these
corrections, which unto the wicked are messengers of hell, because when we are
judged, we are chastened of the Lord that we may not be condemned with this
wolrd. 1. Cor. 11.31.32.

CHAP. IIII. Of the knowledge of God in Unity.
THus is Iehoua known by his Attributes and hence arises this necessary
conclusion:

That there is but one God,

As appears not only by Testimonies of the word, Deuteronomy. 6.4. and 32.39. Isai.
44.6. 1 Cor. 8.4. Ephesians. 4.5. 1 Timothy 2.5. Deuteronomy, 4.31. Psalm. 8.31 Isay 37.16.
and 45.21. Hos. 13.4. Malach. 2.10. Mark. 12.32. Rom* 3.30. Gal. 3.20.

But also by such evidences as none else can perform.

1 As being revealed in the word, to work miracles, to foretell things to
come, which cannot be done by any, but an omnipotent nature, Isa. 44.7. Psa.
86.8.

2 He alone reigns over all, and alone governs all things, having sole and
supreme Majesty; and therefore can be but one, Esaias, 42.8. 1. Tim. 1.17 Revel.
4.11.

3 He has greatest perfection, as having the whole, and all alone; and
therefore must needs be but one. Psalm. 89.7.

4 He is only Omnipotent: therefore one, Dan. 4.3. Because, were there many,
they should have power to hinder each other.

5 Multitude of Gods, either implies that each would be imperfect to rule all;
or else, if one will suffice, as being perfect, the rest are superfluous.

6 There can be but one Infinite.

7 Neither but one First cause.

8 Neither but one Chief good.

And therefore.

Use.
1 As this condemns the vanity of the Gentiles and Papists, that have
multiplied their Gods, according to their Cities, yea Houses, yea Necessities,
yea Sins.

2 So it reproves our confusion and divisions in divine worship; seeing as he
is one God, so must he have one form of divine worship for substance; Note.
though for outward manner and circumstance, we may vary according to
difference of times, places, occasions, necessities.

3 As also it condemns all hypocrisy in divine worship, when either the man
is divided, serving God with the body, and keeping the heart to it lusts; or it
is presumed that we may serve God sufficiently with the heart alone, though we
serve the Devil and the time with the outward man. Or else the heart is divided
in the service of God, one part intending Religion, and yet with the other the
World is aimed at. And

4* This instructs to unity and uniformity in Religion, according to the
truth, and to maintain the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.
submitting variety of opinions to the rule of the word, Gal. 6. And by variety
of circumstance, commending and advancing the unity of the Church.

5 As also it justifies the unity in marriage, that so there might be an holy
seed, Mal. 2.7. And so condemns Poligamy, howsoever it might be tolerated in
the Church of the Jews for some private respects which now are ceased.

(...) our God more easily and freely.

Especially seeing this God loves truth in the inward parts; therefore he will
accept the purpose of our hearts, not imputing our failings.

Yea seeing he is one, therefore he will not only sanctify the divisions and
differences of the members for the good of the whole; but further also will
heal every member, and cure every infirmity, that so we may serve this one
God wholly and perfectly.

And as this one God has but one people, as one faith, and one baptism; Ephesians.
4.1.2.
yea one Savior for them, and therefore will not give his glory to another:
so will he show himself still wonderful in the preservation of this his one
Dove, his love, and undefiled, gathering his still from out the co^tagions of
the world, and bridling the world that it shall not root his out; yea,
ripening the world to it just condemnation, that so he may be all in all in his
Saints, and his Saints may be possessed wholly of their full inheritance.

CHAP. V. Of the knowledge of God in Trinity.
WEll, thus may we know God by his Attributes,, and so it appears that
there is but one God.

Now the second means to know him, Sect. 1. What a person is.
and whereby he reueales himself unto us; is the Distinction of Persons.

Now a Person is a thing*

[ Subsisting] no accident, or cogitation, decree, vanishing sound, created
quality, or motion.

[ Indiuiduall] not any general, but a particular One indiuideable.

[ Liuing] not inanimate without life and understanding, not only having sense.

[ Incommunicable] not the Divine Essence, which is common to the three; not
the substance of man's nature, or any other thing created, which is communicated
to the thing begotten thereof, or thence derived.

[ Not sustained in another] And so it is neither the humane nature of Christ;
because, though this be Subsisting* Individual, Understanding and
Incommunicable, yet is it no Person, because it is personally sustained in the
word; so that it, together with the Word, is the substance of one Christ, and
except it were subsisting in the word, should not at all be.

[ Neither part of another] therefore not the soul of man is a person, because
it is part of man, though otherwise it be subsisting by it self, intelligent,
and not sustained by another.

And therefore,

Use.
Hence, first appears the difference btweene the Essence of God, and the
Persons of the Divine Essence. As

1 By the Essence we understand whatsoever is common to the three persons in
regard of their nature and absolute being, considered severally by themselves,
and in themselves.

2 By Person we must understand that relation which is between them, being
compared together, and the manner of their existence therein. Briefly thus:

The Essence signifies that God is, or rather that there is one, and that
eternal Deity.

The person is the manner, by which that divine Essence subsisteth in each
severally. As

The Father is that Essence which is of himself, and not of another.

The Son is the same Essence but not of himself, but of the Father.

The Holy Ghost is the same Essence, not of himself, but of the Father and of
the Son: so that

The divine Essence is one and the same, to, and in these three: but

To be of it self, or, of another, to be either of One, or of two: that is,
to have that one divine essence, either of it self, or communicated from
another; either of one, or two: this is the manner of subsisting, which is
threefold: 1 To be of it self. 2 To be generated. 3 To proceed. And by this
Are those three persons which are signified by the name of Trinity.


3. The essence is absolute and communicable, but the person is relative and
incommunicable. And this difference is to be maintained

1 That the unity of the true God be not distracted: or that

The distinction of persons be not confounded: or that

Any other thing be foisted into our belief, under the name of person, then
what the truth of the word does allow.

And therefore here first we must beware.

1 That by the person we understand not simply either a bare Relation or
Office, as Sabellius dreamed.

2 Much less as Seruetus did, a form or visible representation of another
shape and gesture. But by Person

1 Must be understood a thing subsisting from others, to which it is referred,
distinguished truly from them by an inco^municable propriety, as 1 begetting,
2 begotten, or proceeding, and not the office or dignity, or degree of
begetting, begotten, or proceeding.

2 The person is not a thing abstracted or separated from the essence, which is
common to them; neither is the essence a fourth thing separated from the
persons; but every person is the same entire essence of the Deity, only the
persons are distinguished from each other: the essence is common to the three.

3 The divine essence* has not that respect unto the persons, as the 1 Matter
to the effect, because God is not compounded of matter and form; and therefore
it is not well said, that the three Persons consist of one essence. Neither 2
as the whole unto his parts; because God is indivisible, and therefore it is
not well said, that the Person is a part of the Essence, or that the Essence
does consist of three persons: for every person is the whole divine Essence. 3
Neither as the Genus, or kind, unto the Species. For the Essence is not the
Genus of the three persons, neither the person the Species of the Essence. But
God is a more common name; because the Essence of the Diety is common to the
three persons; and may be affirmed of each alike. And the name of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost is more straight, because the the persons are truly
distinct, and cannot be affirmed of each other. And therefore it is not well
said; the divine essence is the Father, is the Son, is the Holy Ghost.
Again, the three persons are one GOD, or in one GOD. Again, they are one and
the same Essence, Nature, Diuinty; again, They are of the same Essence, Nature,
etc. And yet it is not well said they are of one God, because there is none of
these Persons which is not very God, whole and perfect. Wherefore the divine
Essence has such relation to the persons as it communicates it self after a
singular manner to those unto which it is common. Trinity what.
So that

The Trinity signifies these three persons distinguished by a threefold
manner of existence in one essence of the Deity.

And though this name of Trinity be not expressly in the word yet is the thing
1. there expressed, Math. 28.19. 2. Corinthians. 13.13. Math. 9.17.

2 And the name is not contradicted.

3 And the sense thereof is expressed so by a necessary consequence.

4 And the word Three, whence Trinity is derived is expressed. 1. Ioh. 5.7.
And so it is a sound collection (...) of the Deity, as Eternity, Immensitie,
Omnipotency, Wisdom, Goodness, etc.

3 All the outward works of the Deity respecting the creatures, either
wrought in them, or by them as Creation, Conservation, etc. 2 Wherein the
person differ: Namely in the works, which each Person exercises between
themselves, Persons how they differ.
as the Father existeth of himself and none other, The Son is begotten of
the Father from all Eternity, 1. has his divine Essence communicated unto him
of the Father wonderfully: and so the holy Ghost proceeds eternally from the
Father and the Son, that is, Has the same divine Essence communicated from
the Father and the Son, after an unspeakable manner, Job. 1. v. 1.14 verse.
18. Ioh. 15.26.

3 Hence appears the order of the Person. The Father is the First Person,
because he is the Fountain of the Divinity, of the Son, Order of Persons.
and Holy Ghost.

The Son is the Second Person, because the Deity is communicated unto him,
of the Father by the eternal generation.

The Holy Ghost is the Third Person, because the Deity is communicated unto
him from the Father and the Son by Eternal inspiration. Matthew. 28.19. Ioh.
1.5.7.

And yet the Father is not before the Son, nor the Father and the Son
before the Holy Ghost in time, but in the manner of existence.

And so, as is the order of the Persons, such is the order of their outward
works. For though they are done by the common will, Order of works.
and operation of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost: yet is the
same order of Persons kept in the doing thereof, which the Persons have in
their existence: So

The Father is the Fountain, as of the Person, so of the operation of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost; and does all things, not as if another wrought by him,
as if the will of another went before, communicating power and efficacy unto
him, but as of himself as existing, so understanding and working of himself.

Now the Son and the Holy Ghost work not of themselves, but the Son of
himself, so as that the will of the Father goes before, and the Holy Ghost so
of himself, as that the will, both of the Father and of the Son precedeth.
The Father works by the Son, and holy Ghost; so, as that he sends the^,
and is not sent of them. The Son works by the holy Ghost, sends him into
the hearts of the believers from the Father, and is not sent of him: but of the
Father. The Holy Ghost works and is sent of the Father and of the Son, not
of himself, Ioh. 1.3. Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.2. Ioh. 5.19. Ioh. 8.42. Ioh. 14 26.
Ioh. 15.26.

And yet when the Son and Holy Ghost are said to be sent, this is not meant
of any local motion, or any mutation in God. But 1. of the Eternal Will and
decree to perform some thing by the Son and holy Ghost. And 2. of the
Revealing and execution of that will, by the working of the Son and Holy
Ghost: so says the Son, That he is sent of the Father into the world, that
he came down from heaven, and yet that he is in heaven, even when he was upon
the earth. So is the Holy Ghost said to be sent unto the disciples at
Pentecost, when as yet he was before, and dwelt with the Apostles. So both are
sent into the world; not as if they had received their existence elsewhere,
where they were not before, but because they accomplished in the world the will
of the Father, which was not done before, and so, according to that will,
expressed their presence and effectual working.

This is the doctrine of the Trinity.

And it is to be retained in the Church.

1 For the glory of God, that the true God may be discerned from Idols, Use.
and may be worshipped as he has revealed himself.

2 For our comfort and salvation, which arises hence, that we know the Father
whom we cannot know, but by the Son, Ioh. 1.18. 1. John 2.23. and by
confidence in him. 1. John* 5.20. Romans 10.24. And we can have no knowledge of
Christ, but by the Revelation of the Spirit. 1. Corin. 2. neither any
sanctification from Christ, but by the Spirit. And therefore we must believe
God, as he is thus manifested in the Trinity, that we may be saved eternally.

3 This serves, for confutation of all heretics, that deny the Trinity, and
the order of Persons etc. and of the Jews, And

4 Also for instruction, that we be acquainted with the scriptures whereby we
may attain to this knowledge of God, not resting in the light of nature, or
Tradition of the Elders.

CHAP. VI. God is to be worshipped.
THus are we to know God in the Trinity and this knowledge necessarily
infers, that

We must worship this God:

1 Not only because even by the light of nature each nation worshipped
somewhat in the place of God, after their own vain imaginations, which
necessarily enforces that God is to be worshipped.

2 But the Lord has commanded that he should be worshipped

3 Yea, as he is thus revealed in the Unity and Trinity, he deserves to be
worshipped in many respects: As

First, As he is Iehoua our Lord, so he requires worship of us as his
servants; Malach. 1.7. So we are his creatures, and owe him all homage.

Secondly, as he is God our Father, so are we his children, and therefore owe
him all spiritual love and holy reverence.

3 As he is Redeemer, so he has both deserved our worship, and enableth us
hereunto, and therefore we cannot but worship him the Restorer of our life, and
Recouerer of our happiness.

4 As he is God the holy Ghost, sanctifying, and preserving of us: so are we
bound to worship him, in Spirit and Truth. So can we not, but glorify him in
our bodies and spirits, because they are his, we we must needs, being led by
the Spirit, abound in well-doing to the praise of our glorious God.

And therefore

Use.
1 This condemns all Athiests, and profane beasts, that make no conscience of
this worship of the Lord: seeing the Gentiles and the Devils shall one day
condemn them.

2 As also this reproves all Ignorant and idle persons, that worship they know
not what, nor how, seeing none can worship whom they know not, they cannot
worship him aright who^ they cannot discern by the Unity in Trinity, and
Trinity in Unity.

3 And so it utterly condemns all Popish worships, which is ignorance, and
voluntary devotions, not only, not from any sound knowledge, but even in
defiance and detraction of it, as if it were the greatest enemy to devotion.

2 This instructs: that we ^^^hould labor after this knowledge of God as he
is revealed in the word, not contenting our selves with general notions and
Traditions* concerning the divine nature.

3. And so commends and enioyneth that most excellent and necessary duty of
Catechizing whereby we attain to this particular knowledge.

4 And withal condemns the neglect and contempt of this duty, especially in
the elder sort, laying it only on Children which can yet make little use
thereof, and accounting it their shame to be taught the grounds of religion,
and so dwelling and dying, in palpable and obstinate ignorance.

5 And comfort us, that we have both a certain rule to worship by, to
prevent distraction, and so worthy a God to worship, as that we need not be a
shamed, nor repent of his service.

Thus it appears, That God is to be worshipped. Let us now further consider,
Of whom he is principally to be worshipped.

CHAP. VII. Of whom God is to worshipped.
Howsoever the Lord created all things for himself: so that every inferior
Creature in it place and nature yields homage unto the Creator, in doing his
will, and by the same attaineth his preservation and perfection, yet neither is
this service competent to the nature of God, as being carnal and unreasonable,
neither can it be accepted of him, as being without Christ, without faith in
his blood.

Only man is that Creature who as he was 1. Created of God, fit to perform
this acceptable worship: so was he 2. restored by Christ to renew and continue
the same: and so is 3. kept by the mighty power of God to salvation, that so
he may attain the benefit of his true and constant service.

And therefore,

Howsoever the Angels behold always the face of God, and do perform acceptable
service unto him in Jesus Christ, by whom though they are not redeemed from sin
into which they never fell: Note.
yet are they preserved through Christ in their happy estate: and by him are
gathered together and united to their head: yet seeing these have already
attained their perfection, therefore as they are above the compass of our
direction, so are we rather to admire and propose them as pictures for
imitation then any way to admit them in comparison herein.

Only man is that Creature who being redeemed by Christ Jesus, from the guilt,
power and punishment of sin, has yet the tainture and corruption of sin
remaining in him.

1 That the virtue of his savior might daily appear in the healing thereof.

2 And the free mercy of his God might be advanced in the pardon thereof.

3 That the might be daily exercised in the work of repentance, and so have
truly experience of the true work of grace.

4 That he might maintain the fellowship in having more compassion of others,
out of the sense of his own infirmities, and so make sure, and increase his
consolation in plucking others out of the fire.

5 That his corruptions may be a means to quicken and provoke to the
performance of faith, patience, humility, and many excellent graces, which
heerby are maruellously exercised and increased.

6 That he might have experience of the admirable wisdom of God, in turning
about al to his good, bringing light out of darkness. Romans 8.29. 2. Cor. 4.6.

7 That the power of God may be manifested and perfited in his infirmities, as
preserving so wonderfully contraries by contraries.

8 And using some corruptions to prevent, or purge out others. 2. Cor. 12.7.8.

9 That the Lord might have the only glory of all his means, in the
experience of our own inability and disproportion.

ence whereby our growing in grace, and following hard after the mark: and
thereby hunger more earnestly after perfection.

11 And seeing in this life we cannot be perfect, therefore we might, by the
daily sense of corruption, be weaned from the love hereof, and so

12 Provoked to hunger after our dissolution.

13 To look up still to that City which is above.

14 And to prepare thereto.

15 And in all these perform a constant and spiritual worship unto our God.

16 Using the holy means of the word, and to discover and conquer such
corruptions. And so

17 Approve our hearty obedience to our God, who hates iniquity, that we serve
him of love, because we would not displease him, subduing and weakening sin,
that we might in all things be conformable to him, then either for fear of
any punishment due to, or any benefit may redound unto us for the same; above
this, that we endeavor to obey our God in all things.

18 And so might have herein experience not only of the admirable bounty and
wisdom of our God in accepting our willing mind, even above our outward
ability. 2. Cor. 8.12. but also might have trial of the sincerity of our
obedience, as being rather inward and spiritual in our purpose, and striving
against sin, then any glorious outward show of perfection which we can attain
unto.

Thus has the Lord disposed of the manner of our sanctification and to this
end have I framed this daily direction, that we may the better be led forward
in the work of grace. And seeing to this end the Lord created man even for his
glory. Therefore now in the next place let us consider of This Creation.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Creation of Man.
AS the Lord created al things for his glory, so especially to this end created
he man, Ends of Creation.
as to manifest in him, 1. His free Election, and absolute power, and will Romans
9. and 11.

2 To advance in him the greatness of his justice. So also Romans 9.

3 The riches of his mercy, 1. Cor, 10.31. Ephesians. 2. in bestowing salvation on
him.

4 And also to advance his bounty in communicating his goodness unto him. And
so

5 To manifest and reveal his wonderful wisdom and power and goodness in the
preservation and government of him, and

6 Thereby to procure the glory and praise hereof to be given to him alone.

And therefore,

1 As we must not think that we were made to serve our own turns, Use.
to eat and drink, and so let us labor to answer these ends of our creation,
1 in striving to aspire to our first estate by being recreated in Christ, 2 and
sanctifying all things unto us by the word, 3 and returning the strength in
obedience to our God.

These were the ends and ca^^^ses of man's Creation. The manner whereof, was
this,

1 In respect of the workman the whole Trinity consulted of, and concurred
therein, thereby implying the excellence of the work.

2 Concerning the work, Time.
consider

1 The Time even when God had made all the rest for man's use, then the Lord
made him to partake thereof.

2 And when he had made him, rested from all his works of creating any thing
anew, that it might appear, how the Lord would even repose and quiet himself
in this work; and communicate himself especially thereto. Pro. 8.

(...) the world were laid, 1. Cor. 2.
such as eye never saw, neither can enter into the heart of man to be enjoyed
of us in an eternal kingdom.

And comforting our selves in our choice of God and heaven (howsoever if we
measure it by the present, we may stumble) as looking not only behind to what
was provided for us before we were, but also looking before us to what we do
enjoy, nay looking a far off to what is set before us, that so we may not be
weary, nor faint in our minds.

And so using all good blessings in this life, as to lay up a good foundation
by them against the day of Christ.

Laboring still if by any means we can attain to the resurrection of the
dead.

Thus of the time. 2. Observe we the Author of our Creation which was the holy
Trinity, he it is that made us: not we our selves Psalm. 95. no we cannot so
much as make one hair of our heads. Math. 6.

And this

1 Reproves natural wisdom which not apprehe^ding the omnipotency of God,
who could make all things of nothing: out of that false conclusion* that
nothing could be made of nothing. enforced a more absurd, that the world and
man was eternal, and so denied the Creation.

As also the Atheism of the world, which out of these false grounds, place
only happiness in this life, denying the resurrection and condition of a
better.

2 This teaches to worship this God alone, and to have relation and dependence
only to him as being the work of his hands.

2 As also to be employed in our selves for his glory who of nothing made us for
the same.

3 And so depend upon him for our preservation and perfection.

3 Consider we the matter of our Creation.

Which was generally of nothing such is properly Creation.

Particularly of nothing, like to what we are (such is properly generation when
like begets like) as being made of the

1 Dust of the earth concerning our bodies.

2 But touching our souls: the Lord breathed into us the breath of life, and
so man became a living soul. Genes. 2.

And this Composition of both body and soul from Such diverse matter,

Reproves 1 the Anabaptist, which* Use
under pretense of spiritual liberty, denies subjection to earthly governors,
seeing, concerning the body, and outward earthly things we are bound to man. As
also the

2. Liberine, that only dreams of such an use of the soul which might serve
to satisfy the flesh, as if the happiness thereof co^sisted only in this, as to
serve the body for the committing of sin, whereas the soul was principally
created to serve the Lord, and so to inform the body, as that the members also
thereof might be given as weapons of righteousness to serve the living God.
Romans 6.

2 This teaches a diversity of subjection of the same creature; as in regard
of the body, and such things as belong thereto, he is, and ought to be subject
to man; but in the soul, only, and immediately to the Lord; and to man for
his sake; and yet so, as these may not be divided in either respect; we cannot
so give man the Body, but from, and by the Soul, even for conscience sake.
Neither can we so reserve the Soul unto God, but that it obedience must be
expressed in, and by the body, Romans 12.2. least our service be plain
hypocrisy: only the matter is, in the diversity of order and respect, as the
body to man, immediately by the soul: the soul to God, immediately expressed in
the body, yet both immediately and entirely from God, and for God, Romans 11.

As also this comfort, in this diversity of subjection,

1 That what is yielded unto man for Gods sake, Body.
is not lost, but safely put to keeping to the Lord, and so by him profited,
either here to be restored better, or to be repaied so at length, as to be
only in subjection to the Lord, to be for ever with him.

2 What is reserved entirely unto God in truth, though it be not for the
present, answered with that correspondency of the outward man, Soul,
yet shall this neither be imputed, if there be a willing mind, as to
challenge the sincerity of the inward man, but rather to try and advance the
soundness thereof; and it shall further still be a means of more gracious
conformity of the outward, that so both at length may concur in perfect
obedience to the Creator.

Thus of the composition.

Now if we particularly yet further weigh the several matter of each,

First, that man was made of nothing, that is, of no pre-existent substance.
This

1 Confounds infidelity, that we cannot depend on God without means. And

2 Informs faith, to restore God beyond, without, and contrary to means.

3 Confirms the faith of the Resurrection, though all may seem to be
resolved (...) nothing. And

4 Instructs in the discerning of the nature, practice, and growth of
sanctification, in regard of the Analogy between the Creaation and
Regeneration. 2. Cor. 12.11.
which as it began of nothing in us, as of our selves, so it is daily led
forward by denying of our selves; that in us, that is in our flesh, dwells no
goodness; discerning that we have, to be as nothing; both in comparison of
what we shall have, as also in respect of any thing, as of our selves,
furthering thereto: but especially emptying our selves of all confidence
therein, or glory thereby, that the Lord alone might be honored in his only
work.

Secondly, in that man was made of the dust of the earth, we learn,

1 Not to be puffed up in regard of nature, seeing it came from no better then
the earth.

2 Neither to despise the most unlikely and contemptible means for our good,
seeing the Lord made us of such.

3 Neither to seek after great matters in the world, seeing our original was
so mean.

4 Neither to set up our hearts in this life, but rather to prepare to death,
seeing to the earth we must.

5 Comforting our selves, that our misery in this life is not eternal, seeing
we are of the earth.

6 And seeing this corruption must put on incorruption, therefore learn we to
follow hard after the mark, if by any means we may attain to the
resurrection of the dead: looking by faith a far off for the changing of
these vile bodies. And comforting our selves in our better part; that the soul
is immortal, and therefore laboring to have our conversation in heaven, and
to be made meet for that glorious inheritance.

Thirdly, that man was made a living soul, immediately breathed from the Lord,
eternally to live with him.

This teaches

1 That the soul is immediately subject unto God, ought only to be bound by
him, principally must depend on his blessed will.

2 That it must be exercised in heavenly things, agreeable to the nature and
end thereof.

3 That it is subject to eternal punishment for sin, and therefore ought to
save it self from that fearful vengeance, Matthew. 3.

4 That eternal happiness is due thereto for well-doing; and therefore should
not faint, nor be weary thereof.

5 That as the creation is immediate from God, though the body be from man: so
also is the Recreation and Renewing of the soul immediately from his mere mercy
in Christ, without any help or concurrence from man.

6 And therefore we are not to rest in any natural faculties of the soul, as
if they were sufficient to salvation, or could further thereto: but rather
discern we wisely, That the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God.

7 And so let us deny our selves, that we may be found in Christ, not having
our own righteousness, Phil. 3.8.9. Yet so

8 As that seeing we have freewill in natural and moral actions, concerning
the outward act, though not for the truth, or manner, or end of well-doing;
therefore do we what is ours, in entertaining the means of salvation: As, come
we to the word; and though we cannot discern it naturally, neither propose
the right end therein, least if we forsake God in not doing so far as we
may, he may justly forsake us in denying a blessing to the means, that so our
condemnation may be just and inexcusable.

9 That the soul was breathed into the nostrels, not into the ears, or mouth,
or eyes, this argues the imbecility and frailty of our life, as if it
depended on our nostrels, Esaias, 2 22.

Thus of the matter..

Fourthly, consider we the manner of our creation, and therein the Excellency
and ends thereof.

For the manner, we were created in Gods Image, not that either we were made
of the Essence of God, or that God must be like to us, having humane shape
(although if we respect the second person in Trinity, it might well be, that as
he was to take flesh in the fullness of time, so even at the present when man
was made, he assumed extraordinarily an human form; and so also after that
form and Archetype made man. But we were created after the Image of God, in
holiness and righteousness: that is,

The soul being breathed into the body from the Lord, was endued with divine
and heavenly qualities. As

1 Immortality.

2 Excellent light of reason and understanding, acknowledging God, and his
will, discerning the nature and essence of things.

3 True righteousness of the mind and heart, and all the faculties thereof;
in which was inflamed true love, and fear, and confidence in God.

4 Most absolute consent of the will, obeying the judgment of right and
reason, from compulsion, bondage and misery.

5 Excellent strength and vigor of body, free from all infirmity, diseases,
troubles, death. And

6 Admirable glory and majesty.

7 Destinated to eternal life in heaven.

8 Which should have propagated an immortal kind, according to the Image of
God.

9 Yet all this mutably,

1 That so if Man had overcome the Tempter, his glory had been the greater.

2 That way might be made hereby to the revelation of the eternal mercy of
God to his elect in Jesus Christ, as also of his Justice in the condemnation of
the wicked for the refusal of the Messiah, and in him of their salvation.

And hence arises the excellency of Man; 1 By the consideration of his
creation, especially that in respect of the mutability thereof: he was to be
interessed in the Messiah, and so to be restored and preserved by him unto
salvation.

Hence also arise the ends of man's creation.

1 To advance the goodness and bounty of the Lord, in ordaining salvation for
him by his son.

2 That the Lord hereby might have the only glory of all his mercies.

3 That Man might have the dominion over all the Creatures.

4 That also he might be, as it were, a sweet Companion with the Lord in
eternal glory and happiness. And

5 That he might be made meet hereunto by the knowledge of his Creator and
Redeemer, Ioh. 17. And by spiritual and bodily worship, according to his
knowledge. 1. Cor. 6.

Whence we may learn

1 To admire and conceive worthily of this love of God, Use.
in making us thus like unto himself and so to express our love unto him, in
striving to be like unto him. 1. Ioh. 4.

2 To magnify his admirable wisdom in making our estate such, as in regard
of our free will to be subject to change; and so to rest content with the will
of God in things more contrary to nature and unlikely for our God, seeing the
Lord out of this mutable estate raised so much good, even to advance his holy
son Jesus; and in him to renew and establish our formerly mutable condition.

3 And seeing the Lord did ordain this condition to be therefore mutable, that
so man, being left to himself, might be the chooser and author of his own
fall, therefore learn we to justify God, and to condemn our selves, that so
we may not be judged of the Lord.

Lastly, seeing the Lord, as he ordained the fall of man mutable, so he
ordained a Redeemer before the fall to recover the same. Therefore let this
comfort us in all our troubles, whether upon us, or expected, that undoubtedly
we may expect a good issue therein; seeing we were first appointed to glory, and
so to deliverance from the^, and so appointed to afflictions to make us sit for
glory: And we are here taught to love the person of man, as bearing Gods Image,
though we may hate the sin.

Thus of the Creation.

CHAP. IX. Of the fall of Man.
WHerein man continued not; as being left to himself, and so fell away from
God: in obeying the suggestion of the Serpent, and so fell away from his former
estate of Innocence and happiness, through disobedience of the Commandment,
and plunged himself and his whole posterity (as having received en estate for
it) into a most fearful bondage of sin, and Satan, and to all such
punishments as were due to the breach of the Commandment. The occasion hereto
was the righteous law of God, which the more indifferent it was, and easy to
be obeyed, did

1 The more discover the malice of Satan against the Commandments: And 2 the
more convince the breach of man: and so 3 aduanceth the more the mercy of God,
in providing a redeemer.

The instrument of this fall, and manner thereof, was the suggestion of Satan,
envying man's happiness, and working in him distrust of the word, tickling him
with the outward object [ the Apple] but especially with a conceit of a more
excellent estate. And setting upon the weaker vessel when she was alone.

Breeding discontent of the present estate, and hatred of God, as if he did
envy their happiness, and did not therefore love the^: so being distracted in
their judgment,

to redeem us, Math. 4. Luke 2.49.

2 In taking our nature upon him. Mat. 2, Luke 1.

3 To the Law, in fulfilling it perfectly which we had broken, Esaias. 53.

4 In undergoing the punishment, when he had fulfilled the Law, Romans 5.19. and
10.4.

And by these his sufferings, our redemption was secondly wrought out.

Sect. 6. 2. By sufferings, where what they were.
These sufferings of Christ: were

First, either in the humility of his Nativity: or his whole life, such
miseries as sin had drawn upon us, that he might sanctify them unto us: 1 In
whole life.
as in the body, Hunger, Cold, Poverty, etc. Heb. 2.18. Heb. 4.15.

2 In the soul, 1 Ignorance, Mat. 11.13. Mar. 13.32 2 Tentations, Matthew.
22.35. Matthew. 4.1. 3 Sadness, Ioh. 12. 4 Ignominies, Mat. 12.


2 In death.
Secondly, or at his Death, such pains as we had deserved: and here he suffered,

First, in his body, 3 In body.
as 1 Preparations to death, 1 Accused of Blasphemy, 2 Buffetings by the
Soldiers, Mat. 27. and 28. 3 Whipping and scourging. 4 Crowning with Thorns.
5 Carrying of his Cross. 6 Nayling to his Cross. Ioh. 19.


Secondly, death it self: here consider,

1 The ignominious manner, upon the Cursed Tree. Gal. 3.

2 The cruelty used upon his dead body, as being pierced to the heart by that
merciless Soldier, Ioh. 10.34.

3 His ignominious burial, and detaining for 3 days in the grave.

These were his sufferings in body.

Secondly he also suffered for us in his soul, and that 1. In his whole life.
4 In soul.


1 Grief for the sin of the world, and especially of his own countrymen, who
refused him, Ioh. 1.

2 The mockings of the wicked, (...)

7 That by his death he might ratify the eternal Testament of grace, Heb. 9.

8 That hereby sin and death might be destroyed, and the Devil that had the
rule of death, Heb. 2.14.15. Romans 6.20.

9 As also taking away the fear of death.

10 That sin might not rule over us: but

11 That we might die thereto.

12 That we might live only to Christ.

13 And live for ever with him.

14 And lay down our lives for him.

Now, because it was not possible that the Son of God should be holden of the
sorrows of death; for then had he not been justified and acquitted from our
sins: therefore by the power of his Godhead he raised up himself; and so
accomplished yet further the work of our redemption. Sect. 7. Conquering and
how.
Romans 4.25. Act. 2.24.

And so Christ Jesus our redeemer obtained a glorious conquest by his
resurrection from the dead: and that,

First, over the law, in abolishing the curse, dominion, and rigor thereof.

Secondly, over Satan and hell, chaining up Satan, and destroying for ever the
powers of hell. Use of his death.
1. Cor. 15.57

Thirdly, over sin, and that

1 In taking away the sting and guiltiness thereof.

2 Abating the rage and fury of the same, Romans 7.24.25.

3 Healing in some measure the corrupt fountain of the same.

4 Weakening the force, and daily eating out the very corruption thereof, Romans
6.12.13.

Fourthly, death is also conquered and subdued; and that

1 By taking away the sting thereof.

2 By destroying the dominion of the same, Romans 5.14.

3 Sanctifying it to the Godly, to whom it is the gate to everlasting life. 1 Thessalonians. 4.

4 Raising up our flesh from the grave. 1. Cor. 15.

And thus by this glorious conquest of our captain Jesus Christ, is recovered
unto us, Heb. 12.2^

Sect. 8. The benefit of our Redemption.
First, the favor of God our Father, whose children we are now become in Jesus
Christ, 2. Cor. 5.18 1* Ioh. 3.1. Col 1.20.

Secondly, the fruits of this favor, which are

1 Faith in the Son of God, whereby being justified before God, we have,

2 Peace of Conscience with God and man, Romans 5.1. Romans 7.4.

3 Joy vnspeakeble in the Holy Ghost. 1. Pet. 1.8.

4 We become fruitful in all good works, and so thereby become meet partakers
of salvation, Col. 1.12.

The earnest whereof we have in this life: first, by the inward testimony of
the spirit, 2. Cor. 1. Ephesians. 4.

Secondly, by our outward similitude and conformity to our head Christ Jesus,
being changed into the same Image from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the
Lord, 2. Cor. 3.18,

And we shall fully enjoy it in the life to come, where shall be 1 Ceasing of
all sin, infirmities and sorrow. Reu. 7.17. 2 Perfect knowledge of God. 3
Perfect righteousness and holiness not to be changed, Ephesians. 5.27. 4 Fullness
of joy. Psa. 16. 5 Excellent glory. 6 Immediate fruition of, and conjunction
with God. 1. Cor. 13.12. 7 Continual praising of God. 8 God shall be all in
all. 1. Cor. 15. 9 Perfect love to each other, though in diversity of glory. 10
Knowledge spiritual of each other, as they have had fellowship in this life in
good. 11 Triumph over all enemies. 12 Eternal happiness and bliss for
evermore. 1. Pet. 1.4.


All these has the son of God purchased for us

CHAP. XI. Of the Appliclication of this benefit by faith, how it wrought in us.
THe means whereby all these are made ours.

This faith is wrought in us by the preaching of the word, Romans 10.17. And that
first of the Law.

First, discovering our misery unto us in particular, both

1 By sense of our misery, and fall from our first estate.
From what a blessed estate we are fallen, Romans 3. Romans 7. as also

Into what a woeful and desperate condition we are now plunged, not only by
reason of our sin:

Being able to do nothing but displease God. Genesis 6.5,

And that in regard

1 Of the trangression of Adam, which lies upon us, Romans 5.

2 The fruit of this transgression, even a general infection and corruption of
all the powers and faculties of soul and body. The greatness thereof,
1 By sin.
As

First, the substance of the soul, 1 before being simple, is now become double
through hypocrisy. 2 Before being mortal naturally and spiritually, is now
spiritually dead. Ephesians. 2.

Secondly, the gifts of the soul: As 1 the mind, through ignorance, become
vain in it discourses, Ephesians. 4. Romans 2.21.

2 Of the understanding, filled with blindness and darkness: and not
sauouring the things of God, Ephesians. 4.17.

3 The Conscience wounded, seared, defiled, never soundly peaceable, Tim. 4. 1.
Cor. 1.2. Esaias. 57.1.

4 The Memory fit to retain evil, and to forget good, Heb. 10.22.

5 The Will captiuated to evil, and yet running headlong thereto: but to
choose, or do good, altogether auerse, Romans 8.5.6. Ioh. 8.39. Romans 6.16.17.20.
and 7.14.

6 And so the Affections led violently after the sway thereof. As also,

7 The Conversation most loathsome to God and Man. 1. Tim. 1.15.

8 The Thoughts impotent, and insatiable to evil, and infinite therein.

9 The Members servants of Iniquity.

10 His best actions greatest abominations. Prou. 28.9. Io. 3.31. Psalm. 50.16.

11 His glory also lost, 1. In that he has lost his soueraignetie over the
Creatures.

2 And that reverend majesty of his Person.

A second part of man's misery, is the fruit of his sin, 2 By fruit of sin
what they are.
Namely; that

First, He is most odious to God and most justly accursed of him, Col. 1.21.
and this curse is mainfest,

First, upon his Person which is subject to all infamy.

2 Upon his Body by those fearful and innumerable plagues, diseases,
judgments of famine, etc. which lie upon men and consume them in this life.
Deuteronomy. 28.15. Gene. 3.17.

3 By that horrible abuse of Gods blessings, which are bestowde on him: making
the creature to groan under this bondage of corruption, and so to increase the
score against the life to come. To. 8.19.

Secondly, Upon his Soul, and that first in this life: 1 In this life.


1 In being given up to a reprobate sense. Romans 1.23.

2 Deprived of the knowledge of God, but so far as shall make him without
excuse. Psalm. 49.15.

3 To be past feeling through the hardness of his heart. Ephesians. 4.19.

4 Thence to commit sin with greediness, and so to make up the measure
thereof.

5 Thence to fall into woeful and irrecouerable despair, Genesis 4. and to
discover the same by madness, blasphemies, etc.

Secondly, In the life to come, 2 In the life to come
by

1 Utter separation from the presence of God, and happiness for ever. 2 Thessalonians. 1.21.

2 Perpetual communion with Satan and the infernal spirits: and so of all
torments, Esaias 34.

Especially

First, 3 Particulars of hell torments.
Desperate sorrow for an irrecouerable loss.

Secondly, Insufferable weight of the wrath of God.

Thirdly, Sensible torment, yet not to be expressed. Math. 3.

1 Without intermission, Reu. 14

2 Without end. Apoc. 20.

Fourthly, the worm of conscience accusing and gnawing continually, Esaias. 66.
Esaias 50.

Fifthly, Bitter envy at the happiness of the elect, expressed by gnashing of
teeth, Mat. 13.22.

Sixthly, insatiable desire of sin, without hope or ability to commit the
same.

Seventhly, Restless content in this fearful condition.

Thus the law discouers to man his misery. And therefore, First, it is to be
preached to sinners, 2, Tim. 4.2.

Secondly, Men are to be acquainted with the particulars of it.

Thirdly, And to yield to the power thereof; that so driving men out of
themselves, it may lead them to Christ, who is properly revealed unto us in the
preaching of the Gospel, which does especially beget and perfect the work of
justifying Faith, and that

1 Because the Gospel reueales God in Christ, not as he is in the law,
auenging sin, but reconciling the world unto him, by not imputing sin
thereunto.

2 Hence a sinner is enabled to justify Gods righteousness and mercy in
pardoning sin.

3 And so hence proceeds to apprehend in particular the pardon of his sin:

And that in this manner,

1 By making us to believe our misery, through a particular application
thereof unto our selves, Romans 7.9. Romans 15.4. Mat. 9.12.

2 By working anguish and sorrow in spirit for the same. Act. 2.37. Ier. 21.18.
Judge. 2.3.10.

3 Aduising what to do, Luke 15.17 Ierem. 8.6.7. and considering deeply what
we have done, Reu. 7.24.

4 Submitting to Gods will, to be guided hereafter according to the same. Luke
17.9. Eze. 36.2. Act. 9.6.

9 Heavenly conversation, Phi. 3.20

10 Readiness and patience, to, and under the cross. Romans 5. Phil. 1.27

11 Desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.

Thus is Faith wrought in us: thus may we discern the work thereof.

And this is properly justifying faith, and it differs from all the rest,

1 Because it only is the certain confidence, whereby we apply Christ's
merits unto our selves, that we may be esteemed righteous before God. 1 Cor.
1.11.

2 It only concerns spiritual gifts, and such as belong to salvation.

3 It comprehends all other kinds of faith, but is not comprehended by them.

4 It only obtains the inheritance, which the rest may see, though not
apprehend, nor attain unto, Romans 3.28. Romans 4.5. And this faith is thus
effectual, and discerned by these marks.

1 Acknowledging what is in the Scriptures to be true.

2 Finding our selves bound to believe them.

3 Applying principally the promise of grace. Ioh. 8.36.

4 Boldness on this confidence to rely on this present grace.

5 Joy in the present blessing, but especially in the salvation to come.

6 Desire to bring forth the fruit of an holy life, whereby we are made
partakers of the divine nature, and so made meet to that happiness, wherinto no
unclean thing shall enter. Iam. 2. 2. Pet. 1.3. Col. 1.11. Reu, 21.27.

Hence we may learn,

1 That there is no holiness in nature, and therefore no happiness from
thence, Romans 3.9.

2 Though Christ be offered to al, yet all do not receive him. Romans 5.

3 No man knows justifying faith, but he that has it.

4 Our righteousness is of faith, laying hold on Jesus Christ. Phil. 3, 9

5 Being redeemed by Christ, we must be zealous of good works, which God has
ordained us to walk in.

6 That we may not err in well-doing, nor be weary thereof, we must have a
Guide to direct us therein. Ioh. 11.9.

7 Certainty, upon the assurance of Gods promise, that, though his faith may
languish, and be ecclipsed, yet it shall never fail finally.

8 And therefore still striving with doubts and tentation, and getting the
conquest over them.

CHAP. XII. This Guide is only the perfect word of God.
1 BEcause it is the brief of Gods revealed will. Sect. 1. The word the guide
of this direction.
Psalm 40.7.

2 It reaches not only to the outward, but inward man also, and is a
discerner of the secret thoghts and reins. Heb. 4.12.

3 It is that will of God, which the Lord would have to this end communicated
unto all. Colos. 1.6. Ioh. 5.35.

4 It is sufficient and absolutely perfect to accomplish whatsoever concerns
our entrance or perfection to eternal life. 2. Tim. 3.16.

5 It is a sure and everlasting word able to accomplish that which it promises
or threatens, and giving grace to perform that in some measure which it
enioyneth. Ephesians. 6.17. 1. Pet. 1. 2. Pet. 1.19. Psalm. 19.7. Psalm. 119.93.

6 It is most plain and easy to be apprehended, as being a light shining in a
dark place. 2. Pet. 1. Pr. 8.2. 2* Cor. 4.4.

Hence it follows.

1 That whatsoever is not warranted by the word, is sin, Sect. 2.
Apoc. 22 18. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Prou. 30.6. Use.


2 That the Law of nature written in our hearts, is no sufficient rule of life.
1. Cor. 2.14. Mat. 16.17. Romans 2.12.

3 Much less the Laws of nations are perfect rules to live by. Deuteronomy. 4.6.

4 No will worship is accepted of God. Matthew. 15.9. Colos. 2.23. Deu 12.8.

5 Nither a good intention makes a good action. 2. Sam. 6.6.

6 Nor an erroneous conscience excuses an evil fact, or makes that which is
doubtful good, Romans 14.23.

7 No not Ignorant Devotion auailes in Gods worship. Romans 10 2. Act. 13.50.51.

8 Much less the lawless lusts of our hearts, which tend to the destruction
of life, Ephesians. 1 22.

9 Neither is the Multitude a justifiable warrant for our actions. Exodus 23.

10 No not the examples of any, further then they square with the word. 1. Cor.
11.1.

11 Neither the word it self in the letter, but in the spiritual meaning
thereof. Math. 5.

12 And the meaning of the word to be fetched not from any other but the Word,
comparing spiritual things with spiritual things, 1. Cor. 2.13.

13 Yea, the true meaning must be appplied by faith, before our actions can be
warranted thereby. Romans 14.

So does the word contain a perfect direction of our life. CHAP. XIII. What
this direction is namely to serve God daily and constantly.
THis direction is a daily and constant endeavor to serve God. Sect. 1.
And

1 Because the Lord requires such a daily and constant course. Philip. 3.15.
Genesis 17.1. Job. 1.5.

2 The Lord gives grace and appoints means for the performance thereof, as the
continual inhabitation of his spirit, and the fruit thereof, the holy seed
that remains in us. 1. Job. 3.8.

3 The Saints of God have practiced such a course. Psalm. 1. Genes. 18. 1. Cor.
15.

4 To this end were we redeemed that we should serve God in holiness and
righteousness all the days of ous life. Luke 1.

5 God does daily bestow blessings upon us, therefore we must daily serve him.
Lam. 3.23. Psalm. 103.2.

6 Christ Jesus makes continual intercession for us: that we should daily,
yea hourly and continually perform acceptable service unto God. 1. Job. 2.2.

7 Satan is never weary of tempting us: therefore we should have our loins
girt, and be always upon our watch to resist him. 1. Pet. 5.8.

8 We have not a days warrant, no not an hours certainty of life, therefore
we are at no time to be unprepared, because we know not the hour when our
master comes. Math. 24.

9 We are pilgrims and travelers in this world, and therefore we must travel
each day homeward to our country. Heb. 11.12. 1. Pet. 2.11.

10 By our calling we are watchmen, soldiers, etc. and therefore we must daily
be exercised in this spiritual* warrefare. 2. Timothy 2.6.

Hence it follows.

1 That to fancy any such service out of the word, Sect. 1.
Use.
which is not daily and constant, is sin. Hosea. 6.4.

2 To think that the service of the Sabbath is all that God requires is also
sin. Esa. 1.13.

3 It is in vain to serve God at random, and not in an holy and constant
order.

4 To put off the service of God to the end of our life; is most presumptuous.
Psalm. 95.7.

5 To think I have any liberty or time to serve sin; is Atheistical. 1.
Pet. 4.2. Ephe. 5.16.

6 That it is not will worship, to perform this service, seeing it is warranted
by the word.

7 That it is no nouelty, to serve God after this manner.

8 Neither is it preciseness, to tie our selves hereunto, seeing it is
revealed and therefore beelongs unto us. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Ephesians. 5.15.

Therefore* that we may serve God according to his word, we must perform daily,
and continual obedience to to him, Coloss. 10.

CHAP. XIIII. What this daily course is, namely a constant purpose to serve
God, and how
ANd this is, first, a purpose of the heart, to serve God, as God: wholly and
continually. He. 13.18. Act. 11.13. Sect. 1.


2 This purpose is settled and rooted in the heart, and brings forth some
constant fruit of obedience every day. Col. 1.23.

3 It is also sincere, and general, having respect unto al Gods commandments,
in all things desirous to please him daily, and to be fruitful in every good
work Psa 119.6. Col. 1.10.

4 It is in wisdom, both avoiding all occasions which may hinder, as also
using the best means may further the execution thereof.

5 It is constant and earnest, not giving over though it be prevented, and
interrupted, but hereby is more kindled and enflamed, to weldoing.

Fifthly, it is spiritual, and respects the ends, which are two:

1 Gods glory, not any worldly or vain respects. 1. Cor. 10.31.

2 The eternal salvation of my soul not any tra^sitory or outward blessing.
Phil. 3.8. 1. Pet. 1.9.

3 It enioynes these so far, as God shall inwardly enable; and outward means
permit, rather to put us in mind what we should be, then what we can be in
this life. 2. Cor. 8.12. Hence it follows.

First, that though this course were impossible, Sect. 2. This course to be
known though impossible to be kept.
yet were it necessary to be known, and indeauored of us.

1 That it might be a daily rule of our life.

2 That it might continually humble us under the mighty hand of God.

3 That it may daily drive us to Christ

4 That it might weane us from the world, and fit us to eternal happiness

Hence it follows.

Secondly, that it is not impossible in some good measure, Sect. 3. It is not
impossible
to keep such a course and trade of holiness

1 Because he presumes not absolute perfection; which indeed were folly for any
to dream of in this life, but is only a following hard to the make, and
furtherance to perfection. Phil. 3.13.

2 It is no harder a task, then what the Saints of God do desire to attain,
Psalm. 90.12. have voluntarily undertaken, and in most comfortable measure
performed Genes. 5.22.

3 It may stand well with our ordinary callings. 1. Tim. 4.8.

4 Neither does exclude our lawful comforts 2. Tim. 4.8.

Hence it follows.

Sect. 4. It is necessary.
Thirdly, That it is no more then needs must to take this course.

1 Because hereby we show our selves obedient to Gods commandment. Genesis 17.1.

Secondly, We do also approve the soundnes of our obedience: as

1 That it is hearty, not Hypocritical. 3 To increase in righteous-


2 Not by halfes but general.

3 Not temporary, but continual.

4 Not indifferent, but conscionable.

5 Not enforced, but free and cheerful. Deuteronomy. 28.47.

6 Not uncertain, but constant.

7 Not carnal, but spiritual.

Thirdly, Hereby we increase in righteousness and holiness: as being

First, Confirmed in well doing, and that

1 By the knowledge of our heavenly thrift. 1. These. 4.10. Mat. 25.16.

2 Thanfulnesse unto God for it.

3 Commending the success to God.

4 Craving his further supply. 4 To recover out of evil:


4 Recovered also we shall be out of evil:

1 By seeing our escapes. Jeremy 3.13.

2 Judging them. 1. Cor. 11.32.

3 Denying our selves. Math. 16

4 Casting our selves upon Christ. Math. 11.

Fifthly, Hereby also our outward callings are furthered, 5 To further our
callings.
as

1 Being sanctified by this spiritual exercise 1. Tim. 4.5.

2 Moderated, least we be drunken with them. Deuteronomy. 17.18.

3 Ordered to the right end, least they mislead us. 1. Cor. 10.31

4 Seasoned, lest we be weary of them.

5 Blessed, in seeing a happy return by them Ps. 128.

Hence it follows.

Fifthly, that this duty is most convenient for all sorts. Sect. 5. It is most
convenient for all sorts.


Both for all persons, as well 1 babes in Christ, as 2 Strong men.

And for all estates, as well in prosperity, as in adversity.

1 For Babes
First, for Babes in Christ: that

1 They may begin well.

2 Th^^^y may go forward without grief, uncertainty, wearisomnes.

3 That they may obtain a more glorious Crown. 2 For strong men.


Secondly, For strong men and that

1 To keep them constant from backe-sliding Collos. 2.7.

2 To make them more able to win and hold others. Romans 14.1

3 To acquaint them with the deepnes of Satan. Apoc. 2.24.

4 To repair them to greater glory. Dan. 12.

5 To humble them in the sense of their extraordinary graces. 2. Cor. 12.

Thirdly, it is fit for men in prosperity: and that

1 To prevent security. Isa. 5.12. 3 For men in prosperity.


2 To humble them in regard of those temporal things. Luke 22.48.

3 To teach them how to use them to Gods glory, their own and their neighbors
good. 1, Tim 6.17.

4 That they may part with them willingly. Phil. 4.12.

5 That all may be counted as dung in respect of heaven Phillip. 3.8.

Fourthly, This practice also will be very necessary in the time of affliction:
And that. 4 For the time of offliction.


1 To prepare us thereuto. Prou^ 28.14. Job. 3.25.

2 To qualefie the sharpenes and tediousness of it.

3 To sanctify them unto us.

4 To be conquerors in our trobles, and over them. Romans 8.

5 To be delivered finally from them. Psalm. 34.

And therefore though do what we can, Sect. 6. And profitable.
some corruptions shall still remain, yet this labor is not unprofitable:

1 Because God accepts herein the purpose of our hearts. 2. Cor. 8.12.

2 The Lord will have some infirmities still left in us to humble us with all
2. Cor. 12.

3 And so enable us to make better use of our society, by walking more tenderly
with them and winning them more comfortably. And yet

4 Our hatred of sin shall be perfited hereby, though it remain in us.

5 The strength of sin shall also much he abated in us. Sect. 7. And
pleasant, where


6 Our edge to eternal happi-shall be still sharpened and our desire enflamed
to fit us thereto. Romans 7.

Neither is this labor uncomfortable. For

1 We increase hereby an assurance of our salvation. The benefit of constant
godliness and there in the privilege of Christians.
2. Peter 1 9.10.

2 We grow more settled, and resolved in godliness, and get the maistery of
inconstancy. Ephe. 3.18.19.

3 We perform holy duties more constantly, and easily. Ps. 119 32. Ioh. 4.34.
Mat. 11.24.

4 We have more near and sweet fellowship with our blessed God, and his holy
Spirit. 1. Tim. 4.10. Mat 10.30. Ps. 1.3. Romans 8.31. Ps. 2.12.

6 We prevent many noisome lusts which otherwise would fasten on us, Ps.
119.10.11. Io. 15.15. Exodus 19.5. Pro. 19.23.

6 We are freed from many temporal judgments, which unstaid soul, are
subject to. Psalm. 91.11 Psalm. 32.10.11.

7 Our score shall be the less, and our reckoning more easy at the day of
judgment.

8 Hereby we shall have our conversation in heaven Phil. 3.21

9 We shall labor to a m^^^^^^e excellent measure then we lost in Adam.

10 Our heart and the inordinate lusts thereof shall be kept at a bay

11 We shall be armed against al temptations, end secured in the midst of them
Ephesians. 6.13.

12 We shall be weaned from the love of this wretched world.

13 Yea led forward constantly to obtain the end of our faith, which is the
salvation of our souls Ephesians. 6.2. Tim. 4.

14 We shall approve our selves not to be of the world, by our contrary fashion
to it. Romans 12.

15 We shall recover our first Image, in being holy as God is holy. 1. Pet. 1.

16 And ready to meet our Savior whenever he shall come. Ephesians. 6. Math.
24.25. etc.

17 We shall see out daily weakness and inability to serve God, and so
acknowledge unfeignedly our unworthiness of the least mercies, and so happily
prevent spiritual pride.

18 We gain hereby a certain knowledge of our estate in grace, and by the
light hereof we know whither we walk 1. John. 3.1.

19 We shall be raised up from our falls into sin, 1. Ioh. 2.2.

20 We shall use prosperity aright, Job. 31.24. Ier. 8.4.6.

21 And overcome all troubles. Romans 8.36.

22 Yea, we shall be fitter to win others. Gal. 6.1.

23 And so grow forward to perfection, Col. 1.9. Ioh. 7.52.

24 And happily be continued to the end.

acceptable unto him, Psalm. 51.18.

3 Hereby we deny our selves, and daily take up our Cross, Math. 16.

4 We approve our right and estate in Christ Jesus, in that we confess our
selves to be sinners, and such as have daily need of his mercy, and so daily
fit our selves unto the same, Math. 11.28.

5 We justify the truth of our Religion against all the imaginary perfection
of Popery, and security of Libertines, and Atheists whomsoever, and so do
daily give an account of our Faith 1. Pet. 3.15.

6 As also we maintain the peace of our Conscience, Psalm. 32.5. And so

8 Continue, and renew the assurance of our salvation, 1. Ioh. 3.10. And so

8 Proceed, and follow hard after the mark. Phil. 3.13.

This duty is conscionably performed, Sect. 2. Repentance how performed.
First, by knowledge of sin, not only by the law, but also by the Gospel,
Psalm. 19.11. Ierem, 3.13. 1 By knowledge.
And that voluntarily, according to the conviction of conscience.

Secondly, 2 Sorrow.
by mourning before the Lord in the sense of them, Psalm. 6. and 38. And that,

1 Not for a spurt, but even all our life long, Psalm. 51.5.6.

2 Neither with a few hypocritical tears from the eyes, but even with Deep
sorrow from the heart, expressed even with plenty of tears, and bitter
lamentation, 2. Sam. 7. Matthew. 27. Esra. 1.9.

3 And that not so much for fear of the punishment, as that we have offended
so good a God, Luke 15.21.

4 And not so much, that we are known sinners among men, which happily may
discredit us, as that we feel not our sins pardoned with God.

5 This is accompanied with an astonishment for sin, in respect of Gods
infinite Majesty. Esra. 9.4.

Thirdly, repentance is performed by Acknowledging and confessing of sin, 3
By confession
Pro. 28.13.

And that first for the matter.

1 From the fountain, which is, In general.
1 Original sin, Psa. 51.5. 2 Our corrupt hearts, Psalm. 19.12.
2 From the streams, both our 1 Thoughts, so far as we may, Esr. 9. 2 Our
Idle words, Job. 42. And 3 Profane actions. Psalm. 19.12.

Secondly, for the manner.

1 Aggravating them against our selves, Lam. 3.43.

2 Clearing others, as righteous in comparison of our selves, 1. Sam. 14.

3 Against our selves unto the Lord, Psalm. 32.5. Not 1 Excusing. Nor 2
Diminishing: Nor 3 Posting off to others.


And here, both

1 What Good we have omitted.

2 What Evil we have committed.

3 How we have sinned of Ignorance, Psa. 73.22.

4 How of Knowledge we have transgressed, 2. Sam. 24. Luke 12.48.

Especially and more particularly, we must confess, 1 The sins we have been
subject unto, Psa. 51.14. In particular.


2 Those which for the present we groan under.

3 Those which we fear most. Psalm. 19.13.

4 The sins of our Fathers, Nehem. 9.

5 The sins of the Land, and state where we live. Dan. 9.

6 Those which accompany well-doing. Math. 8.

7 Yea such as in particular we know not, we are notwithstanding to yield up
to be searched by the Lord: and by his mercy either to be brought to our
remembrance, or to be graciously passed over, Psa. 19.12.

4 By judging
Fourthly, we must proceed to judgment against sin: And that,

1 Remembering and producing the law that conuinceth our sin, Esr. 9.11.12.

2 Pleading guilty thereto, Esr. 9.10

3 By abhorring of our selves, Job. 42

4 Stripping our selves of all comforts.

5 Imposing volunatry afflictions upon our selves. Joel. 2.

6 Acknowledging our selves worthy to be cut off Eze. 20.

7 Yielding to temporal chasticements, 2. Sam. 16.

8 Justifying Gods justice in his former chasticements upon our fathers for
sin, Esr. 9.7.

9 Feeling our sin a burden which we are not able to bear, Act. 12.37. Psa.
38.4. Hereupon,

Fifthly, By faith we fly unto Christ.

5 By flying to Christ.
1 Hungring after the least drop of mercy.

2 Preferring it before all earthly comforts.

3 Begging it boldly and constantly.

4 Waiting patiently till the Lord answer.

5 Meditating on Gods former mercies. Esr. 9.8. 5 Forsaking sin, and how.


6 In Christ we gain strength to forsake sin: And that

1 In heart, we thoroughly purpose never to commit the like again. Esr. 10.3.

2 To this end we are Fearful of the occasions, and wisely decline from them.

3 We bend our strength especially against our beloved sin.

4 We complain of our Inability, and labor to be strengthened by the Word,
Conference, etc.

5 Hereupon we find our love increased to all Gods Comma^^^^^^dements, and so
more conscionably intend the performance of ^^^hem.

6 Especially we endeavor to be found in CHRIST, and to feel the power of
his death, and resurrection in the subduing of sin; and so exercise our
meditations more often, and seriously thereon.

7 And so we endeavor, that the life of Christ may appear in our mortal
bodies: and that not we, but Christ may live wholly in us, Galat. 2.19. etc.

8 To this end labor we the practice of some one special virtue, to which we
find our selves most auerse, and which we see, that we have especial need of.

9 And so by Gods mercy, we attain such conquest over our most grievous
tentations, and former evils, as hatred of the word, and the Saints, etc. as
that we never fall into them again.

10 And though we find aptness to fall into some former sins, yet we
earnestly strive against them, and groan under the burden of our corruptions.

11 And so, do hunger and sigh for our dissolution. Romans 7.

12 Submitting our selves to the power of the word, to have corruption
discovered and purged out.

13 Avoiding all occasions that entice to sin.

Now that we may the bettter perform this duty of Repentance; consider we in
the third place, these preparatiues and helps thereto. Section 3. Helps to
repentance.


1 That Repentance is the gift of God, and therefore if we want it, let us ask
it of him in faith, Iam. 1.6.

2 That by nature we cannot repent, and therefore we had more need to
renounce our selves, and fly unto God.

3 That the time of repentance is this life: and therefore while we may, let us
set upon it.

4 The longer we defer it, the harder, and more doubtful it will prove.

5 That the fittest time is immediately after sin committed, Psalm. 95.8.

6 To this end meditate we on the shortness of life, Psalm. 91.12.

And withal,

7 Weigh we the greatness of our sin, how infinite in number, how dangerous
and deadly to our own souls, how offensive to Gods children* etc.

8 And submit we our selves willingly to such rebukes and chasticements, as
are laid upon us to the humbling of the flesh, Iam. 4.9.10. Job. 33.17.18.
Leuit. 26.41.

9 Yea, entreat we the Lord to correct us, Psa. 61. and that the righteous may
smite us, Psalm. 141.5. Psa. 6.1.

Hitherto serves further,

1 The due contemplation of the Majesty of God, whom we have so highly
offended, Psalm. 51.4. Genesis 39.9.

2 The vileness and abiectnesse of Man, that durst commit such wickedness
against God.

3 How fearful (by reason of sin) our condition is under Satan.

4 The dangers we have incurred hereby, even all the plagues that are written
in Gods Book, Deuteronomy. 29.27.

5 The riches of Gods mercy, in providing so excellent a remedy against sin, as
the precious blood of his only and dearly beloved son, when nothing else in
the world was available thereunto, 1. Pet. 1.12.

6 The effectualnesse of this Sacrifice, daily preventing sin, and
furthering, yea sanctifying our repentance, and leading to perfection. 1. Ioh.
1.7. Ephesians. 5.22.23.

7 The excellency of our estate in Jesus Christ, with the manifold benefits
and privileges thereof: and so meditate we on his Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, etc.

8 Consider we the end of our Creation, Redemption, Justification, etc. All
which do call for repentance.

9 And on the other side, impartially discern we our Unthankfulness against
the blood of the Covenant, in not walking worthy of the same. Ephesians. 4.1. yea
in as much as lies in us.

10 Making the same of none effect unto us. Heb. 10.

11 Add we hereunto, How we have grieved the spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30.

1 And dulled, if not quenched the graces of God in us, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.

13 Consider what dishonor we have done unto our God, all this while, that we
have lived in sin.

14 And wonder at the patience of the Almighty, that has spared so long, such
notorious rebels, Lament. 3.23. Romans 2.4.

15 Consider we the small number of those that shall be saved. And

16 That many shall strive to enter in, and shall not be able, Luke 13.23.

17 Treasure we up the Word in our hearts, which daily prouokes to repentance,
Matthew. 3.

18 And meditate we on Gods Judgments inflicted on the world for sin, Psalm.
119.

19 Consider we how hardly, even the righteous, shall be saved, 1. Pet.
4.13.14.

20 Sort we with the Godly, that so we may learn their ways.

21 Enter we into the house of Mourning, and this will bring sin to
remembrance.

22 And think we often of our ends, and of the day of judgment, so shall
sin have little rest with us.

And that we be not deceived in the judgment of Repentance, observe we
wisely, Sect. 4. Marks of Repentance
these Marks, and true Tokens thereof. 1 Care, not to sin again, 2. Cor.
7.11. Luke 9.

2 Clearing and approving of our selves, to the Church of God.

3 In the evidence of the pardon of our sin, being able to make our defense
against sin and Satan. 2. Cor. 7.

And so

4 Giving the Lord no rest, till by prayer we have obtained this assurance.

5 An holy indignation, and displeasure at our selves for offending so good and
gracious a Father. Psalm. 73.22.

6 A fervent affection to Gods word, and spiritual things, Psalm. 51. Psalm. 32.

7 Zeal of Gods glory; and in regard thereof, a judging of our best graces,
and mourning for our failings in them.

8 A spiritual execution, and taking vengeance on our selves, by clearing of
others in affliction, and condemning our selves, Esaias 30.21. 2. Sam. 16.17.
Ier. 31.19. 2. Sam. 24.

9 Yea desirous to be more vile, 1. Timoth. 1.13.14. and exposing our selves
to confusion for the same.

10 And because we cannot be so abased as we should: Mourning and
complaining of the hardness of our hearts, Esaias. 63.17.

11 Provoking deeper sorrow for our own, by mourning for the sins of others,
Psalm. 119.136. Dan. 9. Eze. 9.

12 Trembling at the word, and yet loving the sharpest blows thereof, Psalm.
119.120. And so melting at the sweet promises therein.

13 Submitting our selves willingly to Gods chastisements, Psalm. 39.9. Mich.
7.9.

14 Laboring unfeignedly the conversion of others, Psalm. 51.17. And
admonishing them to take heed by our example, Ezech. 18.30.

15 Shame of humane society, Ezech. 16.61. Ier. 3.3.

16 Fear of the wrath of God. Psalm 119.120.

17 Strong cries for mercy, Io. 2.17.

18 Desire of the restoring of (...) for sin, though we always shed not tears
for it.

4 And though we forsake not sin wholly, yet out endeavor is accepted with
God; so that we find the power of sin weakened in us, and relapse into
former sins breed greater fear of our selves and humility.

5 Considering that our repentance is not to purge out our sin, or defer
pardon: but only,

Use of Repentance.
1 To testify our thankfulness unto God.

2 To assure unto our selves the renewed life of grace.

3 And to proceed and go forward therein.

6 As also, resolving that in all these things, whosoever will lead a godly
life in CHRIST, the power of God is to be made perfect by their infirmities,
2. Cor. 12.9.

7 Comforting our selves, that if being in our ways, we be kept from sin,
Note.
this is the mercy of GOD; but if out of our ways, we seem to master sin,
this is in Justice, and deceiuable.

8 As also, being assured, that what we fail in at one time, will be supplied
at another; and God will accept the measure of his work in us.

9 And lastly, accounting it a good measure of forsaking sin, if we see what
we cannot do, and groan under the burden, desirous to be dissolved, Romans 7
24.

And for our further trial and resolution, Sect. 7. Trial hereof
observe we these things. 1 That our sorrow for sin neither vnfits us for
our callings, nor excludes from such comforts as are tendered in Christ Jesus.

2 That we so judge our selves, that we judge not either peremptorily of our
own estate, to prejudice Gods mercy, or censure our brethren uncharitably, who
stand or fall to their Master.

3 Yet neglect we not reproof for sin, seasonably and conscionably, that
either others, or at least our selves, may be kept from security, and kept in
the tenderness and true judgment of the conscience.

4 That we are more grieved, that we have not served God longer time, then
that we have for the present dishonored him by sin. And yet

5 Are more grieved by this, that the name of God is blasphemed, and his spirit
grieved by our sin; then that any hurt has, or for any that shall redound to
us hereby.

The benefit hereof is as before.

CHAP.. II. Of the raising up of a sinner by a true and lively faith.
THe soul being thus humbled, must be raised up again by a true and lively
Faith. And this is the second duty daily to be performed.

Object. But cannot we be truly humbled without faith? Is this a work of
nature, and so a preparation to grace? Or else rather a work of Sanctification.

Answer. 1 Some kind of humiliation and sorrow for sin, Ahab.
may be natural, as being forced from the conscience accusing naturally, Romans
2.
and furthered by the spirit of illumination. So that

2 In the outward act, the Hypocrite may be like the sound Professor: yea, in
some measure, in regard of the power of conscience let loose, exceed him in
outward humiliation; especially if will worship sway for our own credit.

3 But the truly humbled Soul, expressed in those Marks and Rules before, is
so wrought by faith, apprehending the pardon of sin in Christ (...) our
sins.

This is performed,

1 By a serious meditation on the promise of the Messiah. John 3.16.

2 By exercising our selves more conscionably in the reading, and hearing of
the word taught. John 5.39.

Secondly, Faith is quickened by reviving our apprehension of the promise; and
this is is done. 2. Chr. 17. verse 16.17.18.19. and to the end of the Chapter.

1 By earnest prayer unto God for the renewing of his Spirit in us. Psalm. 51.12.

2 By an hearty acknowledgement, that we have justly grieved the Spirit of God,
and so are deservedly deprived of the feeling thereof. Psalm 51.4.
Lamentation. 3.22, 37.

3 Meditating of our former comfort and assurance herein. Ps. 77.

And this reviving has many degrees. First, Sect. 2. The degrees of this work.
A lively sense what need I have of Christ, and that without him I must
certainly perish. Romans 7.24, 25.

Secondly, Hope of pardon, whereby though we yet feel not our sins certainly
pardoned yet we believe that they are pardonable; not in respect of themselves,
as if they were less heinous, but in respect of God, whose mercies are above
them. Esaias 1.18.

Thirdly, An hungring and thirsting after grace offered in Jesus Christ. Ioh.
6.35.7.37. Reu. 21.6.

And this is discerned,

1 By our prizing and preferring it above all other comforts. Phil. 3.

2 By our fainting and languishing after it. Psalm. 42*

3 By our strong cries and endeavors for the same. Psalm 51.12, 13. etc.

Fourthly, We approach to the throne of grace, and flying from the terror of
the law, we take hold on Christ, and find favor in God. Heb. 4.16. Heb. 10.19.

And this is performed.

1 By an humble confession of thy sin in particular, whereupon follows a
full remission of them Psalm 32.5.

2 Craving pardon of some special sins, with unspeakable sighs and
perseverance. Luke 15.21. Act. 8.21.

Fifthly, Hereupon follows a particular persuasion imprinted in the heart by
the holy Ghost, whereby every faithful man does particularly apply unto
himself those promises which are made in the Gospel. Mat. 9.2. Math. 15.28.
Psalm. 143.12.

This persuasion is discerned by these marks. Sect. 3. The marks of
particular assurance.
1 It goes before experience, Mat. 15.23. and so our faith is supernatural and
contrary to all reason. Heb. 11.1.

2 It holds beyond experience. Job. 13.15. Heb. 11.1. and is above all feeling.

3 And never leaves us till we have obtained the end thereof, which is the
salvation of our souls. 1. Pet. 1.9.

This persuasion has these degrees

First, it takes hold weakly, Sect. 4. The degrees thereof. Weakness of
Faith.
not without doubting, and yet soundly and truly, so that it is accepted of
God. Luke 17.5. Mat 8.

And it is discerned.

1 By an earnest desire and endeavor to obtain Gods favor. How known.
Math. 5.6.

2 By a continual complaining of our unbelief, and mourning for it. Marc.
9.24. Yet

3 By an earnest striving against it, in using all good helps, as prayer, the
word, conference, etc. Mat. 8.25. Luke 17.5.

This weakness proceeds.

1 From want of knowledge in the mystery of salvation. The grounds hereof.
Romans 14.2. Math. 16.16. Ioh. 6.69.

2 For want of application to our selves of the particular promise. 2. Tim.
1.12.

3 By relying on sense, and submitting faith thereto. Ioh. 20.

(...) a far off.

5 By resting upon the power of God, and so building on his promises. Romans
4.21. In

6 Consideration of our own unworthiness, and imperfection, which still sends
us to Christ in whom we are strengthened in faith

7 By long experience of Gods favor and love in many deliverances. Psalm. 23.5.

8 By ripeness and dexterity in the means: as power in prayer, the word,
etc. Ephesians. 6.18.

9 Daily examining and trying our selves. Psalm. 4.34.

10 Renouncing the especial sin which hangs so fast upon us. Heb. 12.1.

11 Renewing daily our covenant with God, and charging a fresh upon our hearts
to constancy.

CHAP. III. The preparing and furnishing the heart to the service of God.
AND this is the third duty daily we must perform, namely; to renew our vows,
and stir up our hearts to the service of God.

1 Because the heart is that which God principally delights in. Prou. 23.25.

2 The heart is the fountain of every action, if it be cleansed, the actions
will be suitable. Luke 8.

3 The infirmity of the action shall not be imputed, if the heart be ordered
aright. 2. Corinthians 8.12.

4 As the body sleeps, so the heart sleeps too, and therefore the one must
be awaked as the other. Esaias. 29.10. Sect. 1. The heart a sleep, and by what
means.


Now the heart may be cast into a sleep. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6.

1 By ignorance of it self. Ephesians. 5.14.

2 By self-love, and ouerweening of it own perfections.

3 By neglecting the means.

4 By corrupt means in stead of the pure fountains.

5 By the ceasing of Gods Spirit to work.

6 By some gross sin committed. 2. Sam. 11.

7 By security in prosperity and sin.

8 By presumption of Gods mercies or it own merits. Matthew 26.33.

9 By stupiditie and senslesnesse.

10 By spiritual blindness and hardness of heart.

The preparing of the heart has these degrees: First, it must be awakened and
roused up, Sect. 2^ The heart to be awakened, and how.
and that

1 By meditating.

1 What it was by nature. Ierem. 17.9. Math. 15.19.

2 What it is now by grace. Rom 6.2. Ephe. 4.23.

3 How unsearchable and bottomless a gulf it is. 1. Cor. 4.4.

2 By yielding it up to God, and exposing it naked before him, and that

1 Both confessing its corruption, and deceitfulness.

2 And also submitting it wholly to his government.

3 Reforming the occasions whereby it was laid a sleep, as

1 Ignorance, by the glass of the word. Iam. 1.25.

2 Self-love, by viewing our selves in the glass of the conscience examined
by the Law. To. 7.8, 9.

3 Using the means conscionably.

4* Especially not closing with corrupt means.

5 Renew the Spirit by unfeigned repentance. Psalm. 51.10.

6 Forsake not only gross sins but even all, yea all appearance of sin. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.

7 Be we always watchful over our selves. Luke 22.

8 Avoid we presumption by meditation of Gods justice. Jude 5.6.7.

9 Remedy we stupidity by quickness in apprehension, and forwardness to
judge our selves 1. Cor. 11.31.

10 Break we our hard hearts with the hammer of Gods word. Iere. 23.29. 1.
Cor. 9.27.

The heart being awakened, must be thoroughly sifted and examined, and that
Sect. 3. The heart awakened, must be examined. And how.
First, By a true rule.

1 Not by it self, but by the law of God. Heb. 4.12.

2 Neither by the world, but by the conscience informed by the word. Ierem.
6.14.

1 By a true rule.
3 Not by opinion, but by the evidence of the Spirt. Roman. 8.16. Romans 14.5.
Pro. 14.12.

4 Neither by the laws of men, but by the rule of faith. Matthew. 15 9. Act. 4
19.

5* Neither by the letter of Gods Law, but by the spiritual meaning thereof.
Matthew. 5.

6 Not by the outward condition, but by the inward experience Eccles. 9.1. Pro.
14.13.

7 Neither by outward actions, but by inward purposes. Ierem. 17.10. Joel. 2.13.

8 Not by the examples of the most, but of the best. Luke 18.1. Cor. 11.1.

Secondly, We must examine the heart after a true and holy manner. 2. An holy
manner.


Not once or seldom, but daily Psalm. 119.

Not slightly but seriously, even from the bottom. Psalm. 119.12.

Not on the oneside, but on both as well what evil we have done, as what
good. Esaias. 1. Psalm. 34.

Neither in general, but in particular, concerning the chief good or evil.
Psalm. 51.

And that not partially but conscionably and indifferently, both concerning it
weakness and also it strength. Psalm. 42. and 43.

Thirdly, We must herein aim at a right end. 3. To a right end.


1 Not vain glory, but the praise of God. 1. Cor. 10.3.

2 Neither for self-love, but to deny our selves. Mat. 16.22.

3 Not for love of the world, but to the renouncing thereof. Romans 13.11.

4 Neither for fear of death, but to be prepared to it. 2. Cor. 5.9.

5 Not to remit of our sincerity, but to increase in holiness. Ps. 119.

6 Not to prefer our selves before others, that are behind us but to be
humbled in regard of those that have out-stript us. Heb. 12.1.

7 Not to be approved of the world, but to the conuincing, or converting
thereof. Gal. 1.9.

8 Not to make us distrust God, but to increase our confidence in him. Sect. 4.
The heart examined must be established in the worship of God.


9 And so to hunger more constantly after him. Phil. 3.13.

The heart being thus tried and examined, must be established and confirmed in
the service of God. Psalm. 51.12. Pro. 4.

And that by these means.

First, by resigning it up to the guidance of the Almighty. And how.
Psalm. 119.

This is performed, by

1 Acknowledging him to be greater, then the heart, who knows all things. 1.
John 3.20.

2 Yielding the heart to be daily searched by him. Psalm^^^ 19.12.

3 And submitting the privy corruptions of the heart not only which we know,
but which are hidden from us, to be judged of him. Psalm. 19.12. Job. 9.

4 Doing al things as in the presence of his Majesty. Genes. 17.

5 Confessing daily unto Him the inward rebellions and deceitfulness of the
heart, and complaining of it backewardnesse to the worship of God.

6 And so renouncing the best testimony of it sincerity, as to be justified
thereby in his presence. 1. Cor. 4.4.3.

7 And yet comforting our selves in the testimony thereof, so far, as thereby
to have boldness, and assurance before him in Christ. 1. Ioh. 3.20.

8 And yet submitting, contrary to all carnal wisdom, to his blessed will.
Galat. 2.

9 And so resting on his promises by faith above all sense and feeling
whatsoever. Job. 13.15 Ion 2.

10 Not tying the providence of God simply to any means. And yet

11 Not despising the providence of God inhibited in the weakest, and most
unlikely means And yet

12 Depending on the mighty power of God, beyond and contrary to all means.

13 And so daily laboring to discern the true estate thereof, by the word.

14 Deny we our selves, and labor to be found of him only in Christ Jesus,
and so

15 In Christ offer we up our hearts as a daily sacrifice of obedience unto
his majesty.

16 Accounting all things as dung, in regard of his favor. And

17 Being ready to forsake all, in comparison thereof.

18 And so hungring after his glorious fellowship, and communion in heaven.

19 Prepare we our selves daily to our ends, that we may for ever be with the
Lord. Thus shall we resign up our selves to his holy government.

Secondly, by renewing our vows and binding us to the performance of them. And
that

1 By public protestation.

2 By subscribing with the hand Esaias. 44.

3 By solemn and conscionable oaths. 2. Chron. 15.

4 By the curse of the law. Nehe. 10.31.

5 Calling others to witness, as the Church of God.

Thirdly, we must continually fear our selves, and have a holy jealousy of
our best actions. Prou. 28.14.

And that in regard.

1 Of the majesty and righteousness of God, able to censure, that which we
have best testimony of. 1. Cor. 4.5.

2 Of the vnsearchablenesse of our hearts. Ierem. 17.9.

3 Of the privy corruptions that do assault us. Psalm. 19.

4 In respect of the infirmities that do accompany our best actions. Job. 4.18.

5 In respect of the treachery of our flesh, ready to betray us to every
tentation. Romans 7.

6 And the continual readiness of Satan to set upon us. 1. Pet. 5 8.

7 As also especially in regard of the presence of our gracious God, beholding,
and approving all our actions. Psalm 33.13.

And this fear is discerned,

1 By an earnest striving against our corruptions.

2 By a desire to approve our selves to the Church of God.

3 By tenderness of conscience in all our actions.

4 By lowlynesse in our carriage, even toward our inferiors.

5 By an holy care to prepare our selves to spiritual duties.

6 Making conscience of the least sins.

7 Keeping our selves from the occasions, and appearance of sin.

8 Restraining our selves in our Christian liberty.

9 By humility in the sense of great graces.

10 Charitable censuring of our brethren and covering their infirmities. And by

11 A daily examination of our ways.

12 Especially complaining of and striving against our secret corruptions.

13 By choice of our company and care therein.

14 Meditation of our end and preparation to the day of judgment.

Fourthly, There must be a constant watching over the outward man, avoiding
both the occasions of evil, and the least appearance thereof. Ps. 39.1. Job.
31.1. of which herafter

Fifthly, We must moderate our selves in our Christian liberty. Galat. 5.13.
and that by these rules:

1 Of our callings, that we exceed not them. 1. Corinthians. 7.20.

2 Of the times, that we bring forth fruit in due season. Psa. 1.3.

3 Of the place, that in outward things we co^firm thereto. 1. Co. 9.20

4 Of the persons, that we give no just offense. 1. Cor. 10.33.

Here our guides must be.

Love, which seeks not our own. 1. Cor. 13.

Wisdom, to become all unto all. 1. Cor. 13. And our ends.

1 Expediencie, what may be fitting. 1. Cor. 9.

2 Order that which may be seemly. Col. 2.

3 Edification, that which may benefit our selves and other. 1. Cor. 10.

4 And principally the glory of Almighty God. 1. Cor. 10.31.

Sixthly, We must entertain, and cherish the motions of the Spirit of God. 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. 2. Tim. 1.6.

This is performed.

1 By a wise discerning of them. 1. Tim. 4.14.

2 By an high esteem of them.

3 By rejoicing in them, as if we had found the greatest treasures. Mat. 13.44.

4 By putting them speedily in execution. Psalm. 45.1.

5 By offering up an extraordinary sacrifice of praise for them, abasing our
selves in regard of such excellent graces, and acknowledgeing the free mercy of
God in so gracious a fellowship. Psalm 116.7, 12.

Seventhly, If the Spirit of God shall lie a sleep in us. Psalm. 119.

This we shall discern:

1 By great terrors in the conscience.

2 A kind of loathing of holy duties.

3 Great coldness and deadness in the use of them.

4 Little sensible comfort when we have performed them. Psalm 77.2, 3.

5 Much coffeehouse in the mind, and blindness in the same. Psalm 6.3.

6 Aptness to rush into the sins we have heretofore conquered.

7 Unwillingness to die, etc. Here then we must at no hand bless our souls
in this estate, but

First, rouse up the Spirit, and labor to be quickened, and that by using the
holy means: as

1 The powerful Ministry of the word. Psalm. 6.6. that so our judgments may
be kept sound.

2 Private and strong crying unto God. Psalm. 51. Psalm. 40 1.

3 Craving the effectual prayers of the Saints. James. 5 15.

4 Using more conscionably their fellowships, and opening our state unto them.

5 Racking our hearts by a serious and impartial examination and committing
our most special tentations to record.

6 Promising more faithfulness for the time to come. Psalm. 80.18.

7 And binding our selves more constantly to the conversion of others. Psalm.
116.18. Psalm. 32.8.9. Ps. 34.3.8.11.

8 Exercising a daily course of repentance. Psalm. 51.4.

9 Not neglecting also to humble our selves in this behalf in some private
fast unto God Psalm. 35. in our closets or families.

Eighthly, make we some experiment upon some chief lust of the heart, to get
the mastery over it: for by an experimental conquest over one, we shall learn
in time to conquer all the rest.

Here learn we:

How to know the master and most beloved sin. How to know the beloved sin.
As

1 That which before conversion we were most subject to, that will now hant us,
seeking to re-enter again.

2 That we most fear, And

3 Feel our selves most weak in.

4 That which most interrupts us, when we are about to do most good.

5 That which has most excuses, and pretenses to defend it self.

6 And also that, which we can cry most earnestly against in our selves.

7 And which we most discern, and condemn in others.

8 That which we have most foiled, and gloriously subdued.

9 That which our carnal affection will be yet most unto, that so our
soundness may be approved, especially in the conquest thereof.

And this must be done:

1 By observing the deepnesse of Satan in his variety of baits, How to conquer
it.
to draw us into the snare.

2 Considering the deceitfulness of the heart, how gladly it it would close
with Satan.

3 Remembering our former tripping by the like tentation.

4 Thereupon confess we in humble prayer unto God that we have deserved to
be overtaken with it.

5 Detest we our selves that sin has got such ground of us. Job. 42.

6 Hereupon vow we revenge against our treacherous flesh. 2. Cor. 7.11.

7 And practice we the same by the former rules of humiliation, and such as
hereafter shall be laid down.

8 And so being wise to fear our selves in regard of the said tentation we
shall happily get the conquest of it, Pro. 14.

9 We must daily recount how we have profited in godliness. Psalm. 119.

10 We must prepare our selves continually to afflictions, Luke 9.23.

11 We must be plentiful in good works. 2. Pet. 1.9.

12 In all our actions, specially extraordinary, we must not trust to that
soundness of heart which has been, but try them by that which is, Sect. 7.
Trial hereof
that so from the sense of the pureness of the fountain the streams may flow
more certainly and purely. Luke 6.43. Matthew. 13.

13 Though the heart may appear to be sound, yet the goodness of the action
must not so much depend upon the soundness of the heart appearing, as upon the
free mercies of God accepting the same.

14 We must provide a complete Armor for the heart, being prepared to
preserve it, Ephesians. 6.13.

CHAP. IIII. Of the spiritual Armor, and arming of the Heart.
ANd this is the fourth duty of necessity to be performed daily by us; Namely,
to arm our hearts against all tentations. And that

1 Because such an Armor is commended unto us in the word. Ephesians. 6.

2 Our enemies are mighty princes, and armed wickednesses. Ephesians. 6.16.

3 The heart without it lies open to all tentations.

4 By it we shall be able to cast down all strong holds, 2. Cor. 10.4. which
stand in our way to happiness, 1. Tim. 6.11.

5 And so shall lay hold on eternal life, and finish our course with joy, 2.
Tim. 4.6.

Here consider these three points: 1 What this Armor is. 2 How it is to be put
on. 3 How to be kept on.


Thus Armor has many pieces. Sect. 1. The parts of the spiritual armor; and
first of the girdle of Truth. Its parts are:


Fist, the Girdle of Truth and Sincerity, Ephesians. 6.14. And this consists of
these parts:

The first is a rectified Judgment, proceeding from an illightned and
sanctified understanding, wrought by a lively Faith, through the Word of God,
Sect. 2. 1 A rectified Judgment.
Ephesians. 4.13.

And it has these properties.

1 Is is sound in what it knows. Coloss. 1.6.9.

2 It retains safely what it knows. Psa. 119.11.

3 It is wise to distinguish between things that differ, Phillip. 1. And so to
try the Spirits, 1. John. 4.1.

4 It discernes all things. 1. Cor. 2.15.

5 It comprehends the height, and breadth, and depth, and length Ephesians. 3.

6 It knows no man after the flesh. 2.5.16.

7 It knows but in part, and so is subject to error. 1. Cor. 13.

8 It is not obstinate in error, but willing to be reformed in what it has
been misinformed. 2. Tim. 2.16.

9 It is apt and desirous to receive further illumination. Col. 1.10. 2. Tim.
3.7.

10 And daily increases in this saving knowledge, Heb. 5.12.

11 It maintains perfection of godliness, and resolves that we cannot be too
righteous.

12 In our failings of practice, it remains sound, and gives no warrant to any
decay.

13 And cleaues to the word for it further establishing, howsoever we may be
humbled in our contrary practice.

14 Yea, it iustifies God, and the truth, though it be to the temporal
confusion of our present practice.

15 It labors to enlighten and inform others.

Helps to put on this Armor are, 1 A discerning of our own inward
blindness, Psalm. 119.28.

2 A daily meditation in the word and works of God. Psalm. 1.

3 A faithful recording and comparing of things past with things present; and
so collecting for the time to come. Luke. 2.51.

And this part of the Girdle serves The benefit thereof.
1 To condemn the blindness of nature, 1. Cor. 2.14. Matthew. 16.17.

2 To discern between the light of nature and grace, the illightning and
sanctifying Spirit. Col. 1.9. Ephesians. 5.8.

3 To direct all our actions: for as we know, so we do. Romans 14.5.23.

4 To make trial of them: for if they have not the light, it is because there
is no truth in them. Ioh. 3.21.

5 To inform and instruct others, Psalm. 34.

The second part of this Girdle is a sanctified conscience: and it is discerned
1 By this, that it excuses for all sins, as our persons are accepted in
Christ, Sect. 3. The sanctified conscience, and how discerned.
1. Cor. 4.4.

2 It checkes for the least sin, before actual repentance be performed. 1.
Ioh. 5.17.

3 It fears falling in regard of the weakness of the flesh, though repentance
be performed.

4 It endeavors in all things to please God. Act. 20. Heb. 13.18.

5 It is not suspicious, but judges charitably, where it knows not the
contrary.

6 It stands only bound by Gods word, and to his glory.

7 It so stands upon it clearing, that it relies wholly on Christ.

8 It applies particular chasticements, to particular and secret sins.

9 It approues our upright walking in the whole course of our life. Act 23.1.
Psa. 26.1.

10 It procures us peace with God, Romans 5.1. and with men so far as it is
possible and expedient, Romans 12.18.

11 It breeds contentment in the life, and all occasions. Phil. 4.12.

12 It procures cheerfulness in the countenance, and readiness in all our
business. Pro. 28.1.

13 It makes us courageous for the truth, and willing by all means to defend
the same. Act. 4.13. Act. 6.15. Act. 18.26.

14 It makes us victorious in troubles; and

15 Ready to yield up our lives to the hands of God, Act. 21.23.

And it is put on and preserved, How put on


1 By making conscience of all things commanded,, Psa. 119.6.

2 By keeping it tender and sensible of the least evil, Hebr. 13.18.

3 To this end view we it daily in the glass of the world; that so the
judgment may be kept clear, to prevent security.

4 Examine we, and censure the daily errors thereof, by calling it before the
Lord, to avoid spiritual blindness.

5 Avoid we, above all things, doubtfulnesse and distraction in our actions.
Romans 14.5.

6 Especially keep we our selves from wilful fighting against the light
thereof, in committing gross and presumptuous sins, Psa. 19.12.

7 Have we always more regard of it in the sight of God, then of our own
credit with men. 1. Cor. 4.4. Romans 2.29.

8 Fly we into the bosom thereof when outward things cross us Act. 23.1.

9 Rest we not so upon the justification thereof, but that we refer it ^^^o
the mercy of God, 1. Cor. 4.4.

The measure of this sincerity is:

1 Because we know but in part, therefore either we may not make conscience of
some things which others are bound to: and so not only dissent from them for a
time, but even afflict them. Or else,

2 We may, through ignorance, be scrupulous, and suspicious in some things
wherein others having knowledge, are free, and so afflict our selves
unnecessarily in not taking our Christian liberty.

3 Or because we know but in part, therefore make we account to be subject to
error, and so to distraction, and anguish of spirit.

4 As also, to curiousity, and searching after speculations.

5 And so to pride, and negligence in well-doing.

6 And so to hardness of heart.

7 And so to fearful terrors and soundings of spirit.

The benefit of this part of the Girdle is: The benefit thereof.
1 It procures and maintains true inward joy. 2. Cor. 1.12.

2 Hereby we have always boldness before God. 1. John. 3.20. to obtain good
things at his hands, Heb. 10.

3 And are enabled and furnished against all the reproaches and evils of men,
Pro. 18.

4 By this we are always certain of the things we do, and the acceptance of
them in the sight of God. Psa. 51.6.

5 Hereby we are comforted in the greatest Buffetings of Satan, and our
cowardly and unbelieving hearts, 1. Ioh. 3.21.

6 We attain to extraordinary sweetness and joy in the Holy Ghost. 1. Pet.
1.8. Romans 5.1.2.

7 And led along in most cheerful manner throughout all difficulties to the
receiving of the reward. Heb. 11.26.

8 we increase in sanctification and holiness. 1. Tim. 1.18.19.

9 We put to confusion the pride and practices of our enemies. 1. Sam. 26.21.

10 we receive hereby a pledge of eternal life, and have our conversation in
heaven, Romans 8.16. Phil. 3.20.

A third part of this sincerity consists in the will, Sect. 4. The sinceri-of
the will. It marks.
which discouers it self, 1 By cheerfulness in well-doing, not by compulsion,
but of a willing mind, 1. Cor. 9. 1. Pet. 5.

2 Subiecting it own will to the will of God in all things.

3 And so yielding it daily to the information of the word, and binding it
thereto.

4 Aiming at the full accomplishment of Gods will in earth, as it is in heaven.
Mat. 6.

5 Not consulting with flesh and blood in heavenly things.

6 Nor proposing our own glory in the performance thereof.

7 Complaining daily of the rebellions thereof. And so

8 Resisting sin, and the occasions thereof, Psa. 119.104.

9 Yielding to sin with grief. Romans 7.15.

10 Rising by repentance out of the same. Prou. 28.14.

The state and measure hereof, is: It measure.


1 That it is not free to good or evil, but freed to do good, Phil. 2.13.

2 And therefore of it self can will no good thing.

3 Yet so freed to good, as that it is in bondage to sin, Romans 7.18.

4 And therefore while we are about any good, evil is present with us, and we
are led captive thereto.

Yet so in bondage, as that it strives against that slavery, and gets daily
ground thereof. Romans 7.25. Ephesians. 2.3.

The benefit hereof is:

The benefit hereof.
1 To enable us to do good. Romans 7.18.

2 To comfort us in our outward failings, 2 Cor. 8.12. Romans 7.19.

3 To discern of our state in sanctification. Ephesians. 2.3. 1. Cor. 12.2.

4 To keep our judgments sincere and upright. 1. Tim. 6.5.

5 To kindle and order our affections in the service of God.

Sect. 5.
And this is a fourth part of this Girdle, even the well ordering of our
affections. The well ordering of the affections, and how discerned.
1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Romans 7.24.

And this is discerned,

1 By a right moving of them to their proper objects. Romans 7.22.25.

2 By their contentment in the same.

3 That what is in the judgment we have also in the affection.

4 In that we can more joy or grieve for spiritual causes, then for carnal.
Psa. 4. Psa. 119.

5 That they tend to the crucifying of the flesh, and building forward of the
New man. Coloss. 3.1.

6 That we labor more for affection then for knowledge.

7 Make we them as little known in company as may be, Genes. 45. especially
if the company and occasion be ordinary and civil.

8 Suspect we our own affection when the case concerns us.

9 And that our affections can send and encourage us to spiritual duties.

10 That indeed by them we are wholly emptied in our selves in respect of God,
2. Cor. 5.16. Genesis 5.22. Romans 12.1.

Helps hereunto are:

1 Knowledge of the right object, Mark. 3.5. 2 Cor. 7.

2 Weaning and abating them from the false. 1. Ioh. 2.15.

3 Trial of our selves in the practice of some one of our afflictions. Deuteronomy.
6.5.

4 Conscience to use them in all their several times and measure. Eccles. 3.1.
Romans 12.16.

The benefit thereof.
The benefit hereof is:

1 We shall attain hereby a gracious conquest over our most unruly thoughts.
Ephesians. 4.25.

2 We shall find much sweet peace and contentment in our Christian callings.

3 We shall be more ready pressed to good actions, 2. Cor. 7.

4 And saved from many noisome tentations, which otherwise would assault us. 2.
Ephesians. 4.26. Ioh. 19.12.

5 We shall have gracious fellowship with God. Col. 3.1.

6 And be better enabled to the conversion of our brethren. Ioh. 21.15.

A fifth part of this girdle is the sincerity of the Tongue: Sect. 6. The
sincerity of the Tongue: Wherein it is seen.
As 1 Being the stern of the ship, and the certain Image of the mind. Iam.
3.5.

2 In the well-gouerning whereof is the trial of sincerity, Psalm. 34. and note
of perfection, Iam. 1. Iam. 3

3 The misgouernment whereof is confusion to the owner, Prou. 18.7.21. and
others.

4 By keeping the same, we avoid trouble, Pro. 21.23.

5 And make the world serve our turn.

And it is discerned: 1 In holy speech. Eccles. 3.7. 2 In wise and seasonable
silence.


Concerning fit and warrantable speech, we are to observe: 1 Preparation to
speech. 2 The matter of it. 3 The manner thereof. 4 The end of the same.
We shall be prepared to speech,

1 By prayer to God to guide our tongue; and that because

Sect. 7. Of speech, and, 1 Of the preparation to it. 2 And be has promised
to bless this means to this end. 3 And the Saints have practiced this duty
profitably.

First, the Lord is Ruler of it. Prou. 16.1.

Secondly, by an holy consideration of these things,

1 That we are to speak in his presence. Psalm. 33.15.

2 That there is no liberty for idle talk. Math. 12.36.

3 That all speech must tend to edification. Ephesians. 4.29.

4 What the matter is we mean to speak of.

5 That what is once out cannot be recalled.

6 That we must give an account for every idle word. And thus we shall be
prepared to speak. Now The matter of our speech concerns either Persons,
Sect. 8. The matter of speech.
or Things. The persons

1 Almighty God and his works.

2 Our neighbor, and what concerns him.

3 Our own persons and occasions.

In our speech concerning our blessed God, we are to observe these Rules: 1
That we take not the names of Gods Majesty in our mouths, Sect. 9. How to
speak of God.
but upon most serious and weighty occasions. Exodus 20.

2 That in the occasion we find our hearts lively affected with a true
knowledge and holy reverence of God, before whom we speak, and before we use
his great and fearful name, least otherwise, though the cause be weighty, yet
we take it in vain.

3 That we find our selves comforted and established in our faith, by taking
of this great and glorious name, as being hereby drawn nearer unto God, and
settled more constantly in our love to his Majesty. To this end use not the name
of God without some addition of his attributes, as the Living Lord, the
Glorious God, My God, etc. Ephesians. 1.3.

4 Yea, that it may appear that we have not only knowledge of the Deity, but
also experience of his nature and properties, we are to give him such
attributes as concern the occasion whereof we speak. Genes. 43. Romans 16. 1.
Cor. 16. etc.

5 Take we heed that the name of God become not ordinary, and for custom.

6 Publish we the works of God not only for the present, but to posterity.
Sect. 4. How to speak of our neighbor.
Exodus 14.26.

Concerning our neighbor, our speech may be either good, or evil.

If we are to speak good of our neighbor, then we must do it:

1 Cheerfully, and upon every fit occasion. Luke 5.29.

2 Wisely, rather in his absence then in his presence.

3 Indifferently, as well if he be our foe as friend.

4 Constantly, maintaining the same testimony without any corruption or
gainsaying.

5 Truly, that we give him no more nor less then his due.

6 Charitably, if the matter be doubtful, rather with the better. 1. Cor.
13.7.

7 Preserve we his good name, by answering for him in a case of slander. 1.
Sam. 20.32. Sect. 15. What here to be avoided.


8 If he be fallen, raise we him up with the spirit of meekness, Gal, 6.1

Here are to be avoided these extremes.

First, those that are in defect: As

1. Deprauing of the actions of our brethren from the intent. Job. 1.9.11. as
if we knew their hearts.

2 Extenuating of them in the measure.

3 Mistaking them in the quality, which is the common practice of the world, to
call good evil, and evil good. Esa. 5.19.

4 Out-facing and bearing men down in their sincerity, and if it were
possible, to drive them from the same. Job. 4.8.11 etc.

5 Mis-iudging of it, by the outward event. Job. 27.

6 Conuincing thereof by false witness and perjury. 1. Reg. 20. etc.

7 Disgracing spiritual gifts for want of natures complement. 1. Sam. 1.14.

Secondly, We must here take heed of the other extreme in excess: As

1 Commending them to their faces.

2 Ascribing that unto them which is not theirs. Act. 12.

3 Yielding more unto them indeed then is theirs.

4 Daubing up their sins with untempered mortar. Ezekiel. 13. as presumption of
Gods mercy, or such like.

5 Crying peace, peace, and putting far off the evil day. Ier. 6.

6 Approving them for the gifts of nature, though they be not sanctified.
Pro., 1.30,

7 Flattring them, as if what they had came by their own industry.

8 Saying as they say, be it true or false. Mich. 2.11.

And thus is our speech to be ordered when we will speak good of our
Neighbor. If we have occasion to speak the contrary of him, let us consider
these bounds:

First, we must not speak what we certainly know not, but have by reports,
surmises, etc.

We may speak that to himself which we must not speak of him to another.
Math. 18.15.

Secondly, we must not speak all what we know, unless we have an especial
calling hereunto.

And that is,

1 When the Magistrate requires it.

2 When his case by admonishment needs it.

3 When danger to others thereby is prevented, as in case of murder, treason,
etc. 2. King. 6.8. Genesis 37.2. Est. 2.

Hence it follows,

First, that auricular confession is abominable, which binds to the
concealment of such wickedness.

Secondly, that it is sin to discover where we are bound to conceal.

As in cases hereafter laid down.

Thirdly, We must not speak that of our neighbor which we know, and is
necessary to be known to all persons; as neither,

To the weak, lest they stumble at it; nor to the wicked, lest they insult in
the infirmities of others. Genesis 8. 2 Samuel 1.

Fourthly, Some may speak that evil of their brethren which is not lawful
for others, As the Magistrate, or Minister in reproving of sin, may abase the
persons with names sorting with their sins, Gal. 4.1. Matthew. 3. which private
men may not do.

5 If it be thought fit to mention the evil which we know by any man: here

1 It must be done only in a general manner, the person and all circumstances
which will descrie the person concealed. 1. Cor. 6.11. 2. Sam. 12.1.

2 We must speak of his sin not with delight or contentment, but with
grief. Psalm. 119.

3 Unless we perceive obstinacy, and scorning of the means, then we are in an
Ironicall manner to leave them to their own lusts. 1. Reg. 22. Eccl. 11.7.

6 The party also in some cases may be discovered, but yet with a double
respect:

First, if his sin be of infirmity, here we may in some sort conceal the
sin: As

1 That it might be mistaken, in regard of the person, Acts 3.17.

2 That the fact may be misreported, and falsely conceived, etc.

If we see the party ashamed, and cast down for his sin, here we are bound
much more to cover it, And that

1 From God by hearty prayer, that it may be forgiven, Acts 7. Math. 27.

Secondly, from our selves: and that

1 By not taking notice of it willingly.

2 Not believing it.

3 Interpreting it to the best.

4 Forgiving it, if it be apparent.

3 We must also bide the sin from the sinner. And that

First, if we see him unfit to be reproved for the present, 1. Sam. 25.

Secondly, if we see him sufficiently checked already by his conscience, then
we must also hide his sin from him. And that

1 By opposing his contrary intent, Act. 3.17. Romans 10.2.

2 Comforting him, with his former course of holiness.

3 From the occasion, that it was in his heat, or provoked thereto in his
defense.

4 From the quality, that it was in ignorance, not wilfulness, infirmity, not
presumption.

5 From Gods mercy, which is above all his sin. Romans 5.20.

6 Age, that it was done in his youth, Psalm. 25.7.

7 The time of life, that yet there is hope to recover. Psalm, 95.2. Tim. 2.25.
and that it was but the first in that kind.

8 From the examples of the Saints, the best of whom have had their slips. Iam.
3.2. Psalm. 19.

9 From his person, opposing other good parts to counteruaile that evil. 1.
King. 15.5. Thus may we hide the sin from the sinner, and thus also may we
hide his sin from the world. If the sin be grievous, and cannot be
excused, yet here we must moderate our speech.

1 And prepare mercy for the party.

2 Acknowledge we it might have been our case, if God should have left us, and
so may be. Gal. 6.1.

3 Intimating his sorrow and detestation of the fact, as the truth shall be, 2.
Cor. 2.6.7.

4 Recounting circumstances that induced thereunto, though not to excuse
altogether, yet to diminish the same, or at lest to make known (...) our
selves. 1. Cor. 15.10.

5 Our speech must rather tend to the defect, then to the excess.

6 We must do it soberly and sparingly, rather showing that we are compelled
thereunto then of our own accord. 2. Cor. 11.

7 We must here especially regard how we are made manifest to the conscience of
the Saints. 2. Cor. 5.9.10.

8 And lastly we must herein especially aim at Gods glory. 1. Cor. 10.31.

Thus may we speak good of our selves. How to speak in dispraise of our
selves.
3 We are also bound to speak evil of our selves, in these cases,

1 We must confess our sin unto man, in that hereby we may clear others,
and give glory to God. Ios. 7.

2 Hereby also we ease our own souls. Psalm. 32.45. Iam. 5.

3 We magnify the mercies of God in recounting how unworthy we are. 1. Tim. 1.

4 We stay up others that have been overtaken with the same tentations, etc.
2. Cor. 1.4.

But here observe these cautions.

1 We are not bound to accuse our selves to the betraying of our innocence, or
the truth of God, or his children. Math. 17.

2 We may not open our infirmity to the disgrace of our calling, or offense
of others.

3 We must take heed of hypocrisy, as if by acknowledging our vileness, we
would be counted conuerts, as Esebolius did:

4 That we labor to hide what we have laid open, by casting our burden upon
Jesus Christ. 1. Tim. 1.

Thus may we speak of the evil that is in us. And thus much concerning the
persons of whom we must speak.

Concerning things to be spoken, observe, Sect. 14 Of things to be spoken


1 That we cannot speak of all, because we know but in part, and thereof it is
vanity to presume thus. 1. Cor. 13.

2 That we may not speak of al we know: Because,

1 Some things are known to us which are neither fit to be done nor spoken, as
the vain thoughts of our own hearts. 2. Cor. 12.

2 Some things are lawful to be done, which it is not lawful to speak of,
as the secrets and necessity of nature. Judge. 3.24.

3 Some things are lawful, but not fit to be spoken: such as either exceed the
capacities of those to whom we speak, or are not suitable to them. 2. Cor. 12.
Hebrew. 5.11. 1. Cor. 14.

3 We must speak what we know but with these conditions:

How to speak of what we know.
1 That we keep our selves within the compass of our callings.

2 That we speak from the holy purpose of the heart.

3 That we labor herein the glory of God. 1. Cor. 10.31.

4 And also the good of our neighbor. Ephesians. 4.29.

5 Yea our own increase both in knowledge and holiness. 1. Cor. 14 26.40.

6 Observing the fitnes of time, place, persons, etc.

Thus may we speak of such things as do occur. And thus far concerning the
matter of our speech.

Touching the manner thereof.

First, Sect. 15. The manner of speech, and 1 It must be gracious.
Our speech in general must be gracious, which is, when the graces of God
imprinted in the heart, are truly pictured in the tongue. Col. 4.6.

Hence it follows.

1 That all rotten and ungracious speech is disclaimed.

2 No vice must be spoken of, but with dislike. Revel. 2.

3 No gracious speech, but from a gracious heart.

Secondly, Speech is then gracious, when it is seasoned with wisdom Act. 2.4

And this is when our speech is applied:

1 Fitly to times, places, persons circumstances. Prou. 19.11. Pro. 10.31.
Esaias. 50.5.

20 When it profits most to the good of men's souls.

3 When it turns not to the hurt of the speaker. 2. Tim. 2.16.

4 When it proceeds from a wise and understanding heart. Eccles. 12.11.

Hence is disclaimed,

1 All foolish talk, wanting reason and conscience. Ephesians. 5.

2 All carnal counsel of worldlings, whatsoever show of wisdom it has in it.
1. Sam. 17.

3 All unseasonable and indiscreet communication.

4 All mystical, or curious conference, etc. 1. Tim. 6.20.

A second holy property of speech is:

Sect. 16.2 Our speech must be true.
1 Truth and fidelity. Ephesians. 4 25. And it is discerned;

1 When we know what we speak upon a sure ground.

2 We speak as the thing is, the whole truth, and no more.

3 And as himself thinks, plainly thereof, not out of others conceits.

4 And also to the mind and purpose of him that asks.

5 And that to have the truth boulted out, not obscured.

6 When we stand to that we have spoken and promised, which that we may do,

Here consider diverse evidences and bonds of truth, Sect. 17. Of the bonds of
truth. 1 Evidences
As First, A simple assertion, which is either,

1 A simple affirmation, Yea, Yea. Math. 5.

2 Or, a bare negation, Nay, Nay

Here observe

1 That in a doubtful case we must add unto our affirmations (these
qualifications: ( As I think, How to affirm in doubtful cases.
As I take it,) because words thus spoken, if they prove true, they show the
modesty of the speaker: If false, yet they save his credit, as showing that
there is not a purpose to deceive, but only that we were deceived.

2 Another evidence of Truth, is, an asseueration, wereby we do vehemently
deny or affirm a (...)

3 The matter.
3 Consider we the matter of an oath.

1 It must not only be true, but so known to us. Ier. 4.2.

2 It must be honest that we swear to.

3 It must be a truth of great importance.

4 The manner.
4 Observe we the manner of an oath, as

1 It must be made in the only name of God.

1 By invocation of his name, to witness the truth of what we swear.

2 And to bless us therein.

2 By imprecation against our selves, whereby we bind our selves if we deceive,
to the vengeance of God.

3 It must be done, not rashly, but with great aduisement.

4 And also with great reverence and feeling, not without prayer unto God to
guide the heart. Eccles. 9.2.

Fourthly, The true and lawful swearer is, indeed

1 The regenerate man, who has right in this service, 5 He that may swear
and knows how to use it aright. Romans 2. and none other.

2 And he must also have a particular calling to this service.

3 Here learn, that though the party in regard of his general calling might
not swear, yet his oath being made, is lawful, if he have a civil calling
thereto, and may be taken, hows^^^euer the swearer herein be not justified.

6 The right use and end of an oath is: 6 The end and causes of an oath.


1 To end controversies between man and man, and free those that are wrongfully
accused.

2 To clear our innocence before men. Heb. 6.16.

3 To provide for the infirmities of men. 1. Sam. 12.5. Genesis 31.53.

4 To witness a truth unto men And to

5 Bind our selves more constantly to the service of God. Neh. 10.1. Chron.
15.23. 6 Before whom we must swear


Sixthly, Consider we the parties before whom we may swear, which are;

1 The Magistrate, who may lawfully exact an oath.

2 To a private man we may also swear to bind contracts.

3 The Master may require an oath of the servant. Genesis 24^ and so the father
of the son, the husband of the wife, etc. one friend of another.

Seventh, Observe we the time of an oath, 7 When
which is:

1 In a case of necessity, when witness fail, or words will not be taken.

Hence it follows:

8 How an oath binds.
1 That we need not swear when the party to whom we swear, is not willing to
accept it.

2 And neither also, if the matter may be cleared by any other lawful means.

Eighthly, Learn we how an oath binds.

1 If it be imposed by him, that may lawfully give it.

2 If it be made of things lawful.

3 If it tend to our own and neighbors good.

4 When Gods glory also is preserved thereby.

9 Wisely consider we the abuses of an oath, which are: 9 The abuses of an oath


1 Usurping such attributes as only belong to God, as: As I live etc.

2 Swearing by Images, trifles, Saints, nullities, etc. Zep. 1.5.

3 Swearing ordinarily, in common speech, or upon heat in gaming, etc. Ier.
5.7. Mat. 5.

4 Rash swearing, when we know not the cause, or have no calling thereto, or
advise not wisely in the action.

5 Murdering of oaths, when we say cods for God, fecke for faith, swounds
for wounds, etc. where hoping to escape the imputation of swearing, we are more
guilty thereof.

6 Outrageous and blasphemous swearing, the badge of ruffians, and rake-hels.

7 Cursed swearing, with fearful imprecations against our selves and others.
Mat. 26. Peter.

8 Wicked swearing, when we bind our selves by oaths to mischief. Act. 23.

9 False swearing, when we swear to that ignorantly, which proves false.

10 Perjury when we know a thing to be false, and yet will swear to it: of
set purpose to do mischief Zach. 5.4.

11 Swearing for hire to any purposes. Act. 6.

12 When we swear to impossibilities, as when the Priest is sworn by the
Bishop to the vow of continency, etc.

Consider we the danger and punishment of unlawful speaking as that hereby,

1 We lie open to Gods curse.

2 Expose our selves to perjury.

3 Shall not be credited neither for word, nor oath.

4 Make the land mourn under this burden. Ier 23.

5 Shall find our selves disenabled, to take the name of God holily and
conscionably.

Generally here is condemned:

First, al kind of lying, upon what pretense soever: Now a lie is then made, 1
When welspeake falsely. 2 And are willing so to do. 2. King. 5. Sect. 21. Of
flattery.
3 Purpose to deceive thereby, Act. 5.


Hence it follows, that all

1 False speaking of ignorance, is no lie.

Secondly, Here is condemned all smoothing and dissembling of a matter, with
purpose to deceive. Eeither

1 By extenuating of it.

2 By excusing the fact.

3 By using pretexts and shifts to avoid it.

4 By mental reservation and such like Iesuitical, and Atheistical tricks

Thirdly, Also, all concealing of truth, when we are bound to speak is here
forbidden.

4 All ambiguous and doubtful speeches. Sest. 22. Concealing of truth.


5 To speak untruths, though not with purpose to deceive.

6 All promise-breaking, when the promise is lawfully made.

A third bond of truth, is imprecation, that is a binding of our selves to the
performance of ttuth by imposing on our selves, for default the curse of the
Law. Neh. 10 29. 1. Sam. 25. This now is abrogated because we are not under the
curse, only comparatively we may rather wish our selves accursed then God may
be dishonored. Rom 9. We may confess we have deserved the curse that so we
may fly to Christ: 3. In stead of the curse we should rather bind our selves
by the sweet and sure promises and by our interest therein, as better fitting
our condition under grace.

And thus far concerning the second grace of speech, which is truth. Sect.
23. The third grace of speech.
A third grace of holy speech is Reverence. And this is in regard, either of

First God, of whose name and titles we must so speak that we both,
Reverence, and that 1. In respect of God.


1 Show reverence our selves, and*

2 Move reverence in others Deuteronomy. 28.58.

And this we shall do:

1 If we know God a right.

2 And fear him as our father: Malach. 1.

3 Behold him in his judgments upon the wicked. Psalm. 119.120.

4 Think often and meditate upon him.

Secondly, we must use reverence in speech in regard of man, and that either
generally, 2. Of man.
as he bears Gods image. So we must,

1 Give holy names unto our children: But here with sobriety, Sect. 24. To give
holy names to to our children.
not the names of God, as Jesuits, etc. but such as, Michael.

1 May show our thankfulness to God Genesis 41.

2 May show our true humiliation under his corrections. Ruth. 1.

3 May put us in mind of his promise. Israel. Ge. 32.

4 May remember us, of our own frailty, and wretchedness, Adam Genesis 33.

5 May intimate our true estate and condition in this life. Est. 2.5.

6 May encourage us to the hope of the life to come.

7 May minister comfort in our troubles, and such like.

2 We must not name professors by the names of profane men.

3 We may change names upon just occasion, as when any are converted from
Gentilism to Christianity, and so baptized, etc. but

1 Not not to deceive withal, neither

2 To deny Christ in the time of trouble.

2 We are to use reverence in more particular manner unto man, Sect. 25.
Reverence to our superior.
as he is our superior either in calling or gifts 1. Cor. 12.13. provided,

1 That we give him not the titles of God, as Iehoua, etc.

2 Give him the titles of his office, though he be evil, Acts 26.25.

3 And yet here so carry our selves, as that we may humble him in the
performance thereof.

Therefore here is forbidden. Here forbidden.


1 All manner of blasphemy; which is either, 1. Blasphemy.
First by detracting ought from God.

2 Or ascribing to him that which beseems him not.

3 Using his great and fearful names in our fumes and rage.

4 Inuocating him also in slight and customary matters.

5 Using the names of God to sorcery, witchcraft. 2. All abuse of scripture


2 All abuse of Scripture: And this is either,

1 When we have no calling to use it. 1. Cor. 14.34.

2 We speak of the things of God in a profane and carnal manner. 1. Cor. 2.

3 When we make jests thereof.

4 When we keep back any of Gods counsel, and clip the word of God. Math.
4. Act. 20.

5 When we use it to sorcery.

2. Abuse of our selves.
6 And when we reason and cavil about the truth thereof.

3 All abuse of our selves or others:

Either,

1 By reuilings and barbarous speeches. 1. Sam. 16. dead dog.

2 Cursing or banning. Colos. 3.8.

3 Scoffing and scorning each other. Psalm. 1. 2. King. 2. especially for our
profession and religion.

4 Not using titles of honor, etc. Genesis 39. He has brought in

5 Not calling by their names, but rather by such attributes as may tend to
disgrace. Genesis 39.14. Hebrew servant. 1. Sa. 25.10. The son of Ishay, etc. as
by country, base parentage, etc.

6 Currish and dogged speech, etc.

And thus far of the third grace of speech, which is reverence. Sect. 26. A
fourth grace of speech Sobriety, and Modesty.
A fourth grace of speech is sobriety, modesty, or meeknes. And this is seen.

1 In praising others, and that rather behind their backs then before their
faces.

2 In praising and dispraysing our selves, as before. And where in.


3 In speakeing of things secret which may move blushing, fairly Genesis 4.11. 1.
Sam. 24.4.

4 Conferring with inferiors tenderly and humbly.

5 Saluting kindly and reverently. And that,

1 By name. Romans 16.

2 By profession. Romans 16.3. Sect. 27. Of saluatio^s


3 Calling or office.

4 By the way of blessing. Romans 16 24.

5 Praying for the blessing of God upon them.

Here observe,

1 That it is lawful for children to invoke the blessing of their paren^^^s
Genesis 27. Genesis 48.

2 That we may salute generally though the person be evil, so far as we
may converse with him, giving the titles of his profession, calling, etc. Ge.
34. Act. 26.

3 That we avoid such blessing and charitable speeches (as we account them)
when the cause is not necessary, as in neesing, etc.

Popish blessing to be moderated.
4 Whereas it is common with the Popish and ignorant to invoke the name of God
over their cattle so often as they speak thereof, this is to be moderated and
refrained. And that

1 Because the ground thereof was sorcery.

2 They use it more often for their cattle then themselves.

3 It maintains that Popish customary abusing of such holy names.

4 It shows our infidelity, for if we were persuaded that God has received us
into grace, then surely also all ours; and therefore what need such often
inuocations?

This meeknes of speech is seen in soft answering. Sect. 28. Of soft
ananswering.
Proverbs 15.25. And that,

Secondly, not a fool according to his foolishness. Proverbs 26.3.

Thirdly, in a just defense of our selves. 1. Sam. 1.15. Anna.

Fourthly, commending our cause to God. Psalm. 26. Sect. 28. Of reproof of
sin.


Secondly, this grace of speech is especially seen in reproving of sin. Here
observe these Rules.

1 We must try all other gentle means before we reprove.

1 We must perform it generally, that so the party may willingly acknowledge
the particular. 2. Sam. 12.

3 We must do it in a parable.

4 By way of exhortation, insinuating an oblique reproof. 1. Tim. 5.1.

5 Wrapping up the reproof in some sweet protestations of love and grief.
Gal. 5.9. Romans 9.

6 Yielding unto them their due, that so they may acknowledge their wants, Act.
25. reproving in the person of another.

6 Joining our selves with them, and in our own person reproving their sin.
1. Corinthians. 4.6. Genes. 43.

7 By prevention; as, Though Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah sin,
Hos. 4.15.

8 Wishing that such things be not found among them. 2. Cor. 12.20.

9 Speaking to them as considering our selves. Gal. 6.1. That we are in danger
of the same tentations.

10 Framing the reproof out of the word, that the party may see himself
rather reproved of God then of us.

11 Adjoining to our reproof holy example of our conscience in the thing which
we reprove in another. And

12 Commending the reproof to the blessing of God.

Sect. 30. A fit grace of speech is cheerfulnes and joy. It conditions.
And thus far of the fourth grace of speech, which is meeknes and modesty.

A fifth grace of speech is cheerfulnes and joy, when we use delightful speech
for recreation. Eccles. 3.4.

Here is to be observed:

1 That it must be seasoned with Gods fear. Eccles. 2.2.

2 It must be with compassion for those that are in affliction. Amos. 6.6.

3 It must be sparing and moderate. 2. Tim. 3.

4 It most not be mixed with sin. Heb. 11.25.

5 It must tend to edification. 1. Cor. 10.

6 It must be suitable to the time.

7 It must also be fitted to the place, which is either the board or bed.

For the board observe, How fitted to the board


1 The intent, the which is to hinder other idle and profane talk.

2 To season the company with better.

3 To prevent gluttony.

4 A desire to catch spiritually.

5 To sanctify the creatures.

2 Consider the matter of Table-talke. Which,

1 Especially must be of religion. Luke 11.35.

2 That which is incident hereunto, As

1 Of our union with God: As the meat is made one substance with us; so we
after an unspeakable manner are made one with God.

2 Of our liberty in Christ, that all is ours, and that we may safely and
freely partake thereof.

3 Of our miserable condition; for were we not sinful, we need not eat, nor
find such loathsomeness, or want of content thereby.

4 Of our estate in glory, where this Manna shall cease.

3 Of sobriety, and such examples.

4 Gods special providence and bounty in making a dead creature means to
preserve life. Joel. 2.26. Haggai. 1.6.

5 Contentation in our estate, with prayer for other that have fullness or
want. 1* Tim. 6.

6 Death, how that we shall be worms meat.

7 Of the heavenly food, Ioh. 4.

8 Misery of the poor, which want in our fullness.

9 Of our life by faith, because both these unlikely do nourish, and we weak,
unthankful, riotous, are nourished.

10 Change of things and states, but within our bounds. Job. 1.

11 The punishment of sin, the case of Dives. etc. Luke 16.

For the bed; let these be the rules of holy mirth. 1 We must confer of the
grave. Act. 7. How for bed.


2 Of the occasions passed in the day. Cant. 3.1.

3 Of the security of the Church. 2. Cant.

4 And watchfulness in the night. 3. Cant.

5 Of the ignorance of the land. And

6 The continual night in hell.

7 Of the Resurrection.

8 Of worldly occasions, so far as to humble us.

9 In our comforts of our sweet fellowship with Christ.

10 Generally, not to provoke, but to mortify the flesh. Gal. 5.13.

Here to be avoided.
Here is to be avoided generally, 1 All offense to the weak. 2 All occasion to
the wicked.


As in

First, Jesting, which is a quipping of some to delight others, 1 Jesting with
it bounds.
wherein a man had rather loose his friend, then his jest: offend God, rather
then not please man.

This is utterly unlawful, unless, 1 The matter be indifferent.

2 The measure modest.

3 The season convenient.

4 Offense removed.

5 Our selves and others benefited.

6 We thereby, when other reproves will not prevail, in an holy manner do
deride and scorn sinners. 1. Reg. 19. Eccles. 11. giving them up to their own
councels.

Secondly, laughter, which though in it self it be not simply unlawful, 2
Laughter
yet it is moderately to be be used, and seldom; but sorrow more often, and
more plentifully. Eccles. 7.4.5.

The sixth grace of speech is, Sect. 31. A sixth grace of speech, care of our
neighbors good name. 1 How performed. 2 What avoided.
Care of our neighbors good name. Pro. 22.

This is performed as before, and farther,

1 By being not suspicious in unlikely, or uncertain occasions. Ier. 40.

2 By private reproving him.

4 Publicly answering for him if he be slandered.

Here is to be avoided,

1 Secret whispering abroad of what we suspect or know, behind his back. Psalm.
50.20.

2 Adding to, or changing the thing said or done. Mat. 26.60.61.

3 Open traducing and reuiling to his face. 2. Sam. 16.

4 Telling that was never done. Ier. 37.13.

5 Coloring their reports with pretenses of grief or necessity, or public
profit, inioyning secrecy by the party to whom he tells it, etc.

6 Rash censuring, before evident knowledge.

Therefore here we are, 1 To interrupt such talk. 2 To give no heed to it. 3
Not to believe it. 4 To reprove it.


Sect. 32. The seventh grace of speech: slownesse and briefnes.
The seventh and last grace of speech is Slownesse and Briefness.

Slownesse is seen either in

First, provoking; or

Secondly, answering.

Herein observe:

1 That it is better to be provoked to speech, then provoke; especially if we
be inferior.

2 Not to take a Tale out of ones mouth; but to hear it thoroughly.

3 To consider whether it be to be answered, or no.

4 To ponder on it before we answer, what answer is to be made thereto.

5 To answer to the points, omitting partial respects.

6 To cut off idle interruptions, and vain cauils.

7 Not to power out all our minds at once, but to keep some what till
afterward, Prou. 29.

Here is to be avoided.

1 Pride to hear a man's self speak.

2 The fruit thereof, namely:

First, Obscurity.

Secondly, Affectation.

2 We must avoid tempting speeches, whereby we may si^^^^^^ and undermine
others.

4 As also, that spirit of contradiction, whereby thwarting oothers and
contradicting every man, Heresy and Atheism is bred and maintained.

5 We must also refrain bitterness, and captious taking up of our brother, a
fault incident to briefness of speech.

6 As also, we must beware of sottishnes and inconsequence of speech, while
happily we think to show our skill in breuity.

Hitherto appertain,

1 Restraining of our passion, by interrupting our selves, if by course of
speech we grow into an heat.

2 Correcting our selves by silence wherein we have mis-said.

3 Contracting our matter into the briefest form of words.

4 Disposing it methodically to the best capacity of the hearer.

An eighth grace of speech is Wisdom. 1 That we minister a word in due
season, Isa. 50. As, comfort to whom comfort belongs, and when he is fit for
comfort, being thoroughly humbled; and so reproof.

2 That we submit subordination to the best ends.

3 That we affect not words, but labor to express our matter in the fewest
and plainest.

4 And also neglect not to ascribe what in ciuility belongs to each. And

5 In charity ascribe for religion what is outwardly apparent, leaving the
heart to God.

6 Not judging peremptorily of any, though his estate be outwardly desperate.

7 Neither discovering our own good or evil, but when, as before, we hear a
calling

General Rules to be observed herein. 1 That what is here spoken of Speech,
Rules herein.
is to be understood also of Writing, in which all these graces are to be
practiced, and vices to be avoided.

2 That in all kind of speech, as well Latin as English, etc. exemplary, as
wherein though the phrases of other tongues may lead us to prophanesses, yet
we must avoid them. As in Grammar, Would God I did, etc.

Hitherto of speech.

Now because we cannot speak well, unless we know also how to hold our
peace, we are therefore, in the second place, to consider of silence. Sect. 33
Of silence, and the right use thereof.


Here observe,

1 That the Rule of silence must be Gods word.

2 Matter of silence, concerns God, our Neighbor, our Selves.

3 Persons, before whom.

Things to be conceald And first, wherein silence is to be used.
4 The end, which is,

Gods glory, ours and others good.

Things concerning God, are:

1 His secrets which we know not, and therefore are to admire them in silence.
Deuteronomy. 29.29.

1 Concerning God.
2 His strange and extraordinary works, which we may not speak boldly of, but
rather in silence wonder at. Job. 36.37. Leuit. 10.3.

3 We are to conceal the mercy of from God obstinate sinners.

4 We are to conceal his judgments from humbled sinners.

5 We are to be silent at his corrections. Psalm. 39. hereby showing our
submission to his will.

6 We are to yield to the known truth, and in silence to glorify God. Act.
11.18.

2 Concerning our selves.
Touching our Neighbor, observe

1 That we may conceal some truth from him, not being demanded; yea, being
question^^^d we may conceal either the whole, or part:

Provided that it do not.

1 Hinder Gods glory.

2 Or my neighbors good.

Truth in the whole is to be concealed:

1 When the speaking of the least word is hurtful: as for example, the father
and son lies sick at once, the son dies first, the father asks whether
the son be dead or no; if it be said, No, an untruth is told; if yea, the
fathers life is endangered: therefore silence is best. 2. Sam. 12.

2 When the revealing thereof indangers the life of the innocent; 3 What to be
conceald Aug. lib. ad conser.
and therefore I am not to reveal my brethren in affliction, nor to be
compelled thereto by oath:

Provided, first, that the authority requiring this be unlawful.

2 The thing I conceal, be not in it self evil; but so mistaken.

3 That in the concealing of it, I prefer not a private before a public
good.

Truth in part is to be concealed; when I speak a part of the truth, but not
the whole. 1. Sam. 16.1. 23. Ier. 38.24. Exodus 5. Act. 23.6.

Q. When I am demanded, may I answer in part?

Yea so,

1 I purpose not to deceive.

2 Content the mind of the answerer.

Secondly, I am to conceal the infirmities of my Neighbor, unless (as
before) we be called of God to speak, Prou. 17.14. Prou. 19.11.

3 All unseemly matters,

4 Such as concern us not,

5 And such as are above our reach, are to be buried in silence.

3 Ministers must conceal the infirmities of their people, unless they be
otherwise vnreclaimable.

4 Magistrates secrets of state, least the enemy know them.

Concerning my self. I am,

1 To conceal mine own secrets. Iud. 14. or else, if need be, tell those that
are faithful of silence concerning my self.

2 That which thou would have no man know, tell no man.

As for the persons before whom we must keep silence: 4 Before whom we must
keep silence.
they are 1 The malicious enemies of religion, Mat. 7.6. Mat. 27.14. Ps. 39.2.

2 Before Magistrates in open Courts, Act. 24, 10. till we be bidden.

3 In the presence of our elders and betters. Job. 32.8.

4 Fools and pratlers are to be humbled and convinced with silence. Pro. 26.

Thus far concerning the guidance of the tongue.

The sixth and last part of this Girdle of truth contains the fitting and
conforming our outward actions to the will of God, which is performed 1 When
they proceed from a true ground

2 And are to be performed true means, and a holy manner. Sect.34. Last part
of the Girdle: Conformi^^^ie of outward actions.


3 When they aim, at a right end. The ground of all good actions is faith in
Jesus Christ. Romans 14. Heb. 11.6.

1 Assuring us, that our persons are accepted of God, and so our (...) Gods
mere mercy in Jesus Christ. Phil. 3.

12 That we be that we seem to be.

13 That we make conscience of the least as well as the greatest.

14 That we provide things honest before men, as well as in the sight of God.

15 Distrust the goodness of that work in w^^^ich thou have not a contrary
tentation.

16 Especially if thou be not rowsed with an imputation of hypocrisy.

17 That we measure not the substance of well-doing by particular actions.

18 That the rule for approbations of our actions be the acceptance of our
persons in Christ, not any perfection that is in the^.

19 That in all well-doing we discern a kind of foolishness in regard of the
wisdom of the world, and of the flesh.

1 To be abased in our selves.

2 To give God the glory.

3 To try the sincerity thereof in regard of the opposition of the world. 1.
Cor. 3.18.

The end of our actions is,

1 That whatsoever we do, The end what,
it be done to Gods glory. 1. Cor. 10.31. and this is performed: 1 Gods glory.


1 In sanctifying and auspicating them by prayer and invocation of the name of
God. 1. Tim. 4.

2 In returning the strength of them to the worship of God, in causing our
light to shine before men. Math. 5.20. Prou. 5.10.

3 In all things, and in every issue of them, giving thanks to God the father,
through Jesus Christ.

4 Being abased before the Lord in regard of our unworthiness to do him any
service, as also of the unworthiness of the service we do perform.

5 Acknowledging that nothing is due unto us but shame and confusion of our
faces. Dan, 9.

6 Desiring to be found in Christ, not having our own righteousness, which is
of the Law, but that which is by the faith of Christ. Phil. 3.9.

2 Edification how accomplished.
Secondly, we must do all things to edification both of our selves and others.
Here observe:

1 That the less benefit must give place to the greater.

2 That in all things next to Gods glory, our chief aim must be the salvation
of the soul. 1. Cor. 16.

3 That more regard be had of those which are within, the^ which are without,
Gal. 6.10. 1. Cor. 6. and yet the good of none neglected.

4 That of those which are within, we have more respect to the weak in cases
of indifferency. Romans 14. Romans 15.1.

5 That our conversation be answerable to our profession. Ephesians. 4.1.

6 That we have as well strong meat for men, as milk for babes; not sticking
always in the infancy of our profession, but growing up in Jesus Christ,
Hebr. 6.1. Hebr. 13.

7 That we abound in weldoing, and make sure our Election by good works. 2.
Pet. 1.8.9.

8 That we as well cast out the hypocrite and stumbling-blocke, as hold on the
sound Christian. Ier. 1.

9 We must bring forth fruit in due season, observing the comeliness of time,
place, persons, etc. Psa. 1.3.

10 That in actions either doubtful or deceitful, as we have cause to suspect
them.

1 If they grieve the godly.

2 If they give occasion of the wicked to rejoice: so we may have comfort if
the conscience approve, and the Saints allow, though the wicked condemn. etc

This Girdle is put on.

1 By continual setting of our hearts before God, How applied.
for the searching thereof.

2 Trying all our thoughts, words, and actions, by the word.

3 By continual watching over our ways.

4 By earnest prayer to God.

And it is kept on,

1 By not straining the conscience in the least evil, Hebr. 13.18.

2 By cleaving to the testimony thereof, and reioyi^^^ng especially therein. 2.
Cor. 1.12.

3 By obeying the checkes of conscience.

4 Conuincing the hollownesse and hypocrisy of the world.

5 Laboring and aprouing sincerity in others.

6 Daily fearing our selves, and renewing our covenant with God.

7 Renouncing daily our selves, and flying to Christ. Phil. 3.12.13.

Benefit of this part of the Girdle.
The use of this Girdle is:

1 We are ready pressed to do Gods will. Reu. 1.

2 We are cleared from hypocrisy, which is the moth of well-doing. Mat. 6.
Mat. 23.

3 We avoid vncertatnty, and dullness in good things.

4 We are preserved from corruption in judgment, and Apostasy in life.

5 All other gifts of God are adorned and approved thereby.

6 We are enabled to hold out to the end, and so obtain the Crown.

7 As by this rule of our actions, discerning the unworthiness thereof.

8 In the unworthiness of the action, discerning the worthiness of our persons
in Christ, and growing up in him by faith to perfection.

9 The other parts of the spiritual Armor are compact in themselves, and
fastened to us by it: The next whereof is the Breast Plate of righteousness, or
Innocence. And this is, 1 An inclination and resolution of the heart to all
good. Sect. 35. The Breast Plate of righteousness


This is necessary,

1 To justify and beautify our profession, and make sure our election. 2. Pet
1.10.

2 That we may be freed from many inward pangs, and outward troubles.

3 By abstaining from the occasions and appearance of evil. 1 Thessalonians. 5.

4 By justifying and maintaining the same, with the loss of al in respect
thereof. Act. 21. Job. 2.

5 By walking conscionably in the duties of our callings.

6 By trying our faith which is the life thereof. 2. Cor. 13.

7 Undergoing continual troubles for the same. And to this end serves the
third part of this Armor. This is, that our feet be shod with the preparation
of the Gospel, that is:

1. What it is
In the assurance of our acceptance into the favor of God, through Jesus
Christ, we are armed and prepared:

First, to Deny our selves.

Secondly, to take up the cross of Christ and to follow him. Luke 9.23.

And this must be done.

1 That troubles find us not unprepared. 2. The use of this part.
Job. 3 25.

2 That the fear of them may not dismay us.

3 That we be not overwhelmed with the weight of them. 2. Corin. 4.8.9.

4 That our minds may be quieted in the midst of them. Rom 5.2.

5 That we may be more then conqueror in them. Romans 8.24.

6 That we may comforts others which groan under the like burden 2. Cor. 1.4.5.

7 And so finish our course and obtain the crown. 2. Tim. 4.

This armor is put on, and so kept: 1 By daily reading and meditating on the
passion of Christ. How to be attained, and preserved.
Heb. 12.2.

2 Giving all diligence to the word preached.

3 Preferring the favor of God in Christ above all things. Ps. 4.6.

4 Not depending upon things seen, but contemplating things invisible. Heb.
11.1.

5 Having our eye fixed on the recompense of the reward, and comparing the
momentany trouble, with the surpassing weight of glory Heb. 11.26.

And here the shield of faith, is of special use, which is the fourth part of
this Armor: Sect. 37. A fourth part of the Armor, the shield of faith.
And it is a full and strong persuasion of the love of God in Christ Jesus, Romans
8.38. whereby

1 We beat back all the fiery darts of the devil, as carnal confidence,
presumption, security, infidelity, distrust, credulity, etc.

2 Prize all things at their true worth and prosecute them accordingly:

3 We preserve the graces of God, and increase them unto us.

4 We follow hard to the mark, and attain perfection. Phil. 3.13.

This is requisite:

It use.
1 To give approbation to all our actions.

2 To give comfort in regard of their imperfections.

3 To enable us in our sufferings Job. 1.5.

4 To finish our course and procure us the crown. Hebrew 11.13 2. Tim. 4^

5 To overcome tentations, as despair, and presumption of Gods mercy, etc.

6 To obtain a comfortable life

7 To be prepared unto death. This is obtained and preserved as before. Cap. 7,
Sect. 38. The fifth part the helmet of hope.
A fifth part of this Armor is the helmet of hope. This is

1 A constant desire of the promised happiness. Mat. 5.6. Phil. 1.23. 2. Tim.
4.8.

2 A cheerful expectation and waiting after the same.

3 A resigning our selves into the hands of God. Psalm. 5.12.

And it differs from faith:

1 In the manner of apprehending faith apprehends things to come, as if they
were present.

Hope discerns them as they are in time to be performed and so waits the
accomplishment of them.

2 In the use, Faith gives a being to things that are not, calling (...) Lord
when means fail. ibid. 5. and resting in him. Prou. 14.32 Romans 4.

5 Reverent observing of the works of God. Psalm 40.4. Psalm 115.11.

6 Depending on the truth of Gods promises, though we see the^ not
accomplished. Psalm. 46.5. Psalm. 130.9. Prou. 16.20.

7 Expecting the Lords leisure, contrary to sense and reason* Psalm. 69.4. Esaias
26.8

8 Abasing and renouncing our selves before the Lord. Psalm. 131.3 Zeph. 3.12.

9 Submitting our selves to the ministry of the Gospel. Es. 50.10.

10 Waiting further upon God, then this life can counteruaile. 1. Cor. 15.19.

The last part of this spiritual armor, is the sword of the Spirit, which is
the word of God. Sect. 39. The last part the sword of the Spirit.
Hebrew 4 Psalm 149. etc

And this must be had,

First, To discern:

1. It use.
1 The deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3.13.

2 The poison of error and heresy. 1. Tim. 6.3.

3 The corruption of our own hearts. Heb. 12.

4 The manifold subtilties and deepenesse of Satan. Apoc. 2.24. 2. Pet. 1.19.

5 The riches of Gods mercy. Ephesians. 3.18. Ephesians. 1.18.

Secondly, to confirm and maintain

1 Faith against infidelity and coffeehouse.

2 Hope against despair. To. 15.4

3 Truth against error and humane wisdom. James 1.18.

Christ against Antichrist.

4 God against man.

Thirdly, To captiuate and subdue:

1 Every imagination that exalts it self against God. 2. Cor. 10.4.

2 To cut off the power and cords of sin. Hos. 6.

3 To repel the impudency and importunity of Satan. Mat. 4.

Fourthly, To purge: 1 Zeal, of ignorance and selfeloue 2 Religion, of
hypocrisy. 3 Profession, of vain glory. 4 Weldoing, of wearisomnesse 5 Faith
of carnalnesse. 6 Afflictions, of impatiency, etc.


Fifthly, To confound: 1 Satan's kingdom. Mat. 4. 2 The fleshes tyranny. Tit.
2.11. 3 The worlds deceitfulness. Ps. 119.95


Our hearts doubtfulnesse. Psalm. 73.17.

2 How obtained.
5 Man's inventions. Psalm. 119.113

This armor is obtained and put on,

1 By prayer.

2 Study and meditation. 1. Tim 4.13.

3 Submitting our selves to the word preached. 3 Trial ^^^ereof.
Iam. 1.21.

These means how wrought effectually:

1 When our understanding is illightened, and delighted with the saving
knowledge thereof.

2 Our judgments confirmed, and established in the same. Ep. 1.9*

3 Our consciences convinced, and quieted therein. Romans 5.1.

4 Our will and affections subdued and captiuated thereto. Ps. 40.6.

5 Our desire enflamed and insatiable thereof. Mat. 5.6.

6 Our mind satisfied and contented therewith, above all treasures. Psalm.
119.97. Psalm 19.10.

7 Our lives reformed and amended thereby. Psalm. 119.9.

8 Our faith quickened, and daily nourished by the same. 2. Pet. 1.

9 And we enabled to overcome tentations, and to finish our course with joy.
Psalm. 119.7.9.

And this armor is kept on:

1 By recording and rehearsing the same unto other: 4. How kept on.
so to labor their conversion. Lu 22.23.

2 By spiritual experience of the power thereof in putting our knowledge into
continual practice.

3 By cleaving constantly to an effectual ministry. John. 10.5.

4 By suffering afflictions for the Gospel. Heb. 10. Act. 21.

5 By laboring to have it to dwell plentifully among us, and to have the power
thereof more and more abound in the mortifying of our affections and special
sins. Col. 3.16. Tit. 2.11.

Thus far of the parts of the Christian armor.

Now the necessity in general of it, is that without it, Sect. 40. The
general benefit of the whole army.
First, In respect of our selves,

1 Our whole life must needs be subject to many fearful breaches and
distractions, 2. Pet. 1.

2 We shall pass it very ildy and unprofitably.

3 We shall be deceived with many false shadows, and apparances of good, and
be much to seek in that good which we do desire, either in the knowledge of
it, or desire to the same.

4 Our course at the best will be most uncertain. John 11.10. In regard of
others.

5 We shall not so shine before them, as lights by our good examples. Mat,
5.16.

6 Nay, we shall necessarily in respect of our evil example be stumbling
blocks unto them.

7 We shall cause our profession to be evil spoken of. Ephesians. 5.4.3

8 And our God, and his Religion and word blasphemed. Timothy 6.1.

But with this Armor, we shall be, 1 Certain of what we do. John 11.9.

2 Enabled in some measure to do it. Psalm. 119.104.

3 Strong to encounter all oppositions, and victorious therein. Psalm. 119.6.

4 Assured of the acceptance of what we do Phil. 1.21, 20.

5 Ready for all occasions whatsoever. Phil. 4.12.

6 And willing to yield up ^^^his due unto God, when he shall require it.
Acts 7.1. Cor. 7.

And thus much concerning the spiritual Armor. CHAP. V. Of the pursuit of
God, and the avoiding of evil.
Now being thus armed, we are prepared to encounter such occasions as occur
in the day, which are generally and necessary: 1 To avoid evil, Esaias 1.16,
17. 2 To prosecute that which is good.


Concerning the avoiding of evil. First, we must labor to have our judgment
rectified.

Concerning.

1 The evil it self.

2 Our own estate in respect of it^

3 God, who hates it and yet orders it.

That which we are to be informed concerning evil, Sest. 1. Difference of
evil.
is, that there is evil.

1 By nature, and such is whatsoever is against or besides the law of God, and
this is properly called sin.

2 By accident, so a good thing may be made evil. Psalm. 69.22. Malach. 2.2.

3 Opinion, so afflictions are counted evils; yea, the truth and power of good
in the censure of the world, usually is counted evil. Esaias 5.20.

The use hereof is:

1 That we may discern things that differ, not stumbling upon evil in stead
of good, nor avoiding good in stead of evil, not fearing afflictions when they
come for good, nor distrusting our goodness, though it be accounted evil.
Phil. 1.10.

2 We must understand the true author of evil, which is not God, but our
selves, that so we may blame none, but our selves. James 1.13

3 That evil is not only a mere priuati^^^n of good, Sect. 2. What the evil
of sin is.
but a quality inherent and defiling the soul. 1. John 3.4.

4 That it is not only committed in act, but in thought; though consent come
not thereto. Exodus 20.

5 That it is as well committed in omitting what we should do, as in doing what
we should not.

6 That sin is seen in the least that is forbidden, as well as in the
greatest. 1. John 3.4.

That the least sin breaks the law of God, and makes us guilty of the whole.
Iam. 2.12. Ephesians. 5.11.12. Romans 6.21.

8 That sin is filthy and loathsome even in the greatest pleasure and act
thereof.

9 That the end thereof is bitter and the inward parts most abominable Romans 6.

Sect. 3. The use of this knowledge.
And this knowledge serves.

1 To conclude all under sin. Romans 3.9.

2 To lay the fault justly where it is.

3 To prevent diminishing and increasing of sin.

4 To avoid the custom, and punishment thereof.

Concerning our own estate in respect of sin, we are to learn. 1 That if we
never committed sin, yet we are not free from it, as being guilta of the sin
of another, and deriuing it from the loins of our parents. Romans 5.14. Psalm.
51.5. Ephesians. 2.3.

2 That hereby our nature is wholly tainted with corruption, and uncleanness.
Job. 14. Psalm 51.

3 That we are deprived of all original, and actual righteousness. Sect. 4 How
far sin has taken hold on man.
Ephesians. 2. Romans 6.

4 And prone, yea desparately set to commit all sin with greediness. Genesis 6.

5 That we delight in sin, and repose our chief contentment therein. Pro. 2.

6 That naturally we hate to be reformed and plucked out of sin. Romans 10.21.

7 That we cannot but necessarily, and yet willingly sin. 1. Cor. 12.2.

8 That our best actions are beautiful sins. Esaias. 64.6.

9 That in our nature, sin yet remains. Romans 7.1. John 1.7. And that. Reason

How far sin remains in the Regenerate, and why

1 That we might have daily experience of the virtue of Christ's sacrifice.

2 As also discern the work of sanctification by the contrary tentations.

3 That by renewed repentance we might maintain the assurance of the
forgiveness of sin.

4 That we might be daily humbled under the hand of God.

5 That we might give God the glory of his freee mercy, in working wholly our
salvation. The benefit of this knowledge.


And this knowledge serves:

1 To justify God in his judgments. Romans 3.5.

2 To confound the goodness of nature. Romans 3.19.

3 To magnify the riches of Gods mercy. Ephesians. 2.3.7.

4 To send us to Christ. Romans 3.22.

5 To provoke us to hunger after heaven.

Concerning God, we are thus to conceive of si^^^n^^^. Sect. 4. Gods ordering
sins
1 That he hates all evil as a righteous God. Psalm. 5. and no unclean thing
shall dwell with him. Revel. 21.

2 That he permits and orders evil in special wisdom to his glory.
Act. 5. As

1 In that he presustaineth the subject of sin.

2 He denies or withdraws his assistance by which necessarily we fall.

3 He turns all evil to good.

3 That he knows and searches the most inmost closet of sin. Ierem. 17.10.

4 That he is able to punish, and to take vengeance of the same. Isa 40.

5 That he punishes sin with sin, and yet most righteously. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.

6 That though he have laid the chastisement of our peace upon on his Son:
yet he will correct us as his children for sin. Isa. 53 Psalm. 88.89.

7 That he leaves to gross and open sins to prevent and purge out
spiritual wickedness in his children.

8 That he gives up the wicked to spiritual wickedness, of self-love,
pride, hardness of heart, security, to prevent hereby for a time gross evils,
which might be a means to bring to repentance, whereby they are detained in a
false conceit of their estates, and so are ripened to eternal vengeance

And the use
And this knowledge serves:

1 To justify the perfect holiness of God. Psalm. 18.30. Psalm. 145.17.

2 To magnify his wisdom in disposing of evil. Romans 11.33.

3 To give him his prerogative, that he is (...), the searcher of the heart.
Ier. 17.10.

4 To ascribe unto him the glory of his power and super excellent greatness,
that we might be humbled before him. Psa. 86.9, 10.

5 To work in us an hatred of evil, and love of righteousness. Genesis 17.1.
because god hates him. Ps. 139

6 To prevent presumption, and cause us to work out our salvation with fear
and trembling 2. Co. 5.

7 To trust perfitly in him, that so graciously orders evil, and turns hem
about to our good. Sect. 5. How sin to be avoided.


Secondly, Our judgment being thus rectified, we must proceed to the practice
of avoiding evil.

And this is seen, either in 1 Preventing sin, or 2 Recovering out of it by
unfeigned repentance. And first how prevented 1. generally.



Sin is prevented either: 1 Generally, or 2 Particularly: Generally: by


1 A continual watchfulness over our heart, and outward man.

2 A fear and suspecting of our selves, as at all times, so when we have most
experience of Gods mercy. Prou. 28.14. Job. 1.

3 A continual resigning of our selves into the hands of God.

4 Walking as always in his presence. Genesis 5.22. Genesis 17.1.

5 To have a continual eye to Gods commandments. Psalm 119.

6 To meditate on Gods judgments, inflicted on his dearest children for sin.
2. Sam. 12.11, 14.

How to be employed in our callings generally.
7 Consider the inestimable love and mercy of God toward us. Exodus 34 6.

Eighthly, Employing our selves in some honest calling 2 Thessalonians. 3.11.12. And
that

1 In faith and without distrust of Gods providence, with a good conscience.
Mat. 6.25. Heb. 13.18.

2 With cheerfulness and contentment, without murmuring and covetousness.
Heb. 13.5.

3 Committing the success to God, and waiting for his blessing, without making
haste to be rich, or indenting with God for these outward things. 1. Tim. 6.
Genesis 30. 1. Ha. 1.16.

4 In humility, and lowlines, not sacrificing to our net, but giving God the
glory. Genesis 32.10.

5 In holiness sanctifying the same by the word and prayer, and laying a good
foundation thereby toward heaven. 1. Tim. 6. 1. Tim. 4.

6 In faithfulness and diligence, redeeming the time, and accounting for it.
Ephesians. 5*16 Psalm. 90.

Ninthly, How to use Christian liberty aright
learning to use our Christian liberty a right.

1 Herein not so much to stand on lawfulness, as expedience. 1. Cor. 10.

2 That all things be done to edification, not offense. 1. Cor. 14.

3 That as we remit of our liberty in regard of such as are weak of ignorance,
so we use it in respect of the obstinately ignorant, lest we harden them in
their sin. Mat. 15.14.

4 That we use the things of this life within the compass of our callings. 1.
Cor. 7. 1. Cor. 10.

5 For our recreation that it be in things indifferent. Phil. 4.8

2 Very spare and sober.

3 Tending to a spiritual end, not the satisfying of the flesh. Ga. 5.13

6 That all things be done to the glory of God. 1, Cor. 16.

Tenthly; By avoiding the occasions of sin, which are

1 Evil company. Ephesians. 5.11.

2 Excess in the use of the creatures. Luke 21.34.

3 Giving the bridle to the outward man. Genesis 31.1.

4 Opportunity and seasonablenesse. Eccles. 3.1.

5 Appearance and show of evil, etc. These. 5.22.

And thus sin generally may be prevented, particularly, thus, when we are
assaulted by any tentation.

2 How in particular we may resist sin.
1 To mourn at the privy motions of sin, and at no hand to set light by it.

2 To know that I bear a traitor in my bosom, and therefore here here at no
hand consult with flesh nor give away to the temptation. James. 1.14.

3 To choke it by strong cries and groans to God. Mat. 6.13.

4 To put it off by exercising the mind with contrary meditations and affecting
the contrary virtue Psalm 1.

5 Examine thy heart why it is thus, and thou shall find some cause of this
tentation, Psalm 4.

6 The cause found either,

1 Want of found repentance for some former sin.

2 Security.

3 Some greater evil like to follow, whereof this tentation is a messenger, or
such like negligence, dispose thy self accordingly.

4 Forget not heartily to mourn for thy former yielding to the like tentations,
and so renew thy repentance for former sins. And strengthen thy self
especially by the meditation of the sufficiency of thy Savior, who now
suffers with thee, and in whom thou shall be more then a conqueror.

5 Intend thy calling more carefully and conscionably, Ephesians. 5.15.

6 Renew thy repentance and vows to God more effectually. Psa. 116. for the
present motions and prouocations to evil.

7 Dispute not with Satan, neither play with the flame; but fly away with
Joseph, though thou leave thy coat behind thee, Iam. 4.7. Gen* 39.12.

8 Labor not so much to avoid the outward act, as to have thy heart purged
from the evil thought. Psalm. 51.2.10.

9 Esteem it thy greatest happiness in this life, to be free from the rage
and slavery of sin. And,

10 Magnify in thy judgment their condition who are constantly masters of
their own corruptions.

11 Submitting thy self rather to any punishment (if it so please God) then to
yield to the tentation. Mat. 5.29.

12 Remembering often with fear and trembling, what thou might be brought to
by this ^^^enta^^^ion, if God should leave thee. And look for one temptation
in the neck of another.

13 Yet faint not in thy resistance: but persevere constantly, and by Gods mercy
Satan shall fly away. Iam. 4.7. Mat. 4

14 Fail not to be thankful unto God for every little occasion of avoiding
the tentation, or conquering the same.

Here at no hand give way to corruption, or defer repentance,

1 Because thou have no certainty of thy life.

2 Nor assurance of the renewing and return of Gods mercy, if once thou refuse
it, Pro. 1.24.25.

3 The sooner thou returnest, the surer will be thy acceptance, and the more
sweet and beautiful thy after conversation.

4 Yea thou shall more increase Gods kingdom, and so gaining God more glory,
prepare thy self to greater glory.

If Satan prevail, and thou are foiled, and therefore now thou must speedily
rise again by repentance. To this end consider:

1 Thy estate in grace, Sect. 6 How to recover out of sin.
which must be renewed by repentance. Psalm. 51.

2 Gods mercies, which are above all thy sins. Psalm. 103.8. Exodus 24.16.

3 The effectualnesse of Christ's sacrifice; daily cleansing thee from sin. 1.
John. 1.7.

4 And that still thou live by faith, above the sense of thine own present
state, Romans 1. yet still refreshing thy self with

5 Thy former experience how thou have recovered, Psa. 77.5.

And so practice thy raising up in this manner: 1 By viewing sin, and that
first in the Law.
First, view thine iniquity in the glass of the Law, to bruise thine heart, and
there thou shall find what an evil and bitter thing sin is. Ier. 2.19.

2 Secondly hereupon apply that knowledge unto thine own soul by the power of
Conscience, assisted by the Spirit of Bondage: and proceed to judge thy self,
concluding that thou art guilty of eternal death. And hence will follow
compunction, and wounding of the heart, Act. 2.37

3 The heart being thus wounded, that thou may be kept from despair, 2 In
the Gospel.
view thy self, secondly, in the glass of the Gospel, that the bruised Reed
may not be broken; by considering what a bitter, and yet precious ransom was
paid for thy sin. Mat. 20.28.

4 Hereupon make application unto thine heart, by the work of Conscience,
renewed by the Spirit of Adoption, and raise up thy self with this assurance,
that though thou art a sinner; yet Christ is thine, and thou have pardon of thy
sin, and shall have life eternal in him. Mat. 11.28. Math. 5.3.4. Luke 15.2.
Cor. 7.

This application works two contrary effects: 1 Thou shall rejoice that thy
sins are forgiven thee in Christ Jesus.

2 Thou shall be sorrowful t^^^at thou have displeased so good and gracious a
Father.

And this sorrow is expressed: 2 By iudgeing.


First, by judging thy sin before God in the Court of thy Conscience.

And this judgment consists:

1 In conceiving the foolishness of thy sin, to cross the wisdom of the
flesh, and condemn the same. 2. Sam. 24.

2 In examining thy sin, and taking a more particular notice thereof, Psa.
51.4.

2 Confessing it, Psalm. 32.5. And that,

1 With grief and detestation. Esaias 37.

2 Particularly, not generally, not only so far as thou know, confessing
herein thy knowledge to be short, and yielding up thy unsearchable heart unto
God, Lord cleanse me from my secret sins. Psa. 19.

3 Against thy self, not excusing or diminishing: not laying the fault upon
God, the creatures etc. but blaming especially that corrupt fountain of thy
heart herein, Psa. 32.5. Psa. 51.

4 Unto God, not unto Angels, or Men, etc. who only is able and ready to
forgive. Psalm. 103.

Thirdly, thou must condemn sinnne, and this is done;

1 By acknowleging what is d^^^e unto thee for it, namely shame and confusion
of face for ever. (...) 9.6. Da^^^.

2 Professing thine own vileness and unworthiness of the least of Gods
mercies. Job. 39.16.

3 Justifying God in what he might do, and submitting thy self under his
mighty hand Ely 2. Sam 2. David, 2. Sam. 16.

4 Execute vengeance on thy self for thy sin, 2. Corinthians. 7. in this manner:

1 Lie down in thy confusion, and cover thy face with shame. Ier. 3. Luk 18.

2 Abhor and detest thy self in sackcloth and ashes, Job. 42.6.

3 Have indignation and zeal against thy self for offending so good a God: 2.
Cor, 7. Peter wept bitterly. Psalm, 73.22. So foolish, etc.

4 Groan under the burden of thy flesh, and desire to be rid of it, Romans 7.21.

5 Possess a broken heart for thy sin, all thy life long, Psalm. 51.17.

6 Refrain thy self from lawful comforts. Joel. 2.

7 Impose all means of mortifiing thy rebellious flesh, as fear of thy self,
lest thou fall again. Pro. 28.14.

8 Mingle thy drink with thy tears, and in thy greatest security let the
remembrance of thy sin awake and rouse thee up. Psa. 51.

9 Desire ever after more carefully to please God. 2. Cor 7.

10 To this end preserve a record of thy sin, and retain some monument thereof
with thee.

11 Consider often what punishments thou have felt for sin.

12 And let the day of thy death, and appearing before the judgment seat of
Christ, be always in thy mind, make thou sure account of it, and daily make
ready for it, 2. Pet. 3.

13 Cease not crying out against thy corruptions, and complaining unto God of
thy rebellions, that he may strengthen thee against them. Psa. 119.49.

14 Bind thy self by the oath, and by the curse to forsake all sin, and to
continue constant in the service of thy God, Ezra. 10.3. 2. Chro. 15.

15 Reprove sin boldly in others, and pluck them out of the fire: Jude 23.
though thou be scorcht for thy labor.

16 Suffer affliction as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, and prepare thy soul
unto tentations. 2. Tim. 2.

Thus shall thou cut off sin, and happily preserve thy self in a constant
course of godliness.

For thy better instruction herein:

1 Call to mind what before is delivered in the sixth part of the Girdle of
Truth, concerning Holy Actions; which may help thee both in the true knowledge
of God, to inform thy judgment, as also in the right and holy practice of
good things, which must be part of thy Daily Sacrifice.

CHAP. VI. Of growing in grace.
BEing thus instructed in general to avoid evil, and do good, the next duty
that thou must perform, is to grow in grace.

And this duty is necessary: because, Resons and motives hereto.
1 We do approve our right in Gods blessing we have received. 1. Tim. 4.

2 We make them profitable, and durable, Mat. 14.19.20.

3 Hereby we imitate our Savior Christ Jesus, who grew in favor and grace
with God and Men. Mat. 13.

4 Hereby we weaken daily the old man. 2. Cor. 4.

5 And draw nearer to the life of glory.

6 By growing, we have comfortable experience more and more of our corruption,
that so we may be more humbled in our selves, and hunger after Christ.

7 Hereby we are weaned from the love of the world, and more eased and freed
from distrustful cares for worldly things, because the more heavenly riches we
enjoy, the less mind have we, the less need do we see our selves to have of
earthly things; yea the experience of Gods mercy increasing us in spiritual
riches, con^^^^^^mes our faith more in the providence of God for outward things.

8 And so we obtain also by this increase, more confidence and boldness in
the presence of God.

9 Yea we shall find our life and power miraculously quickened in holy duties,
especially prayer, and zeal of Gods glory, humility, patience, etc.

10 And whereas before, the least afflictions were Irksome, now by this
increase, we shall think nothing strange, no not the fiery trial. 1. Pet. 4
11. we shall be more ready to undergo them, and have more comfort in them. As

11 Having by this increase of grace, more lively experience of the power of
Christ reigning in our mortal bodies; by whom we shall have strength to
persevere unto the end.

12 And this is also the benefit of this growing, even to assure us that we
shall hold out, and continue unto the end.

Thus shall we be convinced, and provoked to grow in grace.

Secondly, consider we now in the next place, 1 The means whereby we must
grow. And 2 The manner. And 3 The measure. And 4 Trial of our growth.


For the means, these are:

Means of growing.
1 The powerful preaching of the word, as being Gods Instrument to lead forward
as well as to begin the work. 1. Pet. 2.1.

2 The daily viewing of the heart therein: for as we discern corruption, so we
desire to grow. Psalm. 4.5.

3 The quickening of our desires and purposes for well-doing: for as we desire
and love, so we shall practice.

Now our desires are quickened and enlarged thus: Desire how quickened.
1 By retaining soundness of judgment so far as we know.

2 Rejecting carnal rules for holiness, which may cool,

1 As that we may be too holy.

2 That it is enough to be holy as others are. Carnal and false rules.


3 Flesh and blood cannot do this.

4 That God is merciful, and if we do our best, what can you have more?

5 That we must not presume to be so holy as Peter and Paul were. 1. Cor. 11.1.

6 That our forefathers were saved with less ado, and less means; and what
need we stand so much upon it?

7 That we must live, and therefore cannot stand upon heavenly thrift.

8 Nay, we must be obedient, and therefore do as the times will bear; go no
further then those that are wiser then we.

Thirdly, labor we to be rooted and grounded in knowledge, that so our desires
may be truly enliued. And this is effected:

1 By receiving the power of the word, Knowledge how to be rooted.
unto the root and fountain of corruption, even our hearts, not so much
being humbled with our outward failings, as our inward corruptions, and
unreasonable lusts; laboring more and more to discern the deceitfulness of
the heart, and vnsearchablenesse thereof, that so we may be more inflamed to
redress the same.

2 Attempt we no action without particular knowledge both of the thing to done.

1 With the circumstances of time, person, and place belonging thereto.

2 As also of our right therein, that so from the certainty of resolution,
especially from the comfort of our acceptance, our desires may be quickened.

3 And so receiving strength from Christ, our endeavors shall be quickened and
confirmed in well-doing.

Fourthly, that our desires may be enlarged, we must be enlarged in knowledge,
that so as we know we may affect. Phil 1.9.

5 And seeing that variety of objects may stumble and distract us, therefore we
also must labor to grow in spiritual wisdom, discerning between things
that differ, that so we may know what chiefly is to be followed, what is the
time, and means, and manner thereof: so shall we be more provoked (...) yet
gone before, that we may neither think our case to be singular, as if we
alone were put to this hard task; neither think we have done enough, seeing
those that received less means, yet have gone beyond us in obedience, and
shall find the way now much more easy, seeing it has been so trodden and
traced to our hands.

8 And seeing the world will not stick to hinder our growth by pressing us
down even with our own weight: Therefore though we have attained a glorious
liberty in Christ to take comfort in things lawful and necessary, yet let us
take heed that we use not this liberty as an occasion to the flesh, and so it
prove a burden to press us down. Gal. 5.

How to mo^^^erate in (...) Christi^^^n liberty.
To this end moderate we our selves in Christian liberty, by these rules:

1 That all tend to Gods glory, emptying our selves thereof.

2 That we keep our selves within the bounds of our calling, not only Civil,
doing what may stand with the ability and conueniencie, yea decorum thereof,
but Christian principally,

1 What may be warranted thereby.

2 What may further the same.

3 Subordinating the civil calling to the judgment and measure thereof.

3 That in the use of our liberty, we contain within the bounds of charity,
and that

1 Toward God, doing all things rather in love to his Majesty, and zeal to
his glory, then our own salvation.

2 And yet so, as that believing his promises, and applying them to our selves,
we make our selves fitter to love God, by being made conformable to him, and
so follow hard after the accomplishment of the promise, by obedience to the
Commandment, that so we may express yet more and more our love unto God.

2 That we may prepare our selves hereby to the full enjoying of his love.

3 That we may attain at length that perfection, when we shall wholly and
fully love and glorify our God.

3 And yet seeing without others we shall not be profited, Heb. 11.
therefore in the use of our Christian liberty we must also show our love
toward others: And that both first superiors: as 1 Magistrates, 2 Ministers.


1 Acknowledging the authority of the Magistrate to be of God; howsoever the
person be.

2 Obeying that Authority in the Lord: As

1 To be restrained thereby in the use of things indifferent.

2 To be ordered thereby for the use thereof.

3 To be punished for the abuse.

4 Yea to be ordered for the outward circumstances of time, place, decency
concerning the worship of God.

5 And to be censured for default therein, both in our goods and bodies,
enduring patiently, and amending thereby.

Secondly, in our Christian liberty we must have regard to the Ministers: As

1 Being wise to try the Spirits, and so to affect accordingly.

2 Reuerencing their persons.

3 Receiving them as Gods Ambassadors, yea as Jesus Christ. Gal. 4. 2 Cor. 5.

4 Embracing their message as the counsel of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.
whatsoever the vessel may be.

5 Yielding them maintenance cheerfully, and bountifully, 1. Tim. 5. 1 Cor. 9.

6 And submitting to the censure of the Church with all humility and good
conscience, as to be reformed by the same. 1. Cor. 5.

Secondly, in our Christian liberty we must have respect to our equals, and
that to such are equal either in the Civil or calling. Christian calling.


Toward our equal in the Civil calling, we are to order our selves thus:

1 To deal truly and justly with them in our commerce, that so they may either
justify and love religion, or else have their mouths stopped, and be made
inexcusable.

2 We are to communicate unto them by occasion of worldly commerce, some
heavenly riches, laboring to bring them to Christ, Ioh. 4.1. Ioh.

3 To this end fail we not to convince and repress known corruptions by the
word: and to bring forth secret, by searching and launcing, resolving rather to
loose our gain, then to be partakers of his sin.

4 And here we must even refrain in our liberty in diet, apparel being an
example of modesty, etc. that so we may weane him the rather from the love
thereof, and by our example may justify our profession. 1. Cor. 9.

5 And so with all meekness of wisdom and long suffering, wait upon him if at
any time God may give him repentance, that he may be saved. 2. Timoth.
2.24.25.

6 Choosing to this end what may most edify, what least give offense, and
exasperate; taking opportunity from his natural inclination, from his present
afflictions and temptations to work upon him.

7 And laboring to root out Distrust and Covetousness, that so setting
bounds to his earthly desires, by true co^tentation, he may have more scope for
heavenly.

Thus are we to order our liberty toward our equal, in his civil calling.

(...) him to sense of inward corruption, and purge we out hypocrisy and
spiritual pride.

9 Preparing him to this purpose to endure the cross.

10 Informing him to discern the reigning sins of the time.

11 Especially the corruption that most hangs upon him, the sin that he has
or is most subject unto.

12 And so provoke we him still to perfection, not to live by examples, nor to
stint himself in religion, but to follow hard after the mark for the high
price of his calling in Jesus Christ.

Thus are we to carry our selves in our liberty toward our equals in their
general callings.

We are also herein to respect our inferiors: As 1 Laboring to be equal with
them in affection, To inferiors
though superiors in gifts.

2 Not to despise or disgrace or discourage, or separate from the^: but rather
to take unto us him that is weak, and we which are strong to support him that
is weak.

3 Not contemning or measuring his inward estate by the outward condition, but
rather helping the outward estate, that it may further the inward.

4 Not being advanced in our selves because we have more, but rather fearing,
because, we have a greater burden, a greater account to make, and so easing
our selves by communicating unto oothers, yet correcting our selves by
scattring our ouer-plus. Prou. 11.

5 Yea submitting our selves for the Lords sake unto meanest condition in all
lawful things, to bring them unto Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 9.21 2. Cor. 11.29.

6 And as a tender Nurse cherishing and dandling of them, not to pamper them in
their weakness but to lead them on to perfection. 1 Thessalonians. 2. Heb. 6.1.2.

7 And yet not always enduring their weakness, but by severity to compel to
what lenity could not persuade unto, at least to prevent obstinacy, and
infection of others.

Thus are we to use our Christian liberty, toward inferiors: 8 And thus
behauing our selves in the converting of others, we shall by this means
increase Gods graces in our selves.

9 If we neglect not withal conscionable walking in our civil callings. And

10 Labor to maintain the fellowship by exhorting and provoking to love and
good works. Heb. 10.

11 Not neglecting to take notice of, and offer up unto our blessed God, every
mercy vouchsafed unto us in a daily sacrifice of obedience and so renewing our
repentance for our failing therein. And

12 So considering the shortness of our lives and sodainnesse of Christ Jesus
coming: use we all diligence to make our election sure, and redeem we the
time, because the days are evil.

These are the means whereby we may grow in grace. Now that we be not
deceived nor discouraged herein: observe we in the next place, the manner of
this increase, which is,

1 A coming forward in every part together, Manner of spiritual groweh.
as when the first wheel of a clock moves, it carries about all the rest: so
the heart being enlarged, the conscience and will, and affections, yea the
members of the body, in some measure are enliued. As

2 Yea so, as that this growing is not always sensible, by reason of the
different working of the Spirit.

1 Sustaining and cherishing sometimes inwardly, sometimes putting forth the
sap into the branch and bud.

4 Seeing the power of God must be made manifest in weakness, therefore
resolve we, that the manner of this growth at the best must be in great
weakness. Yet so

5 That we shall by Gods mercy daily weaken corruption, more clearly
discerning it, loathing it more heartily, more meekly groan under it, more
sighs to be delivered from it.

6 And therefore though the grace of God shall not be in vain in us for the
subduing of corruption: Yet shall our increase in grace, rather appear in
discerning the greatness of corruption, and deceitfulness of sin, then in any
manifest conquest over the same.

7 And seeing the best we cancan do, is subject to much mixture of
corruption; therefore shall we best discern the manner of our growth by the
right use of grace: yea herein shall we have best evidence thereof, because we
find above the work of weldoing our persons accepted of our gracious Father
in Jesus Christ.

Thus are we to conceive of the manner of our growth.

Now for the measure.

1 We are daily growing until the moment of our death. Measure of growth.


2 In holiness howsoever we may come short of many of the elect, yet we shall
exceed our selves yea the most vain glorious Pharisees in the power and
conscience of well doing, though happily not in the show. Mat. 3.

4 We purpose the most absolute pattern, and not only for the truth of
holiness, but for such a measure as we are capable of, we follow hard
thereafter. 1. Cor. 11. 1. Pet. 1.18.

5 Though we fail in practice yet we stand firm in judgment what should be
done, and judge our selves, especially for failing herein.

6 And are so far from excusing our selves in any such stinted measure as the
world approves: either that we may not presume to be as such have been, or
else that it is needless, because we have not the like employment, or
unreasonable, because we have not the like gifts, or it will be sufficient if
we attain to such a measure, as the time, multitude, examples of leaders do
prescribe.

These leaden rules I say, and carnal pretenses, are so far from prevailing
with the saints in their measure proposed: that they are bold so far to
endeavor as the means are supplied, though in their practice they are short
of their endeavor: and howsoever the world shall be contented with such a
measure as may serve to commit sin more greedily, and hide it more
dangerously.

Yet does the upright heart still cleave to the word, for the scantling of his
sincerity, he submits to the word; for his failing therein; he increases in
knowledge, that he may still grow in grace, and so by a further sight of his
corruption, is daily sent out of himself, that so he may obtain new strength
in Christ to go forward in weldoing.

And so the child of God grows strong in the grace of God. 2. Tim 2.1.

1 And that by being daily broken by the power of the law, Means.
seeing his damnable estate, and so driven out of himself upon the mere mercy
of God.

2 By enduring afflictions patiently, that in the experience of the changings
in himself he may have more experience of the unchangeable love of God.

3 To this end he must daily discern his inabilitie to any good that so he
may interest himself in the merit of Christ.

4 And he must renounce all other strength of wisdom, riches, and that he may
find more comfortably the power of God. Ier. 9.

And to this end he has many gracious helps. Helps to grow.
As especially

The virtue and power of his head and Captain Jesus Christ who grew in grace,
and is now perfected in glory to make us perfect. Ioh. 17. Heb. 12.2.

2 The example and furtherance of the Saints which have gone before, and do
accompany him therein. Heb. 12.1.

3 The continual light of the word and spirit, both informing in the present
estate, truth of our as also discovering what we should, and shall be.

4 The experience of former grace, quickening faith and so sending to Christ.

5 As also experience of former failings, spurring forward through an holy shame
and indignation, to recover and redeem the time

6 The time lost before, and therefore now much more to be redeemed. The time
to come not in our power, uncertain.

7 The increase of glory answering the increase of grace.

The trial of our increase of grace is* Trial of growth.
1 If we have fully subdued some sins, so that we never fall into the
purpose or act of them again, as hearted of God, expressed by hatred of his
word, and Saints, rejecting of Christ, and his merit, and the effects thereof.

2 If we find such sins most weakened, unto which heretofore we have been
most addicted.

3 The more we grow, we shall be sure to have more tentations, more
oppositions of the world.

4 The more we discern and are humbled in the sense of corruption the more
we grow in faith, and so in grace.

5 The more we are enlaged for the good of others souls, the more is the love
of God shed abroad in our hearts.

6 The more lowly, and meek, and patient we are, the more has the spirit of
grace and compassion prevailed in our hearts.

4 That for the use thereof, we have deserved to be utterly stripped of the
blessing. Yea

To be cut off finally from ever enjoying any further mercy of our God. Yea

To have deserved all contrary plagues to increase our damnation.

Yet still ascribing unto Jesus Christ the glory of his sacrifice.

That through him we have obtained right in all Gods blessings.

And grace so to use them, as that in Christ they are accepted.

That our persons are accepted above the worth of our obedience

That in Christ we shall grow, and so attain to perfection.

This is thankfulness. And it is necessary: Sect. 2. It use and benefit.
1 To testify and renew our right in each blessing.

2 To gain thereby assurance of heaven:

3 We condemn the wisdom of the world which thinks it baseness to be
thankful, or some imputation of ill desert and unworthiness

4 We increase them, and make them pledges of heaven. Psalm. 67.6

5 We do ease our selves of much begging, and so approach to the life of glory.

6 We acknowledge God to be the giver, and blesser of them.

7 We do answer the end, why God bestowed them on us. Deu. 8.

8 And do by this duty perform a most principal part of worship and glory to
our God, Psalm. 50.23.

9 Security and hardness of heart is hereby prevented.

10 Our faith in God is confirmed and increased.

11 Spiritual pride and hypocrisy is ouer-mastered.

12 The certainty of our salvation hereby pledged and confirmed.

13 We have our conversation in a most special manner in heaven.

14 Our account made ready, and so we prepared to meet the Lord.

15 It is hardest to be performed and therefore most excellent.

16 We are hereby humbled, and so fitted for further blessings.

17 This is the end to which all other exercises of religion are directed.

18 Hereby we glorify God as God. Romans 1.22.

19 And so being daily abased in our selves we are prepared unto glory.

And it is to be performed daily.

1 Because we daily receive good at the hands of God. Lam. 3.23.

2 And by this means shall prevent many evils which daily do assault us And this
duty is performed on this manner. Sect. 3.


First, The heart must be prepared: And that

1 We must be ravished with the greatness and goodness of the Lord.

2 With sound notice of the blessing, both concerning the truth thereof, as
also the worth of the same, conceiving more excellently of God then we
possible can see him by his blessings. Ps. 47.7.

3 True humility for the same, by serious meditation, both of the Majesty,
power and goodness of God, and also of it own unworthiness. Genesis 32

4 As also it must be purged by a settled purpose of not offending so bountiful
a God.

5 And with an holy persuasion, that we have received the benefit in the favor
of God, through Jesus Christ.

6 And lastly with an holy desire to set forth the glory of God.

7 As also it must so be filled with the present blessing, as that still it
hunger after greater graces

2 The mouth must speak of the mercies of God: How to speak of Gods mercies.
And that 1 Reverently and holily, not lightly or loosely.

2 Particularly, as near as we may recounting the same. Gene. 32.10. And as
daily and howerly occasions are offered, 1. as by deliverance from evils. 2.
Preservation in good, 3. acceptance of imperfect service, 4. and renewing
increase of spiritual and temporal blessings, as also 5. prevention of sin,
and so suiting, and renewing our thanksgiving accordingly.

3 Publicly, even in the great congregations unto the Church of God, yea to
the generations to come. Psalm. 66. and 102. Psalm. 34.

4 Privately between God and our own souls to avoid hypocrisy. Mat. 6.

5 Wisely and orderly for spiritual blessings, and then for temporal. Ephesians.
1.3.

6 Faithfully, as well for blessings promised and to come, as for those we have
received. 2. Chron. 6.

7 Constantly, as well when God takes, as when he gives. Job. 1.21.

8 Humbly, acknowledging our selves to be unworthy of the least of them. Jacob.
Genesis 32. As Well confessing our wants and desiring supply, as acknowledging Gods
graces in us. Luke 18.

9 Speedily, if it be possible to prevent the Lord. Ge. 24. Ps. 59.16.

10 Continually, even all our life long. Psalm. 75.9. Psalm. 79.13.

11 Charitably provoking others to the like duty. Ps. 34.3. Ps. 92.18.

12 Acknowledging Gods graces in others, and without envy or detractio^
advancing the same Nu. 11

13 Yea, wishing that all may be partakers of the same graces with us. Number. 11.

14 Impartially, as well for the least, as for the greatest:

15 Spiritually, referring all present blessings, to the Fountain, our
redemption by Christ, and confirming our right, and use from thence yea from
thence, building assurance of perfection.

16 Sensibly, apprehending Gods goodness more to us then to any other. De. 17.
receiving every present blessing as in our right to heaven. Frequently,
remembering often what God has done for us, and by many and diverse words
couenanting with our God, to pay this oblation, 1 both to prevent the
vntowardlines of our nature, which is so unwilling.

2 To this, as also to shame our selves the more, if happily we grow negligent
herein. Psalm. 107. Psalm. 146. etc.

3 We must praise God in our life and actions. 3 Thankefulnes must be
performed in life.
Here observe these principal actions of thankfulness. Psalm. 3.1. Psalm.
50.23.

1 To renew our obedience, and increase our service of God. Psalm 116.

2 Continual mortification of the old man. Psalm 106.3. Ezra. 10. Romans 12.1.

3 Casting out the special and beloved sin. Mat. 5.29.

4 Making much of the means whereby Gods blessings are sanctified, and so
continued unto us, namely, the preaching of the Gospel, etc. Romans 10.15.

5 Laboring heattily the conversion of others. Psalm. 51 Psalm. 34.4.5.

6 Releeuing, and forgiving, and praying one for another. Ephesians. 4.

7 Believing Gods promises, and waiting patiently the full accomplishment of
them. Psalm. 40.1. Heb. 11. Psalm. 64.10.

8 Erecting monuments and trophes of Gods benefits to posterity. Genesis 22.15.
etc.

9 Writing and registring the noble acts of the Lord. Psalm 102. Psalm 45.

10 Imposing fit names unto our children, in remembrance of Gods mercies. Genesis
41.

11 Paying our vows unto God and men. Psalm. 65.1. Ion. 2.9. Ps. 50.

12 Being content with whatsoever God bestows upon us. Phi. 4. Giving thanks
in all things at al times to God the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ Ephesians. 5.20.

13 To employ the blessing we receive to the best behoof of our Master and
our own comfort. Math. 25.26.27.

14 Confessing the name of God constantly. Psalm. 44.

15 Hatience in waiting the acco^plishment of Gods promise.

16 Seeing by faith into the fullness of happiness, yea

17 Apprehending light in darkness and seeing that to be good which the world
esteems evil,

18 And rejoicing in a little good though there be matter of mourning for much
more evil.

19 So honoring the instrument as not to make an Idol thereof.

Thus are we to perform thankfulness unto God.

Which that we may perform more happily: Sect. 3. What evils to be avoided.


First, Let us beware of these evils which are maine enemies to this duty As,

1 To imagine, that we deserve any thing. Luke 17.10.

2 That we have any thing merely, by our own labor and industry. Psalm. 127.

3 That we harp more upon our troubles, then Gods favors and benefits.

4 Take we heed that we grieve not immoderatly for evils present for this will
steal from us all remembrance of former blessings.

5 That we be always begging, but never recounting what we have received.

6 That we consider what others have, rather then what we have need of.

7 That we be not secure in the blessings of God, but rather fear our estate
most when we have most favors. Job. 1.

8 That we tie God unto these outward things, or to the continuance of any
particular.

9 That we dote and rest upon these, not rather forget them in regard of the
things of the life to come. Phil. 3.

10 That we conceive basely and meanly of Gods mercies, and do not see and
worship God in the least of them.

11 Avoid we slavish fear, and desperate pride, as if because we are unworthy
of any, therefore we will acknowledge none.

12 Nay, lest we be accounted hypocrites, we will not declare what God has
done for us.

13 Take we heed here also of Spiritual pride, that while we should
acknowledge our thankfulness for what we have recieued, we rather repine at
our own condition, that we had need thereof.

Secondly, Let us use these helps to thankfulness: As

1 Rest we upon God, as the giver of all good blessings.

Sect. 6. Helps to thankfulness
2 Use we all holy means for the obtaining of them.

3 Leave we the success to GOD, depending on his providence.

4 Think we not what God can give, but what is fit for us to receive.

5 And think we not so much on what we want, as what we have, above many of
t^^^e dear children of God.

6 Yea, consider we not so much what we have, as how we have used it.

7 And further, remember we not so much what we have, as what we may have, if
we do believe, and offer the sacrifice of praise.

8 Yea, let us wisely lay to our hearts what we have lost by our former
unthankfulness.

9 Consider we how small a tribute the Lord requires for all his blessings.
Psa. 116.12.

10 What a prerogative we attain by thanksgiving, that God is the receiver,
and we the giuers unto God, and how much better it is to give, then to receive.

11 Let the creatures provoke us hereto, lest otherwise they condemn us. Heb.
6.

12 Let our commodity persuade us, either if we will have, or use, or hold Gods
favors comfortably.

13 And lastly, consider we the account to be made in the life to come, which
is made up by thankfulness unto God in this life, Ioh. 3.

14 Labor we in each particular blessing to see a pledge of heaven, and a step
thereto.

15 And that all the sense and sight of present and future blessings, be
swallowed up in our desire to glorify God.

And thus far concerning thankfulness. The chief use and benefit thereof,
is, to keep us in a constant course of obedience unto God in the enjoying of
his blessings. Sect. 7. Benefit thereof.


And this is the next duty daily to be performed of us.

CHAP. VIII. Of Constancy and Perseverance.
NAmely, to labor constancy, and perseverance unto the end.

Sect. 1. It is most necessary.
And that because:

First, hereby we approve the soundness of our calling and gifts, which
otherwise if we fail, were but temporary, given rather for others then for our
own good.

2 We do uphold and confirm others.

3 We do also justify the power of our profession, and advance it before all
other callings.

4 We obtain the promise and the crown that is set before us. Heb. 11. which
otherwise by falling away we shall lose. Reu. 3.6.

5 We approve the truth of God, and give him the glory of his faithfulness,
1 Thessalonians. 5.24.

6 We overcome Satan and all our enemies, Ephesians. 6.13.

Grounds hereunto are: First, The establishing of our faith, Sect. 2. Grounds
of perseuera^ce
that the children of God shall continue to the end; and that because,

1 Our God is faithful and Almighty, Romans 11. and his gifts are without
repentance who has promised it.

2 Jesus Christ makes continual intercession for us. Luke 22.33.

3 The Holy Ghost shall abide with us to the end of the world. John 16. to
preserve us. John 14.

4 We are the beloved of God: and therefore,

1 Whom he loves once, he will love to the end. John. 13.

2 Whatsoever we ask in his name, the father will give us, if it be
agreeable to his will. 1. John. 5.14.

3 All things shall turn unto our good. Romans 8.29.

4 We are married to him for ever in holiness and righteousness. Ose. 2.

5 Gods Covenant with us is everlasting Ier. 30. Eze. 11. Psa. 89 and Ose 2.

6 We are united unto Christ our head, Col. 2. and given to him of the Father:
and therefore none shall take us out of his hands. Ioh. 10. Ioh. 17.17.

7 We have the Word and Sacraments, which shall continue with us to the worlds
end, to uphold us in our righteousness, Mat. 28. Ephesians. 4, 8.

8 We have strengthening grace to continue us in well-doing. Ephesians. 3.16.

9 Our slippes and fallings are means to perseverance.

Here consider: Sect. 3. Removing the hindrances here,


1 That the child of God being regenerated, may, and does fall; and that
because,

1 God leaves him often to himself, Ose. 5. Ps. 30. and that 1 of the fall of
Gods children and the cause thereof.


1 To let him see his own strength to be humbled thereby. Hos. 14.4.

2 To drive from that hold, to rely only upon God, Cantic. 3.4. Luke 22.32.

3 To make him more compassionate and helpful to others in their infirmities.

2 Satan is continually sifting of him. Luke 22.

3 He carries about him a Traitor ready to betray him hourly. 1. Pet. 2.11.

4 His falls may well stand with his estate in grace, yea do much make for the
trial and increase thereof, 1. Pet. 1.7.

As in his fall,

2 The benefit thereof.
1 He discernes his imperfection, and so is provoked to take stronger hold.
Canti. 3.4.

2 In his, recovery he feels the undoubted grace of God, Psa. 32.

3 In both he has experience of the combats between the flesh and the spirit,
all which are undoubted signs of regeneration. Luke 11.21.

4 He is made more acquainted with the deceitfulness of sin, and so more
skillful to prevent the same. Heb. 3.13.

5 He is shamed by his fall, and driven from the hold of the world, and such
like baits of sin, Hos. 14.4.

6 He is provoked more eagerly to follow after the mark, by how much he has
been cast behind. 2. Cor. 11.

7 He becomes more fearful of himself, and will not be so venturous upon the
occasions of sin. Math. 26 75. Consider therefore,

2 How far a regenerate man may fall.

First, In his Faith, by doubting of Gods favor and the assurance of his
salvation, 3 How far the regenerate fall.
Psalm. 22. Psalm. 51. Psalm. 77. Hence procedes,

1 Proud and foolish reasonings against God, Ier. 12.1.

2 Vain and uncharitable speeches and wishes against our selves. Job. 3.

3 Rash and hard censuring of others.

4 Distasting of the means, and furtherances to salvation.

5 The graces of God may be lessened in them. Psalm. 51.

6 They may be covered.

7 Loss of some graces of God all his life long, as the measure of the
comfortable evidence of salvation.

2 Erring through ignorance in some maine point of salvation, so the Apostles,
Act. 1.6.

3 He may dwell in his ignorance for a time, and maintain the same. Gal. 2.
Peter.

Secondly, in his life. And that,

1 By falling into some gross sins. 2. Sam. 11.2. Sam. 24.

2 To lie a sleep in them till he be roused up.

3 To fall into them again after repentance, and so may commit rebellion
against God. Lament. 3.45.

Hence will follow:

1 That the light of Gods countenance shall be taken away. 4 Danger of the
falls of the Elect.
Psa. 51.

2 The horrors of hell shall assault and buffet him, and so he may despair
both in himself, and also concerning any present feeling of Gods mercy. Psa.
77.11.

3 Some grievous outward afflictions shall follow him to the grave. David.

4 His life shall be a burden and irksome to him. Jacob. and he shall be
impatient under the cross. Job. 3.7.

5 Yea through violence of tenration he may happily offer violence to himself.
And so

6 He shall cause the name of God to be blasphemed by the wicked, 2. Sam 12.

7 His first love shall be cooled, and zeal in godliness abated. Apoc. 2.4.

8 The weak shall be offended at him.

9 Gods Spirit shall be grieved. Ephesians. 4.

10 He shall feel a weakness in him, in regard of such sins as have got
strong hold often over him. Psa. 6. Ier. 13.23.

Thus far may a regenerate man fall, and yet remain in the state of grace,
and differ from a reprobate, or hypocrite, As thus:

1 The Reprobates temporary faith is the chief cause of his falling, and
profaneness of life; Sect. 5. Of the difference between the^ and the wicked in
their falls.
but the elects erro^^^r in life is the occasion of the decay of his faith.

2 The hypocrite is usually senseless in his fall, and so continues, 1. Tim.
4.2. but the regenerate at length has the true sight of it. 2. Sam. 24.10.

3 The hypocrite if he fret and grieve, it is for fear of punishment, or loss
of the temporal blessing, not for the loss of Gods favor, etc. Psalm. 51.
Genesis 27. But the sorrow of Gods servant is for the offense against God
principally.

4 They both fall into the same sins again, but yet the hypocrites after sins
are committed, with more strength and security, those of the regenerate with
more resistance, fear, grief, and in great weakness. Psa. 19.

5 They both are impatient, and speak foolishly against God, but the hypocrite
speaks as he thinks, and wishes in the aduisednesse and purpose of his
heart: the regenerate speaks in folly, rashness, not as he thinks or
wishes; but as his corruption and tentation ouer-ruling him, does mislead: and
coming to himself, condemns himself for it, and cleares the Lord, Psalm.
7.3. Job. 42.

6 They both decay, and loose their first love, but yet the hypocrite counts
this to be his wisdom, and the true measure of holiness, esteeming his
former zeal to be rashness, etc. whereas the regenerate acknowledges it was
better before then now, and mourning under his estate, labors the recovery,
and in some measure obtaines it. 2. Sam. 12. Mat. 26.2. Hos 7

7 They both may refuse the means also, but yet the hypocrite in pride and
obstinacy, falls at length, from loose means, to none, and so to a despising
and persecuting the same: the elect, though he leave in his heart, yet he
returns with shame, and cleaues more conscionably to the means, and is
profited thereby.

8 They both may be loosers by their fall, and not recover all their life long:
But with these differences,

1 The reprobate looses all graces, and becomes a very beast, Psa. 49. without
knowledge, ciuility, etc. The regenerate recouers necessary graces, as faith in
some measure of use and feeling: but that full persuasion, joy in the Spirit,
etc. he happily recouers not again, all his life long.

2 The reprobates loss is without feeling, causing him to set up his rest more
securely in this life, and so prepares him to sudden destruction: that of the
elect, humbles him in all things, causes him to work out his salvation with
fear and trembling; to go down with sorrow to his grave, and to be weary of
the world, and to desire to be with Christ, Phil. 2.12.

This may we discern between the falls of Gods children, and the wicked.
And this serves, Sect. 5. Use hereof.
1 To prevent wrong judgment concerning the falls of our brethren. And so

2 To labor with all meekness their recovery. Gal. 6.1.

3 To condemn the world that makes no difference herein between the Saints
and the wicked.

4 To provoke the Saints to repentance.

5 To prevent repining, and murmuring at Gods wisdom, leaving corruption in
us. As also,

6 To esteem more highly of Christ our Sacrifice.

7 To try us in our decays, and to comfort us in the same. Prou. 24.16.

8 To justify Gods faithfulness who never forsakes his children. 1. Cor.
10.13.

9 To stop the mouths of the wicked, who rejoice at our falls. Mich. 7.8.

10 To assure us of constancy and perseverance to the end. 2. Tim. 4.18

11 And to hunger after heaven.

Helps hereunto are,

1 The keeping of the light of judgment, Sect. 6. Helps to perseuera^ce
clear and sound, Phi. 2.8

And that because,

1 Hereby the exorbitant practice is eft-soones reformed.

2 The true state and measure of sanctification is discerned, and so finding
our shortness, we are provoked to go forward, Phil. 2.9.

3 The conscience hereby is assertained of the truth of it well-doing, and so
faith is confirmed, and sanctification thereby renewed.

4 Repentance also is hereby renewed, in that the conscience, by the light of
judgment, discerning it daily failings, is thereby convinced, and so prepared
to repentance.

And how
And this is obtained and preserved,

1 By submitting the judgment in all things to the rule of the word. Esaias. 8.

2 Harkening to the voice of conscience checking for sin, and approving for
well-doing.

3 Laboring a daily increase of knowledge, Philip. 1.9.10. Ephesians. 3.

4 Yet avoiding curiosity, and unnecessary speculations. 1. Tim. 4.

5 Submitting to reproof, and continual afflictions.

6 Resolving that sin is foolishness to God, and holiness foolishness to the
world.

A second help to perseverance, is,

The wel-ordering and guiding of the heart ( of which heretofore) And

Thankfulness for what we have received. Col. 1.12.

A third is, the daily maistering and subjection of our affections. Of which
also before.

A fourth is the continual remembrance of Gods mercies toward us. Ios.
24.1.2.3.

A fifth is a continual fear of our selves, Romans 11.

6 We must also labor the establishing and confirming of others.

7 Meditation of the shortness of our life, and uncertainty of the coming of
Jesus Christ.

8 As also waiting patiently the accomplishment of the promises. Col. ^^^.

9 Spiritual wisdom in avoiding troubles, and disposing affairs, Col. 1.9.

10 consid^^^r we the Saints, who have finished their course, and yet without
us shall not be perfected, Heb. 11.

11 Look we unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith; who has finished
his course, and we shall follow him. Hebr. 12.1.2.3.

12 Comfort we our selves in our former experience; and if we have overcome
the Lion and the Bear, we shall also overcome the Philistim. 1. Sam. 17. 2.
Cor. 1.10. 2 Timothy 4.17.18.

13 Look we by faith unto the recompense of the reward, so shall we swallow
up and overcome all difficulties and tediousness whatsoever. Hebr. 11.25.26.

CHAP. IX. Of Watchfulness.
A Notable help to Perseverance, 1. It use.
is Watchfulness over our hearts, and ways, that they may continually be
acceptable to God. Ephesians. 6.15.

And that because,

1 Hereby we are prepared to tentations. Luke 21.34. Mat. 13.25.

2 Enabled to undergo them. Ephesians. 6.11.12.

3 And also to have a good issue out of them, Luke 21.36.

4 Without this, our whole life and best actions are either rashness,
uncertainties, or security, Prou. 28.14.

5 By it we attain certainety and resolution in well-doing, Ephesians. 6.13.

6 We prevent some evil which may make all other comforts unsavory, which we
are sure to look for in well-doing, Math. 26.41.

7 Hereby the other graces of God are much beautified and increased in us.

8 And our infirmity very happily avoided, or covered, Ps. 119.9

9 The best without it, have been deceived, as Adam, David, Genesis 3.6. 2. Sam.
12.

10 Hypocrisy in well-doing, and spiritual pride is prevented, or maistered.

11 Dullness and wearisomnesse also in good things, is much helped and
prevented.

12 Especially hereby we are enabled to powerful prayer, Math. 26.41.

13 As also kept sober and humble in well-doing. 1. Pet. 5.7.

14 The whole body of sin is hereby daily weakened.

15 The Spirit of God is kept lively in operation.

16 And so we prepared happily to perfection.

Now this Watchfulness is performed, 2 How performed.
First and principally by observing the heart, and yoaking it.

2 Keeping under also the outward man.

3 And this not for a spurt, but all our life long, Psalm 101. Psalm. 119.73.
most fearing our abuse of Christian liberty, and so bounding the same within it
true compass, Gal. 5. especially that we be not brought in subjection to any
thing.

4 And that observing and suspecting our greatest strength, 1. Cor. 10.12.

5 Aiming especially at the sins which we have most delighted in. Psalm. 19.
Psalm. 25.

6 Looking especially to the sins that do most annoy us.

7 Examining the best graces of God in us, left some dead fly be in them.
Prou. 28.9. Mat. 6.

8 Behauing our selves in all things as weaned children, Ps. 131.3.

9 More depe^ding on the watchfulness of our God over us, then in any thing we
can do.

10 And therefore continually renouncing our selves, and resigneing our selves
into the protection of the Almighty.

11 In performance of holy duties, suspecting especially the show and color,
watching over our natural corruption, and the sins of our Calling.

12 Also laboring to discover and conquer the contrary tentation: as in
affliction, impatiency, and distrust.

Helps hereunto are:

3 Helps to it.
1 Consider we, that the best do fail in watching as they should.

2 That it is no bondage, but a blessed liberty thus to look to our selves.

3 Look we our selves d^^^ily in the glass of the word, Psalm. 119. Heb. 11 6.

4 Suspect we also our selves, and fear we always. Pro. 28.14.

5 Let the fear of God be continually before our eyes, 1. Cor. 7.1

6 Use we sobriety in our knowledge and use of outward things. 1. Pet. 4. Romans
12.3.

7 Provoke we each other cheerfully to holy duties, Psalm. 122.

8 Consider we, how watchful worldlings are to obey the precepts of men.

9 If we have slipped, let us return again in fear and trembling.

10 Observe we the checkes of conscience for every action.

11 And let not the motions of the spirit be unrespected.

12 Extraordinary and special mercies of God be we catefull to record.

13 And tremble we at his judgments, wisely laying them to our heart.

14 Let the day of our death be always in our eye.

15 And make we full account to come to judgment. 2. Cor. 5.

CHAP. X. Of Prayer.
A Further help to Constancy, is, Earnest and constant Prayer unto GOD, to
uphold us by his mighty hand, Ephesians. 6.14 15.

And that,

1 Public in the Congregation, Psa. 92. Psa. 122. Mat 6.

2 In private, as well with our families, as in our closets and secret
recourse, Mat. 6. Psa. 4.6.

And this is necessary,

1 Because the Lord has commanded it, 1 It use.
Psalm. 50.15. Matthew. 6. Luke 11. to oppose against our unworthiness.

2 Hereby we approve our selves to be loving membes of Christ's body; and the
truly adopted sons of God, Romans 8.13. Psa. 14.22.

3 We perform a special part of worship unto the Almighty, Psa. 50.15.23.

4 We use the especial means, whereby all Gods blessings are enjoyed, and
sanctified. Luke 11.13 1. Tim. 4.5.

5 And, though the Lord know what we have need of before we ask, yet hereby
we acknowledge and discern the same. Isa. 65.24.

6 Hereby we are also humbled under the mighty hand of God.

7 We do also perform thankfulness unto God for all his mercies.

8 As also we give unto God this prerogative, that he is the searcher of our
hearts, and also

9 We acknowledge his special providence, that he cares for us. Psalm. 34

10 Heerby our faith and patience is graciously exercised and confirmed.

Now that we may pray aright:

1 Our prayer must be in faith without doubting. How performed.
Iam. 1.6. to God not to Saints or Angels. Romans 10.

2 In love forgiving one another, and praying for each other Luke 1. Math. 6.
yea for our enemies.

3 In wisdom, praying first for the favor of God, when we would have blessing,
Note.
and when we would have any evil removed, praying for the forgiveness of
sin, which is the cause thereof. As also 2. dividing the times wisely, for
prayer, and our callings.

4 In zeal, and feruency, 1. from the heart, and affections, principally
aiming at Gods glory, etc. 1. Cor. 14. Jacob. 5.16.

5 In constancy and patience, waiting the Lords good leisure. Psa. 40.1. Psalm.
135. Psalm. 147.

6 In sincerity, from our right in Christ Jesus; and out of the holy purpose
of our heart denying our selves.

7 In an holy order, 1. for those that concern Gods glory: 2. such as concern
salvation: 3. such as respect this life. And so on the contrary, we are to pray
against such as cross these things in their order.

8 Our minds must be free from all worldly and carnal respects.

9 In humility, abasing our selves before the Lord, Dan. 9. Genesis 32.

10 With thanksgiving unto God for all his mercies. Psalm. 116.12.

11 As also, with true repentance renewing our vows to the Lord. Psalm. 26.6.
Isa. 1.15. 1. Ioh. 3.22.

Thus must our prayers be made unto the Lord, and by them we shall be, First,
Much strengthened in the grace of perseverance. Luke 22.32. as also. 3 The
benefit of prayer


2 Kept in the vigor and power of our Christian life. Ephesians. 6.

3 Experienced in our sweet fellowshippe with God. Romans 8.15.

4 Our spiritual armor always fitted and exercised. Ephesians 6.

5 Our daily wants supplied or recompensed. James 1.5, 2. Cor. 12.

6 Tentations conquered; and happily diminished. Mat. 4.

7 All our occasions well seasoned, and turned to our good. 1. Tim. 4.

8 Our whole life sanctified, and we prepared comfortably to a better. Phil.
1.19.

To this end also serves another

omitted or slightly performed any of these.

6 Be sure so to perform these as that thou do not neglect thy calling. 2 Thessalonians. 3.12.

7 If thou have performed them in some poor measure, yet rest not in it, but
labor more earnestly with God for a further grace. Phil. 3.13.

8 And yet be thankful unto God for these small grapes and fruits,
acknowledging that it is his great mercy, that thou can do any thing, and
giving him all the glory thereof. 1. Corinthians. 15.10. And thus shall thou be
sure to obtain this peace of God.

And having obtained it, thou must lie down therewith, and carry it with thee
to thy bed.

1 Because thou know not whether thy bed shall be thy grave 1. Pet. 1.24.

2 Thy sleep hereby shall be much sweeter, and dreams more comfortable.
Psalm. 4.8.

3 Thou shall avoid nocturnall pollutions and vncleanesses.

4 Thy reins shall teach thee in the night season, and the darkness shall be
as the noone day. Psalm. 16.7.

And this is performed.

1 By resigning up our selves into the hands of God. 3 How performed.


2 Ascribing unto him the glory of all the good we have performed. Psalm.
115.1. Esaias 26.12.

3 Acknowledging our selves to be unprofitable servants, if God should enter
into judgment with us Luke 17.10.

4 Craving earnest pardon of our imperfections in Jesus Christ, and laying our
selves a sleep in his bosom. 1. John 1.9.

5 Comforting our selves if sense of faith be not present, yet with former
experience and inward habit thereof. Psalm. 22.10.

6 Yielding up our selves in a willingness to death, in full expectation of the
life to come. Phil. 1.20.23. And thus guiding our selves by these former rules,
we shall lie down in peace, and so shall we comfortably perform the daily
sacrifice.

And thus far concerning such necessary duties, as we are bound in some
measure daily to perform. CHAP. XII. How to profit in this direction.
FOR our better encouragement and furtherance herein; observe these rules:

1 That being convinced in conscience with the necessity of these duties, we
purpose and solemnly vow unto the Lord the attempting and prosecuting thereof.
Psalm. 119.206. Psalm. 119.7.

2 That God principally respects the purpose of the heart, and if there be a
willing mind, accepts according to what we have, and requires not what we
have not. 2. Cor. 8.12.

3 That we give not ear to the flesh pleading novelty, impossibility, etc.
Gal. 1.16.

4 That we try the Lord, who is wonderful in blessing the unfeigned endeauours
of his children. Hag. 2. Malach. 3.10.

5 Then let us make trial at first in one of these, and grow ready therein, so
shall we with more willingness and skilfulnesse proceed in the rest. James
2.10. James 3.2.

6 Let us not fail to meet the Lord with unfeigned thankefulnes, when we see
him coming effectually in the weak performance thereof. Psalm. 81.

7 And so condemn and provoke thy self, as before, and thou shall see (by
Gods mercy) a good increase.

Yea, thou shall not only be able to perform these duties with comfort, but
also thou shall be able to entertain each several occasions of the day, to
Gods glory thy exceeding profit and benefit of others.

Motives and Helps hereunto thou shall find,

Helps thereto.
1 A daily discerning of thine own inabilitie. And

2 So renouncing of thy self to be found in Jesus Christ.

3 When thou have found thy self in Christ, yet still to deny thy best
righteousness, that thou may wholly live by and in the life of thy Savior:
in whom thy person shall be accepted, above all worth of thy service.

4 And meditate often, not so much on the joy the Saints have in heaven, as in
the matter there, of their constant and free glorifying of God.

2 Cheering up thy heart, that thou have so far communion with them, in that
heavenly worship, as that now thou performest that in truth, which they do in
perfection: and so have thy conversation also in heaven: yea thou art hastening
to that perfection, by daily denying of thy self, and growing in Christ thy
head, and have both their examples to encourage, and prayers to further thee
thereto: yea seeing without thee they shall not be perfected. Therefore thou
shall also aspire to perfection, that so the body of thy Savior may be fully
complete. 1. Cor. 1.24. Neb. 11.40^

6 And seeing all lets shall by Gods mercy prove furtherances hereunto, thy
very sins shall provoke thee, much less then affliction shall hinder:
therefore learn to live by faith in the discerning of thy estate, and wrestling
with these oppositions; that so not yielding to tentation, or not lying under
the burden thereof, thou may still go forward more humbly with thy God, and
be more then conqueror through Christ that has loved thee. Romans 8.

7 Add hereunto a daily meditation of the time unprofitably spent heretofore,
and hence we shall be provoked to redeem it in this constant manner for the
time to come. Romans 6.22. 1. Pet. 4.4.5.

8 Especially if we weigh withal the wonderful mercy of our God that has not
yet called us to an account for our former abuse and unprofitableness, surely
if we make a right use hereof, we cannot choose but resolve to answer this
love of God in our more earnest and constant endeavors, for the time to come.
Romans 2.4.

9 And if we shall now withal wisely lay to heart, what little assurance we have
of any time to come: how that there is not any hour, nay moment, wherein we
shall promise security to our selves, and put the evil day far from us, that
we may approach to the seat of iniquity: whereas we may say to our soul, Now
soul cast care away, be bold a little with God, remit off thy sincerity, etc.
But that, even in that moment, it may be said unto thee, Thou fool, thy soul
shall be taken from thee, surely this would move us rather to this daily and
continual serving of God, to add somewhat upon every occasion, to the making
sure of our election. Luke 12.21.

11 Especially, if we consider that our adversary the devil goes about
continually to entrap and devour us, 12. and our own wicked and treacherous
hearts are never a sleep to sin to entertain Satan: ought we not
continually to stand upon our guard, that so we may resist the devil, and
preserve our souls from bondage. 1. Pet. 5.8.

13 Surely if we did but consider that while we do not serve our blessed God
in this holy and constant manner, we in that mean time are servants unto sin:
and so both break the peace of our consciences, interrupt and hinder our sweet
fellowship with our God, grieve his blessed Spirit, and so expose our selves not
only to many secret wounds of conscience, but also to many outward blows, and
reproachful buffetings, not only tending to bring some heavy affliction upon
our selves, but especially to lay reproach upon our profession, and to cause
the name of our glorious God to be blasphemed. This, if either we love our
selves, or have any zeal to the glory of our God, must certainly constrain us
to the conscionable performance of this duty, even daily to endeavor somewhat
to maintain our peace with God.

14 And had we no other respect but this: how we might lay our selves down in
peace, how we should sleep sweetly, how to lay al our cares under our pillow,
and prevent filthy and fearful dreams, how to avoid fears of worldly
casualties as fire, thieves, etc. Surely we would settle our hearts by this
course in the day, that they might not be unsettled in the night.

15 Nay must we not be guilty of despising the blood of the covenant, and
esteeming of the Son of God as a profane thing: If, seeing the Lord Jesus
makes continual intercession for us at the throne of grace, that we might
daily offer up our souls and bodies as a living sacrifice in obedience unto
our God, we shall notwithstanding neglect this holy duty, and either not
serve our God at all, or serve him at our pleasure.

16 Will not this prove even plain will worship, and so abominable to God!

17 And shall we not be condemned of horrible in gratitude, that when our God
bestows such blessings on us, and renues his mercies every morning unto us:
especially reuiues our lives to make us capable thereof, we shall yet despise
this bounty of our God, and riote out his blessings to the dishonor of the
giver.

18 See that thou praise God for these, that walk thus constantly, not envying
their strictness, but imitating the same, delighting in their company, etc.

So the Lord give us understanding in these things.

And this shall be thy trial that thou have profited by this direction. Trial
hereof.
1 If thy conceit and judgment concerning the excellency and benefit of a
christian life, be more confirmed, and comfortable.

2 If thou find more ease and delight in the practice thereof.

3 And yet by this practice attainest to a greater sense of thy corruption and
shortness of perfection:

4 And can go with more boldness and assurance unto thy God to beg mercy
and strength against thy corruptions.

5 If thou can now more deny thine own righteousness, that so still thou
may be found in Christ Jesus, feeling in him more comfortably, the
acceptance of thy person.

6 And daily drawing new virtue from him to walk more constantly with thy God.

7 If thou art desirous to provoke thy brethren to undertake this holy task.

8 And art weaned more graciously from the love of the world, growing more
contented with thine outward estate. And

10 Still hungring more earnestly after the revealing of the Sons of God.

11 If thou art more faithful and conscionable in thy civil calling.

12 And art more thankful unto thy God for this his gracious assistance:

13 If now thou can more rejoice in heavenly duties and less, in such
means which concern only this life.

14 Yea can more triumph that thou art grown a master of thy former
inco^stancie, that thou have now attained a constant measure of serving thy
blessed God, then for any recompense that may redound unto thee hereby.

15 If yet thou can be more humbled in the sense of thy wants the^ any whit
puffed up with whatsoever thou have already attained.

16 And so shall still follow hard after the mark for the hie price of thy
calling in Jesus Christ* Phil. 3.

17 If thou shall grow more spiritual in the use of outward comforts. And

18 Shall also grow more wise to discern between things that differ, being able

19 To try the spirits whether they be of God or no, and yet

20 To maintain the fellowship not judging any before the time,

21 And yet reproving sharply that they may be sound, and

22 Yet rejoicing in such as are beyond thee in this glorious course.

23 If thou can more moderate thy self in thy Christian liberty doing not
what thou may do, but what is expedient, not what may respect thy private,
but the public good. And

24 Aiming at the chiefest good even the glory of thy blessed God

25 Preferring the same, even above thine own salvation.

26 Comforting thy self in the acceptance of the purpose of thy heart.

27 As that thou neglectedst no good opportunity to express thy conscionable
endeauours in some one or more of these holy duties, as occasion is offered.

28 Examining thy self in private concerning the performance of them.

29 And so offering up each duty in a sacrifice of obedience in thy private
reckoning, and daily casting up of thy account, not enjoying,

30 But esteeming highly of such that have attained to some constancy herein.
And

31 So following the examples of the best in this holy course.

By these rules may thou try thy self, whether thou have profited by this
daily direction.

And the benefit hereof will be exceeding great. Benefit hereof.
As has bin partly observed heretofore; and further may be discerned in these
particulars.

As first, We shall prevent hereby that secret hypocrisy which acco^panies
holy duties, and shall attain to more sincerity, and plainnes, not only in
all actions toward God, but in our outward dealings toward men: and so shall
prevent much reproach to our profession, and gain much glory thereto. Yea

2 We shall be a means, hereby to shine as light in a froward generation, to the
increase of Christ's kingdom, and so of our glory.

3 We shall also by this constant performance of these set and necessary
duties, prevent all unnecessary care and infidelity the root thereof, by
keeping our selves with in the bounds of Gods protection, and quickening our
faith in this lively expressing of the fruit thereof.

4 And so shall be better fitted to perform any extraordinary duty of visiting
of thy distressed neighbor; or resisting any violent tentation, or entertaining
of some extraordinary comfort of the spirit. Or expressing thy inward wants
unto thy God in prayer, or offering up thy self, as a sacrifice of thanksgiving
unto thy God, etc. To these I say, and such like thou shall be better fitted by
this daily sacrifice.

5 And shall not the mouth of iniquity be stopped by this constant worship,
that they shall be convinced with the power of godliness, they shall justify
God, and so either brought to embrace him with us, else fret away at our holy
courses, and thereby do less hurt to us, and hasten their own damnation.
Shall not

6 The coming of Christ be hastened, the means of religion held up, the
estates and kingdoms of Princes preserved hereby. Eccl. 9.

Conclusion.

The Lord give us understanding in these things.

7 Shall not this constant worship of God, though it be but in few, yea but in
some one, keep out the judgment from the rest, else be a means to save our
own souls from a common desolation Genesis 18.

8 Shall not the wiseman see the plague and hide himself. Prouer. 22.3. Though
the fool run on still and be taken in the trap.

9 Shall not the Lord thus preserve one in a city, and two in a Tribe, that
they may be repairers of the breach, and the restorers of the paths to dwell in,
that they may build up the old wast places, and raise up the foundations for
many generations. Ier. 3. Isay 58.12.

10 That so the face of the church may be renewed and continued till the coming
of Christ. Even so Lord Jesus allure us to this holy duty, and hasten thy
kingdom of Grace, that thy will may be done in our perfection to glory.

The third book of the daily Sacrifice, Containing a direction how to order
our daily occasions to the glory of our blessed God.
In a Constant worship of his Majesty. And these are, 1. A Preparation to each
occasion. Chap. 1. 2. To arise with God and beginning the day with him of which
in the second. Cha. 2. 3. The means hereto private and Familie-exercises.
Chap. 3. 4. The following of our callings. Chap 4. 5. The use of the creatures.
Chap. 5. 6. The right use of Apparel. Chap 6. 7. Of company. Chap. 7. 8. Of
solitariness and it right use. Chap. 8. 9. Of prosperity. Chap 9. 10. Of
Adversity Chap. 10. 11. Of the daily account. Chap. 11.


Hitherto we have spoken of such necessary Duties, Which are daily in a
constant measure to be performed of those that will approve themselves to
travel toward heaven.

Now because there are many other occasions that do offer themselves (besides
these ^^^et means) even every day unto which we ought both wisely to be
prepared to; as also we must learn to entertain them wisely, and profitably
to pursue and go through them, so as to further us to happiness.

Therefore, in the next place, it shall be necessary, both to lay down Rules
how to be prepared to them: as also to propose a several direction for each,
that they may not interrupt, but further our constant course of Holiness.

CHAP. I. Of preparation to each occasion.
Howsoever occasions are manifold and contrary, yet shall we be graciously
prepared to the^,

First, if we consider, that they are no certain marks of Gods favor,
neither are we absolutely to judge of our estate by them, or in them.

2 And yet do resolve, that whatsoever befall, yet all shall turn to our good.

3 And therefore that we set not up our rest in any one of them, but prepare for
such variety and contradiction as our holy God has appointed to manifest his
more admirable power and wisdom, and to try our faith, and patience, our
industry, and wisdom in encountering, our courage in conquering the same.

4 And so be daily ready to yield up our selves unto our blessed God, both
resigning our ways and lives unto his holy hands. And

5 Preparing our selves unto our ends: so shall nothing be strange or unwelcome
unto us.

Thus shall we be prepared to each occasion. And that we be not distracted,
and discouraged with the multiplicity and contradictions herein, know we, that
as it were infinite to lay down direction for each particular; so shall it be
needless to descend thereto, because what is laid down for the well-managing
of some principal, will give light to the better ordering of the rest: And
therefore my purpose is only to stand upon some principals, and the Lord give
a blessing hereunto.

CHAP. II. Of rising with God, and awaking in his peace.
And these Principals are,

FIrst, to arise with God, 1 The necessity thereof.
and as we laid our selves down in peace, so to awake with the comfort
thereof. Psa. 23.6. Lam. 3.23. Psa. 139.18. Psa. 119.147. The reason whereof
is: Because,

1 We maintain hereby constancy in well-doing.

2 We renew that soundness* wherewith we lay down.

3 We prevent that no root of bitterness break out at the first.

4 We provide for our more settled courses all the day after, and so begin a
new to live the daily life of grace.

5 We make our hearts merry in the Lord*

6 We are made principally more apt to prayer, which is the next occasion to
be entertained of us.

This is performed,

2 How performed.
1 By meditating of the true life of God, and day of the resurrection* 1. Cor.
1. and so our arising to judgment.

2 By magnifying our sweet repose, and resting in the bosom of Gods
protection. Psalm. 3.5.

3 Taking occasion by the light that appears, to consider of the Armor of
light, or by the outward darkness that compasses, to bless God for the
inward light, and to mourn for the ignorance and blindness that is yet in us
and others, yea to resolve the casting away of the works of darkness, etc.
Roman. 13 12.

4 Praising the mercy and patience of the Lord, that yet we live to praise
him, and are spared to make our Election more sure; and thereto especially
meditating on the constancy of Gods love toward us. John. 13.1. Psalm. 19.2.
Psalm. 102.27. Jeremy Lament. 3.23. as being renewed every morning.

And this is furthered, if we perceive dullness. 1 By striving even in the
night when we awake, to sigh for sin, 3 How furthered.
and hunger after mercy. Psalm. 16.7. Cant. 3.1.

2 By opening our hearts (if occasion serve) to our Chamber-fellow, if such
fellowship be enjoyed, and so shaming of our selves, Iam. 5*

3 By avoiding overmuch sleep, yea scanting and stinting our selves thereof,
and rowsing up our selves from drowsinesse, by checking our hearts, and
complaining of them to our blessed God, Pro. 24, 32.33.

4 Taking occasion by our dreams, or nocturnall infirmities, to magnify Gods
mercy, that it is not so as we dreamed; or to check our infidelity, in relying
superstitiously upon dreams, or to condemn our security, and profaneness in
neglecting them utterly. And if we have been assaulted with terrors and
corruptions, yet either they have not prevailed, or shall not be imputed unto us.

5 Calling to mind some place of the word for our better stirring up, as Romans
13.11.12.13.14. Ephesians. 5.14. 1 Thessalonians. 5.4.5. etc. And provoking our selves by
the examples of the Saints, who have risen early to praise the Lord, Psa. 5.34.
etc.

To this end cut we off all idle, worldly, and contentious speeches. 1 By
conferring of the sweet conferences and accidents that have befallen in the
night with our blessed God.

2 Meditating and rejoicing together in those gracious victories that we have
had over our secret lusts and corruptions in the night.

3 Strengthening our faith in the special providence of our gracious father, in
giving us such sweet and satisfying rest, etc.

4 Stir we up each other to the payment of our vows. And

5 Put we each other in mind of our particular corruptions, to help each
other by prayer, and to master them. And

6 Fail we not to record, and so communicate to posterity such extraordinary
feelings and accidents of tentations, or deliverance as have befallen us in
private.

7 Examining our true contentment in God, and laboring to confirm the same.

8 Trying our affection to death, even now our life is renewed, that so we may
begin to dye daily. 1. Cor. 15.

9 And fail we not to satisfy each other in whatsoever doubts may distract,
or not increase sound peace to the Conscience.

And so rising with the Lord, we shall be fitted to entertain the next
special occasion of the day: which is Prayer. CHAP. III. Of Family and private
Prayer.
THe necessity and right use thereof you have before;

Only here observe these points for direction herein: As

Sect. 1. It necessity.
First, that howsoever this duty of prayer in Families be neglected, and not
esteemed necessary, yet the not use thereof at all, argues irreligion, and
contempt of God. Psalm. 14.4.

Secondly, Sect. 2.
that not once, but oftentimes in the d^^^y we must perform the same. Daniel.
6^10. Often to be performed, and by whom


Thirdly, And that not only in private in our Closets, etc. but publicly with
our Families. Genesis 18.19. Job. 1.5.

Fourthly, that the Master of the Family is fittest to be the mouth of God
for his people, as being therein their Priest and Prophet. Reu. 1.6.

Fifthly, that to this end, set times are to be appointed and kept constantly,
unless by sickness or other more invincible occasions we be interrupted.

Sixthly, And that with the soonest, taking the opportunity of the morning, and
our reviving and quickening joys in our conferences with our God, and each
other concerning former comforts in the night.

Seventhly, that we keep our selves in an holy temper, Sect. 3. The manner how,
and peace of mind by a constant course, in all occurrents, and so prepare our
selves to prayer.

1 Fixing our hearts on God, and meditating of his Power and Majesty, to work
reverence in us.

2 Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, to breed affiance,
Heb. 12.2.

3 Considering and examining our wants, to breed humility and patience. Psa.
39. Psa. 4.6.

4 Laboring not so much about the matter of our prayer, how we are illightned
with knowledge, as how we are affected,

1 With the Majesty of God.

2 The sense of our wants.

3 Benefit by Christ.

4 Assistance of the spirit.

5 Excluding worldly cares, which may hinder devotion. Luke 8. Mat. 6.

6 Not fretting at the prosperity of the wicked, Psa. 37.1.

7 In Patience, bearing the wrongs of enemies, and leaving revenge to God, Romans
12.

8 Doing all things as in Gods presence.

9 Avoiding evil for conscience sake.

10 Meditating still on the day of judgment, least we be unfitted or interrupted
in prayer. 2. Pet. 3. 2. Cor. 5.11.

7 Codsider we the manifold blessings we have received from God to provoke us
to thanksgiving, without which our prayers are ineffectuall. Ephesians. 6. etc.

8 Here it is requisite that we also quicken our hearts by Reading and
Meditating twice, (or oftener) in the day on some part of the Scriptures, either
as

1 Taking the Scripture in order before us. Nehemiah 8. Act. 13 Or else,

2 Upon extraordinary occasions, making choice of fit Scriptures.

9 Bewail we seriously our neglect of closet prayer, and condemn we our
selves for our lippe-labour, and customarie devotions, our wearisomnesse in
well-doing, our contentment with little feelings.

10 Renew we our vows for more often and conscionable performance hereof.

11 Rest we especially upon the continual intercession of our blessed Advocate
Jesus Christ, who continually makes intercession for us, and is now both
praying for us, and ready to present our prayers to the Throne of grace, and to
cover all the infirmities and failings of them.

12 Stir we up the blessed Spirit (as before) which may help us with sighs
and groans unspeakable, Romans 8.

13 And be we well advised of the particular thing we desire, that it may be
fit for God to give us, and us to ask for the present occasion. Mat. 6. Iam.
4.2.

Being thus prepared, we must power out our prayers (as before.) Avoiding here
especially:

1 Constraint, and Cerimoniousnesse. Sect. 4.


2 Customarinesse, praying rather for the times sake, Sect. 4. What to be
avoided therein.
then for Gods glory. Psalm. 119.108.

3 Conceit of the well-doing hereof in regard of the thing done.

4 Pride and ostentation in the opinion of our well-doing. Matthew. 6.

5 Lip-labor and idle repetition of words.

6 Confusion and disorder, praying for earthly things before heavenly. Math.
6.33.

7 Carnalnesse, when we pray more for earth then heaven.

8 Hypocrisy, doing it to be seen of men. Math. 6.

9 Uncharitableness, praying for revenge, etc. of private wrongs. Eccle.
10.20. Iam. 4.7.

10 Wearisomnesse and dullness. Gal. 6. Exodus 15.

11 Hastiness and rashness, as if we would feign have done.

12 Presumption, begging such things as are not seasonable. Luke 9.54. or
beseem us not.

13 Impiety, praying for indulgence in sin; or indenting with God, and
limiting him to our will, to help us at such a time, or in such a manner. Act.
1. Dan^ 4.

14 Infidelity, when we pray without the assurance of the acceptance of our
persons, which is the cause of all Popish devotion. Iam. 1.6.

Observing well:

Sect. 5. Directions for prayer, and trial thereof.
1 That as well for the least blessing, as for the greatest, we sue to God in
prayer, and so be thankful unto him, lest otherwise we deny God the giver,
and so hinder our receiving.

2 That we measure not the prayer by the outward success, because an evil
prayer may be heard in anger, Ose. 13. and a good deferred in mercy: Yea, a
good prayer, though in much weakness, may be granted in love, Mat 6. to
keep us from despair; and yet a more strong and fervent prayer may be denied
in greater love, both to humble us, that we put not confidence in the means,
and to encourage us to constancy therein, assuring our selves that the issue
of our prayers shall be gracious.

3 That in the greatest feeling of Gods mercy, we pray against tentations.
Math. 16.

4 That we especially commend unto God the afflicted state of the Church, and
desire our welfare in the prosperity thereof, Psa. 122.6. Psa. 126.

5 That we redouble our sighs and prayers, not suffering any repulse. Psa.
119.164. Mat. 15. Genesis 32 Genesis 18. etc. Ephesians. 6.

6 That we highly esteem of the thing we pray for, Matthew 5.6.

7 That we find as much comfort in abiding long at prayer, as at hearing the
word.

8 That we be as ready to praise God for his mercies received, as to sue for
the obtaining of them. Psalm. 116. Luke 17.12.18.

9 That we rebuke our selves in our prayers, and rely only upon Christ.
Further trial hereof that we have the spirit of prayer.

1 If we especially aim at Gods glory in doing his will.

2 That we especially are affected not with bodily, but sinful wants.

3 That upon good evidences and from infallible grounds we press the Lord to
be merciful unto us.

4 That we can single out our special wants.

5 And find our zeal increased in the continuance of prayer.

6 And yet can so submit to Gods will, as by faith to assure our souls that
the Lord will answer, and so quiet our souls in acceptance of our God, and
undoubted expectation of that which shall turn to most good.

The benefit hereof is manifold:

Sect. 6. The benefit hereof.
1 We renew our right in the day 1. Tim. 4.4.

2 We arm our selves against tentations. Ephesians. 6.14.15.

3 We are ready for any good that shall be offered us, as consolation of the
sick, conference, etc.

4 We are pressed to do all things in the sight of God.

5 And so very much fitted and furthered to set upon our callings

CHAP. IIII. Of callings, and following thereof.
ANd this is the next maine occurrent that falls out in the day, even to
following our Callings.

And here observe:

First, that to walk in a set calling for the common good, is the ordinance of
God imposed on every Christian. 2 Thessalonians. 3.12. Genesis 3.19. Ephesians. 4.28.

And that:

1 To communicate Gods providence in the government of the world. Sect. 1.
That it is Gods ordinance to walk in a calling.


2 To maintain a comely order in the administration thereof.

3 To employ such variety of gifts, as God bestows on men aright.

4 To maintain humane societies in the bond of peace.

5 To avoid idleness and curiosity.

6 To prevent errors and distractions in religion.

7 To fit us to the ends of Gods providence.

8 That God may be glorified in ordering such infinite variety of callings,
both for the common, and each private good, and that especially for the life to
come.

And this serves,

1 To teach us to try our callings, Use.
by this, That they have their warrant from the word of God, and that we be
fitted thereto, and so to reject the contrary

2 To sanctify our callings, by bounding them in the Lord, Ephesians 6.1.
because they are preserved by the same means, by which they were ordained.

3 To labor in our callings, especially to approve our selves unto God, Nehem.
13.

4 To look for the recompense of our labors especially from the Lord. 2.
Timoth. 4. Psalm. 127. Esaias. 48.1.2.

5 To condemn such as unfit for humane society, that will live in no calling.

Secondly, learn we,

That howsoever callings be the ordinance of God, Sect. 2. Callings to be
expected by ordinary means.
yet in these days we are to expect them,

1 By the ministry of men. And

2 By our industry, fitting us thereto.

3 Submitting our selves herein to the rule of the word.

And that because,

1 Extraordinary callings belonged to the infancy of the Church, and times of
extremity, And why.
etc

2 We have a sure word, better then any such extraordinary revelations. Heb. 1.
2. Pet. 1.

3 The providence of God is subordinate to means.

4 God has ordained this labor to humble us, and withal to comfort us in the
right use of Gods blessings. Eccl. 1.

And this serves.

Use.
1 To reprove presumption upon extraordinary callings in these days, and
corruption in the obtaining of them.

2 To teach us for outward callings to depend upon the means which God has
sanctified threto. Namely, 1 The authority of the Magistrate. 2 Our fitness
to the calling. 3 It fitness for us.


3 To condemn those that under pretense of religion reject humane callings.

4 As also to reprove such who wander up and down, betaking themselves to no
calling. And

5 To convince also those, that think callings are only appointed to get
blessings, whereas indeed they both serve to get, and also to use a right,
those that are cast upon us: Wherein gentlemen are much faulty.

Thirdly observe we:

That though it be the ordinance of God to have a calling: Sect. 3 The right
use of a calling sanct^^^fies the same
yet it is not the having of a calling: but, the right use thereof: whereby we
glorify God, and further our selves to happiness. 1. Corint. 9.1. 1. Cor. 7

And this serves: Use.


1 For the condemnation of those, that when they are in a calling, make no
conscience thereof, esteeming it rather a reward of former service, then a
place of further service.

2 As also they are here condemned, that rather busy themselves in prying
into, and censuring others callings, then walk faithfully in their own.

3 This serves for the confirmation of our faith when we see our faithful
labors blessed of the Lord.

4 As also we perceive hereby the especial providence of God, and so are led
along in a more assured expectation of everlasting life.

5 Lastly, we are here instructed to measure the worth of our callings by the
right use thereof, and only in the same to expect a blessing. Sect. 4.
Callings how to be used aright


Now that we may use our calling aright, we are further to observe these
Rules.

And that by these directions,

1 That each one, by profession, has a general calling to be a Christian,
which excludes not, but orders the Civil calling. 1, Cor. 2.20.



Use.
And this serves,

1 Much for the maintenance of order, and the avoiding of confusion in Church
and Commonwealth.

2 To prevent idleness and distraction in our callings.

3 To secure us of good success therein.

Thirdly, learn we,

That all our actions be warranted by our Callings, as being

And that because,

1 Else they are not done in faith and so cannot please God. Hebr. 11.6.

2 They are excluded out of the protection of the Almighty. Psalm. 91. Math. 4.

And this serves,

1 To condemn all busybodies, Use.
and presumptuous usurpers of other men's callings upon what pretense soever. 2.
Sam. 6. John. 21.21. 1. Pet. 4.

2 To discern of the integrite of our actions: because even a good Action, not
warranted by some Calling, is sin.

3 To instruct us, that though we see no likelihood of doing good, yet we must
not draw back so far as our calling requires. Ierem. 1.20.19. Ezechiel 2.5.
Esaias 6.

4 To advise us, that we abuse not Gods providence: and so expose our selves
to his justice.

5 To comfort us in the ill success of endeauours, that our labor shall not
be in vain. Esaias 49.3. 1. Cor. 15. etc.

Fourthly learn we:

That together with the following of our earthly callings, we

1 Because we must serve man, in and for God Ephesians. 6.1.

2 And in providing for this life, we must also store up for heaven. Luke 16.

3 Hereby tediousness, and corruption is prevented.

4 And we better fitted to return to them again.

5 Ye these things will not prosper, unless the better plough go forward.
Hagg. 1.9.10. and 2.14.15.

And this serves.

1 To condemn those that profane their callings by not following the most
necessary. Use.


2 As also such who think that skill, and diligence in a civil calling,
either excuses, or is accepted for religion.

3 Especially, they are reproved, that will have no servants, that are
religious, or else give them liberty of profaneness, that they may do them
better service.

4 As also they that complain, how the following of their earthly callings
hinders necessarily their heavenly.

5 Hereby we are taught to try our estate in grace, if our civil calling
hinders not the as in spiritual.

6 This serves to comfort us, in our base callings, because God may as well be
served in these, as the greatest.

7 And hereby we are taught to have respect to our brethren, and to prefer
their souls before their bodies.

8 As also we shall be established in our callings, not to be puffed up when we
prosper, neither to be confounded when we are crossed: but to be patterns of
the right use of the world.

9 Lastly, to humble men in every calling. The mighty, who think their
callings either must not stoop to religion or has no leisure thereto. The
Poor, who think their want, a privilege, from following their spiritual
callings.

Fifthly, observe we,

That whatsoever shall be sufficient for the right use of our callings, shall be
revealed unto us from the word, and thence to be warranted. Act. 9.

And that because:

1 God is as well the ordainer of the means, as of the end.

2 And in his love he will have us certain what to do.

3 And hereby presumption and destraction are happily prevented.

And this serves:

1 To try the fitness, and blessing of our callings. Use.


2 To humble us in regard of our ignorance and presumption.

3 To comfort us if through want or ignorance we may fail in some point, because
all is not revealed at once, and to assure us of good success therein. Psalm.
73.

4 To provoke us to seek after knowledge, as after treasures. Proverbs 2.

5 To teach us not to presume upon good meanings or bare intentions. 1. Sam. 13.

6 To condemn all rash, and licentious actions whatsoever.

Sixthly, we must be resolved.

That our callings are imposed,

And that because,

1 Christ Jesus has sufficiently deserved for us, and so we shall derogate from
his sufficiency.

2 God does not require it at our hands. Esa. 1.

3 We are never able to perform it, but when we have done al we can, we are
unprofitable servants. Luke 17.10.

Use.
And this:

1 Condemns all Popish, and voluntary service.

2 Encourages us in our callings seeing God requires but what we can, nay,
what he gives. 2. Cor. 8.12.

3 It comfort in our imperfections, and takes away that slavish fear of
hirelings and mercenaries.

4 And assures us of salvation.

7 Know we that each in regard

And that because:

1 Unto who^ much is given, much shall be required. Luke 12.48.

2 Herebe he is the better enabled thereto. And this,

1 Condemns such as think their state and play does exempt them from a civil
calling, or from the burden thereof. As Gentl. etc.

2 Hereby we may try whether our callings are sanctified.

3 As also, we are comforted, that god requires no more the^ he gives

Eighthly, Learn we,

That though we fail in the best And that,

1 By this faithfulness we may witness that our callings are sanctified unto
us, in our obedience to God in them.

2 That they may be means of our enjoying of heaven. 1. Ti. 6.19

3 To try and so condemn the uncharitableness of the world.

4 That we may be also possessors of greater glory in the heavens. Mat. 25.26.
etc.

And this serves:

1 To condem al time-seruing and customarines in our callings. Ephesians. 6.5, 6.

2 To instruct the poor not to neglect their callings altogether, because they
will not maintain them fully. As also

3 To try them whether they will depend upon Gods providence by using lawful
means.

4 We are provoked to strive with the best for the best gain, and in these
things to seek after heaven.

And this is done:

By walking in our callings by faith and not by sense, that so both our persons
and actions may be approved.

And this is known:

1 Being warranted from the word, in what we do, or intend. 2. Pet. 1.

2 Our consciences convinced from the word to the same: and also

Sect. 5. Callings how performed a right.
3 Witnessing with us in what we do. And that,

1 With cheerfulness, not making have to be rich, but casting our care upon
God, and committing the success to him. 1. Pet. 5. Eccl. 9.9.

2 With diligence, redeeming the time, and entertaining the means of Gods
providence, and not being wilfully guilty of the neglect thereof. Ephesians. 3.16.17.

3 In wisdom, 1. keeping our selves in our callings within the compass of
our ability. 2. Doing the most necessary duty, 3. submitting always these
earthly callings to the furtherance of the heavenly, 4. and expressing our
spiritual calling, even in the use of this, and 5. so avoiding negligence that
we be not entangled with covetousness.

4 In love and meeknes, making others partakers of the benefit of our labors

5 In patience, not tying God so much to the outward blessing of our labors,
as contenting our selves with the testimony of our good conscience therein.
Hebrews 13:18.

6 With conscience, doing that (...)

2 If we be not supplied, we are to yield to necessity, and either

3 To submit our selves to handy labor, or if we cannot thereto, depend upon
the providence of God, and so to submit our selves to the relief of the Church.

Thirdly, we must resign up our callings. And that.

1 When God calls by death.

2 When other means warranted by the conscience, guided by the word do,
require: that

3 With testimony of a good conscience. 1. Sam. 12.3.

4 By giving up our account for them unto the great judge. Heb. 13.

Thus are we to perform our calllings.

The benefit whereof is exceeding great, for: 1 Hereby we shall be sure to be
fed. Sect. 8. Benefit of callings.
Psalm. 37. Psalm. 33.19.

2 We shall eat our bread with power and much contentment.

3 We shall have to comfort and releive others.

4 We please our glorious God and perform a special service to him.

4 We shall be better fitted to our general callings.

5 We shall lay up a good foundation for heaven. 1. Tim. 6.19.

6 We shall exercise herin many spiritual graces. 1. Cor. 7. as patience,
faithfulness, etc.

7 Hereby we shall perceive Gods power, and holiness, even in these base and
mean things, and be provoked to seek him in greater blessings. Mat. 6.

8 We shall be humbled, and so provoked to hunger after our dissolution.

And thus far concerning our behavior in our callings.

The trial of conscionable performance of our callings* Is

1 If our conscience witness with us, Sect. 9. Trial.
that not so much for this life, as to please our blessed God, and further us
to heaven, we have traveled therein.

2 That of all ploughs the spiritual thriues best.

3 Our negligence in the civil calling, bewrayes some flaw in the general.

4 That our walking in the civil calling shall end in a fitting, and furthering
us in our Christian calling yielding some particular matter and occasion to
more profitable exercise therein.

CHAP. V. Of the right use of the Creatures.
THe next main incident to the day is the use of the creatures.

And these are of two sorts.

1 Such as serve for the necessary preservation of life, as food, apparel.

2 Such as serve especially for the better being of the soul, as company.

Concernig food and sustenance, observe these rules. Sect. 1. Rules herin
1 That every creature is good, and that there is no more holiness in the one,
then in the other, 1. Tim. 4.5.

2 Though each Christian has a right to all the creatures, yet is he to be
restrained in the use of them. Sect. 1. Rules herein.


And that by these limits:

1 The bond of Religion, which enioynes sometimes an entire abstinence from the
creature, that so we might be better fitted to spiritual duties. 1. Tim.
5.23. 1. Pet. 5.8, Ion. 3. and teaches at all times so to use the food of the
body, as that it may quicken the spiritual appetite after heavenly graces,
John. 6.27.

2 The bond of Christian Policy may restrain us the use of some creatures on
some days, for the benefit of the Commonwealth, to which we ought to obey
for Conscience sake, Rom 13.5.

3 The bond of Nature restraines us that we may not eat but for necessity,
Eccles. 10.16. Math. 12.1.

4 The bond of Conscience and Equity also enioynes us, that we may not
lawfully eat, unless we have labored for it. 2 Thessalonians. 3.12.

5 The bond of our callings binds us so to eat, as our Christian callings may
be furthered and our civil callings will maintain. 1. Tim. 5.8.

6 The bond of Charity wills us not to eat our morsels alone, but to provide and
reserve somewhat for the poor. Job. 29.31. Psalm 16 Neh. 5. avoiding herein
all manner of offense. 1. Cor. 8.

7 The bond of Sobriety restrains us from faring deliciously every day, and
from far-fetcht dainties, but to use our liberty as if we used it not,
avoiding unnecessary prouocations of gluttony. Esaias 5.9.10. Luke 16. 1. Cor.
7.23. And putting our knife to our throats in our greatest liberty, feasting
always in fear, and yet with thanksgiving. Prou. 23.3.

8 The bond of contentment, which wishes the servant not to envy at the more
liberal fare of his master but each to be content with the portion that is fit
for him. 1. Tim 6 6.8.

Thirdly, we are to renew our right in the creature, Sect. 3. Of the renewing
of our right in the creature.
by daily sanctifying them unto us by the word and prayer. 1. Tim. 5.1. Sam.
9.13.

And that:

1 By acknowledging our selves unworthy of them: Genesis 32.10.

2 Giving God the glory of them with thanksgiving. Mat. 26.

3 Seasoning them with holy and religious thoughts, and cheerful yet
profitable conference. Judge. 14 Luke 14.

4 Offering the strength of them unto God in our callings. 1. Kings 19.8.

The trial of the right use, i^^^*

1 If our comforts beneath, descend from comforts above.

2 If in these finite and corruptible things, we see an infinite and eternal
good*

3 And these earthly things are seals thereof unto us, and life up our hearts
thither.

4 If we find such contentednes in them as always affords desire and fitness
to spiritual blessings.

5 If in regard of their shortness fully to satisfy us, and our abuse of them
and aptnes thereto, we see in them our mortality, and so hunger after our
dissolution.

Sect. 4. The benefit hereof.
The benefit hereof.

1 We shall avoid superstition, and that damnable doctrine of devils. 1. Tim.
4.2.

2 We shall be better enabled to spiritual duties. Mat 26.30.

3 We shall use the Christian liberty aright. Romans 14.

4 We shall further nature to grace.

5 We shall eat of our own, and so be blessed. Psalm. 128.1.

6 We shall provide safely for the time of famine, and eat to live. Psalm.
33.10. Psalm. 37.

7 We shall make us friends of this Mammon of iniquity, and ease our selves
well of an heavy burden. Luke 16.

8 We shall be ready to die, and prepared to the meat that shall endure for
ever. John 6.27.

And thus much concerning our food.

The like may we conceive concerning our apparel. CHAP. VI. Of apparel.
WHich that we may the rathe use aright.

1 Consider we that our clothing is a badge of our sinful state, Sect. 1. How
to be informed in judgment.
and therefore let us not rejoice in our sin, let us not give strength thereto,
by vanity therein.

2 That herein we frame our selves to the guise of the country wherein we
live, avoiding the new fanglednesse of other nations. 1. Zeph. 9.

3 That we be constant in our general habits, and alter not the same.

4 That in the use of apparel we are subject to the authority of the
Magistrate. Romans 13.

5 That when we put on our apparel, we remember that excellent clothing of
Christ Jesus his righteousness, and the fruit thereof, that clothing upon in
glory, and immortality. 2. Ephesians. 2. Cor. 5.

6 That when we put off our apparel, we remember also to put off sin, and
so to lie down with peace of conscience, as not to resume sin again,
together with our apparel.

7 Be we careful that we disguise not our selves with the monstrous fashions
of the world, lest together with this outward fashion, we partake with them in
their sin, and so share with them in their punishments.

8 Take we heed, lest by our shameless disguising we so bring it to pass,
that the Lord when he comes to judgment acknowledge not his own creature.

9 Consider we the providence of God herein, that apparel, that has no heat,
should notwithstanding be a means to get and maintain the same, that so

1 Our hearts be not set upon the same.

2 That we labor for that only which may answer the right end* namely, 1. to
procure warmth to the body.

2 To adorn the same.

3 That we depend upon the blessing of God therein. Psalm, 127.

4 That in the want thereof, we despair not of Gods love: seeing 1. he which
makes the cold apparel to be a means of heat: can also maintain the heat
of the body without apparel: and 2. no man knows love or hatred by these
things. Eccl. 9.1.2.

5 Learn we hereby, that the body is better worth then the raiment, and so
the soul more precious then the body. Mat, 6.

6 And yet presume we not of heat without the use of these means.

7 And let this serve to humble us, that the greatest cause of our pride, we
have from the beasts, and that which has heat in it self does yet receive
heat from that which has none.

8 To confirm us not to neglect the most unlikely means.

9 And thus keeping our selves within the bound of necessity, sobriety,
religion, authority, ou^ callings avoiding of offense, etc. we shall by Gods
mercy attain to a right use of these outward blessings and so

1 Shall reeiue them as pledges of the immortal clothing.

2 Shall be assured of Gods mercy in the present use of them: as being now
sanctified unto us, etc.

10 Remember we that sin hangs upon us all our life long: and therefore let us
not set it faster on by vanity in apparel. But rather

11 Let us sigh and hunger for that clothing which is above, and especially
labor to adorn the hidden man in the heart. 1. Pet. 3.

12 Consider that this glory of apparel is the shame of the wearer causing them
to be counted light, wanton, proud, and consuming their outward estates,
disrobing the soul of spiritual graces, and exposing to more grievous
tentations as lust, theft, and pride,

Our judgments being thus rectified and resolved, concerning our right and
usage of apparel, we may safely use.

1 Even the most precious, Sect. 2. How in practice.
as our callings do allow. Genesis 41. Genesis 24. Psalm 45.10. Mat. 6.27. 2. Chro.
9.27. 2. So there be no vanity in them. Esa. 3.

3 So we remit of our liberty to the more fit worship of God in fasting, etc.
Ion. 3. Esth. 4.

4 So we more especially intend the adorning of the mind. 1. Tim. 2 9. 1. Pet.
3.3.

5 So we make them not means and ensigns of our pride, lightness etc. Esa. 3.16.

6 So that our care be moderate for the same. Mat. 6 28. 1. Tim. 6.8.

7 As also suitable unto our several callings and degrees.

8 Approving our selves herein unto the examples of the grauest and most
frugall. Phil. 4.9. Mat. 3.4

9 Especially correspondent to decency and holiness. Tit. 2.3.

1 So that the man must not wear that which belongs to the woman Deuteronomy. 22.5.

2 Our apparel must be fit to execute our several callings.

3 As also such as may express the several virtues of the mind. 1. Tim. 2.9.10.

Observing these ends in the use thereof. 1 Necessity to defend us from heat
and could.

2 Honesty to cover our nakedness. Os. 2. Saving only the face and hands.

3 Honor. 1. Cor. 12.23. 1. These. 4.4 to adorn our persons and callings.

4 Contenting our selves with our natural favor and complexion. 2. King. 9 30.

5 Aiming herein at a spiritual use, as before: especially, our death and
resurrection.

The benefit hereof is,

1 Our outward estate maintained and honored. Sect. 3. It benefit.


2 The inward beauty and grace of the mind furthered.

3 Abuse of time prevented, which we must give account of.

4 Gods creatures used to their right end, and in an holy manner: whereby not
only their groaning is eased. Romans. 8.19. But they fitted as means of the
worship of God, and so furtherers of our eternal happiness. 1. Tim. 6 19.

5 The judgments of God avoided. Esa. 2.11. Zeph. 3.11.

6 We better enabled to cloth and comfort others. Job. 30. and so

7 Pride exceedingly mastered, and subdued.

8 Offense of our brother, and scorn of the wicked prevented.

9 Natures shame covered.

10 Sin also daily set before us Ps. 55. and so we provoked to repentance.

11 And thereby prepared happily to our ends. In that with apparel we resuming
sin, are so provoked to groan under it and sigh for delivery therefrom.

Helps hereunto are: Sect. 4. Helps.


1 Consideration of our inward nakedness and filthiness of the soul, whic^^^
will withdraw our minds from vain tricking of the body.

2 Meditation of the inward clothing of Christ his righteousness; Romans 13. Gal.
3. As also,

3 Of that heavenly clothing wherewith we shall be fully invested in heaven, 2.
Cor. 5.1, Cor. 15.

4 Meditation of the grave, when all this glory, etc. shall be laid in the
dust. etc.

CHAP. VII. Of Company.
TOuching Company we are to observe these points:

Sect. 1. 1 Necessary
First, that society is most necessary and profitable for us. As in that

1 By Nature we are inclined thereto.

2 So created of God, as that we have need one of another. 1. Cor. 12. Genesis 2.

3 So disposed in the world, as that we must needs sort together by reason of
our particular wants, and diversity of gifts.

4 So united in Christ, as that we are bound to help each other. 1. Cor. 12

5 So interressed in happiness, as that we jointly labor together.

6 Hereby we communicate of the good that God bestows on us, 1. Tim. 6.17.

7 As also are relieved and comforted in the evil that is laid upon us.

8 We maintain our right, and pursuit of the heavenly fellowship.

9 And have daily experience of our union and fellowship with our blessed God.
And

10 Exercise love with each other.

11 As also have experience of his admirable power and wisdom in keeping us
untainted, and making us profitable in all company.

12 Hereby we discern the use of the tongue, and attain to an holy ordering
thereof.

13 Hereby also we effect the conversion of others, and so increase our
endless glory, and confirm our present estate, Iam. 5.20^

14 As also we quicken and kindle the graces of God in each other. Pro. 10.20.

15 We prevent hardness of heart, and the deceitfulness of sin, as gaining
a more excellent knowledge of our selves.

16 As also are provoked to remember them absent, by whom we have received good
in company.

And this serves,

1 To condemn that monstrousness of nature which endures no society.

2 As also that voluntary devotion which excludes from society.

3 To instruct us to employ our selves for the public and common good.

4 To prepare our selves, and so to be armed against all company whatsoever.

5 To content us, whatsoever company the Lord shall cast us upon.

6 And also to assure us of good success therein.

Secondly, Sect. 2. How to be used aright
that we may the better profit by all companies, observe we: 1 That we must
fear danger from all: from the evil, by being defiled with them: from the
good, by being puffed up with them.

2 That we leave no ill savor behind us, but walk harmlesly before them,
and with them.

3 That we rush not unadvisedly into any company. But

1 Determine before hand to do them good. Or else,

2 To receive good of them, as occasion shall require, and so prepare to
question with them accordingly.

4 Be we resolved that company is not simply necessary to salvation, we are to
use them, if God cast us upon them: If otherwise by infirmity, or some outward
affliction we are debarred, know we, that in stead of men, we have the society
of our blessed God, and his Angels; yea we can never be deprived of the
company of a good conscience, Pro. 15.15.

5 Especially prepare we the the heart by a serious examination. And

6 Set we a watch before the door of our lips, that our tongues may not
betray us.

7 Remember that God is president in each company, to judge of our speech, Romans
11.36. and therefore let all be done of him, through him, and for him, let him
be accounted the best therein.

8 And consider we, that the Diuill will be one in despite of us, to write what
we say: and therefore entertain we not him, by vanity, worldliness, etc. Job.
1.2.

9 Aim we at spiritual peace, and avoid we brawling, contentions, etc.

10 And remember we, that here is no liberty for Idle talk.

Thirdly, observe we:

The kinds of company, which are, Good, Bad.


Here learn,

First to discern good and evil company, As thus,

First, they are to be esteemed good. which

1 Are of the same profession with us, Ephesians 5.11. Psa. 15.4.

2 Who speak with sound judgment, and power of true knowledge, Col. 1. Phil. 1.

3 Who labor to holiness and sincerity of life, Ephesians. 5. In all things
continually,

4 Who have a sight of their inward corruptions, and mourn for them.

5 Labor to do good to others. Gal. 6.10.

6 Who suffer with us for the same profession. Phil. 1.27.

7 Who love the word, and Gods children. Psa. 16.2.

8 Long for the appearance of Jesus Christ, 1 Corinthians. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. 2 Cor.
5.1.2. etc.

9 Which can endure to be reproved.

10 And go the straight way, contrary to the world thereto, Mat. 7. Luke 13.
Romans 12.2.3.

Sect. 5. Who bad.
Secondly, they are to be accounted evil: that

1 Speak evil of the power of profession, Iud. 8. 2 Pet. 2.3.4.

2 Despise the word, and means of holiness. 2. Pet. 3.5.6.

3 Disgrace profession with a profane life. Ephesians. 5.6.

4 Resolve that we may be too holy and religious.

5 Separate themselves from the society of the Saints, Hebr. 10. Esaias. 65.5.

6 Run the broad way, following: 1 Examples, 2 Multitude, 3 Time. 4 Custom,
5 Opinion. etc.


7 Who hate to be reproved, and continue obstinate in their sin, John. 2.

8 Which decay in sincerity, and grow worse and worse. 2. Tim. 3.13

9 Who notwithstanding the outward form of godliness, retain the fashion of
the world, and savor thereof. Romans 12.

10 Who give occasion of grief to the Saints, and rejoicing to the wicked.
Psalm. 110.

11 Which betray and persecute the Saints of God, Matthew. 10. John. 16.1.

12 Who cannot endure reprofe.

13 Who refuse the cross, and make choice of the pleasures of sin for a
season, 2. T^^^m. 4. Demas Hebr. 11.25.26.

14 Who are afraid of death, and set up their rest in this life, Luke 12.20.
Amos 6.3.4.

Fourthly learn we,

Principally to make choice of good Company: As, Sect. 6. To choose good.


1 Best agreeing with our qualities.

2 Those who are knit with us in the holy and constant bond of love and
religion. Ephesians. 4.1.

3 Those of whom we shall receive most good, and least hurt.

4 Those whom we are most bound to do good unto, Galath 6.10.

5 As also with whom w^^^e shall enjoy most constant and perpetual society. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Heb. 12.

And this condemns,

1 Those that are indifferent for all companies.

2 Instructs us whom especially to sort with. And

3 Whom to avoid in our election.

Sect. 7. Wicked how to be sorted with
Fifthly, observe we, that we are not to refuse the worst company upon these
conditions:

1 If thy calling require and allow thee for their good, especially being
sought unto, Mat. 3.5. Luke 14.1

2 If upon occasion thou fall upon them, or they into thy company. 1. Reg. 18.
Act. 17.17.

3 If they be in any extremity, thou art to seek unto them. Luke 10.33.

4 So thou do not return to them, but reclaim them unto thee Ier. 15.19.

And this condemns,

1 That scrupulosity that allows no society with the wicked.

2 As also that profaneness which upon such pretenses are companions with them
in evil.

3 It instructs us in the right of our Christian liberty, to become all unto
all, that so we may win some unto Christ, 1. Corinthians. 9.17.18.

4 As also comfort us, that if we do them no good, yet we shall (keeping
these Rules) receive no hurt; nay, we shall be the better by them. Matthew
10.3.4.

Otherwise we are not to converse with them: Because, 1 They do not love us,
Prou. 29.

2 They will defile us with their corruptions, and hinder us in well-doing.

3 And draw down Gods wrath upon us. Reu. 18, 5.

4 They are hated of God, Mat. 9.

5 And to be secluded the society of the faithful. 2 John.

And this,

1 Reproves their profaneness, who, to choose, sort with the wicked, to make
them merry, and reject the godly, as being melancholy persons, etc.

2 As also, that for fear to offend the wicked, converse and close with them,
or to make gain of them, or by them.

3 Hereby we learn how to avoid contagion and confusion even by forsaking the
company of the wicked, Reu. 18.4.

4 As also hereby we have a protection from their malice, if we run not into
the same excess with them.

Ninthly, learn we how to behave our selves in good company. Concerning good
company, there are these rules: Sect. 9.


1 We must provoke each other thereto.

2 Christian salutation is to begin this society, and greeting each other in
the Lord. Ruth. 2.

3 To be large-hearted, offering the most precious pearls unto them, Math. 13.

4 To use among them more cheerfulness and familiarity.

5 Exhortation of each other to constancy.

6 Reproving each other for suspected or known infirmities, Leuit. 19.17.
Galath. 2.11.13. privately.

7 Taking occasion by some present blessing or judgment to provoke to
repentance, or thankfulness, Genesis 33.11. Genesis 4^^^.9

8 Joining together in prayer at least once before breaking up, Ephesians. 6. Acts
1.

9 Aduising each other for outward occasions but sparingly, 2. Tim. 4.13.14.

10 Commending each other to their private remembrances, Ephesians. 6.19. Act. 20.32.

11 In conference, keeping an holy order, that the grauest, and most
experienced may both begin, and moderate without interruption or prejudice of
any other gifts. 1. Cor. 14. Job. 32.4.

12 Not wading into matters beyond their skill, or calling.

13 Bearing with one another, through love.

14 Conferring especially of such things as they have learned.

15 Rejoicing together in singing of Psalms, Col. 3.15.

Sect. 10. Benefit of good company.
The end and use of good company is: 1 To draw understanding out of them by
conference, Luke 24. Ioh. 4

2 To receive comfort in our inward and outward troubles, Ruth. 2.13.

3 To increase spiritual joy, Psalm. 32.11.

4 To maintain love and Christian unity, Psa. 133.1.

5 To nourish our hope and union in the fellowship which is above. Sect. 11.
Kinds of good company.
Col. 1.5.

Now good company is either

Set, and appointed: or

Occasional.

Set company is either to Spiritual or Civil ends.


That which is to spiritual ends is either, Public, or Private.


The Set Public meetings of the Saints are of two sorts.

Principal and necessary,

Accessory and occasional.

The Principal meetings are such which do immediately concern, and so are
employed in the worship of God.

And therefore,

First, the weekly meetings on the Sabbath. Sect. 12. Of Sabbath society, and
the Rules thereof.


And herein observe these Rules: First, that we prepare each other thereto.
Eccle. 4.17.

And that by 1 For Preparation.


1 Council and Instruction.

2 Encouragement and provocation by example, etc. rejoicing that now we are
freed from bodily labor to serve our God more freely.

3 By examination, and that,

1 Of sins committed, especially such of neglect of Gods worship.

2 Present wants, of knowledge, desire, etc.

3 What furniture of graces we are fitted withal, what Faith, Repentance,
Joy, etc.

4 Especially laboring to be found in Christ, Phil. 3.9.10.

5 Praying unfeignedly for the ministry of the world, Col. 4. Romans 16. 2 Thessalonians.
3.

6 Instructing our Families, 2 Thessalonians. 3. Gen 18. Psalm. 101.

7 Condemning our former abuse of the Saboth.

8 Renewing our vows for more conscionable obedience for the time to come. And
lastly,

9 Meditating on the eternal Saboth, and so stirring up our selves in a
through emptying of all carnal thoughts, etc.

Secondly, for the worship of the day. 2 Practice of they day.
1 We are to arise early, to praise the Lord.

2 To stir up our selves and people by reading, meditating and praying, in
private, and with the Family.

3 That we come together to the Assemblies, and not straggle, but that we may
be partakers of the whole worship of GOD, Acts 13.44.

4 That we use all holy and reverend gestures to further attention to holy
things, as to be bare, to stand up, to look upon the preacher, etc. Luke 4.20.
Numb. 23 18.22.

5 That we fail not privately to stir up one another (as we perceive
dullness) to watchfulness, heede-taking, by iogging, etc.

6 That we join with the Congregation in such parts of Gods worship, as then
are performing, 1 Cor. 14. Act. 20.36.

7 That we continue out the performance thereof, waiting for the blessing,
unless more urgent occasion call away, Math. 24.20.

8 That we confer with our family and neighbors some few together, of such
lessons as we have publickely heard, desiring to be satisfied by our
Minister, of doubtful points, Acts 17.11.

9 That we visit the sick, and relieve the poor, make peace among neighbors,
minister a word in due season to them that are weary, Isa. 50. Math. 7.

10 That we meditate upon the Means.

1 Accounting with our selves what things either read or preached especially
concerned us.

2 What especial comforts and feelings the Lord gave us in prayer.

3 What increase of faith in the promises.

4 What renewing of repentance, etc.

11 That we take a view of the creatures, and stir up our hearts in the
Spiritual meditation thereof to a greater love and reverence of the Creator.
Psalm. 19.1. Psalm. 92.4.

12 That we count this our only recreation for this day, to build up the soul
in knowledge and holiness. Esaias. 58.13.

The use and benefit of the Sabbath is: 3 It benefit.
1 We aree better fitted to the daily sacrifice.

2 And also enabled to walk profitably in our Civil Callings.

3 We renew our heavenly conversation.

4 We increase in knowledge, and so are fitted to a further measure of
sanctification.

5 We are provoked to meditate on the work of our redemption which was the
cause of the unchangeable change of this day.

6 We are more weaned from the world, and settled in our best choice.

7 We renew our right, and prosecute our interest in the eternal Sabbath.

8 We are thoroughly humbled in the sense of our unworthiness, as discerning by
the impossibility of so keeping in our selves; but that in thought, word, and
deed we have often transgressed the bounds of this day, how far we are from
perfection, and so are provoked the rather to hasten thereto.

Sect. 13 Of thankesgiuings.
A second public meeting for Gods worship, are the Solemnities of
Thanksgiving for extraordinary blessings received, Exo. 15.1. Hest. 9. Nehem.
8.

And these are to be performed. 1 By the lawful authority of the Magistrate.
Hest. 9.

2 They are to be kept as Sabboths, with

1 Like preparation,

2 Cessation from work,

3 Contribution to the poor.

4 Spiritual exercise of the word and prayer, 1, Corinth. 16. Hest. 9.

Fasting.
5 Only here may be a more liberal use of Gods Creatures, in regard of
inuitation of the poor, and enlarging of Christian liberty upon the occasion,
1, Sam. 9.23.24. Genesis 21.8.

6 And that the memorial of Gods mercy may continue, we are to set a part
solemn days thereto Hest. 9. Exodus 14.15.

These are so to be kept, that we be fitted and prepared thereby to other the
like duties of thanksgiving upon private occasions, not that the performance
hereof should make amends for, and cut off these, Luke 16. Hest. 1.

So that we herein avoid, 1 Customarinesse, 2 Pet. 2.13. 2 Opinion of merit.
3 Superstition, Iud. 13. 4 Will Worship. Col. 2.16.21. 5 Vain prodigality. etc.


For the matter and Rules of thanksgiving before.

A third public Spiritual meeting is that holy exercise of Fasting and
Prayer: Sect. 14. Public fasts.
Luke 5.33. Act. 1. Ion. 3.

And here observe,

What fasting is.

1 What it is
1 Not what God imposes, and is not willingly chosen either by the shutting of
the heaven, or hardening of the earth, which is properly called famine, Genes.
12.10.41.53.

2 Neither that hunger which proceeds for want of meat, Act. 27.21 33.

3 Neither that extraordinary abstinence from meat caused by such strange
visions, etc. Act. 9.9.

4 Neither that miraculous fasting by a divine power, as that of our Savior,
Moses, Elias, Math. 4.2 Exodus 34.28. 1 King. 19 8.

5 Neither that daily sobriety and temperance of Christians in moderate diet
and spare, as that of John Baptist, Mat. 3. 1. Pet. 5.8. Genesis 1.29.

6 Neither that extraordinary sobriety and moderation in our Christian liberty,
when the judgment of famine lies sore upon the land, to show our sense of Gods
hand, and to be better able, by sparing from our former liberty, to relieve
others. Nehem. 5.

7 Neither that superstitious difference of meats, as of fish in stead of
flesh, abstaining from white-meates, and on set days.

8 But it is a voluntary abstinence, and extraordinary, taken up for a
religious end.

Voluntary it is, 1 because the time and manner of fasting is not imposed or
determined, but lost free to our own liberty.

2 This is to be understood of private fasts, because the public for the time
and outward manner, are at the disposing of the magistrate.

2 It is an abstinence,

1 Either of all kinds of meats, wholly for so long time as nature will endure
to be fitted to spiritual duties.

2 Or if it continue any long time, then to receive sparingly, somewhat to
maintain life, without any daintiness or excess to nourish pleasure. This is
also true fasting: so that it be,

3 Extraordinary, that is, differ from our ordinary temperance in diet, which
is to be at all times: but this at certain times, and for certain occasions.
And that

4 As also to religious ends. Of which hereafter.

And this condemns,

1 Blasphemous fasting of such, who in imitation of the divine power have
presumed* The use.
to commend unto the Church, by their wicked imitation, that miraculous fast of
40 day, as the Montanists, Papists.

2 It condemns generally all Popish fasting: and that,

1 Because it consists in the observation of set times, upon pain of mortal
sin, Mat. 9.

2 They make the very abstinence from flesh, a matter of conscience.

3 They place their abstinence in difference of meats, as if one were more holy
then another.

4 They determine the act of fasting to be a religious and holy work, whereas
indeed in it self it is but indifferent.

5 Yea, they make fasting to be a matter of merit, whereas indeed, at the
best, it is but a help to a good work.

2 This teaches us to put a difference between religious fasts, and civil
abstinence from some Creatures upon certain week days for the good of the
Commonwealth, and mutual use of the creatures, imposed by the Magistrate, as
the moderator of our liberty in these things.

3 As also, we are hereby taught to discern of our fasts, whether they be
warrantable or no.

Secondly, observe the kinds of fasting, which are: 1 Private, upon
extraordinary, 2 Kinds of Fasting.
or ordinary occasions, within the power of each particular Christian to
dispose of, either for his own person* concerning time, etc. or for his family,
where he is King, Priest, and Prophet.

2 Public, which depend on the Authority,

1 Of the Christian Magistrate.

2 Are celebrated in a public place.

3 Solemnized only for extraordinary occasions.

4 Continue either one or more days, as the occasion is more urgent Ion. 3.
Esaias 58.

Thirdly, consider the causes and occasions of these public fasts.

1 The ouerflowing of sin, threatening some grievous judgment. ^^^ Causes of
^^^ast^^^ng.


2 Some judgment threatened, either by the word, or by some visible sign, 2,
Chron. 20. Joel. 3. Ion. 3. Hest. 4.

3 Some present judgment upon the land. Judge. 20.

4 When any especial good is to be done for Church, or Commonwealth, Exodus 19.
Act. 14. Dan. 10.3. Luke 6.12.

5 When we fear the remove all of some principal blessing, as good
government, the Word, etc.

6* When we see the like occasions in our neighbors, we are for their sakes
also to be humbled, Psalm. 35.

Fourthly, learn we the manner of true fasting, which is: 4. Manner of fasting.
1 For the solemnity of it, it must be kept as a Sabbath. Esa* 58. Za. 7.

2 There must be an abstinence from all meats, so far, that the body be
afflicted. Ezra^ 8.2. 1 Cor. 9

3 Yet so, as nature be not destroyed, or unfitted to spiritual duties. 2.
Col. 23. Math. 6.

4 That we continue in this abstinence, at the least all the time of the
performance of such spiritual actions of prayer and the word: and that, if
nature will endure, even from morning to the evening.

5 As also, we must abstain from all delights, which either may ^^^^^^eare
nature ordinarily, unless some sudden oppress it, or may provoke it to sin.
Da. 10.3. Ioe. 2.15

6 Yea, all persons are bound to the performance thereof, unless by impotency
of nature, or inabilitie of spiritual gifts, they are unfitted thereto: so
children sick and old folks are excepted: a^^^ also such, which by reason of
the constitution of their bodies, cannot endure fasting. Romans 14. Tit. 1.15.

7 We must also come before the Lord in our meanest attire, as a sign of our
humility. Ion 3. Est. 4.

8 Here must be a more solemn confession of sins, both in general and
particular, with more strong cries, and groans to obtain pardon for the same,
as also a more public profession of our faith, and apprehension of the favor
of God in Jesus Christ. Dan. 9.6.7

9 Lastly, concerning plenty of tears and lementation, putting on sacke-cloth,
bowing of the body and going crooked, renting of garments, lying in the dust.
Joel 2. Mich. 1. covering the head with ashes, etc. These being rudiments of
the Jewish Church, are now left arbitrary in Christian liberty, and are to be
used according to the manner of the Churches where we live. Math. 5.27.

And this,

1 Condemns Popish fasting which admits delicate and riotous dainties,
howsoever it deny gross meats.

2 As also teaches us the true manner of fasting.

Fifthly, observe we the right Ends of fasting. 5. Ends of Fasting.
Which are 1 To subdue the flesh and bring down the bodily lusts into
subjection to the will of God. Luke 21.24.

2 To stir up devotion and attention to holy duties. Luke. 2.37. 1. Cor. 7.5.
So did Anna use it because the heart and affections are lighter and in better
order, etc.

3 To testify the humility and contrition of our hearts namely, our inward
sorrow for sin, and worthiness to be cut off by the hand of God. Joel.
2.12.13. To this end do we deny our selves the use of Gods creatures* to
signify that we have deserved death, which would fall upon us* if we were not
nourished by the creatures.

4 To put us in mind of our guiltiness before the Lord, that we are unworthy
to live, breathe the air, etc.

To these we may add the notable effects of Fasting, 6. Benefits of fasting.
which have been and are, 1 Great blessings have been obtained: and retained
to the Church.

2 Grievous judgments have been kept out and removed, and turned into
blessings. Ion. 3. Iud. 20.2. Chron. 20.

3 Gods children have been confirmed and assured of their salvation. 1. Cor.
9.23. 2. Cor. 6.

4 And enabled the better to holy duties. Act* 1. Act. 14. and Mat. 17.21.

5 And the like may the Church and Saints exspect in the conscionable
performance of this duty to the worlds end.

6 Satan this means is especially defeated and cast out. Math. 17.21.

And thus far of the public use of spiritual society.

The private follows, Sect. 15. Of private Sociceie.
which is seen: 1 In the private exercise of religion, in our families, as
Prayer Catechizing, reading of the word, Meditation, etc. Of which at large in
the second part of the Daily Sacrifice.

2 In private Fasts and Thankesgiuings, for family and personal, Private
Fasts, etc.
, yea, in the failing of the Church, for public occasions also.

Wherein observe:

1 That they are to be performed by the authority of the master of the
family (it being not lawful for any private person therein, unless he be
free and at his own liberty to perform these duties to the hinderance of his
civil Calling, which is subordinate to the profit of his master, without
special license from him contenting himself, otherwise, with his inward
desires and private times, which are left him from his vocation: unless his
master be merely profane, and will allow no liberty at all to holy duties,
then is he rather to submit to the chastisement of a wicked master, then by
neglecting holy duties, to incur the wrath of God. Dan. 6. Ephesians. 6.1.

2 These fasts are to be kept as Sabbath.

3 That which is allowable in publik, may here be faulty. Namely, show and
ostentation of that openly, which we do in private. Math. 6.

3. Holy conferences
Thirdly, spiritual society is seen in holy conferences And that

1. Between minister and people.
First between the Minister and his flock.

This is necessary. 1 To breed acquaintance, and so love of the minister, and
consequently of the word.

2 To enable us the better to the understanding of the word.

3 To the better informing of the conscience, and subduing of the affections
thereto.

4 To acquaint the Pastor with the (...) of his flock, that so he may give
unto each his portion in due season. Isa. 5.6.

And this:

1 Condemns the Pride of Pastors, who (guilty to themselves of ignorance or
profaneness) refuse to converse with, and resolve their people.

2 As also the pride and security of the people, who either are strange to
their Pastors, or rather use them for worldly respects, as Law, Physic,
Craft, etc. then for the resolution of the conscience.

Here observe

1 To avoid high and curious speculations.

2 To reason of such things as concern each others estate.

3 And that not so much for desire of knowledge as conscience sake.

1 That we confer of our own principally, and not of others estates.

2 That we avoid as much as may be, speech of worldliness, etc.

3 That we confer of spiritual things seasonably, and within compass.

4 Though it be lawful to speak of things indifferent, yet we make choice to
speak of what directly concerns holiness.

5 That we meddle not with state, or secret domestical occasions.

6 That we be not discouraged if we profit not by conference, contenting our
selves in the good purpose of our hearts, that we have done the good will of
God: and that our labor will return into our own bosom: or else we may do
good hereafter.

7 That we entend the glory of God, and each others profit.

8 That we be swift to hear, and slow to speak, Iam. 5.

The trial of holy conference is:

That,

1 If our desire of profiting others grow cold, through carnal joy, Sect. 16.
Trial of right use.
the^ are we to suspect that joy. Act. 20. Ioh. 4.

2 That either both depart better hereby, or else, we at least have the
testimony of a good conscience herein, and give not over the hope of good
success.

3 That we so part with company, as that we be fit to be alone.

Thus far of the spiritual use of society, Sect. 17. Of accessory meetings
concerning principally the worship of God.

2 The Accessory meetings concerning religion, follow. Namely, such as tend to
the furtherance thereof.

And that:

1 In the establishing of truth.

2 Conuincing of error.

3 As also in the correction of the offend or by the discipline of the Church.

And these are either more general.

1 Such as are the general councelles, Synods, and appointed, 1. More general.
and gathered by the Christian magistrate, for the maintenance of true
religion, and the rooting out of heresies. 2. Rules.


Here observe these rules.

1 That the Christian magistrate is the chief moderator.

2 The word of God must be the rule and Judge. Mat. 27. Ioh. 7.

3 The end must be to mainethe unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians.
4.

2. Less general.
Secondly, some are less general. As

1 The national and prouincial Synods of particular Churches to be ordered in
the same manner as before.

2 The more parti^^^^^ Ecclesiastical governments, and Consistories of the
Ministry, for the correcting of manners, and due execution of the discipline
of the Church.

Hitherto appertain:

3. Their appurtenances
1 The Schools of the Prophets as being the nurseries of religion and
Seminaries of the Church and commonwealth. Ie. 1.

Amos 7.14. Act. 6.9. 2. Reg. 2.15.

2 Religious Feasts tending to nourish the society of the Saints. 2. Feasts.
Iud. 12.

3 Contributions and collections for the poor. 1. Cor, 16.1. 3. Contributions.


1 To be performed on the Sabbath.

2 And distributed according to the necessity of the Churches.

Thus far of the use of spiritual society.

The Civil follows, Sect. 18. Of civil society.
and it is manifold. 1 State assemblies to determine for the good of the body
politic, among which the highest and most authentical, 1. State assemblies.
are the Parliaments Next to these the Council Table. Thirdly, the
Starre-Camber. Fourthly, the Exchequer and Kings Bench.

2 Corporations and Brotherhoods, Cities and Towns concerning the right use of
trades and mysteries. 2. Corporations.


3 Thirdly, Contracts and Bargains which must be with these conditions. 3.
Contracts


1 That we use no deceit either in word or deed to entrap or ouer-rate.

2 That promise be kept unless with consent on each side.

3 That we sell not time, making more profit in regard thereof.

4 That we sell what is good and saleable. Amos. 8.

5 Mercy is to be showed if we have our brother at an advantage

4. Suites.
Fourthly, Civil society may fall out in suits and controversies. Here observe:

1 That these hinder not our spiritual society in the worship of God.

2 Neither impeach other ordinary kindnesses which ought to pass between
neighbors.

3 Yet rather we should suffer wrong, then fall into these suites. 1. Cor. 6.

4 Seek we all means of private agreement before we go to law.

5 Delay we not suits to weary out a brother.

6 Much less by bribery seek to overthrow a good cause.

7 But to overcome evil with good, seeking peace and ensuing it Romans 12. Psalm.
34.

A fifth use of society is for Recreation. Here observe. 5. Society in
Recreation


1 That we be as careful to use recreation a right, as to have liberty in it.

2 That we make choice of a fit time, when we have need, by reason of
wearisomnesse in our callings.

3 That we make no ocupation of it, neither labor so much for skill therein,
as rather to make us more skillful to moderate the same.

4 Look we up still to God for continency in the use of our liberty.

5 Our kinds of recreation must be honest and of good report.

6 We must use great moderation of our affections therein.

3 Neither enrage them by unseasonable and over bitter reproofs unless the
glory of God presently lie in the balance. Mat. 7.6.

4 Take we heed, lest by laboring in simplicity to approve our selves unto
them, we expose our selves as a prey.

But that we may benefit them, we are 1 To converse gravely, but yet humbly
with them. Neh. 2.12.

12 To wait some good occasion from their speech, and so to work upon it. Act.
16.

3 To call to mind some present blessing, or judgment, that so we may put by
idle talk. Amos 6.6. Esa. 5.12.

4 Commend we what is likely spoken of them, yet with an holy drawing them on
to better, by grave exhortations. 2. Tim. 2.24.25.

5 In all our speech let it appear that love is the ground, and the souls
good the principal end. Math. 5.44.

6 Contrary we them not always in their weakness, but expound it to the best,
unless we see apparent contempt and desperate scorning. Judges 22.23. To.
14.1.

7 If we cannot benefit by conference, then let us take heed, that we do not
communicate with them in evil, but rather wisely break it we off, as Sampson
did, by some riddle or such like, as ne^^^e as may be, leave we them with peace
that so afterward, there may be hope to win them. 2 Thessalonians. 3.15* Romans 12.18.

Thus are we to behave our selves in evil company, 2. Cautions herein.
if by occasion they light upon us, etc. But purposely we are not to make
choice of them.

Either in holy duties concerning the worship of God. Here learn:

1 That we are to pray for the communion of Saints, and perfection thereof. 1.
Cor. 15.

2 Not to join any otherwise with (...) in charity, partly by our own
experience we hope and guess their fitnes to our fellowship.

3 If we know otherwise, we are after private admonition to make known the
offense, and our dislike thereof, that we be not partaker of other men's sins.
1. Tim. 5.

4 If the party will not refrain, or by the lamenesse of discipline is not
repelled: we are not to refuse our comfort, because he turns his into poison.

5 Yet are we to eat with sour herbs, even to mourn, and sigh for further
purity.

2 We are not to admit the wicked to our private tables. Psalm. 101. and
families.

3 Nor to assume them as partners, in our private recreations.

4 Neither to employ them in our civil and domestical affairs. Genesis 14.

5 Especially not to acquaint them with our secrets. Judge. 10.

6 Generally, wherein it stands with our liberty, and their saftie, we are not
purposely to sort with them.

3. Use hereof
The use of evil company, is,

1 That we make more of the better sort.

2 And labor to make the bad better.

3 That we long after heaven, where we shall find none but good company.
Phil. 1. Heb. 12.

4 That we grow more private and learn to be a part with our God. Genesis 5.21.

CHAP. VIII. Of solitariness.
ANd this is the next occasion of the day, Sect. 1. why
wisely to be entertained of us. Namely,

To order wisely solitariness.

And that because:

First, now we lie naked and open to spiritual tentations, which are most
dangerous, as Pride, etc.

Secondly, and may with best advantage and least hinderance, pursue the best
things: and so are capable of the greatest good, or subject to the greatest
evil.

Here therefore observe these Rules. Sect. 2. Rules thereof
1 That though we be from the presence and company of men: yet we have the
presence, and fellowship of the Almighty, and the ministry of his holy Angels,
and therefore that now especially, we rejoice in this fellowship. Psalm. 16.

2 Yet so as that we neglect not our callings, but be sure that we be kept
from idleness. 2 Thessalonians. 3.

3 That we especially call to mind those ill neighbors, which we shall never
be rid of, so long as we live namely, our sins, and in our greatest freedom
of solitariness forget not our bondage under this tyranny, to pr^^^uent
spiritual pride and security. Romans 7.24.25.

4 That we take heed of idle and curious speculations, feeding thereby our
melancholy and vain thoughts, lest Satan take advantage of our curiosity, and
so provoke us to schisms and heresies, or else breed fearful distractions,
and defections of the mind Heb. 10.23.

5 Provoking hereby to singularity and so forsaking of the fellowship.

6 That we be careful to order and repress the infinite wanderings of the
mind, which at such times is most busy and exorbitant. Gen 6.5. Dan. 4.2. And
that

1 By singling out the most necessary matter that concerns our present
occasion.

2 And prosecuting at once the same, as we may without interruption.

3 At lest, if some special motion come in the way, so entertaining it, as
taking only some brief note thereof to help memory, we leave it to some proper
season, and so return again to our former subject.

4 Not leaving it till we have driven it from speculation to particular use.

5 And so raise up, to run our communion with Christ.

7 Especially that we be wise to discern Satan's deepnes, who now will usually
most eagerly assault us either taking advantage of our security, because we
are freede from outward occasions, or working upon priuatenesse and want of
succor. Mat. 4.

8 That especially we meditate on heavenly things, comforting our selves with
the holy protection of Angels, who attend us, and rejoicing in the hope of that
blessed fellowship which expects us in heaven. Genesis 5. Gen 24.63.

9 At no hand give we place to Satan, seeking now to scare or distract us, but
resist we strongly by faithful prayer. 1. Pe. 5.8.9.2. Chapter 3.^^^

10 Presume not of such solitarines either which has no warrant, as that of
Monks, etc. or when thou art bound to society, for herein thou excludest thy
self the protection of the Lord. Eccles 4 9.10.

Thus behauing our selves alone. Sect. 3. Benefit ^^^ereof.
1 We shall never want the comfort of sweet communion* Mat. 28. Apoca 3.20. John
14.23.

2 Ready shall we be for such troubles, when we may be driven to be alone,
Apoc. 1.9.10.

3 Fitter also for the fellowship and communion of the Saints, 1. Tim. 3.4.5.

4 Strengthened against Satan, who now will principally assault us, Mat. 4.
Eccles. 4.10.

5 And profitable redeemers of the time, and purchasers of eternity, Ephesians. 5.16.
Provided,

1 That we vex not our selves with sifting, Sect. 4. Cautions to be observed
or envying others business and states, lest thereby we be made unfit for our
own, 1. Tim. 5.13.

2 That we ouer-whelme not our selves with overmuch thinking of worldly things,
especially of the times to come, or things which may happen, least the heart
be drowned with the love of the creature, or appalled with fear of
after-claps, Matthew. 6.34. Luke 21.34.

3 In meditation of heavenly things, look we that our custom herein cause not
a vilifying or loathing of such heavenly mysteries, Math. 6.7. Mat. 15.9.

4 Take we heed of an ouerweening conceit of our selves, if thou findst a
greater furniture of Gods graces, John. 5.53.

5 Especially be careful that while thou meditatest of forsaking sin, thou
be not entangled with some spice thereof, either presuming further then thy
present strength, or by conceit of what thou do, or by the deceitfulness of
Satan, abusing thee with a contrary color of sin, while thou labourest to
prevent him in another.

6 And then in laboring to resist sin, see thou be well armed, and know
thy strength too: yet fearful of thy self, and so humbly cast upon God, that
so thou may resist in the evil day, Ephesians. 6. Proverbs 28.14. Psalm. 16.8.

Trial of the right use is: 1 That we find our zeal and comfort in holy
duties quickened and increased.

2 And yet can stoop more humbly and chifely to the meanest occasions in our
calling, and walk more freely, and yet more profitably herein.

3 And so shall be more ready to embrace the fellowship, and impart our best
treasures thereto.

4 And shall by experience of such offenses, and wants, which we find among
men, be sent more often to confer in private with our God, and solace our
selves in his presence.

5 And so be weaned from the love of this life, as we neglect no lawful
means for the maintenance thereof to a better.

6 And yet shall hunger after a better life, and prepare thereto.

And thus much concerning solitariness. CHAP. IX. Of Prosperity, and the
right use thereof.
THe next employment of the day is how to behave thy self in enjoying of good
things, and in the right use of Prosperity: and the knowledge hereof is
needful.

Sect. 1 Necessary to be known.
First, because the best have been tripped in this estate, as Solomon, Jonas,
etc.

For first, hereby religious exercises have been coldly performed and
intermitted, Mat. 22.5.

2 Liberty has been given to loosnesse, and inward gifts grown cold, Hab.
1.16. Amos 6.5.

3 Evils that were banished, have been recalled again, as gaming, etc. 1.
Cor. 10.7.

4 They weaken our trust and confidence in God, Hab. 1.16.

5 Withdraw our love and kindness toward inferiors, with whom heretofore
we have been inward.

6 Breed policy, and so deceit, even in many professors. Genes. 20.11. And

7 Cause covetousness and love of this life, Psa. 62.10. Luke 12.19. Amos 6.3.

8 Yea, breed unwillingness to bear the cross, and cunning to avoid it, Mat.
26.

9 Give occasion to the world to think we are hers, and so causing her to
presume of us, makes her hereby, being deceived, when it comes to the proof,
our more heavy enemy, Genesis 31.

10 Hereupon also it comes to pass, that the burden lies heavier upon the
afflicted, even because of our prosperity, being not carried wisely and
tenderly, Amos 6.5. Esaias 5.

11 Yea, it is the occasion that causes us, many times, to censure those that
are afflicted, and to challenge their sincerity, because of their afflictions,
Job. 8. Job. 4. etc.

12 And not only so, but it causes jealousy among Professors, and so
distrust of each other, when all bear not the same burden, Rom 15.1. Romans
12.13.16.

Secondly, this estate is very slippery, and therefore we had need to get sure
footing, that we may stand upright therein. Psalm. 73.

Thirdly, it is most uncertain and changeable, and therefore it stands us
upon to make us friends thereof while we have it. Luke 16.

Fourthly, the fear of the loss hereof does much distract, which the right
use hereof will much abate and qualify, Psa. 112.7.

It being therefore apparent that the best may and do abuse prosperity,
observe now how we may use it aright: Sect. 2. How to use prosperity aright.
First then, let us consider the ends why the Lord bestow, those outward
blessings in this life upon his children, which are these:

1 To try whether we will prefer him before them, and can love him better
then them, Job. 1.

2 To make us his Stewards in an holy dispensation of them to others. Mat. 25.

3 To be pledges unto us, and furtherances of spiritual blessings. Genesis 17.1.

4 That we may be humbled to give him the glory of them. Romans 11.36.

And therefore,

1 We must not esteem basely of them, Sect. 3 Use thereof
seeing they are the gifts of so glorious a God.

2 Neither must we be secure in this slippery estate, seeing the same giver is
also the taker away.

3 Take heed we despise not others in regard of them.

4 Nor thrust our God, and set them up in our hearts. Job. 31.

5 We must not cloy our hearts with them, but keep them entirely to God. Psa.
62.

6 We must not be puffed up with them. Psa. 75.

7 We must not tie, nor measure God only by them, Psa. 30.6.

8 We must be willing, for his sake, to part with them either for the good of
others, or to avoid our own hurt. Mat. 10.37.

9 And all this, not as if they were ours, but Gods to dispose wholly to his
glory, and the good of his Church and Children, Math. 19.29*13. Col. 3.23. Romans
12.

Secondly, because the ouer-high conceit of these things is no small occasion
to be-witch our hearts with them, therefore let us labor to rectify our
judgments concerning prosperity, that so our ouerweening opinion thereof may
be abated, and our affections rectified therein.

To this end,

Sect. 4. Considerations to this purpose, that we ouer-rate them not.
First, consider that though they are Gods blessings, yet they are given, for
the most part, to evil men, and become snares and pits unto them Psalm. 69.
And therefore, if there were no other pre-eminence, even the wicked in these
excel us. 1. Tim. 6.

2 Acknowledge we that the best have been tainted, and much defaced by them,
and behold we in their example, what may befall us. as Solomon and David, 2.
Sam. 12. 1. King. 5.

3 That they neither have been, nor shall be any certain inheritance to the
best, but have changed their master, according to the good pleasure of the
giver. Pro. 23

4 That we deserve nor the least of them, and with all our industry, without
Gods blessing, cannot compass them, and when we have them, they are but lent
us, Psa. 127 Genesis ^^^2.

5 That in the judgment of the best they are but vanity, and breed vexation
of Spirit; Nay, that indeed they are nothing: yea less then nothing, Eccles.
1.2. 1. Cor. 7.

6 That the enjoying of them is not simply a note of the love of God.

7 Neither when they are taken away, is it an infallible token of Gods
displeasure.

8 That the Lord can supply us without them.

9 And he is and will be better unto us infinitely above them.

Thirdly, we must be careful in the right dispensation of them. 1. Cor. 7.

And that in this manner.

Sect. 5. How to dispense them aright.
First, we must principally honor God with our substance, Proverbs 3.

And this is done,

1 By acknowledging we have all of his free mercy. Genesis 32.

2 Willingly confessing from what a low estate the Lord has raised us, Genesis 32.

3 By thankfulness unto him for the least as well as for the greatest, 1. Tim.
6.8. Ephesians. 5.20.

4 By faithfulness in a lower estate, that so the Lord may increase us* Mat.
25.

And this is performed,

1 By following our Calling, as contentedly and humbling our selves therein,
being increased, as when we began with nothing, Deuteronomy. 8.11. Phil. 4.11.12.

2 We must now much more be open handed, and that especially to the household of
faith, 2. Cor. 9. Gal. 6.10.

3 We must not think it enough to comfort the body, but we must also minister
to the soul, which few rich men make conscience of, neither indeed are able
to perform, Genesis 18.

2 We must honor our selves in God with them, by eating the labors of our
hands, Psa. 128. and that not only for necessity, but for ornament also.

But yet with these conditions:

1 That we exceed not our callings. Sect. 6. How to moderate our selves in the
use of them


2 That we remember Joseph in trouble. Amos. 6.5.

3 That we be always fitted to spiritual duties. Luke 21.34.

4 And ready to be abased as we have abounded. Phil. 4.11.

The trial of the right use of our prosperity, is, 1 That we have attained
the same by holy means, Sect. 7. To know when we have used prosperity aright.
as prayer, etc. Genesis 31. 1. King. 3.

2 That our heavenly thrift goes forward with our earthly, and exceeds it, 1.
Timoth. 6. Mat. 6.33.

3 That the more we enjoy, of these things, the more we fear our selves, and
keep a more special watch over our souls, to prevent pride, and security,
and profaneness.

4 That these outward things weane us from the love of the world, 1. Cor.
7.29.30.31.

5 That we are prepared to suffer afflictions, and to be tempted of them. Luke
9.23.

6 That though we give these things their due, yet we account them all as
dung, in respect of Christ. Phil. 3.8.

7 That we make them our servants to our Christian Callings. Luke 16.19.

8 And instruments to most good.

9 That our prosperity be mingled with some outward or inward crosses.

10 Especially, that though we prosper, yet we are grieved with the miseries
of others.

Helps hereunto are,

1 To consider we are but strangers and pilgrims in this life, Sect. 8. Helps
hereto.
and therefore had need to go lightly on our journey. 1. Pet. 2.11.

2 We are but tenants at will, 1. Tim. 6.17.

3 Stewards for other. Luke 16.

4 Must give up a large account at the day of Christ Jesus, Luke 12 48.

The benefit hereof is:

1 We shall glorify God herein. Sect. 9. Benefit hereof.


2 Enjoy this estate with more comfort and constancy.

3 Benefit others more graciously thereby.

4 As also herein, the heavenly bliss shall be sealed up unto us.

5 Hereby we shall discern and enjoy the right use of our Christian liberty

6 And by the right use thereof prepared to a more glorious measure of
happiness.

7 We shall also be better fitted to afflictions, to purge out corruption.

CHAP. X. Of Adversity, and the right use thereof.
AND this is the next occasion daily occurring, Sect. 1. How necessary.
even to use Adversity aright.

A direction very needful.

1 Because the derest Children of God have failed herein, Psalm. 73.

2 We profit in nothing more then in an holy use of afflictions. Psa. 119.71.

3 God shows himself in no occasion so marvelous as in this. Psalm. 107.

4 Satan hopes in nothing to trip us a herein. Job. 1.

5 The world has no more effectual means to condemn the generation of the
just, then by their troubles. Job. 8. Act. 28.4.

That we may therefore use adversity aright: First, learn we to inform our
judgments concerning the same: as

1 Concerning the Causes:

1 That they come not by chance, Sect. 2. How to be used well.
but are appointed of God, and sealed upon us, Io^^^. 33.15. Amos 3

2 That they are imposed in love and of very faithfulness, Psalm 119.

3 That there is some cause of them in us, though presently not known to us.

And these causes may be,

1 Either chastisement for some sin past, or present, Sect. 3. Causes of
Afflictions.
2. Samuel 21.1.

2 Prevention of some sin wherein we are like to fall: as security, pride,
etc. 2. Cor. 12.

3 Trial and exercise of some graces of God in us. 1. Pet. 1.7. Especially of
our love to God. Gen 22. Job. 1.

4 Conuincing the world of slanderous imputations, as that we serve God for
these things, Job. 1.

5 To draw us nearer to God, and cause us to have experience of his power and
goodness, John. 11.

6 Recovery of some graces which by prosperity have been decayed in us. Hos.
5.15.

7 As also for the increase and perfection of grace in us.

8 To separate us from the wicked in this life.

9 And so to conform us to Christ, Romans 8.25. 2. Tim 3.5.

10 Provoking us to a daily judging of our selves, that we be not condemned
with the world, 1. Cor. 11.30.31.

11 To weane us from the love of this life, and cause us to long and sigh for
our deliverance, Apoc. 6.10. Apoc. 22.20.

Secondly, that we may use afflictions rightly, we must be able rightly to
discern of them: As Sect. 4. How to dis^^^erne affli^^^tions.
1 That of all, those of the conscience are most fearful and dangerous, and yet
in the issue prove most comfortable.

2 That in the greatest we are to look for greatest assistance.

3 Such as proceed from Satan may be discerned by their violence and
suddenness, and shortness.

4 Those from the flesh, by their sutablenesse to the complexion, and diseases.

5 Those from the world by their sorting with our quality, calling, outward
occasions, etc.

Thirdly, that we may use them aright, we must be always prepared to them. 1.
Pet. 4.12. and that, Sect. 5. Of prepara^^^tion.
1 By submitting our wills simply in all things to the providence of our
gracious father, Math 26.39.

2 By considering that we were predestined and ordained unto them, Romans 8.22.

3 We must in the purpose of our hearts make choice of this ordinance, Math. 7.
and be ready to undergo it. Heb. 11.25.

4 That this is the narrow way, and straight gate that leads to heaven. Act.
14.

5 That all the Saints of God have have traced this way before us. Heb. 1.

6 That this yoke is easy, and the burden passing light, as having the sting
thereof taken away by Jesus Christ, and yet that he bears the burden now
with us. Esaias. 53 and indeed wholly takes it upon him. Math. 10.

7 Fear we always our selves, in regard of sin, and what in this respect may
come upon us.

8 That these troubles are enemies to the flesh, and therefore the rather to be
undergone to subdue so treacherous an enemy, 2. Cor. 12.

9 By imposing voluntary troubles upon our selves, that so we may better
digest such as God shall necessarily inflict upon us, 1. Cor. 9.27.

And these are,

Sect. 6. Of voluntary afflictions and rules for the same.
9 Let us enter into the house of mourning, and observe the chastisements of the
Lord upon others, laboring to stir up our bowels toward them; and to weep
with them that weep, Romans 12.

10 And at no hand presume we of our strength before the time, but fear we
our selves, and cast we our selves wholly on GOD. Mat. 26.33.

11 Discern we wisely our fitness for troubles and avoid we all unnecessary
and unseasonable afflictions. John. 18.8. Matthew. 10.23. 2. Cor. 11.33.

12 Judge we wisely of the troubles of others, and take heed we add not
affliction to their affliction. Psa. 41.

13 Meditate we often of the former ends and benefits of troubles, which are
manifold. Psa. 119.67.

14 Use we an holy moderation in the time of our prosperity in our diet,
apparel, liberty, etc. 1. Pet. 5.8. And let us now cut off all heady
affections, as anger, grief, and so in troubles they shall not prevail
against us.

15 Maintain we especially tenderness of conscience, and soundness of heart
by daily examination, and judging our selves so shall we be fit for any
affliction Cor. 1.12.

16 If our estate seem to diminish outwardly, let us be contented with it, and
so shall we by degrees be prepared to further emptying. 2. Cor. 4.16.
Especially let us deny our selves, and our own wisdom, so shall no cross
be strange unto us.

17 Consider we that we have our Captain Christ Jesus to be our Companion
in all troubles, 1. Pet. 4.13. Yea he has already trod the wine press
alone, and taken away the sting of our troubles, yea conquered for us, that so
we may not be weary, nor faint in our minds.

18 And that we have the strength of the holy Ghost to lead us through them.
Phil. 4.13.

19 And be we assured of the protection of Angels to defend us in the same.
Psalm. 34.

20 And let us be thinking of the shortness of life, and so of troubles, and
preparing to death, and so no afflictions shall be unwelcome to us. Phil. 1.20.

21 Forget we not to meditate often on the joys of heaven, that so when
afflictions come we may be encouraged the rather to undergo them in respect
of the inestimable reward which is set before us. 2. Cor. 4.16.17.

And thus shall we be happily prepared to afflictions, and so make a
comfortable use of them when they are upon us. To this end consider further,

1 Not what God has laid upon us, but what we have deserved, Sect. 7.
Directions and helps hereto.
Romans 6.23. Dan. 9.7. Psa. 119.75. Psa. 103.9.10.

2 In all our troubles, look we not upon the Instrument that does chastise
us, as on the Lord that directs and turns about to good, 2. Chr. 20. Ps. 142.
renouncing chance, and trusting only in the Lord, as the guider of our
troubles (...) all use, discerning the cause, and reforming it, and seeing
light in darkness.

15 Be we thankful unto God for them, and rejoice we under the cross.

16 If we be buffeted under the cross with impatiency, or such like
tentations, let it comfort us, that feeling these corruptions and
acknowledging, yea striving against them, it is a certain token of a future
victory.

17 Consider we the evils that are prepared for sinners, that so we may the
better endure light afflictions. 2 Thessalonians. 1.

18 Forget we not to compare the present profit in troubles with the sensible
loss, that sin is hereby lessened, and the matter of sin weakened. 2. Cor. 4.
And rather bless we GOD that we suffer not more troubles then be grieved
for such as are upon us.

19 Live we especially by Faith, and not by Sense; believing the things we see
not, and hoping the things that are desperate. 2. Corin. 1. Heb. 11.

20 That Gods power is more seen in the issues out of trouble then in keeping
us out of them altogether, and therefore this serves to the magnifying of Gods
power Psalm. 98.1. Which we must meditate on, remembering when we suffer most,
yet we suffer as the children of God. 1. Pet. 5.9.

21 Hereby Satan also is most confounded, that whereby he labors most to
overthrow the Cburch, and Gods children, they are by the same confirmed and
profited. Phil. 1.12. In our particular troubles, rejoice we for the
prosperity of the Church, and Christians elsewhere.

22 Promise we to further others in the ways of God. Psalm. 51.

23 Vow we the praises of God in the great congregations. Ps. 35

24 Move we the Lord from the insolency of our enemies. Ps. 119.126. Psa. 41.

25 As also by testifying our zeal to his glory, that it may not be
blasphemed of the wicked. Number. 14. Exodus 12. Psalm. 74. Psalm. 80.

26 Labor we especially to comfort our heart, with the testimony of our
innocence, and that good cause for which we suffer. 1. Sam. 24.12. That the
servant is not above the master.

27 Yet acknowledge we before God that we are not clear, and so abhor we our
selves in sackcloth and ashes. Job. 11.

28 If we suffer as evil doers, yet remember we that the cross is not so much
sent as a punishment for sin, as a remedy against it. Psalm. 119.77. And
comfort we our selves, that the Lord helps the abject and unworthy.

29 Move we the Lord from the senee of our own weakness. Job. 6 and utter
inability as of our selves. Psalm. 6.

30 Protest we our faith in God. Job. 13.15. and patience in waiting upon him.
Psalm 123.2. Mich. 7.9. And above all things, use we fervent prayer. Iam.
5.13. And this shall most steed us in the time of trouble. And possess our
souls in patience. Mat. 10.

31 Bind we the Lord to us from the manifestation, and making good of his
favor in that he suffers not our enemies to triumph over us. Psalm 41.11.

32 Meditate we of the shortness of life, and so of the end of troubles.

The trial of our right use of afflictions. Is, 1 That the power of sin be
weakened, and our corruption purged out,

2 That we be more powerful in spiritual duties: and yet humbled in them.

3 And more compassionate toward our brethren, and yet more zealous against
sin.

4 That we be more wained from the love of the world, and in prosperity be
amended by the afflictions on others.

(...) selves, and so submitting to the wisdom of our superiors: yet so

9 As that we do nothing against a truly informed conscience, lest in seeking
to avoid troubles from men; we cause our conscience to become our scourge: and
then God, which is greater then the conscience, shall much more condemn us.

10 And yet rest we not upon a scrupulous or erroneous conscience, lest
hereby, through obstinacy, we thrust our selves upon the edge of authority.

11 So using diligence and con. science in our places, and withal

12 Laboring to give mild and soft answers.

Thus may we prevent unnecessary troubles, etc And seeing the wiseman sees the
plague and hides himself. Therefore seeing the Lord wi^^^l visit a sinful
nation: so as that he will reserve a remnant from the common desolation.

Therefore here,

First learn we how to foresee a plague.

1 By faith, resting on the word denouncing the same.

2 By experience, comparing the sins present with the sins of former ages,
and so collecting from the constancy of Gods providence, that as he has
punished like sins formerly, so will he also meet with like sinners.

3 By the quality and measure of the sin, we may guess at the time, and
nature of the scourge.

Secondly. And we have also these marks when the plague stands at the door.

1 When sin is ripe, that is:

1 When the sinner sits in the seat of the scorner.

2 When he is drowned in security.

3 When he has made up his measure by persecution. Math. 23.32.

4 Where in his carnal wisdom he chooses the rod that (...) Lord, that we
may not be condemned with the world. 2. Cor. 11.31.32.

7 Hereby we are kept in the life of grace and power of weldoing: kept
graciously

8 From security, and

9 Apostasy: as also

10 From spiritual pride, and

11 Hypocrisy the causes thereof.

12 By these we are provoked to more compassion toward our brethren: and so

13 To maintain the fellowship and to avoid separation. Heb. 10. Gal. 6.1. And
are

14 Delivered from general judgments. Psalm. 94.13

15 And so being fitted for comforts, we are pertakers of them in more
abundance, 2. Cor. 6.7.

16 And can use them more spiritually.

17 Hereby we are daily raised out of sin, and so renew our repentance. Os.
5.

18 As also are sent unto our gracious God in prayer, that we may be partakers
of his assistance Esaias 26. Os 5.

19 And so our Faith is quickened in the expectation of the promises. 1. Pet.
1.5. Iam. 1.

20 And we more graciously exercised in humility, and patience Iam. 1.2.

21 And so provoked to hunger after Christ Jesus, and to wait for the glorious
appearance of the sons of God.

22 And being by afflictions daily scoured and purged, we are made meet
partakers of that glorious inheritance with the saints in light. Col. 1.12.

23 And so are graciously hereby not only taken away, that we shall not see the
evils to come. Esa. 57.1. as Josias.

24 But we are even taken up by these, as in a fiery chariot, to partake of
that unspeakable and eternal weight of glory, which is reserved for us in the
heavens. 2. Cor. 4.

CHAP. XII. Thus are we to behave our selves in afflictions, and try our
estates thereby.
ANd to this end, seeing each day as it brings it trouble with it, so it wants
not it comfort to sweeten, and season the same. And above all, our conscionable
performance of family duties and private exercise of prayer, and a veil
hereto. Therefore, be we careful to observe and perform such duties
conscionably.

Which are:

1 Private examination and prayer thereupon, to begin the day withal.

2 Reading of the word to stir us up to

3 Family Prayer with the household.

4 Catechizing of the Family.

5 Singing of Psalms. Genesis 18.

Of which in particular in the second general part of the Helps God willing.

And these are daily to be performed. 1 Because we are yet ignorant of what we
should know, and forgetful of what we have known. 2. Pet. 1.13.15.

2 New tentations and occasions require new strength and means thereto. Luke 9
3.

3 Hereby we maintain the life and power of grace, cherish the spirit and grow
daily.

4 And are better fitted to the Sabbath. Act. 13.

5 And renew and increase our sweet communion with God. Ioh. 5.39 Genesis 18.17.

The manner of performance is.

1 We must appoint and keep set times for the same.

2 Preparing thereto with some premeditation of our own inabilitie, former
abuse, and necessity thereof.

3 If by ordinary occasion we have been interrupted, or prevented for once,
recover we our selves at the next opportunity.

(...) against the day of the Lord Jesus.

5 We procure stabilitie and constancy for the time to come.

6 We yoke and diminish our daily tentations.

7 We keep sin from sleeping, with us.

8 By repentance removing it, our sleep becomes more sweet and comfortable.

9 Our labors afterward prove less irkesone.

10 We walk with God and express the true pilgrims life. Ge. 4

11 The carnal and worldly minded, will otherwise condemn us.

12 And we leave our hearts to be buffeted with much infidelity and distraction.

Now that we may the rather perform this duty. Consider we, Sect. 2. Motives
hereto.
1 That the very heathen in some sort by the light of nature practiced it.

2 That if trouble here be, it is to the flesh, to which we are not debtors.
Romans 8.12.

3 That it is no more then God commands, and Christianity requires at our
hands. Psalm. 4.6.

4 That when we have done all we can, we are but unprofitable servants, and
therefore we had need str^^^ue to the utmost. Luke 17.10.

And for our better direction herein; learn we, 1 First, Sect. 3. Rules herein
that the fittest time for performance hereof is after the evening prayer.

Secondly, For the manner hereof begin we.

1 From the cogitations of the first awaking from sleep.

2 So proceed we to consider of our morning actions, how we have conferred
with our God in private, how sanctified our families

3 Meditate we on Gods patience in sparing us hitherto.

4 How we have been humbled in the sense of our own and others sins.

5 Especially how we have been employed in the sense of Gods graces.

(...)

27 If thou shall find the testimony of a good conscience and peace, so rejoice
and praise thy God. If thou find thy failings, so be humbled and cast thy
self upon Jesus Christ in prayer.

28 Recounting unto God, as near as thou may thy particular slips, and so
acknowledging thy self an unprofitable servant, seek thy peace in the merits
of thy Savior, and so lie down in his bosom, and so thou shall find rest for
thy soul.

The benefit hereof is,

1 We obey Gods commandment and so are kept within his protection for the night
coming.

2 We attain to the certainty, and true mesure of our estate in grace and so
thereby prevent security, which carnal rest might cause, and provoke an
hungring after perfection.

3 We are better prepared to death and so to judgment.

4 We gain much increase to the assurance of salvation, and so 5 Obtain in
this life a more sweet and heavenly conversation. Ph. 3.20.

And by these rules we may try whether we have performed this duty
conscionably or no.

1 If this casting up of our account has cast us out of our selves, and cast
us wholly upon Christ.

2 And herein Christ has sent us home again to our selves, not to riot in
sin, because the score is cleared, but to weaken and diminish sin, that the
new score may be lessened.

3 And therefore if now we shall be more fearful to offend our blessed God,
and

4 More fearful of our selves even when we stand most firmly.

5 And yet can take faster hold on Christ, when we fall, that so we may rise
again, and yet

6 If our rising shall be more constant, and our falls more seldom. And

7 If we shall be more careful to clear the score with others, by seeking
peace, and maintaining the fellowship. And also,

8 Shall further help others to wipe off the score, both by example and
council, provoking to repentance.

9 And still from looking abroad, shall return home again, being humbled
not so much because we can do no man good, as when we have done our best.

10 And yet being comforted that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord:
and therefore,

11 Shall not measure our payment by what is present, but rather by that which
is promised.

12 And so shall live by faith in the expectation thereof.

13 And so shall follow hard after the mark for the high price of our Calling
in JESUS CHRIST.

14 Waiting with patience the accomplishment of the promise. And

15 Suffering afflictions as the good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, that our
patience may be perfited and our faith tried.

16 And so patience shall bring forth the perfect work still to humble us,
that we may be fitted for glory.

17 And our humility shall be thoroughly tried by our perseverance in
well-doing, in our obedience to our blessed GOD, and thankfulness to his
Majesty.

18 As considering that do we what we can, it can never be sufficient to
return thankfulness unto our God for what he has done.

19 And therefore not chalenging what he will do: for any thing what we have,
or can do.

20 But rather accounting our selves, when we have done our best, to be but
unprofitable servants. Luke 17.10.

21 And so esteeming our selves rather much more bounden unto our God, for
accepting that poor and poluted service we have done unto him, then that our
GOD should be bound unto us, to recompense our finite service with so infinite
a reward, Romans 8. And yet

22 Still living by Faith in the apprehension of the promise. And so

23 Giving glory unto our God in believing his Word. And so,

24 Preparing our selves to the enjoying of those precious promises, by having
our conversation in heaven.

25 And so looking for our Redeemer to change these our vile bodies. Phil. 3.20.

26 And so clearing the eye of our Faith by casting away every thing that may
obscure, or press down, that we may more sensibly discern the brightness
of that Glory, and may run with more joy and patience, the Race that is set
before us. Hebr. 12.1.

27 Looking still unto JESUS, the Author and finisher of our faith. Hebrews
12. still returning thankfulness unto him, as the Author, and hoping in him
as the finisher of his own work. And so

28 Still resting upon his Word, for our daily direction, and encouragement
therein. And

29 Maintaining the fellowship by encouraging each other in public duties.

30 And yet still laboring especially to prevail with our gracious GOD in
private duties of Prayer, Meditation, etc. Sanctifying and trying the public
by these private.

31 And yet sanctifying both, by laboring to be found in Christ. And,

32 Still seeking Christ in the things which are above. Coloss. 3.

33 And yet still laboring to have our life hid with CHRIST in GOD, more
resting on the acceptance of our persons, and endeavors of the hidden man in
the heart. And yet

34 Still living by Faith in the Son of GOD, above all present feeling, that
neither present sense of joy may puff up, and so cool and interrupt the
current of our faith, Note.
nor absence of present comfort may quench in us zeal of obedience. And yet

35 Still quenching all strange fire, and carnal mattter which may neither
accompany our obedience, or kindle the same, by bounding our selves within our
Callings, and CHRISTIAN liberty, and aiming at the right end, the glory of our
GOD, and our own salvation, subordinate thereto: that so possessing our souls
in sobriety, and meekness, we may both avoid unnecessary troubles, and
better wade through such as necessarily will oppose us.

36 And being hereby enabled to be more fruitful in doing and receiving good.

37 Hereby we shall make sure our Election, with more comfort.

38 And so be more ready to give up our general account.

CHAP. XIIII. Containing a Conclusion of the present, and promise of future
light.
AND thus shall we make Trial of our daily Reckon^^^ngs, and so performing
conscionably this Daily Sacrifice, we shall approve our selves right
NATHANAELS, and true Israelites.

And so by the mercy of God, walking after this Rule, grow in grace, and
abound in every good work, perseuering with all patience, through the mighty
power of GOD, that so he may perfect the work which he has begun in us.

To this end, seeing (according to our necessity) the Lord has supplied us
with many gracious helps and furtherances to inform and strengthen us in the
work of grace.

Therefore having now laid down the true Pattern of Holiness, and lively
practice thereof, my purpose is (GOD willing) shortly to furnish thee with such
variety of helps as may serve both to uphold and increase this blessed
condition.

And seeing we shall not want many Lettes and Hindrances to interrupt, and so
to linger us in, if not quite to break off this holy course.

Therefore (by GODS grace) I do intend in the third place, to discover those
several Rubbes and impediments, and withal to instruct how we may encounter
and subdue the same.

And withal,

As GOD shall lend health and liberty, to add such motives and encouragements,
both from the present benefits of this constant walking, as also from the
future recompense which waits the same, as may thoroughly settle us in the
practice thereof.

Mean while, let us (in the name of GOD) be faithful in a little, that so
we may be fitted to further blessings, being thankful for the means we
enjoy to this end; and laboring thereby to serve one another in love, praying
for the peace of Jerusalem, and seeking the same above our chiefest joy, that
so in the peace thereof we may have peace, even a gracious liberty to walk
with our God in constant obedience, to whom in Jesus Christ, through the
blessed Spirit, be praise and Dominion in all the Churches, Amen.

FINIS.

