THE GHOST OF the Marquess d' Ancre, with his Spirits attending him. OR The
Fiction of a Dialogue between Galligaia, Conchini by name, or Marquess d'
Ancre his wife, and Misoquin a deluding Spirit, by whom her Husband was
misse-lead. Together with the same Spirits meeting the good Genius to Monsieur
the Prince of CONDE: Faithfully translated out of the French Copy printed at
ROAN.

Printed at LONDON for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at the
South-entrance of the Royall-Exchange. 1617.

THE FICTION OF A DIALOGVE, between Galligaia, Wife to Conchini, and Misoquin,
the false and deluding Spirit that transported her Husband with vain hopes.
Together with a meeting of the said Spirit with the Genius of Monsieur the
Prince of CONDE.
SVCH dispositions, as have but once contracted with Gods enemy, can very
hardly ever be clean freed out of his foul clowches: For we have an evident
example hereof in Conchini, and his Wife, who being both of them so many times
admonished by Gods wrath poured upon them, yet would they not retire, nor give
over their wicked life: no, not when they evidently saw, how both God and all
the people were incensed against them; being afflicted by sickness, and the
death of one of their children; as also one of their houses rifled and pillaged
by the just rage of the people; two of their domestical friends hanged, and a
thousand other manifest tokens, intimating to them, how all the Princes bare
them a most worthy and deserved hatred. Oh, what inexplicable miseries does
affectation of power and greatness bring unto men! O how our disordinate
appetites, to amasse, and purchase worldly honors, does heap and augment our
misfortunes! Thou now feel it, now that a sudden death has violently
carried thee out of the world, (and as may be inferred by all pregnant
probabilities) in the height of thy sins and transgressions. Now thou feel
it; thou, who after so many worldly delights, so many flatteries of honors, of
contentments, art now more miserable peradventure then the most wretched
creature in all France: Thou I say, who in stead of a Royal Palace stately
adorned, have for thy habitation an obscure and hideous dungeon: Thou art he
who now find it; for in stead of a thousand Gentlemen well borne, that were
wont to do thee all kind of honor, stand before thee uncovered, adoring
thee, and making show, as if they breathed and lived for no other end but to
offer thee their humblest services; thou have now it may be, some rigorous
Iaylor, that contemnes thee, and in stead of any consolation, flowts and
laughes at thy precipice and downfall: Thou I say, who were wont to give life
and death to all those whom thou would thy self, have now need to implore
and cry out for mercy of all the world: Thy greatness and riches wherein thou
did put such confidence, what avail they? Where is now that same troop of
Nobility which were accustomed to follow and attend thee? Questionless thou
were but deceived: for these people followed not thy self, but merely thy
present fortunes and high favors. And now thou truly know how unhappy all
they are, who relying upon Fortune, think that she can make them masters of
the whole world, whereas she makes them but slaves and infamous vassals, not
only to her self, but to their own disordinate appetites and desires. Thou, I
say again, Conchini, now feel it, thou that were sprung from a base Sire,
and yet would have exalted thy self not only above the French Nobility,
but even above all Princes of the French stock and race. Thou I say, that most
infatiable Seianus, whose furious rage could never be appeased by the massacre
of so many good Frenchmen, by the imprisonment, not only of many of the
Nobility, but even of the Princes of the blood; whose wrath and revenge could
not be fully satisfied with the doleful banishment of so many Princes, and
whose avarice was never contented with so many millions of gold and silver: Now
thou have a bitter experience, thou which gouernedst all France at thine own
pleasure; who after thine own miserable death were not only prevented from
being the food and nourishment of worms, but moreover, thou were the Butt
whereat all the arrows of the peoples rage and fury were shot. Thou that had
so many houses, Palaces and Castles, and could not be suffered to repose within
the earth in peace, for the space only of four and twenty hours? and whom
the Earth her self indeed disgorged, impatient to retain such a letiferous
poison within her womb: the Air could not endure thy infections: the Water
thy putrefaction: neither would the Fire consume thy body, reserving it for a
prey to Sea Monsters: And now thou know apparently what difference there is
betwixt the beginnings and ends of Fortune, how variable and mutable she is;
who being huffed up to such eminent place, did foolishly give credit to a
prediction and prophecy made of thee; and that when thou did pass along the
streets, every one should put off his hat, and cry out, Viue le Roy. But now
thou see, that Fortune inuerting quite this prediction, it yet comes to be
most true, but thanks be to God, clean contrary to thine own expectation:
for in stead of thy beds of state, of Gold, silver, and silk, thou were laid
within a stinking puddle of a foul and unclean water, and for trapped and
rich harnished horses, thou were trailed along the streets by rascally and
contemptible people.

Oh, whosoever thou art, on whom Fortune at this present, peradventure may
smile, learn to be wise by other men's harms, and remember Gods Justice, which
never fails to punish the wicked soon or late; Behold here one, that was
called the Marshallesse of France, who was possessed of the Queens greatest
favors, and disposed wholly of her will, that now foaming with fury and
madness, and being enclosed within a prison, spits for anger, cries and howles
out like a shee-wolfe that had been robbed of her whelps. I saw her by chance
the other day in the Bastille, she looks most hideously, and stroke fear
into all those that did behold her; and her staring eyes, ghastly countenance,
with her fearful visage and distracted speech, plainly show that she is
conducted by some other spirit besides her own: her hair all full of skirfe
and filth, hanging loose and confused upon her shoulders, tearing her own face
and bosom, so as I never was touched with such an affrightment before.
Wherefore I went and hid my self in a corner, to see the issue and further
event of this business, when incontinently I heard her vomit and belch out
these or the like words:

What I? who lately could the Furies move,
To practice murder and confusion;
Shall I endure? no, no, I will not sure:
Rather both heaven and earth I will confound,
The Elements, and all this lower round
I Will make a Chaos, mixing waves and fire,
The air, the earth, the heavens, and heat and cold,
What is beneath shall soon mount up aloft,
I will my Husbands cynders summon up.
Phoebus by Verses has been made descend
From the highest Firmament, and Rivers quite reuerse,
To fly the vaste and spacious Ocean.
Nothing I fear: my force I must extend:
So loud I Will yelpe, that all shall understand;
If I the Gods immortal cannot move,
Yet will I Devils infernal prove.
Assist me therefore Pluto, hideous Megara,
With tresses of a thousand Vipers hanging down,
Come succor me; and all you dreadful Fiends
In hels deep dungeon, fearing nor men nor Gods.
What? shall our enemies us thus deface?
Permit it not or thou neglect'st our case.
Shall we before our time be thus subdude
By this same Prince? nay, rather cut his thread,
O daughter of the night, that so his destiny
May no ways curb our Fame and Dignity.
Heavens favor, I see plain, this mortal wight:
The Gods in counsel, all, succor him with might.
Thou that can pleasure or annoy each one,
And cause a son his fathers blood to shed,
By discord also thou can soon devise
Firmest accords and houses to dissolve:
In brief, thou can hurt men by sundry means,
Out of thy bosom foul some poisons belch,
Now break this peace, and sow both war and strife,
That so by millions they may fall and dye.
Come hither Misoquin, who did always
Protect my husband; come, make no delay.
When she had finished this discourse, I saw a Spirit of strange shape and
form to appear, with staring eyes, a huge mouth, or rather indeed a gulf,
without a nose, but having a body like a Caterpiller, and wings, but without
legs or arms, and I believe it was one of those that are called watery Spirits.

So she drew near to this Spirit, and then they had this communication
together. Gall. Well sir, where is now the performance of all your frivolous
promises? that you should have preserved and protected my husband for so long
time? that you would confound, spoil, and ruin all his enemies? Misoquin. Why
I pray, did I deceive him? Did I not tell both him and you oftentimes, that the
Prince of Conde was his fatal opposite, and how he must endeavor to extirpate
the Princes of the blood. Gall. It Is true: but on the other side it was
foretold us, that our greatness depended on a war; but if they were once dead,
against whom should we have made war? Misoq. Why, against the Flies: a good
workman never wants matter nor tools. But to speak truly thy husband was but
a cowardly coistrell, for had he been in the Army, he had never been slain
at Paris. Alas, he never had no valor in his life, and further he spent his
time in pleasures and luxuries: but think you if it had lain in my power, I
would not have prevented it? What tribute do you imagine paid he to Pluto
every year? I assure you more then a million of souls. Gall. Well I called
thee not now to check thee for any misfortune past, but to take order with
thee for some thing that is to come; for I am inwardly enraged, and reduced in
a manner to utter despair: my Iugineere and plotting Spirit, and who have
aided me in many things, can thou not for my sake, confer some miserable
disaster upon the French? Remains there no Art, nor no policy, to compass
and atchieue our wicked enterprises? Misoquin. Your words are but mere wind:
There Is other matters in hand, woman, thy husband contary to all other men,
makes his repentance in another world: for he is now turned Moncke. Gall. And
how so I pray? Misoq. Why, had he not good cause to do so, when all his
virile parts were so shamefully cut away. Gall. Why thou wretched impe, will thou ever be mocking us? Well, could thou but be sensible of the miseries
which ouer-whelme me, thou would not thus laugh, and make thy self merry.
Misoquin. You are in the right: I pray do Devils use to weep? But there is
other news besides this. Gall. Even from the Cock to the Bull: But what I
pray? Misoquin. Why yesterday I met with your neighbors Genius. Gall. Why, who
was that? Misoquin The Angel of the grand Master, and we had almost gone
together by the ears about my coming hither. Gall. How came that to pass?
Misoquin. I was no sooner come in, but he knew me, by reason I was somewhat of
a different form: and thus he said; I conjure thee to tell me whither thou
go. Then I went still onward, and he began again to say; In the name of God
tell me who thou art, and whither thou go: upon this iniunction I was
enforced to answer. I am, then replied I, Misoquin, sometimes his Demon or
evil Angel, that was called Marshall d' Ancre: and you sir, Who may you be?
When in great choler, he returned me this answer; It concerns not you to be
herein very inquisitiue: But come you hither to seduce or corrupt any body? No,
said I, for she I come to, is corrupt enough already. Accursed wretch as thou
art; for, said he, thou always delightest in doing evil: Come hither, said
he, thou cursed Caytife; Art not thou he, that did advise this silly woman
to practice such mischief against France? Art not thou the cause, this Prince
has endured so much disgrace? But all thy time and labor is herein but lost:
for the good, and Almighty God has made him take all his misfortunes
patiently: and herein he has highly deserved. And the same God will deliver
him from the imprisonment he suffers, confounding all the enemies of truth;
and unhappiness shall befall them that persecute him: for God himself is
provoked, and stirred up against them. Tush, replied I, these be goodly reasons
you allege; but at conclusion I prevail in my cause, for you could not
preserve your Prince so well as I did my Marquess: for thine endured more
misery since he came in here, then mine did in all his life: And so on the
other side, thou know not how he shall dye, but I know well enough how mine
did: and howsoever, he dyed like a brave man, with his sword in his hand,
swearing like a gallant Captain, and blaspheming God thy Master. And be
assured that they who killed him, augmented greatly herein his renown: for had
he not been surprised there, he might peradventure have dyed in the chimney
corner. Then growing into great choler, See this miscreant villain, said he,
how after he has betrayed them, how he derides and laughes at men. This is
he (meaning it by me) said he, that was the cause of all his disaster, by
tickling him daily in the head with ambitions and extrauagant desires of Rule
and Government: God in him has expressly manifested, how he ever abandons
those that leave and forsake him, for he dyed miserably, giving them cause who
justly hated him, to mock and laugh both at him and his designs. But as for
you sir, I command you to retire: Believe me, if we then had had any bodies,
I think we should have devoured one another; but so I left him, and came
straight to you: and therefore suppose you whether he was not deeply moved
and angry or no. Gall. I find that soundly, poor wretch as I am. Misoquin.
What, do you repent your self? You shall see your Husband presently, and if
possible, you shall enjoy your liberty. Gall. How know you that? Misoquin. I
was very lately with two special Gentlemen of Paris that spoke of you. Gall.
And what said they? Misoquin. Faith no great matter: for they wished you at the
Devil, with whom you are already: they said you should be made so great, as
you should be all cut, shaven, and trimde, without costing you one penny. Gall.
But what shall I do to those wicked fellows that clapped me up here? Misoquin.
Wotst thou what, why for their greater despite, either let them alone, or go
hang thy self, and so thou may prevent them of the honor of putting thee to
death: for believe it, if they of Paris ever lay hold on thee, they will handle
ye in your true kind. And a certain woman, has already sold your nose to
one of her neighbors, to roost her Chickens upon: others have bought your
eyes, that so they may have four to see you withal, when you are led to
hanging: another your ears, the better to hear your trial and sentence:
others say, your skin will serve them fitly to make gloves of, by reason they
will cost nothing the perfuming, it being of it self so ordurous, and
stinking, that no perfume can be cast upon it. Gall. Imagine when thou have
said what thou will, we will talk somewhat of our business. Misoquin. And
why of them? Thou have nothing nearer to thee then thy Husband: matters are so
plainly reported and diuulged of him, as they are openly cried up and down
through the streets of Paris; but they are but fools that buy them, because
they are but mere fopperies to that which will come out. Gall. And what can
they say of him? Misoquin. Marry, all kind of reproachful and ignominious
matters, but only that they term him not a Cuckold, by reason that (for thus
these wicked fellows allege) his wife is so ougly and odious, as none but the
Devil himself would be his Cuckoldmaker. They express him making of his last
Will and Testament: they say he has left thee his beauty, because thou were
thereof so ill furnished; his understanding he gave to his brother, because
he had not enough to discharge a Cardinals place: for the parts inferior of
his body, he has now neither feet, nor hands; his feet commended over to
his brother Governor of the Bastile, to further his flight, and his hands to
those that after him shall have the managing of the Kings treasure. And to
enrich you, he has himself forsaken the world, but he was so long a time in
passing Acharon, by reason of a tempest, that he is grown all scaly over like
a fish. And there below, which is the best least of all, he laughes at them
which made him give so much money for his release when he should be in
Purgatory; for in passing along he had not so much as a sight of it. Gall.
Well, well, I see now a days you can do nothing but cogge and flout: I pray
let us talk of revenging my husbands death. Misoquin. What telst thou me of
thy husband? Behold, Conchini, by the power which thou have given me over thy
self, I command thee to appear here presently.

Conchini. Will thou never leave tormenting of my soul, which has been
miserably afflicted for so long time? Ah, forlorn and wretched caytife that I
am! Misoquin. What aylst thou? do thou repent thee? nothing worse can come
to thee. Conchini. Ah most accursed creature, art not thou she who were the
cause of all my misfortunes? Gall. Who I? Conch. I you: for otherwise we might
have lived contentedly upon some poor humble calling, exempted from all
ambition and avarice. Gall. But come hither a little: why are you in this garb
and fashion? Conch. I perform penance. Gall. Why have you no hands? Conch.
Pluto took them from me, for prodigally wasting and consuming his riches and
wealth. Gall. And why no feet? Conch. Because I used to employ them in base
flight when my Regiment was discomfited. Gall. Why me thinks ye are in the
habit of a strange Moncke. Canch. Oh would I had been so all days of my
life, and had perpetually observed chastity. Gall. We never dreamt of thy
death. Conch. No, but we shall dream fairly when we are both together once:
wherefore understand and use means to preserve thine own life; for me
thinks I see how thou art rent and torn a pieces by the cruel and inhumane
multitude. And what do our creatures and favorites now? Gall. Some are like
to be burnt, others sent back again from whence they came, others have turned
their proud coats into penitential roabes, like Bell-founders. Conch. Why, are
they not yet satisfied with the disgrace and opprobry they laid upon me? Gall.
No, they say, we deserved much more. Misoquin. Well, you have leisure enough
to rip up all your miseries and calamities together, it is time now for me to
return, dinner is almost past.

As soon as this little Devil had thus spoken, a thick vaporous cloud
obscured and darkened all the chamber: this was it wherewith the season was so
changed, and so amidst this darkness, I escaped away well and safe, but not
without some fear.

After so fair a time, thick showers of rain come down;
And shall not yet our miseries have end?
Has Fortune yet reserved some other frown?
And yet will God some further scourge us send:
No: but the husbands blood cries for his wives, and yet
The root of all our Woads is not cut up,
On ground while this vile wretch her foot does set,
Till she drink deeply of Reuenges cup.
It is further reported that upon Wednesday, the last of April, 1617. Stila
Anglia, at four a clock in the afternoon, the general cessation of Arms
was proclaimed at Deep in Normandy, and all the Soldiers whatsoever to depart
upon pain of death: particularly the 5500. Strangers, that the Marquess d'
Ancre had caused to be levied for his service in Normandy in the Wallone
Countries, and the Land of Lake, alias, Les Liege^yr, et Wallons.

FINIS.

