A Sermon of sure Comfort, preached at the Funeral of Master Robert Keylwey
Esquire, at Exton in Rutland, the 18. of March 1580.

By Anthony Anderson Preacher, and Parson of Medburne in Leicestershiere.

AT LONDON, Printed by H. Middleton, dwelling in Fleetstreete at the sign of
the Falcon. ANNO 1581.

A SERMON OF sure comfort, preached at the Funeral of Master Robert Keylway
Esquier, the 18. day of March. 1580.
As we are assembled in the name of our good God, so let us pray for his
universal Church, etc.
The text.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection: for on such
the second death has no power: but they shall be the Priests of God and
Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand year. Apocalips. 20.
IT has been from ancient time received, and very long used in the Church
of God (right worshipful and Christian audience) at the Funerals of the godly
to have the word preached to the people: Not thereby to profit the dead
(which no way after life can change this departing state) but by it to
instruct the living, that they may learn to die in the Lord: and so rest from
the labor of sin and hell. And why may not the godly preacher, take occasion
at funerals to preach the word of God? Nay: why should they omit any
occasion? but rather with Christ and his Apostles wait opportunity to preach
the word, whenever the people be gathered together? So Christ at Jerusalem,
John in the wilderness, John. 7. etc. Math. 3.1. Mar. 1.45. Act. 17.22.
and Paul in Mars street preached the word, where and in what place the
people were assembled. The fathers likewise of the Church, of ancient time,
have at such assemblies, taken occasion to teach the living, even when the
funeralles were solemnized over the dead. Whereby it was, that those men did
not only benefit ye Churh, during their lives, but even their corpse (as it
were) did afforde a final benefit to the same, at their departure to the
earth. And though the Papists have abused much this sacred use, so as, at this
day, some use it and suppose it, rather to benefit the dead, then seeking to
profit the living thereby: yet is this no reason, why we should abstain from
food, or our parents should foreslow, to feed us with the bread of life,
because ye enemies of God have abused it. Let us then look upon this heavenly
bread, which God (in mercy) by ye occasion of this christian corpse here
present, has new, in the service of mine endeavor, offered unto you. It is a
comfortable consolation to ye children of God, spoken, and commanded to be
written to them, yt they should not be swallowed up, in the sorrows of sharp
persecution, and tyranny of Antichrist: Or be beaten from the anchor of hope
in God, whilst they are accursed of ye world: or be driven to despair under
the cross, by the multitude of afflictions: but should assure themselves, of
his love toward them, and of their estate in him, howsoever the malignaunt
minds of wicked men should bend their force against them.

Blessed and holy is he etc. This scripture compriseth a resolute answer, to
that often asked matter: namely, who is he that is truly blessed? and what it
is to be blessed indeed. In answer whereof, the spirit of God observes this
order. First he declares who they be which be truly blessed. Secondly he
does elegantly set down the condition and state of them, which are so blessed.

Touching the first: Who is blessed? he answers, Blessed is he yt has part
in the first resurrection. Concerning the second: And what is their
blessedness? He faith, For on such the second death shall have no power: but
they shall be ye priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him 1000.
years, that is to say, for ever. That we may take sufficient profit of this
Godly labor, let us well observe the text:

Bessed is he that has part, etc. There has been no state so accursed, but
the same has desired to be blessed: Nor any people so sottish, that have not,
in cause of happy desire, sought after felicity. But such as the dispositions
of the persons were, such for the most part, was their supposall of felicity.
Symonides
Some sort supposed it an happy thing to be beautiful and brave. Pindarus.
Some other deemed happiness, to consist only in rule and dignity: And
therefore have tendered with hazard, their souls to Hell, atchiuing by wicked
practizes some stately seats in earth. Aristot.
Some have supposed civil honesty, to be the habit of true felicity, and
having obtained a fair course therein, have only rested there, as in the
chair of heavenly happiness. But others more lewd, have sonke themselves to
hell: Romans 2.
with gaping after earthly treasure, have thesaured to themselves in deed, the
malediction of God, against the day of wrath. Of this sort was that Dives, in
the 12. of Luke, and likewise his companion, Luke. 12.
in the 16. of the same. Luke. 16.
In whose earthly beatitude, appear these deadly miseries: Namely, in
obtaining riches a greedy desire, and in possessing them, a double mischief.
To themselves, they did abound in great prodigality, but unto all other they
were imprisoned in the deep dungeon of needless nigardie. For themselves they
gathered still, fared always delicately, aparelled ever costly, still open
hearted to their own delights, but very narrowly chested to al others: which
would have been resonably satisfied, with ye least part of their superfluous
provision. Oh, that ye states of our days would look to this. Those Lords;
these knights, and you the rich of this age, you suppose it your chief
happiness, to join house to house, and land to land, blood to blood, and
thousands to thousands, and yet ye hunger after more. But (alas) the most of
these do suppose it, their blessedness, to have a Rowlande for an Oliver: To
banquet and furfette with Bacchus, and to disporte and sleep with Venus* To
have store of children, great wealth, sound bodies, stately buildinges, and
noble names of the vulgar sort. But behold, both reason in earth, and
torments in hell, shall teach you in truth, that this is rather folly, then
true felicity. For if this be true happiness, to be free from al sorts of
misery, and to abound in all sacietie of good things, without appetite of
farther or desire of more: how can you reiecte reason, which tells you (O
earthly happy) yt you are yet in great misery? For though in riches, ye
surpass Cresus in carnal venery, Sardanapalus, in delicate disshes, either the
Epicure, or Bacchus; in conjoined possessions even Alexander the conqueror: yet
your miserable minds think, though we have much, yet have we not enough. We
are sorry our throtes be no deeper, our bellies no greater, our nights no
longer, and our patrimonies no larger. For had you won the whole world, yet
would you covet to have another, and miserably ye fear the deserved fall of
this you have, which is evermore environed with miserable fear and blindness,
with fear to loose that they have, by sundry casualties: And so blind, as
not able to behold the misery of that end, which has none other heaven,
then this present earth. But (Oh) come, and behold the state of these blessed
that are not godly rich, (O ye sons of men) and you shall be enforced, if
you hunger to be truly blessed, to pray with that holy rich David: Psalm.
17.14.
Deliver my soul from the wicked with thy sword, from men (O Lord) by thine
hand, from men of the world, who have their portion in this life, whose
bellyes* thou fillest with thine hid treasure: their children have enough,
and leave the rest of their their substance for their children. But I will
behold thy face in righteousness, and when I awake, I shall be satisfied
with thine image. That is: When I shall arise from the sleep of natural
death, it shall be full felicity to me, that thou in thy mercy (O Lord) have
made me thy creature, and lively image, formed by and after thee, in holiness
and righteousness, and to enjoy the fullness of thy face, Colloss. 2.
which is true blessedness.

The torments of Hell in Dives, might sufficiently teach us, how false is the
felicity of earthly beauty, bravery, dignity, riches, and greatest glory:
If Christ be not in them, your end shall be weeping and woe: James.
He was brave, but now is ye Godly Lazar beautiful: he was of great
possessions, but Lazarus has the kingdom: Luke. 16.
He gaped after gold, gay clothes, and delicate fare, but the despised man of
God, is truly rich, decked with glory and delicately fed, with the countenance
of the Lord. Dives (supposed rich) is buried in hell. And by yt he greatly
offended, in that, he is greatly punished: For his tongue is vehemently
tormented in ye flame, he cries for favor, but cannot obtain: for he had no
part of ye first resurrection, (which is true beatitude:) and therefore must he
needs dwell for ever, in the second death. He would have his brethren warned,
that they dream not of false felicity, but the very way to blessednesses, is
there taught him (and also us) not to be learned from the dead: Luke. 16.
but of the living Law of the Lord. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them
hear them. Esai 8.19.20
Be afraid ye gallants of the earth, you delicate Nymphs of these deayes
(which term it now most delicate to you) judge your selves, that ye be not
judged of the Lord. 1. Cor. 11.
Bury not your minds in fained felicity: but seek you after true
happiness. If riches, honors, Castles, Lordships, Lands, Revenues, and wordly
goods greatly increase: set not your hearts upon them. Be not locked into the
Coffer of thy gold with Dives, but have a godly liberal heart with Abraham.
Rather sit at the door of thy house ready to benefit thy country, the^
having many, to run from al thy homestedes, to lie aloof to feed thy self.
Have a Christian eye, to the wheel of false felicity: For the more sweet
she seems, the sharper is her loose; and whom she most favors, him makes
she most fottish. Truly the prosperity of fools destroys them. Prou. 1.32.
But if by grace from God, in thy part of the first resurrection, thou
withstandest her pleasures, and ungodly desires: Sizach.
thou crownest then thy life with felicity in him: Which God grant us for his
holy Christ's sake. And thus much of false flattering felicite. But yt we may be
partakers of this blessedness, approved to us here, by ye spirit of god, let us
lend our hearts to hear. Truly this felicity is first by the Lord, diffused
to us, in this life, but possessed by us more amply in heaven, at the hour of
death, yet never fully obtained, till the time here mentioned for the just:
namely, at the second resurrection: When we shall be freed from all woe, and
shall be filled with all fullness of joy, and be the priests of God and Christ,
to reign with him a thousand year: that is, for ever and ever.

Blessed is he that has part in the first resurrection: for on such, etc. This
text does first then yield a resolute answer to this demand, and who are they
which be truly blessed? Truly says our text: even whatsoever he, yt has part
in the first resurrection, whether he be king or caytiffe, prince or potentate,
preacher or people, rich or poor, he or she, young or old, one or other. Come
up hither ye so^ns of me^, raise up you your heavy hearts: for ye catholic curse
of Adams loins, behold an universal beatitude, in our common Christ. This
absolute happiness is not shut up to a few, but as many, as can be partakers
of ye first resurrection: so many (I say) shall be blessed from ye second death,
which is the infernal lake of fire and brimstone. But for your better help to
the comfort of this place, note here with me, two things. The first: what is
this first resurrection. The second, how we may assure our selves to be
partakers thereof Now we must consider, our text does insinuate unto us a duple
resurrection: namely, a corporal and a spiritual. 2. Cor. 5.2.20.
The corporal resurrection, is ye supply of this article: I believe the
resurrection of the dead, and is common to all: for all flesh shall die and
rise again to judgment. But the spiritual resurrection, is particular to
the sons of God alone, and is called the first, because in this life, his
holy spirit does kill the members of sin, to death in us, and rayseth us up
together in Christ, Ephesi. 2.
to a newness of life. But so necessary a doctrine it is, to be delivered us
of either resurrection: that I may not omit, but speak of them both. And, as
many scriptures do testify the first: so it is my purpose to charge your
memories but with one: but that so sufficient, as may alone suffice our purpose
at this time, and your understanding of Gods good pleasure, in that judgment.
viz. Apoc. 20.11.12.13.14.15
And I saw a great white throne, and one that sat on it, from whose face fled
away both the earth and heaven, and their place was no more found. And I saw
the dead both great and small, stand before God, and the books were opened, and
an other book was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead were
judged of those things, which were written in the books according to their
works. And the sea gave up her dead which were in her, and death and hell
delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man
according to their works. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire:
this is the second death. And whosoever was not found in the book of life
written, was cast into the lake of fire. This holy scripture (beloved) does
most plainly lay abroad, the order and manner of judgment, at the last day.
And first the majesty of the judge in his coming is described: Secondly, the
manner of the judgment, who they be, and whereof the Apparants be judged. The
Lords coming is with great glory, he sits on a mighty seat, far passing
the judicial thrones of the greatest princes. And of necessity that must be a
great Seat, Titus. 2.13. Luke 1.32.
which must bear the God of might: It is a bright shining seat, all glorious,
not with corruptible gold or precious stone, but with the heavenly gleames,
more bright then the Sun beams, even lightened with the brightness of his
divine glory, as Christ has said: Matt. 25.31.
The son of Man shall come in his glory, and he shall sit upon the seat of
his glory, and all the holy Angels shall come with him. Whose glorious throne,
does even teach us, that the Lords judgments are pure and without spotte. No
pleading at the bar, no bribing of the judge, no frending by aquest, no
favor found for silver, nor love or hate shall bear a sway, but equity alone
in him shall then be seen. Also his brightness in coming, shall perce into
the hearts and acts of al men, to manifest and lay open ye hidden secrets of
the conscience, according to ye sentence of Paul: 1. Cor. 4.5.
Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will lighten things
that are hide in darkness, and make the councels of the hearts manifest, and
then shall every man have praise of God. viz. as his labor asks. Likewise the
shinning sun and moon, the glittering stars, yea, heaven and earth shall
be darkened, and fail of their brightness, before him. For like as the glorious
sun shinning, causes the blasing torch to loose his brightness, in respect of
him: So shall that most beawtifull planet, be as darkened with the great glory
of this shining throne, in the coming of the Amightie Christ.

But (my beloved) if these glorious creatures shall flee from the presence of
this mighty CHRIST, coming to judgment, which ever have been obedient to his
holy will; yea, and that but when he is coming: how shall it fare with us, when
he is set upon that terrible throne whose sins have been so many, and the
accusers so ready, (as the Lord his witness, satha^s accusation, Zopho.
and thine own conscience, which is to thee 1000. witnesses) when the sun is
black, the Moon as blood, the stars fall, Malach.
like the green figs from their trees, in a mighty wind, the heavens depart
away like a scroll, Reave. 6.12.
and all ysles and montaines, are moved out of their places. And the kings the
of earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and
the mighty men, and every bondsman and every free man, hide them selves in
dens, Esa. 2.19. Hos. 10.8. Luk 23.30.
and amongst the rocks of the mountains, and shall say to the mountains and
rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the presence of him, that sits on the
throne, and from ye wrath of the lamb. In cause hereof, let me say unto us,
with that holy David; Oh, Psalm. 50.22.
consider this, you that forget God, least the Lord tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver you. Seeing therefore yt all these things must be
dissolved (and come to pass) what manner of persons ought we to be, 2. Pet.
3.11.
in holy conversation and godliness? But when this judge our Lord Christ is
thus gloriouslyset, then these foresaid persons of each degree, shall stand
before him, even great and small: for neither heaven nor earth can hid them, or
their crowns, their dignities, Lordships or warrelike courage, wealth, will, or
wit, shall be able to keep them from his presence, or escape the just
judgment which the balance of his equity shall cast unto the^. Look to this
now, ye knights and gentiles here present, and you rich in possessions, be not
careless of your life: for godly prevention now, shall embolden your persons
then, to lift up your heads, because your redemption is the^ at hand. Luke
21.28.
This order then shall be observed: The books shall be laid open before the
Lord: and every man high and low, rich and poor, shall be judged with the
scepter of truth, even according as his deeds are written in those books.
Note here (beloved) by an elegant Metaphor, how the spirit of GOD does
display the judgments of the Lord. He alludeth unto the judicial courts of
kings and Potentates, where the books of record bear memory of the faults
of men convicted by good proof. Not that the Lord has need of books: for he
knows the thoughts, words and works of all men, and of every idle word,
Math. 12.36.
shall man be judged: but, that hereby, he would send us, to our own senses,
to know and feel, that all our actions and hearts are in his sight, and
cannot be wiped out of his remembrance by other pensill, then only by true
faith and repentance. And as we are fallen into this Metaphor, of the Lords
books: So let us know that the holy scriptures, Ezech. 18. Heb. 6.
attribute three books unto God: viz. liber prouidentiae, Iudicii, and vitae:
The book of his providence: The book of his judgment: and the blessed book
of life. Of his providence, David says thus: Psalm. 139 16.
Thine eyes did see me, when I was without form: for in thy book were all
things written, which in continuance were fashioned, when there was none of
them before. O Lord (says he) when as yet I was not formed in my mothers
womb, thine eyes did see me, and in the book of thy foreknowledge and
providence of thy divine mind, were all men written from the foundation of the
earth, when as yet there was not one begotten.

The book of his judgments, this former text does enforce ye consideration
of, which books were opened, and signifies the certain knowledge, of all the
words and works, of every man, from Adam, till that instant, according to the
which, they shall be all then judged. For those things, which ye Lord now
knows, as if he had them written in books, those things, that either our
hearts, words or works, have imagined, spoken or done, the same then shall
he then lay before us, as if he read them out of them, Apoc. 20.
and shall thereby build a reason unto us all, why some shall by judgment go
to hell, some other unto life. Be not deceived therefore (good people) God is
not mocked or beguiled: Gal. 6.7.
for we shall be adjudged of every idle word, yt shall be spoken: how much
more, of wicked deeds: as of idolatry, whordome, blasphemy and such like?
Now go too, you that put far away the evil day, Amos. 6.3.
and approach the seat of iniquity, which take singular pleasure in ribauldry
and filthy jesting: which can laughe the lowdest, when your lewd servants are
most disposed to lie. Do you think indeed, there is a God, that knows this?
A Scribe, that records it? A judge, that will revenge it? and a day, that
shall reveal it, by the books of your heavy judgment? And dare you continue
your delight, in lying, whoring, in filthy iestinges, that are not comely, in
such the works of darkness, which rather you ought to reprove in others,
then to favor or practice them your selves? But these evils dwell not
altogether in beggars, but you, you, eue^ you: (I say) who^ the Lord has
blessed with lands and revenues in great abundance, which for your birthes,
are called gentlemen, and for your chivalry, knights: but for your folly,
flattered as fools, to win of you preferment: even of you (I said) there
are, that dare despise the spirit of truth, with the false spirit of lying,
ribauldry, and filthy whoredom. Your servants perceiving your foolishness,
are contented to sell themselves to hell, to gain some earthly preferment at
your hands. For, seeing your devilish disposition, they frame their practice
to your pleasurs: but you shall be judged of those things most severely. Oh, you
seruing-men absteyne from pleasing your masters, with this egregious lewdenes
of lying. Wotte you what you do? and whose ye are? Io. 8.
you do make your souls the slaves of satan, and you are herein, the children
of the devil your father, which is a liar from the beginning. Cast of these
works of darkness, have no fellowship with them, but rather reprove them,
and those that use them, yea, though they be your great masters. For, you are
not called to serve men, but God. And you shall then be found best profitable
to your masters, when you shall take sin from their bodies, and exhort
virtue to their souls. And be it known to you, you knights here present,
and the rest, that, that noble Naaman had not been cleansed from his leprosy,
had he not humbled his soul to the admonition of his godly seruing-men. 2.
Kings. 5.13. 2. King. 5.13


The Lord GOD work our conversion in time, that we may dye to sin, and
have part in the first resurrection: so shall we be sure not to taste of the
second death: because our names are found written, in the book of life:
Whereof now we are to speak. And it is notable, that it is said, every man
was judged according to his works, that he had done in his life time, not
what others have done for him, after. Yea, as well the godly as the reprobate,
are in themselves under the censure of the second book, that is, condemnable
to the second death.

But now there is an other cause, why the godly are saved: namely, that their
names are written in the book of life. Ephe. 1.2.
This book of life is not of this life corporal, but spiritual, and has his
beginning in these our days, but is perfited in the last resurrection, and is
called the most sure, and sweet election and predestination of god, which does
seal and sanctify to himself, those that be his, whom he has chosen to be
partakers of the first resurrection, before the beginning of days: Ephe. 1.2.
and therefore they cannot perish in the end of time. Of this book speaks
Paul: The Lord knows who be his. And though sparingly I would speak in
singular reverence of this hidden mystery, 2. Tim. 2.19.
to many in ye world, and comfortable only to the children of life, when their
eyes be opened to read this book: yet in humbleness of heart, I say thus
much of it: This book of life, is the most certain, sure, firm, and eternal
foreknowledge in the most holy mind of God, Zanch. To. 2 lib. 3. cap. 3. 712.
by the which he ever has and does in his Christ, and for him alone, appoint
and choose us, to be his children adopted to grace, and heirs of eternal
life, approves them for his, and takes peculiar and perpetual care on them.
I know my sheep, says Christ: I know whom I have choosen etc. And those
whom the Lord writes in this book, those only shall have says and life.
And whosoever is not written in this book, without doubt, he shall be cast
into the second death. But how shall we know that we are written in this
book? Surely every man is to seek the knowledge hereof. To some it is given
at morn, to other at noone, and to some only at night, even gasping at
breath. The ordinary way to this knowledge is elega^tly set down by Paul to
the Romans, where the graces of God are so linked in one, and so easy to be
perceived, that every man may have an insight, of this golden cheine yt
fears God. Romans 8.28.
We know that all things (says he) work together for the best, to to them
that love God, eue^ to them that are called of his purpose. For those who^ he
knew before, he also predestinate to be made like to the image of his son,
that he might be the first borne among many brethren. Moreover, Whom he
predestinate, them also he called, and whom he called, them also he
justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified. Here, beloved, the
book is gods purpose to choose, and our writing in it is, that we are elected
to live in Christ before all times, a life conformable to the following of
Christ: to be holy and blameles, sober and godly, religious and just,
peaceable and blessed in this present world: And not to be worldly bent, and
to blaspheme with rebellious spirits, saying: what should I fear to to rob,
to kill, to spoil, to whore it, and brace it, and to follow my lust? For, if I
be elected, I shall be saved: if I be not elected, I shall be damned. But beloved,
Oh, hateful spirit against Gods holy spirit of our election. Do you draw hence
an other nature in the grace of this book? namely, learn to see, how those
that are elected, those shall be called to feel their election. And they shall be
justified from their former corruptions, sanctified from after sins: and
glorified to God. But as we have said, those yt be not found written in this
book, those shall be judged by ye other books of judgment, and that according
to their works. This doctrine is here delivered us to note: John speaks of
the general judgment, executed long after the natural death, and he speaks
generally of all, when as (no doubt) great heaps of infinite thousands, have
had the works of Popes and Cardinals, popish priests, and sacrilegious Masses,
trentals, doles and chauntrie fees, moonkish build and frierish helps for
them. All whose works of darkness notwithstanding, every man shall rise
unchanged, from his former state: For, even so as he dyed, such shall he
arise, and shall have judgment after his own works, and not according to the
merit of other men's labors for him after his death. Thus says Gods spirit,
which cannot lie: Away therefore with your prayer for the dead, your alms and
dole to the poor, at the place and day of Funerals. And even this day I exhort
in the Lord, whom it does most concern, that as I know, and do affirm your
hate, to that pestilent piece of popery, and your sincerity in Christ: so ye
faithfully show it at this instant. Feed these poor assembled, but foster
not that popish opinion, to pray for the soul departed. Forget not ye Lord at
this present, who has not forgotten to bring you to great things. Abstain
(says ye Apostle) not only from evil: but even also from ye shadow and show
of evil. If it might be, take some other day for them and give them with
warning, yt you mean no procuring of prayer for ye dead. For I know, yt you
are assured, yt every man shall appear and answer for his own factes, as
well this reverend corpse going to his grave, as all you and we here assembled,
in cause of him. We must all appear (says Paul) before the judgment seat
of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.10.
that every man may receive the things that are done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or evil. The Lord in mercy bless us
with his grace, that living in him, we may die in the Lord Christ, and so rest
in peace, till our return to this bodily resurrection, when we shall resign
to our souls, our new bodies, though burned to ashes, eaten with vermin, in
Sea, or by land: For death, land and sea, shall give up, not new
creatures, but her received dead, to be reunited, to this resurrection. And so
with holy Job, we shall all see our redeemer, not with other, but with these
eyes, that now we have, and with the self same bodies which now we bear,
shall we all both small and great, stand before the almighty Christ, the
judge of quick and dead. To whom be glory for ever. And now time requires to
speak of the first resurrection, which erst we called spiritual. And of this
resurrection Paul speaks thus: Ephe. 2.4.
And when we were dead by sins, God in his rich mercy, through his great
love, wherewith he loved us, has quickened us together in Christ, by whose
grace we are saved: And has raised us up together, and made us sit together
in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Romans 6.4
And again to the Romans thus: We are buried then with Christ by baptism,
into his death, that like as Christ was raised of God the father, so we
should walk in newness of life. And now of these places we are to observe:
First, that there is a death, that goes before this resurrection. Then, yt by
an other power, beyond our selves, we are revived, and raised from that death.
And thirdly, what this life is, where unto we are raised. To the first, this
death is spiritual, and is none other but sin, as here is said: and when we
were dead in sin. And rightly is sin called death: for it kills all the
vital parts of the soul, and makes it not only unapt, but unable to serve
the living God. It depriueth us of the grace of God. It separateth Christ, Romans
6.
which is our life, from us, it brings satan to possess our souls, and
haleth us to the second death: which is the infernal lake. This is the nature
of every sin, and therefore they are rightly said to be dead, which be
possessed of it: as wholly cut off from God, estraunged from his life, 1. Tim.
5.6.
and dead to godliness. So are the lashing widows called dead in spirit,
though they live by nature, which give themselves to carnalitie and fleshly
lusts. And of such men also spoke Christ the Lord, saying: Let the dead bury
their dead. Matthew. 8.22
Now (beloved) draw hence this doctrine: We are by course of natural life
sinners, but by our self delights, we are become dead in trespasses: but he
that is dead, is so free from life, that he has no part of whatsoever is done
under the sun: as the preacher says. Eccle. 9.4.5.6.
So now that I speak to you, that you conceive, and we all feel the power of
the voice, it is by that we live: but this Corpse here present, is so free
from all this, yt he neither hears, or conceiueth, feels, or partaketh,
whatsoever by his occasion here is done: for he is dead, and his life is not
in him: Even so (beloved) the dead in sin are as free from righteousness, and
the true feeling thereof: as this sanctified corpse is cut from our present
action. Moreover this corpse can neither go, nor stir, hinder or let those,
that list to carry and convey him whether they would: Neither can the dead in
sin, withstand the guide of his deadly soul, the killing devil the prince
of hell, but is led and drawn, even whether and to what him lust: to
whoredoms, murders, lying, blasphemy, and what not? Ion. 8.34. Romans 6.20. 2.
Pet. 2.19.
For of whom so ever a man is overcome, his servant he is, whether of sin
unto death, or of grace unto life. Last of all, it is not in the power of any
dead man to arise again, till his life be returned to him: No more is it in
ye power of man once dead in sin, to rise again from it: until his life,
which is Christ, return, to revive him. Wherefore the Apostle says, he has
quickened us, even God the father, by the spirit of his Christ, has raised us
up with Christ. Where is then thy free will, and power, to keep the ways of
God? when thou have ears, but fatted ears, that cannot hear: a heart, but
blinded, Matt. 13.14.
that cannot perceive ye good will of god: a soul, but dead and estraunged
from the life of God. Ephe. 41.8.
And for this cause God is said, to raise us from the dead, that Christ may
give us light, and that by his mighty operation through faith in him. It is his
mighty operation, Colos. 2.12.
not man's weakness, to raise us from sin: For satan is stronger then we, 2.
Tim. 2.26.
and holds us (once dead) eue^ at his will, as Paul says, so as it is not
possible for us, to arise from his bo^os, til our life Christ, which is ye
stronger, Luke 11.29. Math. 12.29. Mark. 3.22.
enter combat with him, bind him, and take us (his spoil) away from him. The
workman then to raise us in this first resurrection, is not man, but God. And
he uses heereto (as his finger to form us anewe) his word and his spirit,
and both from him self: that he might have the whole glory of our life.
Embrace then this holy means, come to ye word, there is his spirit. If thou be
his he will draw thee to it, lighten thee by them, and raise thee from this
spiritual death, as the Apostle has said, Romans 3.11.
If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he
that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies,
because that his spirit dwells in you. Now what this resurrection is, the
Apostle does tell us: namely, newness of life, saying: Romans 6.4
We are buried then with Christ by baptism into his death, that like as Christ
was raised from the dead by ye glory of the father: so we should walk in
newness of life. This is then ye first resurrection: namely, newnes of life.
There must be life (beloved) as well in the spirit as in the body. Many men
seem to live, and to do the works of life, but not in the spirit, but in the
body: to serve their turn, to answer the law, to observe the time, but all
this while the spirit lives not. Many a papist to day will come to Church in
body, but he brings a dead soul with him: for Christian Religion has no
room in his heart. But if thou will have thy part (Papist or Protestant) in
the first resurrection, thou must begin to live in thy spirit, that thy
spirit may enforce thy body, to love, live, and fear thy God. According to
this sentence of Paul: Ephesians. 4.22.
Cast off the old man, which is corrupt through the deceivable lusts, and
be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. And at one word to
speak it, herein consists the first resurrection: To cast away the works of
darkness, and to put on, Christ the armor of light. But, as no man raised
from a filthy puddle, will willingly bear with him the myerie spots of that
dirtie soil, but will rather cast away the defiled garments that he might
appear cleansed: Hos. 3.
Even so (beloved) we must not part stakes with God and sin, but we must say
to sin, get thee hence by a spiritual hatred unto her, and so increase in
it, that we must (as the Apostle Jude says) even hate the very garment that is
polluted by the flesh. verse. 23.
So must we (having received such grace) live in spirit and body, as the
sons of light, translated from the power of death, to the kingdom of Christ
in all peace, Colos. 1.13.
Godlynes, Tit. 2.11.
sobriety and honesty. Thus shall we live, and reign with Christ, a thousand
year, viz. for ever. Now call your spirits to your senses, and see how ye
savor this truth, (beloved in Christ) Rowse up your drowsy hearts and
with the perspicuitie of a good conscience, sifte and search your selves every
one, how you have profited by this doctrine, and whether you live or die. Be
not deceived, God is not mocked: whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap.
For, if ye sow still to the flesh, your former corruptions, you shall reap
the second death. But if now, you can take hold of Christ's doctrine, by his
spirit, and from his truth sow to your spirits, ye seeds of ye word of Faith,
of righteousness of peace, and godliness, Gal. 6.7.
you are partakers then of ye first resurrection; and shall reap hereof, life
everlasting. And in this examination, two sorts of men, are meruellously
convinced. The first, neither feeling death or life in god, runs headlong to
his lust, in infidelity and greediness to sin: as though that only were
his chief beatitude. And these be the Atheistes of our days, whose
consciences are seared up with an hot iron, so, as no word can pearce into
their hearts, or sap of Gods spirit have course in their members, but are
past all feeling, even at the point of damnation.

The second sort, are of such, as having some sparks, of a former fire, and a
little breathing force of an elder strength, (but now decaying) do yet seem
to live: when rather it may be feared, that they are almost dead. And these
are notably shadowed unto us by ye Church of Sardi in the Apocalips. Apoca. 3.1.
And writ unto the Angel (.i. the Minister) of the Church which is at Sardi:
These things says he, that has the seven spirits of God in his hand, and the
7. stars, I know thy works: for thou have a name that thou live, but thou
art dead. Oh (beloved) mark well this Church of Sardi or Lidia. She is not an
idolatrous Church, but professing God and godliness. She has the form of
Gods government, his word, his ministers, and is called his Church. She
seems for her outward show, to be most Christian and holy: but in deed and
troth, she is convicted of death. And that not because she has no part of
godly life in her, but because she has fallen from her first love, life, and
strength in him, that holds ye manifold graces (called 7, spirits) in his
hand, to dispose at his good pleasure, and the sufficient number of his
preachers, named stars, to shine into the darkness of man's nature, with the
brightness of his word. Finally, Sardi is convinced, yt she is imperfect in
her works before God: that is, she was but an hypocritical Church, rested in
the external ceremonies and rites, but sought not the Lord, in truth and
sincerity. And here note, beloved, that whatsoever Church, or people, which
has not in her soul, the rooted faith of Christ, graft by his spirit, in
that inner Man, in strength whereof, the force and power of Christ's spirit
flows thence, into an open practice of holiness and godliness,
righteousness and honesty: That same Church, people, or severed person is as
dead before the Lord. But yet in this Church of Lidia, there were a few
names, as ye Lord notes in the 4. ver. of ye 3. chap. which had not defiled
their garments: yt is, had not stained ye profession of Christ, which Christ,
they by baptism, had put on and is ye wedding garment, adorning our beauty in
him, and covers our infirmities and iniquities, from ye censure of gods
justice. Very comfortable is this to the Godly, but to ye wicked most terrible.
The Lords eyes behold the hearts and acts of men, and does daily discern
the number of the Godly: but keeps records of the wickeds practizes, against
the day of wrath. O England, England, Oh thou Church of Sardi, if thou be
looked into with a spiritual eye, thou shall be found near unto death: only
a few names or persons are kept in thee, for a reserved seed to the Lord. In
outward show, what Church more holy? Thy Princes are protestants: Thy
angelical stars, thy bishops and preachers, are learned teachers; Thy
government is godly, thy profession is holy: But (O England) if thou be
sounded to the heart, thou shall be found (I fear me) very sick and near
unto death. Many maladies have met with thee, no sickness, but has taken
hold of thee, and sore weakened thy strength: But last of al, hypocrisy and
security sleep in thy bosom. Thou stainest thy bright vesture of holy
profession with the filthy spots of carnal desires: Thy religion, is a
cloak to all thy iniquities. But as a spot is soon espied, and seems most
foul in a scarlet robe: So the brighter thy profession is, the sooner thy
sins are discovered, and thine imperfections more notorious. But by two
especial notes, a sick man is known to be near his death. First, his pulses
labor weakly, his speech draws farrely, and his strength is fled away:
Secondly when he is sodeinely bereft of his vital spirits and perfect senses,
so as he is not feeling ye parts of his dying body, he is deemed near unto
his death. Alas, look into the body of England, for the soundenes of her
life, Christ in her; and behold, her pulses beat faintly, her speech fetches
farly, her strength is meruellously decayed. Is her zeal to religion, as it
was in the beginning of her majesty's reign? Is it continually vigent in all
the parts of the body? does every knee bow to Christ the Lord in her? does
every tongue confess Jesus to be the Lord, to the glory of God the father?
Nay, (alas) this little life left, is drawn near to the heart, and the heart
is very sick. A few names, a few, in respect of so great a number. What
means it, yt so many magistrates are molested with carcke against
conspiracies and domestical furies? That such and so great vices, are daily
spread, and break out? So sundry persons forced, with papists filthy familyes
and popish seminaries? Such friendship to Gods enemies of some, that rather
should help to spewe them out of the body? Such provision for war? such
fear of foreign foes? and so small trust in many home dwellers? undoubtedly,
this is the very cause, that England is very sick, fainting and falling, as
by degrees, from her former strength in Christ. Religion is thought to be
strong enough of it self: for aid it can obtain little, except about the
heart. Godly conversation is fled out of the country, God grant him godly,
and constant entertainment in her graces Court. Charity is become key cold: for
no man has leisure to love beyond himself. Hate of iniquity is banished the
land, and the true love of God is hardly to be found, in the body of
England. Even now is performed again the prophet Hosias speech: There is no
truth nor mercy, Hose. 4 2.2.3.
nor knowledge of God in ye land: by swearing, and lying, and killing, and
stealing, and whoring, they break out, and blood touches blood: therefore
shall the land mourn etc. And are we not senseless of our weak estate? Do
not our spiritual preachers cry unto us? Esa. 1.53.6. Romans 2.2.
There is no health from top to ye toe. All have gone astray, every man after
his picked and chose^ way: ye long suffering of God, has been to draw you to
repentance, but you have abused his great patience, and are like to the raging
seas: for in ye glory of your presumptio^s, you have cast up to the eyes of ye
Lord, the filthy foam of your bloodgiltinesse. But now repent in time, ere
the day of his decree come forth. Zoph. 2.1.^.
Gather your selves together (O nation not worthy to be beloved) least you be
blown away like chafe, in that day. Seek the Lord ye meek of the earth,
you that have wrought his judgments. Seek righteousness, seek lowlines, if
so be ye ye may be hidden in the day of the lords wrath. But, beloved in GOD,
Esa. 26.20.
how feel we our selves now? are we sick or whole? To this me think some do
say: No, sir: loquere no bis placentia, speak more pleasant things to us.
Cry, peace, peace, Iere. 20.1.
eue^ til ye day of war. Cast Jeremy into prison, says Pashur, and his
partakers: for he speaks against this city. But those names only, yt are
about the heart, and have not so steined their cloths, they say: he is not
worthy to die: for he has spoken to us in ye name of ye lord our god. Ier.
26.16.
But of ye residue, what shall we say? truly we may rightly say as God him self
spoke to his prophet Ezechiel, in ye time, saying: Also thou son of man, the
children of thy people, ye talk of thee by the walls (as they sit at their
banquets, Ezec. 33.30.
you art their sauce to their delicates) and in the doors of their houses, and
when they sit in the streets to recreate themselves, and speak one to an
other, saying: (in derisio^ of my law) come I pray you, and hear what is ye
word yt comes from the Lord: for they come unto thee, as the people uses to
come, and my people sit before thee, and hear thy words, but they will not do
the^: for with their mouths they make (mowes and) iestes and their heart* goes
after their covetousness. And lo, Thou art to them, as a jesting song, of one
that has a pleasant voice, and can sing well: for they hear thy words, but
they do the^ not. And when this comes to pas (for lo, it will come) (namely ye
ripenes of this sin, and the performance of my prophets threts from me) Then
shall they know, Verse. 28.
yt (not a jesting singer but) a prophet has been amongst them. When Lord? even
when I will lay ye land desolate (says ye Lord) and wast, and ye pomp of her
strength shall cease, etc. O lord in thy great mercy look down upon our English
Israel. What is he ye sees this huge heap of people, here this day being a
stranger to ye state of this country, but presently might conceive much life
of god to be in the^? Surely it is a great people, yea a very great auditorie:
I have not seen ye like in the country, ye Lord bless you al, with the first
resurrection, according to his blessed will. But you of ye greater sort, take
you care, yt ye come not to hear what ye lord says, only for ciuility or
neiborly courtesy, in respect of these funerals: or in nisenes, to hear a
voice that might delight you: but what cause soever brought you, now yt you are
come: be attentive to ye lord, yt you may be taught of god. As for ye gretest
number, it is too apparent, and will be proved anonne, yt as our prophet says,
they follow their covetousness. They are come in hope to have a dole to day.
Against whose greedy desire eftsoon I pray you, to whom it belongs, that
regard may be had hereof: least this days exercise, may be abused by the
wicked, to father their popish prayer for the dead, upon your charitable
devotion to the poor. But (beloved) let the bell call you to another Church,
or at an other time, be ye preacher liked never so well, and we shall not have
the third part of this audience. Nay, if we might have but the fourth part,
and that on the Sabbath only, it were in these parts a virtuous people. And
after our hearing, how do we digest the word? For the most part, this is al:
At dinner, and after, we talk of the man, but feed not of the matter: We
either yield him his due commendation, or our dislike: But even as minstrels
song once heard, is straight forgotten: So very few, with Marie, lays up in
his heart, those things which the Prophet spoke, Take heed that you spurn not
at your Phisicions: for then your health is at an end. Did Esaias cry in his
time, Esa. 53.1.
lord, who believes our sayings? And may not we cry now, Lord, who does
credit our report? We are ye ofscowring of the people, the laughing-stockes of
the world, we are counted contentious, seditious, slanderous, railers,
liars, and troublers, of ye state. But as for this people, (though thou O Lord)
speak in us unto them, yet will they not bend their ears, to hear thy voice
in us. Though ye earth be weary of her sinful burden, and as surcharged
(with the heaviness of sin) does universally totter as a dronken man, April
8. 1580.
at our iniquities, and thy heavy judgments: yea though the waters here
below, the heavens and planets far above, though blasing gleames, and burning
lamps, have summoned us, and ugly shapes in monstrous birth, have and yet do
cite us, to the preuentio^ of thy heavy wrath in true repentance: Iere. 8.6.
yet no man says to himself, and what have I done? But every man goes to
the corruption of his own heart, and fetches thence, the labor of his life,
in Hypocrisy, Popery, Drunkenness, Whoredom, covetousness, pride, ambition,
atheism and such like. And all this comes hereof, that being almost all
dead, we feel not, that we are once touched with sickness. We go on in our
wickedness, and seek credit against our reprouers, and scorn at Gods
judgments, and when most seeming is of imminent danger: we assure our
selves of great security. Oh people of this waywarde nation and you here
present, let us his ministers be the Lords cocks, to rowse you out of this
deadely sleep, having first with Peter's tears, examined well our selves. Let
us be the trumpettes of the Lord, to warn you of the great and mighty
battle of the God of hosts against us. And now accept you this labor of me,
the watchman of the Lord, and hearken with comfort to this my cry: Arise you
that sleep in your sins and shameful security (O Christians by name) Arise
from the first death of sin, by the operation of Gods holy spirit in you,
and walk in newness of life, by the light of the glorious gospel of GOD,
given you in Christ, so shall not the second death have any power of you:
because you have taken part in the first resurrection.

And now I perceive this first part has taken my whole time allotted me, so
as I can not speak of the second, which is so depending of the first, that
well they can not be disioyned. But in as much as your civil solemnities, ask
more time, then possibly the forenoone would afforde us, I will defer my
second part till some other time, except I receive your pleasures, farther to
proceed. Well then: knowing now your godly desires, by the harald at arms,
that I should proceed: Let us read our second part, and it is thus: For on
such the second death has no power, Text ver. 6.
but they shall be ye priests of god and Christ, and shall reign with him a
thousand year.

In this part (dearly beloved) the Evangelist does by a most elegant phrase,
describe the state and condition of the faithful, affirming the^, so far of
to be once touched, after ye punct of natural death, with the pains of hell or
false fained popish purgatory, that contrarily, they presently are in bliss
with God, singing with the spirits of ye just, the due praises of the Lord:
saying, for on such. etc. But to the further openyng of this excellent part,
let us observe these three things: First what is to be understood by this
second death. Secondly, of what prerogative and power ye same is. And last of
al, for a final conclusion, what, and where is the full felicity of the just,
which have their part in the first resurrection. The second death, (to be
short) is that which follows the first, as a merit of his deserte. But
death is said to be twofold, in the holy scriptures. For as there is a death of
the body, so is there likewise a death of the soul. But of death of the body,
we have said before: And of the natural death, Gods holy book, our common
experience: and the dead body of this departed Christian before us, bears
perfect testimony. Of which the Apostle Paul says: It is decreed that man
shall once die, and then comes his judgment. And our Apostle in this book:
Heb. 9.27. Apoc. 14.13
Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord: (or for the Lords cause) for they
rest from their labors, so says the spirit, and their works follow them.
Their own works follow them, not the works of other for them. And be it
known unto you yt the first death of ye soul, (which is sin and iniquity)
is the very cause procuring Gods judgment, to strike the body with natural
death, and is here called the first death of the body. For ye which, the
soul, that dies in sin, shall abide much pain and torment in hell, when yet
the body thereof sleeps quiet in the grave, expecting his woeful resurrection.

And now of the second death, which Christ Jesus, Matt. 10.28
and our Apostle John calls hell, and the lake of fire. Fear not the^, says
Christ, which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather
fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul, into hell. Here is ye
death of ye body, the first death; and the death of the soul in hell, the
second. Of the same second death, speaks S. John in this received text. Go
too, you worldlings, Iam. 5.1. Romans 2.5.
that treasure up wrath to your selves, for the last day: tribulation and
anguish, death and hell, shall be your portion. Look to this you scorners yt
put far off the last day, here is to you endless woe. You have made a covenant
with death, but death it self and hell, viz. the damned souls in them, shall
henceforth be cast both body and soul, into the burning lake of fire and
brimston, which is the second death. For be the day never so long, at the last
comes Evening. Oh, beloved that weep now, then shall you laugh and rejoice,
if so that you kiss and embrace the Son of God, and fall before his presence,
conde^ning your selves for sin, and killing sin in you, by ye power of his
spirit you shall the^ see ye proud antechristia^ Pharaoh, and al his popish
Egyptia^s, cast into ye sea and gulf of unquenchable fire, when your selves,
by your mighty Moses and captain christ, shall be ledd into the heavenly land
of promise, there to reign with him for ever and ever. Many men move much
dispute about the site and place of hell, this fiery lake: But I say only this
of it: It is a forbidden curiosity, engendring strife, deuoide of profit, to
question where, and in what place it is: But it is a commanded divinity, to
seek the living God, with reverent fear, by his mercy, and Christ's merit
to be raunsomed from the pains and power thereof. Of whose power, we thus say:
The second death (which is hell) has a double power or prerogative. The first
is a prerogative to receive such persons as of right do belong unto her. The
second is, perpetually to keep their souls in that lake, till the day of
judgment, and can neither be coniured or commanded to deliver any one of them
(or can they come out of her) by any authority or power, of Pope or whole
papasie: but after that day, shall possess both the bodies and souls of ye
malignant Church, to her everlasting torments. Now, what souls and persons,
do belong to her, our Apostle does tell us, in the 21. of this book, saying:
But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, Apoc. 21.8.
and murderers, and whormongers, and idolaters and sorcerers, and al liers,
shall have their part in ye lake, which burns with fire and brimsto^, which is
the second death. Three sorts of persons Gods spirit does assure us, to be
under the power of ye second death. That is: ye obstinate Infidel, the
fearful Papiste, and the abominable covetous of the world: as drunkards
whoremongers, murderers, covetous, liars and such like. Delicate be your
delights, ye gallants of these days, but wisely call them to account, before
the mourners follow the sinful corpse to the grave. Eccle. 12.1. etc.
For if the Lord (which is the searcher of the heart) find your delights with
death to end in infidelity, in fearful popery, or in any these carnal
abominations, the^ deceive not your selves: for the prerogative of the second
death, may not be taken from her. God is a just God, Romans 2.6.
and in his justice, will judge every man according to the very nature of his
work. Note here also, yt civil honesty, without Christ's divinity, cannot
keep the honest Infidel, and unbeliever, from the second death. For we
possess ye heavens, by inheritance only, and we are none otherwise made
heirs, the^ by this prerogative, that we are made the so^ns of God. Io. 1.
And we are none otherwise made the sons of God, but by our faith in Jesus
Christ. Nor can this faith be else obtained, but by the spirit of God. Or
does this spirit otherwise (ordinarily) work it in us, then by the preaching
of the word of God. But, the infidel rejects the word: 1. These. 4.5.
and therefore Gods spirit: likewise our Christ, and in him, our heavenly
father, and so finally, this heavenly inheritance. And as for our honest life
and good works, they serve, but so seal up the hearts of the faithful, to
thassuraunce of their election, and to procure others, to praise the Lord,
being benefited by them, in us. But the only hand that apprehends our
inheritance in Christ, is our firm fixed faith in him, believing by his word
and spirit, in the full consent of our hearts, that he is the same, which the
most merciful father has given him to be to us: That is, our wisdom, our
justification, our holiness, our free and most absolute redemption: 1. Cor.
1.10.
and so in the bottom of our hearts, do by faith embrace him.

2 The second sort subject unto hell, are the fearful papists, who shall never
(so dying) escape ye second death. And if you will mark with me this
Epitheton, fearful: and therewith measure in truth, the popish profession:
you must of mere necessity grant me, that no papist (dying in his popery) can
be else where placed but in the second death. And to your better understanding
hereof, you must distinguish betwixt fear and fear: for there is a fear,
commended and commanded to us, in ye holy scriptures, Psa. 111.10.
as: The fear of the Lord is ye beginning of wisdom: commanded, Psa. 2.10.11.
Serve ye Lord in fear, and rejoice to him with tre^bling. Again, Fear god,
honor the king, 1. Pet. 2.17.
love brotherly fellowship. But this is yt fear, which Gods spirit planteth
in his children, to serve him in his true worship, and is ever joined, with
assured knowledge, and affiance in God. And in ye knot of christian marriage,
Psalm. 58.9. Psalm. 112. Psalm. 118.
this sacred fear is rightly shadowed: for ye wife fears to offend her
husband, but it is for reverence and love to him, and never without affiance of
his favor, because she knows him, to be her married husband: So likewise ye
godly child, does fear to displease his father, not because he doubts of his
love, but for yt he would not grieve ye spirit of his life, who^ he feleth most
assuredly in natural knot, fast tied to him. And though his father lend him a
frowning face, he knows yt those his looks proceed of fatherly love, to his
correction. whereof persuaded, so he fears, so he trusts, so he naturally
loves and obeieth him. And this knowledge and love drives away filthy fear,
which gendreth painefulnes. But the fear yt John speaks of, is flat
contrary to this. It is begotten by distrust in god, it is borne of ignorance,
it lives to despair, and dies in great painfulnes. what other is ye whole
profession of popery, but mere timiditie? They ever distrust god of his
promise, during their life, and therefore they die in fear of his favor, at ye
hour of death. If he say: That soul yt sins shall die, they believe him not,
but walk from sin to sin, committing more trust to a Popes bull, the^ credit to
ye immortal word of god. If ye Lord say, and swear also: Verily, verily, Io.
5.24.
he that hears my words, and believes in him yt sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into conde^natio^: but has passed from death to life.
yet ye papist is afraid to rest upon this promise: for he does not absolutely
believe it, but is in fear notwtstanding, yt after death, his soul shall go to
condemnation, if not to hell, yet at the least to purgatory. Though the spirit
of God say, There is no comdemnation to the^ that are graft in Christ Jesus:
whose life is not after ye flesh, but after the spirit: yet the papist, will not
believe, yt he ought to be assured of this Christian rock, to rest upon: but
casts himself into the raging sea of wavering distrust. Which fearful
persuasion, has been the very building of al Abbeys, priories, and popish
paultries, from many years past us, and does breed great blasphemy to the
glory of God. For first it takes away the foundation of our faith, in the
merit of Christ, which is, ye God almighty is become our father in him, and yt
he is now well pleased with us, and as a father, not only does pardon our
sins, but so tenderly loves us, yt our necessities whatsoever, he carefully
helps. It takes away also this holy boldness in love, which his spirit does
assure us of, and Christ does teach us to cry unto him: Math. 6.
O thou yt art our father. Secondly the popish doubtfulnes takes away ye
benefit of Christ his son. For we are taught to believe, ye Christ is dead,
for us, that he is ye lamb of God, which takes away our sins, that nothing
can condemn us, because our Christ has justified us, and is dead, risen
again, and set at the right hand of God, for us, so that in him, we that
truly believe, are more then conquerours: so as neither hell or heaven, man or
Angel, prince or devil, things present or to come, can separate us, from our
benefit, and love of Christ. This certainty the book of God does teach us:
but from this anchorholde, the devil and popery, labors to draw us.
Thirdly it takes all godly consolation from us, in the day of tentation, and
lays us open to Satan's jaws. For who can lift up his heart, in tentation,
that fighting with his enemy much stronger the^ he, has no hope of his
captain Christ, the strongest of all, or in the mercy of God, to defend him?
It also takes away ardent and earnest prayer to God: for who can with comfort
cry in trial, that stands in fear he shall not be heard? but in the end
he falls into despair and hate of God, to all looseness of life, and
ruffianlike boldness, taking lust to live in sin, not expecting other then
hell at the end. Last of all, the popish doctrine of doubtfulnesse fights
flat against the nature of our Christian faith: which is not a light opinion of
our God, and Christ his love to us, and our salvation in him: but a most firm,
stable and sure foundation settled in our souls: so, as neither fire in earth,
nor powers in hell, can burn or raze it out of our hearts, that we are
sealed by his spirit, in the faith of his Christ, Romans 8.
to be his children, and fellow heirs with our eldest brother Christ our
Lord, in his great love, wherwt he has loved us, yea, even when we were his
enemies. Wherefore we are taught that be faithful, Romans 5.
to hold this for most certain: that though we be wicked of our selves, yet
are we justified by his grace, in our faith, and have peace with God, and free
access in one spirit, to God our father now, and shall be received to him of
Angels, when we depart this life, as this our text does also tell us. Hell
shall not touch us, but we shall reign with God, his priests, and holy ones
for ever. Cast off popish fearfulness therefore, and acquaint your selves with
the hearing of ye word of God: so shall ye learn, to be firm in faith and
sure to live. Here be touched also, all those, which fear men rather then God,
and in time of persecution run from religion, or in the presence of popish
princes, judges, tormentours, or before a balde Mass Priest, dare not confess
the Lord: but to save his momentary life, does cast away the eternal. He
that will save his life, shall lose it: Matt. 10.38. Mark. 8.35 Luke 9.23. Io.
12.2^.
and he that shall lose his life for my sake and the gospels, shall save it,
says our savior Christ. Pray, pray: pray the Lord to pull you out of popery
(beloved) and in speed, come out of Babylon, Apoc. 18.
which is appointed to be cast into the fiery lake, least being partakers of
her sins, ye also feed of her plagues. The third sort which shall to hell,
are the abominable murderers, harlots, and such like. These abominable are
to be understood of such persons, as, having once professed the truth of God,
are now, not only become to hate it, but most filthily they blaspheme it,
persecute and torment those, that profess it, to whom is reserved fire and
brimstone. Heb. 6. Heb. 10. The rest, are so manifest, as need no commentary:
only let us know, that murderers be they, which kill, wound or hurt,
themselves or their neighbors, either with the sword of an hateful heart, 1.
Io. 3.15.
(as John says) or with the sharpened tongue (as David says) or with the
hand, as Caine did his brother Habell. Psa. 120.3.4
And forget not that the second death, is the receptacle for all such as die
impenitent hereof.

The second part of deaths power in hell is, fast to retain her captives,
from the hour of their death with Dives, until the day of the last
resurrection: which thing is most plainly proved by the story of Dives and
Lazarus. Luke 16.


Now (beloved) the papists grant with us, that in the hels there is no
redemption: but they say, that in the earth there are distinct, three sorts of
me^: One sort most holy, another sort most wicked and the third sort of a
certain mixture, neither so holy, as straight upon death they demerite to go
to heaven, or yet so wicked, as at all they can be sent to hell, but are for a
time, committed after death, unto the pains of Purgatory, and must thence be
delivered, not by mercy, but by merit of Masses (dirtie) diriges, popes
(paltries called) pardons, and such like. And here is your foundation, and your
cause of prayer for the dead. In answer whereof we grant: some persons are
so sanctified in earth, that straight from hence they go to heaven, but not
for any their merit: For they are taught to hold, that having done all they
can: Luke 17.10.
yet they are none other but wasting and unprofitable servants. And that some
are so wicked, that straight they go to hell, as all obstinate, rebellyous and
traiterous papists, fearful wretches, and abominable persons, we firmly
believe. But, that there are any so imperfect, that for their imperfection,
they are stayed from heaven, and for their remnant of holiness, cannot come to
hell, and therefore of necessity must tumble into a popish purgatory, this we
flatly affirm to be a foolish opinion, without warrant from God. And touching
these mixed persons, surely the Church neither has had, or shall have any
other. Of women: was not that most holy maid, Marie, the blessed mother of
Christ, one most sacred? Io. 2.3.4.
But both the holy scriptures, and her own confession conuinceth her of sin,
but she is saved by her Christ, Luke 2.
saying: My spirit does rejoice in God my savior. And for her daily sins,
she, as al other, is taught to pray: forgive us our sins. So also, in her
blessed body, was sure faith, great love, a pure heart, and much godliness,
wherefore behold a certain mixture. Also of men: the Apostles were the most
pure, and yet not without the bodies of sin. What else moves Paul, to cry
to the Romans: Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from ye body of this death? And
this our most holy John, in his first Epistle, does accuse himself, 1. Io.
1.8.
and all other Apostles, of sin, saying: If we say yt we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, etc. Thus they lived, and thus they dyed with this battle
against sin, but had victory in Jesus Christ. Yet I trow, yt the papists
will not say: how the gracious virgin Mary and the holy Apostles, went from
death, to their popish purgatory. Romans 7.23.
The same mixture, yt is to say, in one body, to have obeying faith, and in it
another law rebelling to the spirit, is in all the elect of God, in more or
less measure. By means whereof, there cannot but be many sharp battles, in
the heart of man, so, as some times, he slippeth and is brought very low, and
sometimes he rests again and takes courage, and stoutly stands under the
banner, of his captain Christ, by the strength of his holy spirit: but yet at
the hour of death, if he should be measured, by his falls, he should be
judged worthy of the second death. Psalm. 130.3.
But because he has his part (by true and loving Faith, in repentance) of the
first resurrection, he dies blessed in the Lord, and holy, rests from his
labors in earth, and pains in hell: for, the second death has no power of
him, much less can a popish purgatory, which is not. I come not to dispute
with the papists now, but to lay forth the plain doctrine of salvation, to
your Christian hearts, and something to let you see the blindness of ye side,
which in so clear a light do grope at their own inventions. But to your
purgatory thus much: Is there such a place? yea sir. I pray you where sir, have
you warrant for it in the holy scriptures? Forsooth says the papist, both in
the old Testament, and in the new. does not Zachary say: Zach. 9.11.
I have loosed my prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water? Sir, here is
our purgatory. Well proved: and like the rest of all your religion. Here is
mention made of a pit void of water, and that is enough for purgatories
proof. Such warrant have they, for the assumption of their Lady, having no
warrant for it, in their blasphemous Mass, of that day they solemnly sing the
Gospel, of Marie and Martha. But this is enough to blind the eyes of the
ignorant, that they have the name of Marie, in that Mass, although it concern
a far other matter, and be altogether spoken of another person. And even such
is the popish beggerie of this rich place, and promise of Gods prophet here.
But be it that this scripture did any whitte toote at your purgatory: I pray
you sir, has your purgatory neither fire nor water in it? you see, water is
here denied, and here is no mention of fire at all. Besides, the delivery here
is said to be, by the Lord in heaven, and that in his mercy, without their
merit: But out of your purgatory, men's souls are delivered by men: in earth,
without him in heaven, through their merit (to his justice) of prayer and
alms, and diriges, and restles masses, and such like, and not by his mercy.
And for the proof hereof, you cite this place: Matt. 5.26.
He shall not come out thence, till he has paid the utmost farthinge. If
this sentence serve your purpose, then this doctrine, is rightly gathered of it,
that though all the papists in the world pray and cry, and lance themselves,
1. King. 18 27.
with their forefathers the false priests of Baal, till they cease to live,
yet their poor popish prisoner lies in the pit still, but without fire or
water, (it is sure, some driefatte) till he has paid, and not prayed, the
utmost farthing. Thus (beloved) ye may see what gain the papists have got of
this place, which they have stolen from his true sense, to shadow their
shameful briberie, and merchandise of men's souls in a feigned purgatory. If
it be lawful to allegorize this place, 1. Pet. 2.1.2.3 Apoc. 12.16.17.
then this lake is rather the power of Satan, and the blood of the covenant,
is the death of the Lord Christ: who has long since, before we were borne,
purged us, and thence delivered us, ^oll. 1.13.
and has translated us into the kingdom of himself. And your own doctor
Hierome affirms, yt this lake is (not purgatory, but) hell it self. But ye
true sense of the place is, an assurance of Gods hand to them of Jerusalem,
for the covenant of his Christ, for whose sake he has now brought them from
Babylons bondage.

A second place, the papists have of the new Testament, and that is out of the
1. Corinthians. 3. Every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall
declare it, because it shall be revealed by the fire, and the fire shall try
every man's work, of what sort it is. And this place seems so flat on their
side, that needs we must have a purgatory. Aeneid 6. Olimp. 2. Aretius loc.
56.
Truly, for all this, we must drive them to Virgil, and Pindarus, for Paul
does no whit help them. And (good Christian auditorie) measure their opinion,
by this scripture, and you shall see how falsely they father their purgatory
hereof. Herein is mention of fire, I grant: But such is this fire, yt not the
persons yt do work gold or stubble, but ye work wrought shall be cast into it:
For he says, and the fire shall try every man's work, etc. but they are to
prove a place of fire, wherein the workman for his work, is to be cast, which
thou see cannot be this. Again, they say no man shall come into their
purgatory, but ye mixed sort whereof we spoke before: But Paul speaks here,
of such a fire, as universally all must be tried by. For he says not, they
which have builded hay, wood or stubble only, shall be tried there, but also
they, which have builded gold, silver, and precious stones upon the
foundation: These good workme^ must yet go through this fire, or at the least
their workemanshippe: For he says, every man's work, etc. Further, the text
does not say, that this fire shall purge the work from corruption, or change
it: as to make Hay become Gold; Wood, Silver; stubble precious stones: But
he says, it shall be ignis probatorius, non Purgatorius, it shall only
prove and try, what nature the metal is off, not purge the person; or his
work at all. Do not ye see, by this sounding and short sifting of their
popish follyes, with this portion of holy scripture, that the papists are
sacrilegious robbers of God, and his scriptures? I doubt not, but you do. Add
to this, their own doctors are of other judgment, touching this fire.
Chrysostom takes it for hell fire: To. 1. li. 4. c. 36
Hierome, for the fire at the last day, which shall then try every man's work
what it is: Gregory a Pope of Rome, understands it for the afflictions of
this life: And ancient Ambrose interprets it of doctrine, which of al other
is the nearest the mind of the Apostle. For, the Apostle speaks only of
preachers and their labors, which the fire of Gods judgment shall make
manifest at his appointed season, whether they have preached with the grounds
of Religion in truth, and taught other points of doctrine also, sincerely and
soundly, in purity of truth, or more corruptly have laid erroneous opinions;
upon the foundation of our faith. This was the Apostles purpose, so that if
this fire should be of purgatory, then no man, but preachers, (protestants
and popish) should come thither. Last of all, their transgressions could
never in this fire be forgiven, but only proved such as they were. But if
they could have so good hap, as there to be purged, yet is mercy so shut
out of that purgatory, that no prayer can obtain remission of sins there,
or any redemption, can be had, till sufficient pains be paid in that
scarrefire, and so by fire, the soul must be purged. Some other places they
bring out, for their purgatory. As, Macha. 1^.
that act of Machabeus for the dead, who sent his silver to pray for them, and
is commended by ye abridgement. For answer heereto, I say, although we
should grant this Act consonant with the word (which indeed, is most flat
against it) yet, that he, in that corruption of the Church, prayed for the
dead, nothing shall it prove for your purgatory, no more then the prayers of
some auncientes before us, for the dead, did, when as they dreamed, not of
purgatory, but thought only of the resurrection, verse. 44.
as Judas does in this place. But I say to this place, as some Lawyers use to
say: Truth may not be trodden underfoot with a counterfaite show. Of the
weakness of this book, the Papists themselves sufficiently know, and he that
is ignorant thereof, let him read Kemnisius against the Tridentine council in
his Historia Purgatorii, cap. 20. sess. 8. I will no longer detain you (good
people) in these purgatory matters: only I tell you, such warrant has all
the rest of their profession, for their imagined purgatory, out of which they
say men's souls shall once come, but they know not when. No, no, the second
death is the only receptacle of them, that go not to heaven, where they
shall be holden remediless until the last resurrection. And this is the power
of the second death. Against this the papists also say, that after life there
is forgiveness of sins, to this mixed company, which is obtained by their
friends, and merits of the Church, for them. But (beloved) this is their
dream against the truth of the scripture, and the judgments of their best
doctors, both which affirm plainly, that after natural death, there is no
remission of sins to the departed. Wherefore David (in his life time) prays,
Psalm. 39.13.
O Lord stay thine anger from me, that I may recover my strength before I go
hence, and be not.

The parable of the wise, Matthew. 25.
and foolish virgin, is set down of Christ to prove this. and how fares it
with them? The wiser sort take Oil with them: They love, and live a Christian
life, while they have time in this world, and therefore their own works do
follow them: and present themselves, as a witness to the parties faith, and
are crowned with mercy: Come ye blessed of my Father, when I was an hungry,
you fed me. But the foolish Virgins, though of the same calling, Virgins,
the same profession to bear the lamp: Yet, because they were careless of
Gods holy spirit, and thereby had no lights before men, of Godly labors in
good works (the true trial of a liuelye faith) but have committed that unto
their friends, for them. These (I say) wanting true obedience to GOD, who has
said, Matt. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good works, may
glory your Father which is in Heaven, had a boundance of carnalitie, with them.

1. Tim. 5.24.
These their evil works, as some went before, and some followed them, unto
Iudgmente: so, they (after life) could have none other answer to their cry,
Matt. 25.13
(Lord open to us) but this: depart ye cursed, I know you not. As many of
you, here present, therefore, as long after life: seek the Lord while he is
to be found, before your natural death. While ye have the light (says Christ
our Lord) walk in the light: For darkness will come, wherein no man can
walk. And his Apostle Paul says, Galat. 6.6.
While we have time, let us do good to all men: but he says, while we have
time, which time is, yt we possess in this life, and not others for us after
it. To this doctrine the ancient writers subscribe their hearts, and have
left their hands with us, yea even such fathers, as ye papists approve for
saints, and their writings equal to the holy scriptures.

And first touching the sentence of David before cited, videlicet: Lord stay
thine anger from me. etc. Ambrose Ambrosius To. 1. li de B^. Mor. c. 2. page
243
says, Qui enim hic non accipit, etc.

Truly he ye receives not forgiveness of his sins, in this life, shall not
be there. He shall not be there. Why? for he can not possibly come to eternal
life, because life eternal depends upon the forgiveness of sins. And
therefore David prayed, Forgive me Lord, that I may be comforted, before I go
hence. Thus far Ambrose. Hierome a priest of Rome, and one of the four
Evangelists of that Synagogue, upon the same text, writing upon Esaias, says:
Hier. in Esa. to. 5. cap. 65 Pa. 244. b.
He that whilst he here lives, Dum in hoc corpore viuit) has not obtained
forgiveness of his sins, but has without such remission, departed this
life, he perishes to God, and ceasseth to be: although he continue to
himself, in pain and torments. And as touching the second scripture: Dum
tempus habemus, Hierome says of it: This our present life, is the seed time
for us to sow, whatsoever we will (says Hierome:) but when this life is
passed, and gone from us, then is the time of good working taken away also.
Augustine says hereof, In futuro solism est remuneratio, In the life to come
there is only recompense and condemnation: but in this life, our sins are
either bound up or loosed. And that learned Cyprian says expressly: When our
departure shall be herehence, there is left no place for repentance or power
of any satisfaction. No says Augustine ad Hesichium: Aug. ad Hefic. To. 2.
epi. 80. fol. 350.
For in what state soever at the last day of man's life, death shall sinde him:
in the same state and condition, the last day of the world, shall comprehend
him. Quoniam qualis in die isto quisque moritur, talis in illo die iudicabitur:
For in what case soever a man at his last day, shall die, in the same case and
state, shall the Lord judge him, at the great day. From all these places, and
witnesses then (beloved) ye see, that neither popish prayer, Romish masses,
deadly diriges, frivolous alms, or paltrie pardons, pains in purgatory, or
popish pardons can any whit alter the state and condition of the persons once
dead: but such works as they themselves carried with them, such shall they rise
withal unto their judgment: whether lamps of loving faith, to the praise of
God, or cressettes of corruption, to their own condemnation. And thus I will
conclude, with the spirit of Gods sentence, our best moderator, and so pass
to the last branch. Io. 5.28.
Marvel not at this (says Christ) for the hour shall come, in the which all
that are in the graves, shall hear his voice: And they shall come forth, that
have done good unto the resurrection of life: But they that have done evil,
unto the resurrection of condemnation. The same assurance of doctrine, Gods
spirit, by Paul does deliver us saying: 2. Cor. 5.10.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or evil.

Note well this doctrine, and amend your lives, rest not upon the doubtful
doctrine, of popery (O dearly bought children of GOD) but fix your faith, in
this absolute doctrine of sound warrant, which is yea, and amen Then here you
may perceive, that after death there is no temporary prison, as Popish
purgatory but a perpetual lake of fire, which is ye second death: And also,
yt after this life, there is no remission of sins to any that has not obtained
that grace, during this time of repentance. But even in what state the soul
departs from the body, at the coming of death: even unchanged, he retyreth
to the same body at the last, for the deeds done by himself, and not for the
works of any other done after him: And to receive his judgment, whether
through faith (in her fruits) unto life, in Christ, or because of sin and
Satan, to eternal death. This is the sound, and sure doctrine of our good
God. But as for the gainefull and paineful preaching of popery, and her
purgatory, as a most venomous Serpente, flee from it: that you may escape the
second death, and be partakers of the felicity of the just, which our text
says, is this: For they shall be the priests of God and Christ, and shall
reign with him a thousand years.

Cicero has said, that true beatitude or blessedness consists of two
parts: Namely, to be free from al kind of want and misery: and so to abound
in all goodness, that on no part he needs to ask further. Surely this very
happiness shall come to all those, which be partakers of the first
resurrection. First, they shall be free from all woe and misery, in the end
of their course: for the second death, shall have no power of them. And they
shall abound in all felicity: for they are blessed, and holy, and shall
therefore reign with Christ for ever more. And here again (beloved) note with
me, what it is, to be blessed and holy. Namely, to have forgiveness of our
sins in Christ's death: Heb. 9.
and by the same, to be purged and segregated from dead works, to serve the
living God. Psalm. 32.1.2. Romans 4.7.8.
Blessed are they (says David) whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins
are covered: blessed is the man to whom the Lord does not impute sin. And
then again note, who they be that are so blessed, by Gods censure here: mark
it well, and thou shall see it: Not they, that live so uprightly, that God has
not any thing, to lay to their charges: for none such can be found amongst
the sons of men. For what is he, that lives and sins not, yea, more then
seven times a day? Psalm. 14.1. and 53.4.
No flesh is righteous in Gods sight: for all have sinned, Romans 3.23.
all have gone out of the way, every man his severed course: this, after this
sin, another, after that, and all are therefore deprived of the glory of God:
Dan. 9.5.
All are taught to cry, We and our fathers have sinned, we have done unjustly,
but deal not with us, O Lord, in thine anger, for then we perish: but in the
multitude of thy mercies, have thou mercy upon us, and forgive us our
trespasses. And herein consists the felicity of the just, that they have
feeling hearts of sin, and penitent spirits for their transgressions:
humbled souls, void of hypocrisy, before the Almighty God, confessing with
tears, in great remorse and agonies, their heaps of corruptions, before him:
Even Marie Christ's mother, the Apostles and all the four elect of God. Then
are these mixed persons (whom the Papists make the third sort, to go to
purgatory) only they which are blessed, and are the whole number of the
elect. All which as they confess them selves; worthy the second death,
because of Sin, and no ways can merit eternal life, because their best
works are full of corruption: So they mightily triumph over sin, Esa. 30.22.
death and hell: because they are purged in the blood of the lamb, Revel.
7.14.
and have their garments made white, are pardoned, of their former sins, by
faith, in his blood, and are sanctified unto godliness. Yea, so long as they
live, they confess: because they feel the burden of sin in them, but they
rejoice in this felicity, that his spirit works in them an ardent zeal,
and burninge desire, to live in godliness and honesty, according to such
portion, as the Lord does give them, in their part of the first resurrection.
And he that sees not this, nor has the practice of the premises, is blind
and has forgotten the purgation of sins.

Last of all, forget not, this our Apostle does not say, Blessed is he, 2. Pet.
1.9*
which has perfection in the first resurrection: but, blessed is he, that
has his part in the first resurrection. So as, though there be in us, yet the
remnauntes of sin, and we can not quite shake off, that which cleaves so
fast on, Heb. 12.1.
or fully creep, from that burden, that presses so hard upon us: (and
therefore always of this sort, that are before called mixed) yet that
Mediocritie or mixture, can not send us to the second death, if we have our
part, in the first resurrection. But I would not leave thy conscience to bare
affirmations. There be very sound reasons to draw thy confidence to this
comfort. 1. Reason.
The first is, the great mercy and rich clemency of God the father, whose
mercy has been such toward us, that when we were his enemies, through
sin, he has even then reconciled us to himself, by his grace: how much
more therefore now, shall he esteem us for his, and embrace us with his arms
of mercy, seeing, we being so reconciled, seek for his spirit to dwell in
his love? If he from his wrath delivered us, when we had no care of him: shall
he not much more now deliver us, show a part thereof (which they say, is
purgatory) now that our chief desire is, to seek after him: and do lament,
at the very heart, that daily we so grieve him by our sin? This I take to be
Paul's comfort to us, where he says: But God sets out his love toward us,
Romans 5.8.9.10.
seeing that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us: much more then,
being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath, through him.
For, if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his
son: much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.

2 The second argument is of the absolute sacrifice of Christ, Gods son, for
us. we cannot fall from natural death, into popish purgatory, which are graft
into his death: for the same has fully satisfied the justice of God for us,
pacified his anger, and obtained us eternal redemption. 1. Pet. 3.18.
For Christ also has once suffered (says Peter,) ye just for the unjust, that
he might (not send us to purgatory, but) bring us to God. And this Christ in
his own body, bare our sins, on the tree, 1. Pet. 2.24
that being delivered from sin (then of good consequent, from the reward of
sin, which is death) we should live in righteousness: by whose stripes
(and not by popish purgatories purging) we are soundly healed. The fathers
wrath, in this sacrifice, is fully pacified: for he has given us twice warrant
thereof, by his own voice, saing: 1. Pet. 2.24. Mat. 3.17. and 17.5. 1. Pet.
1.17.
This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. It rests therefore,
according to our heavenly fathers commandment, that we only hear, and
believe him. No fear of death, or judgment to hell, (much less to
purgatory) can come then to us, which live in the first resurrection by newnes
of life. For the Lord our redemer, has paid the full price of our ransom,
and is therefore our Lutron and Lutrosis, so as, the uttermost farthing is
tendered to Gods justice in his death, for man's sin, not by petition of
sparing, or bearing for day of further payment, Matt. 20.
but by his blood he has paid himself once for all, a full and absolute
price for our redemption, to his father, Col. 2.14.15
and has therefore, triumphed on the cross against principalities and powers,
and has taken us, in his victory from the hands of captivity, and
translated us into his grace, putting out the whole hand writing that was
against us. Totum Chyrographum, he has taken away, the whole obligation, not
part of it, in discharge of our debts, that be graft in him. And therefore
there can not remain a remnaunt of redemption for our selves, in a popish
purgatory: For, to suppose this, were the greatest injury that could be, to
the blood of our full ransom Jesus Christ.

Last of all, ye promise of Gods mouth which can not lie (whose words are
always yea, and shall be always true, though heaven and earth run together,
to perform them) is a further assurance to the conscience, of the godly man,
that he shall pass from death, presently unto life. For their purgatory is
(say they) but to punish those sins, which at a man's death, remain
unpardoned, and not purged before. But to the penitent God says thus: At what
time so ever a sinner does repent him of his sin, Ezech. 18.
from the bottom of his heart, at that time will I (says the Lord) I, (shall
the Pope then punish?) put all, (and not part of) his wickedness out of my
remembrance. And our savior Christ, Io. 6.
has promised us (which is the author of truth) He that believes in me, yea,
though he were dead, yet shall he live. And he that believes in me, has
everlasting life. Again, that which above all other, is most plain: He that
believes in me, Io. 5.24.
shall not come into condemnation: but has passed from death to life. Here is
plain pardon and free immunitie, from judge and jailer, or corpus capias, to
bring to the bar, for them that die in the true faith of the Lord: for they
are blessed and holy, and shall not see death, but shall be presently taken up to
life, to be the priests of God, and Christ, to reign with him for evermore.

But now to end this my tedious labor, (O my dear brethren) both tyring you,
and much toyling my self gods spirit does here tell us, how the faithful
(whose sins, Psa. 32.1.2.
though they have many, are not laid to their charge) are so far, from being
plunged in a popish purgatory, that far contrary they are exalted into the
height of heaven, and called to the company of those sanctified souls, which
daily follow ye lamb, and offer up to God the holy sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, for their redemption in the blood of the Lamb saying: Apoc.
7.12.
Amen. Praise and glory, and wisdom and thanks, and honor and power, and
might be unto God, for ever more, Amen. These are they, which came out of great
tribulations (says the elder unto John) and have washed their robes white, in
the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they in the presence of ye throne of God,
and serve him day and night in his temple, and he that sits on the Throne
will dwell among them. This is not a paineful purgatory, for it follows, They
shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the sun light on
them, neither any heat (therefore no hott purgatory fire:) for ye Lamb which
is in the midst of the Throne, shall govern them, and shall lead them unto the
lively fountains of waters, and God shall wipe al tears away from their eyes.
Behold here a most blessed felicity, god grant us all that be here to day,
(if it be his blessed will) to be partakers hereof. And now something to say of
this reverend person, whose christian corpse does lie yet before us, according
to the truth of his demerit with man, and for whose sake, we are here assembled.
Somewhat I knew the man my self: But I am further assured of him, by such as
do not fawn, but truly fear ye Lord: That he was according to gods
providence, born unto Christ, he has been trained up, in Christianity, and
mercifully called, from ye pestilent sink of popery, and from his first
feeling of Christ, has ever constantly in heart, embraced true religion, and
very comfortably, made confession thereof, in ye whole course of his life, so as
his handworking, has borne good testimony of his believing heart: and has so
uprightly received these great blessings cast unto him of God, that this offer
is made by such as it does most concern: If any man be able justly to charge
him, to have at any time willingly done wrong to him, or by brybery in his
office, to have enriched himself, upon due proof hereof, Zacheus tribute
shall be paid unto him: that is, he shall be restored four fold. And though
this man had his imperfectio^s with ye sons of god: yet he comfortably felt his
beatitude, in his savior Christ, even ye forgiveness of his sins, in the mercy
of God, through him: and therefore as he lived a partaker of the first
resurrection: so he ended this life without fear of the second death. And as
he saw with holy Symeon, the Lord Christ to be only his salvation: So, we may
pronounce of him, with good confidence, that his soul does rest in peace. And
no doubt, it is taken up of Angels, unto the mount Syon, the city of the
living God, the celestial Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22.
and to ye company of innumerable Angels, and to the congregation of the first
born, which are written in heaven, and to god the judge of all: and to Jesus
the mediator of the new Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling, that
speaks better things, then that of Habell. For it asks vengeance, more
forcibly to the wicked, and promises life, and pardon most assuredly to the
sons of GOD. Wherefore to thee our dear father, our savior Christ, and the
holy ghost, three persons distinct, but one immortal god, be all glory,
wisdom, thanks, honor, power and might, for ever more. Amen.

Lauds Deo, per Christum seruatorem nostrum.

