THE ABATEMENT OF POPISH BRAGGS, PRETENDING SCRIPTVRE TO BE THEIRS.

RETORTED BY THE HAND OF ALEXANDER COOK.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES dwelling in Red-Crosse-streete. 1625.

TO ALL LAY PAPISTS IN THIS KINGDOM.
Dear Countrymen and seduced brethren, I religiously protest, I honor some
of you; and love all of you. Grieuing in my very soul: that you, and I,
acknowledging one and the self same true God, cannot hit upon the worshipping
of him after one and the self same true manner: Oh that I might live to see
the day wherein we might agree in one! But I have small hope to see it, as long
as you suffer your Priest, to bring you in bondage, to devour you, to take
your goods: as the 2. Cor. 11. 20
Corinthians suffered the false Apostles to ferue them. -- Por, as the Esaias. 9.
16.
leaders of the people caused Israel to err: and their Ie^. ^0. 6^
shepherds caused them to go astray, and turned them away to the mountains:
so it is your Priests that have misled you; and that they may make merchandise
of you, as the false Prophets (who in 2. Pat. 2. 1* 2* 3
St. Peter's days taught damnable heresies) made of them, who followed their
destruction, it is your Priests who do hinder your return into the right way.
To alienate your affections from us, they tell you: That we teach, Campi^n.
rat. 8
All sins are equal. Rhem. Annot at. marg. in Luk 6. 1. and 1. Pet. 3. 19
All Scripture is very easy. That we maintain the heresy of the Bell. de
not. i.c. chlib. 4. c. 9.
Simonians, which was: that men might be saved by the grace of Simon Magus: and
the heresy of the ibid.
Eunomians, which was: Austin lib. de hares^. 54.
That whosoever believed one especial point of doctrine which they beleeusd,
viz. That the Son of God is altogether unlike the Father: and the Holy Ghost
unlike the Son: could not possibly be damned, how damnably soever he lived.
They report we maintain the her esy of the ibid.
Repusians, which was: That women might be Priested: and one of the heresiesof
ibid.
Iouinian, which was: That a man truly baptized could sin no more: and
another of the same man's, which was: ibid.
That the Virgin Mary at the time of her childbirth lost her virginity. They
report we maintain, that heresy of Vigilantius, which was: ibid.
That Clergy men ought of necessity to be married. and that of the Pelagtans,
viz: ibid.
That the children of the faithful are not tainted with original sin: and
that of the Graecians, viz: Idem lib. 1. de funct beatit. Cap. 2. ct 4.
That just men shall not see the face of god before the day of dome: and that
of the Pseudo apostoli, which was N. D. in his 2. part of 3. conuers chapt. 2.
sect. 14.
That only faith is sufficient to salvation without works: and that of the
chapt. 3. sect. 6. 1 ibid.
Nouatians, which consisted in dening the Churches power to forgive sins: and
that of the Aerians, to wit, That solemn fasts are not to be appointed by the
Church. They would make you believe, Rehm. Annot. Heb. 7. 17.
we plainly deny Melchizedech to have been a Priest, That we teach, Annot. in
Mat. 19. 16.
God can do no more then he has done, or will do. That Annot. in Mark 1. 8.
water in Baptism is not necessary. That Annot. in 2. Pet. 1. 15.
we abhor the prayers of the Saints. That Annot. in 2. Pet. 2. 18.
we take away penance, fasting, chastity, keeping of vows, necessity of good
works, obedience to Ecclesiastical persons. Gagge of the new Gospel. Nu. 16.
That it is not in our power to choose evil. Idem. Nu. 26.
That the Angels cannot help us. Idem. Nu. 27.
That no saint deceased has afterward appeared to any in earth. Idem Nu. 40.
That fasting is not grounded upon scripture: no Idem Nu 46.
nor blessing. and in brief (to pass by many other) some of them are not
ashamed to say, we believe Rossaus lib. de iusta Reip. Christ in reges impias
^t haret authoritate cap. 4. Nu. 6.
the souls of men are mortal: ibid.
and that there is no resurection: and Cope deal 6. c. 21.
that Christ Jesus is not come in the flesh, from all which errors, heresies
and blasphemies we are as far as they are from truth and honesty. On the
other side, to win your affections to the^, they See the book page
bear you in hand, that the Scriptures, the Fathers, the Counsels, are all
yours: that Campian. rat. 10.
Heaven: yea Hell: the gates of Cities: the glasse-windowes in Churches: res et
reculae, give testimony to your Religion. Whereas yet they dare not refer the
judgment of such differences asare between us, either to Scripture, or
Fathers, or Counsels: but only to the Greg. de valent Analys. fid. Cathol.
lib. 5. cap. 1. page 18.
present Church, which is all one in effect, as if they referred it unto
themselves, or to your Pope: they being, in their opinion, the Church
representative: the Pope being the Church virtually, Idem lib. 7. Assertio
probanda.
who only has power to judge of controversies. Now do you not smell there is
some pad in the straw by their devilish slaundring of us: and their cogging
with you? I pass by their restraining you from reading any of ourbookes,
especially the Bible of our translation, though Gagge of the new Gospel.
preface to the Catholic Reader.
one of them of late assures you, That our condemnation is so expressly set down
in our own Bibles, and is so clear to all the world, that nothing more needs
hereto, but only that you know to read, and to have your eyes in your heads
at the opening of our Bible: which might give you occasion to suspect some
falsehood: for if our condemnation be so expressly set down in them, why may
not you for your greater comfort read them? Only I wish you would be pleased
to consider seriously, whether it be likely they had any honest meaning in
making their Indices Expurgatorios: and forbidding you to read books written
by your own friends, till they had patched something into them, which might
make for you* and torn out of them, whatsoever they thought did make against
you. Me thinks (considering your many good moral parts) you should not be so
stupid, as not to perceive: or so blind, as not to see there is some my stery
of iniquity in it, that you may neither read what your friends, or foes have
written. Quidam senex etc, A certain old man (as Discip. de Te^p. ser. 121.
one of your own writers) being asked by one who had a purpose to betake
himself into a Monastery, how he should carry himself after his admission,
answered him in good earnest* Tuet Asinus vnum estote. Carry thy self like an
Ass, refuse no burden that is laid upon thy back. Do not groan at it. For
my part I fear they would make Asses of you all. They would have you to
receive hand over head whatsoever they reach you: to believe (without search)
whatsoever they tell you. But as some of you are Noble Gentlemen, others of you
good fellows; be not Asse*fied by them. Remember that you are men, men of
understanding, and able to judge of reason when you hear it. Believe none of
your Priests upon their bare words, without proof: but especially take heed
how you lightly believe your ordinary Mass Priests: for in truth, the most of
them are ignorant Sir John's, not much unlike the Seo Fox Ac^s
Bishop of Dunkelden, who thanked God, he never knew what the old and new
Testament was. The most of them are not and Mon. in Hen. 8. Treatise of the
persecution in Scotland.
much guilty of learning. Take hearts unto you (beloved Countrymen) and read
our books, and our Bibles: my soul for yours, you may do it with good
consciences, and with much profit to your selves. But if you cannot be
persuaded thereunto: yet let me entreat this of you, that you will forbear to
censure either our books, or our persons, upon your Priests bare information.
For their words are no Gospel: their tongues no slander. And that you would
remember that of g Tertullian, Quid q Apologet. Cap. 1.
iniquius quam vt oderint homines quod ignorant; etiamsi res mereatur odium.
Tuncenim meretur, cum cognoscitur an mereatur. Vacant aute^ meriti notitia,
vnde odij iustitia defenditur, quae non deeventu, sed de conscientia probanda
est? with which I end, wishing to you all as to my self, a comfortable life,
and blessed death.

Leeds in Yorkshire May 20. 1625. ALEXANDER COOK.

A DIALOGVE BETWIXT A PROTESTANT AND A PAPIST: Wherein is manifested, the
Papists Brag, that Scripture makes for them.
Protestant. OH well met once again! where have you bin that I never saw you
since we talked about Pope Ioane? Are you the same man for Religion, that you
was then?


Papist. Yea truly, or rather more resolute, and confident.


Prot. What new arguments have you lighted on to increase your resolution and
confidence? for my part, I am every day further out of love with your Religion,
then other.


Pa. The Arguments which have doubled my resolution and confidence are diverse,
whereof the first is this: Allen Apology of the Seminaries, c. 5. f. 58
That I find sentence given for us Catholics against you Protestants in all the
Tribunals of Gods Church, I find that all the Writings of the Saints in Heaven
profess for us.


Prot. What? the Writings of the Prophets and of the Apostles? and of the
Fathers in the Primitive Church? and of the Councels? Do you find that all
profess for you?


Pa. Yea, all of them: Campian, rat, 10.
Quaecunque vel opera, vel fragmenta supersunt eorum qui disiunctissimis terris
Euangelium seuerunt, omnes nobis vnam fidem exhibent quam hodie Catholici
profitemur. There is not a book, nor a piece of a book extant, written by the
first Preachers of the Gospel, whenever, or how far so ever they lived one
from another, but it gives witness to the Catholic Faith which we profess
at this day.


Prot. Can you make proof thereof unto me, and I will be of your Religion?


Pa. That I can; and I will first begin with Scriptures: for I am of Rock of
the Church, Chapter 8. p. 193.
Doctor Saunders opinion, That there are most plain Scriptures in all points
for the Catholic Faith, and none at all against the same. And of Motive 48.
Doctor Bristoes mind, whose words these are; Most certain it is, that from
the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Apocalips there is no Text that
makes for you, nor against us but all for us.


Prot. Say you so? Verily, and if the Scriptures be for you, I will be with
you: for I like well of Epist. 80.
Saint Basils motion to one with whom he had a controversy; Stemus arbitratu
inspiratae a Deo Scriptura, and apud quos inueniuntur dogmata diuinis oraculis
consona, illis omnino veritas adiudicetur sententiae. Let us stand to the
arbiterment of holy Scripture, and let them be thought to have the truth on
their side whose opinions are found to be agreeable to Scriptures. But let me
tell you a word or two by the way, and they are these* viz. That you are not
more thoroughly persuaded of the truth of your two Doctors speeches, then I am of
a Gentlemuns speech of our Religion, who being importuned by an idle
Questionist of your side, to tell where our Religion was before Luthers time,
returned him this answer* That our Religion was always in the Bible, where
your Religion never was. In which persuasion I am the more confirmed by this,
That there Test Espentao Comment. in Tit. c. 1. p. 104. 105.
are of your selves (no fools I wisse) who write, that some among you, Poene
peceatum putant Scripturas legere, ne sic siant haeretici: Do think it almost
a sin to read the Scriptures, least by reading of them they should prove
heretics. For if your Religion were in the Bible, and that in so plain manner
as you brag, why should any of you be so afraid of opening a Bible* why did
one of your Apud Hassenmullerum. Hist. Jesuit. ord. cap. ^ p. 428.
Jesuits confess, that Lectis Bebliotu^t cicius haereticum Lutheranum, quam
Catholicum Romanum facit: The reading of the Bible makes rather Heretical
Lutherans, then Romau Catholics? Why suffer you this marginal Note, Conc. 3.
de Lazaro; printed at Basil 1530.
Nunc ex^^udit haresies, to be set over these words of Chrysosta^^, ^g^oratio
scripturarum peperit haereses.


Pa. I mean not to take upon me the justifying of every man's private conceits
or speeches; but what I my self have said, all that shall be made good. I
will prove unto you the troth of our Religion by the Bible.


Prot. Now (indeed) I am afraid you are bewitched with that damnable opinion,
which of later years has run currantly among you, viz. Sunt Pighius
Hierarch. Eccles. l. 3. ^. 3. and 5. c. 3. Simanea Instit. Cathol. c. 57. nu.
12.
scriptura V^lut nasus cereus, qui se her sum, illorsum, and in quam volueris
partem trahi, retrahi, fingique facile permittit, and tanquam plumbea quadam
Lesbi^ ^disicationis regula, quam no^ (...) difficile accommodare ad quiduis
volueris. The Scriptures are like a nose of wax, which may be writhen this
way, or that way, backward, or forward as a manwould would have it. And with
that of Quintinus the Parisian In Arg. lib. de pr^scip^. adu. here. per Tertul.
Doctor, commended by Pamelius, who writes thus. Not* in Tertul* de pr^scrip.
adu* har^t. c. 39. nu. 237. iuxta edit. Pamel.
Tam facile est, im^ facilius est adres profanas and impias pr^bandas
detorquere sanctam scripturam, quam facile est and pedibus, ac semi-pedibus aut
penthememeribus Virgilianis Epithalmia, sen quiduis aliud in vnum congerere. It
is as casie, yea it is more easy to wrest the Scripture to the proving of any
villainy or impiety: then to make a Love Song, by snatching here a patch and
there a patch of a Verse out of Virgil. And that in confidence hereof you hope
to make a show of somewhat out of the Bible for the proving of your Religion:
otherwise I know not what should move you to begin with Scripture. You have
forgotten (I believe) that Moti^s 48.
Doctor Bristow describing the means to make plain demonstration, that
Heretics have no evidence, but you all, advises his Agents to labor still to
get the Heretics out of their weak and false Castle of holy Scripture, into
the plaint fields of Councels and Fathers. For all his bragging of the
Scriptures, he put but a little trust in them: he was loath to have them in
the foreward.


Pa. But I am content they match in the foreward, if you will believe me.


Prot. Why, but I pray you then place the best foremost. And if we fall into
dispute with Saint Peter's Supremacy, trouble me not with such Texts as some
of your n Simanea Institut. Cathol. c. 44. nu. 2. and 3. impres. Valissoleti.
A. 1552.
Rabbis allege for it. Tell me not that our Savior Christ said unto S. Peter
only, Duc in altum: Launch into the deep. No^ potuisti vna hora vigilare
mecum? Could thou not watch one hour with me? Sequere me, Follow me.
Neither tell me in way of proving the same, That S. Peter cut off Malous care.
And if from that we fall to argue about your Popes omnipotency, allege me not
the first verse of the first Chapter of Genesis for it, as your Extro. de
Maeiori. and obed. Cap. vna^ sanctam
Pope Boniface the eight did: neither yet the sixteenth verse of the said
Chapter, as another of your Popes, even Extra de Maeiorit. and obed. Cap s^lita.
Innocentius the third did. Nor that in Jeremy, Chap. 1. v. 10. as the same
Innocentius Ibid.
did. Let me notheere out of your mouth, as making to that purpose, That the
spiritual man judges all things, and himself is judged of no man. Lo: Two
swords here. Return thy sowrd into his place. Know you not that we shall judge
the Angels? which are the special Texts whereon your Loca supra Citato.
Boniface rested. Neither would I willingly hear of Sentron
Baronius Text, Act. 10. Kill and eat. For that which Ibid.
Polidore Virgil observed to be the trick of Popish Canonists is found
practiced by those whomake* these Arguments. viz. Non secus ists aliquoties
de^^^quent sacr as scriptur as quo volunt, ac sutores for did as solent
dentibus extendere pelles. These Canonists do^ now and then stretch the
Scriptures to their purpose, as shooemakers do their greasy ouer-leathers
with their teeth.


Pa. Some of these Texts afford Arguments good enough for the conclusions for
which they are brought. Yet fear not you: for I mean not to trouble you with
any of them.


Prot. Neither, if we ahue occasion to talk of Communicating in one kind,
will you (I hope) Roffens. adu. Luth. Act. 16. Eckius in Enchirid. Tit. de
Communione sub altera specie.
allege unto me, for proof of your practice, the words in our Pater Noster,
Give us this day our daily bread. Nor Bell. 4. de Euch* Cap. 24.
tell me, That our Savior Christ, Ioh. 6. multiplied l^aues, but multiplied no
drink. Nor Eckius loco citato.
cite 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8. Our Pasch Christ is immolated. Let us therefore feast in
the Azymes of sincerity and verity. And if we fall to argue by case, whether
it be meet that boys and wenches should make Monkish vows of obedience,
poucrtie, and chastity: you will not press me with such Texts as lib. 2. de
Monach. Cap. 35.
Bellarmine stands upon, where he disputes the point. You will not tell me, It
is written by Jeremy, Lament. 3. 27. It is good for a man to bear the yoke
from his youth. And that our Savior Christ said, Matthew. 19. 14. Suffer little
children to come unto me. Neither will you in way of proving, That boys and
wenches may enter into Monasteries against their parents minds: allege that
Text in Genesis 12. Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from
thy fathers (...) Nor that in Deuteronomy. 33. 9. He that said unto his father and to
his mother, I know you not, etc. Not that in the Psalm 45. 10. Forget thine
own people, and thy fathers house, and the King shall have pleasure in thy
beauty. Nor that in S. Matthew. 10. 37. He that loves father or mother more
then me, is not worthy of me. Nor that in S. Luke 9. 60. etc. Let the dead
bury the dead. Which are the only Scriptures alleged by Lib. 2. de Minach.
Cap. 36.
Bellarmine in that Controversy. For these Texts are so far from proving any
such couclusions, that a man may truly swear, He and his with had made a fray
who alleged them.


Pa. I will not trouble you with this neither.


Prot. Nor with that, Matthew. 7. 6. Give ye not that which is holy to dogs, in
way of proving: Staphylus in Apolog.
That ignorant persons may not read the Scriptures. Nor with that in Genesis.
God for Adams sin cursed the earth, but not the water, in way of proving.
English Festiual feria 4. post fostum palmaru^.
That it is lawful for a man to eat Fish in Lent, but not Flesh. You will make
me no such Conclusions as these. Ledesma de divine script* quauis lingua non
legend. C. 22.
Our Savior Luke 4. opened the book and read a few verses in it, and
afterward closed it. Ergo, Divine Service is not to be said in a known
language. Innocent. 1. ^^pist. ad E^uperi^^ vide Gratian d. 82. proposui^l^.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. Ergo, Ministers of the Gospel may not lie with
their wives. God Bell. l. 1. de sanct, beatit. Cap. 20.
said unto Jobs friends, Go unto my servant Job. Ergo, Scripture affords a
particular precept, binding men to Invocation of Saints. Ibid.
God told Jobs friends, That Job should pray for them. Ergo, the Scripture
affords a particular example of praying to Saints. Ibid.
God promised Jobs friends, That he would accept of Jobs prayer, etc. Ergo,
The Scripture affords a particular example of blessing to such as pray to
Saints. Greg. de valeu^ia de Idol^lat. Chap. 7.
S. Peter condemns the unlawful service of Idols, 1 Pet. 4. 3. Ergo, some
Idolatry is lawful. 1. Cor. 6. 4
S. Paul commands to set the contemptible in the Church to judge. Bell. l. 5.
Romans Pont. Cap. 7.
Ergo, The ancient Christians might, if their abilities had served, have
deposed from the Empire both the Heathen and Heretical Emperors.


Pa. The Conclusions which I will make shall arise naturally from the Text: for
they shall be drawn from the express words, which are one thousand times
more clear for us, then they are for you, as Apol. of the English Sem. fol. 57.
Cardinal Allen affirms. Yea, very many of the Texts which I will cite, shall
be so open and evident, that unless you deny them to be text of Scripture,
you shall not be able to avoid them, and the rest shall be Answer to M.
Charkspref. p. 57
such as you cannot shift without glozes and fond interpretations of your own.


Prot. Perhaps you will take them to be open and evident for your purpose,
which neither seem to me: nor are indeed such in themselves. You know the
Proverb; As the fool thinks, so the bell ringeth. I doubt not but those
Districtis^imi Monachi.
Puritan Monks, Ioh. de Polemar. Orat. in Cone Basil apud Binnium (...) 4.
Conc. p. 385.
who made themselves wooden Crosses, and carried them on their backs
continually, making all the world laugh at them, thought the Text, Matthew. 10.
He that takes not a Cross, and follows me, is not worthy of me: a plain
and worthy Text for the approving of their practice. And it may be that the
Frenchmen, Test Azono To. 2. Instit. Moral. lib. 11. Cap. 2. 14. quaritur.
who for the proof of their Salike-Law, alleged the words of our Savior, Luke
12. 27. Considerate Lilia quomodo crescunt: non laborant, ne que nent. Consider
the Lillies of the field how they grow, they labor not, neither do they spin:
concluding thereon, Lilia Francorum non deberi nisi nebilibus qui non laborant:
nec deberi nisi masculis qui non nent. That the Flower-de-luces of France
(meaning the Crown of France) belongs to none but Nobles, who work not for
their living; and those men, not women (who are Spinsters) thought they had a
good text in hand for their purpose. Certainly your lousie S. Francit, was not
ashamed to say, that the words of our Savior, Matthew. 25. 40. Quod vni ex
minoribus meis fecistis, mihi fecistis. Whatsoever you have done to one of
these little ones, you have done it unto me: were spoken by him Lib.
Conformitat. B. Francise^ per Pi saum ^di. Bonon. 1590. l. ^. Fructus. 1. fol.
13. Col. 3.
specialiter, yea Lib. 1. Fructius fol. 113. Col. 3
ad literam, of his Frier-Minorits. And your Lib. 1. Fructus 9. fol. 127. Col.
3.
Pisanus Writer of that lousie Friars Alcaron will needs threaten us down,
That the words of S. Paul, Galat. 6. 16. As many as walk according to this
Rule, peace shall be upon them and mercy: were meant of Francis his rule. Have
you not read that a Sorbonist finding it written at the end of S. Paul's
Epistles, Missa est, etc. Be Hyue cap. 3. fol. 93. 94.
bragd he had found the Mass in his Bible? And that another reading in S. John
1. 42. inuenimus Messiam, x drew thence the same conclusion. In Test Stella de
modo Concionandi cap. 6.
Salaminca a Friar took upon him to prove, That the name of the Virgin Mary
was spoken of Genesis 1. where we read, that God called the gatherings together
of the waters Maria. I doubt not but he thought it an open and evident text for
his turn. Test Malanthont. Oral. de (...) Elequentia.
In another place, another Friar speaking of the words, Ge. 14. 18. Rex Salem
panem ac vinu^ pertulit: fell into a long discourse of the nature of Salt.* the
nature of Salt. ^ believe he could hardly have been persuaded that Salem there,
had not signified Salt. Your D. Poynes who writes, Preface to his book of the
Sacram.
That it was foretold in the Old Testament, That the Protestants were a
malignant Church, alleging for proof thereof, 2. Chr. 24. 19. where,
according to our vulgar Translation we read thus, Mittebatque prophet as vt
reuerterentur ad Dominum, quos protestants illi audire nolebant, thought an
hundred for one, that the text was plain. And it may be that Parish Priest of
years, who being at controversy with his Parishioners about pauing some plot
of ground, and alleging the words in Ier. 17. 18. to prove that he was not
bound to paue any place, saying: Paueant illi, ego non paueant: was not in
jest, but in good earnest, thinking the letter of the text made evidently for
him. Verily I am persuaded, that that See Sixth. Senens. Bibl. Sanctae l. 5.
Annot. 116.
Painter, whosoever he was, who first painted Moses with a pair of horns:
making him, as the Jews say, like a devil: thought the text in Exodus 34. 30.
where you read, Faciem Moses esse cornutam, Moses face was horned; a plain
warrant for his picturing him so. And I make no question, d Theodorus Stadytus
Epi. 4. ad Naucratium qua extat. To. 3. Bibl. vel pal. Edit. 3. Col. 216.
but d they who make the world believe they have the two keys of S. Peter at
Rome, showing them sometimes that they may be adored: if they were urged to
make proof how S. Peter came by those keys, would allege the words of the
Evangelist, To thee will I give the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, as an open
and evident text for that matter.


Pa. What ado make you about had I wists? I tell you once again, Grounds of
the New Religion, part. 2. cap. 18. p. 197.
The Scriptures which I will allege shall be plain, and the expositions such,
as you shall take no acceptions against. For, for the the truth of our
expositions of holy Scripture, we have the continual tradition of the Church:
and the testimony and suffrage of all the holy Fathers, and of thousands of
Saints and learned men, who ever expounded it as we do, and out of it gathered
the self same doctrine and belief.


Prot. No marvel if this be so, that you Bulla P^^ 4 super forma profess.
^id. Constitut. 30. in Sum. Constitut. Sum. Pontif. a Greg. 9. vsque ad Sixth. 5
swear the^ whole College of your Cardinals: all your Archbishops, Bishops,
Priests, Abbats, Priors, Friars, Graduats, that they shall never take the
Scriptures in other sense, or interpret it to others in other sense, then that
which the Fathers gave thereof with joint consent. But I meruell as much that
you blush not in saying as you do: as that they tremble not who administer and
take such an oath: for as they wittingly give occasion of perjury, who
administer such an oath, and they periure themselves who take such an oath: so
you apparently speak over. Yet seeing you are so confident, let us fall to our
work roundly: And first let me hear by you, what the Scriptures are which
are so plain for the proof of your opinions: and when you have done, you
shall hear by me what plain texts may be alleged for proof of our opinions.


Pa. Erislow Motive 48.
Take then that for the first; Matt. 26.
Host est corpus meum, Hic est sanguis meus: This is my body; This is my blood.


Prot. For what opinion of yours is this Scripture so plain?


Pa. For the Real presence in the Sacrament, which you deny.


Prot. We believe as well as you, That Christ's flesh and blood are truly
present, and truly received of the faithful at the Lords Table. We Artie.
relig. nn. 28, eait. 1562.
teach the people, that Christieorpus datur, accipitur, manducatur in Caena. The
body of Christ is given (indeed and verily) and taken and eaten in the Lords
Supper. L, Eltensis Episeopus. Res^os. ad Cardinalia Bell. Apologiam. c. 1.
page 11.
The question between us and you is de modo: about the manner of Christ's
presence: and not de obiecto, whether he be present or no. You Harding in his
g. Article to M. Jewels Challenge fol. 99.
say, Christ is in the Sacrament really, substantially, corporally, carnally,
naturally. Yea, Apud Gratiamd 2. de Consecrat. cap. 42. Ego Berengarius
you say, He is there sensualiter, sensibly: vt manibus sacerdotum tractari,
velfrangi, aut fidelium dentibus atteri possit: so that the Priests may handle
him and break him with their hands, and the faithful may tear him with their
teeth. Now this manner of presence we deny: and the letter of the words which
we allege proves not that. For Christ said, This is my body; and not, This is
my body in such a manner. In 3. part. Tho. superquaest. 75. Artie. 1.
agnoscente Joseph Angles Flores Theolog. Quaest. in 4. sent. q. 4. ae effectis
Euch. Art. 1.
Caietan your Cardinal confesses, Non apparere ex Euangelio coactivum aliquid
quo possimus conuincere-haereticos ad intelligendum verba haec, Hoc est corpus
meum, proprie: sed tenendum hoc esse solum ex authoritate Ecclesiae quae ita
verba consecrationis declarat. There is nothing in the Gospel whereby an
Heretic may be enforced to expound the words, This is my body, properly: but
men are to believe so, because the Church teaches so. And Contra Captiuit.
Babylon. cap. 10. nu* 2.
Fisher Bishop of Rochester confesses, Neque vllum hic (viz. in Matthew.) verbum
positum est, quo probetur in nostra Missa veram fieri carnis and sanguinis
Christi praesentiam. There is not a word in S. Matthews Gospel whereby it can
be proved, that Christ is really present in your Sacrament. Your second
instance had need be plainer.


Pa. My second instance is plain enough: for Answ. to M. Charks Preface p. 27.
we have expressly, The bread which I will give, is my flesh, Ioh. 6. 51.


Prot. For what opinion of yours are these words so plain?


Pa. For the former point: even for the Real presence in the Sacrament. And
yet Ibid.
you expound them, as if no more were meant by them, then that we should have
given us the sign of his flesh only.


Prot. We do not expound them so: We Rainold Confer. Cap. 2. diuis. 2. p. 67.
and 68.
say, That the words are meant of Christ himself, the word that was made
flesh, Ioh. 1. 14. We expound them not of the sign of his flesh. We teach,
That Ioh. 6. v. 32.
the true bread, V. 33.
the bread of God, which came down from heaven, and gives life unto the world,
Ioh. 6. v. 35. and 48.
is Christ, V. 51.
even the flesh, the very flesh of Christ, that is, Christ incarnate: and that
he gave us this bread to eat, not in the Sacrament, but upon the Cross. And
this exposition of ours is approved for good by Gabriel Biel, Lect. 84. super
Canon. Missae. By Nic. Cusanus Epist. 7. ad Bohemos. By Caietan in 3. part.
Tho. 9. 80. Art. vlt. By Ruard. Tapperus in explicat. Artic. 15. Louan. To. 2.
By Hessels, lib. de Communione sub vnicaspecie. Tract. 1. By Iansen. Concord.
Euang. cap. 59. as Bellarmine acknowledges, lib. 1. de Euch. cap. 5. And your
self cannot with any reason maintain the contrary, if you will be tried by
the express words. For you deny that Christ gave bread at the celebration of
this Sacrament. He gave shows of bread, not bread indeed, according to your
learning. What is your third instance?


Pa. Answ. to M. Charks Preface, p. 27.
We have expressly, touching the Apostles inequality, He that is great among
you, let him be made as the younger, Luke 22. whereas you say, There was none
greater then other among them.


Prot. Here is some little show, and no substance. For it is plain by the
express words of our Savior, Matthew. 20. 25. and Mark. 10. 41. That no more
is meant by the words you cite then this, viz. He that would be great among
you, let him be made as the younger, which makes nothing for you, nor against
us. What is your fourth instance?


Pa. Ibid.
We have expressly, A man is justified by works, and not by faith only, Iam.
2. 24. which is directly opposite to that which you hold, Man is not justified
by good works, but by faith only.


Prot. We do not deny, that before men, and with men: A man may be justified
by works. We deny only, That before God a man may be justified by works. Now
Saint James speaks of Justification, which is before, or with men: not of that
which is before God, whereof Saint Paul speaks, from whom we gather our
assertion. And that this is so, Comment in Iam. 2. 24.
Tho. of Aquin confesses, for Iacobus hic loquitur de operibus sequentibus
fidem, quae dicuntur iustificare, non secundum quod iustificare dicitur
institiae infusio; sed secundum quod dicitur iustitiae exercitatio, vel
ostensio, vel consummatio. S. James speaks here of Justification, as it is
taken for manifestation and approving of justification, says Thomas. And so,
these words do neither make any thing for you, nor against us. What is your
fifth instance?


Pa. Answ. to M. Charks Prefece, pa. 28.
We have expressly, Whose sins ye forgive, are forgiven: Whose sins ye
retain, are retained, Ioh. 20.


Prot. And what of this? make these words against us?


Pa. Yea, for Ibid.
you say, Priests cannot forgive, or retain sins in earth.


Prot. You say truly. See a learned discourse hereof in the Answer to a
challenge made by a Jesuit in Ireland. p. 109. etc.
We believe that Ministers (Priests as you call them) have power to forgive and
retain sins on earth. The difference between us and you is about the
manner, which is not determined by those words, and about which you agree not
among your selves. What is your sixtinstance?


Pa. Answ. to M. Charks Preface, p. 28.
We have expressly, The doers of the Law shall be justified, Romans 2. 13. Yet you
say, The doing thereof justifies not Christians.


Prot. We say, That if a man can bring the Justice which the Law requires, he
shall be justified thereby. But who can bring that, seeing in many things we
sin all? Iam. 3. 2. What is your seventh instance?


Pa. Answ. to M. Charks Preface, p. 28.
We have expressly, Vow ye, and render your vows, Psalm. 75.


Prot. And how then? makes this against us?


Pa. Yo^, for Ibid.
you teach; We should not vow, or if we vow, we ought to break our vows.


Prot. We do not; A man, according to our Religion, may vow in some cases, and
upon some occasions, as is plain by Calvin. Iustitut lib. 4. cap. 13
our books, and acknowledged by Lib* 2. de Monach. cap. 15.
Bellarmine himself: and, by our Religion, he needs not vow; for vouere
nusquam est praeceptum. Its no where commanded that we should vow, says Bell.
lib. 2. de Monath. cap. 16.
one. And Fateor quia Deus non praecipit, sed tantum consulit nobis vt aliquid
illi v^ueamus, I confess that God commands us not, but only counsels us to
vow unto him, says an Alfons. de Castro adu. haer.
other of you. Again, 14. verba vo^^^ ^ Trauerse in his Answ. to a Popish
Treatise written to the Lords of the Council, p 173
we teach, That when a man has vowed a thing lawful, honest, and possible, he
ought inuiolably to observe it. And how then makes this text more for you, then
for us?


Pa. Answ to M. Charks Preface, p. 28.
We have expressly, Keep the traditions which you have learned either by word,
or by Epistle, 2 These. 2. 15. yet, Ibid.
you say, The Apostles left nothing to the Church unwritten.


Prot. We say indeed, That the Apostles left no necessary tradition to the
Church unwritten: but we do not say, That S. Paul left no traditions to the
Church of the Thessalonians unwritten by him to them. We grant, that he
delivered to the Thessalonians traditions, which he did not write in his
Epistles which he writ to them. But what he delivered by word to them, and not
by way (...) Epistle, that was written either by other holy men of God, or by
himself in the Epistles which he sent to others. So that though he delivered
to the Thessalonians traditions, which he writ not in his Epistles sent to
them: it follows not thereon, that he left some unwritten [necessary]
traditions to the Church in general. What is your next instance?


Pa. Answ to M. Charks Preface, p. 28.
We have expressly, If thou wit enter into life, keep the Commandments,
Matthew. 19. 17. Yet you say, The Commandments cannot be kept; yea, you Ibid.
say, We are not bound unto them.


Prot. We confess that we are bound to keep the Commandments; And if any be
desirous to have life everlasting, by doing some good thing, as this young man
was, to whom Christ spoke these words, He must keep the Commandments. Yet
we say, It follows not. He that would have life euerl^sting by doing some
good, must keep the Commandments. Ergo, the Commandments may b^^ kept: for
by* Gods Commandments we learn what we should do.


Pa. Yea but Answ. to M. Charks Preface p. 28.
we have expressly, That when the young man said, he had already kept the
Commandments; it was said unto him, ^f thou will be perfect, go and sell all
things thou have, and give to the poor, and follow me. Which shows there is
one degree of life perfecter then another.


Prot. Nay, not so: It rather shows there is but one degree of life which is
perfect, even that which consists in keeping the Commandments; and (which is
more) Counsels. For upon the young man's asse^eration, that he had kept all the
Commandments from his youth, it is not said: If thou will be more perfect;
but, If thou will be perfect, as though there were no perfection attained unto
by keeping the whole Law. But indeed the young man lied in saying, he had kept
all the Commandments from his youth. Else our Savior must be thought to have
spoken over, when he said, Ioh. 7. 19. Did not Moses give you a law, and yet
none of you keeps the law? Have you any more instances?


Pa. Yea, many: for Pref supra ^it.
we have expressly, work your own salvation with fear and trembling.


Prot. And what gather you of that against us:


Pa. Ibid.
s That a man should not make it of his belief, that he shall be saved
without all doubt and fears.


Prot. Why* may not a man fear to offend God, unless he doubt that he shall
finally fall away from God? Are not those wives most fearful to offend their
husbands: and those children most fearful to offend their fathers: who are
best assured of their husbands, and parents constant love unto them? Fear of
Gods anger against us, by reason of our sins, may well stand with assurance of
salvation. Else, why did Psalm. 2. 11.
David require, That we should serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in
trembling? May a man tremble, and yet rejoice? and may he not fear to offend,
and yet be assured of favor?


Pa. Well, Praf. supracit.
we have expressly, That every man shall be judged according to his works, A
poc. 20.


Prot. Good: And so have we.


Pa. Nay: Ibid.
you teach, That men shall be judged only according to their faith.


Prot. That is not true: See M. Cartwrights Answ, to the Rhem. Matthew. 25. 35.
We teach, that seeing it is most fitting for the nature and condition of
judgments, to take the evidence whereupon the sentence shall be pronounced,
from such things as are most notorious: the works good or evil being known
both to Men and Angels, whereas faith, which has her seat in the heart is
only seen of the Lord: it is most convenient for justifying the truth of the
Judge before the world, that those things should be given in evidence, which
fall into the knowledge of the standers by; especially when the godly
themselves shall be admitted into part of the honor of our Savior Christ's
judicial sentence against the reprobates. And for this cause it is (as we say)
that our Savior at the latter day will say, Come ye blessed of my Father --
For when I was hungry you gave me meat -- rather then, For that you have
believed in me. Have you any more to say?


Pa. Yea: Praf. supra ^it.
We have expressly, That there remains a retribution, stipend, and pay to every
good work in heaven, Mark. 9. 1 Corinthians. 3. Apoc. 22. Psalm. 118.


Prot. And do we deny it? See Trauerse Answ. to a Popish Treatise to the
Lords of the Council, p. 267.
We believe no good deed shall be lost: no not the bestowing of a cup of cold
water in the name of a disciple. Wherefore this makes nothing against us.


Pa. Yea, but Ibid.
you teach, Good works done in Christ merit nothing.


Prot. Yea, but it is one thing to teach, That good works done in Christ find
retribution and payment in heaven: and another thing to say, They merit some
things: for retribution and stipends, and paies are as well given of courtesy,
as of debt or merit. Wherefore we teach the former, and deny the latter. What
is your next instance?


Pa. Pref. cit. p. 29.
We have expressly, That the affliction which Daniel used upon his body was
acceptable in the sight of God, Dan. 10.


Prot. And what is that to us?


Pa. Much: for Ibid.
you teach, That such voluntary corporal afflictions are in vain.


Prot. But we do not. We teach with S. Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 8. that Corporal
exercise (voluntary corporal afflictions) are profitable to little. There is
some good use of them. Not a man of us teaches, that such voluntary corporal
afflictions as Daniel used, and to such end as he did use them are in vain.
Have you not done?


Pa. No: Bristow Motive 48.
we have a plain text, Genesis 48. God who has fed me from my youth up even to
this day: The Angel who has delivered me from all aduers^ie bless these
children. Dowis^s Annotas. upon Ge^. 48
Which implies as much as if we would say, God and our Lady bless them.


Prot. By the Angel, which is here prayed unto, is not meant any created Angel:
but the Angel of the everlasting Covenant, Christ Jesus; as it is plain by the Sea marg. Notes on our Bibles upon Genesis 48.
circumstances of the text, and by that testimony of the Athanas. orat. 4. adu.
Arianos, p. 260 edit. Comelin. Graecolat. A. 1600. ci^il. l. 3 Thesauri,
Nouatian, apud Tertul. de Trinitate c. 15 and 27.
Fathers. And therefore this prayer does not justify your prayer, God and our
Lady bless them. No man ever conceived a prayer after this manner; Det tibi
Deus and Angelus, that is in effect, God and our Lady bless them, says Loco
citato.
Athanasius.


Pa. Answ. to M. Charks Preface, p. 29. and Briflow Motive 48.
We have expressly: It is an holy cogitation to pray for the dead, 2. Match. 12.


Prot. Yea, but the Book of Machabees is not Canonical Scripture, as I shall
prove unto you ere we part. Now I look for proof at your hands out of the
Canonical Scripture.


Pa. Why then, if I should tell you, Ibid.
we read expressly in the same Book, that Jeremy the Prophet after he was dead
prayed for the people of Israel: whereby is proved Intercession of Saints; you
would put me off with this, That the Scripture alleged by me is not
Canonical Scripture.


Prot. I might do so: yet I need not, for we deny not that Saints make
intercession for us in general. And your Lib. 1. de sancta. beatit. c. 18.
Bellarmine alleges this to that purpose only. He alleges it not either to
prove Invocation of Saints; or the intercession of Saints in particular.


Pa. And what would you answer me if I urged, That Answ. to M. Charks Preface,
p. 29.
we have an express example of an holy man that offered sacrifice for the
dead, 2 Match. 12.


Prot. I would answer you to it; That the holy man you mean of, offered
sacrifice for the living and not for the dead. And for the full proof thereof,
I would refer you to Doctor Reinolds Readings upon the Apocrypha, praelect.
158.


Pa. And what answer should I look to receive of you upon mention, that
Tobit. 12. Pref. citas.
we read expressly, That an Angel did present Tobias good works and alms deeds
before God.


Prot. My answer to that should be, That the book is Apocrypha.


Pa. And is not the Book of Ecclesiasticus Apocrypha, Gap. 16. 15.
in which we read expressly thus: Omnis misericordia faciet locum vnicuique
secundum meritum operum; Mercy shall make a place to every man according to
the merit of his works?


Prot. Yes: but I will use the exception in this case. The exception which I
take is, that the words are cited out of a corrupt Translation: for in the
Greek, wherein Ecclesiasticus was first written, there is no mention made of
merit. To every pitlifull act of goodness give place, for every one shall find
(not according to the merit of his works, but) according to his works, says
the Greek.


Pa. Indeed I confess, the word merit is not in the Greek: for the word merit
is not Greek, but Latin; yet the Greek words are well translated by the
word merit, no man can deny who knows the rudiments of Greek: for in the Greek
it is, (...), which in Latin signifies as much as pro meritis operum.


Prot. Indeed you fit it: for our Savior Christ, warning his disciples how
they should carry themselves toward the Scribes and Pharisees: Do not (
Matthew. 23.
says he) (...) (not meaning after the merit of their works, but simply)
after their works. Your great M. Lib. 2. de verbo Dei c. 12. and l. 5. de
Iustif* c. 2.
Cardinal Bellarmine, of whom you had this, was deceived.


Pa. And is that proof, which Bell. l. 5. de Iustif. c. 2.
we fetch for merits out of Heb. 13. 16. fetched out of a corrupt translation,
Beneficence and communication forget not; for with such sacrifices God is
promerited.


Prot. Yea verily: for according to the Greek the Apostle says no more, but:
That with such hosts God is well pleased. And that may appear unto you by this,
that both Lib. 10. de Ciuit. d^i cap. 5.
S. Austine, and In bunc locum.
Beda read so; and a Cor. 5. 9. and Heb. 11. 5. 6.
your own Translator else where translates so.


Pa. Yet See Rhem. Annot. in Heb. 13. 16.
Primasius S. Austines Scholar reads it as it is in our vulgar Latin: With
such hosts God is promerited.


Prot. Yea, but how know you that that Commentary is Primasius his own? for
it is the self same which is fathered on Haymo, who lived after the year 800.
whose credit is nothing answerable to Primasius.


Pa. Well, let both these places pass. Brislow Motive 48.
Is not a plain text for extreme unction, which is in S. James, Infirmatur quis
in vobis -- If any among you be dangerously sick, let him send for the
Priests of the Church, and they to pray over him, anealing him with oil in the
name of the Lord.


Prot. Of whom learned you to translate Infirmatur quis in vobis. If any man
be dangerously sick, etc. I thought the word Infirmatur, had signified any
infirmity, great or small growing upon a man. And if so, then the text makes
as much against you as us. For first, you aneale not all such persons as are
infirm, but only such as you suppose to be desperately sick, sick unto death.
Secondly, you send not Presbiters, Priests: but any one bold Priest to anoint
them, and pray over them. Thirdly, you intend principally in anealing them, the
forgiveness of sins: whereas by the text is principally intended, the curing
of them of their infirmities. Which is so plain that a Cardinal of your own
renounceth this text as not making for you.


Pa. What Cardinal is that?


Prot. Comment in Lic. 2. 14.
Caietan, whose words these are: Nec ex verbis, nec ex effectu verba haec
loquuntur de sacramentali unction extreme vnctionis: sed mag is de unction
quam instituit Dominus Jesus in Euangelio a discipulis exercendam in agr^tis.
Textus enim non dicit: Infirmatur quis in vobis ad mortem sed absolute,
infirmatur quis. Et effectam dicit, infirmi alleuiationem: and de remissione
peccatorum non loquitur nisi conditionaliter: quum extrema vnctio non nisi
prope articulum mortis datur. Et direct (vt eius forma sona^^ tendi^ ad
remissionem peccatorum: praeter hoc quod Iacobus ad vnum agrum multes
presbyteros tum orantes, tum vngentes mand^t vocari, quod ab extrema vnctionis
rit^ alienum est.


Pa. But is not that a plain text for proof of satisfaction, which is
alleged by Ans. to Jewels pology part. 2. cap. 16. fol. 117.
Doctor Harding, out of 2 Cor. 7. 1.


Prot. What are the words?


Pa. Seeing then we have these promises dearly beloved, let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, making perfect our
satisfaction in the fear of God.


Prot. These are plain words I promise you. But I do not remember that I ever
read such words, either in the Greek, or in any translation. Your Doctor (I
believe) has showed a piece of cunning, and chopped in the word satisfaction,
for sanctification, and quite altered the Apostles meaning.


Pa. God forbid he should have dealt so naughtily: But what say you to the text
alleged by Confess. Petrikoni^ c. 48. de sacra^. p^nit. f. 127
Cardinal Hosius out of Romans 6. 19. for the same doctrine of Satisfaction. Is it
not pregnant to his purpose?


Prot. How cites he it?


Pa. Exhibeamus membra nostra seruire iustitiae in satisfactionem. Let us
exhibit our members to serve justice unto satisfaction.


Prot. In good earnest this is a plain text: but it is none of Saint Paul's. It
is one of your Cardinals own making. As Harding in the former, so your
Cardinal in this has chopped in the word satisfaction, for sanctification, and
made a proposition of his own, different from S. Paul's: I wish it were no
Argument of their sanctification to deal so falsely with the Scriptures: they
had need to make satisfaction (though not to God, because they cannot,) yet to
his Church for such bad dealing.


Pa. But are there not express words for the supremacy of S. Peter, Matt. 16.
where we read thus: Thou art a rock, and upon this rock will I build my
Church. M. Walsingham says. That the Author of the answer to M. Charks book
gives this for one instance, in way of proving that express Scripture is for
us.


Prot. I know no such text in S. Matthew, as; Thou art a Rock -- I find there,
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church: but, Thou art a
rock, and upon this rock I will build my Church, is not in any book, nor in
any Bible that I have seen.


Pa. Are these words; Exodus 12. 16.
Dies prima erit sancta and septima eadem Religione venerabiles, The first day
shall be holy, and the seventh day with like religion shall be venerable: whereby
Lib. de Imag. cap. 12.
Cardinal Bellarmine would prove, That every holy thing is to be religiously
worshipped: in your Bible me thinks they are plain to prove his purpose.


Prot. Yea, but those are not in my Bible: nor in yours, I think, your false
Cardinal has most irreligiously chopped in a word religiously in the Text: make
search, and trust me worse another time if it be not so.


Pa. I will, I warrant you. In the mean let me hear what plain Text* you
can allege for proof of your opinions.


Prot. Content: Do not these words in Deutronomy 4. 15, 16: Take heed unto
your selves, for ye saw no Image in the day that the Lord spoke unto you in
Hereb -- that ye corrupt not your selves, and make you a graven Image, etc.
plainly prove, That the Scriptures forbid the representing of God by any
Image? And yet do not ye represent God the Father by the Image of an old man?
and the Bell lib. 2. de Imag. c. 8.
most of you maintain, That he may lawfully be represented in such an Image?


Pa. I confess with Lib. 2. de Ad^rat. c. 3. d^spu^, 4. nu. 74.
Vasquez, That in the words you cite, plane indicat Scriptura, etc. The
Scripture speaks plainly, that God did forbid the Jews to represent him by
any Image. But you must know, that Ioh. Ragusius Oras. habita in Conc. Basil,
De Communione sub viraque specie. apud Binnium, To. 4. Conc. p. 297
Licet in lege veteri prohibitae fuissent lege d^u^na imagines visibiles, nedum
ipsius Dei, sed qu rumcunque sanctorum hominum, nec de post in Scripturis sieve
veteris sieve Noui Testamenti concessa licentia eius faciendi aut fabricandi
reperiatur; nihilominus Ecclesia Catholica edocta a spiritu sancto, nedum
permisit, imo statuit and ordinauit, vt venerabiles Imagines Christi,
glori^sissimae suae matris, and caeterorum sanctorum fierent, etc. Though in
old time the visible Images of God, yea, and of his Saints, were forbidden by
the Law of God: and no liberty granted since, either in the Old or New
Testament to make any such: yet the Church, which is taught of God, has not
only permitted, but decreed and ordained, That the Images of Christ, and his
blessed Mother the Virgin Mary, and the rest of the Saints may be made for
sundry good purposes.


Prot. What? dare you say, The Church has decreed contrary to that which God
commanded in holy Scripture? If so, you must needs grant, That the Scripture in
this is for us, and against you. The pretended Church, not the Scripture, is
for you only. Wherefore to go on.

The Scriptures forbid expressly, The adoring or serving of any similitude or
Image, Exodus 20. 4. yet you Bell. lib. 2. de Imag. c. 12.
teach, That Similitudes (Images of Christ and his Saints) may be adored and
served.


Pa. I confess with Lib. supra cit. c. 2. ^isp. 4. (...) 70
Vasquez here also, That the Law given to the Jews forbad, Non solum cultum
Idol^latri^, sed quamuis adorationem and vsum imaginum: Not only that
adoration and service which was due to God; but all manner of adoration and
serving Images. But the case is now altered.


Prot. Yet in the maine it appears, That in this the Scripture is for us also.
And is not Exodus 21. 14. so too, wherein we find an express commandment,
binding us to take the wilful Murderer from Gods Altar, that he may die:
seeing you have sanctuaries out of which no malefactor, no murderer, may be
taken that judgment may pass on him?


Pa. I confess with De Invent. Rerum. l. 3. c. 12.
Polidore Virgil, Sunt in orb nostro Christiano passim Asyla, qua non in
insidias timentibus, sed quibusuis sontibus etiam May statis reis patent.
There are many sanctuaries amongst us, which are receptacles not only for such
as are afraid of mischief toward themselves, but to all malefactors, even to
Traitors. And I for my part confess further with him, Ibid.
Quod templa nostra vbique gen^ium istiusmedi sceleratis hominibus instar
Asylorum sunt, and id contra quam Moses constituer at, Exodus 21. That our
Churches in all places serve for sanctuaries to all manner of wicked persons,
though God by Moses did forbid the same, Exodus 21. To tell you truly, I think
it is plain, that Nihil immunitatis sac^r prestaret locus, The holiness of
the place should not privilege wilful murderers: though it be to true which
Annotat ad mores in Exo. 21.
Hieronimus ab Olea stro writes, nu^c sacra loca homicidarum and id genus
peccatorum, speluncae factae sunt: Holy places at this day are made refuges for
murderers, and such like wicked persons.


Prot. Well then, the Scripture in this is ours* and so I doubt not, you will
confess, that Scripture is, wherein the Stews and Brothel houses are expressly
condemned, viz. Deuteronomy. 23. 17. for they are tolerated Brer^ley c. 16. sect. 3.
of S. Austines Religion. Harding in his Confutation of Jewels Apology
and defended by you.


Pa. I know they are tolerated in some Catholic Countries, and defended by
some Catholics. But I am of In Manaali c. 17 n. 195. quinto
Nauarrus mind, Magis expediret non permittere: It were better they were not
tolerated. I think De Contin^ntia l. 3. c. 4. p. 236.
Espenceus had just cause to say, Huius permissionis nos non semel pudurt,
Christianam scilicet Remp. eo carere non posse, quod tandiu, hoc est, annis
plus 1500. non admisit M^saica. I have been often ashamed to think of the
toleration for Stews: That the Christian Commonwealth should not be able to
stand without admission of that which the Commonwealth of Israel by the space
of 1500. years and upward, would never admit of. What other instance have you?


Prot. The Scriptures forbid expressly, The marrying of a man's Aunt; and of a
Brothers wife; Leuit. 18. v. 14. and 16. Yet you approve the Nephews marrying
his Aunt: and of any man's marrying his Brothers wife, if the parties have your
Popes dispensation. Do you think that your Popes dispensations will stand
good against the Scriptures?


Pa. Yea; in things forbid^ (...) positive, proprio Iudaeorum: By some positi^e
Law peculiar to the Jews: though not in things forbidden, iure naturae, by the
law of Nature. Now these kinds of marriages were forbidden, not by the law of
Nature, but by a positive law peculiar to the Jews, as you may see in Lib. 1.
de Matrimon c 27.
Card^nall Bellarmine.


Prot. These marriages were forbidden by the law of Nature, and not by a
positive law peculiar to the Jews: for the Heathen, who lived in Canaan before
the Jews, and were not punishable for breaking of positive laws peculiar to
the Jews, but for breaking of the laws of nature; by these, and such like
marriages defiled the Land* and for such marriages the Land did spue them out,
as you may see, Leuit. 18. 27, 28. and of which you may read more in your
learned Friar Hieronimus ab Oleastro Exposit ad literam in Leuit. 18. Wherefore
to proceed.

In the Scriptures it is expressly written, That a man cannot lay his hand upon
the Lords anointed and be guiltless, 1. Sam. 26. 9. Yet Ioh. Mariana l. 1. de
Regu. c. 6.
you teach contrary.

In 1 King. 2. 27
Scriptures we read expressly, That a Prince deposed even the high Priest: but no
where that a Priest deposed a lawful Prince. Yet by your Bell. l. 5. de To.
Pont. c. 27.
I^suiticall Religion, A Pope may depose a lawful Prince: but a Prince may not
depose a Priest.

The Scriptures require expressly, That they who vow, should vow unto the Lord,
Psalm. 76. 11. and testify as expressly. That all the vows recorded in them
were made unto the Lord: insomuch that your Lib. 3. di* culiu sanctis. c. 5.
Cardinal Bellarmine was forced to confess, Cum scriberentur Scripture Sancta,
nondum coeperat vsus vouendi sanctis, When the Scriptures were written, it was
not the use to vow to Saints. Yet you do ordinarily vow to Saints, and take
upon you the Justifying of vows to Saints.

The Scriptures require expressly, That when men pray, they should pray unto the
Lord, Psalm 50. 51. Matt. 6. 9. and testify as expressly, That all the prayers
of holy men recorded in them were made unto the Lord: insomuch that some of
your greatest Bar^e^ in 2. 3. The. quast* ^. Art. 10. 2. Con^lus^^* C^l. 269.
Clerks confess, Orationes esse ad sanct^s faciendas, neque express, neque
impresse, and inuolute sacra liter^ docent. The holy Scriptures neither teach
expressly, nor impliedly, that prayers may be made to Saints. Yet Bell. l. 1.
de sanct. be^^it. ^. 19.
you do ordinarily pray to Saints, and justify your practice of praying to
Saints.

The Scriptures require expressly, That men should believe in God, 2 Chro. 20.
20. and as expressly commend them who believe in God, 1 Pet. 1. 8. yet Bell.
lib. citat. c. ^0. Rh^m. Annot. in To. 10. 14.
you of later years have begun to teach, That we may believe in men.


Pa. Why say you, That of later years, we have begun to teach, That men may
believe in men: Did not our Church teach always so?


Prot. No: five or six hundred years ago such doctrine went not for current
in your Church; for when Gualterus Mape lib. de Nugis Cu^^ali^m did. 1. c. 3.
M. S. in Bibl. ^^dl^iana O^^^.
the Waldensians in a Council holden at Rome, under Alexander the third, were
asked by one Gualter Mape, whether they believed in the Mother of Christ: they
answered, that they did so, Ab omnibus sunt multiplici clamore derisi. They
were laughed to scorn by the Pope and all the Council. Which shows that the
doctrine of believing in Saints, was then a ridiculous doctrine even in your
Church.

The Scripture requires expressly, That men should trust in God, Psalm. 115. 9,
10, 11. and as expressly curses them who trust in man, Ierem. 17. 5. yet you
like well, that men should trust in men: else would you burn the Virgin Mary's
Psalter made by Bonauenture, Psalm. 10. 1. and 30. 1. and 70. 1. and 124* 1.
in which there is so often mention of trusting in our Lady, as hereafter I
shall show you.

The Scriptures teach expressly, That sacrifices are due to God only, Exodus 22.
20. and testify as expressly, That holy men did sacrifice to God only. Yet
Bell. l. 2. de Imag. c. 17.
you do sacrifice to Images; for you burn Incense to them.


Pa. I confess we burn Incense to Images: but I deny, that that is to
sacrifice to them.


Prot. They who burnt Incense to any thing, but God, are Ier. 44. 23.
reproved in the Old Testament, even they 2. Ki^g^ 18.
who burnt Incense to the Brazen Serpent, though the Serpent was a figure of
Christ: And it belonged to the Priest only to burn Incense. Which argues, That
to burn Incense, was to sacrifice in old time; and that you in burning Incense
to Images, do sacrifice unto them.


Pa. Bell. lo^o pr^^ime citat^.
To burn Incense was a sacrifice in old time, but so it is not now; for we
see such as are no Priests burn it in our Churches.


Prot. So 2 Ch^. (...) 1^.
some who were no Priests took upon them to burn Incense in the old Law. And
therefore, if because it is burned now by them who are no Priests, it follows:
Ergo, it is no sacrifice now. Surely by the same reason we must deny, that it
was a sacrifice in old time. But see I pray you, at leisure, how fully this
foolery is discovered by De lib. Apoc. praelect. 243.
D. Rainolds, and let us proceed.

In the Scripture Priests are expressly forbidden to shave their heads, Ezech.
44. 20. yet Rhem. Annot. in 2 Thessalonians, 3. 10.
the Religious sort among you must have their heads shaven.

In the Scripture it is expressly written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve, Matt. 4. 10. Yet Rhem, Annot, in Heb. 11. 21.
you teach, That a man may worship He Saints, and She Saints: yea Relikes,
besides the Lord his God.

In the Scriptures it is expressly written, Matt. 6. 7.
When ye pray use no vain repititions. Yet Polid, Virgil de Invent. rerum l.
5. ^. 9.
you have appointed a form of prayer upon the Beads: in which the Aue Mary is
to be said one hundred and fifty times, and the Pater Noster fifteen, and the
Creed thrice. Besides, since that you have set us out a Jesus Psalter, in which
there is a form of prayer, wherein fifteen such petitions as this, Jesus, Jesus,
Jesus, give me here my purgatory, are to be repeated ten times, which makes in
all one hundred and fifty petitions, in which the name of Jesus is repeated
four hundred and fifty times: which argue ye allow of vain repetitions.

In the Scriptures it is expressly written, Matt. 15. 9.
That in vain they worship God, who teach for doctrines men's commandments.
Yet Vaux in Catech. ^. 3. Bell. in Catech. c. 7. Tabula Xristiana Relig. in
Exam. Ordinand.
you, over and besides the Commandments of God, have written others; which some
of you call the commandments of the Church: some commandments of the Canon
law; which are at fewest, five; if not six: some say, Ten, even just as many
as those of Gods; which you urge more strictly then the Commandments of God:
for, Grauius plectitur contra vnum Papae decretum, qua^ delinquens contra
diuinum praeceptum and Euan geltum: He that offends against the Popes Law, is
more grievously punished, then he who offends against Gods Law and the Gospel,
says In 3. part operum. Tit. de asrections Cordis Consid. 30.
Gerson.

In the Scripture it is expressly written, That whosoever shall put away his
wife, except it be for whoredom, and marries another, commits adultery, Matt.
19. 9. Yet Guicciard in Hist lib. 4.
your Alexander the sixth, consented that Lewis the twelfth of France, should put
away his wife, because she was barren and deformed; and marry Anne, the wife
to Lewis the eleventh, his predecessor. And your C. Laudabilem de conuersione
sidelium agnoscente Bell. l. 4. de R^. Pont c. 14.
Pope Coelestine the third, set forth a Decree, That when, of married persons,
the one falls into heresy, the marriage is dissolved, and the Catholic
party is free to marry again.

In the Scriptures it is expressly written, Mark. 16. 9.
That our Savior after his Resurrection appeared first to Mary Magdalen: yet
many of you say, We must believe he first appeared to his Mother Mary.


Pa. True: for To. 3 (...) Ma^^^^ part. 10. se^. 2. de ga^dijs Mariae part. 5.
f^l. 347.
Bernardinus de Bustis, having noted, That our Savior after his Resurrection
appeared first unto his Mother, adds: Ft hanc opinionem tenet sancta Matter
Ecclesia. And this is the opinion of our holy Mother the Church. And Annal. To.
1. ad An. 34 n. 183
Baronius falling to speak of the same point, Vetus traditio per manus
maiorum, ac per subsequentia secula ad posteros dilapsa testatur Christum
dominum nostrum apparuisse pr^mum omnium sanctissimae genetrici Mariae: quod
nemo pius puto, neg ar it. It is, says he, an ancient tradition of our
Ancestors, which is come to us from hand to hand, that our Savior Christ
appeared first to his most holy Mother Mary, and I think no godly man will
deny it.


Prot. In the Scripture it is expressly written, That Mark. 3. 29.
he who blasphemeth against the holy Ghost shall never be forgiven: Yet Bell.
l. 2 de Paenitentia, c. 16
you teach, That blasphemy against the holy Ghost may be forgiven.

In the Scripture we read expressly, That S. John was the disciple whom Jesus
loved, Ioh. 13. 23. compared with Chap. 21. 20. and 24. And yet you will needs
it was Saint Peter whom Jesus loved most entirely.

In the Scripture we read expressly, That when Cornelius met S. Peter, and fell
at his feet to adore him: S. Peter reproved him for it. Act. 10. 25, 26. Yet
your Ps^udo-Peters are so far from refusing adoration when it is offered,
that Pius 2. Malliensibus aliquandi^s visendu^ s^ adorandumque praebuit.
Pi^olom, Card. ^ Papy^nsis in Epist. Card. Seninsi. and Commentar. l. 1.
some of them have presented themselves to the people that they might be adored.

In the Scripture it is expressly written, That our Savior speaking of the
Sacramental Cup, said: Drink ye all of this, Matthew. 26. 27. Yet, Suarez in
3. part. Tho q 80. Act. 12. disput. 71. sect. 2. ^ 905
you say; All need not drink thereof. Yea, ye say, All shall not drink
thereof: Patris and Primitiua Ecclesia populum a Commun^one Calicis non
prohibebant, nos arcemus, etc. The Fathers in the Primitive Church did not
forbid the people to drink of the Cup, but we drive them from it, says Epist.
130.
Aeneas Syluius.

That which was the Sacramental Cup, after the words of Consecration in the
Scripture, is expressly called, The fruit of the Vine, Matthew. 26. 29. Yet ye
say, That after words of Consecration uttered, it is not the fruit of the Vine,
Wine; which is in the Sacramental Cup, but blood.

In the Scripture it is expressly written, That the other element delivered by
our Savior Christ to his Apostles, at the celebration of the Communion was
Bread: for so it is ^ Cor. 11, 26, 27, 28.
called after the words of Consecration uttered, as well as before: Yet ye say,
That after the words of Consecration uttered, it is not Bread, which is
delivered to the Communicants.

In the Scriptures we read expressly, That S. Paul in nothing was inferior to
the chief Apostles, 1 Cor. 12. 11. Yet Baron. Annal. To. 1. ad An. 34. nu. 207.
ye push at it when we tell you, S. Paul was equal to Peter in power.

In the Scriptures we read expressly, That a man is justified by faith, without
the works of the Law, Romans 3. 28. Yet Rhem Annot. (...) 21.
ye say, Works justify.

In the Scripture we read expressly, That as ^y one man, sin entered into the
world, and death by sin* so death went over all men, in whom all men have
sinned, Romans 5. 12. Yet Ehem. (...)
ye say, The Virgin Mary never sinned.

In the Scriptures, Saint Paul speaking of Concupiscence, in express terms
calls it sin, Romans 6. 12. as you your selves confess: Yet ye deny
Concupiscence is sin: and (...)
tell us soberly, that Apostolus Concupiscentiam peccatum vota^, at non lice^
nobis it a loq^^: Though the Apostle calls it sin, yet we may not call it so.

In the Scriptures we read expressly, That whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
Romans 14. 23. Yet Rhem. Annot. in To. 14. 23.
ye teach, That many actions done by Infidels are not finne.

In the Scriptures it is expressly written, That if any Brother have a wife that
believes not, if she be content to dwell with him, he should not forsake her:
and if any woman have an unbelieving husband, who is content to dwell with her,
she should not forsake him. 1 Cor 7. 12, 13. Yet ye teach, That a believing
brother may put away his unbelieving wife though she be content to dwell with
him: and a believing woman, may put away her unbelieving husband, though he be
content to dwell with her: Yea, ye teach, That the unbelieving party may not
continue with the unbelieving. They must part company.


Pa. Indeed I read in Not in Conc. Yoles. 17. c. 8. To. 3. Conc. part. prior*
p. 171.
Binnius, that Licet in principie nascentis Ecclesi^ erat licitum post
susceptam sidem virum fidelem ab vxore infideli non discedere vel contra, sed
eandem in domo and commerci^ manner vt constat ex Paulo: 1 Cor. 7. propter spem
conuersionis alterius: tamen ab hinc 800. annis Ecclesia contrarium pr^cepit,
si^que lege, consuetudine, and vsu introductum est vt fidelis non maneat cum
in^i^eli, Though in the Prime age of the Church it was lawful for the believer
to continue in the same house and fellowship with the unbeliever, and not to
make a separation, in hope the believing party might convert the unbelieving:
yet the Church about eight hundred years ago gave commandment to the
contrary. So that now partly by virtue of a law, partly by custom, it is
generally received, That the believing party may not continue with the
unbelieving. And to confess the whole truth, Inter Epistolas Indicas Scripta^
Ormuti^ A. 1551
I read that Father Gaspar in India having baptized an honorable Indian Lady,
when her husband made great means to have her again, being desired to deliver
his opinion in a Council held about that matter, answered roundly: That they
ought not to give holy things to dogs, nor the persons of such as praise God
unto beasts. Whereupon it was concluded, Her husband should not have her
again. She should be married to another.


Pro. In the Scripture it is expressly written, Defraud not one another, except
it be with consent for a time, that you may give your selves to Fasting and
Prayer, 1 Cor. 7. 5. Yet ye teach, A married man may go in pilgrimage, even to
Jerusalem, without his wives consent.


Pa. I grant Cap. ex multa. sect. in ^anto. Extra. de rote and vo^i Redemp.
Innocentius the third decreed so upon a special occasion: but I know not
whether that Decree stand in force now. But proceed.


Pro. In the Scripture it is expressly written, That he who cannot abstain
should marry, because it is better to marry then to burn, 1 Cor. 7. 9. Yet
Rhem. Annot. in 1 Cor. 7. 9.
ye teach, That some such, as your Priests and Monks may not marry though
they burn.

In the Scripture it is expressly written, That it is a shame for a woman to be
shaven, 1 Cor. 11. 6. Yet your Rhem Annot. in 2 Thessalonians. 3 10.
Nuns are shorn.

In the Scripture it is expressly written, That Christians should praise God in
their assenblies, by singing, Coloss. 3. 16. Yet ye will not allow them to sing
in their assemblies. And this is confessed by your Not. in Cont. Laodic. Can.
15. To. 1. Cont p. 293
Binnius: for, Vt ^ideles in suis conuentibus Psalmis and hymnis, alternatim
cord simul and ore decan* at is Deum landent a Paulo ad Coloss. cap. 3. and ad
Ephesians. cap. 5. praeceptum esse fat^mur. Sed dum olim vna cum clericis etiam
popolus promiscue cantare^, imper itia Canentium aliquando accidebat, vt ij,
quorum vox inculta erat, aut absona Harmonicum illum Ecclesiastic^ dignitati
congruentem concentum plane corrumperent. Ad bo^ ergo incommodum a cantu
religioso tollendum Ecclesiast. institut. hisce optime prouisum est, ne praeter
cert^s ad hoc opus ascr^ptes al ij in Ecclesia psallerent. We confess (says
he) Saint Paul commanded Christians to sing in their assemblies: but because it
fell out, that some who had no skill in singing, sung with other who had skill,
they marred the Music, it was very well provided by Ecclesiastical
Institutions, That only certain Singing men and Quoristers should sing in
Church assemblies.

In the Scripture we read expressly, That prayers should be conceived in known
languages, 1. Cor. 14. Yet ye like not of that. Benedictus Montanus in 1 Cor.
14.
A Parisian Doctor tells us, Et si Apostolus lingua intellect a preces velit
celebrari, tamen sanctam Ecclesiam iustissimis de causis contra statuisse, That
though the Apostle thought good prayer should be in known languages; yet your
Church upon good reason has decreed the contrary.

In the Scripture we read expressly, That the unlearned should say, Amen, at
the end of prayers, 1 Cor. 14. 16. which they did even, Ab initio nascentis
Ecclesiae, from the Apostles time, as De Ritibus Ec^l. Cathol. l. 2. c. 17. ^u.
2.
Dorantes conconfesseth: Yet by your Religion, The Clerk of the Parish only is
to say Amen, at the end of prayers.

In the Scripture it is expressly written, That he is cursed who abides not in
all things which are written in the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. Yet Rhem.
Annot. in To. 1. 32.
ye teaching, That some sins are pardonable of their own nature, must needs
be thought to teach by necessary consequence, That every such man is not
cursed.

In the Scripture it is expressly written, Every man shall bear his own
burden, Galat. 6. 5. Yet ye teach, That one man may bear another burden:
for Azorius Instit. Moral part 1. l. 7. c. 21. 7. quaritur.
if one be enioined to fast, in part of Penance: another may fast for him.

In the Scripture it is expressly written, That the Mediator between God and
man is one, and he is Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Yet ye generally teach, That
there are many mediators between God and man, more then Christ Jesus.


Pa. That is our general doctrine, I grant: Yet there are among us who teach,
Ioh. Hess^ls pro Inuccas. sanct. c. 5.
Sanctos Angelos and homines non dicendos esse mediatores Dei and hominum, sed
potius mediatores ad mediatorem: The holy Men and Angels are not to be
reputed mediators between God and man, but rather mediators between the
Mediator: Yea some of us simply deny that Saints be Mediators: Vniuer salis
Ecclesia San^tos colit, sed non vt mediatores, The Catholic Church worshippeth
Saints, but not as Mediators, ^aith (...) Juth^^^* d^g^ata Philip-pica 16. p.
206. and 216.
Viruesius.


Prot. That doctrine is as false as the other, but it suffices me that your
ordinary doctrine is proved to be contrary to express Scripture. I will
pass to another instance.

By express Scripture married men may be made Bishops, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Yet
Dominicus Soto de Iustitia and ^^re l, (...) q. 6. p. 731.
ye teach, Married men may not be made Bishops.

By express Scripture, they be made Bishops who have children, 1 Timothy 3 4.
Yet Ioh. Franc. Ieo in Thesauro Fori Eccl. part. 1. c 3. de Elect. Epist. nu.
38. 39.
your Clemens the eighth, would admit none to be Bishops who had children;
though some of his predecessors did otherwise, yet his practice was according
to your learning: For in Did. 61. Catinensis.
your Canon Law, Pope Pelagius giving one direction what manner of man he
should choose for a Bishop, bids him look unto it, Nec vxorem habeat, nec
filios: He neither have wife nor children. Whereof some of you give this
reason, Ioh. Franc. Leo citat. and glossa apud Great. d. 82 preposuisti verbo
(...)
Quia filius est Argumentum ambulans super terram de incontinentia patris:
Because children are aprant ambling Arguments of the Incontinencie of their
fathers.

By express Scripture they are condemned who forbid marriage, 1 Timothy 4. 3. Yet
ye do so: for ye will not suffer Priests to marry.


Pa. Rhem. Annot. 1 Timothy 4. 3.
They who forbid marriage as unlawful, such as the Manichees, are condemned:
but not we, who only forbid some sorts of men to marry.


Prot. The Austin. Epist. 74.
Manicheis did not forbid all men to marry; but only their Elect, such as your
Priests and Monks. And therefore if the Manicheis be hereby condemned; why
not ye also?

In the Scriptures we read expressly, That if any who believes not, call a
Christian to a feast, the Christian should cate of whatsoever is set before
him, asking no question for conscience sake; 1 Corinthians. 10. 27. Yet if one of
you Papists be bidden to a feast by a Protestant (of whom you make no more
esteem, then of one who believes not) you will not eat of whatsoever is set
before you.

1 Timothy 4. 3.
By express Scripture they are condemned, who command men to abstain from
meats: Yet so do you Papists. Erasm. Schol. in Epist. ad Episcop. Basil. de
del^ctu ciborum. nu. 29.
Qui gustauit ouum, trahitur in carcerem: cogitur que de haeresi causam dicere:
qui totam diem Dominicam vacat temulentiae, scortis, and aleae, audit bellus
home: He who eats an egg on a fasting day is committed to prison, and
suspected for an Heretic: He who sits at the Alehouse all the Lords day,
and gives himself to whoring, and dicing, is counted a good man and a true.

In the Esaias 53. 6.
Scripture we read expressly, That the Lord laid upon him (viz Christ) the
iniquity of us all: and that it was 1 Pet. 3. 10.
Christ, who suffered for our sins: and, 1 Pet. 2, 24, 25.
bare them in his body on the tree: so that, by his stripes we are healed. Yet
you Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 8.
teach, That satisfaciendo patimur pro peccatis, By satisfactory works we must
suffer for our sins: We, as well as He; Not he only.

In the Scripture we read expressly, Heb. 7. 27.
That our Savior Christ did but offer himself once: And yet you Con. Trid.
Sess. 22. e. 1.
say, That in precise manner he offered himself twice. Once at his last
Supper; and again, upon the Cross.


Pa. Some of us say so indeed: Velosillus Aduertent. in 2 To. Chrysostom. ad 16.
quasitum. Suarez in Tho. To. 3. d 74. sect. 2. The History of the Council of
Trent in English, p. 545. and 555. and 574.
But there was a hot contention about it in the Council at Trent: a good sort
maintaining resolutely, That he did not offer himself at the last Supper: Of
which number that famous Mussus was one, Sixth. Senens. l. 4. verbo. Cornel.
Mussus.
who was a Preacher at twelve years old, with whom all Italy was in admiration.
But say on.

In the Scripture we read expressly, Heb. 9. 25.
That our Savior was not to offer himself often: Yet Conc. Trid. Sess. 22. c.
2.
you teach, That he offered himself daily.

In the Scripture we read expressly, Heb. 9. 25.
That if Christ be often offered, he must often suffer. But you deny, that he
suffers often, though you grant he is often offered.

In the Scripture we read expressly, Heb. 9. 22.
That without shedding of blood there is no remission of sins. Yet Bell. l. 2.
de Missa c. 2.
you teach* That your Mass is a propitiatory sacrifice for sin; though you
acknowledge it an unbloody sacrifice.

In the Scripture it is expressly written, Heb. 13. 4.
That Marriage is honorable among all: And yet Rhem. Annot. in 1 Cor. 7. 9.
you say, Marriage of Priests is the worst sort of incontinency.

In the Scripture we read expressly, James 3. 2.
That in many things we sin all: Yet Bell. l 4. de (...) c. 13.
you say, He who is justified, Legem omnino implet, Keeps the Law wholly.

In the Scripture we read expressly, Apoc. 14. 13.
That they are blessed who die in the Lord hereafter, for they rest from their
labors: Yet Rhem. Annot. ibid.
you teach, That many of those that die in the Lord go to Purgatory: where
their labor is greater then they ever underwent in this world.

To be brief: In the Scripture we read expressly, That Christ is Ephesians. 5. 23.
the Head, and 2 Cor. 1^. 2.
Spouse of the Church. Yet Bell. l. 2. de Romans Pont. c. 31.
you tell us, The Pope is Head, and Spouse of the Church. In the Scripture we
read expressly, 1 Ioh. 1. ^.
That it is the blood of Christ which cleanses us from all sin: and yet you tell
us, That Holy Water, Holy-bread, Bishops* blessing, and such like will cleanse
us from many sins. In the e Matt. 25. 34, 41.
Scriptures we read expressly of two places appointed for Souls after this life,
Heaven, and Hell. And Bell. l. 2. de purgat. c. 6.
yet you tell us, there are four places: Heaven, Hell, Purgatory, and Limbus
puerorum; yea, and perhaps Bell. l. 2. de purg. c. 7.
a fifth differing from all these. By all which do not you see how plain, and
how plentiful the Scriptures are which make for us, and against you in matters
controuersed? Do not you see Hill, in his Quarterne of Reasons, reason 8. p. 41.
his falsehood, who said; The Catholics follow the Bible, but the Protestants
force the Bible to follow them?


Pa. I see you huddle up one Scripture in the neck of another readily: (...)
Survey first Book c. 2.
But it has been the property of all Heretics to make no bones of
Scripture, but prodigally to spend them, and to lavish them out to prove
thereby their heresies, were they never so fantastical. Lib. adu. pr^fama^
omnium haeres. nouati^nes.
Vincentius Lyrinensis witnesses, That Heretics fly through every volume of
the heavenly Law; and that they dye and color almost every Page in their
Books with sentences of the Old and New Testament.


Pro. And do not you so too, I pray? Are there not many Pages in many Books of
yours, which are died and colored with sentences of the Old and New Testament?
Is not your Canisius Catechism as full of Texts of the Old and New Testament,
as any Heretics? Is not your Summarie of Controversies, made by W. C. and
published, A. 1623. and your Brerely Austins Religion c. 3. sect. 4. ^. 35.
Gagge of the New Gospel, published ^. 1622. dyed with sentences out of
Scripture?


Pa. Yes: but Heretics insist upon Scriptures only, as S. Austine witnesses;
whereas our Books are full of other testimonies out of Fathers and Counsels.


Prot. Yea: but it is not true that Heretics insisted upon Scripture only; for
the most notorious Heretics that ever were, have been as confident that the
Fathers were on their side, as you are confident they are on your side. The
most notorious Heretics have insisted much upon the Fathers.

m Hist. l. 5. c. 27.
The Samosatenians, who denied the Godhead of Christ, bragd, Maiores omnes
etiam ipsos Apostolos ea sensisse ac docuisse quae ipsi nunc dicunt seruatamque
esse predicationis veritatem vsque ad tempora Victoris qui 13. a Petro
Romanorum Episcopus fuit. All their predecessors, even the Apostles themselves
thought as they thought, and that the truth of their doctrine continued till
Victors time, who was the thirteenth Bishop of Rome after S. Peter.

n Act. 1. To. 2. Conc. p. 21. edit. Binniana.
Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, who denied the two Natures of Christ's cried
out in the Council at Chalcedon, Ego testimonia habeo sanctorum patrum
Athanasij, Gregorij, Cyrilli in multis locis; Ego cum patribus eijcior, ego
defendo patrum dogmata, non transgredior in alique, and horum testimonia non
simpliciter ne^ transitory, sea in libris habeo. I have the testimonies of the
holy Fathers, Athanasius, Gregory's, Cyrils, and that in many places; I am
condemned with the Fathers; it is I who defend the Fathers opinions, I do not
swerue one Iod from them, I have their testimonies not by hearsay, and at
second hand, but in their own Books.

o Epist. ad Rufum. qu^ extat. apud Binn^um inter Acta Conc. Ephesians. O^cumen.
To. 3. c. 13 p. 780. To. 1. edit. Binniana.
The Nestorians, who held many heresies, at the Council of Ephesus, made this
protestation. Nos in sanctorum patrum qui apud Nic^nam conuenerant
caeterorumque qui post illos in Ecclesia claruerunt, Eust achij Antiocheni,
Basilij Caesariensis, Gregorij, ^oannis, Athanasij, Theophili, Damasi Romani,
Ambrosij Mediolanensis, reliquorum que qui cum memoratis consentiunt doctrina
persevere amus pijsque illorum vestig ijs insistimus: quippe qui Euangel^cam
Apostolicamque and Propheticam doctrinam plene assecuti exact am Oxthedoxae
fidei Rogulam nobis tradiderunt: quam doctrinam and nos inconcussam inflexamque
retinere satagimus, etc. We maintain the doctrine which the holy Fathers
assembled at Nice, and others who were men of fame in the Church since that
time maintained. Such as Eustac^ius of Antioch, Basil of Caesarea, Gregory,
John, Athanasius, Theophilus, Damasus of Rome, Ambrose of Millain, and the
like. We tread in their most holy steps, who having fully attained to the
knowledge of the Gospel, and of the Apostles, and of the Prophets, have left us
an exact rule to follow, which we desire also to leave unto our posterities,
etc.

p Synod. ^at^ranens. apud Bin. To. 2. Cont. p. 1091. S^cretario 4.
Certain Heretics in a Council held under Martin 1. cried out, Haec
pietatis dog mata tradiderunt nobis qui ab initio praesentialiter viderunt, vel
Ministri verbi facti sunt, eorumque discipuli, and successores, and sequentes a
Deo inspiratae Ecclestae doctores, etc. These religious opinions were delivered
unto us, by such as were made Ministers of the Word at the beginning, and by
their disciples and successors, and since by the Doctors of the Church, who
were illuminated by God, etc. And this is so plain that Dial. 6. c. 22.
Cope confesses it in these words: Veteres haeretici cum patres ipsis
apertissime aduer sarentur cos tamen a se stare magna contention^ clamabant:
The ancient Heretics cried out with open mouth, that the Fathers made for
them, though indeed the Fathers were flat against them. And if Copes
acknowledgement will not satisfy you, you may find as much acknowledged by
Baronius, Annal To. 5. An. 431. Nu. 170.


Pa. But what say you to Saint Anstine, whom I alleged as witnessing, That
Heretics insist upon Scripture only?


Prot. I say it is not credible that Saint Austin ever said so, or thought so;
for he himself witnesses, That Heretics have insisted upon Visions and
Miracles, and Successions, and Counsels, and Fathers, as well as upon
Scripture. That Heretics insisted upon Visions, Saint Austin witnesses, De
vnitate Ecclesiae Cap. 16. That Heretics have insisted upon Miracles, Saint
Austin witnesses, Tract. 13. in Ioh. That they have insisted upon Succession,
S. Austin witnesses Epistola 165. And that Maximini^s the Arian insisted upon
the Council at Arminium. That the Donatists insisted upon S. Cyprian, and
other Fathers concurring in opinion with him. That Pelagius insisted upon
Hilary, and Ambrose, and Chrysostom, and Sixtus Bishop of Rome, and Jerome,
and upon some passages of S. Austin we read in S. Austin. Now except he would
contradict himself, how can it be that he, who witnesses these things,
should witness also, That Heretics insisted upon Scripture only?


Pa. It seems by your speech, That Heretics used all kind of arguments in
defense of themselves, and that they insisted upon Fathers especially. I could
wish you durst refer the hearing of the more weighty differences between us
unto the Fathers.


Prot. What reason have you to fear, that I dare not refer the hearing of
the more weighty differences between us unto the Fathers: it by Fathers you
mean the Ancient Fathers, and not your Father Jesuits?


Pa. I fear you dare not make such a reference, because I read in Annal. To.
6. ad ^n 448 (...) 42.
Cardinal Baronius that, Haeretici nostri temporis sic prouocant ad diuinam
scripturam, vt nisi tot syllabis and elementis id ipsum quod profitetur
Ecclesia Catholica in ea expressum inueniunt, minime sibi retinendum esse
pertinacissime reluct antur: nullam vel traditionum, vel sanctorum patrum
interpretationum rationem pror sus habentes. The Heretics of this age (he
means such as you) do so appeal to Scripture, that except they find therein
even in so many words, whatsoever the Catholic Church be^eeueth, they utterly
dislike it: making no reckoning at all of Traditions, or of the expositions of
the Fathers.


Prot. Your Cardinal is a Cardinal lier. We require no such dunstable plain
proof out of Scripture for points of Faith, as he lyingly affirms. Neither
do we despise the Fathers: We Rainolds C^^fer. with Heart. ^ c. 2. diuis. 2.
confess they were men endued of God with excellent gifts, and brought no small
light to the understanding of Scriptures. And much more we say (saying nothing
but what we think) in their commendation.


Pa. Why, but I have heard (for all your talk) by others, Dowly in his
instruction of Christian Relig c. 8. p. 108
That you despise all the Churches Doctors, and ancient Fathers, That Hill in
his Quarterne of Reasons Nu. 10.
you make no more account of the Fathers, longer then you can wrest them to
serve your turn, then you do of Beuis of Hampton, or Adam Bell. Yea, I read it
Sebastian ^laseh in proses. Cathol. ratio 10. 7.
written of such as you, that, Non alio loco reuera sanctos Patres habent quam
que loco Alcoranum Mahometi, and Esopi fabulas: They make no more account of
the holy Fathers, then they do of the Turks Alkaron, or Esops Fables. And,
Brislow Motive 14.
that it is well known to such as hear your Sermons, or be in place to hear
you talk boldly and familiarly together among your selves, you are not afraid
plainly to confess, That the Fathers all were Papists. And I am sure you know
the man, whose words these are: Campian, rat. 5. Kellinsons Survey l. 1. c. 4.
Nu. 6
The Protestants let not to confess with Tobith Matthew, That no man can read
the Fathers, and believe them, and embrace the New Religion.


Prot. I know there are of you Papists, Walsinghams search into Religion. p.
19. i Brislow Motive 14.
who confidently avouch, That the old Fathers make against us in all points:
and i that in most matters of Controversy they are so plainly on your side,
that it cannot with any color be denied, or called in question. I know there
are of you who Fieri non against Rider, p. 25.
write: That in all the Volumes of the Fathers nothing is treated, but what you
profess, nothing commended or condemned, but what you commend or condemn; and
that we in our consciences know all Antiquity to be against us: Because (as
Bishop in his 2. part against M. Perkins Tit. of Repentance. p. 214.
they say) in no one point that they can hear of, will any of us be tried by
the judgment, and consent of Antiquity. I know the man, and what became of
him (he was hanged at A. 1581.
Tiburne for Treason) who first broached that slander on Tobith Matthew, the most
reverend Archbishop of York at this day: who being almost eighty years old,
preaches more Sermons in a year, then you can prove have bin preached by all
your Popes since Gregory the great his days. And I know that that Rat. 5.
man vaunted; Ad Patres si quando licebit accedere, confectum est praelium: tam
sunt nostri quam Gregorius 13. filiorum Ecclesiae Pater amantissimus. If
Controversies of Religion came once to the decision of the Fathers, all would
go on your side: for the Fathers, were as flat for you, as Gregory the
thirteenth, your beloved Pope. Yea, and I know your Lay Apology or Petition of
Lay Catholics. 1604. c. 4.
Catholics in their Petition to his Majesty, suggested: That for one place of
a Father evil understood, sometimes falsified, sometimes mutilated, and
sometimes wholly corrupted, brought by us: they could produce a thousand, not
by patches and mammocks, as we do: but whole Pages, whole Chapters, whole
Books, and the uniform consent of all the ancient Fathers, and Catholic
Church. Yet I am of Medulla patrum in Athanasion. c. 15. p. 140.
Scultetus mind, That D. Whitakers spoke nothing but the truth, when in his
answer to Campian he avouched, Patres in maximis iudic ijs toti sunt nostri,
in leuioribus varij, in minutissimis vestri. The Fathers in main Controsies
are wholly ours, in the lesser, some ours, some yours, in the least yours, not
ours. Yea I am of D. Conference with Heart. c. 8. di^is. 6. in fine.
Raynolds mind, who protests that in his opinion, Not one of all the Fathers
was a Papist; especially, considering the very essence of a Papist consists
in opinion of the Popes Supremacy: and the Popes Supremacy is not allowed by
any of the Fathers.


Pa. r Why, but you will not deny I am sure, That some of your predecessors, as
for example Luther, has spoken scornfully of the Fathers* Are not these his
words, Nihil curo, etc. I care not if a thousand Austins, a thousand Cyprians,
a thousand Churches think otherwise then I do.


Prot. Luther persuading himself that the Word of God made for him in a
controversy which he handled, by way of supposall, that Austin and Cyprian,
etc. thought otherwise* professes, that having the Word with him, he cared not
who they were, not how many they were, who were against him. And do you think
that therein he spoke scornfully of the Fathers? What do you think then of
him, who persuading himself that some of your Popes made for him, protests
he would rest more thereon, then upon thousand Austins, thousand Ieroms,
thousand Gregory's, Ego vt ingenue ^atcor plus vnt summo pontificicrederem in
his qui fidci mysteria tangunt qua^ mill Augustinis, Hieronymis, Gregorijs
says your Cornelius Mussus, in his Cap. 14. p. 606. edit. venet. 1588
Commentary upon the Epistle to the Romans. If it were scornefullnesse in
Luther to prefer the Word of God before thousand Austins: does it not much
more argue scornfulnesse in Musse, to prefer an usurping, most vicious, and
unlettered Pope, before thousand Austins? Pious Mirandula in Quaest. An Papasit
supra Conc.
He was a great Clerk in his time, who delivered this as sound doctrine;
Simplici potius Rustice, and infanti, and Anicul^, magis quam Pontifici maximo,
and mill Episcopis credendum est, si isti contra Euangelium, illi pro
Euangelie faciant. We ought rather believe a plain country fellow, or a child,
or an old wife, then the Pope, and a thousand Bishops: if the Pope and Bishops
speak against the Gospel; and the others agreeably to the Gospel. To prefer
the Word of God before Bishops, is not to scorn Bishops.


Pa. Well, shall we then fall to the Fathers, and see what they say?


Prot. Nay, stay a little. And tell me first what hope there is that either you
should persuade me, or I persuade you, by Fathers: seeing the one of us cannot
persuade the other to be of his opinion by the Scripture: It is Luke 16. 31
written, That they who hear not Moses, and the Prophets, will not be
persuaded though one rise from the dead again. Which makes me fear, that
seeing Moses and the Prophets, alleged by me, cannot persuade you, nor the
Texts which you allege out of the same cannot persuade me, we shall lose both
our labors in examining what the Fathers have said about the differences
between us: For if men who hear not Moses and the Prophets, will not be
persuaded by the dead miraculously raised; I cannot think they will ever be
persuaded by the Fathers.


Pa. Say you so?


Prot. Yea truly: and I am the more afraid we shall lose our labors in this
kind; because there is as great question between us, about the Fathers, as
about the Scriptures: what the meaning of the Fathers is, as what the meaning
of the Scriptures is. On whose side St. Austin, and St. Ambrose stands, as on
whose side St. Paul, and St. Peter stands. The Fathers Writings are subject to
mistakings as well as the Scriptures. Arbitror nonnulles in quibusdamlocis
libr^rum meorum opinaturos me sensisse, quod non sensi, aut non sensisse quod
sensi: I suppose (says Lib. 1. de Trinitate 6. 3. prope sinem.
St. Austin) that many by reason of some passages in my Books, will conceive
that my meaning is otherwise then it was: or that it was not such as it was.
And it fell out accordingly. For as Aunal. To. 6. ad An. 450. n. 17
Baronius witnesses, after St. Austins death, there arose up diverse, Qui ex
eius scriptis male perceptis complures inuexerunt errores, quos S. Aug. nomine
and authoritate defendere conabantur. Who mistaking his meaning, broached many
errors in his name. Now I doubt not, but you think other Fathers Writings are
as subject to mistakings as St. Austins.


Pa. That I do: Yet prove this point (I pray) a little more fully.


Prot. I will; and that by examples of ancienter, and later times. In ancient
times one Father mistook the meaning of another. At this time, even one of you
conceiues differently of the meaning of the Fathers, from others of you: some
saying, This is the meaning: others saying, not so; but this is the meaning.


Pa. What ancient Father mistook his fellows meaning?


Prot. St. Austin mistook St. Cyprians: for St. Austin thought St. Cyprian had
been of opinion, that Heretics were within the Church: which (as your men
say) St. Cyprian did not.


Pa. Indeed, I think St. Austin mistook St. Cyprian foulely: for I read in
Lib. 3. de Eccle^a c. 4.
Bellarmine, that, Cypriani verba nihil tale sonant. S. Cyprians words founded
nothing that way. And in Loc. com. l. 4. c. 2. fol. 118 a.
Canus, Ego, vt quemadmodum sentio loquar, non intelligo quid caus^ Augustimo
fuerit, vt verba Cypriani in eum sensu^ acceperit, qui mihi sane tam apparet a
Cypriani mente alienus, quam Coelum a terrae natura altenum est* sed aliquando
bonus dormitat Homerus. If I may speak my mind freely; I wonder why S. Austin
took S. Cyprians words in that meaning; from which they are as are far as
heaven from earth: but the greatest Clerks may now and then be taken napping.
But what other mistaking do you read of in old time? One swallow makes not
summer.


Prot. Iulianus Bishop of Capna, of quick wit, and good understanding in the
Scriptures, as De viris Illustribus To. 4. ^perum Hi^ron.
Gennadius witnesses, conceived that Chrysostom did not believe Original
sin was derived from the fathers unto the children. Yet See Sixth. Senens. l.
6. Ann^s. 236.
S. Austin was of another mind: S. Austin thought Julian was deceived: Julian
mistook the meaning of S. Chrysostom.

Synod. Paris. impress. An. 1596. p. 155.
About the year 824. there was a great question, Whether Images might be
worshipped. The Bishops of France in a meeting at Paris, collected diverse
testimonies out of Gregory Nyssen, Basil, Chrysostom, Cyril, Athanasius,
Ambrose, Epiphanius, and Stephen Bostron, as they call him, to prove Images
might not be worshipped: yet I pist. 1. To. 3. Conc. edit. Bin. p. 256.
Hadrian alleges the same testimonies, out of the same Fathers, to prove the
contrary. viz. That Images might be worshipped.


Pa. May I believe you that this is true?


Prot. Yea: for Bellarmine grants it to be true. Plurima testimonia quae summus
Pontifex Hadrianus in Epistola illa sua doctissima pro Imaginibus posuit isti
rursum allegant qui contra Imagines pugnant. The many testimonies alleged by
Pope Hadrian, in that his learned Epistle in defense of Images: these Bishops
(he means the Bishops which met at Paris) allege them to disprove Images,
Append. ad lib. de cultu Imag. c. 4.
says Bellarmine.


Pa. What instances can you give me to make it plain, that learned Catholics
differ about the meaning of the Fathers: for I thought the Fathers had written
so plainly, that any man might easily have conceived their meaning, and that
all (Catholics especially) had understood them alike.


Prot. I could load you with instances of your learned Romanists differences
about the meaning of the Fathers: but I will give you only a few, yet such as I
think very remarkable. It is a great question among yourselues, Whether the
Virgin Mary was conceived in sin, or no: Lib. 4. de A(...)iss. grattae. etc.
^. 15.
some affirming, some denying. Bellarmine is one of them who denies that she was
conceived in sin: and for proof of his opinion, he alleges Ambrose Ser. 22.
in Ps. 118. Yet To. 2. in 3 par. Tho. q. 27. disput. 117. c. 3. nu* 36, etc.
Vasquez disputing the question, tho he be of Bellarmines opinion in the maine,
professes: he durst not cite that place of Ambrose, which Bellarmine does for
that purpose. Mitto ex Latinis testimonium Ambrosij, quamuis istud non nulli
praeclarum existiment. Mihi enim verba ipsius aliud omnino sonare videntur,
etc. I pass over the testimony of S. Ambrose, says he, tho some account of it
highly, because in my opinion his words carry quite another meaning. That which
Bellarmine thought S. Ambrose meant, Vasquez thought he did not mean. The same
Loc^^itat^.
Bellarmine, in prosecuting the same controversy, alleges Anselme, Lib. de
concepta virginali and peccato Originali, Cap. 18. Yet Lib. de B. Virg.
Conception^.
Petrus de Vincentia alleges the same words out of the same place unto the
contrary. Bellarmine thought the Virgin Mary's immaculate conception to be
proved by Anselme. Petrus de Vincentia thought that the Virgin Mary's
conception in sin was proved by Anselme. ^o^o citat^. m ^^b. supra ^^t.
Bellarmine in the same case alleges Austin, and Jerome, as being of his
opinion: m Petrus de Vi^centia alleges the same Fathers, as being of a
contrary opinion. Hildephonsus lib. de virginita^^ B. Mariae, is alleged by
Petrus de Vincentia, for the Virgins conception in sin: and yet Ibid.
he confesses, that Hildephonsus is alleged by a contrary faction, to prove
her freedom from sin. May not this serve for one instance, to prove that
your learned Catholics differ about the understanding of the Fathers?


Pap. What is your next?


Prot. It is a great Question (as you know) between us, and you, Whether
Matrimony be a Sacrament in proper sense? You say it is so. We say, it is not
so. For the proof of your, it is so. Lib. 1. de Maetrimon* c. 3.
Bellarmine alleges Leo 1. in his ninety two Epistle; and Chrysostom in his
twenty Homily upon the Ephesians; and Ambrose upon the fifth to the Ephesians. and a
number of places out of S. Austin. Whereby it is plain, (except he write
against his own conscience) that he conceived these Fathers held opinion,
Matromony was a Sacrament in proper sense: Yet your To 4. in 3. par, The.
disput. 2. ^. 4 Nu. 22. 23.
Vasquez thinks they did not: for handling that point, Mitto*testimonia Leonis
Papae 1. in Epistola 90. alias 92. Cap. 4. Chrysostomum Hom. 20. in Epist. ad
Ephesians. and Authorem Comment. in Paulum apud Ambrosium in illud Ephesians. 5.
Sacramentum h^c, etc. qui Matrimonimm Sacramentum seu mysterium appellant: e^
quod non loquuntur ipside sacramento proprie, qualia sunt 7. quae in Ecclesia
sunt a Christo instituta, etc. sed de Sacramento latiori significatione, pro ut
est mysterium and signum coniunctionis Christi cum Ecclesia de qua nunc non
disputamus. In quo etiam sensu existimo Aug. ubique Matrimonium Sacramentum
appellasse. I do not urge Leo 1. in his 92. Epistle: nor Chrysostomes 20*
Homily upon the Ephesians, nor the Author of the Commentaries which go under
Ambrose his name upon the Ephesians: tho they call Matrimony a Sacrament:
because they speak not of a Sacrament in proper sense, such as are those seven
which Christ ordained in his Church: but of a Sacrament in a larger sense, as
it is a mystery, or a sign of the union that is between Christ and his Church,
of which kind of Sacrament we speak not now. In which kind of meaning I think
S. Austin continually called Matrimony a Sacrament, says Vasquez. And in the
Cap. 5. de Matrimon. Sacr. n. 30
Chapter following, treating upon the same Argument: Postquam singula loca Aug.
perlegi and attente considerani, An. 1588. manifesse deprehendi cum non loqui
de Sacramento proprie, pro vt in praesenti loquimur: sed de sacramento latior^
significationepro vt est signum vnionis Christi cum Ecclesia, ac proiude
indi^^^ authoritate ipsi^^ in has part^ ^^^ra haretic^s v^^ non debere. After
that, in the year 1588. I did diligently read and considered of the places in
S. Austin, I found it very apparent, that when he called Matrimony a Sacrament,
he spoke not of a Sacrament in proper sense, but in larger signification* and
therefore I thought it not fit to allege Austins authority against the
Heretics in this Controversy, says the same man. May not this serve for
another instance to prove that your learned Catholics differ about the
understanding of the Fathers?


Pa. What is your third instance?


Prot. It is See ^^ll^r. l. 3. (...) c. 3.
questioned partly between us, and you: partly among your selves, what kind of
certainty a man may have of his salvation: some saying, That faithful men may
attain to such knowledge of their salvation, that they may rest assured of the
forgiveness of their sins: other saying, not so, except it be by special
revelation. Of the former opinion is ^ Catharinus, of the later L^it. c. 7. and
10
Bellarmine. Both of them allege the self same Fathers, Greek, and Latin,
for the proof of their several opinions, which argues they conceived
differently of the Fathers meaning. In like manner it is questioned between us
and you, Whether the words of Saine Peter, 1 Epist. 3. 19. are to be understood
of Christ's discension into hell in soul after his death. And your Anno^. in ^
P^^. 3. 19.
Rhemists would persuade us, That S. Austine found himself sure that so much
was plainly proved thereby: yet Lib. 4. de Christ^ c. 13.
Bellarmine confesses; Non vult Aug. h^^c locu^^ ad Infer^s pertiner^: That S.
Austin did not think Christ's discension into hell was proved thereby.

A great question it is even See Bell* l* 1. de Euth^i^^. c. 5.
amongst your selves, Whether the words of Christ, Ioh. Chap. 6. be to be
understood properly of the Sac^ament, or no: Caietan, Iansenius, Hessels,
Tapperus, and some others, hold negatiuely: Roffensis, Bell. Maldonate, etc.
hold affirmatively. Now, Caietan proves his Negative, ijs them modis quibus
Roffensis stabiliuit contrarium sententiam authoritate sanctorum and pracipue
B. Aug. By the same Arguments that Roffensis proved his affirmative, even by
the testimony of the Fathers, especially of S. Austin, as Artu. 15.
Tapperus witnesses.

Grauisitina atque exa^hsima illustrissimorum to^^^ Italia and Gallia Academia,
cum Censura, etc. Printed at London 1530
In King Henry the Eighth days, there was a great controversy among your
selves, Vtrum ducere relictam (...) mortui sine liberis it a sit de iure divine
and naturali prohibitu^: vt nullus po^ti^ex super hui^snoodi m^trimonij
contract is sine contrahen^is dispensare posset. And the most famous
Universities in France and Italy, grounding themselves upon the Scriptures, and
Fathers, were of opinion, That marrying of the brothers wife was so forbidden,
that no dispensation could make it lawful. And to that purpose some learned
man made a book. Now the Fathers, whereon the Universities, and the Author of
the book rested were Origin, Chrysostom, Basil, Hierom, Augustine, Greg. etc.
Yet Bellarmine, and the Author of the book, entitled, Apologia Tumultuaria*
etc. allege the same Fathers to the contrary. I did not think the Fathers
words had been so subject to different constructions. But I must put off the
further dispute about the Fathers, till our next meeting, which shall be (God
willing) err long, while, God be with you, only remember* I pray you, that
which is written: 1. Tim. 6. 3. 4. and 5. verses, If any man teach otherwise,
and consents not to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
doctrine, which is according to godliness. He is puffed up and knows nothing,
but doteth about questions and strife of words, whereof comes envy strife,
railings, evil surmisings, Froward disputations of men of corrupt minds and
destitute of the truth, which think that gain is godliness: from such separate
thy self.


FINIS.
The Errata.
page 5. lin. 8. for with read about. p. 6. l. 19. for by read the case. p. 9.
l. 17. threaten for threape. p. 10. l. 6. our for your. in marg. staditas for
studites. l. 17. we for ye. p. 15. lm. 9. you say truly for you say not
truly ibid. (...)l. 31. our for your. p. 17 l 10 read^ not* what we can do.
p. 20. l. 14. that read the. pa. 21 l. 25. I will use, read I will not use. p.
22. l. 3. yet the, read yet that the. ibid. fit it, read fi^ten. p. 23. l. 14.
bold, read bald. ibid. l. 28. effectum, read effectum. p. 25. l. 25. a for the.
p. 28. l. 22. for, read of p. 34. marg. Malliensibus, read Mas^il. p. 35. l. 2.
was the, read was in the. p. 36. lin 22. eauden, read euden. p. 39. l. 1.
Dorantes, read Durantus, p. 42. l. 6. offered read offers.


