THE FRENCH IVBILE: OR, THE JOY AND THANKSGIVING of all France, to God and
their King, for the death of the Marquise d'Ancre.

Translated out of the French Copy printed at Paris.

BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY. printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by Felix Kyngston for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold at
his shop under S. Peter's Church in Cornehill, and in Pope's Head Alley. 1617.

TO THE READER.
HOnest and well affected Reader, for thy greater contentment, I am bold to
present thee with this Iubile of the whole French Nation upon the death of the
Marquise de'Ancre: this joy has been manifested on all hands, by all sorts and
degrees. The King to show how acceptable the service of Mounsier de Vitry was
to him in this execution, has made him thereupon Marshall of France, in the
place of the Marquise d'Ancre: And Mounsier d'Hailler, who accompanied d'Vitry
in that action, has he caused to be sworn Captain of his Guard; and many
other of the ancient Officers of the Crown has he restored to their places,
absolutely taking the government to himself: and leaving (as he says) all
childish sports to his brother, he has caused to be set at liberty those
little Birds, wherein he formerly delighted, that so they may have their
liberty as well as himself. The Princes (upon it) are some of them returned
to Court, and others expected daily, every one laying down Arms presently,
and amongst others the Duke d'Mayen presented the King with the keys of
Soysons, a town which he had fortified.

The general and extraordinary rejoicing of the common people cannot be
sufficiently expressed; but because I list not to trouble thee (good Reader)
with uncertain and slender reports, I refer thee for the full manifestation
of their general joy to the discourse following; entreating thee to be
persuaded of my honest fidelity and care in these publications, for J assure
thee J am not desirous to show my self both false and foolish in Print.
Farewell.

THE FRENCH IVBILE: OR, THE JOY AND THANKSGIVING of all France, to God and
their King, for the death of the Marquise d'Ancre.
SIR:
Amongst many conformities, between your Majesty, and Alexander the Great,
these are the most evident: first, that he was the son (as you are) of a
famous Captain, and a great King; then, he succeeded him very young, as your
Majesty did to great Henry; and after his death the most part of his subjects
revolted, as yours did. And yet above all the rest, this is the most particular
observation, that in his youth some Grecians (and Demosthenes amongst the rest)
not understanding him well, called him an infant: even as some Frenchmen
conceiving less of your Majesty, have been so impudent to say as much: yea
though he showed himself to be a man, and the greatest man of the world, even
as your Majesty gives evident testimony that you are no less.

Sir: It is true, there is this difference, that Alexander made his greatness
appear to the Grecians, to their loss and prejudice; but you manifest yours
to the French, for their benefit and preservation.

Alexander made it known by the loss of their liberty; but you display your
greatness, by the supplantation of a Tyranny established in your State, by the
most insolent, outrageous, and insupportable stranger that ever was known.
Sir: in conclusion, Alexander employed his first arms against the Grecians,
who then were enemies to the Barbarians; and you have applied yours, against a
barbarous enemy to your royal authority: who trampled under his feet, the
fairest flowers of your Crown, and did so mastiue-like tear France in pieces,
as she can never sufficiently enough express the Tyranny.

Sir: I will not exclaim upon a dead body; but so true it is, I never loved
him when he was alive, and yet I hated him but as a mere French man,
interessed only in the general oppression of your subjects: I grieved
together with them to see a man of small worth, one of little reputation in any
respect, not commended for any virtue; a man of no esteem or reckoning in the
world, especially in France (into which he came without any quality or place)
to rise in a moment, to such a redoubted power and greatness, that there was
not a gentleman in your Court who adored him not; nor a knee, which did not
idolatrously bend not only to himself, but to his meanest creatures: there was
no Officer of your Crown, that trembled not before him; no Court nor Council
that feared him not, no places which he sold not, no royal revenues that he
did not poll; no Seals nor Keepers of Seals, which he did not deprive or
confer; nor no Territory within your Estate, which he was not able to raze,
and tumultuate at his own will and pleasure.

I have read the History of our Kings from Faramond, and observed the Mayors of
the Royal Palace, which in the end dispossessed their Masters: the Grecians,
and Romans have had but few Tyrants, of whose lives, and histories, I have not
a reasonable understanding and knowledge: but neither in them, nor elsewhere,
did I ever read, or hear of such a like Tyranny as this: for these were
contented to tyrannize over the people, whom they had wickedly subdued; but
this man being a stranger and less then a subject in France, did rule, and
sway over the King, and the people. He was full gorged with abundance in your
necessities, he would have an hundred men at his heels, when you should have
but ten; and that in your presence, and before the very beams of your
Majesty, where no other luster should appear: even as no star, nor light
appears in the firmament before the Sun. Briefly, he so beleaguerd your
Majesty, as there was no entertainment into your service, but by his means;
neither had you a servant in your house, whom you almost durst receive, from
any other, then his recommendation.

Nay, if he had stayed here, it might have bin tolerable: but to replunge us
into our intestine wars, to open the gates of Ianus Temple, which you shut,
to kindle again those furious civil flames, which at first were set on fire
by his means, and by your Majesty happily extinguished: and after the raising
up of a dangerous storm among the French, racking of their substance, and
purloining of your own treasure, in the view and knowledge of all the world,
he further coueted to glut himself with their blood; and yet to vaunt and brag
impudently, how he spent his own goods in your service, he that in your
Fathers days was but a base companion. And what Frenchman was there, whose
heart did not bleed to see these opprobies? Yet nevertheless, Sir, both great
and small, though they were his capital enemies, and besides the common
apprehension of a public injury, daily either in general or particular
wronged, yet they swallowed these indignities; Heaven reserving the glory, and
revenge thereof only to your Majesty.

But thanks be given to God Sir; who has made you look so circumspectly
into your people, and cleared your sight in so mistie a season; causing us also
plainly to discern, that the hearts of Kings are in his hands, and that he has
touched yours, causing your Majesty to understand, that your bear not the
hand of Justice in vain, seeing you now begin to yield unto your subjects so
good a testimony thereof; when Sir, it was impossible, but that the wishes and
prayers of so many good men should at last be heard: and ascribe not the
principal hereof to your self, but let God have his part and hand therein: And
his exceeding great, long, and slow Justice being now weary, with the patient
enduring of so odious a reproach to all France, meant to employ your Majesty,
for the restitution of his own honor; and to make this Tyrant, together with
his own blood, to discharge the general substance of your subjects, which he
has before so greedily devoured. But who ever saw so vast a gulf? what
profunditie can be imagined, which might not have been filled with his
rapines? Or what insatiable and monstrous famine might not be satisfied with
the things that he did devour?

So that (after God) Sir, your Majesty in one blow has remedied all these
disorders, with so much Justice, happiness, and prudence, as can no more be
desired: You have made all the world see, that you are truly a King, and that
you will reign and execute Justice: you have removed all pretext and color of
discord from amongst the French, who will now knit and unite themselves to
serve your Majesty, converting the sword they had drawn one against another,
to the augmentation of your Crown and Scepter. We hope, Sir, that under so
valiant, and so just a King, who is so dear to his subjects, and his subjects
to him, we shall display the ensigns of your glorious arms over all the
world; that in stead of murdering one another in Civil wars, whereof can
ensue no other but Cadmean victories, and your Majesty in winning but loose and
beweakened, we shall make strangers to acknowledge, that the Flowers de-luce
having bin buried in oblivion for a time amongst them, shall flourish again
under the felicities and fortunes of your Majesty, more fragrantly, then ever
they did under the Kings your royal Progenitors, who planted them with the
sword in the remotest parts of the earth: that under an invincible Prince we
shall also be victorious: and that the French generositie resuming new vigor
and force under such a King, shall make you greater then Henry the great; more
holy then Saint Lewys; more Imperial then Philip; and more victorious and
conquering then Charlemaine: your Realm shall be greater, and more
redoubtable then ever was his Empire; your Scepter then his sword, and your
reputation, then his name.

And because Sir, you have first satisfied herein the Justice of God, who not
content with the blood and life only of this common enemy of all your
subjects, and your royal self, but persecuting him further after his death,
has deprived him of his funeral rites, which your Majesty granted unto him:
who put into the peoples minds (without any warrant, or order given, nay
contrary to a prohibition) to take his carcass out of the grave, whereof it
was unworthy, and out of the earth, which but yesterday he thought unworthy
to bear him; and to traile it ignominiously along the streets, and hanging it
upon the same Gibbet himself had formerly caused to be erected, to burn the
miserable remainder of his body, with all the madness and fury, that an
enraged people could use upon an infamous Carrion.

And besides this, you have herein given good satisfaction to men, in
revenging the honor of the French Nation; and in his own blood quenching so
many firebrands, as he meant to kindle in France. That by the death of such a
criminal party, you have saved the lives of so many innoce^ts, stopped the
course of so many evils, appeased so many commotions, secured so many towns,
brought peace to your Kingdom, and repose to your people, security to the
Clergy, contentment to the Nobility, and authority and reputation to
Justice; purchasing by this only means, more love amongst your subjects, and
reputation with strangers, then the victory of ten fought fields could have
gotten you.

We most humbly acknowledge, that this was truly the Lords day, wherein he
did, and does continually great things: and we beseech him, that as it has
pleased him so sacredly to inspire your Majesty, he may vouchsafe to continue
ever the same favors toward you, to preserve him, who has preserved us, and
to multiply upon your life, all the benedictions of true happiness. And Sir,
we most sincerely protest, that as you have in this action preserved the
Frenchmens blood; so they shall never be more desirous of any thing, then to
shead the same in your Majesty's service: that seeing your are their Prince as
well in effect, as name, and title, no more violent passion shall ever possess
them, then to make it evidently appear that they are your loyal subjects;
that they will never brook any other Sovereign, nor never swerve from the
fidelity they have sworn to you. That the Nobility will ever recognize you
for their head, the people for their Father; the Church for her eldest Son,
Justice for her protector; and all of them jointly together, for the best King
that this day lives.

They wish, that your fair destinies may spin as long a thread of your life,
and glory of your Conquests, as there be ages in the continuance, or climates
in the worlds large extent. That your Majesty being a new Alcides amongst the
French, may purge the earth of all monsters, restore the honors of arms,
augment the estimation of learning, punish your enemies, and cherish your
subjects. That your prosperities may surmount our wishes, and your own
desires: that you may not only obtain victory, but possess the States of
those that would enjoy yours.

FINIS.

