DIANA. The praises of his Mistres, in certain sweet Sonnets.

By H. C.

VERITAS TEMPORE PATET OCCVLTA
R S
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by I. C. for Richard Smith: and are to be sold at the West
door of Paul's. 1592.

To his absent Diana.
SEuer'd from sweet Content, my lives sole light;
Banished by ouer-weening wit from my desire:
This poor acceptance only I require,
That though my fault have forced me from thy sight;
Yet that thou would (my sorrows to requite)
Review these Sonnets, pictures of thy praise;
Wherein each woe thy wondrous worth does raise,
Though first thy worth bereft me of delight.
See them forsaken: for I them forsook,
Forsaken first of thee, next of my sense;
And when thou deignst on their black tears to look,
Shed not one tear my tears to recompense:
But joy in this (though Fates against me repine)
My verse still lives, to witness thee divine.
To the Gentlemen Readers.
THE eye (Gentlemen) is the Judge of beauty, the ear of vtteraunce, the sense
of Art: these ensuing Sonnets, (sons of no partial Judge, whose eyes were
acquainted with Beauties Riches, whose ears frequented to Angelical sounds,
and sense ravished with excellent Science) are now by misfortune left as
Orphans: and crave desertfull acceptance of your experienst judgments; in whom
rests what ever Beauty would grace, or Art adorn. Being left desolate, they
seek entertainment: farther they will not, how ever you accept them; better
they desire not, but as you like to use them.

Sonetto primo.
Resolved to love, unworthy to obtain,
I do no favor crave: but humble wise
to thee my sighs in verse I sacrifise;
only some pity, and no help to gain.
Hear then, and as my heart shall aye remain
a patient object to thy lightning eyes:
a patient ear bring thou to thundering cries;
fear not the crack, when I the blow sustain.
So, as thine eye bred mine ambitious thought,
so shall thine ear make proud my voice for joy:
lo (Dear) what wonders great by thee are wrought,
when I but little favors do enjoy.
The voice is made the ear for to rejoice:
and your ear gives pleasure to my voice.
Sonnetto secondo.
It may be, Love my death does not pretend,
although he shootes at me: but thinks it fit
thus to bewitch thee for my benefit,
causing thy will to my wish condescend.
For witches which some murder do intend,
do make a picture, and do shoot at it;
and in that part where they the picture hit,
the parties self does languish to his end.
So Love too weak by force thy heart to taint,
within my heart thy heavenly shape does paint:
suffering therein his arrows to abide,
only to the end he might by witches art,
within my heart pierce through thy pictures side,
and through thy pictures side might wound my heart.
Sonnetto terzo.
Blame not my heart for flieng up too hie,
since thou art cause that it this flight begun;
for earthly vapors drawn up by the Sun,
Comets begin, and night-sunnes in the sky.
Mine humble heart, so with thy heavenly eye
drawn up aloft, all low desires does shun:
raise then me up, as thou my heart have done;
so during night, in heaven remain may I.
I say again, blame not my high desire,
since of us both the cause thereof depends:
In thee does shine, in me does burn a fire,
fire draws up other, and it self ascends.
Thine eye a fire, and so draws up my love:
my love a fire, and so ascends above.
Sonnetto quattro.
The Son his journey ending in the West,
taking his lodging up in Thetis bed:
though from our eyes his beams be banished,
yet with his light the Antipodes be blessed.
Now when the Sun time brings my Sun to rest,
(which me too often of rest has hindered)
and whiter skin with white sheet covered,
and softer cheek does on soft pillow rest:
Then I (oh Sun of Suns, and Light of Lights)
wish me with those Antipodes to be,
which see and feel thy beams and heat by nights.
Well, though the night both cold and darksome is,
yet half the days delight the night graunts me:
I feel my Suns heat, though his light I miss.
Sonnetto quinto.
Fly low dear Love, thy Sun do thou not see?
Take heed, do not so near his rays aspire:
least (for thy pride, inflamed with wreakfull ire)
it burn thy wings, as it has burned me.
Thou (happily) say, thy wings immortal be,
and so cannot consumed be with fire:
the one is Hope, the other is Desire,
and that the heavens bestowed them both on thee.
A Muses words made thee with Hope to fly,
an Angels face Desire has begot,
thy self engendered by a Goddess eye:
yet for all this, immortal thou art not.
Of heavenly eye though thou begotten art,
yet art thou borne but of a mortal heart.
Sonnetto sesto.
Uncivil sickness, have thou no regard,
but do presume my dearest to molest?
and without leave dare enter in that breast,
wheretoo sweet Love approach yet never dared?
Spare thou her health, which my life has not spared,
too bitter such revenge of my unrest:
although with wrongs my thought she has oppressed,
my wrongs seek not revenge, they crave reward.
Cease Sickness, cease in her then to remain,
and come and welcome, harbor thou in me:
whom Love long since has taught to suffer pain.
So she which has so often my pain increast,
(Oh God, that I might so revenged be:)
by my more pain, might have her pain releast.
Sonnetto settimo.
A friend of mine, pitieng my hopeless love,
hoping (by killing hope) my hope to slaie:
Let not (quoth he) thy hope thy heart betraie,
impossible it is her heart to move.
But since resolved love cannot remove,
as long as thy divine perfections stay:
thy Godhead then he sought to take away.
Dear, seek revenge, and him a liar prove.
Gods only do impossibilities,
Impossible (says he) thy grace to gain:
show then the power of thy diuinities,
by granting me thy favor to obtain.
So shall thy foe give to himself the lie:
a Goddess thou shall prove, and happy I.
Sonnetto ottauo.
If true love might true loves reward obtain,
dumb wonder only might speak of my joy:
but too much worth has made thee too much coy,
and told me long ago, I sighd in vain.
Not then vain hope of undeserved gain
has made me paint in verses mine annoy:
but for thy pleasure, that thou might enjoy
thy beauties sight, in glasses of my pain.
See then thy self (though me thou will not hear)
by looking on my verse: for pain in verse,
love does in pain, beauty in love appear.
So, if thou would my verses meaning see,
expound them thus, when I my love rehearse;
None loves like him; that is, None fair like me.
Sonnetto nono.
Thine eye the glass where I behold my heart,
mine eye the window, through the which thine eye
may see my heart, and there thy self espy
in bloody colors how thou painted art.
Thine eye the pyle is of a murdring dart,
mine eye the sight thou take thy level by
to hit my heart, and never shootes awry;
mine eye thus helps thine eye to work my smart.
Thine eye a fire is both in heat and light,
mine eye of tears a river does become:
Oh that the water of mine eye had might
to quench the flames that from thine eyes do come.
Or that the fire kindled by thine eye,
the flowing streams of mine eyes could make dry.
Sonnetto decimo.
Lady in beauty and in favor rare,
of favor (not of due) I favor crave:
Nature to thee Beauty and Favor gave;
fair then thou art, and Favor thou may spare.
When on poor me bestowed your favors are,
less Favor in your face you shall not have:
If favor then a wounded soul may save,
of murders guilt (dear Lady) then beware.
My loss of life a million sold were less,
than the least loss should unto you befall:
yet grant this gift, which gift when I possess,
both I have life, and you no loss at all.
For by your Favor only I do live:
and Favor you may well both keep and give.
Sonnetto vndeci.
Mine eye with all the deadly sins is fraught,
proud, since it presumed to look so hie:
a watchman being made, stood gazing by,
idle, took no heed till I was caught:
envious, bears envy that my thought
should in his absence be to her so nie:
to kill my heart, mine eye let in her eye,
murder wrought:
covetous, it never would remove
from her fair hair, gold so does please his sight:
Unchaste, a baud between my heart and love:
glutton eye; with tears drunk every night.
These sins procured have a Goddess ire:
wherefore my heart is damnd in Loves sweet fire.
Sonnetto dodeci.
My Reason absent, did mine eyes require
to watch and ward, and such foes to descrie
as they should near my heart approaching spy:
but traitor eyes my hearts death did conspire,
(Corrupted with Hopes gifts) let in Desire
to burn my heart: and sought no remedy,
though store of water were in either eye;
which well imploid, might well have quenched the fire.
Reason returned, Love and Fortune made
Judges, to judge mine eyes to punishment:
Fortune, since they by sight my heart betraide,
from wished sight adiudgd them banishment:
Love, since by fire murdered my heart was found,
adjudged them in tears for to be drowned,
Sonnetto tredeci.
Falsely does envy of your praises blame
my tongue, my pen, my heart of flattery:
because I said there was no sun but thee,
it called my tongue the partial trumpe of fame;
And says my pen has flattered thy name,
because my pen did to my tongue agree;
and that my heart must needs a flattrer be,
which taught both tongue and pen to say the same.
No, no, I flatter not, when thee I call
the sun, since that the sun was never such:
but when the sun thee I compared withal,
doubtless the sun I flattered too much.
Witness mine eyes I say the truth in this:
they have seen thee, and know that so it is.
Sonnetto quaterdeci.
Wonder it is, and pity is it, that she
in whom all beauties treasure we may find,
that may enrich the body and the mind,
toward the poor should use no charity.
My Love is gone a begging unto thee,
and if that Beauty had not been more kind
than Pity, long ere this he had been pinde:
but Beauty is content his food to be.
Oh pity have, when such poor Orphans beg;
Love (naked boy) has nothing on his back:
and though he wants neither arm nor leg,
yet maym'd he is, since he his sight does lack.
And yet (though blind) he beauty can behold*
and yet (though naked) he feels more heat than cold.
Sonnetto quindeci.
Much sorrow in it self my love does move,
more my despair, to love a hopeless bliss:
my folly most, to love whom sure to miss;
oh help me but this last grief to remove.
All pains if you command, it joy shall prove,
and wisdom to seek joy: then say but this;
Because my pleasure in thy torment is,
I do command thee without hope to love.
So, when this thought my sorrow shall augment,
that my own folly did procure my pain:
then shall I say, to give my self content,
obedience only made me love in vain.
It was your will, and not my want of wit:
I have the pain, bear you the blame of it.
Sonnetto sedeci.
Pity refusing my poor Love to feed,
a beggar starved for want of help he lies,
and at your mouth (the door of Beauty) cries,
that thence some alms of sweet grants might proceed.
But as he waits for some almes-deed,
a cherrie tree before the door he spies;
Oh dear (quoth he) two cherries may suffice,
two only may save life in this my need.
But beggars, can they naught but cherries eat?
Pardon my Love, he is a Goddess son,
and never feeds but on dainty meat,
else need he not to pine as he has done:
For only the sweet fruit of this sweet tree,
can give food to my Love, and life to me.
Sonnetto decisette.
My Ladies presence makes the Roses red,
because to see her lips, they blush for shame:
the Lillies leaves (for envy) pale became,
and her white hands in them this envy bred:
The Marigold the leaves abroad does spread,
because the suns: and her power is the same:
the Violet of purple color came,
di'd in the blood she made my heart to shed.
In brief, all flowers from her their virtue take;
from her sweet breath, their sweet smells do proceed;
the living heat which her eye beams does make,
warmeth the ground, and quickens the seed:
The rain wherewith she waters the flowers,
falls from mine eyes, which she dissolues in showers.
Sonnetto deciotto.
The Fouler hides (as closely as he may)
the net, where caught the silly bird should be,
least he the threatening prison should but see,
and so for fear be forced to fly away.
My Lady so, the while she does assay
in curled knots fast to entangle me:
puts on her veil, to the end I should not flee
the golden net, wherein I am a pray.
Alas (most sweet) what need is of a net,
to catch a bird, that is already taken?
Since with your hand alone you may it get.
for it desires to fly into the same.
What need such art my thoughts then to entrap:
when (of themselves) they fly into your lap.
Sonnetto decinoue.
When your perfections to my thoughts appear,
they say among themselves; O happy we,
which ever shall so rare an object see:
but happy heart, if thoughts less happy were,
For their delights have cost my heart full dear,
in whom of love a thousand causes be,
and each cause breeds a thousand loves in me,
and each love more than thousand hearts can bear.
How can my heart so many loves then hold,
which yet (by heaps) increase from day to day?
But like a ship that is ouer-charg'd with gold,
must either sink, or hurl the gold away.
But hurl not love: thou can not feeble heart.
In thine own blood, thou therefore drowned art.
Sonnetto vinti.
Sweet hand the sweet, but cruel bow thou art,
from whence at me five yuorie arrows fly:
so with five wounds at once I wounded lie,
bearing my breast the print of every dart.
Saint Fraunces had the like, yet felt no smart;
where I in living torments never die:
His wounds were in his hands and feet. where I
all these five helpless wounds feel in my heart.
Now (as Saint Fraunces) if a Saint am I,
the bow that shot these shafts a relic is:
I mean the hand, which is the reason why
so many for devotion thee would kiss:
And some thy glove kiss, as a thing divine,
this arrows quiver, and this relics shrine.
A calculation upon the birth of an honorable Ladies daughter, borne in the
year, 1588. and on a Friday.
Fair by inheritance; whom borne we see,
both in the wondrous year, and on the day
wherein the fairest Planet bears sway:
the Heavens to thee this fortune does decree.
Thou of a world of hearts in time shall be
a Monarch great, and with one beauties ray
so many hoasts of hearts thy face shall slay,
as all the rest (for love) shall yield to thee.
But even as Alexander (when he knew
his Fathers conquests) wept, least he should leave
no Kingdom unto him for to subdue:
so shall thy Mother thee of praise bereave.
So many hearts already she has slain,
as few behind to conquer shall remain.
Vltimo Sonnetto.
Fair Sun, if you would have me praise your light:
when night approaches, wherefore do you fly?
Time is so short, Beauties so many be,
as I have need to see them day and night:
That by continual view, my verses might
tell all the beams of your divinity;
which praise to you, and joy should be to me,
you living by my verse, I by your sight.
I by your sight, and not you by my vearse:
need mortal skill immortal praise rehearse?
No, no, though eyes were blind, and verse were dumb,
your beauty should be seen, and your fame known.
For by the wind which from my sighs do come,
your praises round about the world is blown.

