THE Book in me^ter of Robin Conscience: against his Father Come, his Mother
(...) ^is Sister Proud Bea^ (...) to be^^d and (...) of all people that will
anoide the dangers thereof; which is unto condemnation.

Newly corrected by the Author.

Abacuc. 2. Curssed be he that gets any thing into his house by Covetousness.

Esaias. 33. He shall dwell with God that is without Covetousness.

(...) way with Gods word will not agree.
Wherefore good Father in time here repent:
And have a respect unto Christ's Testament.
Father. What Robin me thinks thou have little wit,
Do thou think scorn to come to promotion:
To marry with gentills I trow it is fit,
Having with them of money a good portion,
Beware of extortion
What though it be gotten by craft and extortion.
By the Mass it is all my delight and pleasure:
To have here abundance of worldly treasure.

Robin. By extortion Father? mary God it forefend,
That any Christian man therein should delight:
Father give me no stolen goods, my wealth to amend,
Unless I do live by the poor man's right,
As I fear that some do both Lord and Knight.
Wherefore (...) Father (...) time here repent:
And have a respect unto Christ's Testament.

Father. Ah Robin I perceive now so God me save,
That thou will be but a mean gentleman:
Seeing you be such a Conscionable knave,
A shameless answer for a Parent.
Go seek thou thy living where that thou can,
Tush, what care I though the people me ban.
By the Mass it is all my delight and pleasure:
To have here abundance of worldly treasure.

Robin. Oh Father seek first here the kingdom of Heaven,
And gather you up of Gods treasure therein to lay:
And not wicked Mammon to fulfill the sins seven,
for that were a very right damnable way,
Remember Father that you be but earth and clay.
Wherefore good Father I pray you yet repent:
And have a respect unto Christ's Testament.

Father. Robin, would thou not have me to buy and sell?
(...) buy and sell and keep in store, so it be done lawfully, and in a right
can*
Nor yet to keep in store for to do me good?
By the mass if I follow thee or the Gospel,
At the length I might chance to lie in my hood,
Tush I will be counted here for a lusty blood.
Seeing it is all my delight and pleasure:
I will have abundance of worldly treasure.

Robin. Father you have enough if you have not too much,
For this I dare be hold here to auow:
You have ten times more ground and money in your hutch,
Then ever had my Grand-sire you will this allow,
Yet he kept a better house then ever did you.
Wherefore good Father amend and repent:
And have a respect unto Christ's Testament.

Father. Tush Robin thy talk is foolish and fond,
I know thy mind that thou go about:
Thou would have me live only by my land,
Be liberal unto the poor.
And to keep open house for every Jack rout,
No, I will feast none but the rufling rout.
For it is all my delight and pleasure:
To have here abundance of worldly treasure.

Robin. Father, I would have you to live so that God may be pleased
And for your good life, God will give you meede:
Father spend your goods so that the poor may be eased,
For your riches be lent you to do such a deed,
And do not spend all on the rich, for they have no need,
Wherefore good Father in time yet repent:
And have a respect unto Christ's Testament.

Father. By the mass Robin I think thou art mad,
The bread of the needful, is the life of the poor. Eccle. 3.4*
Should I feast beggars, mary fie for shame:
I dare say it would make some gentlemen sad,
That all rich men should have such a name.
Yea I my self will confess the same.
Seeing it is my whole delight and pleasure:

Here begins Mother Newgise to talk with Robin her Son, only for the
ease and pleasure of this world. Very necessary to be read and marked of all
newfangled women, that they may avoid the desires thereof.
Mother. Soon Robert I heard say that your Father and you,
Have had since you went great communication:
Concerning our wealth which you will not allow,
You are of such a strange holy fashion,
But this shall be only my preparation,
To live and go gentle-like, gallant and gay:
Seeing it is my chief desire always.

Robin. Mother, like as I said of late unto my Father,
Even so I say now unto you certain:
I would wish you to desire Gods kingdom rather,
Then either wealth, ease, pleasure or gain,
Mother beware of apparel for it is but vain.
Wherefore good Mother mark this thing well:
Yet live and go Christian like after the Gospel.

Mother. Son I will live easily now in mine old age,
A wicked desire of new fangled Women.
And also go as gallantly as I can devise:
What though the people do rail and rage,
And say that I go painted up like butter-flyes,
I will have my clothes made of the new gife.
To live and go gentle like, gallant and gay:
Oh Son it is my chief desire always.

Robin. Yet Mother remember the virtuous good wives,
As Sara, Rebecea and Rachell, with many other more:
Which clothed themselves all the days of their lives,
With shamefastnes, chastity and sobriety also,
Which contrary to their husbands mind would not go.
Wherefore good Mother mark this thing well:
To live and go Christian like after the gospel.

Mother. Son what though your father would not have me go clad
Women of an evil condition
Now after my mind by him in gorgious apparel:
Should I be ruled by him? nay then I were mad,
Yet had I rather with him pick a quarrel,
Though I for my labor had straight of the barrel.
For to live and go gentle like, gallant and gay?
By the mass it is my chief desire always.

Robin. O Mother, ye be now in a wicked mind,
Seeing you will disobay your husband for this:
You show your self to be unnatural and unkind,
And that you have given him many a Judas kiss,
Your act will declare how you have done amiss.
Wherefore good Mother mark this thing well:
Yet live and go Christian like after the Gospel.

Mother. Son I will live gentle like and go at my pleasure,
Seeing thy Father for his substance might be a gentleman:
And though he were poor and had but little treasure,
A point of an vnthriftye Huswife,
Yet would I go gallantly say he what he can,
For I would borrow or else pledge pot, kettle or pan.
To live and go gentle-like, gallant and gay:
Seeing it is my chief desire always.

Robin. O Mother I think you are past all shame,
You would make a right good man to fret:
Think you by your pledging to get you good name?
Or by bringing your husband into danger or det?
Fie that either rich or poor their minds thus should set.
To maintain their pride, wherefore murke this thing well:
Live and go Christian like after the gospel,

Mother. Am I past shame thou peelde apish boy?
Thou malapert knave controlest thou me?
Thou shall fare the woorsse I swear by Saint Loy,
The brag of affinity that comes of Nobility.
Or any that are of thy sect or property,
Will thou be against my estate or degree?
I come of the stock to go gallant and gay:
Wherefore it is my chief desire always.

Robin. Mother I do not dispraise your stock,
Nor yet your own person will I discommend:
But I would have you so live to be of Christ's flock,
And so ask Godmercy, with pride whom ye offend,
This is the hurt that I you pretend.
Wherefore good Mother mark this thing well:
Live and go Christian like after the Gospel.

Mother. A proud enterprise of the base sort of some women now a days.
I pray thee Soon Robert tell me no such tale,
For I will go frocked and in a french hood:
I will have my fine Cassockes and my round Verdingale,
Like one that came of a noble borne blood,
By the mass to think of it, it does my heart good.
To live and go gentle like, gallant and gay:
Oh it is my chief desire always.

Robin. With Nobility Mother you may not compare,
Although ye be rich here in worldly substance:
Neither with apparel nor yet ordinary fare,
To be equal with them you may not your self inhaunce,
For they have their vocation, and you have but your chance.
Wherefore good Mother mark this thing well:
Live and go Christian like after the Gospel.

Mother. Son, live they not Christian like that banquet at the wine?
And goes in their billaments of fine pearl and gold?
Also with broadered hair whereunto they inclne,
Spending much yearly this trade to uphold,
Thus setting forth them selves both young and old.
Is not this Christian like, gallant and gay?
Son this do I chiefly desire always.

Robin. Christian like Mother: no I will not so say,
But heathen indeed such pomp do use:
Saint Paul and Saint Peter does set forth the array,
Mark well.
what Christian women should take and refuse,
Wear sover apparel but desire no news.
Wherefore good Mother mark this thing well:
Live and go Christian like after the Gospel.

Mother. To wear sober apparel, what me anest thou by that?
My clothes are not drunk I would thou should know,
I think thou speak by my red silk hat,
But and I live another year I will have a better show,
I will not go thus sluttishly I trow.
To live and go gentle like, gallant and gay:
Seeing it is my chief desire always,

Robin. Mother the sober apparel that I do mean,
Apparel for women both holy days and woorking days.
Is sadness, wisdom, virtue and learning:
Also your bodily apparel is comely to be seen,
For your degree even now in your going,
It is not sumptuous apparel that is to Gods pleasing.
But a decent order, wherefore mark this thing well:
Live and go Christian like after the gospel.

Mother. Son hold thy peace, for thy talk makes me weary,
A Robin Robin, thou art a shroud toward Child:
If thy Father were of thy mind, I could not be merry,
The desperate mind of wicked women.
Nay I had rather be dead by sweet Mary mild.
Farewell, if thou proouest not a knave I am beguilde.
If I do not live gentle like, to go gallant and gay:
By the mass I would I were hanged up out of the way.

Robin. Such a tree, such fruit from it does proceed,
Fie Mother fie, that you wish you such ill:
Repent your speaking and beware of the deed,
Unless both your soul and body you do kill:
I fear that the devil with you has wrought his will.
Now will I to my Sister to give her some counsel,
For she has many tricks to bring her unto hell.

FINIS.
She Devils are hard to turn.
Here Proud Beautye begins to talk with Robin her Brother, for her proud
fancye and wanton dallying: Very necessary to be read and marked of all Maidens
that seek the vain glory of this world, and the uncomely tricks therein, that
they may avoid the dangers thereof: for fear of condemnation.
The Maid. The name of Gods word to the blasphemy thereof.
BRother Robert, yesterday as I understand,
With my Father and Mother you were offended:
With her for her apparel, and with him for his land,
Thou would by the gospel have them amended,
Mary I with my self have thus pretended.
To be fair and feate, nice and neat, is a gay thing:
To colly and kis, my pleasure it is, for all your new learning.

Robin. New learning Sister? what you be very bold,
Thus disdainfully to give it such a name:
Gods word indeed is both new and old,
To set a work all things in right frame,
But you boast of knackes that will bring you to shame.
Wherefore measure your pleasure by Gods word and will:
And you shall find that your mind is whorish and ill.

Maid. What whorish* you knave, by the blessed mass
Whore I am thus to swear, God give thee sorrow,
Evil word corrupt good manners.
Dout not if I can bring my masters to pass,
I will have knacks indeed (you knave) by tomorrow,
Yet will I for them neither beg, steal nor horrow.
Oh to be fair and feate, nice and neat is a gay thing:
To colly and kis, my pleasure it is for all your new learning.

Robin. Sister, it becomes maids to be gentle of speech,
Both to man, wife and child, whersoeuer they gee:
That your words and works your children may teach,
To live in the fear of God hereafter also,
Would you be and do as you li^^ no sister no.
But measure your pleasure by Gods word and will:
And you shall find that your mind is whorish and ill.

Maid. Jack sauce (I say) thou lout, thou hoddie peake,
I defy thy teaching I would thou know:
Do thou take upon thee to learn me speak,
By the mass but for shame thou should bear me a blow,
As I am of person so my behavior shall show.
Oh to be fair and feate, nice and neat is a gay thing:
To colly and kis my pleasure it is for all your new learning.

Robin. Solomon declares this by the beautiful rout,
A fair woman without discrete manners (says he)
Is like a ring of gold on a Swines snout,
The which is a thing sister uncomely to see,
And now surely by you it well may spoken be.
If you measure your pleasure by Gods word and will:
You shall find that your mind is whorish and ill.

Maid. By my troth for a knave I will thee allow,
All the days of thy life thou shall be none other:
Do thou liken me and my manners unto a sow?
Mary I defy thee though thou art my brother,
Sir my fashions do please my Father and Mother.
Oh to be fair and feate, nice and neat is a gay thing:
To colly and kis, my pleasure it is for all your new learning.

Robin. Sister, can you be fayrer then God has you made,
Feater or neater, by policye or wit?
I ask you because your color often does fade,
And your clothes very grossly about you do sit,
If you use any thing not honest and fit,
Then measure your pleasure, by Gods word and will:
And you shall find that your mind is whorish and ill.

Maid. The practices and motions of Satan and are used of those that be his
fathers darlings now a days.
If God make my face as brown as a berry,
I can painte it white and ruddish withal:
And if God make me look as red as a Cherry,
I can dry up my blood with Chalk in a wall,
If God make me gross, I can pent my self small
To be fair and feate nice and neat is a gay thing:
To colly and kiss my pleasure it is, for all your new learning

Robin. Oh what a damnable evil, that either Christian or Turk.
Should trans-forme them selves from their first creation:
What Lucifer woman will amend Gods work,
They far excel the Sodomites in this abomination,
O pride out of measure, O satan's generation,
Measure this pleasure by Gods word and will:
And you shall find that your mind is whorish and ill.

Maid. Tush I can dye my hair be it never so black,
I can make it shine like gold in a little space:
The works of the evil.
Also to tire up my head I have such a knack,
That some maids will delight to follow my trace,
I can lay out my hair to set out my face.
Oh to be fair and feate, nice and neat is a gay thing:
To colly and kiss my pleasure it is for all your new learning

Robin. To dye and to fleare your hair so abroad,
Surely sister you do it shamfully use:
For with the Scriptures it does not accord,
That maids nor wives their hair should so abuse,
Cover it for shame it is the use of the (...)
Wherefore measure your pleasure up Gods word and (...)
And you shall find that your mind is whorish and ill.

Maid. The decking and balming of proud living Idols.
Brother thou art but a fool me thus so check,
For I will have my Pomande is of (...) smell:
Also my Chains of gold to hang about my neck,
And my broadered hair while I at home dwell,
Stomachers of golds becomes me well.
To be fair and feate, nice and neat is a gay thing:
To colly and kis my pleasure it is, for all your new learning.

Robin. Sister, in the third of Esaias the Lord says plain,
For your broadered hair you shall have baldnes:
For your Chains of gold you shall have halters certain,
For your Pomanders and musk, you shall have stink doutles
And for your stomachers, sackcloth this he does confess.
Wherefore measure your pleasure by Gods word and will:
And you shall find that your mind is whorish and ill.

Maid. If the Lord plague all those that so lead their lives,
With halters and stinkings and with baldnes of head:
Great shame it will be both for maidens and wives,
Fear and shame, much fin does tame
That so tire them selves daily till they go to bed,
To be thus plagued, marry I had rather to be dead.
To be fair and feate, nice and neat is a gay thing:
To colly and kis my pleasure it is for all your new learning.

Robin. Sister, your colling and kissing will have an evil end,
To clatter and flatter is no maidenlike way:
Your gladness and madness does God sore offend,
To entice men to vice is all your cheifest play,
In their sight your delight is for to go gay.
Wherefore measure your pleasure by Gods word and will:
And you shall find that your mind is whorish and ill.

Maid. I perceive that thou would have me live like a mome,
I will talk no (...) I must depart
By the (...)
My (...)
If thou be thy talk^ (...) Father convert
Then (...)
Were (...)

Robin. Sister (...) have you and sa^e you^ if it be his pleasure,
And present to (...) your life is now evil*
Look in (...) to have heavenly treasure,
There (...) to be med^ your proud har^ to kill,
Make haste for to taste of Gods holy will.
(...) it is he (...) to those that be penitent:
Wherefore yet evermore (...) Christ's Testament.

FINIS.
To talk well with some women does as much good:
As a sick man to eat up a load of green wood.

AT London Printed by Edward Allde.


