THE DEFENSE OF Conny catching. OR A CONFVTATION OF THOSE two injurious
Pamphlets published by R. G. against the practitioners of many Nimble-witted
and mystical Sciences.

By Cuthbert Cunny-catcher, Licenciate in Whittington College.

Qui been latuit been vixit, dominatur enim fraus in omnibus.

Printed at London by A. I. for Thomas Gubbins and are to be sold by John
Busbie, 1592.

To all my good friends health.
AS Plato (my good friends) traveled from Athens to Egypt, and from thence
through sundry clymes to increase his knowledge: so I as desirous as he to
search the deapth of those liberal Arts wherein I was a professor, left my
study in Whittington College, Newgate builded by one Wittington
and traced the country to grow famous in my faculty, so that I was so expert
in the Art of Cony-catching by my continual practice, that that learned
Philosopher Jack Cuttes, whose deep insight into this science had drawn him
thrice through every jail in England, meeting of me at Maidstone, gave me
the bucklers, as the subtlelest that ever he saw in that quaint and mystical
form of Foolosophie: for if ever I brought my Conny but to crush a pot of
ale with me, I was as sure of all the crowns in his purse, as if he had
conveyed them into my proper possession by a deed of gift with his own hand.

At Dequor, (...)
Mumchaunce, Catch-dolt, Our le bourse, Non est possible, Dutch Noddie, or
Irish one and thirty, none durst ever make compare with me for excellence: but
as so many heads so many wits, so some that would not stoop a farthing at
cards, All the money in their purse.
would venture all the byte in their boung at dice. Therefore had I cheates for
the very sise, of the squariers, langrets, gourds, stoppedice, high-men,
low-men, and dice barde for all aduauntages: that if I fetched in any nouyce
either at tables, or any other game of hazard, I would be sure to strippe him
of all that his purse had in Esse, or his credyt in Posse, ere the simple
Connie and I parted.

When neither of these would serve, I had consorts that could verse, nippe, and
foyst, so that I had a superficial sight into every profitable faculty.
Insomuch that my principles grew authentical, and I so famous, that had I not
been crossed by those two pe^uish Pamphlets, I might at the next Midsommer have
worn Doctor Stories cappe for a favor. For I traveled almost throughout all
England, admired for my ingenious capacity: till coming about Exceter, I
began to exercise my art, and drawing in a Tanner for a tame Conie, as soon as
he had lost two shillings he made this reply. Sirrah, So^e Conicatchers dare
wear noblemens liueryes, as W. Bickerton and others.
although you have a livery on your back, and a cognizance to countenance you
withal, and bear the port of a Gentleman, yet I see you are a false knave and
a Conny-catcher, and this your companion your setter, and that before you and I
part I Will prove.

At these words Conny-catcher and Setter, I was driven into as great a maze,
as if one had dropped out of the clouds, to hear a pesant cant the words of art
belonging to our trade: yet I set a good face on the matter and asked him what
he meant by Cony-catching. Marry (q. he) although it is your practice, yet I have
for 3. pence bought a little Pamphlet, that has taught me to smoke such a
couple of knaves as you be. When I heard him talk of smoking, my heart waxed
cold, and I began to gather into him gently. No no sir (q. he) you cannot verse
upon me, this book has taught me to beware of crosbiting: And so to be brief
he used me courteously, and that night causd the Constable to lodge me in
prison, and the next morning I was carried before the Justice, where likewise
he had this cursed book of Cony catching, so that he could tell the secrets of
mine art better then my self: whereupon after strict examination I was sent to
the jail, and at the Sessions by good hap and some friend that my money
procured me, I was delivered. As Soon as I was at liberty, I got one of these
books, and began to toss it over very devoutly, wherein I found one art so
perfectly anotomized, as if he had been practitioner in our faculty forty
winters before: then with a deep sigh I began to curse this R. G. that had
made a public spoil of so noble a science, and to exclaim against that
palpable ass whosoever, that would make any pe^-man privy to our secret
sciences. But see the sequel, I smoothered my sorrow in silence, and away I
trudged out of Devonshire, and went toward Cornwall, and coming to a simple
Alehouse to lodge, I found at a square table hard by the fire half a doozen
country Farmars at cards. The sight of these penny-fathers at play, drove me
straight into a pleasant p^ssion, to bless fortune that had offered such sweet
opportunity to exercise my wits, and fill my purse with crowns: for I counted
all the money they had, mine by proper interest. As thus I stood looking on them
playing at cros-ruffe, one was taken reuoking, whereat the other said; what
neighbor will you play the cony-catcher with us? no no, we have read the book
as well as you. Never went a cup of small bear so sorowfully down an
Ale-knights belly in a frosty morning, as that word stroke to my heart, so that
for fear of trouble I was fain to ^ry my good hap a^ square play, at which
fortune favoring me* I wan twenty (...), and yet do as simply as I could, I
was not only suspected, but called Conny-catcher and crosse-biter.

But away I went with the money, and came presently to London, where I no
sooner arrived amongst the crew, but I heard of a second part worse then the
first, which drove me into such a great choler, that I began to enquire what
this R. G. should be. At last I learned that he was a scholar, and a Master
of Arts, and a Conny-catcher in his kind, though not at cards, and one that
favored good fellows, so they were not palpable offenders in such desperate
laws: whereupon reading his books, and surueying every line with deep
judgment, I began to note folly in the man, that would strain a Gnat, and
let pass an Elephant: that would touch small scapes, and let gross
faults pass without any reprehension. Insomuch that I resolved to make an
Apology, and to answer his libellous inuectiues, and to prove that we
Conny-catchers are like little flies in the grass, which live: or little
leaves and do no more harm: whereas there be in England other professions
that be great Conny-catchers and caterpillars, that make barraine the field
wherein they bait.

Therefore all my good friends vouch of my pains, and pray for my proceedings,
for I mean to have about with this R. G. and to give him such a veny, that he
shall be afraid hereafter to disparage that mystical science of Conny-catching:
if not, and that I prove too weak for him in sophistry, I mean to borrowe
Wili Bickertons blade, of as good a temper as Mo^glay King Arthures sword was,
and so ch^llenge him to the single combat: But desirous to end the quarrel
with the pen if it be possible, hear what I have learned in Whittington
College,

Yours in cards and dice Cuthbert cony-catcher.

THE DEFENSE OF Conny-catching.
I Cannot but wonder master R. G. what Poetical fury made you so fantastic,
to write against Conny-catchers? Was your brain so barraine that you had no
other subject? or your wits so dried with dreaming of love Pamphlettes, that
you had no other humor left, but satirically with Diogenes, to snarle at all
men's manners? You never found in Tully nor Aristotle, what a setter or a
verser was.

It had been the part of a Scholar, to have written seri^usly of some grave
subject, either Philosophically to have shown how you were proficient in
Cambridge, or divinely to have manifested your religion to the world. Such
trunall trinkets and threedbare ^rash, had better seemed T. D. whose brains
beaten to the yarking up of Ballades, might more lawfully have glaunst at the
quaint conceits of conny-catching and crosse-biting.

But to this my objection, me thinks I hear your maship learnedly reply,
Nascimur pro patria: Every man is not vorne for himself, but for his country:
and that the end of all studious endeavors ought to tend to the advancing of
virtue, or suppressing of vice in the commonwealth. So that you have herein
do^e the part of a good subject, and a good scholar, to anotomize such secret
villa^^es as are practiced by cosoning companions, to the overthrow of the
simple people: for by the discovery of such pernicious laws, you seek to
root out of the commonwealth, such ^ll and licentious living persons* as do
Ex alieno succo viuere, live of the sweat of other men's brows, and under
su^til shif^es of wit abused, seek to ruin the flourishing estate of
England. These you call vipers, moathes of the commonwealth, caterpillars
worse then ^od rayned down on Egypt, rotten flesh which must be divided from
the whole.

Ense resecandum est ne pars sincera trahatur. This master R. G. I know will
be your answer, as it is the pretended cause of your injurious Pamphlets. And
indeed it is very well done, but greater had your praise been, if you had
entered into the nature of more gross abuses, and set down the particular
enormities that grow from such palpable villainies. For truth it is, that his
is the Iron age, wherein iniquity has the upper hand, and all conditions and
estates of men seek to live by their wits, and he is counted wisest, that
has the deepest insight into the getting of games: every thing now that is
found profitable, is counted honest and lawful: and men are valued by their
wealth, not by their virtues. He that cannot dissemble cannot live, and men
put their sons now a days Apprentises, not to learn trades and occupations,
but crafts and mysteries.

If then wit in this age be counted a great patrimony, and subtletie an
inseparable accident to all estates, why should you be so spiteful master R.
G. to poor Conny-catchers above all the rest, since they are the simplest
souls of all in shifting to live in this over wise world?

But you play like the Spider that makes her web to entrap and snare little
flies, but weaues it so slenderly, that the great ones break through without
any damage. You strain Gnats, and pass ^uer Elephants: you scour the ponde
of a few croakyng Frogs, and leave behind an infinite number of most
venomous Scorpions. You decypher poor Conny-catchers, that perhaps with a
t^^cke at cards, win forty shillings from a churl that can spare it, and
never talk of those Caterpillars that undo the poor, ruin whole Lorships,
infect the commonwealth, and delight in nothing but in wrong^ull extorting and
purloyning of pelte, when as such be the greatest Conny-catchers of all, as by
your leave master. R G. I will make manifest.

Sir reverence on your worship, had you such a moate in your eye, that you
could not see those Fox-^urd Gentlemen that hyde under their gowns faced with
foynes, more falsehood then all the Conny-catchers in England beside, those
miserable Usurers (I mean) that like Uultures pray upon the spoil of the
poor, sleeping with his neighbors pledges all night in his bosom, and feeding
upon forfaits and penalties, as the ravens do upon carren? If his poor
neighbor want to supply his need, either for his household necessa^ies, or his
rent at the day, he will not lend a penny for charity, all his money is abroad:
but if he offer him either co^ or sow, mare or horse, or the very corn scarce
sprowted out of the ground to sell, so the bargain may be cheap, though to the
beggary of the poor man, he choppes with him straight, and makes the poor
Conny fare the worse all the year after. Why write you not of these
Connycatchers Master R. G.?

Besides if pawnes come, as the lease of a house, or the fee simple in morgage,
he can out of his furd cassocke draw money to lend: but the old Cole has
such quirkes and quiddities in the conueyance, such prouisoes, such days,
hours, nay minutes of payments, that if his neighbor break bnt a moment, he
takes the forfayt, and like a pinke-eyed Ferret so claws the poor Cony in the
burrow, that he leaves no hair on his breach nor on his back ere he parts
with him. Are not these vipers of the commonwelth, and to be exclaimde against,
not in small Pamphlets, but in great volumes?

You set down how there be requisite Setters and Uersers in Conny-catching,
and be there not so I pray you in Usury? for when a young youthful Gentleman,
given a little to lash out liberalley, wants money, makes he not his moan
first to the Broker, as subtle a knave to induce him to his overthrow, as the
wyliest Set^er or Uerser in England? and he must be feed to speak to the
Usurer, and have so much in the pound for his labor: then he shall have grant
of money and c^mmodities together, so that if he borrow a hundred pound, he
shall have forty in (...), and threescore in wares, dead stuff God wot: as
Lute strings, Hobby horses, or (if he be greatly favored) brown paper or
cloth, and that shootes out in the lash. Then his land is turnde over in
^tatute or recognizance for six months and six months, so that he pays
some thirty in the hundred to the Usurer, beside the Scriuener he has a blind
share: but when he comes to sell his threescore pound commodities, it is well if he
get five and t^^rtie.

Thus is the poor gentleman made a ^e^re and simple Conny, and verst upon to
the uttermost, and yet if he break his day, loses as much land as cost his
father a thousand marks.

Is not this coossenage and Conny-catching Master R G. and more daily
practiced in England, and more hurtful then our poor shifting at Cards, and
yet your mashippe can wink at the cause? they be wealthy, but Cuthbert
Conny-catcher cares for none of them no more then they care for him, and
therefore will reveal all. And because Master R. G. you were pleasant in
examples, I Will tell you a tale of an Usurer, done within a mile of a knaves head,
and since the Cuckoo sung last, and it fellout thus.

A pleasant tale of an Usurer.
IT fortuned that a young gentleman not far off from Cockermouth, was
somewhat sl^pt behind hand, and grown in debt, so that he durst hardly show
his head for fear of his creditors, and having wife and children to mai^taine,
although he had a pr^per land, yet wanting money to s^ocke his ground, he lived
very bare: whereupon he determined with himself to go to an old penny-father
that dwelt hard by him, and so borrow some money of him, and so to lay his land
in morgage for the repayment of it.

He no sooner made the motion but it was accepted, for it was a goodly Lorship,
worth in rent of assise seven score pound by the year, and did ab^ut upon the
Usurers ground, which drew the old churl to be marvelous willing to di^burse
money, so that he was content to lend him two hundred marks for three year
according to the statute, so that he might have the land for assurance of his
money.

The ge^tleman agreed to that, and promised to acknowledge a statute staple to
him, with letters of defeysance. The Usurer (although he lik^ this well, and s^w
the young man offere^ more than reason required) yet had a further setch to have
the land his whatsoever should chance, and therefore he began to verse upon
the poor Conny thus.

Sir (quoth he) if I did not pity your estate, I would not lend you my money
at such a ^ate: for whereas you have it after ten pounds in the hundred* I can
make it worth thirty. But seeing the distress you your wife and children are
in, and considering all grows through your own liberal nature, I
compassionate you the more, and would do for you as for mine own son:
therefore if you shall think good to follow it, I will give you fatherly advise,
I know you are greatly inde^ted, and have many unmerciful creditors, and they
have you in suit, and I doubt ere long will have some ex^ent against your lands,
so shall you be utterly undone, and I greatly encumbered. Therefore to avoid all
this, in my judgment it were best for you to make a deed of gift of all your
lands, without condition or promise, to some one faithful friend or other, in
whom you may repose credit, so shall your enemies have no advantage against
you: and seeing they shall have nothing but your bare body liable to their
executions, they will take the more easy and speedy composition. I think this
the surest way, and if you durst repose your self in me, God is my witness, I
would be to you as your father if he lived. How say you to this compendious
tale Master R. G. ^^uld the proudest setter or verser in the world have drawn
on a Conny more cunningly?

Well, again to our young gentleman, who simply (with tears in his eyes to
hear the kindness of the Usurer) thankt him heartily, and deferred not to put in
practice his counsel, for he made an absolute deed of gift from wife and
children to this Usurer of all his Lordshippe, and so had the two hundred
marks upon the plain forfait of a ^and.

To be short, the money made him and his merry, and yet he did hus^and it so
well, that he not only duly paid the interest, but stockt his grounds, and
began to grow out of debt, so that his creditors were willing to bear with
him. Against the three years were expired, he made shift by the help of his
friends for the money, and carried it home to the Usurer, thanking him greatly,
and craving a return of his deed of gift. Nay soft sir (says the old Churl)
that bargain is yet to make, the land is mine to me and mine heirs for ever,
by a deed of gift from your own hand, and what can be more sure: take the
money if you please, and there is your band, but for the Lordship I will enter
on it to morrow: yet if you will be ^y tenant, you shall have it before another,
and that is all the favor you shall have of me.

At this the Gentleman was amazed, and began to plead conscience with him, but
in vain: whereupon he went sorrowfully home and told his wife, who as a woman
half lunatike ran with her little children to his house, and cried out, but
bootlesse: For although they called him before the chief of the country, yet
(...) the law had granted him the fee simple thereof he would not part withal:
so that this distressed gentleman was feign to become tenant to this Usurer,
and for two hundred marks to lofe a Lordship worth six or seven thousand
pounds. I pray you was not this an old Conycatcher M. R. G. that could lurtch a
poor Conny of so many thousands at one time? whether is our cros^ing at cards
more perilous to the commonwelth than this cossenage for land? you wink at
it, but I will tell all, yet hear out the end of my tale, for as fortune fell
out, the Usurer was made a Cony himself.

The gentleman and his wife smothering this with patience, she that had a
reaching wit, and ha^^ brain revenge in her head, counseld her husband to make
a voyage from home, and to stay a week or two: and (q. she) before you come
again you shall see me venture fair for the land. The gentleman willing to let
his wife practice her wits, went his way, and left al to his wives discretion.
She after her husband was four or five days from home, was visited by the
Usurer, who used her very kindly, and sent victuals to her house, promising to
sup with her that night, and that she should not want any thing in her husbands
absence. The gentl^woman with gracious acceptance thankt him, and bad diverse of
her neighbors to bear him company, having a further reatch in her head then
he suspected. For the old Churl coming an hour before Supper time, even as
she her self would wish, after an amorous wehe or two, as old Iades wynnie
when they cannot wagge the tail, began to be very pleasant with his tenant,
and desired her to show him all the rooms in her house, and happily (says he)
if I die without issue, I may give it to your children, for my conscience bids
me be favorable to you.

The gentlewoman lead him through every part, and at last brought him into a
back room much like a backhouse, where she said thus unto him.

Sir, this room is the most vnhandsomest in all the house, but if there were a
dormar built to it, and these shut windows made bay windows and glazd, it would
make the properest parlour in all the house: for (says she) put your head out
at this window, and look what a sweet prospect belongs unto it.

The Usurer mistrusting nothing, thrust out his crafty sconce, and the
Gentlewoman shut to the window, and called her maids to help, where they
bound and pinyond the caterpillars arms fast, and then stood he with his head
into a backeyard, as if he had been on a pillory, and struggle he durst not
for stifling himself. When she had him thus at the vauntage, she got a couple
of six penny nails and a hammer, and went into the yard, having her children
attending upon her, every one with a sharp knife in their hands, and then
coming to him with a stern countenance, she looked as Medea did when she
attempted revenge against Jason. The Usurer seeing this tragedy, was afraid of
his life, and cried out, but in vain, for her maids made such a noise, that
his ^hr^king could not be heard, whilst she nailed one ea^e fast to the
window, and the other to the stanshel, then began she to use these words unto
him.

Ah vile and injurious caterpiller, God has sent thee to seek thine own
revenge, and now I and my children will perform it. For since thy wealth does so
couutenance thee, that we cannot have thee punished for thy coossenage, I my
self will be Justice, Judge, and Executioner: for as the Pillory belongs to
such a villain, so have I nailed thy ears and they shall be cut off to the
perpetual example of such purloining reprobates, and the executers shall be
these little infants, whose right without conscience or mercy thou so
wrongfully deteinest. Look on this old Churl little babes. this is he that
with his coossenage will drive you to beg and want in your age, and at this
instant brings your Father to all this present misery, have no pity upon
him, but you two cut off his ears, and thou (quoth she to the eldest) cut off
his nose, and so be revenged on the villain whatsoever fortune me for my
labor. At this the Usurer cried out, and bad her stay her children, and he
would restore the house and land again to her husband. I cannot believe thee
base churl q. she, for thou that would periure thy self against so honest a
Gentleman as my husband, will not stick to forswear thy self were thou at
liberty and therefore I will mangle thee to the uttermost. As thus she was ready
to have her children fall upon him, one of her maids came running in, and told
her, her neighbors were came to supper: bid them come in, quoth she, and behold
this spectacle. Although the Usurer was passing loath to have his neighbors see
him thus tyranously used, yet in they came, and when they saw him thus mannerly
in a new made pillory, and his ears fast nailed, some wondered, some laughed,
and all stood amazed, till the Gentlewoman discourst to them all the coosenage,
and how she meant to be revenged: some of them persuaded her to let him go,
others were silent, and some bad him confess: he hearing them debate the
matter, and not to offer to help him, cried out: why, and stand you staring on
me neighbors, and will not you save my life? No quoth the Gentlewoman, he or she
that stirs to help thee shall pay dearly for it, and therefore my boys, off
with his ears: then he cried out, but stay, and he would confess all, when
from point to point he rehearst how he had coossened her husband by a deed of
gift only made to him in trust, and there was content to give him the two
hundredth marks freely for amends, and to yield up before any men of worship
the land again into his possession, and upon that he bad them all bear
witness. Then the gentlewoman let loose his ears, and let slip his head, and
away went he home with his bloody lugges, and tarryed not to take part of the
meat he had sent, but the gentlewoman and her neighbors made merry therewith,
and laughed heartily at the usage of the usurer. The next day it was bruted
abroad, and came to the ears of the worshipful of the country, who sat in
commission upon it, and found out the coossenage of the Usurer, so they
praised the wit of the Gentlewoman, restored her husband to the land, and the
old churl remained in discredit, and was a laughing stock to all the country
all his life after.

I pray you what say you to Mounser the Miller with the gilden thumb, whether
think you him a Conny catcher or no? that rob^ every poor man of his meal
and corn, and takes towle at his own pleasure, how many Conyes does he take
up in a year? for when he brings them wheat to the Mill, he sels them meal of
their own corn in the market. Iomi^ Miles the Millers coossenage for wenching
affairs, as no doubt in these causes they be mighty Cony-catchers, and mean
to speak of their policy in ^^ltching and stealing of meal. For you must
note, that our jolly M^ller does not only verse upon the poor and rich for
their towle, but has false hoppers conveyed under the fall of his Mill, where
all the best of the meal runs by, this is, if the party be by that brings
the corn: but because many men have many eyes, the Miller will drive them off
for their griest for a day or two, and then he plays his pranks at his own
pleasure. I need not tell that stale ^east of the Gentleman's Miller that kept
Court and Leet once every week, and used to set in every sack a candle, and
so summon the owners ^o appear by their names, if they came not, as they were
far enough from that place, then he amerced them, and so took treple towle
of every sack. One night amongst the rest, the Gentleman his master was under
the Mill, and heard all his knau^ry, how every one was called, and paid his
amerciament, at last he heard his own name called, and then stepping up the
Ladder, he had stay, for he was there to make his appearance. I do imagine that
the Miller was blanke, and perhaps his Master called him knave, but the For
the more he is cursed the better he fares, and the oftener the Miller is called
thief, the richer the waxes: and therefore do men rightly by a by word did
the Miller put out, and if he asks what, they say a thieves head and a
thieves pair of ears: for such graund Cony-catchers are these Millers, that
he that cannot verse upon a poor man's lack, is said to be borne with a golden
thumb. But that you may see more plainly their knavery, I Will tell you a pleasant
tale, performed not many years since by a Miller in Enfield Mil, ten miles
from London, and an Alewiues boy of Edmondton, but because they are al at this
present alive, I will conceal their names, but thus it fell out.

A pleasant Tale of a Miller and an Alewiues Boy of Edmondton.
AN Alewife of Edmondton, who had a great vent for spiced Cakes, sent her son
often to Endfield Mill for to have her wheat ground, so that the Boy who was of
a quick spirit and ripe wit, grew very familiar both with the Miller and his
man, and his man, and could get his corn sooner put in the Mil then any Boy in
the country beside. It fortuned on a time, that this good wife wanting meal,
bad her Boy hie to the Mil, and be at home that night without fail, for she
had not a pint of flower in the house. Jack her son, for so we will call his
name, lays his sack on his mares back, and away he rides singing toward
Endfield: as he rode, he met at the washes with the Miller, and gave him the
time of the day, Godfather quoth he, whither ride you? to London Jack quoth
the Miller: Oh good Godfather quoth the boy, tell me what store of griest is at
the Mil? marry great store quoth the Miller: but Jack if thou will do me an
arrant to my man, i will send thee by a token that thou shall have thy coru cast
on and ground as soon as thou come, I Will say and do what you will to be
dispatched, for my mother has neither Cakes nor flower at home: then Jack
says the Miller, bid my man grind thy corn next, by that token he look to my
Bitch and feed her well. I will Godfather says the Boy, and rides his way, and
marueiled with himself what Bitch it was that he bad his man feed, considering
for two or three years he had used to the Mil, and never saw a Dog nor Bitch,
but a little prickeard Shault that kept the Mil door. Riding thus musing with
himself, at last he came to Endfield, and there he had his corn wound up:
as soon as he came up the stairs, the Millers man being somewhat sleepy began to
ask Jack drowsily what news, Marry quoth the Boy, the news is this, that I
must have my corn laid on next: soft Jack quoth the Millers man, your turn
will not row before midnight, but ye are always in have, soft fire makes sweet
malt, your betters shall be served before you this time. Not so quoth the Boy,
for I met my Godfather at the washes-riding to London, and told him what have
I had, and so he bids my griest shall be laid on next, by that token you must
look to his Bitch and feed her well. At that the Millers man smilde, and said
he should be the next, and so rose up and turned a pin behind the Hopper.
Jack marked all this, and being a wily and a witty Boy, mused where this Bitch
should be, and seeing none began to suspect some knavery, and therefore being
very familiar, was bold to look about in every corner, while the man was busy
about the Hopper, at last Jack turning up a cloth that hung before the
Trough, spied under the Hopper below, where a great P^ake was tied with a cord
almost full of fine flower, that ran at a false hole underneath, and could not
be spyed by any means. Jack seeing this, began to suspect this was the
Millers Bitch that he commanded his man to feed, and so s^^led and let it
alone: at last when the corn was ground off that was in the Hopper, Jack
laid on his, and was very bus^e about it himself, so that the Millers man set
him down and took a nap, knowing the Boy could look to the m^ll almost as
well as himself, Jack all this while had an eye to the Bitch, and determined
at last to slip her haul^er, which he warily performed, for when his corn was
ground and he had put up his meal, he whipst asunder the cord with his knife
that held the Poake, and thrust it into the mouth of his sack, now there was
in the Poake a bushel and more of passing fine flower, that the Millers Bitch
had eaten that day, as soon as Jack had tied up his sack, there was str^^^ng
who should lay on corn next, so that the Millers man wakte, and Jack
desiring one to help him up with his corn, took his leave and went his way,
ryding merely homeward, smiling to think how he had cousoned the Miller, as he
road, at that same place where he met the Miller outward* he met him
homeward, How now Ia^ke quoth the Miller have ground, I, I thank you Godfather
quoth the Boy, but did remember my arrant to my man says he, did bid him
look to my Bitch well, Oh Godfather quoth the Boy, take no care for your Bitch
she is well, for I have her here in my sack whelps and all, away rydes Jack
at this laughing, and the Miller grieuing, but when he found it true, I leave
you to guess how he and his man dealt together, but how the Alewife sported at
the knavery of her son when he told her all the jest, that imagine, but how
soever for all that, Jack was ever welcome to the Mill and ground before any,
and whose soever sack fed the Bitch, Iackes scapte ever towle-free, that he
might conceal the Millers subtlety.

Was not this Miller a Conny-catcher master R. G? What should I talk of the
baser sort of men, whose occupation cannot be vpholden without craft, there is
no mystery nor science almost, wherein a man may thrive, without it be lincked
to this famous Art of Conny-catching. The Alewife vales she ^^cke her P^ts and
Conny-catch her gue^tes with stone Pottes and petty Cannes, can hardly pay her
Brewer, nay and yet that will not serve, the chalk must walk to set up now and
then a shilling or two too much, or else the rent will not be answered at the
quarter day, besides ostrey, faggots, and fair chambring, and pretty wenches
that have no wages, but what they get by making of beds. I know some
Taphouses about the Subberbes, where they buy a shoulder of mutton for two
groats, and sell it to their ghuest for two shillings, and yet have no female
friends to sup withal, let such take heed, least my fathers white Horse loose
saddle and bridle and they go on foot to the devil on pilgrimage. Tush master
R. G. God is my witness, I have seen Chaunlers about London, have two pair
of waits, and when the searchers come, they shew^ them those that are sealed,
but when their poor neighbors buy ware, they use them that lack weight, I
condemn not all, but let such amend as are touched at the quick. And is not
this flat Conny-catching, yes, if it please your maship and worser. Why the
base sort of Ostlers have their shifts, and the crew of S* Patrickes
Costerdmongers, can sell a simple man a crab for a pipping. And but that I have
loved wine well, I would touch both the Uintner and his bush, for they have such
brewing and tunning, such chopping and changing, such mingling and mixing. what
of wine with water in the quart pot, and tempering one wine with an other in
the vessel, that it is hard to get a neat cup of wine and simple of it self,
in most of our ordinary Tauerus, and do not they make poor men connies, that
for their current money give them counterfeit wine.

What say you to the Butcher with his pricks, that has policies to puff up
his meat to please the eye, is not al his craft used to draw the poor Conny
to ryd him of his ware. Has not the Draper his dark shop to shadow the dye
and wool of his cloth, and all to make the country Gentleman or Farmer a
conny. What trade can maintain his traffic? what science uphold it self?
what man live, unless he grow into the nature of a Cony-catcher? Do not the
Lawyers make long Pleaes, stand upon their demurres, and have their quirks and
quiddities to make his poor Client a Cony? I speak not generally, for so they
be the ministers of justice, and the Patrons of the poo^e men's right, but
particularly of such as hold gains their G^d, and esteem more of coin then
of conscience. I remember by the way a merry jest performed by a Fool, yet
wittily hit home at hazard, as blind men shoot the Crow.

A pleasant Tale of Will Summers.
KIng Henry the eight of famous memory, walking one day in his privy Garden,
with Will Summers his Fool, it fortuned that two Lawyers had a sui^e unto his
majesty for one piece of ground that was almost out of lease and in the
Kings gift, and at time put up their Supplication to his highness, and at
that instant one of the Pantry that had been a long seruiture, had spyed out
the same land, and exhibited his petition for the same gift, so that in one
hour, all the three Supplications were given to the King, which his highness
noting, and being as then pleasantly disposed, he revealed it to them that were
by him, how there were three Fishes at one b^yte, and all gapte for a benefice,
and he stood in doubt on whom to bestow it, and s^ showed them the
Supplications, the Courtiers spoke for their fellow, except two that were feed
by the Lawyers, and they ^articularly pleaded for their friends, yelding many
reasons to the King on both sides. At last his majesty said, he would refer
the matter to Will Summers, which of them his Fool thought most worthy of it
should have the land. Will was glad of this, and loved him of the Pan^rie well,
and resolved he should have the ground, but the Fool brought it about with
pretty jest, Marry quoth he, what are these two Lawiers? I Will said the King,
then quoth the Fool, I will use them as they use their poor clients. Look
here quoth he, I have a Walnut in my hand, and I will divide it among the three,
so Will cracked it, and gave to one Lawyer one shel, and to an other the other
shel, and to him of the Pantry the meat, so shall thy gift be Harry, quoth he,
this Lawyer shall have good Books, and this fair promises, but my fellow of the
Pantry shall have the land. For thus deal they with their clyents, two men go
to two, and spend all that they have upon the Law, and at last, have nothing
but bare shales for their labor. At this, the King and his Noble men laughed:
the Yeoman of the Pantry had the gift, and the Lawyers went home with fleas in
their ears, by a Fools verdite. I rehearst this Act to show how men of Law,
feed on poor men's purses, and makes their country clyents, oftentimes simple
connyes. But leaving these common courses and trinial examples, I will show you
master R. G. of a kind or Conny-catchers, that as yet passes al these.

There be in England, but especially about London, certain quar^t, picked,
and neat com^anions, attyred in their apparel, either alla mode de France,
with a side Cloak, and a hat of a high block and a broad brimme, as if he
could with his head cosmographise the world in a moment, or else Allespanyole,
with a straight bombast^ fleeue like a quail pipe, his short Cloak, and his
Rapier hanging as if he were entering the List to a desperate Combat: his
beard squared with such Art, either with his mustachies after the lash of
Lions, standing as stiff as if he wore a Ruler in his mouth, or else nickt off
with the Italian cut, as if he meant to profess one faith with the upper lip,
and an other with his nether lip, and then he must be Marquisad^d, with a
side peake pendent, either sharp like the single of a Dear, or curtold like
the broad end of a Moule spade. This Gentleman forsooth, hanteth Tabling
houses, Tauerns, and such places, where young nouices resort, and can fit his
humor to all companies, and openly shadoweth his disguise with the name of a
Traveler, so that he will have a superficial insight into certain phrases of
every language, and pronounce them in such a grace, as if almost he were that
Countryman borne: then shall you hear him vaunt of his travels, and tell what
wonders he has seen in strange countries: how be has bin at Saint James of
Gompostella in Spain, at Madril in the Kings Court: and then drawing out his
blade, he claps it on the board, and and swears he bought that in Toledo:
then will he roue to Venice, and with a sigh, discover the situation of the
city, how it is seated two Leagues from Terra frenia, in the Sea, and speak
of Rialto Treuiso and Murano, where they make Glasses: and to set the young
ge^tlemans teeth an edge, he will make a long tale of La Strado Courtizano, where
the beautiful Curtizans dwell* discribing their excellency, and what angellical
creatures they be and how amorously they will entertain strangers. Tush, he will
discourse the state of Barbary, and there to Esc^^tes and Alcaires, and from
thence leap to France, Denmark, and Germany, After all concluding thus.

What is a Gentleman (says he) without travail? even as a man without one
eye. The sight of sundry c^untries made V^isses so famous: bought wit is the
sweetest, and experience goes beyond all Patrymon^es. Did young Gentlemen, as
well as I, know the pleasure and profit of (...), they would not keep them at
home within their (...): but visit the world, and win more wisdom in
traveling two or three years, then all the wealth their Ancestors left them
to poss^sse. Ah the sweet sight of ladies, the strange wonders in cities, and
the diverse manners of men and their conditions, were able to ravish a young
Gentleman's senses with the sur^et of content, and what is a thousand pound
spent to the obtaining of those pleasures.

All these Novelties does this pip^ed Bragout boast on, when his only travail
has been to look on a fair day, from Dover Clifts to Callis, never having
stepped a foot out of England, but surueyed the Maps, and heard others talk what
they knew (...) experience. Thus decking himself like the Daw with the fair
feathers of other birds, and discoursing what he heard other men report, he
grew so plausible among young Gentlemen, that he got his ordinary at the least,
and some gracious thanks for his labor. But happily some amongst many, tickled
with the desire to see strange countries, and ^rawne on by his alluring words,
would join with him, and questi^n if he meant ever to travail again. He
straight after he has (...) his peake by the end, Alla Neopoli^ano begins thus
to reply.

Sir, although a man of my (...) experienc^ might be satisfied in the sight of
countries, yet so (...) in the desire of travailing, that if perhaps a young
Gentleman of a (...) and courteous nature, were desirous to see Jerusalem or
Constantinople, would he well acquit my pains and follow my counfaile, I would
bestow a year or two with him out of England. To be brief, if the Gentleman
^umpe with him, then does he cause him to sell some Lordship, and put some
thousand or tw^ thousand pound in the bank to be received by letters of
exchange: and because the gentleman is ignorant, my young Master his guide must
have the disposing of it: which he so well sets out, that the poor gentleman
never sees any return of his money after. Then must store of suites of apparel
he bought and furnished every way: at last, he names a ship wherein they should
pass, and so down to Grauesend they go, and there he leaves the young nouice,
fleest of his money and woe begone, as far from travail as Miles the merry
Cobbler of Shorditch, that swore he would never travail further, than from his
shop to the Alehouse. I pray you call you not these fine witted fellows
Conny-catchers Master R. G.?

But now Sir by your leave a little, what if I should prove you a Conny-catcher
Master R. G. would it not make you blush at the matter? I Will go as near to it
as the Frye^ did to his Hostess maid, when the Clarke of the parish took him
at Leuatem at midnight. Ask the Queens P^ayers, if you sold them not Orlando
Furio so for twenty Nobles, and when they were in the country, sold the same
Play to the Lord Admirals als men for as much more. Was not this plain
Conny-catching Master R. G?

But I hear when this was objected, that you made this excuse: that there was
no more faith to be held with Plaiers, than with them that valued faith at the
price of a feather: for as they were Comaedians to act* so the actions of their
lives were Cameleon like, that they were uncertain, variable, time pleasers,
men that measured honesty by profit, and that regarded their Authors not by
desert, but by necessity of time. If this may serve you for a shadow, let me
use it for an excuse of our Car^ Conny-catching: for when we meet a country
Farmar with a fulpurse, a miserable (...), that either rocks his Tenants
rents, or selles his grain in the market at an unreasonable rate: we hold it a
devotion to make him a Conny, in that he is a Caterpiller to others, and gets
that by pilling and polling of the poor, that we strip him of by ^^eight and
agilitie of wit.

Is there not here resident about London, (...) crew of terryble Hacksters in
the habit of Gentlemen, well (...), and yet some wear^ boots for want of
stockings, with a lock worn at their left ear for their mistrisse favor,
his Rapyer Alla reuoloto, his Poynado pendent ready for the sta^, and
cauileuarst like a warlike Magnifico: yet for all this outward show of pride,
inwardly they be humble in mind, and despise worldly wealth, for you ^hal never
take them with a pen^y in their purse. These Souldados, for under that
profession most of them wander, have a policy to scourge Alehouses, for where
they ^ight in, they never leap out, till they have showed their Arithmatike
with chalk on every post in the house, figured in Ciphers like round Os, till
they make the goodman cry O, O, O, as if he should call an O yes at Size or
Sessions. Now sir, they have sundry shifts to maintain them in this versing,
for either they creep in with the goodwife, and so undo the goodman, or else
they bear it out with great brags if the Host be simple, or else they trip him
in some words when he is tipsy, that he has spoken against some Justice of
peace or other, or some other great man: and then they hold him at a bay with
that, til his b^cke almost break. Thus shift they from house to house, having
this proverb amongst them: Such must eat as are hungry and they must p^y that
have money. Call you not these Conny-catchers Master R. G.?

It were an endless piece of work, to discover the abominable (...) of
brokers, whose shops are the very temples of the devil, themselves his priests,
and their books of account more damnable, th^n the Al^or^n set out by Mahomet:
for as they induce young gentlemen to pawn their lands, as I said before: so
they are ready (the more is the pity that it is suffered) to receive any
goods, howsoever it be came by, having their shoppes, (as they say) a lawful
market to buy and sell in, so that whence grows to money Lifts about London, but
in that they have Brokers their friends, to ^uy whatsoever they purloyne and
fleale? And yet is the Picklocke, Lift, or Hooker, that brings y^ stolen goods,
made a (...) Conny, and used as an Instrument only of their villainy: for
suppose he has lifted a gown or a cloak, or so many parcels as are worth
ten pounds, and (...) his life in hazard for the obtaining of it: the
miserable Caterpiller the Broker, will think he deals liberaily with him if
he give him forty shillings, so does he not only maintain felony, but like a
thief ^^^ssens the th^e^e. And ar^ not these graund Conny-catchers (...) R. G.?

I knew not far from Fleetbridge a (...), it were a good deed to take Pain.
Pain.
to tell his name, that took of a boy of seven year old a Rapier worth forty
shillinges, and a stitcht taffata Hat worth ten, and all for five shilling^^
the Gentleman, father to the child, was sick when necessity dro^^ him thus
nigh, to lay his weapon and his Bonnet to pawn, and (...) as he recovered,
which was within six weeks after, sent the money and twelve pence for the
lone, to have the parcels again. But this Cutthrotes answer was, the Boy had
made him a bil of sa^e of his hand for a month, and the day was broken, (...)
and he had made the best of the Rapier and Hat. Was not this a Jew and a
notable Conny-catcher Master R. G.

It had been well if you had rould out your Rhetorike against such a rakehel.
But come to their honest kind of life, and you shall see how they stand upon
circumstances: if you borrow but two shillings, there must be a groat for the
money, and a groat for the Bil of sale, and this must be renewed every month:
so that they resemble the Box (...), which being well paid all night, will in
the morning be the greatest winner.

Were not a merry jest to have about again Master R. G. with your poetical
Brethren: amongst the which, one learned Hypocrite, that could brook no abuses
in the Commonwealth, was so zealous, that he began to put an English she Saint
in the Legend, for the holiness of her life: and forgot not so much as her
dog, as Tobies was remembered, that wagged his tail at the sight of his old
Mistress. This pure Martinist (if he were not worse) had a combat between the
flesh and the spirit, that he must needs have a Wife, which he cunningly
conny-catcht in this manner.

A pleasant Tale how a holy brother Conny-catcht for a Wife.
FIrst you must understand, that he was a kind of Scholastical panyon, nourst
up only at Grammar school, least going to the University, through his nimble
wit, too much learning should make him mad. So he had past As in praesenti,
and was gone a proficient as far as Carmen Heroicum: for he pronounst his
words like a ^ragout, and held up his head like a Malt-horse, and could talk
against Bishops, and (...) very mannerly the discipline of the Primitive Church
were restored. Now sir, this Gentleman had espied (I dare not say about
Fleetstreet) a proper maid, who had given her by the decease of her Father
four hundred pound in money, besides certain fair houses in the City: to
this girl goes this proper Greek a wooing, naming himself to be a Gentleman
of Cheshire, and only son and heir to his Father, who was a man of great
revenues: and to make the matter more plausible, he had attyred his own
brother very orderly in a blew coat, and made him his seruingman, who, though
he were eldest, yet to advance his younger brother to so good a marriage, was
content to lie, cog, and flatter, and to take any servile pains, to sooth up
the matter: insomuch that when her Father in law (for her mother was married
again, to an honest, virtuous, and substantial man in Fleetstreet or
thereabouts) heard how this young Gentleman was a Suitor to his daughter in
law, careful she should do well, calde the Serving man aside, which by his
outward behavior seemed to be an honest and discreet m^n, and began to
question with him what his Master was, of what par^^tage, of what possibility
of living after his Fathers decease, and how many children he had beside him.

This fellow well instructed by his holy Brother, without distrust to the man,
simply as he thought, said, that he was the son and heir of one Master etc.
dwelling in Cheshire, at the Manor of etc. and that he had a yoonger brother,
but this was hey^e to all, and rehearst a proper living of some five hundred
marks a year. The honest man, knowing diverse Cheshire Gentlemen of that name,
g^ue credyte to the fellow, and made no further inquiry, but gave countenance
to my young Master, who by his flattering speeches had won, rot only the
Maids favor unto the full, but also the good will of her Mother, so that the
match shortly was made up, and married they should be forsooth, and then
should she, her Father and her Mother, ride home to his Father in Cheshire, to
have su^^icient dowry appointed.

To be brief, wedded they were, and bedded they had been three or four
nights, and yet for all this fair show the Father was a little jealous, and
smoakt him, but durst say nothing. But at last, after the marriage had been
past over three or four days, it chanced that her Father and this Seruingman
went abroad, and past through S. Paul's Churchyard amongst the Stationers, a
Prentise amongst the rest, that was a Cheshire man, and knew this counterfayte
Seruingman and his brother, as being borne in the same Parish where his Father
dwelt, called to him, and said: What I. how does your Brother P. how does your
Father, lives he still? The fellow answered him all were well, and loath his
brothers wives father should hear any thing, made no stay but departed.

This acquaintance naming the fellow by his name and asking for his brother,
drove the honest Citizen into a great maze, and doubted he, his wife and h^s
d^ughter were made Connyes. Well, he smoothed all ^p, ^s if he had heard
nothing, and let it pass til he had sent the man about necessary business,
and then secretly returned again unto the (...) shop, and began to question
with the Boy, if he knew the (...) ^an well, that he called to him of lat^. I
marry do I sir quoth (...) and his brothe^ P. I can tell you they have an (...)
at the boordes end but my young Master, and he very coyly, badde them all
welcome to his fathers house, they all gave him reverent thanks, esteeming him
to be a man of worship and worth. As Soon as all were set, and the meat served
in, and the Gentleman's Seruing-man stood mannerly waiting on his brothers
trencher at last the good man of the house smiling said: Son P. I pray you
let your man sit down, and eat such part with us as God has sent us. Marry
quoth Master P. that were well to make my man my companion, he is well enough,
let him suppe with his fellows. Why sir says he, in faith he plain, call him
brother, and bid him sit down. Come coossen I. quoth he, make not strange,
I am sure your brother P. will give you leave. At this Master P. blushed, and
asked his Father in law what he meant by those words? and whether he thought
his man his brother or no? I by my faith do I son quoth he, and account thee
no honest man that wilt deny thine own brother and thy father: For sir know I
have learnd your pettegree. Alas daughter quoth he, you are well married, for
his Father lives of the alms of the Parish, and this poor Fellow which he
has made his slave, is his eldest Brother. At this his wife began to weep,
all was dashed, and what she thought G^d knows. Her mother cried out, but all
was bootlesse, Master P. confessed the truth, and his brother sat down at
supper, and for all that he had the wench. I pray you was not this a
Conny-catcher Master R. G.?

But now to be a little pleasant with you, let me have your opinion what you
deem of those Amarosos here in England, and about London, that (because the
old proverb says, change of pasture makes fat calves, will have in every shire
in England a sundry wife, as for an instance your countryman R. B. are not they
right Conny-catchers? enter into the nature of them, and see whether your pen
had been better employed in discovering their vill^inies, tha^ a simple
legerdemain at cards. For suppose a man has but one daughter, and has no
other dowry but her beauty and honesty, what a spoil is it for her to light
in the hands of such an adulterous and incestuous rascal? had not her father
been better to have lost forty shillings at cards, then to have his daughter
so conny caught and spoyld for ever after? These youths are proper fellows,
never without good apparel and store of crowns, well horst, and of so quaint and
fine behauior, and so eloquent, that they are able to induce a young girl to
folly, especially since they shadow the^r villainy with the honest pretense of
marriage: for their custom is this. When they come into the City or other
place of credit, or sometime i^ a country village, as the fortune of their
villainy leads them, they make inquiry what good marriages are abroad, and on
the sunday make survey what fair and beautiful mayds or widows are in the
Parish: then as their licentious lust leads them, whether the eye for favor,
or the ear for riches, so they set down their rest, and soiourne either there
or thereabouts, having money at will, and their companions to sooth up
whatsoever damnably they shall protest, courting the maid or widow with such
fair words, and sweet promises, that she is often so set on fire, that
neither the report of others, nor the admonition of their friends, can draw them
from the love of the Poligamoi or bel-swaggers of the country. And when the
wretches have by the space of a month or two satisfied their lust, they wax
weary, and either feign some great journey for a while to be absent, and so go
and visit some other of his wives, or else if he mean to give her the bag, he
sells whatsoever he can, and so leaves her spoild both of her wealth and
honesty, then which there is nothing more pre^ious to an honest woman. And
because you shall see an instance, I will tell you a pleasant tale performd by our
villains in Wiltshire not long since, I will conceal the parties names,
because I think the woman is yet alive.

A pleasant Tale of a man that was married to sixteen Wives, and how
courteously his last wife entreated him.
IN Wiltshire there dwelt a Farm^r of indifferent wealth, that had but only
one child, and that was a daughter, a maid of excellent beauty and good
behauior, and so honest in her conversation, that the good r^port of her
ver^ues was well spoken of in al^ the cuntry, so that what for her good
quali^ies, and sufficient dowry that was like to fall to her* she h^d many
suitors, men's sons of good wealth and honest conversation But whether this maid
had no mind to wed, or she likte none that made love to her, or she was
afraid to match in haste least she might repent at leisure, I know not: but
she refused all, and kept her still a virgin. But as we see oftentimes, the
coyest maids happen on the coldest marriages, playing like the beetle that
makes scorn al day of the dai^tiest slowers, and at night takes up his lodging
in a cowsh^rd* So this maid, whom we will call Marian, refused many honest and
wealthy Farmars sons, and at last lighted on a match, that for ever after
^ard her market: for it fell out thus. One of these notable roges, by occupation
a tailor, and a fine workman, a reprobate given over to the spoil of honest
maids, and to the deflowring of virgins, hearing as he traveled abroad of this
Marian, did mean to have a fling at her, and there^^re came into the town
where her father dwelt and asked work. A very ^o^est man of that trade, seeing
him a passing proper man, and of a very good and honest countenance, and not
simply app^relled, said he would make trial of him for a garment or two, and so
^ooke him into service: as soon as he saw him use his needle, he wondered not
only at his workemanshippe, but at the swiftnes of his hand. At last the
fello^ (whom we will name William) desired his Master that he might use his
sheeres but once for the cutting out of a dublet, which his Master granted,
and he used so excellently well, that although his Master was counted the best
tailor in Wiltshire, yet he found himself a botcher in respect of his new
entertained iourneyman, so that from that time forward he was m^de forema^ of
the shop, and so pleased the gentlemen of that shire, that who but William
talked on for a good tailor in that shire. Well, as young men and maids meet on
sondayes and holydaies, so this tailor was passing brave, and began to frolike
it amongst the maids, and to be very li^eral, being full of silver and gold,
and for his personage a properer man than any was in all the Parish, and made a
far off a kind of love to this Marian, who seeing this William to be a very
hand some man, began somewhat is affect him, so that in short time she thought
well of his favors, and there grew some love between them, insomuch that it
came to her fathers ears, who began to school his daughter for such foolish
affection toward one she knew not what he was, nor whither he would: but in
vain, Marian could not but think well of him, so that her father one d^y sent
for his Master* and began to qu^s^ion of the disposi^^on of his m^n. The
Master told the Farmar friendly that what he was he ^new not, as being a
me^re strang^r unto him: but for his workmans^ip, he was one of the most
excellent b^th for needle and sheeres in England: for his behauior since he
came into his house, he had behaved himself very honestly and (...): well
apparelled he was, and well mo^ied, and might for his good qualiti^s s^eme to
be a good w^mans f^llow. Although this somewhat satisfied the father, yet he
was loath a tail^r should (...) away his daughter, and that she should be driven
to live of a bar^ occupation, whereas she might have landed men to her
husbands, so that he and her friends called her (...), and persuaded her
from him, but she flatly told them ^he never loved any but him, and since it was
her first love, she would not now be turned from it, whatsoever hap did
afterward befall unto her. Her father that loved her dearly, seeing no
persuasions could draw her from the tailor, left her to her own liberty, and
so she and William agreed together, that in short time they were married, and
had a good portion, and set up shop, and lived together by the space of a (...)
of a year very orderly. At satisfied with the lust of his new wife, he thought
it good to visit some other of his wives (for at that instant he had sixteen
alive) and made a scuse to his wife and his wives father to go into Yorkshire
(which was his native country) and visit his friends, and crave somewhat of his
father toward household. Although his wife was loath to part from her sweet Will.
yet she must be content, and so welhorst and provided, away he rydes for a
month or two, that was his furthest day, and down goes he into some other
country to solace himself with some other of his wives. In this mean while one
of his wives that he married in or about Tanton in Sommersetshire, had learnd
of his villainy, and how many wives he had, and by long traueyle had got a note
of their names and dwelling, and the hands and seals of every parish where he
was marries, and now by fortune she heard that he had married a wife in
Wilshire, not far from Malborough; thither hies she with warrants from the
Bishop and diverse Justices to apprehend him, and coming to the Town where he
dwelt, vere subtly inquired at her host of his estate, who told her that be
had married a rich Farmers daughter, but now was gone down to his friends in
Yorkshire, and would be at home again within a week, for he had been eight
weeks already from home. The woman inquired no further for that time, but the
next morning went home to the Farmers house, and desired him to send for his
daughter, for she^ would speak with her from her husband: the man straight did
so, and she hearing she should have news from her William, came very hastily.
Then the woman said, she was sorry for her, in that their misfortunes were
alyke, in being married to such a ru^^agate as this Tailor: for (quoth she) it
is not yet a year and a half since he was married to me in Somersetshire. As
this went cold to the old man's heart, so stroke it deadly into the mind of
Marian, who desiring her to tell the truth, she out with her testimony, and
showed them how he had at that instant sixteen wives alive. When they read the
certificate, and saw the hands and seals of every parish, the old man fell a
weeping: but such was the grief of Marian, that her sorrow stopped her tears,
and she ^at as a woman in a trance, til at last fetching a great sigh, she
called God to witness she would be revenged on him for all his wives, and would
make him a general example of al such graceless runnagates. So she conceald
the matter, and placed this her fellow in misfortune in a kinswomans house of
hers, so secretly as might be, at tending the coming of her treacherous
husband, who returned within a fortnight, having in the space he was absent
visited three or four of his wives, and now meant to make a short cut of the
matter, and sell all that his new wife had, and to travel into some other shire,
for he had heard how his Somersetshire wife had made inquiry after him in
diverse places. Being come home he was wonderfully welcome to Marian, who
entertained him with such courtesies as a kind wife could any ways afford him,
only y^ use of her body she denied, saying her natural disease was upon her.
Well to be brief, a great supper was made, and al her friends was bidden, and
he every way so welcome as if it had bin the day of his bridal, yea al things
was smoothed up so cunningly, y^ he suspected nothing less then yt revenge
intended against him. As Soon as supper was ended, and al had taken their
leave, our tailor would to bed, and his wife with her own hands helped to
undress him very lovingly, and being laid down she kissed him, and said she
would go to her fathers and come again straight, bidding him fall a sleep the
whilst: he y^ was drowsy with travel and drinking at supper, had no need of
great entreaty, for he straight fell into a sound slumber, the whilst she had
sent for his other wife, and other her neighbors disguised, and coming softly
into the parlour where he lay, she turned up his clothes at his feet, and tied
his legs fast together with a rope, then waking him, she asked him what reason
he had to sleep so soundly. He new wakte out his sleep began to stretch
himself, and gald his legs with the cord, whereat he wondering said; How now
wife? what is that hurts my legs? what are my feet bound together? Marian looking
on him with looks full of death, made him this answer: I villain, thy legs are
bound, but had thou thy just desert, thy neck had long since been stretched
at the gallows, but before thou and I part, I will make thee a just spectacle
unto the world, for thy abominable treachery: and with that she clapped her hand
fast on the hair of his head, and held him down to the pillow. William driven
into a wondrous amaze at these words, said trembling: Sweet wife, what sudden
altera^ion is this? what mean these words wife? Traitor (q. she) I am none of
thy wife, neither is this thy wife, and with that she brought her forth that he
was married in Somersetshire, although thou art married to her as well as to me,
and have like a villain sought the spo^le of fifteen women beside my self,
and that thou shall hear by just certificat, and with y^ there was read the
bedrol of his wives, where he married them, and where they dwelt. At this he
lay mute as in a trance, and only for answer held up his hands, and desired
them both to be merciful unto him, for he confessed al was truth, that he had bin
a ^ainous offender, and deserved death. Tush says Marian, but how can thou
make any one of us amends? If a man kill the father, he may satisfy the blood
in the son: if a man steal, he may make restitution: but he that robs a
woman of her honesty and ^ir g^nitie, can never make any satis^action: and
therefore for all the rest I will be revenged. With that his other wife and the
women clapped hold on him, and held him fast, while Marian with a sharp rasor
cut off his stones, and made him a gelding. I think she had little respect
where the sign was, or observed ^itle art for the string, but off they went,
and then she cast them in his face, and said, Now lustful whoremaister, go I
deceive other women as thou have done us, if thou can, so they sent in a
surgion to him y^ they had provided, and away they went. The man lying in great
pain of body, and agony of mind, the surgion looking to his wound, had much
ado to stanch the blood, and always he laughed heartily when he thought on the
revenge, and bad a vengeance on such sow-gelders as made such large slits: but
at last be laid a blood-plaister to him, and stopped his bleeding, and to be
brief in time heald him, but with much pain. As Soon as he was whole, and
might go abroad without danger, he was committed to the jail, and after some
other punishment, banished out of Wilshire and Somersetshire for ever after.
Thus was this lusty cock of the game made a capon, and as I heard, had little
lust to marry any more wives to his dying day.

How like you of this conny-catching M. R. G? But because now we have entered
talk of Tailors, let me have about with them, for they be mighty
Conny-catchers in sundry kinds. I pray you what Poet has so many fictions,
what Painter so many fancies, as a Tailor has fashions, to show the variety
of his (...) every week the shape of his apparel into new forms, or else he is
counted a mere botcher. The venetian and the gallogascaine is s^ale, and
trunk slop out of use, the round hose bumbasted close to the breech, and ^uft
above the neck with a curle, is now common to every cullion in the country,
and dublets be they never so quaintly quilted, yet forsooth the swain at
plough must have his belly as side as the courtier, that he may piss out at a
button hole at the least. And al these strange devises does the Tailor invent
to make poor gentlemen connies: for if they were tied to one fashion, they
still might they know how much velvet to send to the Tailor, and then would his
filching abate. But to prevent them, if he have a french belly, he will have a
Spanish skirt, and an Italian wing, seamed and quartered at the elbows, as if
he were a souldado ready to put on an armor of proof to fight in Mile-ende
under the bloody ens^gne of the Duke of Shorditch. Thus will the fantastic
Tailor make poor gentlemen Conies, and ever ask more velvet by a yard and a
haffe then the doublet in conscience requires. But therein lies the least part
of their cony-catching: for those graund Tailors that have all the right
properties of the mystery, which is to be knaui^^, theeuish, and proud, take
this course with courtiers and courtly gentlemen, they flade outside, inside,
lace, drawing out, and making, and then set down their parcels in a bil, which
they so ouerprise, that some of them with very pricking up of dublets, have
fleest young gentlemen of whole Lordships, and call you not this cony-catching M.
R. G? To use the figure Pleonasmos, Hisce^culis, with these eyes I have seen
Tailors prentises sell as much vales in a week in cloth of gold, velvet,
satin, taffat^, and lace, as has been worth thir^^e shillinges, and these
ears has heard them scorn when their vales came but to ten shillinges, and
yet there were four prentises in the shop. If the prentises could lurch so
mightily, then what did the master? But you must imagine this was a woman's
tailor, that could i^ a gown put seventeen yards of ell broad taffata, blessed
be the French sleeves and breech verdingales, that grants them liberty to
connycate so mightily. But this I talk if ou^ London and courtly Tailors but
even the poor pricklouse the country tailor, that has scarce (...) more
wealth then his thimble, his needle, his pressing iron, and hisheers, will
filtch as well as the proudest of that trade in England, they will to snip and
snap, that all the reuersion goes into hell. Now sir, th^s helis a place that the
tailors have under their shopboord, where al their stolen shreds is thrust, and
I pray you call you not this pilling and polling, and flat Conny-catching
Master R. G? B^t because you may see whether I speak truth or no, I Will tell you
a merry jest of a Tailor in York not ^arre from Petergate, done about
fourteen year ago, and thus it fell out.

A pleasant Tale of a Tailor, how he conny-catcht a Gentlewoman, and was made
himself a Gonny afterward by his man.
IN Yorkshire there dwelt a woman's Tailor famous for his Art, but noted for
his filching, which although he was light fingerd, yet for the excellency of
his workmanship he was much sought too, and kept more Iournymen, then any five
in that city did: and albeit he would have his share of velvet, satin, or
cloth of gold, yet they must find no fault with him, least he half spoyld
their garment in y^ making. Bes^^es, he was passing proud, and had as haughty
alooke, as if his father had with the devil look^e over Lyncolne: his ordinary
dublets were (...) cut in the summer upon a wrought shirt, and his cloak faced
with velvet, his stockinges of the purest granado silk, with a French painde
hoase of the richest billiment lace, a beauer hatte turft with (...), so
quaintly as if he ha^ been some Espagnolo trickt up to go court some quaint
curtesine, insomuch that a plain seruingman once meeting him in this attire,
going through (...) to take air in the field, thought him at the least same
Esquire, and of with his Hat and gave his worship ^he time of the day, this
clawed this Glorioso by the elbow, so that if a Tavern had been by, a pottle
of wine should have been the lea^^ reward for a largess to the simple serving
man: but this bowical huffs, sauffe, not content to pass away with oue
worship, began to hold the fellow in prate, and to question whose man he was.
The f^low courteously making a low cringe said, may it please your woorship, I
serve such a Gentleman dwelling in such a place, as thus he answered him, he
spied in the gentleman's bo^ome a needle and a thread, whereupon the fellow
simply said to him, ^e your woordships man in looking this morning to your
doublet, has left a needle and a threede on your worships breast, you had best
take it off, least some think your worship to be a Taylour. The Taylour not
thinkyng the fellow had spoken simply, but frumpt him, made this reply: what
sawty knave do thou mock me? what if I be a taylour, what is that to thee,
were not for shame I would lend thee a box on the ear or two, the fellow
being plain, but peevish and an old knave, gathering by his own words that
he was a taylour said, fie so God help me I mock you not, but are you a
taylour, I marry am I quoth he, why then says the seruyng man, all my cappes,
knees, and worships, I did to thy apparel, and therefore master thank me,
for it (...) against my will, but now I know thee farewell good honest
prickelouce, and look not behind you, for if you do, i will swindge (...) in my
scabbe^d of my sword til I can stand over thee, away went Monsier Magnifico
^rowning, and the seruyng man went into the C^tie laughing* but all this is but
to describe the nature of the man, now to the secrets of his Art, all the
Gentlewomen of the Country cryde out upon him, yet could they not part from
him, because he so quaintly fitted their h^mors, at last it so fell out, that a
Gentlewoman not far from Feroy Brigges, had a taffata gown to make, and he
would have no less at those days then el^uen else of ^lbroad taffato, so she
bought so much and ready to send it, she said to her husband in hearing of al
her seru^^g^^m^n, what a spite is this, seeing that I must send always to
yonder knave tailor two yards more then is necessary, but how can we amend us,
all the rest are but botchers in respect of him, and yet nothing gri^ues me
but we can never take him with it, and yet I and mine have flood by while he
has cut my g^^ne out, a pleasant fellow that was new come to serve her
husband, one that was his Clarke and a pre^y scholar, answered good mistress
give me leave to carry your taffata and see it cut out, and if I spy not out
his knavery laugh ^t me when I come home, marry I prithy do q. his M. and
mistress, but whatsoever thou see say nothing least he be angry and spolie my
gown, let me alone mistress q. he, and so away he goes to York, and coming to
this tailor found him in his shop, and delivered him the taffata with this
message, that his mistress had charged him to set it cut out, not yt she
suspected him, but yt else he would let it ly long by him and take other work in
hand, yt tailor scornfully said he should, and asked him if he had any
spectacles about him, n^ q. the fellow my sight is young enough I need no
glasses, if you do put them quoth he, and see if you can see me steal a yard
of taffata out of your miscresse gown, and so taking his sheeres in hand* he
cut it out so nimbly that he cut three foreparts to the gown, and four side
pieces* that by computation the fellow gest he had stolen two else and a half,
but say nothing he durst. As Soon as he had done, there came in more gentlemen's
men with work, that the tailor was very busy and regarded not, the seruingma^
who seeing the tailors cloak lying lose, lifted it away and carried it home with
him to his mistress house, where he discourst to his master and his mistress
what he had seen, and how he had stole the tailors cloak, not to that intent
to filtch, but to try an experiment upon him, for master q. he, when he brings
home my mistress gown, he will complain of ye loss of his cloak, and then see,
do you but tell him that I am experienced in Magike, and can cast a figure, and
will tell him where his cloak is without fail, say but this sir, and let me
alone: they al agreed, and resolved to try the w^t of their young man. But
leaving him, again to our tailor: who when he had dispatched his customers, was
ready to walk with one of them to the tauern, and then mist his cloak, searched
al about, but find it he could not, neither knew he w^^o^ to suspect: so with
much grief he past it over, and when he had ended the gentlewomans gown
(because she was a good customer of his) he himself took his nag and rid home
withal: welcome he was to the gentlewoman and her husband, and the gown was
passing fit, so that it could not be amended, insomuch that the gentlewoman
praisd it, and highly thankt him. Oh mistress (quoth he) thought it is a good
gown to you, it is an unfortunate gown to me, for that day your man brought the
taffata, I had a cloak stolen that stood me but one fortnight before in four
pound, and never since could I hear any word of it. Truly said the Gentleman,
I am passing sorry for your loss, but that same man that was at your house is
passing skilful in Negromancy, and if any man in England can tell you where your
cloak is, my man can: marry q. he, and I will give him a brace of angels for his
labor: so the fellow was called and talked with all, and at his mistress request
was content to do it, but he would have his twenty shillings in hand, and
promised if he told him not where it was, who had it, and caused it to be
delivered to him again, for his two angels he would give him ten pounds: upon
this the tailor willingly gave him the money, and up went he into a closet like
a learned clark, and there was three or four hours laughing at the tailor, he
thinking he had bin all this while at Caurake. At last down comes the fellow
with a figure drawn (...) a paper in his hand, and smiling called for a bible,
and told the tailor he would tell him who had his cloak, where it was, and help
him to it again, so that he would be sworn on a bible to answer to all
questious that he demanded of him faithfully: the tailor granted and swore on a
bible, then he commanded al should go out but his master, his mistres, the
tailor and himself. Then he began thus: well, you have taken your oath on the
holy bible, tell me q. he, did you not cut three foreparts for my mistress gown?
At this the t^ylor blushed, and began to be in a chafe, and would have flung out
of the door, but the seruingman said, nay never start man, for before thou
go out of this parlour* if thou de^iest it. I will bring the taffata thou
flolest into this place, wrapped in thine own cloak: and therefore answer
directly to my question, least to your discredit I show you the ^^ick of a
scholar: the tailor half afraid, said he did so indeed: and q he, did you not
cut four side pieces where you have cut but two? yes a^is true q. the tailor
why then as true it is, that to deceive the deceiuer is no deceit: for as truly
as you stole my mistrist affata, so truly did I steal your cloak, and here it
is. At this the tailor was am^zed* ^he gentleman and his wife laughed heartily,
and so al was turned to (...), the tailor had his cloak again, the gentlewoman
her taffata, and the seruingman twenty shillings, was not this (...)
Conny-catching M. R. G.

Thus have I proved (...), how there is no estate, ^rade, occupation, nor
mystery, (...) Conny-catching, and that our shift at cards compared to the
rest, is the (...) of al, and yet forsooth, you could bestow the pa^^es to
write two who^e (...) against us poor conycatchers: think M R. G it shall not
be put up except you grant us our request. It is informed us that you are in
hand with a book named The repentance of a Conny-catcher, with a discovery of
secret villainies, wherein you mean to discourse at full the nature of the
stripping Law, which is the abuse offered by the Keepers of Newgate to poor
prisoners, and some that belong to the Marshalsea. If you do so, ye shall do
not only a charitable, but a meritorious deed: for the occasion of most
mischief, of greatest nipp^ng and foysting, and of al vilanies, comes through
the extorting bribery of some coossening and counterfaite keepers and
companions that carry unlawful warrants about them to take up men Will your
worship therefore stand to your word, and set out the discovery of that, al we
of Whittington College will rest your beadmen. Otherwise look that I will have
the crew of Cony-catchers swear themselves your professed enemies for ever.
Farewell.

Cuthbert Conny-catcher.

FINIS.

