SATAN TRANSFORMED into an Angel of Light, expressing his dangerous
Impostures under glorious shows.

Emplified Specially in the Doctrine of Witchcraft, and such sleights of
Satan, as are incident thereunto.

Very necessary to discern the speci-Plague raging in these days, and so to
hide our selves from the snare thereof.

LONDON, Printed by Barnard Alsop. 1622.

To the right worshipful Alderman Holiday, the worthy Governor of the East
Indian Merchants, together with the provident Treasures and grave Committees,
and the rest of the adventurers in that famous trade All things pertaining to
life and godliness.
RIght worthy and beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ: It is the wonderful mercy
and exceeding patience of our gracious God toward us of this sinful Nation
that in the midst of such fearful storms and bloody garboyles devouring our
neighbors round about us, we of this Island though, as it were, environed round
about with such tempestuous seas, do yet notwithstanding enjoy such temperate
seasons, as not only to eat the fruit of our own labors, but to be enabled
moreover out of our abundance to entertain and relieve our distressed
neighbors. And is not the wisdom of God admirable herein to warn us to
look home, when our neighbors house is on fire, and to make it our own case,
what is common to us with others. Is not his mercy unspeakable that seeing
charity covers a multitude of sins, and much is forgiven to those that
love much, therefore we may have hope of Gods longer forbearance and
indulgence toward us, so long as we regard the afflictions of Joseph, and by
our brotherly affections, bear one another burden. Surely though the sickle
must be put in when the harvest is ripe, and there are too many signs among us
that the regions are white unto the harvest, yea that the Dear is gone out to
go through the land, yet even here I have observed these means to stay the
execution. First, when there are some remaining to stand in the gap to turn
away the wrath. Secondly, when the Lord is justified and approved by his word.
And thirdly, when by our compassion and prudence we do communicate with the
afflictions of our brethren, and so voluntarily suffer with them in their
distresses. Wherein as we have special cause to bless our gracious God for
his good hand with our worthy Nehemiah in this holy work, so are we wisely to
secure our selves in succouring others, and doing good while we have time to
the household of faith. Shall not Satan and his instruments herein otherwise
condemn us, who if ever heretore, do speedily combine them selves against the
Lord and his anointed, whose maine policy it is in these latter days to
disunite the hearts of Christians and to weaken their hands that they may more
speedily and easily make prey of them. Do not his croaking frogs those
infernal Iebusites compass land and sea to this end, creeping into the
chambers, yea into the hearts of Princes, both to exasperate such as are auerse
against the poor members of Christ, and also alienate even the well affected
from the maintenance of the common faith. And do we think that they have
left any stone vnrowled to compass the same, can we imagine but that these
spirits of devils have waded into the depth of their fathers methods, and as
she in the Poet:

When heaven will afford no help, she will move the infernal powers, so in
despite of heaven these limbs of Satan have now failed to employ the powers of
darkness for the more effectual deluding of the children of disobedience?
And are not these the times wherein if it were possible the very elect may be
seduced and ensnared hereby. Is not the wisdom and justice of God admirable
herein that when the Fool says in his heart there is no God, and the Atheist
dreams of no other hell but to be in debt, and affliction, and so plots by all
means to build his heaven on earth by wallowing in all excess of riot and
vanity, as hereby he reapes such wages of his error as is meet, even to be
given up to a reprobate sense, and so not only to all monstrous and desperate
wickedness, but even to maintain and secure the same against all future
reckonings, as if he had made a couenent with hell, and were at an agreement
with death* so is he justly taken in his own craftiness, and most wonderfully
arrested by the power of hell, to the apparent confusion of his imagined
happiness, and while he dreams of no other heaven but to do what he list
in earth, he is not only therein restrained by the power of heaven to the
confusion of his present hopes for the good of the Saints, but also justly
caught in the snares of his own wickedness by the power of hell, as to
begin and seal hereby unto him eternal vengeance, and to hasten him
thereto; so that the righteous may more wonderfully escape of our trouble, when
the wicked are fallen into the pit they dug for them. Surely as it is a
righteous thing with God, that they that do not receive the love of the truth,
shall be given up to strong delusions to believe lies: so if ever satan were
transformed into an Angel of light, and so more effectually by his lies and
subtilties did deceive unstable souls: If ever the sure word and wonderful
works of God were outfaced and suppressed by the sleights and forgeries of the
God of this world, the experience here of is most notorious in our times: to
instance in this particular being the subject of our experience how mightily
the Lord has justified his word, both auouching in these days the truth of
this doctrine of Witchcraft as also euidencing the power thereof in dissoluing
the works of Satan, as experience has made it manifest, so we have had not
only the great Patrones and friends of the Church confirming the same, but
even the Churches very enemies have been enforced to acknowledge no less.
And yet such has been the efficacy of delusion, that this very same most
glorious truth upon other respects as it has found hard measure among fained
friends, so it has also thereby been traduced and perverted by it enemies.
And surely we may the less wonder hereat, if we consider wisely, that as
commodities are in request with many according to their diverse humors, and
different seasons, so does it befall the sacred truth. which though it be
sometimes in request, when it may serve to advance the pride of the flesh and
infancy of religion, yet does it easily grow out of date, when either it tends
to humble the flesh, or justly challenges lukewarmnesse and hypocrisy. Which
as it was the portion of the Lord and master of the Church, sometimes to be
cried up with Hosanna, eftsoons to be cried down with crucifige so has it
been the lot of the scepter of this kingdom, the budding rod of Aaron
sometimes to be turned into a serpent in the opinion of man, as if it only
intended to destruction and not to edification, no better then a doctrine of
licentiousness or sedition and despair, which eftoones was in esteem as
Angels food, sweeter then honey, precious above rubies, most orient gems.
Which seeing it has been also the portion of this truth concerning
witchcraft, is it any marvel if what man opposes and seeks to suppress,
the Lord himself has powerfully maintaind and justified, as proving unto it
gainesayers a savor of death, that have refused to embrace the same as a
savor of life unto life. Surely when I discern the efficacy of delusion
prevailing in these days even upon such that have tested of the good word of
God, and been pertakens of the enlightening spirit: and so have had some
kenning of the power of the life to come, and yet are so falue away from
conscience, yea from science it self, that they are very strangers from the
life of God through their affected ignorance, and being willingly ignorant of
what they have formerly been convinced of, are grown to be starke-mockers of
all powers; yet all form of Religion, and so in this their Atheism, sing a
Requiem to their souls, fearing no other hell, then to be moved in their
slippery state, and dreaming of no other heaven then to build their foundation
in the sands: Me thinks I see the foolish worldling on the pinnacle of his
confidence, and so in his greatest security, lying open to confusion. And do I
not see the Justice of God working wonderfully herein, in besotting the fool
in his own wisdom. Even giving him up to rest upon such broken reeds, for
the securing of his Babel, which are the only means to confound the same. And
has not the God of the world by divine permission a special stroke in this
delusion, not only to prove a lying spirit in the mouth of our false Prophets,
bidding to go (...)

THE Particular Contents.
This Treatise is digested into three Books.
In the Former whereof is contained.
FIrst, the Occasion and scope of this Discourse. in Sect. 1. page 1. And
therein proved that this Doctrine of Witchcraft is necessary to be
prosecuted and ohserued in these days. Sect. 2. page 16. Chap. 1. Secondly, it
is proved that there have been, are, and shall be Witches to the worlds end:
both by sound Testimony, 1. from the Word, p. 25. 2. from Antiquity, p. 26.
3. from pregnant reasons, p. 27. and so snch Objections answred, as seem to
contradict this Truth, page 35. Chap. 2. Thtrdly it is declared; what
Witchcraft properly is: where both the Nature, Causes, and Effects are
briefly opened and applied, page 47. Wherein is set down, both that Satan 1.
Can work wonders, p. 52. as also 2. The difference between true Miracles, and
Satan's wonderful works, p. 54. 3. And so the diverse kinds of these wonders
are discoursed, page 55. 4. Together with the intent, how far, and in what
Cases, Satan can effect them, page 55, 56. Chap. 3. Fourthly, is laid open the
policy of Satan, in drawing and uniting ignorant and unstable souls to this
Art. Where first; the Occasions are discovered, page 57. 2. Hereupon the manner
of Satan's working and enueighling to this Trade, page 58. 3. And of his
several Impostures, and treacheries therein, against the poor soul. p. 61.
4. And so of the entering his Nouices into this School: With the Use thereof,
page 62. 5. It is further manifested by what means Satan now confirms, and
detaineth his Proselites in this mystery: where 1. Of the Covenant, which
passes between the Witch and Satan to this end: And here first proved that
there is such a covenant, p. 65. 2. Of the nature and bruticall bond of the
covenant is set down. 3. The diverse kinds of the Covenants are discryed, and
so the policy of Satan therein further opened, p. 68. 4. The ground of the
Covenant is searched, and therein Satan's policy also detected, p. 69. and 70.
With the Uses thereof, p. 72. 5. The Parts of this covenant distinguished. 1.
What Satan binds himself to do for the Witch, p. 78. 2. Wherein the Witch is
bound to the Devil, p. 86. And the several sleights of Satan, in each
coniectured. p. 87. Chap. 5. Sixthly, is declared what Ceremonies Satan does
accompany this Covenant withal: the better to detain and hold his vassals to
the performance thereof: Whereof the secret Mark of the Witch, p. 88. 2. Of
conuenting them into the Church page 90. and there: First. To renounce their
Baptism, p. 91. 2. To offer up their blood in sacrifice to the Devil. 3. Of
kissing Satan's back parts. 4. Of carnal society by Satan, with Witches,
Together with the special sleights of Satan therein, p. 92. and the Use
thereof, page 94. Chap. 6. Seventhly, diverse other means are laid down,
whereby Satan confirms his Proselites, as Cap. 7. page 124. Diverse kinds of
Witchcraft are opened, both 1. That which consists in Divination; wherein
first is shawed, p. 128. That Satan can foretell in some measure things to
come. p. 129. 2. How far he may proceed therein, page 131. Wherrin is laid
down the difference between Divine and Satanicall predictions, page 132. 3.
The diverse means are discovered, whereby Satan foretells things to come; as,
by true Creatures. As 1. Flight of Birds, page 136. 2. The Intrals of Beasts,
ibid. 3. The Observation of the Stars, and heavenly bodies condemned, p. 137.
with answer to Objections to Astrology, page 138. 4. Dreams. 5. Lots.
Wherein is set down the right use of these things, Namely How the Doctrine of
the Stars is to be used. What Dreams are to be heeded, page 144. and so the
differeuce between divine, and other dreams manifested, p. 135. as also How
Lets are to be used, and herein the perverse abuse of these things discovered,
and rejected, p. 149. Secondly, it is declared how Satan deceiues, and foretells
things to come by forged means: as, answering in the shape of a Dead body, p.
151. 2. Where it is proved particularly: That the Resemblance appearing to
Saul was not true Samuel but Satan in his likeness. p. 152. Thirdly, it is
proved that Satan also uses to foretell things to come without means, and
that either by Real possessing of the souls and bodies of men, p. 155. Or
else by Obsession, and inspiring them with his evil counsels. Where
particularly is declared the differences between Satanicall Revelations,
Exthusiasmes, And Those true and Heavenly Revelations wherewith the true
Prophets of God were furnished: to declare the will of the Lord in
extraordinary times and oceasions: page 156. And so the use thereof commended
to the church of Christ Jesus. cha. 8. It yields further to declare another
kind of Witchcraft, which consists in operation, p. 157. And here first of
working Wonders by Charms, that it is unlawful. Where are answered diverse
Objections seeming to justify them, and so all sorts of Charms condemned,
page 158. etc. Either by Words sacred or profane, page, 160. Or by making of
Characters, p. 167. Images. Circles. Using of Amulets. Scratching of the Witch.
Exorcismes. Pictures of Wax, etc. Together with the use thereof to the Church
of God, page 169. Secondly, it is declared; that strange things are done by
Iugling, and deceiving of the senses, page 171. Wherein first, the Manner
thereof is set down, page 172. 2. Reasons answered for the Lawfulness
thereof, page 173. 3. It is proved that this is plain Sorcerie; and that the
Sorcerers of Egypt were but plain Iuglers, page 174. And so 1 Application
hereof made to the Church of Christ. Chap. 8. 109. Out of these Grounds thus
soundly laid, It is further considered: Who is the Practiser of this Art.
Namely the Witch. Where first, a Witch is discribed and lively painted out unto
us, in her several Lineaments and true Proportion: page 117. Secondly, It is
proved, that men as well as women, are Practioners therein. page 180. Thirdly,
And the Policy of Satan discovered in bayting these diverse Sects, with fit
means to ensnare them with this dangerous hook, page 181 According, both to
the diversity of Times, and Estates of the Church: page 183.
And also,
Suitable to the several Conditions and qualities of Nature, p. 184. And so it
is further manifested, that Antichrist has especially entertained and
advanced this Devilish Art, as an especial means to attain and maintain
his visible Monarchy: page 193 194., etc. And here is also resolved, what
especial Places Witches do most haunt together. With the Use thereof, page
199. and 200. Chap. 9. It being apparent what a Witch is, It is now further
discovered, how many kinds of Witches there are, p. 203. And here first of
the Bad Witch: page 206. 2. Of the means whereby she executes her mischief,
namely Cursing: and so, 3. Satan's policies herein: page 208. 209.
Secondly, Of the Good Witch:
First, Of her Nature and Condition, p. 211. 2 That her skill in helping is no
special gift of God: but attained by the assistance of the Devil. p. 213. 3
Of the means whereby she binds to be helpful. Namely, the belief of men,
and here, page 218. Whether they can help any that does not believe: page 219.
220. Whether the Good Witch can hurt: and the hurting Witch can help? Where the
admirable Wisdom and Justice of God is declared, page 224. And so it is
approved that the good Witch is sarre more dangerous then the bad: p. 232.
And thereupon advice given for her auoydance and apprehension especially, and
this in the 10. Chap. And thus ends the first Book, containing the Truth,
Nature, and Kinds of Witchcraft; together with the proper subject of this Art:
and so of her Entrance, Confirmation, and Practice therein, as also the
several kinds and dangers of them.
The second Book, proceeds to their Detection, and Conviction: and to this
end.
FIrst, sets down the Power and Efficacy of Witchcraft. Whereby they
execute their feats, and several mischiefs, and so draw themselves, yet
more palpably within the compass of authority. And here first it is showed
wherein the power of Witches is restrained, page 230.
And here it is enquired,
Whether the Witch have power to afflict the child of God, and how far: with
the uses thereof? page 248. How in these kinds of afflictions the Elect differ
from the wicked, page 253. Secondly, is declared, wherein the Witches power is
apparent:
And here.
First, of the Actions concerning their own persons, p. 257. Secondly, of
their actions toward others, p. 258. And so the Policy of Satan is
discovered, in executing and conuaying of this power. 1 By natural Medecines,
page 262 2 By Prayers, and good Counsels: page 263. 3 By shrowding it under
natural diseases, and mixing it therewith. 4 And of his notable sleights, and
dangerous snares therein, page 265.
And all this Chap 1.
Secondly is discoursed that Witches ought to be detected.
And to this end.
First, The admirable Wisdom and Justice of God is discovered, in making them
instruments of their own confusion page 270. Secondly, Two principal means
are laid down for their Discovery: Namely, Examination; And Conviction.
And here,
First, are commended diverse weighty presumptions, tending probably to detect
the Witch. p. 274. 2, Diverse manifest Proofs are added, tending to the
conviction of the same, page 277. And so false means of Detection being
rejected, and some doubts answered concerning the same: use is made thereof to
the Church of God, and this is in the second Chap. Thirdy are discovered the
Remedies against Witchcraft. Whereof the principal is, the Execution of
Authority, in cutting of the Offenders, Both for the practizing of their
mischieifes: and also: For Release from the same, p. 280.
And here first is proved, That
These mischiefs may be prevented: page 282. 2. The means of prevention are
laid down.
And these first Preservative, both,
First, such as concern the persons of men, page 284. And 2. Such as concern
their Habitations, page 289. Secondly, to these are added, Restoratiue
Remedies:
And these:
Either General, to dissolve the works of Satan, p. 293.
Or else:
Special Respecting Private Persons, page 295. And this Chap. 3. The True
Remedies being thus discoursed: Examination is further made of such
counterfaite and unlawful means, as are used to the Discovery of Witches.
And here first of
The Gift of Miracles which is proved, now to be ceased, and needless
heereto, and therefore falsely arrogated, and wickedly forged to the same: where
Objections are auswered, and the truth cleared, that these are but lying
wonders accomplished by the power of Satan, page. 297. As appears by the
means whereby they are wrought: Namely; First, the Name of Jesus, which is not
effectual by Divine power to any such ends, p. 302. Secondly, The Relics of
Saints, page 304. Thirdly, The Sign of the Cross: page 305. Fourthly, Use of
Holy Water, Salt, Images, Agnus Dei, Grains, etc. p. 306 5. Exorcismes, and
here it is resolved whether it be lawful to relieve a Witch, and how far it
may be done. p. 307. and this in the 4. Cap. Fifthly is proposed and prosecuted
a principal Remedy against Witchcraft: Namely, Execution of Justice: and
here likewise, First is propounded the just Punishment belonging to this
Sin: that Witches by the Law of God are to die the death, where both
objections are answered. page 313. And the equity of Gods Law cleared and
maintained. Chap. 5. Lastly, by way of conclusion, are laid open the several
Uses of this Doctrine of Witchcraft for the further edification of the Church
of God.
Here begins the third Book.
THose are, first of Reproof, and that 1 of the Atheism of these Times, sect.
1. page 320. 2 For contempt of the Word. page 322. sect. 2. 3 The Idolatry and
false worship of this present age is justly taxed and convinced. page 324.
sect. 3. 4 As also the gross profaneness and general rebellions of the
present Generation. page 325. sect. 4. 5 Lastly, it is a manifest conviction of
that damnable hypocrisy, and accursed dissimulation that reigns in this
present age. sect. 5. Chap. 1. page 327. A second general use is for
Instruction: and that, First, Teaching how to avoid and remedy the causes of
Witchcraft. Which are, First, That gross and wilful Ignorance that swarms
in the Land, Where is proved, first, That this is a maine cause of
Witchcraft. page 329. 2 How this is to be remedied. page 330. chap. 2. A
second cause of Witchcraft, is Infidelity. 1 This is proved by many
Circumstances. page 331. 2 The means laid down how to remedy this evil.
page 332 chap. 3. A third cause of Witchcraft, is Malice, declared by many
pregnant Reasons. page 334. 2 And the particular means laid down to prevent
and remedy this mischief. page 335. chap. 4. A fourth cause of Witchcraft is
Covetousness, as appears: 1 By many lively Evidences. p. 337 And so we are
directed how to remedy this great sin. page 338. A fifth cause of Witchcraft,
is Curiosity, here, 1 The Reasons hereof are discovered. page 339. 2 And the
way declared how to meet with this sin. page 341. chap. 6. The sixth and
principal cause of this judgment of Witchcraft is Pride.
As appears,
1 By diverse pregnant Evidences hereof. page 342: and so, 2 We are informed
how to encounter this mischief. p. 344. cha. 7. A second general Instruction
is to teach us hereby the truth of our natural condition, that we are the
very slaves of Satan, and vessels of wrath. page 346 chap. 8. A third general
Instruction here is, to teach us how we may be freed from this natural
bondage, what is the principal means heereunto. page 347. chap. 9. A fifth
general Instruction, is to teach us a conscionable and sincere use of all
other means of our salvation, as of Prayer, Sacraments, and both concerning
Preachers and People. page 351. chap. 11. A sixth general Instruction, is to
provoke us to sincerity and power of Religion in all our ways. page 352.
chap. 12. page 352. A seventh general Instruction, is to inform us in the
sleights and cunning of Satan, that so we may not be ignorant of his dangerous
snares. chap. 13. page 353. Eighthly, here is matter of Instruction, both for
the particular trial of our own estates page 354. As also for the discerning
of the true Church of God militant here on earth. chap. 14. page 357.
Ninthly, we are here instructed,
Both how to behave our selves in general under the Cross, especially how to
carry our selves in this affliction of Witc-craft. chap. 15. page 356. As also
how to prevent such snares as are in this Practice of Witchcraft, most
cunningly laid to entangle and draw us to the liking and entertainment
thereof. page 357. chap. 16. A third general Use, is for consalation, and that
many ways:
And that generally,
1 To comfort the Church of God, in regard of the grievous judgment of witch
craft. 360. chap. 17. 2 To comfort in particular such as are afflicted with
this Judgment. page 361. chap. 18. The conclusion of the whole.
Errata.
Pa. 25. l. 17. for bad read good 26. li. 2. for preached practiced 27. lin.
17. for hurt help 37. li. 6. for Witches works 57. lin. 8. for imitate
initiate 69. lin. 4. for promise procure 100. l. 26. for match mark 125. li.
13. mischief mistress 164. li. 21. sometimes societies. 160. li. 18 for serve
some 292. li. 18. for run a Rule 302. li. 8. Primitiues Prime Times 339. li.
13. delivered diuerted 341. lin. 14. for with within. 344. lin. 27. for end
evil.

THE MYSTERY OF Witchcraft discovered.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Of the Occasions and Scope of this Treatise; wherein is especially proved that
this doctrine of Witchcraft is very necessary to be handled and prosecuted in
these days.

DIVERSE have been the motives and occasions which have lead me to treatise
of this Subject at this time.

Some more General, concerning the diseases of the Time.

Others Special, concerning my Self.

The General are: General reasons moving to this Treatise.
Because the wise and glorious God by his special providence in these days,
requires an especial account of our Faith in this Truth: And that in these
respects.

First, That we should in thankfulness, acknowledge his great power and
mercy, That has so honored and justified the Revelation of the glorious
Gospel of his Son Jesus, by which this Mystery of Satan which in former
ages has been either smothered, or perverted, to the further erecting and
maintaining of the Kingdom of darkness; is now graciously and clearly, not
only discovered, but further also reformed to the true use thereof, and so we
rightly informed how to deal therein: And so by the power of God, the
Magistrate enabled to take such course therein, as may best serve to the
demolishing of the Kingdom of Antichrist.

Secondly, seeing the Power of the Gospel is thus able to discover and
confound the kingdom of Satan, may not this condemn our unprofitable receiving
thereof, who still mask it in our sins, and will not come out of them,
whereas the very devils give testimony thereunto? Iam. 2.
If they believe and tremble, if they cannot endure the glorious light of the
Gospel, if they forsake their holds, and confound their Proselites, being
forced to discover them by the power of the Word, Act. 19. 3.
and so to be the executioners of Gods righteous judgments against them; Shall
not this be our condemnation, that though light be come into the world, Ioh.
3. 9.
yet still we love the darkness more then the light? we less obey the
Gospel then the devils do; Angli quasi Angeli.
we Angels in name, are less affected then these infernal spirits; we
spurn against Authority, when these are controuled by it; we continue in our
sins, when these are cut off by the Magistrate; we justify sin, when
these discover and unfold it?

Surely seeing God is glorified in confessing of our sins, Josh. 7. 9.
shall not the devils rise up in judgment against us? may not they teach us to
yield more obedience to the Gospel? And seeing, for our disobedience to the
Truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
it has pleased the Lord to give us up in his justice to strong delusions;
either, Delusions of the time.
to rest in the form of religion denying the power thereof, or else, to run
back to Egypt again: even to loath this heavenly Manna, and so to doat upon
the fitches and onions, yea the garbidge and very deepenesse of Antichrist,
exalting him above all that is called God, In seeking for help unto Blessers,
and good Witches, as we call them, who being commonly ignorant, profane, and
superstitious, prove very dangerous instruments for the restoring and increase
of the kingdom of Antichrist. As both coloring their Diabolical practice
under pretense of holy prayers and natural means, and thereby advancing that
lip-labor and formal devotion, the very life of Popery. As also by their
pretense of great charity in relieuing so many infirmities, Note. Miracles.
justifying that false Fire of Popish Love, and fained Miracles: But especially
nuzeling the people in ignorance by their example and corrupt practice, and
seducing them from the light of the Gospel, and such holy means as therein
are offered for their relief, to most indirect and desperate remedies, as to
enthrall their souls to hell for ever, that the poor carkase may have present
ease: As requiring trust and confidence to be reposed in them, and so
excluding utterly from Christ, and so from salvation. Seeing (I say) these
Blessers are highly esteemed of in these days, as being dangerous Factors for
Antichrists kingdom: Ought not every True Member of Christ to see this
plague, to give warning of it, that so their blood may not be required at his
hands? And has the glorious Lord been without witnesses in these days to
discover the practices of Antichrist, his creepings in again, and that by
these means of Sorceries and enchantments?

Surely, the Name of his Majesty be blessed for ever, that has raised up
even a cloud of Witnesses in these declining days; as to contest against
Antichrist, and his hellish Monarchy, so withal to discrie his deepenesse in
these his deuilish instruments, and therefore especially to detect and confound
the same.

Consider, I pray you, with me the wisdom of our God, and let us magnify
his Name together.

Has he not ordained the Magistrate and the Minister for the seasonable
overthrow of Antichrists kingdom?

And has he not very meruailously disposed in these times, that as
Antichrist has renewed his hopes by these and other desperate engines of his
spiritual warfare, so he has been confronted by Gods powerful Ordinances?

As the Magistrate not only in making seucre Laws against the increase of his
kingdom, Magistrates. R. Iacobus.
but further also by his happy Pen, cutting down his usurped Authority to the
very root; and further also discovering and confounding this Mystery of
Witchcraft, In Daemonologia.
as being a maine proppe and hope for the upholding and continuance thereof.

And concerning the Ministers of the Gospel, Ministers.
have not these in their Places, as they have the more in general been
zealous against Antichrist kingdom, as they have more discerned the Mystery
and Mark of the Beast, so they have been more quick-sighted to discern him
in this Policy of Witchcraft, Mr. Perkins Gifford, North-brooke.
and so have more earnestly labored against the same? And shall I hold my
peace in this day of good-tydings? Shall I not also bring my faggot to the
burning of these Witches, and so to further the destroying of the kingdom of
Antichrist.

Has not the Lord enabled me to discover the practice of Antichrist in that
hellish Plot of the Gunpowder-treason? Has he not preserved me graciously
from many such devilish Practices of these Antichristian Instruments, not only
in keeping me from seeking for their help, when my children were suspected to
be afflicted by them, that so my soul might be endangered thereby: But
especially in preserusing me from many cursed snares which by these
mischievous instruments have been privily laid for me, to the endangering of
my life, and hinderance of the Gospel?

Surely were there no general reasons to induce me hereunto, yet mine own
private respect, might well herein provoke me to erect some such like Altar
in memorial of Gods mercies toward me; and to enable and advise my brethren
to keep themselves from Witchcraft.

Must I not confess, to the glory of my God, that as Younger Studies are
subject to Pride and Curiosity, so Curiosity, through Pride, not contenting
it self with Common knowledge, is provoked hereby to taste of the forbidden
fruit, even to diue into secrets belonging only unto God, to foreknow things
to come, and so to gain some high and divine esteem in declaring of them?

And does not Art give some color and show hereunto? as yielding out of
general precedences of the conjunctions and motions of heavenly Bodies, Note.
some probable conjectures concerning the motion and success of these
inferior things? And does not Satan most cunningly and dangerously shroud
himself under this Art? as concluding particular certainities out of general
probabilities, and conjectures, which the curious Student coveting after, as
being ashamed to stagger in his skill; while he cannot therefore find this in
his Art, is therefore the rather baited by Satan to seek this skill from him,
who will not now fail to tender his help for the satisfying of proud
curiosity, and that by such means as are not likely to be refused.

For whereas flesh and blood would be afraid to encounter Satan in his own
likeness at the first, unless it were further deluded and hardened in the
Trade; therefore behold the dangerous cunning of Satan to entice these nouices
to his lure, and that by the appearance of contrary semblance.

To this end he appears first transformed into an Angel of Light, pretending
his willing subjection to certain idle and worthless Characters and Names of
God, whereby he deceiues his nouices two ways.

First, in making them believe that this Art is approved of God, in that it
goes under his name.

2 That it is also performed by the power of God, as whose name is the ground
of the charms, and therefore shall have good success.

3 And that not only in the thing attempted, but also to the party attempting
the same, as having special favor with God, having the Lord (as it were) at
his beck, being made of Gods secret couusell, being as God, knowing things to
come.

For the further confirmation of this delusion, behold in this point another
policy of Satan; that whereas man, through pride, desires Soueraignety and
Dominion, therefore now (in the second Place) Satan offers himself unto this
Nouice, as a Slave and Vassaile, seeming to be commanded by him, whom he now
labors to enthrall for ever, And therein notably gulling the ambitious spirit
with this conceited Emperie: What can thou desire more then to prevail with
God, then to lead hell captive in this triumphant manner, then by these means
to prevail with men?

Thus are Young Scholars puffed up with knowledge, and the Pride of knowledge
exalts them above that which is meet, that so their fall may be more fearful
and irrecouerable.

And was not my Younger Studies subject to this tentation?

Surely blessed be God in Jesus Christ that has lent me life to acknowledge
his mercy in this behalf!

Was there not a time when I admired some in the University famozed in that
skill?

Did not the Lord so dispose of me, that my Chamber-fellow was exceedingly
bewitched with these fair shows, and having gotten diverse books to that end,
was earnest in the pursuit of that glory which might redound thereby?

Did not we communicate our Studies together? was not this skill proposed and
canuased in common? And did not the Lord so arm his unworthy servant, that not
only the snare was graciously espied; but, by the great mercy of my God, the
Lord used me as a means to divert my Chamber-fellow from these dangerous
Studies? And shall not this mercy of our God be had in everlasting
remembrance?

Surely the mercies of God are everlasting, worthy to be sought out of all
that fear him: Lam. 3. 23.
How are they renewed every morning, so great is his faithfulness?

For did not my God exercise me usually with continual buffetings of Satan,
that so I might be better enabled to discover his sleights to others? Witness
my diurnall Records to this end, which if God continue life and health, may
serve the common Good.

Has not the Lord since, wheresoever it has pleased him to pitch my Tent,
even there to follow me with this Tentation, In Cheshire and Couentry.
to be assaulted with this pestilent-brood, and Deuillish Generation? Has not
he used me as an instrument, though most unworthy, to comfort others
according to the comforts that have abounded unto me? Has not my gracious God
wonderfully delivered me from their cursed Trains, and made me able in some
poor measure to declare his great mercies to the generations to come?

And have I not often Vowed to glorify God in this behalf? Have not my
meditations and experience been faithfully stored up to this end? Was I not
purposed upon a special occasion of the death of the Lady HALES procured by
Witchcraft, to commend such observations to Posterity, but that the good
knight her husband, for reviving and continuing of his grief by that memorial
ouer-ruled that opportunity: But is not the Lord merciful to offer another
seasonable and worthy occasion to Pay my Vows?

Surely, the Lord be blessed that awakens this secure age daily by renewed
tokens of his power and displeasure: And seeing we will not obey his Word, but
reject the power of it, vouchsafes yet to Preach unto us by his wonderful
works.

And seeing ordinary judgments will not awaken us; even from the belly of Hell
he cries unto us, and sends forth his evil Angels to vex and torment us.
Blessed be his Name that gives us warning of the great and spiritual plague
upon our souls, by these torments upon our bodies: That lets us see the plague
of gross and palpable darkness threatened against us by these common and
fearful delusions of the Prince of darkness.

Does not every Assise almost throughout the Land, resound of the arraignement
and conviction of notorious Witches; either where gross ignorance and Popery
most abounds, or where the truth of God is withheld, and profaned, by
unrighteousness and hypocrisy?

Can we forget the late Assise at Lancaster, where no less then fifteen were
endited, and twelve condemned of that horrible crime, a Country abounding on
that part thereof, with gross ignorance and Popery?

Has not Couentrie been usually haunted by these hellish Sorcerers, where it
was confessed by one of them, that no less then threescore were of that
confedracie? And is not this a place famous for the pride and glory of the
Holy Mountain?

And was I not there enjoined by a necessity to the discovery of this Brood?

These are the occasions of this ensuing Treatise, this is the scope and end
thereof.

And is it not then a word in due season for our present edification?

Surely seeing the Word and the Sword do very graciously sort together, the
one to authorize and confirm the other: Seeing now the sword of the Magistrate
is seasonably brandished against these offenders: is not the Word encouraged to
justify that Authority, which usually is too fearful and charitable in
rooting out such evils?

Ought not the Word to encourage the Sword to this glorious work of detecting
and confounding the kingdom of darkness, which especially preuailes by these
deuillish charms.

And that not only in the Ignorant multitude, and wilfully seduced Papist; But
even in the Carnal Protestant, and Gross Hypocrite, though they have received
the knowledge of the Truth; For do we not generally detain the truth of God
in unrighteousness, making a show of Religion and yet denying the power
thereof; making our belly our God, and the wedge of Gold our hope, turning the
graces of God unto wantonness, and so giving up our members as weapons to the
service of sin; do thereby plainly discover whose servants we are, even the
bondslaues of Satan who rules in the children of disobedience? And does not
the Lord very wonderfully discover our shifts, and confound our painted shows,
even by these evil Angels which he sends amongst us?

Does not our Atheism on the one side, convince our heartlesse and deceitful
worship, while we Plead for Satan, and maintain his Kingdom concluding his
preuailings to be but Counterfaitings; Scot.
his Contracts with Witches to be but Delusions, ascribing his power in
afflicing, to Natural Diseases.

And yet does not the Lord on the other side reject our confidence that so our
own tongues and ways may fall upon us?

For do we yet fear those Withes, whom we conclude to be harmless,
hurting rather by our infidelity, then any power of satan, or in themselves?

Do we not close with them desperately, releeuing them with our Alms, and so
binding them by our charity, and even Tying them by the Teeth, that they may
not hurt us?

Nay, though we make profession to seek to GOD alone in our troubles; yet
when it comes to the Pinch, do we not run unto the Devil? Has not the
Blesser, more Proselites and Patients then the Physician; yea then the
conscionable Preacher?

The Lord give us understanding in these things. Where is our Faith in God? Is
there not a God in Israel that we must run to Beelzebub the Prince of
darkness for help?

Nay where are our Wits and common sense? do we say that Witches have no power
to hurt by Satan; And yet do we run to those for help? Which seeing they
have no calling from God, nor use any such means as are Warrantable by the
Word, it must needs follow that they proceed from the Father of Lies; who then
hurts most dangerously when he pretends to help: And must needs hurt
desperately when he is exalted and adored above all that is called God,
requiring that homage which is only due unto God.

Thus, though light be come into the world, though it be entertained for a
season, yet men love darkness more then the light, because their works are
evil; and so are justly given up for their disobedience to this Strong
Delusion, even to worship Satan; and so to become twofold more the children of
hell then they were before.

And does not their example harden the Papist in their Idolatry? And yet surely
the Justice of God does still gloriously appear in these Children of wilful
ignorance that still stop their eaires against the voice of the charmer,
charm he never so wisely. That seeing they will not be converted by that
mild voice from Heaven, they may be confounded by this fearful voice from
hell: That they may now discern their true estate to be no better then the
Devils slaves, Ephesians. 2. 2. Tim. 2. 32.
led captive by him at his will, by these Good and Bad Witches: these hurters
and helpers.

As Trusting to these for help for the body, and so renouncing the sovereign
and safe remedy of the light of the Gospel for the salvation of souls. As,
fearing the other more then the living God, and his Vicegerent the Magistrate;
and so by this slavish fear, as with a strong eord being faster bound under
the power of darkness, binding hereby iniquity as with Cart-ropes, while
they add drunkenness unto thirst, confirming Ignorance and Infidelity by
this palpable Idolatry in seeking help of Satan: And so being confounded in
their vain confidence of will worship unto God: As now being justly convinced
to offer sacrifice to the devil, might either by this shame be brought to
repentance, or else being made utterly inexcusable, might so be given over to
the fearful expectation of the vengeance to come.

Certainly, if these accursed people yet seek for signs and shadows to
confirm them in their superstition or reform them to the Truth: Have they not
a sign from heaven, even the sign of the Son of Man, Daily crucified unto
them in the powerful Preaching of the Gospel? And yet behold their fearful
obstinacy.

Do they not still dote after stocks and stones? Do they not run from the
living to the dead? Do not they renew their Idolatrous Crosses, to increase
their stony hearts? Do they not say unto the stocks thou art my Savior, and
to the stone thou have redeemed me?

Oh Adulterous and faithless Generation, how long will they provoke the Lord?
Shall not his jealousy burn like fire to consume them and all their stubble
with unquenchable torments.

And seeing they boast that they have made a Covenant with hell, Esaias 28. 45
and are at an agreement with death, as pretending that by their Keys they
have the power to open and shut hell at their pleasure; and yet intending, and
discovering plainly herein their horrible Athiesme, that they have made
Falsehood their Refuge, and are Hid under Vanity, making the Pleasures of
sin, Heb. 11. 26
their chief God and happiness, and resting in their Visible Monarchy, as
their Sovereign and supreme Kingdom And esteeming hell as a Bug-beare and
putting the evil day far from them that they may approach to the seat of
Iniquity.
.

Has not the Lord mightily rejected their confidence by giving them another
Sign even from the bowels of the earth: By letting Satan loose to torment and
delude them, to vex their bodies and yet also to deceive their souls?

Surely the Justice of GOD is admirable herein to be laid to heart of all
those that do hate the Whore, Amos 6. 3.
and desire her desolation, that so they may lift up their heads because their
salvation draws near; in that they may discern in this glass of his
providence, the confusion of Antichrists approachings: And so may take the
opportunity, to hasten the same in their several places and means which yet
the Lord in mercy affoords unto them.

And blessed be God that gives some measure of wisdom to redeem the time,
and declare the wonders of the Lord to the Generation to come. Shall not this
make for the confirmation of our faith, that the Lord will tread Satan utterly
ynder our feet?

CHAP. II.
First proves that there are Witches, and that 1 By testimony from the Word.
2 By testimony from all antiquity. 3 By sound Reason, and that drawn: First
from the Power, Justice and Wisdom of the Lord. Secondly from the Pride and
Policy of Satan. Thirdly from the damnable estate and desperate condition and
corruption of man.

Secondly it reprooueth; 1 Those that impute this to melancholy. 2 The Atheist
that denies Witchcraft. 3 That would have all to be but Illusion. 4 That
justify bad Witches. 5 And so answers to all objections that may be justly
made against this Doctrine.


THat there are Witches; first, this appears by the testimony of the Word,
which witnesses.

1 That there were such Sorcerers that preached this skill, as 1. Sam. 19. The
Witch of Endor, and Simon Magus, Acts. 8. and Pythonesse in the Acts 19. etc.

2 The Judgments of God are denounced against such by the Prophets, as Esaias
44. 25. and 47. 12.

3 The Magistrates by severe Laws interdicted the practice of Witchcraft as
Saul, 1. Sam. 10. 3. and 9.

4 The sentence of death is pronounced against this by the Law of God, as
Exodus 22. 18. Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live.

Secondly, the whole stream of Antiquity also avouches the same.

As appears by that which is declared hereafter concerning the
entertainment and practice of Sercerie: By all nations.

2 By the Laws of each nation, against this Mystery.

3 By the general experience of all Ages wherein either through ignorance this
wickedness has appeared in open face among the Gentiles, or else, for abuse
of knowledge, even hypocrites have been given up to this Judgment of
Witchcraft, because they detain the truth of God in unrighteousness, and
sacrifice to their Art, yea to Satan himself, even wherein they pretend to
serve God, as appears afterward in the use hereof.

This also is manifest by sound Reason and Induction.

And that from the Power, Wisdom and Justice of God.

Gods Power is manifest; as his yielding up the mightiest to the power of
Satan, as Gods executioner, so in brideling Satan to hurt and cut where it
pleases him, Job 1 and 2. 2. Corin. 4. Matthew. 8.

His Wisdom admirable in this: That giving the wicked their desire for the
satisfying of the flesh. Ps. 106. 25.


1 They are willingly given up to submit their souls to the power of Satan,
and so to be the executioners of their own damnation.

2 And whereas Satan, if he should appear in his own likeness, would not so
easily be entertained, could not do so conveniently the will of God, in
deceiving the wicked: yet being now disposed by the Lord of glory in this wise
and glorious manner, that by the ministry of men and women subject to our
infirmities: and therefore more likely by reason of natures bonds, to prevail
with their like, Satan shall tender his service unto us; does he not convey his
poison into our souls more easily? does he not prevail more effectually to
our ensnaring and destruction?

The Justice of God shines also most gloriously in this mystery of Witchcraft.

As first, In making it a Punishment to such as will not obey the truth, that
they might be deluded and ensnared thereby.

And so in sealing up, in this strange and terrible affliction by Witchcraft,
and the desperate covenant that is therein; even eternal vengeance, and those
intolerable pains of the damned, that the Atheist may be utterly confounded,
and the desperate sinner, may be utterly without excuse: As preaching to the
rebellious world, by these prophets of Satan the certainty of their damnation,
who refuse to embrace the glad tidings of their salvation from the Messengers
of the Lord.

And is not the Justice of God admirable herein, that the wicked are now the
choosers and executioners of their own damnation, in being willingly ignorant
of the truth: In their best wisdom heaping up teachers according to their
own lusts, purposely submitting themselves to these prophets of the devil,
that so they may be turned to their inevitable condemnation?

Secondly, It is manifest from the Pride and Cunning of Satan.

Who although he naturally hate God, yet in the Pride of his heart he seeks
to imitate him in all his actions, that so he may more desperately execute his
malice both against God in disgracing his providence, and against man in
furthering his destruction. And therefore, as God has his covenant with man:
so will Satan have a special covenant also with his servants.

As the Lord has his Ministers to execute his wrath upon the disobedient:
namely, the Magistrate, so Satan will have his badde Witches to execute
against the sons of men. Yea,

As the Lord has his Prophets and faithful ministers to relieve and comfort
his distressed people: so Satan will have his good Witches, to minister help
to such as seek unto him, etc.

And as the wise and merciful God, because we are not able to hear him, if
he should himself speak unto us, does therefore convey his will into earthen
vessels 2. Corinthians 4. 7. causing men, like our selves, subject to the same
infirmities with us, to deliver his council, and prepare us to the obedience
thereof: even so deals Satan the god of this world, with the children of
disobedience. That whereas by reason of Natures guilt and infirmity, they
could not endure his terrible and personal presence: therefore he tendereth
his will unto them, by certain delightful and Familiar charms, yea by
Witches his vassales insinuates himself into us, coloring his presence and
sleights by some show of outward holiness, as by abusing of holy Names,
Prayers, Relics, etc. that so he may the better win from us an approbation
of his help; and so the more dangerously ensnare us in his cruel paws.

Thirdly also this is manifest from the consideration of our own cursed
nature. And that not only because we are Satan's slaves naturally, and so are
led captive at his will, even to further our own condemnation, and the
condemnation of others:

But especially in regard of those Remaynders of original goodness: As some
natural light, some conscience of good and evil, etc. whereby we being
usually puffed up, and so laboring to increase these gifts: seeing we know not
the right means heereunto, namely, to seek them of the Lord: Is it any
marvel, if we fall to chaffer with Satan for the obtaining thereof? especially
seeing he will not fail to offer his help, and that upon very fair and
seemingly equal terms?

Now if we consider on the other side, that corruption wherewith we are
infected even from the mothers womb. Two things there are herein that further
this compact with Satan.

The one is, The earnest and insatiable desire to accomplish our lusts: which
seeing we cannot compass by lawful means, will we stick at any thing,
though it be the hazard of the soul, to attain our desires? Math. 16. 25.
Especially, seeing as we desire to commit sin with greediness, so either
for credit, we would not be seen therein: and indeed it is Satan's policy to
blind the eyes of our minds, that so walking in darkness, we may not know
whither we go, but even like fools be led to the Stocks, and oxen to the
shambles: And has not this Practice of Witchcraft many cunning sleights, and
colors to hide and cloak sin, to illude and pervert our judgments, that we
may not discern whereabout we are? Consider to this end that which follows: and
God give us understanding in all things.

Add we hereunto, That as sin increases and ripeneth to vengeance, Note.
so natural light by degrees is clean perverted and extinguished. And the
bands of common honesty being wholly cast off and violated, the bridle is
given to all desperate and presumptuous sins: and that the wicked may more
securely revel therein: religion is made a scorn of, Psalm. 10. 5.
and God is forgotten, Job 21. 15.
and the knowledge of his ways utterly rejected: whereby the Lord in justice
is provoked to execute his fierce wrath, and to power out the most bitter vial
thereof upon the souls of the wicked, yielding them up wholly to the power of
Satan: whereby they are left to these desperate extremities, as to make real
covenants with him: to yield him up their souls, and all at his devotion; to
consecrate themselves to his service and homage, and so to become spectacles
herein of the certainetie of damnation, for the confusion of the Atheist, that
thinks there is no hell, and the warning of the Christian, to avoid the danger
thereof.

3 And seeing it is the Justice of Almighty God to punish extraordinary and
monstrous sins, with strange and unwonted plagues. Therefore seeing the
wicked cannot content them selves with common and natural sins, Note.
but must further devise sins against nature, Romans 1 25 26.
as being justly given up hereto by the divine Justice, punishing their carnal
Wisdom: in their strange and monstrous Idolatry and Will Worship by those
monstrous and unnatural Impieties: Is it not yet further just with the Lord,
to leave them to be tormented by Satan, the god of this world, whom they have
consecrated themselves unto, and that with strange and fearful conuulsions,
and horrible tortures, likely to rend the body from the soul, but that the
mighty hand of GOD ouer-ruleth Satan, and sustaineth Nature, to the further
advancing of his divine Justice and admirable power. And yet all this in show
by the ministry of a poor, weak, and miserable woman, Note.
to the increase of their rage, and confusion of carnal wisdom, to the
nourishment of Infidelity, and so to the sealing up in these bodily torments
of eternal vengeance.

1 And therefore; as this reproves such as seem to elude all with a conceit
of melancholy, Use of c^uiction.
as if these devilish practices and combinations betwixt the Witch and Satan,
were but fancies and vain dreams of a melancholy brain: seeing the symptoms
of melancholy do no whit agree with the persons of these Witches.

2 As these, being fat, merry, delighting in company, and all which are contrary
where melancholy reigns: so this is also a Plain condemnation of the Atheist
of these Times, who does therefore willingly entertain this error; That there
are no Witches: that so he may therehence conclude to his soul, That there is
no Hell, no Devils, etc.

3 This reproves those, that, because many things are done by the delusion of
Satan, (as has bin manifested heretofore) do therefore conclude, that al is
but Illusion, and so would illude the maine ground of Witchcraft, namely, that
real covenant that is between Satan and the Witch, for the effecting of such
things as on both sides are couenanted.

4 But especially, they are here justly to be taxed, that howsoever they will
acknowledge the Badde Witch to work with, and by Satan, because she hurts:
yet at no hand will yield, that the Blesser and wise Witch (as they do term
her) has any thing to do with the devil, by virtue of such compact: but
rather conceive that it is some extraordinary gift of God, given to such
special persons, whereby they have power to dissolve the Witches of the devil;
seeing it is manifest, that such extraordinary gifts now ceasing, and this
being proper only to the Word, in the mouth of a skillful and approved good
workman to that end, If any such thing fall out: it necessarily proceeds
from Satan's power, permitted justly by the Lord, to prevail thus with his
dearest servants, to deceive and ensnare unstable souls, that forsaking the
God of their salvation, run to Satan for help for the body, to the
destruction of the soul.

And therefore, howsoever Satan could without the ministry of Witches, do
happily as great hurt to the body, and therefore it may seem, that to use
them were needless: yet seeing it is the soul that he principally hunts
after; and so, by hurting the body, entendeth also the further ensnaring
thereof. Hence is it, that he employeth these instruments, to accomplish his
will by, not only ensnaring their souls, by satisfying their desires to hurt,
and help whom they list: But hereby also endangering the souls of others.

Both those that are hurt, in provoking them hereby, both to seek for revenge
abroad, against the Witch: when as they should begin at home to be avenged
of their own sins: as also to seek for remedy of their hurt by devilish
means: and so they usually buy this help with the hazard of their souls.

And so also enthralling their souls yet more fearfully unto Satan: In that
receiving help from such means as are tendered out of his school: hereby it
comes to pass that Satan is adored, and advanced above all that is called
God. The holy and lawful means of help are rejected, and despised.

Ignorance and Atheism is nourished in the world, Infidelity and all excess
of sin, maintained and increased, and so iniquity ripened unto the day of
vengeance. And yet.

If here the cunning of Satan be to keep these Witches poor, Why Witches are
kept poor.
and therefore it may seem, that they should have but a little list to follow
this miserable trade: Observe we wisely the admirable Justice and Wisdom of
Almighty God herein, both in ouer-ruling Satan, that he shall not minister to
the Witch according to her desire; that so she may be confounded in her
dtsperate bargain, that has parted with her soul, for enjoying of that
whereof she is disappoynted: As also

Hereby the desires of the Witch being disappoynted, are more enflamed, and so
eternal damnation hereby sealed up unto her.

And withal, she more abiected to the lust of Satan, renewing her covenant,
and multiplying her sacrifices, that she may compass her desires: That so
being still kept short, and confounded in her expectation: she may break out
into more desperate attempts to the ripening of sin, and hastening of
vengeance.

Which shall with greater confusion light upon her, in that being once arrested
and convicted by Authority: she shall find her master whom she has served,
not only to be the means of her discovery, and haling to Judgment, (as
hereafter shall be manifest;) but now he has discovered her, Why Satan for
forsakes the Witch after that Authority has seized on her
to forsake her utterly (in regard of helping out of this brake;) that so she
may be yet further confounded, in her desperate choice, that has forsaken a
faithful GOD, to serve such a master, as will forsake her in her need: and
that to such a fearful end, as hereby to sincke her in horrible despair,
and so to exclude her al hope of mercy and compassion from the Lord; and
thereby to expose her unavoidably to his merciless tyranny.

And to this end serves further, Why the bad Witch cannot help what she has
hurt.
that the bad Witches power being so limited, as having hurt, she cannot help
again; howsoever it may seem to imply a unllotie in this Trade; or at least
challenge the power and perfection of it; yet indeed this restraint of the bad
Witches power, tends much to advance the Mystery of this iniquity; as
hereafter is made manifest, and so to make good the wisdom of this Art:
Especially seeing this both for the present proves a great confusion to the
Witches power, as also gives occasion of her discovery from the Blesser, who
in this case is sought to for help; and so detecting the bad Witch makes way
for her riddance that her Master Satan may have more work.

And howsoever when the Witch is punished, Why though the Witch be punished,
yet the affliction is not removed.
the party afflicted has no ease, yet this does not argue that his affliction
came not by that means. But herein appears; first, the absolute power of
God, who ties not the outward blessing simply to the use of holy means: Though
the Magistrate have done his duty in punishing the Witch, yet the party
afflicted must still abide Gods leisure, The Lord is not simply subject to man:
Or else though that outward means may be used for the punishment of the
offender, yet seeing the affliction must be sanctified before it shall be
removed from the Saints. And this proceeding hitherto may happily be a means
for the good of the Witch, as being staid from further hurting, and so happily
as she belongs to the Lord, by this temporal punishment may be brought to
true repentance: But it cannot simply and necessarily avail the party
afflicted; therefore it is the great wisdom and bounty of the Lord, not to
cease the affliction upon the punishment of the Witch, but rather to linger it
upon his Saints, until by more effectual means of prayer, and unfeigned
repentance, they shall make an holy use of the present chasticement, And so in
it due season it shall be removed from them.

And may not the wise and gracious GOD heerby meet with our Confidence in the
means; not removing the correction, though we have done the will of God for
the further Trial of our faith, and advancement of his absolute power, in
preserving us in this extremity?

And so thereby not only confounding Satan, and his instruments which thirst
for blood: but preparing us hereby to a more glorious deliverance. And what if
it please our merciful God to take us to himself by this strange affliction
does not his exceeding mercy shine herein? Not only in sanctifying this
grievous affliction to his Saints, though he do not utterly remove it; but
further also in delivering them by this affliction from this miserable world;
or at least leading them by the continuance of the rod, to sound repentance,
that so they may howsoever be bettered by it.

And therefore seeing the Lord can raise light of darkness, The Saints
subject to this calamity, and why.
and these outward things are common to all: though the dear Servants of God
should be chasticed with this scourge, may not this stand with the wise
providence of the Almighty may it not come within the compass of this Art, to
have even Gods children afflicted by Witchcraft? Shall not even all things
turn to their good?

And what though the Word seem to condemn such as by poison take away the
life of man; yet seeing these poisons are delivered from Satan unto the Witch,
by virtue of the Covenant between them; Witches though they work by poison,
yet to be punished for compact with Satan.
and though some hurt be done by poisons, yet much more is done by forcerie,
and employment of Satan personally to that end, seeing the Word does as well
condemn these Witches: Is it not manifest that such there are to be condemned?

And though happily they may speak many things falsely, Witches though they lie
yet to be convicted.
as confessing that to be done by them which is done by Satan immediately,
telling of many things that are untrue, yet does this the rather argue that
they are led by Satan, that he does many things by their appointment.

For seeing Satan is a Liar from the beginning, therefore does he both teach
them to lie.

1 That those which yet will depend on them, Willing lie.
may be more inexcusable.

2 That he may also by this means make a Trade of lying. Why they lie.


And he does also give them ocsion to lie unwittingly, in confessing that to
be done by them which Satan did of himself, that so he may hasten them to
their deserved condemnation, causing their own tongues justly to fall upon
them, both in punishing their will though they did no hurt in this particular,
and meeting with former hidden wickedness by this supposed and arrogated crime.

But here it is replied, that these poor women use Salues and good prayers to
the accomplishment of their cures, Witches though they use salues and prayers
yet be convicted of sorcerie.
and therefore neither is it likely that Satan would conioyne with such holy
means, and indeed it is needless, if these will do it, to admit of Satan's
assistance thereto.

To which we answer, that neither are such medicines as are applied usually
fit for all such cures, because commonly they give but one Salve for all
diseases: Or if they were, why may not Satan use these to cloak and color his
presence?

As for prayers, neither are they available in regard of the person, being
usually profane, popish, or ignorant; neither indeed allowable to such ends;
but where other lawful remedies may not be had. And may not Satan hide
hereby his assistance more dangerously? May he not deceive unstable souls
more desperately?

Thus it is apparent that there are Witches, both by testimonies from the Word,
and by sound reasons conuincing the same: And so

Such objections are answered as seem to oppugn this sacred truth.

Now let us consider further what Witchcraft is.

CHAP. III.
1 What Witchcraft is, 2 Of the causes, 3 And effects thereof.

VVItch-craft is a wicked Art serving for the working of wonders by the
assistance of the devil, so far forth as God in Justice shall permit.

An Art (I say it is) because it has it Rules and Observations whereon it is
grounded: especially the Covenant with Satan, and the circumstances

The Author of these Rules is Satan the Prince of darkness reigning in the
children of disobedience, and therefore by his knowledge of divine duties and
malice against God and his children, framing these Rules, to draw them from the
service of God, to the service of the Devil.

And conueying these Rules unto the Witches his chief Scholars, that they
might more easily and familiarly teach the wicked, then if Satan himself
should personally appear unto them.

And therefore it follows that it is a wicked Art, as proceeding from so
fearful a Teacher, and tending to so wicked ends. As

1 To work wonders, whereby it is proved to be a Wicked Art, as proceeding
from that root of Bitterness even a Desire to be like unto God; Genesis 3.
to the compassing whereof, what more colorable then to work wonders? Thus did
Satan prevail with our first Parents, and thus he works upon their
graceless posterity, as being encouraged daily herein by our natural
corruption: And, that especially discovering it self.

1 By self love, and high conceit of our own deserving; which being not
answered, but rather crossed herein, that he that has most is never co^te^ted,
he that has less enuies him that has more: heerevpon Satan lays the
foundation of this Art in the heart of man, Discontent in the heart of man.
as hereby being persuaded that he shall work wonders, both to relieve his
poverty, and advance his credit, as exceeding all in this, though he come
short in other things, and hereby compassing the height of his desire: Thus did
many Popes advance themselves, as Syluester 2. Benedict 8. and Hildebrand.

This self conceit stays not here; but as outwardly it affects to be as a
God among men by honor and promotions, so does it also inwardly affect and
desire some such means, whereby it may reign in the consciences of men.

And to this end, knowing men to affect novelties, does it therefore in
Curiosity, search after knowledge and hidden Mysteries, which being not
supplied by nature and ordinary means, are therefore not unwillingly sought by
this forbidden skill: And that the rather because hereby being enabled to
confirm such newfound knowledge with strange and wonderful events, Curiosity
by this means does more strongly bind the conscience, and detain in
obedience: Although all is done by no other means; but

2 The assistance of the devil: whereby it is further distinguished from all
other Arts, which produce their effects by virtue of their own ground* not any
outward help: As also especially, seuering hereby the wonders that are
wrought by this Art, and those True Miracles, that are wrought by Divine Power.

These are such as are wrought by the power of God simply, True Miracles.
either above or contrary to nature, as Exodus 14. 21. and Exodus 6. 7. 8. those
miracles done before Pharaoh by Moses, and Josh. 10. 13. The causing of the
Sun to stand in the firmament, The preservation of the Three Children in the
fiery furnace; Dan. 3. 20. Daniel in the Lions Den, Dan 6. 23. and Math. 14.
Ioh. 9. these have God truly to be their Author, As being the only Creator
of Nature: 1 And therefore to God alone belongs to restrain or extend the
power thereof: 2 Especially seeing this is a kind of creation, whereby that is
to be made which was not before: Ps. 136. 4. And therefore, if the Prophets
and Apostles have done any such wonders: Prophets and Apostles how they wrought
Miracles.
It has been, 1 Not by their own power, or in their own name, but by the
Name and power of God: 2 Having an especial and extraordinary calling
thereunto: Act. 3. 12.

Nay though the Son of God in his Manhood did many miracles, Christ Jesus how
he wrought Miracles.
yet this was not by the Manhood wholly, though thereby the work being wrought,
was dispensed and acted in such and such a visible manner; yet the work it
self being contrary to nature, was effected only by the power of the Godhead:
as in the raising up of the dead, the manhood uttered the voice, but the
Godhead fetched the soul from heaven and put it in again unto the body, yea
gives life and power to hear the voice uttered to rise, come forth: Ioh. 11.
Math. 10.

And therefore seeing Christ as man only, could not work these miracles, It
follows that whatsoever are wrought by men are deceitful and counterfeit,
And being wonders and strange effects are therefore effected by the subtlety
of Satan, as being able to do strange things above the ordinary course of
nature, though not simply contrary thereto, which ordinarily the wit of man
cannot possibly produce: And that

1 Because he being a spirit, is of extraordinary knowledge and capacity to
search into the secrets of nature, and there to frame strange and wonderful
things: And that the rather because

2 He is ancient and full of experience, and so has increased his knowledge
and profited his practice, which man by reason of his ignorance and
forgetfulness, want of opportunity cannot possibly compass: And this

3 The rather because Satan to his knowledge and experience has great power
sufficient even to confound all inferior creatures if the Lord did not
restrain: And withal

4 Is exceeding nimble and ready in exequution, being able to convey himself
and other creatures in a trice even from far distant places.

1 And so by virtue of skill being able to apply Creature to creature and the
efficient causes to the matter.

2 And that speedily above the ordinary course of nature how can he but effect
admirable things:

3 Especially if we consider that the Lord permitting, it is possible for Satan
to convey himself into the substance of the creature, without any penetration
of dimensions, and being in the creature although it be never so solid, he
can work therein, not only according to the Principle of the nature thereof,
but as far as the strength and ability of those principles will possibly
reach and extend themselves.

By this it is manifest, that Satan can work wonders, and these according to
his several Quaelities, are of two sorts.

1 Illusions, or Real actions, Concerning Illusions.
Satan deceives, 1. The senses, 2 The mind.

The Senses are deceived, when we think that we see, hear, feel, and what
indeed we feel not: How Satan does this, see hereafter in the Sect: of
Iugling: Galatians 3. 1. 1. Sam. 25.

The Mind is deceived, when a man thinks that of himself which is not true;
as when men think they are Kings, or Christ, Elias, etc.

Now Real Works are such, Real Works.
as are indeed what they seem to be: which though to men that know not
natures secrets, may seem strange and admirable; yet are they no true
Miracles, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
but Lying Wonders, in regard of the end, for which they are wrought, as to
maintain error, though not in respect of the work it self, Such were those,
Job 1. So can Satan appear in the shape of a man, not deluding the sense, but
by assuming a true body, and therein utter a true voice.

And yet he cannot Change one creature into another: As a Witch into an Hare
and Cat; This is a mere delusion of the sense, though the like was done by the
mighty power of God, Genesis 19. 26. Lots wife.

As for that of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. It was no change of his substance, but
only of his condition and qualities of his mind, Verse 31. The Lord
inflicting madness, etc. upon him, to punish his Pride: And

Thus may Satan work wonders but yet with this limitation:

So far forth as God in Justice suffers: Implying thereby:

1 That God suffers this Trade to try his children, Deuteronomy. 13. 1
and to Punish the wicked, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11.

2 That Satan can go no further herein then the Lord permits: though his
malice be infinite, yet his power is limited, Exodus 7. 8. 1. Reg. 22. 23.

And this the Lord does 1 to confound Satan in the top of his Pride, and
restraint of his malice; 2 to preserve his children from his power and
cruelty, 3 to humble the wicked that are his Prentices in this Art, as if by
their power, and not a divine hand, Satan were brideled, and to confound them
also in their cruel expectations and designs against the Church of God.

Thus far concerning the Nature, and general Description of this Art.

CHAP. IIII.
Now let us consider further of Satan's Policy in Training his Scholars to
this Art, as also in Trayning them up, and confirming therein.

AS every Art has it entrance and introduction, to allure and encorage
thereto, yea to imitate and happily to begin more rudely, and so by degrees
to attain to perfect skill therein: So is it in this Art of Witchcraft.

The occasions that are ministered to Satan, to allure us hereunto, proceed
from our selves: namely those desperate passions of 1 wrath, 2 discontent, 3
revenge, 4 covetousness, etc. which being joined with a 1 contempt of Gods
ordinance, 2 gross and open profaneness, and 3 to desperate impenitencie; do
therefore give Satan occasion to conceive, that God has forsaken us: and so
now is his time to challenge his own, or at least to set upon us, to make us
his own.

To this purpose first does he suite himself according to our several
reigning sins, nourishing us in ignorance, and so preventing means of
repentance; and yet, hindering for a while by all means the attaining of
unlawful desires, that so he may sink the wicked in despair, as being
utterly out of hope, to compass their intents, and to satisfy their lusts:
provoking them to further despiting of GOD, Note.
and condemning his providence, in not yielding unto their unreasonable, and
insatiable desires: And so by this manner of means provoking the wrath of God
the Lord further against them, they grow to solitariness, and hereupon give
fit opportunity to Satan to enter them to this mystery.

Of the manner of Satan's compassing and trayning his Nouices to his Lure, and
of his notable deceipts, and impostures therein.

THis is according both to the Times wherein he works, as also the several
condition and quality of the persons upon whom he works.

You have heard how Satan deals, to prepare the wicked to this Art: Now let
us consider the manner how he sets upon them, to enter them heereinto: Which is
according,

1 To the Times, which if they be of Ignorance, then he appears more grossly
in some Carnal and ugly shape, to bring into subicction by fear: and so also,
for the same end, he appears in the same manner usually by night.

But if it be in the day, or in the abundance of knowledge, then either only
by some voice, or by some curious appearance, or by some friendly resemblance;
he does make his way, to entertain parlie with the discontented and desperate
parties.

1 Not being dainty to question with them, What is that does discontent? and,

2 Promising them, a sudden, and certain way of remedy.

3 Provided, that they follow his advice, and do such things as he will require
of them.

4 And contenting himself with some general answer for them tending to this
effect, that they seem contented, desiring nothing more then to know what
particular means it may be, that so they may be masters of their desires; and
so

To this end concluding of a second meeting, for this time he takes his leave.

It is not long but he keeps touch with them, remembering them of their
greeuances, reviving their hopes for help, kindling their desires to seek it
from him: and so growing to some particular terms, what they must do in
requital again; Namely,

1 To addict themselves unto his service: and when he has gotten this promise
of them.

2 Then he discouers unto them what he is: making it apparent by some more
terrible form, and thereby the rather to awe them with the presence of his
power:

And so to keep them by terror from starting back, and yet to give them hope
by this resemblance of his power, that he is able to do for them, what they may
desire, able to confound their enemies, and defend their friends.

And so happily for that time also he does proceed no further with them.

It is not long but he meets with them again, and then proceeds to bind
them to his allegiance, by entering into a solemn league, and covenant with
them.

But before we do come to speak hereof, let us make some use of Satan's former
Policies.

Surely, howsoever it be common to all.

1 To sin of Infirmity, yet let us take heed of presumptuous sins.

2 Though we sin, yet let us not reject the means which may bring us to
repentance.

3 Let us learn in all things to clear God, and condemn our selves, that so
Satan may not prevail against us.

4 Take we heed likewise of Ignorance, and wilful resting thereon, lest
hereby Satan prevail against us.

5 And learn we to Moderate our desires, and to get the victory over them,
lest hereby Satan take advantage to draw us to unlawful courses.

6 Observe we the admirable justice of Almighty God, that Presumptuous sins
shall reap no better comfort then despair, and so by despair betray
themselves to Solitariness.

And therefore, to prevent despair, How to prevent despair.
let us daily renew our repentance.

1 Renouncing our selves, by seeking to the mercy of our God.

2 And take we heed of discontens and murmuring against the Lord, lest the Lord
leave us to Satan's power.

3 And though we must daily distrust our selves, yet let us not neglect the
Testimonies to take the surer hold on GOD; lest Satan by degrees steal upon
us, observing his Cunning,

4 That first he works upon the soul secretly and afar off: and so comes
nearer to open contracts: And therefore labor we to resist in the beginning,
using society graciously and following our callings.

CHAP. V.
Satan's Policies in confirming his Nouices in this their Trade.

THis is discovered, either in the Covenants that pass between Satan and the
Witch to this purpose: or else,

Such other Stratagems and devices

That are used to this end (of which in their Places) to make them stick to
their covenant, and so to perform the bargain.

Concerning the covenant, certain it is, that though (as you have heard)
Satan dallies for a time, to draw us on: yet at length he will not fail to
make sure of his Prentice, by binding him in some solemn Bond to faithful
service, and performance of what has formerly been promised.

Now in the Covenant we are to consider.

First, the Nature and Quality of the Covenant.

Secondly, the several ceremonies, enterchangeably concurring to the
solemnizing thereof.

SECTIO I.
COncerning the Covenant; certain it is, That there passes such a Covenant
betwixt the Witch and Satan, as appears:

1 By the Testimony of the Word, as, Psa. 58. v. 5. where the original
yields, thus, which hears not the voice of the Charmer, or Mutterer,
joining societies together: wherein, the holie-Ghost both sets down the
effect of a Charm: namely, that it is able to stay the Adder from stinging
those that shall touch him;

As also the Ground of the Charm, wherein it has it power: Namely, Societies,
or Confederacies, cunningly made, not between man and man, but as the word
imports, between the Inchanter and the Devil. So Deuteronomie 18. ve. 11.
The Lord charges the people when they come into the Land of Canaan, that they
should beware lest any joined society, that is, entered league with wicked
spirits.

2 The practice of Satan proves no less, who is ready to offer conditions of
agreement, as appears, not only in the proffer to our Savior Christ, but in
these daily offers he makes unto men, to give them this, to do that for them.

3 The event and success of Witchcraft makes it plain; which being sometimes
wonderful, always above the power of the silly Witch. It must needs follow,
that this effect proceeds from some such compact with Satan; who is hereby
bound unto the Witch to do such things, which she of her self were never able
to do.

The End of this Couenaut is, To make sure of his Prey, which by virtue here of
he seizes on: The Lord leaving rebellious man hereby to his power, as by this
Covenant with Satan, wilfully forsaking God, and submitting unto Satan as his
Sovereign Lord.

But here it is replied in the defense of Witchcraft, Object.
that both the Devil does many things, and yet not at the Witches command: and
also that the Witch wishes, and performs much evil, either by some cunning
poisons, by outward violence, etc. or at least, though they may be done by
Satan, yet she is not so much as privy thereto: nay many times she seems
to be against the same, and therefore it may seem there is no such Covenant.

To which we answer, Ans.
that though Satan does some things beyond authority, yet he does other
things at the command of the Sorceresse: and those which she commands not,
though Satan does them; these shall be put to the Witches score: yea, though
happily she should seem to be unwilling: because either the Devil answers
herein, in some measure, the general malice of her heart, which is to do more
hurt then she can: or apprehends some secret inckling, though there be no
express command: or else, exceedes his Commission, to the confusion of the
Sorceresse when she now shall discern, how her servant is her master, doing
what he list, though he would seem to be at her beck. To this end consider
we further.

SECTIO II.
Of the kinds of Covenants which are made between Satan and the Devil.

THese are of two sorts: The first expressed and man fist, because it is
performed by solemn words; Satan appearing in some visible form, and the
Witch answering really by some form of speech, tending to this end, To admit
of the Devil as her sovereign lord, to renounce God, Baptism, Christ and
all, to yield him all service both of body and soul, while she lives; and so
to leave him body and soul to dispose of at his pleasure after death.

1 The occasion of this real Covenant, is either the insatiableness of man's
desires, which to enjoy he cares not what he parts with, and so expressing
those desires by some intemperate and violent passion, gives occasion hereby to
Satan to tender this service.

2 Or else some extreamitie of affliction so oppresses him, that being not
able to undergo the burden, he cares not upon what terms he promise his ease,
and so is contented, for present release, to adventure a future casualtie, Or,

3 Some matter of discontent, prouokes to reuengo, and rather then his spleen
may not be satisfied, he will satisfy the Devils request. And so by these and
such like preuayling corruptions, is at length brought to this fearful issue,
as to engage his soul to the bondage of Satan.

Another sort of Covenant there is, secret, and mental, as we say, performed
by consequence, and necessary induction.

And this usually serves the turn, Note.
because Satan hereby deceiues most dangerously: as deluding the Witch that she
is free, because she has made no verbal composition, when as indeed by those
means, she is bound more fearfully.

Or else, this proves in some cases a preparatiue to the other; especially
when the parties use such means ignorantly, which are no better then Satan's
indirect and abominable pranckes to procure ease against infirmities. As, to
scratch the Witch, to bang Amulets about their neck, etc. which though some
do ignorantly, as thinking some inherent power to be in those means to cure
diseases: yet does this by degrees draw them from the use of law full means,
cause them to rest in those that are unlawful: and so nourishing them in
infidelity, provoke them in time to forsake God; and so they are justly left
to the power of Satan, by him to be ripened to the day of vengeance.

If we would know the Tokens of this secret Covenant. Marks of the secret
covenant.


They are, First prayer for unlawful things: which howsoever it may seem to
be made to GOD, yet in truth it is offered up to Satan: so that if now by such
means we become masters of our desires, this is a pledge of this secret
Covenant.

Secondly, using unlawful means: such as are offered by Satan for help in
extremity, as to go to Blessers, to scratch, to use spells, etc. wherein if
we be convinced with the truth, that these have no proper virtue to do such
things, and yet shall use them; This is an other dangerous bond of this secret
Covenant.

So that though all that use these things are not brought to this Trade of
Witchcraft, to hurt the bodies of others: yet are they hereby bewitched in
their souls, and so prove spiritual deceivers, to enthrall the souls of
others to perpetual perdition.

A third mark of this secret Covenant, is an ordinary taking of Gods name in
vain; especially in blessing of Cattle, which although the ignorant and
unbelieving world has taken up of custom, And blind charity.
yet the first tutors hereunto have been the Witches, thereby to color their
sorceries, and draw more Proselites to their devotion.

And therefore it were to be wished, that we were more exceeding careful in
the sober and reverent use of the name of God; especially, when we think or
speak of these outward things, lest Custom breed profaneness, and
profaneness contempt, and despite of GOD and godliness. And so, although at
the first Satan enter not into us, yet by degrees at the length he may so
far prevail, as first to draw us to make charms of these holy names; and so
secondly upon the effect answerring our Infidelity, we be further drawn to
unlawful desires, and to be contented to submit to Satan for the obtaining
thereof, and so at the length become practitioners in this Art.

Uses of these Diverse Covenants.

By this it is apparent, that notwithstanding the caueats of Atheists and
profane persons against the Doctrine of Witchcraft: That certainly there are
Witches, as appears by this Covenant between them and Satan.

And seeing insatiable desires are an especial cause of the making this League
with Satan: Therefore we are taught secondly,

1 To set bounds to our unlawful desires; 2 to be content with our estates; 3
to prepare our souls to afflictions; 4 to enlarge our desires for heavenly
things; 5 to suppress our unruly affections of every anger, and especially 6
to cast our care upon God in Jesus Christ, and 7 to have our persons accepted
of God in him: that so we may not be ensnared with Satan's baits.

And seeing the wicked are not ashamed to make open profession of their homage
and allegeanee unto the Devil: and therefore much less ought we to be
abashed to profess our Faith in God, to give a reason of our hope and
confidence in him: If Satan will have real promises and verbal contracts, not
contenting himself only with the heart and inward man: Then surely ought not
we to content our selves with good or bare purposes, but we must labor to
confess with the mouth to salvation, as we believe with the heart to
righteousness, as Romans 10. 10. If Satan will have deeds as well as words, then
let us also not be hearers ouely, but also doers of the will of God, lest we
deceive our selves.

Lastly, seeing Satan is grown so cunning, as to content himself with privy
signs and circumstances, not exacting of all sorts public and express
bargains: shall not this teach us, not to content our selves with bodily
service, and outward devotion: But especially, to labor for truth in the
inward man? Shall not this win us to watch seriously over our thoughts and
secret purposes? Shall it not send us unto Christ, for the daily purifying of
our hearts by faith in his precious blood? shall Shall it not still round us in
the ear, to take heed of hypocrisy? lest this be of al other the most sure
bargain with the Devil, seeing of all other, the hypocrite is first to go to
hell, as making a mock of heaven. They shall have their portion with
hypocrites: of all other the hypocrite shall drink deepest of the cup of
vengeance.

Hitherto of the nature and kinds of the Covenant: Now let us consider further
of the conditions thereof.

SECTIO III.
Of the conditions of the Covenant between Satan and the Witch.

THese are enterchangeable, as,

1 What Satan will do for the Witch.

2 What the Witch must do for Satan.

The ground of this Covenant, is in imitation of the Divine Wisdom, who by
this means reuealeth himself unto man, and binds man unto him: and so in
high scorn and despite of the Lord our God, by the same means does Satan
endeavor to withdraw man from God, to enthrall man more desperately to his
service.

And yet herein to deceive wretched man; as by this outward ceremony of the
Covenant being in imitation of that divine breeding in the minds of his
Proselites, an opinion of Satan's deity, and so thereby auouching this
subjection unto him.

The Policies of Satan in this Covenant is manifold.

1 As first, to make them believe there is a kind of equity in the business,
and so the rather to stick to it, the rather, when his performance is present,
their turns served, that which they are to perform, to come, uncertain, they
may repent, or, Hell is but a Bugge-beare: yet,

2 To bind them more surely to his service hereby, seeing in honesty they are
to keep touch with him, seeing he keeps with them; binding them herein by
that bond of civil honesty which Nature so much stands upon, Note.
and rests in, thereby, though confounding, yet also flattering the same.

But has not Satan (I pray you) in this Covenant with the Witch, a further
reach, to deceive others also?

Yea surely, and that many ways.

As first, hereby he would bear the world in hand, that he is now so at the
Witches command, as that, neither may he be thought to have any power else,
but what is limited to her lusts, whereas indeed he does many things of
himself, and yet father them upon the Witch, to flatter her in her
soueraignetie, and hasten her to vengeance: yea, exceeds often the
Commission, which he receives from her. And though she would have many times
the mischief undone and released, because she is tormented by such charms,
as Satan teaches, to dissolve the Witchcraft, as to burn some part of the
thing bewitched, etc. and no doubt is in like manner haunted with some
heart-pang, and hell of conscience, yet can she not give the least ease to the
party afflicted.

Especially Satan observing the nature of man to be prone to Idolatry, his
purpose herein is to withdraw the mind from God, and settle it upon the
Witch: As if Satan were not Gods instrument to afflict man, but only the
Witches servant to do what she please, and so the Witch and Satan in the
Witch must be adored and exalted above the Lord. She must be feared, rated,
yea, sometimes she must be innocently condemned, she must be sought unto,
closed with, pacified with gifts etc.

SECTIO IIII.
THat which Satan binds himself to do for the Witch, is, To appear unto
her in what form she pleases.

1 To confirm her conceited power.

2 To prevent that fear which might arise from more horrible apparition, and
so to nourish in security.

Herein he deciueth diversely:

1 As first, that he is no where present but in these forms.

2 That he is always present in these forms, whereas indeed he deludes
oftentimes the senses hereby.

3 That accordingly to the multitude of forms, so are their many Devils, that
the Witch may the rather glory in the multitude of these servants.

4 That the Creatures of Almighty God, 1. Tim. 4. 4.
which in themselves are good and serviceable for use, may be feared, and
hated, yea adored, and respected as presages of good or evil, as, when a Hare
crosses the way, etc. And so our right in the creature questioned: But
especially, Satan's cunning in appearing in these forms even of familiar
Creatures, which if they can hurt, It is but only the body:

1 Is, both to hide that special Tyranny and cruelty of his which he
extends against the soul:

2 And to nourish this conceit by these appearances, that his power is limited
by that creature, and so not to be feared, so to be lightly regarded and
despised of us: as busying themselves about such trifles, as to keep drink
from working, and whereas indeed under color of these they prey upon the
soul, stirring up to revenge, coueteousnesse, uncleanness, etc.

Yea overthrowing of Kingdoms, rooting out the Gospel: which that they may
effect more securely when they are not espied and prevented, therefore they
labor to occupy men's minds in these base and slight matters, that so they
might not suspect, or prevent them in the other.

And does not Satan notably delude the Ignorant People, That by this covenant
with the Witch, to be at her command, he makes the simple people believe,
that he never comes but at the Witches sending: And so both provoke by all
means to curry favor with the Witch, by entertainment, gifts; what not?
whereby they become subject, through this infidelity, to Satan's power; As also
prepares way hereby to seek to the Witch for help; and so is further
ensnared to the danger of the soul.

Nay does he not by submitting himself to base means: as by burning a spitte
red hot, etc. whereby he seems to be removed, herein also further deceive
the simple people: As withdrawing them from the holy means whereby they may
be relieved, and causing them to rest in these accursed and deceitful helps:
which either do no good at all, or if they do any, it is to do a greater hurt,

SECTIO. V.
A second thing whereby Satan binds himself to the Witch, is to do whatsoever
the Witch shall command.

THat is, to lie still when she lists to spare.

To run and hurt when she is moved, where and how it pleases her lust.

And the more cunningly to convey and execute this mischief, to shroud
himself under any shape* yea to convey the Witch under any shape, or form, to
the satisfying of her lusts, and yet to deceive her more grossly therein.

SECTIO. VI.
Shall we now consider a little how Satan deceiues by this subjection?

FIrst, in that he pretends to be at their command: he thereby secures them as
if their state were safe, they need fear no hurt from him, seeing he is at
their beck.

Nay he thereby Puffs them up with a conceit of some extraordinary favor with
God that gives them such power over Satan: Nay he further bewitcheth them that
now they are as Gods; being able to command Satan, whom none can overrule but
the Lord:

And so provoke to horrible blasphemy, and Idolatry, to advance themselves
in Gods steed; to save life and to destroy it at pleasure: And thereupon
inferres a further security of their estates; That they which can thus dispose
of others estates, they are wise enough to secure their own: Or at least, what
need they more then to enjoy this soueraignetie, to exercise this liberty, Note,
thus to satisfy their utmost desires?

Hitherto serves another sleight of Satan herein: That being now at their
command, he has no power but from them: When they call he must run,
otherwise he quitcheth not: And hence arises this delusion, That seeing they
know what is best for themselves, therefore they will be sure to keep him safe
from hurting them.

And here Satan has another trick yet further to beguile them; namely, to
consire himself as an Ape to his clog, to some Box or Prison, where he lies,
as bound not to stir but when the Witch calls, she, as his Goalor, must give
him liberty, whereas he still goes about like a roaring Lion, stirring up in
the heart desires of revenge, covetousness, etc. while he seems to lie still
from bodily harms, and nourishing Pride and Infideliue by this his sained
bondage, and so hardening in security, while he cease from outward hurts.

SECTIO. VII.
AND does he not also by this his sayned subject on to the Witch deceive the
Unbelieving world?

Yea certamely, and that many ways: As First, he with-draweth them from the
acknowledgement of Gods Providence; who only has power to send these evil
Angels to torment the wicked, and afflict his children, and so to rob God of
his glory herein, and to refer it to the Witch, as if Satan were only at
her dispose.

And for their further confusion herein, he provoke them in revenge of their
wrongs, not to look into their sins, which cause the same, or to look up to
God who only can heal, because he gives the wound: But to cry out upon the
Witch, to harry her to the Justice, to scratch, and practice against her, and
so, many times, to shed innocent blood in accusing wrongfully: Or at the best,
though the Law may be satisfied, yet God is not glorified, nor themselves
truly releiued, Seeing by using unlawful means for help, though the body
may find ease, yet the soul thereby is more dangerously ensnared.

And has not Satan another dangerous fetch in this subjection? That whereas
many diseases come of natural causes, which are well known to Satan, though
the simple people are utterly ignorant thereof: Yet seeing the Witch in malice
intends the hurt of her neighbor, and to this end sets Satan on work:
heerevpon it is concluded that all diseases proceeds from Sorcerie; and so
hereby all sober and wise means are neglected to preserve health, the bridle
is given to all riot and excess: and if any thing fall out, Note.
the Witch is blamed, and not our distempers.

SECTIO. VIII.
THus we have heard one part of the covenant, What Satan must do for the Witch:

Now let us consider on the other side, What the Witch must do for him again.

The maine matter is, that she must give her self unto him body and soul,
But this is colored, first, by the Time, he will not have it presently,
because yet she has not made up the measure of her sin: And therein he
deceiues her, that she may repent of her bargain, God may change her mind,
etc. and so drownes in security.

And to this end he has another color, that is, the condition, if he perform
faithful service: And therefore he will of purpose fail her sometimes, Note.
that so she may hope her self free: yea he does usually leave her, when
Authority arrests, to bring her to confusion, that so now she may shame the
devil, as we say, and so perform some hypocritical repentance.

And yet for all this observe, I pray you, his Deepenesse, in making her sure.

Namely to prevent after repentance, or at least to deceive thereby.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Ceremonies of the Covenant.

HE has further diverse ceremonies accompanying this covenant which tend very
fearfully to the confirmation thereof.

And these are:

First, As the Lord has a special Seal to bind his servants unto his
obedience; namely, the seal of Baptism, Romans 4. So when Satan has once
obtained this absolute promise of his Prentices, to yield themselves wholly to
his devotion, then his manner is, to set his seal upon them, thereby to
appropriate them unto him.

And this is commonly some sure mark upon some secret place of their bodies,
which shall remain sore and unhealed until his next meeting with them, and
then for afterward prove ever insensible, howsoever it be pinched by any.

To assure them thereby, that as therein he could hurt or heal them, so all
their ill and well-doing must depend wholly upon him: And that the Intolerable
grief they feel in that place, may both serve to seal up unto them their
eternal damnation; And so to awaken and give them no rest till the next
meeting again, that so they may hasten the vengeance that now they have tasted
of.

This shall appear the better if we consider the* next meeting, and such
circumstances of place and actions, that are performed therein.

SECTIO. I.
Of the Place where the Witch is summoned for further confirmation and binding
of her to Satan.

When Satan the Prince of darkness that rules in the children of
disobedience, has once entangled this Nouice within his snares, and set his
Privy Mark upon her, thereby to bind her unto him more surely, That she may
be yet further given up by the fierce wrath of the Almighty to his power: he
has yet many other Policies to effect the same.

As first,

She must be conuented solemnly into the house of God, Of the co^vening of
Wiches into the Church.
there to make open testimony of her subjection unto him, by renouncing all
former covenants with the Lord.

And here

Usually, these things are performed in their order.

First, In Daemonology.
Satan blasphemously occupying the Place whence the holy Oracles are delivered,
does thence:

First, 1 Approbation of the covenant.
require of his Proselite an acknowledgement of her covenant, causing her
usually in her own person to repeat the form thereof: As IN. do here
acknowledge, that upon such condition I have given my self unto Satan to be
disposed of him at his pleasure: And

Secondly, 2 Kissing of backe-parts.
when this acknowledgement is made, in testimonial of this subjection, Satan
offers his back-parts to be kissed of his vassal.

Thirdly, 3 Information in the rules and mysteries of his Art.
this being done, he then delivers unto his Proselite, and so to the rest (for
many are conuened at this meeting) the Rules of his Art, instructing them in
the manner of hurting and helping, and acquainting them with such medicines and
poisons as are usual hereunto.

Fourthly, 4 Accounting for profit.
Taking also account of the proceedings of his other Scholars, and so
approving or condemning accordingly.

Fifthly, 5 Renouncing Baptism.
for their further confirmation, he yet enioynes them another ceremony:
Namely, to compass about the Fount diverse times, there solemnly to Renounce
the Trinity, especially their salvation by Jesus Christ, and in token thereof
to disclaim their Baptism.

Sixthly, 6 Sacrificing of their blood.
and in further token of their subjection unto Satan in yielding up themselves
wholly unto his devotion, behold yet another ceremony here usually is
performed: namely, to let themselves blood in some apparent place of the body,
yielding the same to be sucked by Satan, as a sacrifice unto him, and
testifying thereby the full subjection of their lives and souls to his
devotion.

Lastly, 7 Carnal and familiar conuersing with them.
to gratify them somewhat for this their dutiful service, it pleases their
new Master oftentimes to offer himself familiarly unto them, to dally and lie
with them, in token of their more near conjunction, and as it were marriage
unto him.

These are usually the ceremonies whereby Satan binds his Proselites to keep
covenant with him.

And his Policies herein are manifold: both in regard of the Witches
themselves, as also in regard of others that shall take notice thereof.

Concerning the Witches.

His Policy in conuening them into the Church is:

1 Partly, Satan's policies herein 1 in respect of Witches.
to procure in them a conceit of the lawfulness of the business (as being
done in so holy a place) thereby to make them secure in continuing therein.

2 As also to encourage the^ the rather to hold out by reason of the company
wherewith they meet, ready to hearten by presence and example.

3 And does not Satan by this convening them into the house of God, and there
presenting himself unto them, procure in their minds a conceit of his Deity
and sovereign Power, that so they may yet better conceive of their dealing
with him, and more willingly perform all covenants, seeing as God he requires
nothing but his due, as God he will perform with them to the full, and
therefore they must not flinch from him.

4 And surely if we shall look up unto the ouer-ruling hand of God herein,
in giving Satan his enemy leave to Profane the place of his worship, and thus
to appear there unto his Proselites for their further condemnation: May not
the Lord have these ends herein in respect of these Witches?

1 That here they may receive the punishment of their gross hypocrisy, and
profaneness for their former abuse of Gods holy ordinances, and bodily
service, lip-labor, etc. where they committed the sin.

2 That here they may be hastened to the participating of this punishment, by
being provoked to fearful blasphemy, and renouncing of that God whom formerly
they served, and so might be more justly subjected to the power of Satan.

SECTIO II.
And may we not here learn many profitable things?

Does not our gracious God tender some light unto us out of this darkness?
Uses herein to the Saints.
Yea surely.

1 Our Prophanenes is reproved, 1 Profaneness reproved.
that abuse and defile the house of God with our bodily service, and vain
thoughts and speeches, rather like a company of devils, then the Saints of God.

2 Our superstition is condemned, 2 Superstition condemned.
in ascribing holiness and perfection to the place of Gods Worship, as if the
place did sanctify our service, or shield us from danger: as if we were free
from Satan when once we have got the Church over our backs: As if no prayers
were available but what were offered up here. Does not Satan hereby take away
the benefit of private prayer which indeed as the life and touchstone of the
public? Does he not provoke us hereby to rob God of his glory, in ascribing
that unto the place, which is proper only to his Majesty? Does he not utterly
frustrate and prevent all spiritual worship of the heart, as if the performing
of a little lip-labor in the house of God would serve the turn; we need not
stand upon any inward touch or feeling, it shall suffice that we have offered up
the sacrifice of our lips before the Lord. 3 Private praying in public
exercises taxed.
Surely when I consider the practice of the time, namely, when we come to the
house of God which is appointed for public prayer to be performed jointly by
the whole Congregation, we then fall to mumbling our private devotions, yea
when the public Exercises are in hand, so that for the present we neither can
join with the^, nay rather indeed do disturb and give offense to the
Congregation, in not consenting with them, me thinks even Satan's Proselites
may here condemn us, who carry themselves more regularly in the house of God
to serve the devil, then we here to the service of God. These wretches, I
warrant you, Customary and formal worship reproved.
are kept from sleeping, they spare not their blood to please the devil, they
are contented to submit themselves to any base office hereunto: Nothing can
keep us waking, not though Jesus Christ be crucified among us daily, though we
are partakers of his blood, yet we will not kiss the Son of Righteousness;
we cannot so much as shed a tear in testimony of our renouncing of sin and
Satan; whereas these wretches spare not their dearest blood to show their
homage unto Satan.

4 And are we not hereby taught, 2 Instruction to wall in great fear in GODS
house.
now to fear our selves most, when we are before the Lord, in his Sanctuary,
because Satan will now be one with us, both to hinder us in the service of God
that we shall not profit, or else to puff us with Pride, as if we had
deserved much hereby: and then to accuse us of presumption, that so he may
drive us to despair.

Surely, seeing we cannot be free from Satan's snares, neither the house of
God will protect us, nor our own houses can shield us, but Satan will be
closing to rob God of his glory, 2 To search and subdue the heart to worship
God in spirit*
and us of the comfort of any public duty; shall not this send us to the
searching of the heart? shall it not teach us to worship God in spirit: that so
Satan may not be acquainted with what we are about, and so may not interrupt
us, or if he guess at our purposes, may be yet confounded, in that our hearts
are best known to the Lord?

It is our comfort unspeakable before our God, that hereby we desire to
worship him in truth, because, as our hearts witness with the truth of our
endeavors, so do they also witness for God against us, the imperfection of
them: that the Lord may be justified when he judges, Psalm. 5 1. 4. 5.

That Satan may be prevented, and confounded, by this judging of our selves,
that hereby we may be daily provoked to perfection: by laboring to be found
in Christ, not having our own righteousness, and so may grow up in him to
perfect holiness, Philip. 3. 13.

Shall not this teach us to try our public worship by this touchstone of the
heart, 3 Public worship to be tried by the heart.
and not the place? Shall it not weane us from the love of this world: seeing
no place so holy, no means so sacred, but by Satan's policy they may be
abused? Shall it not provoke us to hunger after our dissolution, To recant us
from the love of the world.
that so we may freely and continually glorify our GOD in his blessed kingdom?

Does not this condemn that pompous and carnal decking of the house of God,
1 Reproves pompous and carnal decking of god his house.
rather to please the eye, then affect the heart, rather as a Palace for the
god of this world to revel in, and prey upon newfangled and silly souls, then
a place of spiritual worship, for the great GOD of Heaven and Earth?

Certainly, when I observe some occupying the place of Gods worship: and
thence delivering unto Gods people Chafe in stead of Wheat, 2 Here reproved
carnal and merchantlike teaching.
nay sometimes poison in lieu of wholesome food, making merchandise of the
word of God etc. may I not conclude, that these are the devils factors,
bartering their own, 2. Per. 2. 2.
and their peoples souls unto him, Ezech 13.
for alitle, vain credit, and for a few shekells of silver, and morsels of
bread? herein far worse then the devil himself, that whereas he means
plain dealing, to draw them to damnation: Note.
these notwithstanding pretend to show them a nearer way to Heaven, promising
liberty, when themselves are slaves to corruption, and so nouzling in
security, and excluding repentance, do thereby carry their people in a dream*
unto hell, 2. Pet. 2. 19. 20.

And when I consider on the other side, that faithful teachers, who labor by
enforcing the Law, Faithful teaching justified.
to bring the people to a sight of their sins, and so to a denial of
themselves, Mat. 11. 28
that they may hunger after Christ Jesus: being laden with the burden of
their sins: That such, I say, are notwithstanding traduced, as Preachers of
damnation, no better then Satan's harbengers, to drive silly souls through
despair into the very snare and pit of destruction.

Me thinks I observe here, a far more dangerous practice of Satan, then
this, with these Nouices, to renownce their Baptism, even to cause the people
of God utterly to reject the true means of their salvation, namely Christ Jesus.

In that he will not suffer them to see, what need they have of him, by
humbling them with the Law, that so they might be forced out of themselves,
Gal. 3. 24.
to rely wholly on his sacrifice for the pardon of their sins. Is there not
more hope of the salvation even of these Witches, that are thus kept sensible
of their woeful estate, either by the smart of their privy match, or by such
continual tampering with them, sometimes by ugly apparitions, to terrify
them, eftsoons to keep them watchful by continual employments. Is there
not, I say, more hope even of the recovery of such, then of many thousands in
the world, Desperate estate af secure ones.
who are lulled asleep in security, and fatted up, without all sense of
danger, even to utter destruction?

Oh that we were wise to understand these things, to Try the spirits, and
choose the good and perfect way. Is not the Prophet a snare upon Mispath? and
profound to deceive? Is it not just with God, that because we have not
received the truth, therefore to give us up to strong delusions to believe
lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. 12.

Well, this we may learn, by this impudency of Satan, in abusing the place
of Gods worship: and drawing his Proselites hither for their further
confirmation in their subjection unto him. Instruction to profess Christ
publicly.


And are we not yet further taught hereby, to make a profession to our God of
our subjection to him, 1. Pet. 3. 15
and that publicly, when we shall be called hereunto further by the
magistrate, to give an account of our hope, or by the Minister to approve our
profiting by the word; or by our Christian brother, to confirm him therein?
nay, ought we not, to stop the mouths of the wicked, by acknowledging our
sovereign Lord the great God of heaven and earth: seeing the wicked are not
ashamed to honor their master the devil: glorying in this, that they are the
damned crew? etc. Damned crew taxed.
shall not even these silly deceived souls, rise up in judgment against such
monsters, that are drawn to that through fear, or ignorance, or hope of
present release, seeing these wittingly and maliciously, as it were defy God:
and with an high hand, blaspheme, and tread under foot, the blood of the
covenant, acknowledging willingly, and with great applause, their subjection to
Satan? Nay, State-christians condemned.
shall not our Politic and State-christians, be condemned by these poor and
base creatures, who upon necessity, and through fair promises only are
brought to this subjection?

Surely, when I observe, the wisdom of the flesh in many great and mighty of
the world, that either come to the house of God, only to receive honor, and to
maintain credit, and outward esteem; or else, to hedge in some profit and suck
some advantage hereby; or else rather, to honor the word by their presence
(for this is usually the best end) then to be humbled and reformed thereby*
rather, I say, to control the ordinances of the mighty God, then to be
brought in subjection under the power thereof: may I not conclude, that herein
they rather publish their homage unto Satan, As rather serving the devil then
God.
then testify any obedience unto the Lord? Are not these the very stratagems
of Satan, to ensnare unstable souls, Note.
by causing them thus to abase the word, thus to pervert the holy ends thereof,
are not the wicked hereby justly given up to the illusions of Satan, for the
profaning of Gods ordinance? do they not by these abuses, testify their
obeisance unto the Devil, while they pretend the honor of god, do they not in
seeking their own honor, abase that which belongs to the Lord, approve
themselves to be imps of that king of Fear, who in all things seeks to rob
God of his glory.

And what else may we deem of the high mystery of carnal wisdom
chalenging Pre-eminence over the word of God, Authority above and contrary to
the word, reproved.
in determining Laws: besides, or contrary to it, confining and suiting it to
it crooked Rules; binding and loosing it, for the satisfying of it lusts. Is
not this a plain badge of of that man of sin, that some of perdition? Is not
this an apparent evidence of it subjection to Satan? And if we shall scanne
the mystery of that sublimated policy: Absolute subjection to man condemned.
that nowadayes, he is not a wise man, who is not a servant unto men,
submitting himself to be new molded and fashioned according to the lust of
his Patron. This blasphemously chale^ging him as his proper creature; and the
creature reioicing as in his sovereign creator, conforming heart and hand
simply to his devotions: May we not see Satan here adua^ced as god of this
world in the children of disobedience? May we not conclude, that such absolute
subjection as is given unto man, is wholly taken from God, and given to the
Devil?

And what may we deem of the common Idolatry of all sorts? Diverse Idolatries
of the world reproved.
One makes the wedge of gold his hope: An other makes his mistress the
sovereign of his heart: this, makes his belly his god, the other sacrifices to
his net, etc. Are not all these (in effect) sacrificers unto the Devil? Is not
subjection and homage performed unto him, even in them all?

What shall we think of the general and ordinary service of God in these
days; the most fear him with their Lips, but their hearts are far from him:
the best usually serve him but by halfes, they cannot be Saints, God must bear
with the^ in some sin; they must live, and therefore they must strain a little:
they are but flesh and blood, and they do what they can, God must be merciful
to them in this etc. Do they not in all these, show themselves servants to him,
whom yet they obey, even the prince of darkness, the great deceiuer of their
souls?

Is not Satan the lord of their hearts, As the homage to Satan.
while they serve God but with their lips? and does he not hereby hold their
hearts faster bound unto him, in that he gives way to their bodily service;
nay, will he not have their tongues also at his devotion, at a pinch, to curse
the same God whom they seem to bless, Iac. 3. 34.
or to slander their brethren, and condemn the^ of hypocrisy, because they
labor to serve God in spirit and truth?

And is not Satan's cunning the more dangerous, Hypocrites condemned
in that he is content to hold the wicked but by one string? Is not their state
more dangerous, that while they seem to have escaped the pollutions of the
world, and to make a fair show in the flesh; 2. Pet 2 20
as if they were good Christians, Gala. 6 12
glorious sepulchers, yet either inwardly they are full of rotten bones, Matthew.
23.
or else one dead fly will be sufficient to corrupt all the ointment of the
Apothecarie, Eccle. 10 1
easily may Satan recover his full possession again: even by reason of that
one traitor, which they shall nourish in their bosoms: Shall he not reenter
with seven worse spirits, Luk 11. 20
and so the later end of that man shall be worse then the beginning: The dog
shall return to his vomit: and the swine unto the mire, of which he was
cleansed, and so become twice dead, and plucked up by the roots: 2. Pet. 2. 22
even twofold more the child of perdition, Jude 12.
then ever he was before?

O that we were wise to discern our selves whose we are! and whom we serve!
how long shall we halt between two opinions? If God be Lord, deserving all
service at our hands, Mat. 23. 15
inabling us by his spirit, to offer up our bodies and souls, Rom, 12, 1
as a reasonahle service unto him: (and what more reasonable then to give him
his own, Mat. 11. 29
that has bought it so dearly.) If his yoke be easy to those that will take
it up, and his commandments not grievous, to those that will endeavor the
performance thereof.

If he be contented to accept according to that which we have, (...)
not requiring what he give us not. 2. Cor 3. 12
If he vouchsafe the Will instead of the Deed: If he that gives Will, will
give the Deed also, Phil. 2. 13
that we may serve him in Truth, though we cannot be perfect: Phil. 3.
That the sense of our imperfection, may still send us unto the Fountain
Christ Jesus, that so from him we may still draw forth waters to eternal
life, being daily found in him, not having our own righteousness, that so
through him we may daily make our requests Manifest at the throne of Grace:
That we may be careful in nothing, Phil. 4. 6.
nor fearful of any thing: 1. Pet. 5. 7.
Casting our care upon God, because he cares for us, and committing our
selves in well-doing into the hands of our faithful Creator, 1. Pet. 7. 18
still forgetting that which is behind, Phil. 3. 13.
that we may hasten to that which is before, for the price of our high calling
in Jesus. Who may not try himself hereby whether he be in the faith or not?
Who will not daily strive and endeavor to make himself thus manifest unto God
and to his own conscience? 2. Cor. 5. 10
If he that is in Christ must be a new creature; 2. Cor. 5. 17.
so new that all old things must be abolished, because he that abids in the
flesh cannot please God, Romans 8. And if we nourish but one known sin we
are guilty of all: Iam. 2. 11.
If we must have respect unto all Gods commandments, Psalm. 119.
desirous in all things to please our blessed God, Heb. 13. 18
Not caring for the flesh, to satisfy the lusts thereof: Romans 13. 14.
Will it any thing avail us to plead Flesh and Blood? If there be but one thing
wanting, will all the rest any whit avail us? If Christ Jesus be not thus us
in, Lue. 18. 25
That the body is dead to same, 2. Cor, 13. 5
but the Spirit is life for righteousness sake; Romans 8.
Are we any better for all our formal righteousness then very Reprobates, 2.
Cor. 13. 5.
the very slaves of Satan to whom yet we do obey, to whom we there perform
most acceptable service, when we do think it sufficient to serve God
according to the flesh, either by halfes, for a season, etc.

Let this serve for our Trial herein, Trial of sincerity.
and let us give our hearts to observe here further matter:

Do we think that Satan in tampering thus with Witches, entendeth only,
either their own bane, or else, by them to hurt only the bodies of others?

No surely, as his principal end is, by all means to dishonor God, and
discover his malice, and rage against the Almighty, so does he express his
hatted against God, in destroying the Creature, and in the Creature that which
most resembles God. And therefore he not only aims at the Divine soul, but
by all means laboreth the general confusion of mankind: that so (if it were
possible) he might rob God of his glory, in saving any; you see how he
spared not our very Savior himself, Mat. 4. 5. 6
the head of his Church, and will he not attempt (if it may be) the destruction
of all the members? And does he not prosecute this his design, in the other
Ceremonies, whereby he obliges these miserable wretches yet faster unto him?
Use of the ceremony of accounting with his Proselites,
For, what else does that other practice of his aim at, in taking account of
his vassals, and informing them in the mysteries of his damnahle trade:
rewarding them accordingly as their pains has been, and enabling them hereby
to commit further mischief?

As hereby he blasphemously imitates the Offices of that great Judge and
mighty Savior: 1 Satan herein blasphemously imitats God, usurps the
offices of Christ.
instructing them as a Prophet in their several duties, censuring them as a
Supreme Judge and sovereign, according to their exploits.

As their high priest enjoying the sacrifice of their blood, as a pledge and
bond of their allegiance, and satisfaction for their failings: So does he
hereby also more desperately ensnare their souls: As, How the Witches are
deceived hereby.


1 Arresting them hereby wholly to stand to his verdict, and so to make a mock
of the day of Christ's coming.

2. Deceiving them under pretense of these natural medicines, Note.
as if it were by virtue of them, not by any Covenant with him, that such
effects followed.

3 And binding them hereby surely to him, by his familiar and careful dealing
with them, in furnishing them with all means, to become masters of their
desires.

4 Puffing them up with conceit of extraordinary skill in Natures secrets, and
so with a vain imagination to be as gods, through such rare knowledge and great
power: thereby lulling them in security: that so they may hasten their
damnation. Thus are these Witches ensnared thereby. But may not this his
policy extend it self also unto others?

Yea surely; Conuictio^ of idle ministers hereby.
Behold (says reverend Latimer) The devil is a more careful and painful
Dioclesian in his charge then many of our idle and Idol Pastors are in
theirs. Satan is never idle, he is always going about to destroy the souls of
men: These sleepie dogs lie still in their kennells, Esaias 56. 12
fatting themselves with the fleece and leaving the flock to be devoured of
the wolf.

2 Satan is always resident upon his charge to keep the same in his claws:
These leave the Flock, and attend the Courts of Princes, or their Hounds and
Hawlkes, or worse: as for the Flock it may sink or swim; Better far to be
such ones Dogs or Horses then to have their souls committed unto them.

3 Satan he will take account how his Scholars do profit, he will see that
the non proficient shall be sneaped, and the painful encouraged: These by
their evil example corrupt the Flock, discourage those that are forward and
zealous, encouraging those that live at ease in Syon, and will eat any fly,
as peaceable men, quiet neighbors, wise and discrete subjects, etc.

4 Satan will not cease to inform his Proselites further in the Mysteries of
their Trade, that so they may be more skillful and profitable in his service;
These complain, that the people have too much knowledge; they labor rather to
keep them in ignorance, and to darken the light by their profane handling
thereof, that so they may pluck out the spiritual eyes of their people, Note.
and so to lead them about with them, Iud. 16. 24
like blind Sampson, to sport with their follies, and gain by their
infirmities.

Thus shall Satan's vigilancie condemn the slecpinesse, and carelessenesse of
carnal Pastors.

But this is not all that may be gathered out of this Ceremony.

1 May not this be a stumbling block to the Separation, Stumbling block to
the separation.
to renounce our Assemblies, when Witches, yea the devil and all, can Lord it
therein?

2 May not this be an occasion to despise the holy Ordinances of God, the Word,
Baptism, etc. seeing they are thus profaned by these cursed miscreants,
Stumbling block to the Familist and Anabaptist.
and so in seeking to run from God, or rather from the devil abusing these
things, even to run to him, with the Anabaptist and Familist, for Revelations
and Enthusiasmes.

If now we shall take a further view of that other ceremony in causing his
Proselite to compass the Font, and there to Renounce her Baptism: as herein
he entends to harden her heart the more, by this blasphemous disclaiming of the
Seal of her salvation, and so to bind her more firm unto him; Policy in
renouncing the outward seal.
so has he also diverse Fetches herein to deceive others.

As First, to cause Ignorant and unstable souls, to rest in the necessity of
the outward Seal.

As 1 To fear damnation if they want it, 1 In causing the ignorant to rest
therein.
which gave occasion to that blasphemous and sacrilegious intrusion of Midwiues
to the performance cie of that ceremony in a case of necessity.

2 To presume of certainty of salvation upon the having of the Seal; as if
outward Baptism made a Christian, and nothing else, and so to open a gappe to
all profaneness.

3 And so by building salvation upon the outward Elements and means; thereby
to imply an uncertainty, and failing thereof upon the want of outward means:
To build salvation upon visible means.
As if upon extremity, we should be enforced to deny our profession,
therefore we should be deprived of our salvation, if by persecution we should
be driven from the outward means, as the Word, Sacraments: therefore also our
hope of safety were gone. And hence

4 Erecting an Antichristian visibilities, as if no Church; where no public
liberty of the Means: That only the True Church where the Form of Religion
is kept a foot, howsoever the power thereof be therein denied.

Thus does Satan deceive by this Ceremony of Renouncing Baptism.

And does he not also notoriously beguile unstable souls by that other
ceremony, In causing his Proselite to confirm her subjection by venting of
her blood and offering it up unto him as a Sacrament of her loyalty, Use of the
sacrifice of blood.
and entire devotion unto him?

Yea surely, he may pretend hereby Thankfulness in the Witch To the Witch.
that thinks nothing too dear for him.

He may intend hereby the profaning of the blood of Christ, as if her own
blood should seal up her faithfulness and pledge her zeal to increase his
Kingdom.

He may hereby make her more desperate and greedy to shed the blood of others
in revenge of her own.

He may hereby prepare her by this continual issue of blood, causing pain
and waste of the body, to hasten her own destruction by accusing of her
self, etc.

But his intent is also to condemn the world: Use to the world of condemnation.
That will not afford a good word for Christ, not endure a fillip for him,
much less insist unto blood in so good a cause, As also to scorn and condemn
the Manhood of the world that consists only in this, to shed their blood in
revenge of their own quarrels, or for the defense of their friends, A Witch
will do as much to please the devil: A Witch will not spare her blood in her
Mr. quarrel.

And so to deceine the world: 2 Of deceit; 1 Heretics.
As first Heretics, that if they justify it with their blood the cause is
good; so say the Papists, so boasted the Ancient Heretics.

Secondly, seeing these Witches are adored as Gods, in the hearts of godless
people, therefore if they spare not their own blood, may they not be prodigal
of the blood of others? This is one ground of all that cruel murdering of
infants, Papists herein deceived.
of friends, of enemies; yea bathing themselves in the blood of Princes; They
(for the most part) are prodig all of their own blood, yea they offer it up
willingly unto Satan, to prevail by this means in their wicked purposes, and
must they not gratify him with continual shedding of blood? must they not
satisfy their own blood by pouring out the blood of the greatest, that so
thereby they may make way for General conuulsions, and massacres of all sorts.

Thirdly, nay who will not seek to imitate these ghostly Fathers; nay indeed
who can choose but follow them; either they will cosen and disapoint their
followrs, Practice of Papists.
and so through discontent and despair will drive them to Butcher themselves;
or else by partaking with them in their deuilish plots, they will draw them
within the compass of Authority, that so their blood may recompense their
offenses.

If now for every drop of blood which the Witch shall shed, she may gain so
many souls to the devil, or take away life from so many others, Is not her
blood dearly bought?

Look to this you that seek to these Proctors for the devil, you that betray
the glory of your God in seeking help of Satan: behold the Lord will give you
up, and remember that which follows.

You shall have the honor to kiss the devils back-parts, Use of kissing
Satan's back-parts.
and so has the Witch: The baser and vnseemelier the homage is, the more it
binds, Reason being turned vpside down cannot judge otherwise thereof: The
more unseemly the more it binds, as agreeable to flesh, that delights in
filthiness, it is just with God to give up to such slavish baseness, because
his service being most pure and holy, is rejected. Look upon Popery the nurse
of Witchcraft, The glory of Popish Religion it shame.
most glorious in her greatest liberty to the flesh, in the grossest
filthynesse thereof commending horrible uncleanness not to be named, as if
delighted in kissing Satan's backe-parts: Thus does Satan recompense his best
scholars.

That we may prevent this, learn we to Regard the knowledge of God, to
increase therein, to make conscience of practice as we know, so shall we not
be given up to such monstrous wickedness, Romans 1. 28. 29. 30.

As for that Private familaritie which Satan has with the Witch, Of Incubi and
succumbi.
in conuersing with, and carnal knowledge of her body, whether this be
performed really, or by some collusion, it matters not: I dare not simply deny
but that Satan may have this dealing with her, as being able to assume a dead
body that is not yet corrupted, and so by his spiritual qualities so far to
enliue the same, as that, though not by any seed therein, because it appears
that it purges out together with other humors, immediately upon the
dissolution, yet by some other seed, stolen from a living body (to which I
rather agree, because it is confessed that such seed is usually very cold) he
may pearce the body of the Witch.

And further also so affect the same, How Satan may have carnal copulation
with Witches, and of the effects thereof.
as through the divine justice to procure some monstrons birth, either through
mixture with the seed of the woman, or else (which I rather incline unto) he
may by his skill, through Wind or other pestilent humors, so affect the body
of the Witch as that it shall swell, and increase, as in a True Generation, yea
at the time of the birth, shall be subject to pain and such travel as is
usual to women in such case, and then in the time of the breaking open of the
womb may foist in some Infant stolen else where, or delude the eyes of the
beholders with some Impe of his own, in the shape of a child; or with some
dead child taken up and enliued to the purpose: Which things are easy for him
to do, thereby as to give testimony of secret acquaintance, so to deceive the
Witch with her new Darling, which likely shall be but a babie of a day old, so
to increase withal her sorrow, and yet ease of the trouble, which is happily
the desire of such monsters, that so they may be free to the satisfying of his,
and their own insatiable lusts.

This (I say) howsoever it may be granted, yet I cannot see but all this may
be done, as well as others of as great consequence, even by delusion and
imagination; And yet both to one end, even to deceive the Witch, and Others.

Touching the Witch, she is hereby deceived many ways: As

1 She is fed with shadows in steed of substance, The Witch how deceived
hereby.
with cold and dead delights, in steed of real contentment of the flesh.

2 She is put to a great deal of pain and torment in the bearing and birth:
and in the issue, either some Monster or Abortiue is brought forth to increase
her sorrow, and procure Horror and Despair.

3 This disapointment of her lust, enrageth and increases the fire, and so
provoke to further mischief for the satisfying thereof.

4 So is she faster bound unto Satan for the satisfying of her lusts; and for
the gratifying of her Master, still put upon new mischiefs, that so at
length she may make up her measure.

Thus is the Witch deceived by this familiarity with Satan: And does not this
also prove a snare unto others? Yea surely.

This conuersing of Satan with the Witch, How others are deceived.
has been the ground of all these Conceits of Fairies, etc. whereby the
Papists kept the ignorant in awe.

And is not the Lord robbed hereby of the glory of his justice, who punishes
Adultery sometimes with strange and monstrous births, God robbed of the glory
of his justice.
That because by this familiarity with Satan some such monsters are eft-soones
brought forth, therefore all such effects are restrained to this cause: either
some Witches brat is foisted in, etc. or else caused by Witchcraft, etc. Thus
is the Lord robbed of the power of his justice, when his immediate hand is
ascribed unto Satan.

CHAP. VII.
Of Diverse other means whereby Satan confirms his Proselites in their
covenant with him.

BEsides these former Ceremonies and familiarity, mentioned before, Satan has
other means also, as occasion serves, and their dispositions suitable, to keep
his Nouices from reuolting and starting from him. For there is no question, but
notwithstanding all this former making sure, yet some occasion will be offered
to startle these Witches, Occasions of repenting of the bargain.
and so to procure some remorse for the bargain.

1 Either some outward affliction, or their own present case, being likely
miserable, suffering much want, etc. may breed discontent, and so Repentance of
the bargain.

2 Or else, the Lord may awaken the conscience by the power of the word, and so
confound this desperate match; or Satan himself may of purpose fail his
pretended mischief, leaving her for a season, or not doing according to her
command, thereby to prepare her by this qualme to eternal vengeance.

Wherein, lest she should now grow altogether melancholy, and so submit her
self indeed to the true means to undo her bargain.

Observe I pray you how Satan bestirreth himself.

First, in this case, How Satan deals herein.
he will not stick to delude her with proffers of gold, and dainty fare,
granting her opportunity* to satisfy her lusts, where she likes, 1 making
glorious proffers.
as her age and disposition is, heaping on kindness upon kindness unto her;
fitting her with music and al carnal delights; flattering and crowding most
basely into them according to their mere stirring and generous disposition.

If by these means he cannot yet make them sure, but that the sting of
conscience does still stagger, 2 Using strange terrors.
and challenge the bargain; then he discovers him in another fashion.

1 Not only keeping them shorter, that they may fawn upon him, but threatening
to discover them, that so they may undergo the punishment of the law.

2 Yea further also withdrawing himself from them, and so refusing to be at
their check; yea crossing them in their desires, and contradicting or
exceeding their commands.

3 If this will not prevail, then he causes them to renew their homage by
yielding their blood, to be sucked of him, which he will not fail now more
freely to draw out, even to fainting and extreme pining of his staggering
proselite, and appearing further unto them in most fearful and ugly shape,
Fearful Apparitions.
thereby to hold them in with fear, yea, not sticking sometimes to threaten
with present death, by tearing them in pieces, scorching them with flaming
flashes, etc. and all this to let them see what they are like to trust to: that
so even through despair, they may rest content with their bargain, Note.
upon hope that their torments may be yet deferred, or at least upon necessity
to please their cruel master, and so resolve to make the best of a badde
market, and to take their pleasure while they may,: ot at least to prepare way
hereby for their discovery, as being weary of his service, and greedy of
further employment: It usually falling out in such cases, that when by these
terrors of Satan, these silly souls shall be brought to despair,

The horror of their Conscience will not let them be at rest: but obscurely
even now will not fail to use often means of their discovery, either by
voluntarily coming to the parties afflicted, to be scratched of them, or
confessing themselves in general, guilty, of such and such things, and by
their diligence about the distressed parties, and often inquiry concerning
them, or else by their faint and sottish excuses of themselves. By such like
means, I say, they will not obscurely detect themselves, through the guilt of
their conscience, and so hasten hereby their deserved vengeance.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the diverse kinds of Witchcraft, where especially of Good and Badde
Witches, and that the Good Witch is the most dangerous and powerful.

THere are two Principal kinds of Witchcraft. Two kinds of Witchcraft.


Namely, Divining, whereby strange things are revealed, either, past, present,
or to come, by the assistance of the Devil.

Or working, which is employed in the practice and real working of strange
things or wonders.

Concerning the former of these; my purpose is so far to speak thereof at this
time, as may concern the Discovery of the Good Witch: who specially triumphs
in this power of Divination, and coniecturing of unknown and hidden things.

1 And therefore, first let us consider, By what means Satan may give notice
of unknown things.

2 How far he can proceed herein. How Satan knows things to come, and how
far.


That Satan can discern (in some measure) things past, and such as are to
come, is apparent.

1 Because he is acquainted with the prophecies of the word, By aquaintance
with the Scriptures.
and so steals out of them many secrets, concerning things to come.

2 Satan being exquisitely skillful in the knowledge of natural things, By
skill in Nature.
as of the influence of stars, constitutions of men, the kinds, and virtues
of plants, roots, herbs, etc. may out of this experience give a probable
guess, at events of things, out of the certainety of their canses.

3 The presence of Satan and the evil Angels, By his presence in most places.
in most places, and communicating their knowledge together, where-through they
are acquainted with the secret consultations of Princes, may give also
furtherance to this knowledge of things to come, as hereby being able to inform
their Agents hereof, who acquainting by this means, the world withal gain
this reputation, to foretell things to come.

4 Add we hereunto, By his power in putting evil purposes into the mind.
the power of Satan, in putting into men's minds, wicked councels and purposes:
which he discerning to be apprehended, and resolved on, does thereby acquaint
his Proctors herewith, and so they become to foretell of the same.

5 Consider we the agility of Satan's nature, whereby being able to convey
himself in a trice from place to place, By his nimblnes and agilitie.
he comes by this means to the notice of many strange and hidden things to
the vulgar and ignorant, and so communicates them, to serve his turn, to his
Proselites and Creatures.

6 Fspecially consider we, By divine revelation
that Satan being Gods instrument to execute his judgments in the world: has
therefore even from the Lord revealed unto him many things; as the place, M.
Perkins
time, and manner, how such things should be done: which Satan (being no blab)
can publish to serve his turn, so far as shall tend to the trial of the
Church, and stumbling of the unbelieving world: thus he came to reveal unto
Saul his end, as being informed thereof by the Lord: who had taken his good
Spirit from Saul, and left him to Satan, and so informed Satan in the means
to execute his wrath upon him, 1. Sam. chapter 28. verses 20. 21.

Thus may Satan attain to some knowledge of things to come.

If we would know how far:

1 Surely, we are to understand, How God knows things to come, and how Satan
that to the Lord only belongs this absolute prerogative, as to know things
to come certainly, etc.

2 In The nature of the things themselves, without respect to their causes and
signs.

But Satan only knows them probably, and by their signs and causes.

This ground being laid, we may hence gather, that the good Witches being
informed by Satan, know no further then their Tutor, that is, probably,
doubtfully, and deceitfully: and therefore must needs deceive themselves and
others.

This shall appear the rather, if we consider the means, whereby they attain
to this knowledge: which being no ordinance of God, to reveal secrets, nor any
instinct of Nature yielding directly such effects: it must needs follow, That
the knowledge contrived therefrom, proceeds from Satan's cunning, shrowding
his familiarity and intelligence under the rule of these creatures, that so it
may not be discernd to come from him, but rather from the prediction of the
Rule of Nature: as also, if it prove doubtful and contrary: yet Satan's
credit may be saved: seeing he can post it off to the uncertainty of the
Creatures, or some accident altering the former prediction.

It being most certain, that as the knowledge of Satan of himself, is at the
best doubtful and coniecturall in many things: so it becomes hereby much more
intricate and deceitful, when it is shrouded under the mask of Natures
infolded variety.

What this variety of Nature is, appears by the ancient practice of the
heathen, among whom, by these and such like means Satan reigned as the unknown
God.

These were the Flight of Birds. Acts 17.


2 The Intrailes of beasts.

3 The observation of the Stars and those celestial bodies, Esaias 44.

4 Dreams, Dan. 4.

5 Lottes, Hest. 3.

Of all which we may thus conclude, That seeing 1 these were not ordained
constantly to foretell things to come, 2 neither have any natural property
inherent in them, yielding such knowledge, or any likelihoode thereto: neither
indeed was it necessary that men should be acquainted with what is afterward,
otherwise then may concern their Salvation: seeing the word is sufficient for
this: therefore it follows necessarily:

1 That these are but Satan's cloaks to conceal his immediate and dangerous
Covenants with men.

2 That by these Satan withdraws men from embracing of the word.

3 That for the contempt of the word, the Lord in justice gives up to be
deceived by these, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. 12
so far forth, as not only to rest in these predictions, and so by the
uncertainty thereof to be confounded thereby: but as if so be the reason of
this uncertainty, and failing in the success of these predictions, Note.
proceeded rather from want of our obsequiousnes, and diligence in attending
these predictions, then of any real improbability and absurdity in them:
hereby Satan makes way for his further advancing in our hearts above all that
is called God, by procuring us to a more base subjection and bondage to the
Law of the Creatures, toyling us with a more painful study and inquisition
into the books of the Creatures. And so provoking us to a worship of the
Creature, by confidence therein, above the Creator blessed for evermore; And so
in the Creature to worship the Devil especially:

And that;

1 By obeying his council, in leading us to know, what concerns us not.

2 By using his means, for the compassing of this knowledge.

3 And by resting still in the means, though yet they do deceive us.

4 Embracing his intelligence, clouded under the veil of natural causes.

6 Referring the success of things, not to the providence of God, but to the
power of satan, ordering the same thereby.

For our further information herein, examine we in few words these kinds in
particular, that so the vanity of them, as they are used, in Witchcraft, may
the more lively appear to us.

First, Diuinatio^ by slight of Birds condemned.
concerning the flight of Birds, and the noise they make in the same; this, as
it is plainly condemned in Deuteronomy. 18. 10. and 11. so is there great reason
hereof, seeing by no ordinance of God, or secret of Nature, the flying high or
low, on the right hand, or on the left, the diversity of noise etc. can
prognosticate of things to come.

As for the entrails of beasts, Ezech. Diuinatio^ by entrals of beasts wicked.
21. 11. whereby Nehuchadnezzar is resolved in a doubtful case, whether to
attempt first; either the Jews, or Amonites: this also is a plain color of
Satan's deceit, co^iecturing hereby, because neither by virtue of Creatures, nor
by any special ordinance of God afterward, have these Inwards of the Creatures
any such power co^ferred into them, to foretell things to come. Indeed, there
is some prediction naturally arising out of observation of the seasons and
alterations of weather, Mat. 16. 2. 3.
accruing to the Physician, Mariner, and Husbandman. And this according to that
order, God has set in nature, from the beginning: but this is only probable,
as to guess of fair or foul wether. Which, though they allow some
predictions by these Creatures, yet are they no warrant for others, that are
not ordained of God thereto.

And therefore, Predictio^s by what creatures unlawful.
whereas it is ordinary to divine of future things, by some such like, as by
finding a piece of iron, signifying good luck, but if silver be found, then it
is evil; to have a Hare cross the way; to have the salt fall toward him etc.
these having no such virtue from Nature and divine ordinatio^, it must needs
follow, that they are diabolical, or at least superstitious, and no way
warrantable. Concerning divination by Stars, the matter seems more difficult.

For although the word seems to condemn the same, Diuinatio^ by Stars
unlawful Reason.
Deuteronomy. 18. 10. 11. according to the judgment of the best Divines, who though
they differ about the Notation of the word, yet they agree all in this, Esaias
47. 13 14.
that divination by Stars is directly forbidden: Dan. 2. 2.
And the Scriptures also in allotting the same Punishment to the starre-gazer,
as to the Magician, do confirm the same. Yet has this skill gained great
authority and account in the world, and does much deceive the followers
thereof: And that for these respects.

First, Object. 1.
because the Stars are causes of many things here below, and therefore it
may seem lawful to conclude and conjecture from such causes.

And surely if they were particular causes of these lower things, Answ.
I see not but we might conjecture some what in particular from them: If these
Stars had power to communicate the knowledge thereof in particular unto us,
Or if it were needful that we should know such particular events, Or there
were no other means to communicate what is necessary unto us: Reasons Why.
But Seeing 1. the Stars are only general causes of things in the world,
and that not certain and infallible, but variable and subordinate, to the will
of the Creator, who can for his Churches good, alter their particular effects.
2. Seeing they are no ordinance of God to reveal such things unto us, as
having no virtue from their general influence to dispose and determine of
particulars. 3. Seeing it is is not needful we should know of such
particulars, any otherwise then the Word does supply: And if this be
sufficient what need we other? It must needs follow that these predictions
are unlawful. 4. As rejected of the Lord, and therefore proceeding from the
devil. 5. As presuming to foretell particular events of things, which only
belong unto the all-seeing and most wise God.

2 If it be alleged, Object. 2.
that What is foretold by Astrology, usually falls out true, and therefore why
may we not be informed hence?

We answer, Answ.
1. That though it fell out true, yet were we not to enquire from hence, seeing
the Word forbids the use of such means.

2 That things fall out true in particular proceeds not from the necessary
influence of the heavenly bodies, but from the cunning of that infernal
spirit, who supplieth by his knowledge, what is uncertain in that Art,
Insinuating himself into the mind of the Stargazer, Note.
being now puffed up with his knowledge, and desiring success therein, to
satisfy his pride, what art cannot make good, he yet desires may be
accomplished. And so is given up to Satan in a just punishment of this his
presumption, to be lessoned by him in such further Events: and yet most
fearfully to be deceived by him to, as shrowding his devilish inspirations
under the cloak of that otherwise lawful knowledge.

For not to deny that, which the evidence of things does avouch in this case:

True it is, Astronomy how far lawful
that the Sun and the Moon were created for signs, Genesis 1. 14. and so,
so far as they are ordained for signs, namely, to distinguish Times and
Seasons, as Summer, Winter, Spring. etc. Alterations of weathers in general,
they are to be observed of us: but, that hence we may gather any demonstration
for the knowledge of particulars, to fall out in the world: seeing their
grounds are uncertain, and the mere fictions of man's brain, exalting himself
herein in his Pride and Curiosity, above all that is called God. It must
needs follow, that this is but a cloak of Satan's forgerie, and not any Art
allowable from the Lord.

That the grounds are uncertain and most deceitful, Grounds uncertain.
is apparent.

1 First, Reason.
Because the Rules of this Art have no Foundation in Experience: Seeing both
the position of the heavens, and the course of the Stars is mutable, and
therefore can be no Rule of certain and immutable grounds (such as the
Principles of Art must be.)

2 And secondly, there can be no certain Rules given of those things, which
are not known: Now, who knows the particular estate of all the Stars? or
if he know them, is there any yet able to discern the particular virtues of
them, seeing there influences in the Air, and upon the earth, are confused and
uncertain?

3 But the special Reason of the unlawfulness of this Art, is because it
requires confidence in the same, Note.
nay in the Author thereof; They must believe he can resolve them: otherwise if
he come doubting of his ability, or in way of tempting him, he cannot help
him. Now in common understanding if the Diuiner bring the thing to pass, here
must needs be more then Art; For he that is Master of a lawful Art, can work
by his Rules, whether a man believe he can or no: And therefore it necessarily
follows, that this Art is Diabolical, as requiring that service which is due
only to God; and so thereby entending the bondage of the soul, as is apparent
by the Rules and Confessions of the Chaldeans themselves.

If here it shall be questioned how Object. 3.
Moses and Daniel can then be said to have skill in all the wisdom of
Egyptians and Chaldeans, Act. 7. 22. Dan. 1. 17

The Answer is plain, Answ.
either they might have skill so far as was lawful, or though they understood
the mystery of these deuillish Arts, yet it was not to practice, but rather to
condemn the same, and so to dehort from the study thereof.

Well, let this lesson Students, Use to Students.
that they be not bewitched with the glory and skill which this Art pretends.

Let it advice us not to run to Figerflingers, To all Christians
to recover things lost.

Let it admonish us that it is deuillish to observe the Sign for letting of
blood, To Physisitians and Surgeons: no Zodiac nor Signs.
whose ground is mere superstitious and diabolical, seeing the ground is a
mere Figment, namely; that there is a Zodiac and twelve Signs therein,
Letting of blood by observation of the Sign condemned.
being a device of Poetry and vain Philosophy, nature yielding no such
Ram, or Bull. etc. as they foolishly imagine.

And the Device confounds it self, as is plain by the absurd relation and
proportion between the Rule and the thing ruled, as that the Moon should rule
in the cold and moist parts, when she is in hot and dry Signs, whereas rather
when it is in hot Signs, it should rule the hot parts and so contrary.

So that now the Learned Physician has disclaimed this Bug-beare, and
therefore if it prevail, it rather proceeds from our strong imagination, and
Gods divine Justice, in punishing our infidelity, then from any power in that
Poetical Fiction.

4 Let this also reform in us That superstitious observation of days and
times, Observation of days and times condemned.
as if some were luckie and successful, others evil and unlucky.

Wherein if the success answer our conceit, it proceeds not from the Order
in Nature, or Rules of Art, but from Diabolical confidence, and Divine
Justice, giving up to be deceived with our own counsels, and so by degrees, to
grow further in league and bondage unto Satan.

Now concerning prediction by dreams, Observation of dreams, how lawful and
unlawful.
though it must needs be granted that this was one of Gods Ordinances to
reveal his will unto his servants, as Numb. 13. 6. Job. 33. 15. Math. 1. 20.
2. 13. 19. Genesis 37. 7. 9. and 41. 25. Dan. 9. etc Yet has Satan cunningly
imitated God even in this point also, to deceive his Proselites by Dreams and
Visions, and so thereby to enable them to foretell things to come; as
appears, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. Ier. 23. 25.

The Maistery will be how we shall discern and distinguish between these
Dreams: How to discern between Divine and Diabolical Dreams.
To this end

Let us take notice that as there are Three sorts of dreams:

1 Such as prooeed immediately from the Lord, as those before, 3 kind of
dreams.
and therefore called Divine. 1 Divine.


2 Natural dreams, 2 Natural.
proceeding from natural causes: 1. As thoughts of the mind: 2. Affections of
the heart; 3. Or constitution of the body, according to which sutably several
dreams do follow: 1 From Complexion.
To Choleric persons dreams of Wars, to Phelegmaticke of Waters, Fearful
dreams to Melancholicke persons, etc.

2 And so also by these Dreams may we conjecture of the sins of the heart:
From condition of sin.
because what we conceive or practice in the day, will be corruptly dreamed of
in the night, to make us more inexcusable.

3 Devilish Dreams framed in the brain by Satan; Diabolical.
answerable to our desires, as appears not only by the practice of the
Gentiles, who received their answers by Dreams, but also by the practice of
Heretics, as the Maniches, Anabaptists, Familists, etc. who have been
confirmed in their devilish errors, by Revelations and Dreams.

Thus, as hereby it is apparent, there are diverse kinds of Dreams: so may
we also for our Instruction, observe many lively differences between Divine
and Satanicall Dreams. As,

First, divine Dreams concern General and Necessary things to be known,
as the coming of Christ, Revealing of Antichrist, etc. but those from Satan,
are either of curious, or triuiall and vain matters, either not fit, or
worthy to be known.

If it shall be said, How the Sybilles spoke of Christ.
That the Sybills Satan's prophets spoke of these things: the answer is,

1 That so far as they spoke of them, they had their information from Satan,
who being acquainted with the prophecies, Diffrence between Divine and
Diabolical prophecies of Christ.
did inform his disciples accordingly:

2 Yet so, as that neither could he acquaint them with any distinct or clear
knowledge thereof: but rather only in a confused and dark manner, whereby
they might rather stumble, then inform others to believe the same, neither did
his prophets love and affect the things that were revealed, but rather were
constrained to publish so much, Note.
as might make the times inexcusable, and so had no power to benefit others
thereby.

But in Divine Dreams the case is clean contrary, for in this place here is
vouchsafed unto us, both a very clear and manifest revelation of such things
as concern the good of the Church.

2 The mind of Gods servants are affected and subdued to believe the same.

3 And they are enabled to communicate so far unto others, as that so many as
are ordained to salvation shall give credit and obedience thereunto: Act. 13.
And the rather,

Because these Divine Dreams are not only agreeable unto the blessed Word,
and so safely to be believed, whereas Satanicall Dreams, as they are diverse,
or contrary to the Word, so they labor especially to withdraw from obedience
thereunto.

4 But especially, whereas the end of Satan's Enthusiasmes is to set up
Idolatry, and nourish all Atheism and security, Deu. 13. On the contrary,
Divine Dreams aim only at the True worship of God, and further the doctrine
and obedience of the Gospel.

5 And here we are wisely also to distinguish of the Times, For seeing now we
have the Gospel sufficient to reveal the will of God, No divine dreams now
to be expected.
therefore we are not in these days to build upon Dreams; 2. Tim. 3. 17.
so that howsoever they were ordinary before and under the Law, yet now if any
shall rest herein, and expect resolution hereby, we are to conclude that it
is rather a Satanicall illusion then any warning from the Lord, and therefore
at no hand to be heeded of us.

As touching Divination by Lots, Examination of divination by Lots.
herein also we had need to be informed, the rather because this Delusion is
common and prevailing with the ignorant sort, to abuse the same to wicked ends,
and so therein to offer sacrifice to the devil: And therefore,

Though there may be some lawful use hereof, Civil Lots lawful.
as in Civil Occasions, to

Divide Lands, discide controversies in a case of importance and necssity,
Josh. 14. 2. Acts 1. 26. etc. so the Name of God be called upon, and his
providence attended, and obeyed in the success thereof. Sporting Lots
unlawful.
Yet neither are we allowed to use Lots in jest, in triuiall and unnecessary
means, as to set up Banqrouts, to further Plantations, etc. by raising sums
of money thereby, seeing this may be obtained by other means; Much less in
Gaming, to sport our selves hereby.

Especially we are here to beware of such Lottery as tends to resolve
doubtful things, Divining Lots unlawful.
or foreknow things to come, either by opening a Book, casting a Die, to
declare good or bad success; seeing this both implies a secret belief, that
such a feat can do it, and so is a worshipping of the devil, etc. seeing by no
secret property to that means such things are effected, it must needs follow
that it is but Satan's color, to hide his familiarity with the wicked.

Hitherto of Divination by true creatures. And does not Satan also deceive by
forged means?

Yea certainly, as first by answering in the shape of a dead man. Of Satan's
deceit by answering in the shape of a dead man 1. Sam. 28.
Example hereof we have in that answer unto Saul, where Satan deludes the
King with the appearance of Samuels person, when indeed it was only the
cunning of Satan, resembling and counterfeiting the same: As is manifest; First

Because the Lord had denied to answer Saul by ordinary lawful means, That
the apparition unto Saul was Diabolical, and not real Samuel.
and therefore would not endure to have Samuel raised up to answer him
extraordinarily: Luke 16.

2 The Bodies and souls of the Saints departed are in the hands of God resting
from their labors, Reu. 14. 12.
and therefore Satan could not have power to fetch the soul from heaven,
though he might prevail to raise the body from the earth, which yet I see no
reason for, seeing the body also must rest; at least from Satan's power? And
would Samuel, think you, suffer Saul to adore him? Surely it is the devil that
seeks honor and homage from men, as for the Saints, they strive to give all
power and honor unto God, Act. 10. Reu. 22. 8. 9. Add hereunto that true
Samuel would have reproved Saul for running to Witches, he would have exhorted
him to repentance.

1 And therefore, Answ. to objections
though the Word call him Samuel, yet this was according to that, which seemed
to delude Saul.

2 And though Saul might be told by the Appearance what should befall him, yet
might this be done by Satan, as being either acquainted by the Lord with his
purpose herein, or coniecturing by Saul's case what was like to come to him for
his disobedience to God.

As for that which the Church of Rome doates concerning the walking of dead
men, Confutation of walking spirits.
howsoever the Lord gave power unto his Prophets to raise the dead, yet neither
had this Witch any such power, neither was the case necessary why it should be
at this time, neither needed Satan to use this means, seeing he might do the
feat, as well by himself counterfeting the shape and person of Samuel: Neither
may extraordinary and miraculous working, upon special occasion, be traduced
to warrant the ordinary walking of persons after their deaths, whose souls,
the Holy Ghost witnesses to be at rest, and can their bodies walk without
their souls?

Indeed when the Lord was either to plant or restore a Church out of it ruin
and desolation, Note when Miracles used.
we find in the Word this power of raising from the dead to have been
exercised profitably; and therefore seeing now there was no such cause for this
miraculous work, it follows to be the delusion of Satan, and not the finger
of God.

But here me thinks I here some reply that if this were but a collusion of
Satan blinding and deceiving Saul, Object.
why might he not also deeceiue the Witch, as pretending to be raised up by
her, that she had power of him, when it might be but some iugling trick to
bleare her eyes; she raised up no devil in Samuels likeness, but rather was
merely deluded with a conceit hereof.

Surely, Answ.
howsoever the Patrones of Witchcraft would gladly thus conclude to condemn
the truth of the Word, that there are Witches, which work by Familiar spirits;
yet does the circumstance of the History plainly confound them: Howsoever
they also imply further, that the Witch might suborne some man or woman in the
likeness of Samuel to give this answer: seeing no mere humane understanding
could attain to that knowledge, And therefore it necessarily follows, that
the Witch, by virtue of the covenant with Satan, raised him up; He by his power
and skill counterfeited Samuel at an ynch, by his experience and office was
able to acquaint him with Gods will, and so as an instrument of Divine vengeance
to hasten him to his destruction.

And as Satan thus foretells things by means, Of Satan's fore telling without
means By possession.
either true or counterfeit: so does he also Divine without means, either
possessing those that are his oracles, Acts the sixteen chapter and sixteen
verse: or inspiring them by outward obsession with his will and counsels,
Obsession
whereby they become counterfeit prophets, and reuealers of things to come;
such as were the Sybills, etc.

Of all which we are to make this use: Uses hereof.
1 As to judge wisely of the power and manifold cunning of Satan, 2 So to
consider of the preciousnesse of the soul, for which Satan takes such pains,
becomes such a drudge, etc. and to prevent the Devil by our care and
diligence, not so much for the body and the meat that perishes, but for the
poor soul, that it may be saved everlastingly.

3 Lastly, seeing Satan by these Inspirations and Exorcismes deceives the
simple and unstable souls, causing them to believe that such trances and
inspirations are from God; Difference between diabolical Trances and the gift
of Prophecy.
therefore learn we to distinguish between Diabolical Revelations, and the
true gift of Prophecy, which God in Trances reuealeth unto his servants.

As first, Divine Trances may be where the soul for a time is severed from
the body, 2. Cor. 12. 2. But in these Diabolical though the senses may be
bound, or benumbed for a time, yet the soul is never severed from the body,
because this is a work miraculous to take the soul out of the body, and
reunite it again.

2 In Divine Trances the poures and faculties of soul and body though their
operations cease for a time, yet remain sound and perfect; but in Satanicall
Ecstasies, the parties being cast into phrensies and madness, the very
faculties of nature are empaired, and and so distempercd as that they seldom
recover the right use again: At the best, they carry some skarre of Satan to
their graves; whereas the Saints receive a further measure of Illumination, and
increase of grace in all their powers and faculties:

3 Divine trances do always tend to the good of the Church, confirmation of
the Gospel, and advancement of Piety, Acts 10. 11. those of Satan to the
contrary.

And thus far of Witchcraft by Divination.

CHAP. IX.
Of Witchcraft consisting in Operation.

COnsider we now of Witchcraft in operation: which really works strange
things.

This is done, Of encha^tment, and it unlawfulness, I proved by the effects.
first, by Enchantment; namely, when by some Charm wondrous works are
wrought.

Which is not only expressly forbidden, Deuter. chapter 18. verse 11. but is
also manifest by the things wrought hereby. As, 1 Raising of Stormts. 2
Poisoning of the air. 3 Blasting of Corn. 4 Killing of Cattle. 5 Breeding
strange torments in the bodies of men. 6 Casting out of Devils, etc.


All which, and such like, works belonging to the divine power, and justice,
If therefore they shall be imitated, or in any measure effected, by the
creature; It is a plain usurpation of the divine office, and a flat peruersion
and disgracing of the divine Providence, as being accomplished by indirect
means.

Now, Note.
that these, and such, are the effects of Witchcraft,

It is not only apparent by the Confession of Witches themselves: but further
cleared by the testimony of the word; 2 By the word.
who ascribes this power unto the Charmer, Eccles. 10. 11. where the Original
yields thus: If the Serpent bite before he be charmed, what profit has the
master of the tongue thereby, that is the Charmer? signifying therein, that if
the Charmer come in time, he might prevent by his charm, the Serpents stinging.

And what else (I pray you) does Balaams words implie, when being crossed by
the power and mercy of God, he is forced to confess, that there is no sercery
against Jacob, nor sooth saying against Israel: Does he not therein
acknowledge, Nu. 23. 13.
That whereas he was hired by King Balaac by some charm to hurt Gods People,
(as being by Trade no better then a Coniurer, though in the reputation of the
ignorant and superstitious people he was esteemed a Prophet) his Charms could
not prevail, the Lord disappointed him.

And surely, 3 By the nature of a Charm.
if we should consider the nature of a Charm, it will evidently appear, that
it is but a colorable and counterfeit means, under which Satan shrowdeth his
power and malice to divine withal, and so to destroy both body and soul.

Seeing a Charm is no other then a spell consisting of strange words, A
charm, what.
wherein is pretended some secret efficacy, to bring forth some extraordinary
work. It necessarily follows, 1 that by the very nature of the words, and 2
quality of the parties that use them, they are nobetter then Satan's cloaks to
convey his mischiefs more closely, for the endangering of the soul.

The words are either barbarous and unknown, Words of charms, either obscure
and barbarous
as were such, which in times of Ignorance and Infidelity were used. And that
these could work no such effect, it appears:

1 because this was no ordinance of God to this end, as having neither any
power thereto by right of creation, or by any new institution, and gift from
God: That they have no power by virtue of creation, it is manifest, 1 because
words are but sounds, and so pass into the air, without any further effect.

2 If they had power to hurt, or do good, it must needs be by some contiguitie
and presence with the thing it works upon; and therefore seeing these words are
spoken concerning parties and things assent, and far distant, and therefore
they have no power, as is pretended.

And if some words should be effectual of themselves: why then not all words
of all sorts, tending to blessing or cursing: but this is presumed, that only
words proceeding from such cunning men and women, are available; and therefore
it is not the words themselves, but some other secret Magical compact with
such persons that effect the same.

If it be replied, Object.
that these words have signification, Answ.
and happily be understood of the parties that use them reciprocally: Or
blasphemous known charms.
Yet seeing they have in themselves no further use then for what they signify,
and though they be understood, as the charms are now, as being of known
names, and yet still can they not of themselves further avail, then to the
Ends they were appointed. And therefore it follows, that they are no better
then Signs and Watch-wordes to Satan to work his wonders by.

For though the name of the Trinity and Sacrament, serve to that end they were
appointed, namely, to norish the soul: yet to effect wonders by these, seeing
it is contrary to their Institution, etc. that blessing of God especially
accompanying them, it follows, that when they are abused to other ends, as in
charms. etc. they are the devils sacraments, to effect his tricks, by virtue
of the compact between the witch and him: whereby he seems to be bound and
compelled to serve her turn, the rather hereby to color the wickedness, as if
now it were done by the power of God, resembled in these words, and not by the
illusion and cunning of Satan.

As for the power of Imagination in this case, Imagination rejected.
which is pretended to be the occasion of those strange effects; surely, though
it cannot be denied, but that our imagination may hurt our selves: yet that the
imagination of the Witch should hurt others, or that these words poceeding from
her conceit, should so prevail on the bodies and minds of such as are afar
off, it is contrary to reason, and common sense.

And therefore, Infectious looks disclaimed.
though it be conceited, that the Witch by her looks may effect these things:
or having some poisonous quality in them, to infect the air; so the bodies of
men, though this be a mere dotage, fitter for such bedlams, then to be
corrected by any sound Judgment: yet, how can this hurt those which are absent?

Neither will it further this dotage, Objection of Jacobs sheep answered.
that either Jacobs sheep, by looking upon the rods speckled and
partie-coloured, brought forth the like: seeing this was an especial work of
God, to bless Jacob, not any inherent virtue in the rods, or the eyes of the
sheep, because here was some likelihood in nature hereto.

Much less shall that prevail, 2 Objection of the Basiliske and Wolf answered.
that the Basiliske kills with her sight; and the woolfe takes away the voice
of such as he suddenly meets withal, seeing, as there is no ground of
experience concerning these things, but only a common received error: so; if
any such thing be, it may proceed from some force in Nature incident to those
creatures, as the Basiliske being a poisonous substance, may infect the air,
and so take away life, or else from some sudden astonishment in such as
unexpectedly meet with them, causing strange alteration in the mind by fear
and so effecting such stange things.

But they allege further, Object. 3. Answ.
if Enchanters can stay by their Charms the stinging of Serpents, then
certainly there is some force in these words.

Unto which we answer, That the power proceeds not from any virtue in the
words, but by the presence of Satan through compact with the Charmer, as the
word is plain, joined sometimes very cunningly with the devil, seeing no
other, although he use the same words, can effect the like things.

If it be said, Object. 4. Of the parties.
this is, because he has not the same faith: this discouers the root of
bitterness, and argues them plainly to be Diabolical: as being both the
bond of the Covenant, whereby Satan is tied to the Witch: he does all on this
condition, that he is acknowledged as her god, she must trust in him, resign
up her self wholly to his pleasure.

As also by this bond, the Witch tieth her Proselites to her dispose: she can
do nothing for them, unless they believe in her, and so she enthralleth their
souls, while she pretends good to their bodies.

This will yet appear more evident, if we consider the quality of the best
and most colorable charms, that are used to this end: Namely, words of holy
Scripture: Of Scripture char.
which seeing they have their virtue not from him that utters them, much
less from the power of the words in themselves, but from the alone efficacy
of the Spirit of God, annexed by GODS promise heereunto, when the word is used
as his ordinance: seeing therefore this is no ordinance of God to such ends,
and therefore can not proceed from the operation of the good spirit of God: it
follows necessarily, that it is the power of satan, shrouded under these
forms of speech, especially, seeing it is not used to the conversion of
sinners, which is the right end; but to wicked or unnecessary purposes, as
raising of devils, killing of creatures, infecting of the air, etc.

And seeing the word is only effectual, Word how effectual.
not by reason of the sound, er letter thereof, but when it is 1 conceived in
the mind, Hebr. 4. 2
2 received with reverence, 3 treasured in the memory, 4 and mingled with
faith in the heart: seeing it is muttered in these charms; 1 without
understanding, as being in an unknown tongue, 2 without faith, and 3 to wicked
purposes.

It must needs be some Satanicall color to conceal desperate wickedness. And
so, Note.
though it be not abused of all so far forth, that it may include them within
the compass of such charms, which have entered into this certain league with
Satan: yet seeing for want of conscionable understanding, Word commonly made a
charm.
and obedience thereunto, it is made no better then a charm to the common
sort: therefore, as herein they bewray themselves in general to be yet held
under Satan's bondage, so are they hereby both subject the rather to the power
of witch craft, not only to be obnoxious to the hurts thereof, in their
bodies and goods, etc. but especially to be ensnared with the misery thereof,
upon any occasion to become nouices and factors in this devilish trade: it
being just with the glorious Lord, to give up such as will not obey the truth,
to the efficacy and depth of these strong delusions, not only to be deceived
themselves, but to become Satan's chief Schoolmaisters to deceive others.

The like may be concluded of such other means whereby Witches use to perform
their Charms.

As making of Characters, Characters, Images, etc. condemned. Rome.
Images, and Signs in Wax, or Clay, and framing of Circles, using of Amulets,
Exorcismes; an ordinary Practice of the Apostata Church, coniuring thereby
their Cream, Salt, Spittle, holy Water, Oil, Palms, etc. using of the Name
of Jesus with such often repetitions and Crosses annexed. All which, and such
like, being no secret operation of Nature, nor ordinance of God to such ends:
What other can they be, but the Visors of Satan, whereby he maskes it more
securely, and dangerously in his Magical practices, as hereby bearing the
simple people in hand, that Christ is a Coniurer, that he is bound by those
from doing hurt, to do good etc. And shall we think that crossing of the body,
is of any other stamp: surely it is of all other a most dangerous charm, by
how much it caries a show of love and devotion.

So may we judge of scratching of the Witch, Scratching
unto which if the Devil seem to stoop, that the body is eased, it is to
seize more deeply on the soul, by withdrawing it from the right means, and
resting it securely in these devilish charms.

Which, as it may seem to admonish us from the use of them, Use, to decline
these means.
so it may provoke such to repentance, having done these of ignorance, not
contenting themselves with this excuse, that they meant no hurt, they conceived
the persons to be honest of whom they sought help, etc. Seeing because they
had no certain warrant, therefore good meaning without faith, is sin before
God, Romans 14. nay while they mean well, they trust in these things, and so do
rob God of his glory, and themselves, as much as lies in them, of their
salvation.

Neither is there the like reason between Physic and these means: Object.
That is ordained of God, Answ.
This, That we rely upon Paysicke: therefore why not on these charms?
condemned of him; and therefore though we are ignorant of the Physicians
Receipt, yet we are to rely upon his skill, and commend the success to God:
whereas we may not use these charms being ignorant of of the virtue of them,
seeing there can no blessing follow where God leads not; where confidence is
put in the means to thrust out God.

As for the Case of necessity which is here pretended; we can have help no
where else; The Physician will not meddle, the Pain is intolerable, the case
desperate, and God is merciful though we do amiss, yet may we not seek
ease; surely, The Lord will not be merciful to presumptuous sinners, If he
purpose to try thy faith and patience in the enduring of the extremity; if he
entend hereby to fit thee for himself, and to ease thee of thy sins, and
this miserable world, Is it not good waiting his leisure to prepare thy self
unto him? Instead of going to the Wiseman, is it not now time to make up thy
accounts, to make thy peace with him? Certainly, when all lawful means
fail, what does this argue but that either this is a sign of the end of thy
days; Note.
or that the Lord will help thee by his immediate hand? And therefore either
way thou must now cast thy self upon him. If the Lord cannot help thee, much
less shall the devil: and the Lord will help thee, as shall be best for his
glory, and thy good: and therefore in all thy ways acknowledge him, Proverb
3. And though he should kill thee, yet trust thou in him, Job. 13. 15. He
shall be unto thee both in life and death advantage: Phil. 1.

Hitherto of that part of operative Witchcraft which is performed by charms.
Besides this there is another work of Sorcerie, Of sorcerie by lugling, it
properties.
usually practiced by Satan's instruments, which is commonly called Iugling;
When strange Feats are performed, not by real charms, but only by deluding
of the eye, and some extraordinary slight: Not that any such thing is
effected in Truth, but only in Appearance, to the deceived judgment, being
perverted by such delusions as the eye falsely apprehends.

Now the Eye may be deluded. Eye how deluded.


First, by corrupting the humor of the eye, being the next instrument of sight.

2 By Altring the Air whereby the object is conveyed to the eye.

3 By changing the object which is discerned.

That there may be such delusion, not only the Holy Ghost witnesses of the
Galatians and others, Gal. 3. 12
who were then bewitched, and made believe that they saw that, which indeed
they saw not; but experience does daily make it manifest.

Concerning the slight done above the course of Nature: That Iuggling is
sorcery.
As this makes this Trade to be plain Sorcery; because it exceeds Natures
compass, so it necessarily follows that some skill of Satan is concurring
herein, As being by compact with the Iugler to color and further him herein;
either by corrupting the humor of the eye, or coloring the air, etc. which
are things possible for Satan to do. That iuggling is not by opticke skill.
For howsoever some strange things may be done by bodily sleights and by
Opticke Arts, yet these are kept within the compass of nature: But the Iuggler
undertakes things impossible and contrary to Nature, as to transform one
creature into an other, or else, to create and offer things that are not, and
so seems to arrogate divine power, in such works of Creation, and therefore
must needs delude only the eye with the appearance of such things, seeing he
cannot possibly do the things indeed.

Such were the wonders wrought by the Egyptian Enchanters, in imitation of
Moses, Egyptian Enchanters only deluded the eye.
when they turned the Rod into a Serpent, and waters into blood: which, that
it was a plain delusion of the eye, by Satan's forgerie, is manifest, because
they could not be any real creatures: seeing the Lord did not make them, and
the devil could not, the works of ordinary Creation ceasing, and no special
reason now to be given, why myraculously any such Creation should be renewed
by those servants of Pharaoh: but rather plain reason for the contrary,
seeing this they did, tended to the disgrace of Gods work, by his servants
Moses and Aaron, and therefore though they could have done such a work, yet
the Lord at this time would not have endured it at their hands.

But it is most apparent that Satan can do no such thing, seeing the effecting
of the like belongs only to God, Ioh. 2. And the Word is plain, that this
their fained miracle was done by Sorcery, Exodus 7. 11. 22. and 8. 7. And
therefore that the Lord should do them against himself, it is altogether
absurd and blasphemous to grant: And the circumstances do plainly euince that
they were not natural frogs, by such differences as are manifest betweeue
them, and those that Moses created by the finger of God.

As 1. That the Frogs created by Moses caused great stincke by the corruption
that they bred, being gathered on heaps, whereas there is no such ascribed to
the Frogs of the Enchanters.

And* so the blood which Moses brought forth, killed the fish, and stancke so
that the Egiptians could not drink thereof; no such effect appearing from the
Magitians Transmutation.

And is it likely that they which could have created these frogs, could not
also have destroyed the lice? Could not have preserved themselves from those
fearful plagues? Exodus 8. 18. Nay they confess that they were not able to
bring forth lice by their enchantment, much less destroy them.

And seeing that Moses serpents devoured them, and yet retained their former
quality, it necessarily follows that they were no true serpents, the rather
because usually one creature does not devour another of the same kind.

And surely why could they not as well have removed such as Moses made, as well
as they had power to make the same?

CHAP. X.
Of the Subject of Witchcraft.

NOw let us come to the maine Subject and Occasion of this Treatise:

Namely, to consider of the Practiser of this Mystery, to wit, the witch,
whether man or woman.

And here, first consider we the General Notion or Description of a Witch.

Secondly, we will resolve these points, 1 Whether men as well as women, may
not be Practitioners in this Art:

And yet, Why more women then men are engaged therein.

Thirdly, we will lay down the diverse kinds of these Witches: namely, 1 The
Bad Witch, which is the Hurter.

2 The Good Witch, as they are termed, because they do seem to help.

Where it shall be resolved.
1 Why Satan uses these several instruments for these contrary ends. 2
Whether the good Witch cannot hurt, or the bad Witch help. 3 What places are
especially infested with Witches.
SECTIO. I.
AS touching the General Description of a Witch

It may be thus.

A Witch is a Magitian, who, either by open or secret league, wittingly and
willingly, consents to use the aid of the devil in working of Wonders.

A Magitian, I say, to signify that that she professes and practices this
Art, Acts 8. 9. For that is the general name to all such as practice these
unlawful Arts.

2 I add, that consents to use the help of the devil, either by or secret
league wittingly and willingly, which is the very proper passion, or certain
means to make her a Witch.

Excluding herein,

First, Here are excluded, 1 Lunatickes.
such as be tainted with frenzy or weakness of brain, and so are thereby
deluded by the Devil:

Because howsoever Satan may work upon and by these, yet they never give Real
and Willing consent unto him.

2 Such as are Demoniackes, 2 Demoniackes. Two sorts of them. Acts 16.
possessed by him, whereof though some are properly Witches, as consenting to
him, and so he possessing them out of them speaks, by them working strange
things: yet others though they be possessed, yet they consent not thereto,
they in their spirits strive against him: and so Satan does in them, and by
them, strange things; as speaking strange Languages, doing things of
extraordinary strength, etc. which by the mercy of GOD though they afflict
the body, yet they may tend to the salvation of the soul.

3 By this circumstance are excluded those That of blind zeal, 3 Superstitious
persons.
and Ignorant superstition use such charms to bring things to pass, either
thinking they have virtue in them thereto, or else not knowing the deepenesse
of Satan herein: who though they defy the devil, Note.
as they say, and indeed are not yet brought to this league, yet do they sin
grievously herein, and unless they repent, may justly provoke the Lord to
give them up to this or the like, desperate and reprobate sense.

A third thing in this description, is the End of this Trade, namely, To work
Wonders.

It being the Pride of Satan to advance himself hereby as God, in the
children of disobedience, and by these manifold tricks and glorious shows, to
detain the miserable people in vile Ignorance and Idolatry, and to hinder
them from embracing the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ; practicing to this
end, by his instruments, sometimes true, as by Diuinations and Charms, and
otherwise feigned works, as by Iugling, to puff them up also with a vain
conceit of Divine Power, thereby to secure them of their imaginary
happiness, and so to draw them more securely to eternal vengeance, by
enabling them hereby to execute their several lusts with greediness, and
using them as dangerous instruments to deceive others.

Such were Balaam, the Inchanters of Egypt, the Witch of Endor Simon Magus,
Bariesus, Elimas the Sorcerer, the Pythonysse at Phillipi, etc. Acts the
sixteenth, Numb* the twenty two, Acts the eighth.

By which description and examples, the first Question is resolved, namely,
that men, as well as women, may be subject to this Trade; seeing as both are
subject to the State of damnation, so both are liable to Satan's snares, who
has several tricks and colors, in this Mystery of iniquity, to bait each
according to their several abilities and uses in the world, thereby the rather
to fetch them over to this detestable Art.

For whereas man by Ordination is fitter to command, How Satan baitesmen and
women diversely to this Trade.
and the woman to obey, therefore has the God of this world, for ambitious and
aspiring men so suitable a point in this Trade, as to lead him thereto, with
pretense of Soueraignety, Note.
that he shall command the devil, in a more secure and solemn manner,
coloring the same by those manifold delusions, of Circles, Characters, etc. to
this end, as are usually practiced in that high skill of coniuration. By the
which ceremonies and solemnities as Satan procures in the mind of ambitious
and curious man some higher conceit of this sovereign skill; so does he
thereby more deeply cozen him, as fetching him of more roundly hereby to the
intended bargain, even to subject his soul in hope of this power.

To this end we may observe, that though the maine end be one, in these
Diabolical Arts, even to enthrall the soul in perpetual bondage, yet has
Satan diverse means to attain these ends, both answerable to the several
conditions of the world, and particular estates and qualities of men: According
to which diversity, this Art, though it be one in effect, yet has it
obtained diverse names, and sundry respects.

Concerning the Times, as they have obtained more or less light of the
knowledge of God, so has Satan fitted himself in his policies accordingly.
When, and where, there has been none, Note Satan's Policy in suiting variety
of times with several baits.
or less revelation of the Gospel, there has Satan's appearances and workings
been more carnal and preceptible to common sense, his suggestions and devices
more gross and palpable, his attempts more open and natural, his worship more
terrible to the flesh; as appearing ordinarily in ugly shapes, being worshipped
in most horrible forms, presented with most cruel and bloody sacrifices, and
honored with all gross and shameless open filthiness. So did the Heathen, in
their first rude and barbarous estate, worship the devil; then needed they no
covenant to bind them from God to Satan, when they acknowledged no other God
but him: him they served that he might do them good; him they worshipped for
fear, least he should hurt them.

As Barbarousnesse decayed, and Civility, by settled Government, began to
take place, etc. so knowledge and skill was advanced among men, whereby gross
wickedness was somewhat brideled, and moral honesty, for the common and
private good sake, was now outwardly embraced; Hereupon Satan spinnes a finer
third of more colorable idolatry, and that by these means. Benefactors of
Commonwealths, and Deliuerers of their Countries from Tyrants, not knowing
God, were apt to rob him of his glory, seeking their own glory and
eternizing, by their Renowned Acts.

This Satan discerning, does easily insinuate into them, and procuring some
secret assent from them, by his skill and power enables them to do Wonders;
Heerevpon the people cry, The Voice of God and not of man, Act. 12. And this
falls out the rather, because the ignorant and godless people, receiving
good from them, cannot be contained in any sober measure of respect toward
them, but think even all Divine Honor too little for them. So we find that
Heathen Princes were many of them great Magitians and Coniurers, as gaining
hereby an Opinion of Dietie: And so did the people worship them with Divine
Honor, yea ascribed them, being translated among the number of the Gods.

Thus became this Art of Sorcerie a Companion of great Princes and mighty
Conquerours: by this they attained many great enterprises in the world, and
gained an opinion of Omnipotency and Eternity.

And was there not another means herein to set up this Art, in that age of
Knowledge, and greater Ciuility? Yea certainly.

As conquest brought forth Peace, so Peace yielded liberty for knowledge and
liberal studies: And Knowledge brought forth Pride to be excellent therein,
and Pride begets curiosity to search into hidden mysteries, and curiosity
breeds discontent, and restless disquiet: hereupon Satan works:
ministers content to the mind by yielding it that which Art could not reach
unto; so curiosity is satisfied, and pride nourished, and the soul through
Pride enthralled to Satan, and yet deluded justly with the same color of Art:
under which Satan hiding his secret compacts does either persuade them, that
it is done by art, which is done indeed by his assistance, or satisfies them,
that it is done by some Power over Satan, and therefore they need not fear
subjection to Satan. Hitherto served those Charms, Circles, Characters, etc.
by which Satan seeming to be bound, deluded them with a vain conceit of his
subjection to them, And so as men were either more ambitious after honor, or
curious after knowledge, so did Satan bait his devilish Art with more
abundance of pompous and curious ceremonies, the rather to fetch over these
glorious fools thereto: and so he easily prevailed over the profoundest
scholars; the Gymnosophists of Egypt, Magi of Chaldea, Sages of Greece etc.
most whereof gained their chiefest credit by this, that they were most
skillful in this devilish Trade.

And so, because men were fittest for these ends, either to conquer Kingdoms,
or seek after knowledge, so in these respects usually the Male sex have been
trained to this Art. By this they have attained the reputation of Wisdom and
Impery.

Succeeding Ages gave occasion to Satan to work more closely, and yet to weaue
his Idolatry with a finer thread.

For, together with the knowledge of humane Arts, and Sciences which resembled
some sparks of divine light, brake out also at length the day Star of
Righteousness Jesus Christ, bringing with him saving knowledge, and dispelling
the more grosser mystes of Heathenish Idolatry; Oracles ceased.
as being no way sit to encounter therewith: or at least in Policy, not
thinking it meet openly to oppose the same; but rather by a more secret and
colorable means, by closing therewith, to obscure, and so by degrees to
banish the same.

Thus became Satan transformed into an Angel of Light; 2. Cor. 11.
and taking advantage of the pride of Nature, and unthankfulness of men, that
would not obey the Gospel, but rather pervert it, to justify the flesh: As
they were therefore given up justly by the Lord to strong delusions: so is
Satan still ready at a pinch to beguile unstable souls, and insteade of the
purity and simplicity of the Gospel, to draw them by degrees into a Mystery
of Iniquity, and so in the end, to most gross and palpable Idolatry,
justifying and exceeding the most barbarous Heathens therein.

To this end, even so soon as the good Householder had sown his Seed, the
envious man was ready to sow his Tares, Galat. 3.
raising up false apostles to withdraw the people from the Simplicity of the
Gospel, 2. Cor. 10. 11.
and so to prepare them, by giving liberty to the flesh, Galat. 5.
to that corruption of doctrine, which afterward ouer-spread the face of the
Churches.

And at the first assault Satan so prevailed, as that howsoever, as yet the
light of Judgment remained with the Church, as being able to discern of
Spirits, even to discover such as said they were Apostles, and yet in truth,
were no better then Satan's Ministers: yet, by reason that the flesh was
willing to cast off the yoke, and apt to turn the graces of God into
wantonness: hereupon zeal began to decay, Reul. 2. 23.
even with the best, first love was left; the bond of Perfection, and so way
hereby made to carnal liberty, and for the maintenance thereof.

Corrupt doctrine by degrees was hatched, 1. Cor. 15.
and embraced: whereof as the Purest times were not altogether free, 1. Tim. 4.
2
as may appear by the Nicolaitans and others, that went out even from amongst
the Apostles, both to gross profaneness, and also to Doctrines of devils, 1.
Tim. 4.
for the justifying thereof: So appeared hereupon the great mercy of God in
casting this Iezabel into a bed of affliction, Revel. 2.
and increasing his Church graciously with those ten bloody and desperate
persecutions, for the purging out of her dross, and renewing of her first love:
Whereby, as she wanne unto her the hearts of her enemies; so by this means she
gained great friends: even the kings of the earth began to worship the Lord:
and the mightiest became nursing Fathers and foster Mothers, Esaias chapter 49.
chapter, to the distressed Church of God.

And now behold, the great harvest of the Gentiles being wel-neare in, and so
the man-child being borne unto God; Reu. 12. 13
the time was come, for the further revelation of Gods justice, for the former
affliction of his Church. And also to manifest yet further his great mercies
unto his Church, in exercising the same with new afflictions, for the
preventing of that security, and purging out the carnallnesse, which by the
favor and arm of flesh had grown in the Church.

For even thus it befell with the dear Spouse of CHRIST, that as her former
afflictions, had now fitted her to some rest, which she attained by the means
of Constantine: so this rest and ease, accompanied with outward honor and
acceptance with the greatest: instead of Godly simplicity brought in carnal
pomp and wisdom of the flesh.

And the wisdom of the flesh, being once advanced, and grounded in the
hearts of men, banished presently all godly severity of life and zeal for
the honor of Almighty God; And instead thereof brought in will worship, and
profaneness. And did not carnal wisdom strike the chief stroke herein?
Yea surely, the Church being now taken into the Court of the Emperor, and
warming her self well by his fire: as she forgets her former affliction; so is
she not unwilling to remit also of her sincerity, as not being so suitable to
the place and persons, that now she has to deal withal: now she must a
little become all unto all, that so she may either win others, or hold her
own; somewhat must be yielded to her Patrons, to show her thankfulness: and
some Corruption must be swallowed up, to maintain credit.

Now chistian liberty must be strained to be an occasion to the flesh, and
Authority must be deified to maintain the same.

Thus the poor Church of Christ being freed from the malice of heathenish
Idolatry, is corrupted by prosperity, to set up spiritual Idolatry: Not
only aduauncing her Patrons and Benefactours above what was meet, but
aduauncing also her self by their help, above all that was called God, and so
by degrees having well feathered her neast, and strengthened her self by the
arm of flesh, overthrows cunningly the same, even with it own weapons, and
aduanceth it self gloriously upon the ruins and wrecke thereof.

And thus the Church flies into the wilderness upon Eagles wings, Reu. 12. 14
by the favor of earthly Princes, being first highly advanced, and so thereby
growing to loosenes and profanenes; and so justly left to gross errors: both
for the conceiving, as also for the justifying thereof; whereby it comes to
pass, that corrupters of doctrine in the end prevailing, sincerity is
banished, and so Antichrist by degrees exalted above all that is called God:
not only in will worship and bodily service, Coloss. 2.
tyrannizing over the consciences of the faithless and rebellious generation:
but advancing himself by lying signs and wonders thereby, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
to maintain the opinion of that arrogated truth, and so to subdue and hold
in captivity the deceived world.

And so as profane pomp succeeded godly simplicity, so barbarous ignorance
also came in place of pure and saving knowledge, Revel. 8. 7
that not only the third part of the earth was killed therewith, but even the
very Sea of Doctrine was so corrupted by that mountain of worldly pomp and
glory cast into the same, that even the third part also of all things therein
were utterly destroyed: Verse 8.
yea Heaven it self even the church of God escaped not this infection, but
that the Tail of the Dragon even drew down the Stars from Heaven,
Revelation chapter 12. verse 1. Yea the Dragon himself set up his very throne
of darkness in the Temple of the Lord. 2. Th. 2. 10
That his darling the whore of Babylon might be advanced thereupon, above all
that is called God: and did not Satan furnish his minion at all assaies, that
so she might prosper and prevail over the children of unbelief? yea
certainly, it was not enough for that man of sin, to strengthen himself
from the usurped power of Heaven, chalenging the keys, to open and shut at his
pleasure; but he must also wrest into himself all power on earth, disposing of
Kingdoms, and deposing the mightiest at his pleasure.

And that he might appear to be the true Antichrist, Philip. 2.
in all things opposing the kingdom of Jesus Christ. Behold, as all things
under earth do bow unto the Son of God, the very devils tremble, James 2.
and are subject unto him: Even so does this Abaddon assume the power of the
Dragon: and so by Coniuration and Enchantments, attaineth to and confirms his
supreme authority.

And thus Witchcraft became an especial proppe of Antichrists kingdom.

And that in diverse respects, accordingly as that man of sin, by diverse
means advanced and confirmed himself. And these were, 1 Opinion of divine
power. 2 Presumption of perfect Holiness, and so of merits. 3 Maintenance of
Idolatry, and 4 Outward greatness and sovereignty.


To the furthering of al which this devilish Art stood him in great steed.

As, For the first, As Antichrist, intruded into the seat of the Lord, both
fitting in the Temple of the Lord, and reigning in the consciences of men, and
so exalting himself in voluntary worship above all that is called God: So was
he much furthered heereunto, by this Art of Negromancie:

As both hereby through feigned miracles and lying wonders.

1 Gaining from the conceit of the deceived people, the Reputation of divine
power.

2 And by the power of Satan, confounding his enemies, attaining to a conceit
of supreme and immediate justice, As,

3 Hereby relieuing extraordinarily his favorites; and so arrogating the
conceit of divine mercy.

And thus also by this Art gained he an opinion of perfect Holiness:

As, not only hereby being able to bleare the eyes of the world, not to
discern, or not to dare to discover his abominable wickedness.

But especially here by being furthered to perform many glorious outsides of
well-doing, that he might be applauded as the mighty power of God. Acts 8. And
so:

Withal, by this means, bewitching the hearts of the ignorant, to admire the
beauty of the strumpet, and so to fall down and worship her. And,

By this Art, furthering also that Device of canonizing of Saints for their
perfect Holiness, by such forged miracles as hereby were made show of to that
end:

Which as it was an especial ground and foundation of that Idolatry, Note the
ground of Idolatry.
which beginning of a reuer end estimation and affection to holy men; grew at
the length, not only to a worship of their persons, being dead, but of their
Statues and Images also: which at the first, being only erected in memorial
of their well-doings by a thankful world, grew at length to be adored and
exalted also above all that was called God: and that especially by means of
this devilish Art.

For by this means these Stocks and Stones being made to speak and do
wonderful things, as it confounded the Image-makers, who by this practice
condemned their Doctrine of Images: Note.
Teaching that they were but otdayned as means to remember the people of those
persons whom they did represent, Bellarm.
and yet by this practice, making the people believe, that they were the Saints
themselves: so were the ignorant and heartlesse people hereby grossly deceived
and detained in this idolatry, Ose. 7.
even by those lying wonders and signs that were wrought at these Images.

And thus as that man of sin, attained to exceeding credit and riches in the
world: So that he might further exalt himself above all that is called God:
behold, he aduanceth himself above the great Kings and Potentates of the
earth: and is furthered heereto especially by this Art of Coniuration.

For hereby being acquainted with the secrets of all estates, gained he
opportunity to prevent, or confound their determinations.

By this means he many times casts bones among them, that tearing and
devouring each other, they might both in the end, become his prey.

By this, was he able secretly to remove the greatest opposite, and yet by the
secret conueyance thereof to keep the credit of his Holiness: yea to gain the
opinion of divine power and assistance.

By this means, whosoever banded openly against him, was like to take the
foil. And thus, hereby nouzeling the world in ignorance and infidelity,
excluded them by this means the protection of the Lord: and so they became a
prey unto Antichrist.

The bondage of Egypt must lie upon their necks, these cruel taske-maisters
must increase their burdens and withdraw their means: that so at length the
oppressed world might groan to the Lord, who in his mercy, has (in some
measure) released the yoke of the oppressor, in restoring light unto the
world, and authority to the magistrate.

And so now it is come to pass, that though in places of ignorance, witchcraft
abounds, because, as yet, the strong man keeps possession: yet, where the
light of the Gospel has once taken footing, as at the coming of Christ the
Oracles ceased, Plutarch.
so Satan falls down like lightning, at the preaching of the Gospel, and the
grosenesse of Witchcraft is well cleared, and banished, only because, though
the Gospel be offered unto al, yet seeing al receive not the knowledge of the
truth: Therefore it is just with God to give up men to strong delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. 12.
to believe lies: and so Satan becomes, not only a lying spirit in the mouth of
the Prophets, 1. Reg. 22.
to deceive unstable souls, but taking even seven spirits worse, Luke 11.
as the doctrine of the Gospel, decays in it purity, and so becomes a Broker
to profaneness: so together with corruption of Doctrine, Popish delusions
crept in again, to beguile and enthrall unstable souls: And among these
Delusions, Witchcraft not the least, has again got some life and power,
where the Gospel has been revealed. And that,

1 By being defended and justified by godless men, Scot. and alij
as if there were no such thing, that it is but a conceit.

2 Being detected, yet is it not punished thoroughly. The Blesser escapes, and
the silly people that run to this white Devil, are let alone.

Which, Use.
as it may teach the wise to see the plague, and hide himself, so it may
resolve us concerning the places where Witches haunt usually. Of the places
where Witches haunt,


either in places of ignorance, In what places witches most abound, and how.
and there in more gross and sensible manner, or else in Places of knowledge
abused, where Hypocrisy and carnal wisdom, has thrust out the power of
synceritie: There Satan returns with seven worse spirits, Witchcraft is
embraced and countenanced of men, So much the more dangerously, by how much now
Witches are become great Professors, and followers of the Word, have attained
some knowledge, and pretend great holiness, and honesty; whereby as it
appears that Satan is now transformed into an Angel of light; so are we
informed hereby the rather to arm our selves against such cunning and
desperate policies, which now especially are plotted to the ensnaring of our
souls.

CHAP. XI.
Of the diverse kinds of Witches, and their effects.

HItherto of the difference of Witches, in regard of their Training to, and
interessing in their Trade.

Now let us further consider of their several kinds and effects. Howsoever
Satan does especially by this Art of Witchcraft, reign in the children of
disobedience, and does generally aim at the destruction of the soul; yet as
formerly he varied his pollices, according to the several Ages of the world,
and diverse dispositions and affections of men, in the enticing of them to this
Mystery; so does he not want his dangerous snares to detain them in his
obedience, and that by limiting his power in such several manner unto each,
that so they may confirm each other in their Trade, and by their mutual
references to each other, do more mischief in the world.

And therefore as Fear and Love are two special bonds to bind to obedience,
Policy of Satanin limiting of his power to Bad Witches.
therefore has the Divine Providence so disposed, that Satan's power in some,
shall be restrained only to do hurt, that so such as will not Fear God, may
by this means stand in awe of the devil, and of the Witch his servant, who
are called Bad Witches.

And so contrariwise, there are others who by Divine Justice, are given up to
Satan's power with this limitation only, To good Witches or Blessers.
to help and do good, and these are called Good Witches, Blessers, Wise, and
Cunning-women. And this Divine Dispensation is both Suitable to the parties who
are limited thereby, and also very available for the execution of the Divine
Justice.

I say suitable it is to the several qualities of the parties, thus diversely
dispensed, whereof some being vainglorious and drowned in Popery are thereby
carried with the applause of Good Works, and therefore are fitted by Satan
thereunto: Others are prone to malice, discontent, covetousness, etc. and so
are likewise fitted by the Devil, with power to be avenged.

And does not the just and holy God, Gods wisdom in this diversity.
by this diversity and restraint of Satan's power, accomplish most wisely his
just wrath upon the wicked?

Yea certainly, and that not only upon the unbelieving world, but upon the
very Witches themselves. As for the unbelieving and wicked Generations they are
hurt by the one, In confou^ding the unbelieving world
that they may with the danger of their souls seek help of the other: And
they have help by the one, that so, as a punishment of their infidelity they
may be given up again to be hurt of the other. And so betwixt the Good Witch
and the Bad, afflictions are increased, and yet repentance excluded, repentance
excluded,
and so the measure of sin is made up among the children of disobedience,
that so the measure of vengeance may accordingly be inflicted.

And does not this also very wisely, In conde^ning the Witches.
further the damnation of the Witches themselves.

Yea certainly, the Bad Witch, by hurting, makes way for the good Witches
help, and so thereby increases her sin; and the Good Witch in helping
bewrayes the Bad Witch, and so, many times, brings her to the Gallows.

The Good Witch in helping makes more work for the Bad, who being suspected,
reuengeth her self usually by doing more mischief, and so thereby ripens her
sin to the Gallows, and so still makes more work for the Blesser to
increase her condemnation. The Bad Witch, because she does hurt, is hated of
the world, and so thereby increases her malice, and does more harm. The good
Witch is honored, and reputed as a God, because she does good, and so is
hardened in her sin and ripeneth the same, by adding to all former sins,
final impenitencie, and so usually commits the unpardonable sin.

Thus does the providence of God appear in the diverse dispensation of his
judgments, by these instruments of his fierce wrath.

Who in these days are for the most part women. Witches for the most part
women.


1 Both because these are commonly more ignorant, and therefore fitter to be
ensnared.

2 And also usually more ambitious and desirous of Soueraignety, the rather
because they are bound to subjection.

3 And are also more obstinate where they take, and so fitter to stick to it.

4 And by reason of their sex and simplicity have more means to hide this
sin, or else to escape punishment, as being more capable of compassion, in
regard of necessary occasions of childbearing, etc.

SECTIO. I.
Of the Bad Witch.

THus she is so called, because she has only power from Satan to do hurt, Of
the bad Witch.
and that by special league and conenant with Satan.

And this is also called the binding Witch, in a blasphemous imitation of that
Divine power of binding and afflicting which peculiarly belongs unto the
glorious Lord: Ose. 6. 1.

Her power extends in show even as her Masters Satan does, not only upon
the dumb and senseless creatures to breed terror and inconvenience to man,
but even upon man himself, Both upon his body to strike it with all kinds of
diseases, yea with death it self, Job. 1. 17.

As also upon the soul, to afflict with Madness, security, etc.

And yet her power is restrained only to do hurt, and that in diverse
respects, as you have partly heard: especially,

1 That hereby Satan's power and government may be more advanced in this
diverse dispensation of his gifts.

2 That the Bad Witch may be confouaded in her power, seeing it is not
paramount, she cannot help what is hurt.

3 That way hereby may be made for ber detection by the Blesser.

4 That the Good Witch may by this means vent all his cousening ways of
spells, charms, etc. to help withal.

SECT. III.
Of an ordinary means whereby these Bad Witches seem to effect their
mischiefs, namely, by cursing: where of Satan's policy in coloring his
assistance hereby, and deceiving and hardening the Witch in her sin.

AS the Bad Witch has power to hurt, Why Bad Witches use cursing.
so as it is observed, does she usually execute this power.

1 By horrible and fearful cursings and execerations of those Parties whom she
malignes.

Inuocating upon her bare knees (for so the manner is) the vengeance of God
upon them. And if she can conveniently to their faces, breathing out these
fearful curses and direful execrations against them.

So (not to use further instance) is it confessed, that this condemned captive
used ordinarily to curse her neighbors, and thereby (as she vaunted) to get
the upper hand of them.

And this in an Apish and blasphemous imitation of the Divine Justice, which by
such manner of execrations is denounced against the wicked, Deuteron. 28.
Leuiticus 26. Judges 5. Curse ye Meros, etc.

Now the Policy of Satan in provoking to these execrations is manifold.
Satan's Policy to deceive others.
As not only,

1 Hereby to increase the Witches sin, by enraging her soul through these
cursings to malice and revenge.

But hereby also the Lord in his Justice Returns her cursings on her own
pate, though she may hurt the bodies of others thereby, yet the chief hurt
shall rebound upon her own soul.

The wrath of God like a river of Brimstone inflaming those Execrations which
the accursed caitife sends up to Heaven, and so returning them back upon the
Author thereof: and is to seal up hereby unto her eternal vengeance, yet so,
as that it is very fearfully cloaked even by these cursings.

For hereby Satan not only persuades the Witch, that whatsoever evil
ensues, proceeds from the virtue of that curse, and not from his secret help.

But in that the name of God is inuocated to take vengeance on these parties,
thereby also the power of Satan is further concealed: as if now the Lord did
answer the desires of these Monsters.

And so, in that he does answer them, therefore they are in great request
with him: yea in that things succeed according to their cursings, hereby is
arrogated the power of almighty God, and so the Witch puffed up with conceit
of divine authority.

SECTIO IV.
Of Good Witches or Blessers, as we term them: Here first of their Nature
and Condition.

AS the Badde Witch has only power to hurt: what good witches are with their
power.
So the Good Witch or Blesser has only faculty to do good: to help, etc.
And that also by consent, in a league with the devil: And is therefore
blasphemously termed The Unbinding Witch, as being able to undo what the other
has done.

And this Satan disposes in notable Policy, Satan's policy herein.
not only that some order may appear in his kingdom of Darkness,
whereupon it may the rather be obeyed; but especially, advancing hereby his
imaginary power in the hearts of his Proselites, that he is as God, able to
do all things, to hurt, and help, etc. and thereby secretly to delude his
Scholars, that if they can unbind others, why may they not undo their own
bonds: what reckoning to be made of any Covenant with Satan, seeing he will
thus be content to have his works dissolved, etc.

And this the rather, because he so diuides his gifts, as may be thought; not
to one all, but to each several: whereby he I both blasphemously imitates the
divine providence; 2 ties the Witches more obsequiously unto him, 3 makes show
of absolute liberty in his dispensation, 4 and hereby sits his instruments
to do more mischief, 5 and yet secureth them in their damnable estate: as
being by this means more serviceable to each other.

SECTIO IIII.
That their skill in helping to things that are stolen, and healing diseases,
is not a gift of GOD: whereupon they are accounted Good, but rather they do
it certainly by the help of Satan.

THat it is not of God, appearth, 1 By the Quality of their persons, Of the
power of blessers, in healing and restoring stolen goods, whether it be of God.
because they are generally, ignorant, profane, abominable, and therefore the
Lord will not reveal such secrets unto them, Psalm 25. But unto them that
fear him.

2 By the Consideration of the time, wherein these Revelations are pretended:
Proved by the Time.
which being the time of the Gospel established, when an ordinary means of
revealing Gods will is on foot; therefore now we having the Word, as we may
not expect such Revelations, so they are not granted to us, from the Lord our
God.

Especially, Secondly, Matter of revelation
if we consider the matter pretended to be revealed, which is not any
necessary thing, concerning Salvation, but only some particular accidental
matter, concerning the present estate of this life, for which we find not that
there were any Revelations from the Lord, Revelation of what.
but only concerning the general state of Kingdoms, and as it concerned the
Spiritual good of the Church.

Besides, Thirdly, Manner of revelation
if we consider the manner of the Revelation, which is neither by Gods spirit
immediately, nor by an Angel from heaven, not by the soul of some man, that is
formerly dead, and that in some Dream or Vision, for such were the Revelations
from the Lord; but by seeing in the picture of men in a Glass, etc. which may
easily, and must necessarily be done by Satan, as both provoking the thief to
steal, and being able to represent his Image in the Glass as personating him
before the Glass, and so the Reflection must needs return the like
resemblance.

And this must necessarily follow, Fourthly, by the end of this revelation.
if we consider the end of this Revelation; which is, to have goods restored;
which being utterly unlawful, because we should rest contented with this
loss, as a chasticement for sin, and so rather go to God, to enquire the
cause of the loss, and to have sin pardoned, then to run to the wise woman
to have the loss restored.

So that the thing being unlawful, it is just with GOD, to leave us to seek
unlawful means, that so one sin may be the punishment of another.

Lastly, Fifthly, not warranted by the word.
seeing whatsoever help is lawfully to be used in any extremity is plainly
commended to us in the word: Therefore, seeing the word does directly condemn
all these indirect and diu ellish helps, and commands 1 to seek help
principally from the Prophets of the Lord, and 2 so to use means of Physic,
Note.
as the diseases require. Therefore it plainly folows, that seeing these
blessers are neither acquainted with Gods word, nor skillful in Physic; the
help that they minister must needs come from Satan, whose Creatures, and
vassals they now are, who colors his devilish help, both with some formal
prayers, and other medicines, that so he may more dangerously beguile unstable
souls.

This shall appear yet more clearly unto us, if we consider further.

That although these Wisards pretend to help by holy means, Note this.
yet, were there no other evidence to prove their affistance from Satan, 6 By
the strange torments upon them.
this one were sufficient, That these Blessers are not only strangely
tormented, while they are performing this cure, but are even afflicted with the
same diseases, which for the present, they seek to remove from others.

Now, that this is the work of Satan, is manifest.

1 Because the old Sybills and other Witches were usually so tormented, when
they gave their Oracles, who are generally concluded to be Satan's prophets.

2 This their strange tormenting, in this pretended good act, argues that it
is not of God, who would not so requite his servants, whom he sets on work,
especially doing his will, But rather of Satan, who by these torments
convinces them of the evil of their work, and confounds hereby the
unbelieving world, that will seek to such for help: Especially, if we
consider further

That whereas there is a reciprocal covenant between Satan and the Blesser,
as has been declared, that as the Devil must do what the Witch would have
him, so the Witch must endure what Satan will impose. If now it falls out, Note.
that the Disease which the Witch would have removed from another, shall be
transported upon her self, as a pledge of further torments, to confound her in
her present power, and yet to deceive her withal, as if by this strange
alteration and torment she descrued to obtain this pre-eminence, as to help
others, she has bought it dearly: And so yet further to deceive, Note.
as if because she has her pain here, therefore she shall avoid further
reckoning: Is not the justice of God admirable here? Is not his wisdom
wonderful to take the wise in their own craftiness?

SECTIO. V.
Of the Covenant whereby these Blessers bind themselves to do good, namely,
the Belief of men, whether they can benefit any that do not bleeue in them:
and why they are beneficial to such: And so consequently of the danger of
these Good Witches, and that they are far more dangerous then the Bad.

As Satan binds his servants unto his obeisance by a special contract and
covenant (as has been showed thoroughly before) so the good Witch, Of the
covenant of the Blesser, namely, that she must be credited.
being lessoned by her accursed Master, does hereby endeavor to perform truest
service unto him, even by hunting after and ensnaring the precious souls of
men: And to this purpose she has no more dangerous snare then this condition
of Faith, that those who will have help or succor at her hands, must believe
she can do them good.

For whereas Faith is the only Bond whereby God is knit unto man, and man unto
God: If therefore Satan can but once break this bond; as he does hereby:

First, exelude us the especial providence of the Almighty.

Secondly, so does he make way hereby, for the full possessing, and prevailing
over us.

Thirdly, and hence it is that there must be no help without this Belief in
the Witches ability hereunto: That so the Blesser also being puffed up with a
conceit of some Divine Power, might so therein, not only Intrude into the
Office of the Messiah, and thereby to deprive her self utterly of the benefit
of his sacrifice; but also even make a mock of the Son of God by translating
that precious gift of Faith, Note.
which only entends salvation, to the attaining of every base and unfit
trifle, and horrible wickedness, yea offering up hereby the deceived soul,
as a Sacrifice unto Satan, which cost the precious blood of the Son of God.

Fourthly, especially, herein does appear the desperate pride and malice of
Satan against Jesus Christ and his members.

1 As advancing himself hereby in Christ's steed, in the deceived hearts of
the unbelievers.

2 And robbing him, not only of that proper homage which is due from the
creature, namely, to depend on it Savior:

3 But also of the souls of those that are thus ensnared.

4 As detaining them thereby in Atheism and contempt of Gods Ordinances for
salvation,

5 And emboldening them to all desperate and outrageous courses upon
presumption of help from these incarnate devils.

6 And soripening thereby unto eternal vengeance. And this the rather, because
by this condition of Faith thus required for help;

7 It is thereby the rather warranted to come from God.

8 And so both the Witches authority and power justified to this end, as
Divine, even a special Gift of God to such purposes.

9 As also the peoples seeking to such means is colored.

10 And so, in that help hereby is procured for many wicked ends, therefore
fearful and blaspemous conceits are hereby nourished in the minds of
unbelievers, Note.
concerning the Divine Nature; As if the Lord should approve of sin, Psalm. 50.
that he furthers, and gives success thereto. And when this gappe is once
opened, how is sin committed with greediness? How is the deceived soul
drunke^ in security? How by this security prepared to sudden destruction? And
therefore though it were enough for Satan to do good at the command of the
Blesser, to hold her surer unto him by these devotions: Yet seeing he is a
roaring Lion, geing about seeking whom he may devour; does he also yet both
further hereby the damnation of the Sorceresse, in making her an instrument (
by this condition of Faith) to ensnare the souls of men, and so by the same
means, increases his prey, in deceiving such unstable souls who depend upon
such dangerous help.

And therefore though no doubt, by Divine permission, he could help one with
the Good Witches warrant (this being but his color to deceive her and others)
and so much more (if she employed him) without the Faith of the parties, and
happily does tender some trifling help without this Covenant (to believe) to
toll the simple on, to seek further to him: Yet seeing he specially is all
these, aims at the souls destruction, and as the Divine executioner to
prevail in the children of disobedience: Therefore seeing the World generally
will not receive the knowledge of the truth, shall it not be given up to
believe lies? 2. Thessalonians 2. 11. 12. Even to seek unto Satan, forsaking
God, etc. so to buy his help with the danger of their souls: In hunting after
which, this adversary is now grown so cunning, as that howsoever heretofore
in Times of Ignorance, he used more carnal and palpable means for the
ensnaring of them; Yet since the Gospel of Jesus Christ has been advanced,
and the knowledge thereof has in some good measure banished gross ignorance
in many places, therefore does Satan suite himself accordingly: And so, though
he require real covenants of some, Note the policy of Satan in times of
knowledge.
in some cases, yet is he contented also with Mental Covenants, as being able
to guess at the mind by some outward inclinations and distempers, and so does
more cunningly and dangerously deceive even the professors of this Age, whom
seeing they profess to believe in Christ, therefore will he not require an
open covenant to believe in him: As contenting himself:

1 That they allow help to be sought from such means.

2 That in case of necessity they will not stick to seek themselves.

3 That they do not as well further the Blesser, Note.
as the Bad Witch to punishment, etc.

All which, and such like, he takes as arguments of their secret confidence in
him, as approving his power, and justifying the lawfulness of such means.

SECTIO. VII.
Whether the good Witch can hurt, and the hurting Witch help.

BY that which has been said before concerning the limitation of the power of
these Witches, it may seem to be concluded, that the Good Witch can only
help, and the Bad Witch only can hurt.

But yet Experience seems to prove the contrary, not only in Hartley, that
famous Coniurer of Lancashire, which betwitched Mr. Starkie of Clee-worthes
Children, who was also a great Blesser, etc. And so in diverse others: But
especially in the Witch that was the principal occasion of this Treatise.

For it appears by her examinations, that she both used to forespeake (as
they call it) that is to hurt, and weary things, as also to bless the same
again, and so to help as well as to hurt: As appears by the Charm
hereafter set down to this end.

To which we answer.

That though happily by Covenant Satan binds himself no further but to the
Blesser to help, and to the Bad Witch to hurt, because

Either they desire no further, or else this limitation may serve for such end
as heretofore.

Yet herein also does Satan's cunning appear notably, that if upon such
composition only to hurt or help, Note Satan's cunning.
he yet prove better then his bargain, as to assist such to help who have
done hurt, etc, By this means, he binds his servants more obsequiously unto
him; and yet deceiues them more grossly.

As giving them occasion now to conceive, That seeing he couenanted with them
only to hurt or help: If now it shall appear that the Bad Witch can also
help,

Is not this a notable delusion to flatter her, that she has some
extraordinary power above what Satan can confer unto her, and so that the
League between them is disanulled and broken: She is now free (as she thinks)
and rather by some Divine Assistance can undo and help what is fore-spoken, as
they use to speak?

And seeing Satan in all these Covenants with the Witch, Note the ouer-ruling
power of God.
is no Free Agent, but the Lords Executioner to run and stay at his pleasure:
As the Lord therefore has special ends in the disposing of this Covenant to
hurt or help; so may he not have special purpose in this, exceeding therein,
that the same that hurts may also help, and the same that helps may also
hurt?

Yea certainly: The Lords purpose in permitting and wisely ordering these
Compacts between Satan and the Witch to hurt or help; using the Devil herein
as the instrument of his Divine Justice upon the children of disobedience, has
been in some poor measure manifested heretofore: And hereby

Does He wisely and gloriously make manifest, Note this.
that Satan is but his Vassal, that all Covenants between the Witch and him,
for only hurting and helping, are subordinate to his power, alterable at his
pleasure, that though Satan agree with the one Witch to help, and with the
other only to hurt, yet shall the hurting Witch also help, and the helping
Witch hurt, that it may appear also that these Covenants are but Iugling
Tricks between Satan and the Witch, to draw fools to the stocks, and so on
either side to beguile more fearfully: That seeing the Blesser pretends to
help: as she does hereby draw more Proselites after her, for good, so shall
she have power to hurt them, both to keep them the more in awe, Note.
and so to seek unto her more slauishly, and depend the more constantly on her
power; as also when their sin is hereby ripened, to confound them more
fearfully, and so to execute the wrath of God upon them.

And the Badde Witch also, though the Covenant be, That she must only hurt,
that so she may execute her malice upon the bodies of unbelievers, and so
send them to the Blesser for the further destruction of their souls: yet to
spare this labor: and make the delusion more effectual to deceive, may not
the GOD of Wisdom deuolue both these Faculties of hurting and helping to one
person: May he not hereby give way to Satan to advance himself fully in
the hearts of the children of disobedience: as God of this world, to save and
destroy at his pleasure?

And as the Lord in restraining Satan to hurt or help in those diverse
Instruments, would give an understanding heart to consider the limited power of
Satan, and so to depend upon an higher Power of the Divine Majesty: so
seeing the natural and desperate sinner, as he is fast bound to the power of
Satan, even so willingly would he serve none other master: therefore, that
he may serve him the more cheerfully, it is the Justice of GOD, so to give up
to Satan's delusions, as that he shall think he needs serve no other
master.

And hence it proceeds, that the miserable soul affecting a sufficiency in
that God whom it subjects it self unto, able to steed at all assaies;
Therefore, seeing Satan by these Witches labors to erect his Throne in the
hearts of the disobedient: It stands with great policy, that this power of
hurting and helping shall appear in one and the same, both to resemble an
Unity in this Feigned Deity, As also to confirm the conceited Omnipotency,
and sufficiency thereof.

And seeing we are fallen into these evil days, 2. Tim. 3. 2. 3.
wherein iniquity abounds, and ripeneth to the Harvest, 2. Tim. 3. 2, 3.

Does not therefore the admirable Wisdom and Justice of God herein
gloriously shine; that whereas usually the Good Witch has escaped and been
advanced of man, and therefore puffed up with pride, and so provoked to do
mischief; it now pleases the Lord to give her her desire, that she which
helps may also hurt? thereby,

1 To flatter her with a conceit of her Sovereign Power.

2 To nurse her hereby in desperate security.

3 So by this means to ripen her sin, and so to take her napping in her own
counsels.

4 Exposing her to the Sword of the Magistrate, Note.
as having done such mischiefs, and so confounding not only her own
confidence, but the repose of the world in her, who esteems her the only
Goddess, seeks to her for help, etc. Shall not this lesson the unbelieving
Generation not to tamper with her, least though they regard not their souls,
in seeking help from her, yet they may secure their lives and estates in not
meddling with her?

Oh that we could observe the ways of God herein! May we not hence learn
wonderful things? Shall not all Idolatry come to the block? Shall not
Antichrist that great Coniurer, likewise be confounded? Note.
And shall not his open and desperate practices of murdering Princes, and
bringing desolation in the world, justified and taught, now hasten him to his
confusion, who heretofore has been esteemed the common Papa, the father and
giver of life, and salvation to the sons of men?

SECT. VIII.
BY this which has been said, Use 1.
it appears now plainly:

That the Blesser or good Witch (as we term her) is far more dangerous then
the Badde or hurting Witch: The good Witch most dangerous.
And,

1 That because first she is less suspected and feared then the other, and
therefore is like to do more mischeife.

2 Nay she is magnified and adored among men as a Demi Goddess, etc. and so
causes men to commit Idolatry to her by putting confidence in her.

3 She yields help for the satisfying of the flesh, and so hardness in
sin procures hope of longer life, excludes Repentance, withdraws from the
love of the Word, and lawful means, nourishes in ignorance, profaneness,
etc.

4 The badde Witch usually is haled to punishment, and so is prevented of much
evil doing, and happily by this means brought to repentance: But the Blesser
is spared, and so permitted to do more mischief, under pretense of
well-doing, and thereby ripeneth her self more fearfully to vengeance.

5 She yields help at a very desperate rate; namely, the endangering of
the soul: and, What will it profit a man to win the whole world, and loose
the same? Math. 16. 26,

And so also is her estate most dangerous and fearful in regard of herself,
as by requiring this condition of faith, even despiting the spirit of grace,
and making a mock of the Son of God: and so usually committing that
unpardonable sin, Hebr. 6. 4. 10. 16. 17.

And therefore this serves:

1 For the reproof of the Times wherein these Darlings of Satan are so
embraced and adored.

2 It is an Instruction to the Magistrate, to bend the edge of his sword
against these most dangerous Instruments: and to give way unto the Gospel, to
cut them down.

3 It is a Caveat to the people, to take heed of these snares, to seek after
knowledge, and submit to holy means, that so the Lord may have mercy on their
souls, that being within his protection, they may be better secured
concerning their bodies.

The end of the first Book.
THE MYSTERY OF WITCHCRAFT:

The second Book.

Describing,
1 The Power and Effects thereof. 2 The Detection of Witches, with the means
thereto. 3 The remedies against Witchcraft. 4 The Punishment of Witches, with
the nature and lawfulnes thereof.
AT LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1617.

THE MYSTERY OF WITCHCRAFT.
The second Book.
CHAP. I.
Of the Power of Witches, what they are able to do, and of Satan's cunning
sleights and stratagems herein.

THe maine thing whereby Satan fetches over these monsters, Of the power of
witches.
and holds them in his obeisance: is that great power which he deuolueth unto
the^. Whereby being able, in show, to do what they list, they are so
transported with Pride, and wholly blinded therewith, that either they are
hereby secured in their estates, seeing they can do such Feats, or else
careless altogether thereof, for the intending and prosecuting of wonderful
things.

It shall not therefore be amiss in the next place, having proved 1 That there
are Witches. 2 How they attain to this high mystery; and, 3 What several
kinds there are of them.


To add now somewhat concerning this their extraordinary power.

That so we may be rightly informed how far they are able to prevail: and
withal, may discern how notably they are abused by Satan making them believe
that their power is far greater then indeed it is.

To this purpose consider we these two things.

First, wherein this power of Witches is restrained: and,

Secondly, wherein it is enlarged, and particularly aduaunceth it self,
Concerning the first.

SECTIO I.
That the Witches Power is less then it seems, as appears;

FIrst, The power of wiches restrained, 1 By the Lord.
because she is restrained by the Lord, that she can not hurt when she would.

As, not the children of God always whom she maliceth.

Neither these so far as she would: In regard of the Elect.
as not at all to hurt their souls finally:

No not usually to take away life.

Nor upon each occasion, as she is provoked: The Lord restraining her in love
unto his Children, and for the glory of his great name: Defending his Servants
by the attendance of his holy Angels, Psalm 91. That the evil one shall not
do them any violence.

Neither wicked men, In respect of the wicked.
so far as she would, and intends.

As, not all, at all times, whom she maliceth: The Lord in his Justice
brideling her, 1 for the further confusion of the Witch: 2 for the advancement
of his patience to the wicked: 3 for the fatting of them up hereby to the day
of slaughter, and to harden them in their Atheism, that there are no Witches,
no Devils, no Hell, no Heaven, but what is in this life.

Neither to take life from those whom she afflicts, at all times: that so
they may still enjoy greater Patience, and thereby, either be brought to
repentance, by the distemper of the chasticement, or be made inexcusable.

And this, so is disposed:

1 Both for the increase of her malice, and so ripening of her sin, being
disappoynted, and restrained, it raging more within, the more it is outwardly
curbed, and so fretting against God, when she cannot have her will of men: yea
raging, and many times tearing her self, when she is brideled from hurting
others.

2 As also for the confusion of her skill and conceited kingdom, as being now
enthralled, and justly brideled, that so horror of conscience hereby
increasing, she may have her comdemnation sealed up, and hereby be provoked to
renew her covenant with Satan to obtain a greter measure of power, to make him
more serviceable to her.

3 And the Lord has an especial aim herein, for the more orderly and comely
government of the world; which is thus graciously preserved and advanced:
whereas, if Witches might have their wills to hurt whom and how far they list:
neither good Magistrate nor Minister should stand, none should be mightier then
they to control them, none holier to confound the^: their rage, envy, and
covetousness would make confusion and desolation every where, and so the
providence of God would be hardened, and the works of his government hindered
and disgraced in the world.

SECTIO. II.
Her Power is less then it seems.

1 Because Satan does many things by divine dispe^satio^ imediatly, Satan does
many things without the witch.
which yet notwithstanding he fathereth on the Witch: and seems to do at her
sending, which yet he does by his skill, in Natural Temperatures of the bodies
of Creatures, and their diseased estates; Note.
And so being able to guess at the times, Gifford by his skill.
when they will come to their Crisis, and are like to speed: then speeds he to
the witch, prouoks her to malice the parties, and so offers to be sent to
execute that malice, which falling out at the time when the Witch sends, she
thereupon conceiues, that she is the Author of the hurt. She confesses it a
often on the gallows; whereas all this is but Satan's immediate work: and yet
she justly punished, Note.
for dealing with Satan, who thus deceiues.

1 To hasten her to judgment.

2 To satisfy the rage of the world against her, and thereby either to make
them guilty of shedding innocent blood, and so to increase their sin.

3 To obtain his prey of her soul more speedily.

4 And so to seek a new master, or dame, to increase his kingdom.

5 But his especial policy herein is: by fathering it on the Witch, to make
work for the good Witch. Now they must run to her; help must be had, and
what more ready then the cunning woman, especially seeing she does it with so
little cost? and does it with so good prayers, at the least, procures ease,
which Nature is satisfied with, though it is bought at a dear rate, even with
horrible and blasphemous abuses of Gods name, cursed confidence in Satan, etc.

6 And seeing we are many times conceited and suspicious of our neighbors,
ready to judge uncharitably and rashly of them: Note.
does not Satan further the conceit by deluding the Witch, as to think that
Satan did such things at her sending, Deluding the Witches senses.
which also Satan in his policy must have published, to confirm us in our
uncharitable and crucell conceit, and so thereby provoke us further to shed
innocent blood.

Secondly, Satan does also many things by deluding her senses: making her to
believe that which is not, and so deceives her in the conceit of her power: As
that she is transformed into a Cat and Hare, and so can enter into places the
doors being fast, which is contrary to a natural body, etc.

For though Peter came out of prison and the doors all locked, How Peter came
out of the prison, the doors being shut.
yet was this done; First, by the mighty power of God: Secondly, nothing was
done, but what might stand with the condition of a natural body. The doors by
the power of God were opened, and so gave place to the body. The body was not
contracted and exininated to pierce the same: neither could the quality of the
body endure the pain, neither the quantity be dispoyled of it dimensions.

As for that Dream of the spirits transporting the body lying dead in the
bed, Refutatio^ of that conceit, that the soul returns to the dead body
and returning to it again afterward: This being contrary to the divine
decree, That the soul being separated from the body, should return to it
again, till the Resurrection: it must needs be a delusion and forgerie of
Satan.

Thirdly, 3 restraint by composition.
the Witches power is restrained by Composition and Covenant with the Devil,
as the Good Witch must only help, and the Bad Witch she must only hurt: the
one must be accounted the binding Witch, that other the unbinding: The Policy
of Satan herein has been partly discovered before. As also the justice of
God in confounding this covenant, and enlarging this power is laid down
hereafter.

Fourthly, the power at least of the good Witch, 4 restraint by the faith of
the Patients.
is restrained to the faith of the party whom she intends to help: Either he
must believe, she can help him, or else, he shall receive no good from her; Of
the reason and use hereof elsewhere.

Fifthly, Fifthly, restraint by the magistrate
the power of all Witches is restrained by the authority of the Magistrate.
For though, if a private person detain them, they may either hurt or escape,
yet if once the magistrate has arrested them, Satan's power cease, in being
not now able to hinder and defraud the Justice of the Almighty: And lastly, it
is also restrained to the good of the Church. To this end examine we

SECTIO III.
Whether seeing Satan has power from God, First quere
to afflict man, that he does the rather more hurt, by the means of witches

NO question, seeing we are apt to distrust God, and depend upon those, and to
forsake Gods word; therefore it is just with God, to give us up to be deceived
by them: so that, it is not for the Witches sake, but for the wickedness of man,
that Satan's power is enlarged: both for the Witches further condemnation, whose
sin is hereby increased,

And also, Note.
for the punishment of man's horrible and strange sins: by those strange and
fearful plagues, especially to condemn the infidelity of men, in fearing or
seeking to these.

Only herein observe the policy of Satan, Satan's policy herein.
who though he have power from God, yet he will not execute it, but as sent
from the Witch, or at least, seeming so; that so he may both divert the mind of
man from God, and so nourish him in ignorance and Atheism, as fearing and
respecting the Witch more then God;

As also, that he may carry the mind from home, from the consideration of our
own vileness, and wickedness, to look abroad to the Witch, to observe her
malice, and so to increase our rage against her, and thereby increase our
sin, and yield her more power over us; and thereby still to send the mind
from God, and his true means of help, to the cunning woman, etc.

SECTIO IIII.
Whether Witches may have power over Gods children. Second quere.


NO doubt they may have it, so far as to afflict the body, because these
outward crosses are common to all, Eccles. 9. 1.

And we are subject to Infidelity, Gods chidren may be afflicted by
and so to Satan's power.

Yea we are ignorant who are Witches, and so many times are chastized for our
foolish charity in relieuing them.

3 Yea, we may rashly condemn and censure them: witches In body. In soul.
and therefore be liable to the hand of Almighty God by them.

I And so by sympathy with the body, the soul may be afflicted: yea Satan 2
may further afflict the soul, by reason that it cannot brook so well the
bodily misery, by working upon the impatiencie thereof, and so forcing it to
murmuring; yea to a kind of despair: the rather, because the children of God,
through ignorance or extremity of pains, may by themselves, or others use
such unlawful means, or though they use Physic, and some such subordinate
lawful helps; yet the principal is neglected, Repentance for sin, and
Prayer unto God.

And seeing all things are alike to all men; Eccl. 9. 1. 2
may not Satan work so upon the mind, as by such or the like disposition to
bring it to many, and such like raging fittes, either tampering with the
complexion, as melancholy, etc. or furthering those passions of discontent and
despair, by leading them heereto.

And the Providence of God in using Satan as an instrument, Why gods children
may be chastized by witches
to inflict by Witchcraft, these chasticements upon his children, is manifold.

As first, to humble his children: that they shall not escape this scourge, as
well as others: so I remember the Lady Hales complained; What could I have no
other affliction but this, I could have endured any, so it had not been by
this, etc.

2 To comfort his servants, that seeing they shall in this greatest affliction
have a comfortable issue to conquer Satan, therefore heerevpon they may build
the certainety of their salvation: As also,

3 To instruct them, that seeing Satan may have power to take away life, and
yet not to hurt the soul finally, therefore here is the trial of their
Faith, though the Lord should kill them yet to trust in him; Job. 13. 15.
here the trial of their obedience, to yield up life into Gods hands; here
also their Wisdom tried, Acts 20.
not to measure Gods favor by outward things, not to set by this life, which
Satan may prevail against.

And has not the Lord in this affliction of his Saints, The wicked hereby
stumbled.
some further use for the stumbling block of an unbelieving Generation?

Yea surely, and that many ways:

1 Both to flatter them, that their estate is good, Note.
seeing the godly fare as bad as they do.

2 And also to stagger them, that their estate is evil; seeing, if Gods
children are thus afflicted, for all their knowledge, and holiness in this
life, what shall become of them, that have no knowledge, hate holiness, etc.

3 And herein yet most dangerously to stumble them, that seeing the knowledge
and holiness of the Saints cannot free them from the power of Satan, therefore
away with knowledge, welfare ignorance; what boots it to be precise? Note.
Let us live as we list.

Nay seeing these means, cannot preserve, Why may we not seek to other? and
so a gap is open to all unlawful means.

Especially, if we observe Satan's policy herein, who usually being sent to
afflict some holy one, Note Satan's policy in the affliction of the Saints.
returns as confounded, he cannot do it, because they have Faith, thereby
intending, that none that have Faith, are subject to his power: and so puffing
up even the best with security, and thereby preparing them through vain
confidence to his malice: So persuading the world, that he can touch any that
has not faith, and so still robbing God of his glory; as if the let were not
in his free providence, but in the goodness of man: As if the Lord did not
freely execute his providence, but was bounded therein by somewhat in man. And
then he must be sent to the child of the faithful father, and prevail there,
as if the Faith of the Parents did not hold Gods protection over their tender
Infants, as well as over themselves: or the Child, because he has power over
him, is excluded Gods protection, has not Faith, is not of the faithful feed.

And if now at the length it shall appear, that Satan, though he have
returned as disappoynted by the Faith of the Saints, yet shall prevail over
any, to afflict and torment them: Behold then the dangerous delusions: Either
this matter of Faith is but a mockery, seeing it cannot resist Satan: why
should it not repel him on the one side, as well as on the other, If there
were any such thing, or it had any such power?

Or else, the Saints may loose their Faith: and so, if Satan prevail against
life, he must then also prevail against Faith, for the utter abolishing of the
power thereof.

And what difference then between the wicked and godly?

Thus may the Saints be subject to this affliction: and thus may the world
stumble thereat.

SECTIO V.
And yet in all these afflictions much differ from the wicked.

1 AS both in the cause of the affliction. Diffrence between the godly and the
wicked in their afflictions. Math. 25.


2 In the measure of it.

3 In the issue thereof,

For the cause, If the Lord afflict his children with this scourge, neither is
it in anger, Psalm. 6. 1.
or simply as a punishment of sin, though the Lord may intend the chasticement
of the sinner hereby: 1 Difference in the cause.
But especially, 1. To Try their faith: 2. To provoke to repentance: 3. And so
to take them hereby out of this miserable world.

But in the wicked it is otherwise: The Lord is angry when he leaves them to
Satan, he entends the discovery of their Infidelity, and unmasking of their
hypocrisy: By this sharp affliction he awakens hereby their drowsy
conscience, and so in the horror thereof, seals up unto them eternal
vengeance, and leaving them to be releiued by carnal means, subjects them
thereby more surely to the power of Satan, Note.
by whom, making up, in this renewing of their days, the measure of their sin,
they are ripened and hastened to the day of vengeance. 2 Difference in the
measure.


Thus they differ in the cause.

2 As for the measure, the affliction either reaches only to touch the body,
or else if the soul bear a part, still the hand of the Lord is put under,
Psalm. 37. 24. comforts are supplied according to the affliction: or the sharper
affliction, prepares to more sound and heavenly consolation.

But for the wicked it is not so with them: The soul is especially aimed at by
the malice of Satan, and therefore, either the body is so smitten to drive the
soul to despair, or else by sending it to unlawful means, the soul is more
fearfully ensnared by confidence in Satan, and so hastened to it just and
unavoidable confusion: And thus they differ in regard of the measure.

3 For the Issue, 3 Difference in the issue.
The Saints, If they escape out this affliction, 1 are more experienced in
Satan's subtlety 2 more enabled to comfort, and relieve others, 3 more purged
of carnal confidence, 4 more humbled and cast upon the mighty power of God, 5
more quickened in faith, 6 more weaned from the love of the world, 7 more wary
to keep themselves within Gods protection, more patient under the cross, 8
more prepared to death, 9 more ready for the Lord. And therefore,

If they are translated hereby, they make an happy exchange of sin; for
perfect holiness, of misery for eternity, of transitory for eternal
happiness, of deceitful friends for the fellowship and eternal communion of
the thrice blessed God, that innumerable company of heavenly spirits and
souls of the righteous; the inseperable union with Jesus Christ their Savior.

But for the wicked; if they escape, that which they seemed to have, is taken
away; they grow worse and worse, filled with all unrighteousness, seven worse
spirits seizing upon them. And if they are taken away, then is the end of all
their vain happiness, and a full pouring out of Gods wrath upon them.

SECTIO VI.
THus we have heard wherein and by what means the Witches power is restrained.
Wherein the witches power is enlarged.


Now let us consider on the other side wherein it appears.

This may be discerned.

1. If we consider the Actions proper to their own persons.

2. As also in their Actions toward others.

Concerning their own persons.

First, it cannot be denied, but that more speedily, Actions concerning their
persons. Speedy motion.
then may stand with the ordinary course of nature, they may assemble
themselves to their meetings, or trudge to do any mischief; as being carried
by Satan's power above the earth, or sea, speedily, for some short space,
Invisible.
not being seen of any: which is not hard for Satan to do, by thickning the
Air under and about them.

As for any further means, whereby they may transport themselves in the likeness
of an Hare, etc. this we have showed before to be but a mere delusion,
notwithstanding any tokens they bring for the proof thereof.

But that they may abuse the bodies of such, Note.
whom they malice to ride upon them, in the night: this howsoever it be not
impossible, yet I take it, it may rather prove a delusion of the parties sense
that is thus pretended to be abused, then any such real taking up of his body
out of bed, and laying him there again, because this may be done with less
ado, and yet deceive more effectually.

Thus of the actions of the Witches toward themselves.

Touching his Actions toward others. Here consider we these things. What the
Witch can do toward others.


1 Their manner of consulting thereon, which is usually in the Church, where
they meet, to worship their master:

Here, 1 the Devil enquireth what each would have done.

2 They return their particular occasions and businesses.

3 Their demand by Satan is granted, and means propounded and tendered to
the execution thereof.

As giving them powders and poisons, composed by his skill, in the secrets of
Nature to take away life, to inflict diseases, and cure the same; and
especially, Note.
to cloak his damnable conueiance heerewith. Teaching them to make Pictures in
Wax or Clay; that by the rosting thereof, the persons whereof they bear the
name, may continually melt and dry away by sickness: And this, in a blasphemous
imitation of the divine power (who used such means to accomplish his miracles,)
the better to color his devilish co^ueiances, which usually are these.

1 To make men and women love and hate one another: a matter possible for him
to do, by persuading the corrupt affections.

2 To lay the sickness of one upon another, as upon Job, Job. 1.
yea to take away life, etc. by such Pictures, though they are no cause
thereof. It being easy for Satan, being a spirit, to weaken and scatter the
spirits of life, Note.
whereby through faintness the party shall sweat out natural moisture. And
so also by weakening the spirits, the stomach shall be weakened: whereby not
being able to breed new nourishment, the old must needs in short time be spent.

3 He can raise tempests, as has been proved before: and,

4 So to breed madness, and,

5 To haunt men and places with spirits, and so by a kind of obsession to vex
and torment them.

6 Yea, he can hinder the operations of nature, and so may be a means to hinder
copulation, and so procreation, and that not only in general: 1 As corrupting
natural heat, that the generating member may not execute accordingly.

2 That though it should pierce into the womb, yet the seed being cold, may
take no effect.

Or else, he may steal away the seed, that it shall not pass into the womb.

But particularly also, though the party may have ability to others, yet to
serve one, for the like reasons, he may be impotent, not able to perform the
work of Generation, Note.
and so deny that duty of marriage, and so happily produce a nullity thereof;
unless by Physic, or some spiritual means his power may be ouerruled, for
which some time is to be granted, and means used.

7 Lastly, Possession
it cannot be denied, howsoever the world would obscure the work of God herein:
that even by the means of witchcraft, Satan may be sent even into bodies of
men, really to possess them. As of old it was usual in the Primitive Church,
and the like punishment continuing for sin, the like means remaining to
remove the scourge. I see not but now it is usual in these later times; as
has appeared evidently by many instances: the Papists themselves acknowledging
as much, and the Gospel herein powerful! to confound Popery, and to justify
the truth hereof.

SECTIO VII.
Of Satan's Policies in the execution of this Power.

ANd first, that he uses Natural medicines, Of natural medicines.
both for helping, and hurting, giving the Badde Witches secret powders, and
poisons to do mischief withal, and directing his White Devils (I mean the
Blessers) to salues and such like medicines, to help their Patients withal.

This he does,

Partly, to make the Blesser believe that it is not Satan's power, Satan's
policy herein.
but rather some virtue in these things, that accomplish such rare events, and
that so they may be more secure, and forget the covenant, and thereby
accomplish their mischiefs with more delight, and greediness.

Partly also, to deceive such as seek unto the Witches. And that by securing
them in the lawfulness of this business, seeing they receive nothing but
lawful means.

2 By causing them to put confidence in the means: seeing through their
infidelity, they prove usually effectual.

3 Thereby to deiect them from lawful means, as Physic, etc.

4 And so to nourish them in blasphemy, contempt of God, and all divine
assistance, to abolish all trust in GOD, and dependancie upon him.

SECTIO VIII.
He uses also Prayers for the helping of diseases.

ANd this, Of prayers
as to color the secret compact more dangerously: So,

To countenance the vain bablings, and repetitions of profane and ignorant
persons.

As also to show his high malice, and derision of these divine ordinances: and
so also,

To mock and confound the lip-labor, and bodily service of the carnal
christian.

And so, to infer, that all second means, as Physic, etc. are needless,
and unprofitable, seeing it may be done by good prayers: and this is a maine
Ground in the ignorant people, Note.
to reject all lawful helps: hence that speech of theirs; God has sent it,
and he can take it away. Wherein Satan's meaning is, to advance himself in
their hearts, to draw them to his devotion, by the use of such prayers, etc. as
being pretended to be from God, are therefore, in this respect, more greedily
entertained.

Especially herein to coosin the Blesser the more desperately, Note.
either by provoking her to rob GOD of his glory, and so to ascribe these
Prayers unto Satan, conceiting hereby some Divine power, not so much in
Satan, who instructs her, as, in her self, that by these means is able to
do such wonderful things; especially seeing, to the doing thereof, a more
strong and certain Faith is arrogated. As being yielded for the reason, why
the Blesser can do that by prayer, which another, using the same prayer,
cannot do, because he cannot believe. And so by this presumption of Faith,
deluding her in the safety of her estate, that she is at least in high favor
with God, in no danger of damnation, whereby she is confirmed in her Practice,
and so makes sure her condemnation.

SECTIO. IX.
Satan shrowds his power Under natural diseases.

ANd does not Satan also shroud his power sometimes very cunningly and
dangerously under natural diseases. As both, being able to judge of the nature
and criseis of them, and so to adioine his power thereto, to the hastening of
death, by preventing the help of Physic, or infatuating the same.

As also hereby, being able to assimilate his malicious and desperate
afflictions of the bodies and souls of men, Note.
to some such like natural diseases, that so his power may be shrouded under
Natures distempers.

Certainly, Experience makes this manifest unto us, And the Policy of Satan
herein is manifold.

And that first to hide his own secret compact under such natural infirmity,
Note Satan's policy herein.
that so he may both deceive the Witch, as imagining, that by her natural
medicines she cures only a natural disease, and so, that her compact with
Satan was either conceited only, or else is now dissolved. But especially,
that he may deceive others hereby; Note.
and that both the parties afflicted; as detayning them by this means from the
searching of their hearts, and yielding themselves under the mighty hand of
God, by unfeigned repentance, laboring to make peace with him, that so they may
be soundly cured: and so sending only to natural means, as if it were but
some ordinary and common infirmity, incident to nature: and so, if it be
cured by such means, (as many times the Lord gives success to the means to
punish our security, and satisfy carnal wisdom) then Satan's power is less
feared, less regarded, whereby he preuailes yet further on the soul, by
nouzeling it in self-conceit of the goodness of it estate, and so the means
are advanced, Gods holy, and ouer-ruling hand abased, and rejected: And the
Witch set in the place of God, and so hereby she preuailes more fearfully:
not only in the hearts of those that are helped, to put confidence in her, but
in others also, who are desirous to be helped at so easy a rate.

And so the skillful Physician (That Ordinance of God appointed hereto) is
neglected and despised; Note.
and so in the issue, the whole glory and Crown redounds to the Devil: His
power is advanced, his kingdom enlarged, the Gospel and Scepter of Jesus
Christ condemned or neglected, and Atheism, yea gross Idolatry, increased
and confirmed.

But if these seeming natural diseases be not cured by these means; Note this.
yet the Credit of the Witch, and Satan's in her, is yet notwithstanding saved.

1. Either, they sought too late.

2. Or, else they did not apply the medicine well.

3. Or, else they did not believe it could do good.

4. Or, it has helped many others.

5. Or, yet it may do good: And therefore seek for more: Go to some other
Blesser, that has better skill: Make peace, with more confidence.

6. Or now, go to the Physician at last, to consume their estate, and so breed
discontent and despair.

7. Or, languish in despair, seeing God is forsaken, or sought too late unto.

And so Satan triumphs in his spoils, Uses.
confounds the unbelieving generation, 1. Satan's Triumph.
that lives securely, notwithstanding such a Messenger from Hell, might rowse
it out, thereof.

And so God is glorified, 2. Gods glory.
in making the world without excuse, that still will live in Ignorance, and
desperate Atheism, in horrible profaneness, and works of the Devil, and
hastening hereby the coming of his holy Son JESUS, with his reward with him,
to recompense to every one according to his works.

CHAP. II.
Of the detection of Witches, and means thereto.

OF the detection and punishment of Witches: That they are to be punished with
death, especially the Blesser and good Witch, as they term her.

SECT. I.
Of unlawful means of detection.

Having discovered the power of Witches, and so followed them to the utmost of
their glory and advancement: Seeing now Pride goes before destruction, and
the glory of the wicked is their shame: Let us now consider of heir Fall and
confusion, and of such means as further the same.

Wherein we may behold the admirable wisdom and power of God, Gods wisdom
herein.
who as he leaves them to their own lusts, to embrace Satan, and submit unto
him, for the obtaining of their desires; so has he so disposed in his
wonderful Justice, that the God whom they worship, when he has them sure his
own, seeing he is greedy of his Prey, and would gladly have other employment
to do more mischief, therefore he cares not how soon the bargain be
performed, and rather then fail, though all other means of detection should
cease, himself will be the instrument to bring his Bear to the Stake: And
this he does,

By Being an instrument for the detection of the Witch, Satan the Author of
discovery.
and yet in such dangerous policy, as that herein also he hunts after
unstable souls, while he seeks to give them content in the discovery of the
Witch which has done them so much mischief. Note.


To this is it, that he has not only The Blesser ready to discover and
detect the Bad Witch, By using the Blesset to discovery.
that so he might thereby increase the poor peoples rage against the Witch,
whereas indeed they should be angry at their sins.

But whereas in their affliction they should seek unto the Lord that smites
them, Os. 6. 1.
by this discovery of the Bad Witch, he increases the reputation of the
Blesser, and so provoke the people more eagerly to run after her.

And now the Good Witch utters easily all her deceitful wares, to the
deluding of the parties that are thus inquisitiue, and many times to the
condemning of innocent blood.

And to this purpose, because people will be loath to credit her word,
concerning the supposed harmer and Bad Witch, therefore she has usually either
some glass wherein to show the party offending: or else has certain
deceitful and Satanicall experiments, to confirm her former detection of the
Witch; As namely, by casting her into the water, sticking of needles, or
bodkins, under the stool where she sits, burning of the thing bewitched, etc.
By which, either she confirms the superstitious people in a wrong conceit, it
being easy for Satan to further these signs heereto; or if they conceive
aright, yet by using these indirect means for discovery, they shall yet
deeplier engage their souls unto the power and malice of Satan.

And therefore though the Bad Witch may be detected by these means: yet
neither is the wise Christian to use these means for the discovery of this
Monster; neither is the Magistrate to admit of this detection, as a sufficient
evidence for the certain discerning and judging of the Witch.

It will then be demanded, What detections and presumptions lawful we may have
to discover a Witch?

To which we answer, That as the Lord has ordained the Punishment of these
offenders, so no doubt he has also disposed the means whereby they may be
detected, that so they may be justly punished.

SECTIO. II.
Of lawful means of detection, And I of Presumptions.

THe means of these Detections are Principally Two. Of lawful means of
detection: and first of presumption.


Examination, and Conviction.

Touching Examination; This is, when the Magistrate makes enquiry concerning
this crime, and that not upon every corrupt passion, or slight occasion, but
upon weighty Presumptions, probably coniecturing of the Witch.

These are:

1 Notorious defamation of this crime, by the most of neighbors which are of
the best report.

2 The Accusation of a fellow Witch, either at examination, or at the day of
death is not to be neglected, because now Authority having seized on hit,
though she may lie before she be discovered, yet now having confessed herself,
she is an Instrument of the Lords Justice, Note.
to satisfy Authority, and clear the innocent, by speaking truth, etc.
(though otherwise she would not) to accuse the delinquent.

3 A third presumption is from the effect of cursing: For when a bad tongued
woman shall curse a party, and death shortly follow, this is a shrewd token
that she is a Witch, because Witches are accustomed to execute their
mischeuous practices by cursing and banning, and this may be sufficient for
examination, though not of co^uiction.

4 If after Enmity, quarreling, or threatening, a present mischief do follow.

5 If the party suspected be any kim, or of Special acquaintance with a
co^uicted Witch, because it is the manner of them to convey their Trades and
Spirits one to another, and especially to those that are nearest about, and
most familiar with them.

6 It is observed, that the Witch receives some mark from Satan to own her by,
in some privy place, which is usually raw, whence the spirit draws blood, etc.
and this, if there be no other reason in Nature, is a shrewd presumption, to
examine at least.

7 And so if in examination we find the party contrary and in diverse Tales:
not only Fearful, for this may be in a good case; but Doubtful and
Different, this may be a Presumption to argue a guilty conscience:

Thus of Presumptions.

2. Of Examination.

Now concerning Examination, this may either be made by Question from the
Magistrate, by certain wise and cross Interrogations to this end:

Or else by Torture, when together with words, some violent means are used, by
pain, to extort confession, which may have necessary place when the party is
obstinate.

3 Of Conviction.

Having used the best means by Examination, the next is Conviction, whereby
after just examination, the Witch is discovered; To this must concur, not
bare presumptions, but sufficient Proofs: Not such as heretofore have been
reckoned, or like to those; As scratching the suspected party, etc. The
confession of a party dying, that such a one has bewitched him. But for
manifest conviction, these Proofs are to be esteemed sufficient.

1 The Free confession of the crime by the party suspected, Proofs hereunto.
after due examination, being found in diverse tales.

I but say the Party will not confess, Here then the testimony of two
sufficient witnesses is current, proving one of these two things: either,

That the party accused has made a league with Satan; or has done some known
practice of Witchcraft, producing likely arguments for the confirmation
thereof: As

1 That the Witch has called upon the devil for help.

2 That she entertaines a familiar spirit, and had conference with it in any
Form, or likeness.

3 That she has showed ones face in a glass being absent.

4 That they have foretold things to come.

5 Helped to things lost, whereof they have had no ordinary means of knowledge.

6 That they have healed by Prayers, Spells, Amulets.

And so, howsoever the League with Satan be secret, and therefore not able to
be discovered, yet is both Satan willing to have it known by effects, Note.
for the increase of his kingdom, and hastening the confusion of his slaves, and
so by such like effects he does discover them: 1 To have speedier possession
of them, lest afterward by remorce they might be brought to repentance, 2 as
hating so detestably even all mankind, that he cannot endure they should enjoy
the world, or the benefits thereof, no not an hour: 3 but especially, Note
Satan's policy herein
the Policy of Satan in this discovery is, 1 to satisfy the rage of the
people, who now having found the Witch, instead of being avenged of their
sins, do intend nothing more then the satisfying of their malice in
destruction of the Witch, 2 and so therein to procure credit and estimation to
the good Witch, to make more work for her, by whose means, this enemy to
mankind, this badde Witch has been discovered.

And yet we may observe the ouerruling hand of God herein, Gods ouer-ruling
hand herein.
that though Satan do hasten the speedy discovery of the Witch: yet the Lord
in his holy wisdom, oft-times disposes, that such shall live long, yea die
vndetected: Either because some of them, may belong to the Election, and
therefore may repent of this great sin by holy means, and so be freed both
from temporal and eternal punishment.

Or some remain longer vndisclosed, to execute greater mischief in the world:
as they are more cruelly bent thereto.

Or else, there may be some Covenant with Satan by the Wach for some term of
years, which he is contented to bind himself to, to have her more sure, and
secure thereby.

And thus of the proofs to discover the Witch, without which she may not
safely be condemned.

CHAP. III.
Of the True Remedies against Witchcraft.

HItherto of the means to Discover Witchcraft: Now let us consider of the
means whereby we may prevent, and be delivered from the same.

SECTIO I.
WHEREUNTO, Authority of the magistrate.
seeing the Lord has graciously afforded the blessing of Government as a
special means to discover witchcraft: and so by cutting off the offender by
the Law, very mercifully also to prevent the same. Therefore let us acknowledge
unfeignedly the goodness of God herein. Pray we for the Magistrate, that the
Lord may give him a discerning spirit herein: and yield we al conscionable
obedience to him under God, that for our sins he may not be given up to
security and such strong delusio^s, as either to neglect the prosecuting of
this sin, or to justify the same.

Surely, as we have great cause to be thankful to our God for that which our
Gracious Sovereign has commended for the perpetual good of the Church to
this end: so are we also to bless his Majesty for that further Courage and
Conscience of our true Christian and renowned King, In Demonologia.
that has also justified the kingdom of Christ against that usurped
Hierarchy of the Roman Antichrist, being that Arch-coniurer, and deceiuer of
the world: O how has he bin displayed and lively painted out by the Pen of a
ready Writer! And shall not the Lord preserve his Anointed to burn the whore
with fire, and make her desolate? O that the Lord would make us worthy of such
a blessing, that our eyes might behold the fall of Antichrist! That the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ may be set up in full beauty, that the Firstborn
may come in, Jew.
and Jesus Christ may come to judgment: Even so blessed Father, hasten this
thine eternal Word, and let all the people say, Amen.

Now let us further consider of the Remedies of Witchcraft.

These consist either in preventing of the evils and dangers thereof, or,

In the Recovery and Release from the same.

That these may be prevented, it is manifest:

First, That Sorcery may be prevented.
because otherwise, All should be afflicted: For Satan maliceth all, would
have none free, and therefore the Lord that hinders his malice herein, has
also ordained means heereunto.

Secondly, the very Witches themselves have confessed, that they could not
prevail against some: And we see (by Gods mercy) the most freed from them.

What may be the means heereto?

SECTIO. II.
Of the particular Remedies against Witchcraft.

These are either,

1 Deceitful and dangerous.

And these are of two sorts.

1 Either such as seem to help, and yet do nothing in truth.

2 Or else, if they yield help to the body for the present.

1 They both leave it hereafter to further mischief.

2 And especially do hurt the soul, both: first, for the present: but, 2
chiefly for the time to come.

2 These Remedies are sincere and safe. And these are General, or Particular.

Natural or Spiritual.

And these either,

Preservative or Restoratiue:

Or, Private or Public.

SECTIO III.
Preservative Remedies, are such, whereby men are kept from the power and hurts
of Witches: and these are such 1 As concern the persons of men, 2 Or, the
places of their abode.


1 To preserve the persons Preservatives for persons.
of men, the chief and only sovereign means is, that whereas by nature, we
are all the Devils slaves, led captive by him at his will, subject to all
sorts of his delusions and torments, upon any occasion: Therefore we would
discern this natural condition out of the Word.

2 Discerning of it, we would not rest therein: but rather be brought to a
denial thereof, to renounce How to renounce nature.
the same by true sorrow and repentance, and so labor to attain unto the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

And this, by embracing Jesus Christ, How to be in Christ.
and so be partakers of the Covenant of Grace, in his blood, 1 by receiving the
Gospel, 2 believing the precious promises therein contained, 3 applying the
same to our particular conditions, 4 and so returning thankfulness unto our
GOD. For these his rich mercies in the pardon of our sins, by yielding up our
souls and bodies as a living sacrifice unto our God, in obedience to his
blessed will, even with all sincerity, and readiness of mind, and purpose of
heart, together with conformity of the outward man in our reasonable service
of God all the days of our life.

As hereby, having the promise, 1 to be kept by the mighty power of God to
salvation, 2 to be always within the special protection of the Lord to be
kept in all our ways: 3 To this end to have the ministering of the blessed
Angels, to preserve us from the evil one, that there may no Witchcraft
prevail against Jacob, nor sorcery against Israel, otherwise then before has
been laid down: not that the Elect may be altogether free from this
affliction, but that it shall turn to their good, their souls shall be safe,
and they are nothing so often subject thereto as the wicked and reprobate.

And therefore, laboring to walk honestly as in the presence of God;
remembering that his Angels attend for our protection and comfort, and so being
careful not to grieve those heavenly soldiers, but to encourage them in their
watch and guard over us, 1. Corinthians chap. 11. and verse 10.

This sovereign Remedy subordinates also many special prouisoes and caueats,
according to our several occasions in the world: As next to renew our right in
Christ daily by unfeigned repentance. To arm our selves daily by conscionable
meditation in the Word, and the providence of the Almighty in the protection of
his children, Psalm. 91. To fear our selves continually, in respect of our own
worth or sufficiency, and so to renounce carnal confidence, and policy, etc.
wholly to resign up our selves into the sole protection of the Almighty. To
maintain our Christian liberty and humility with all wisdom, not being
servants unto men, but to bring them to Christ, not to entangle our selves with
the world, though we must use it: to avoid as much as may be even lawful
pleasures, and recreations, especially, if they be doubtful and of evil
report, as carding etc. wherein usually Satan has a cast. To be choice of our
company, especially, of Papists, profane persons, cursers, swearers, etc.
because by these instruments God tries our sincerity, and Satan if we grow
indifferent, either prepares to the Trade, or preuayles to afflict us by them.

To be wise in our Liberality, and Almesdeedes, not distributing to each sort
of poor, because many times Witches go under this habit, as being left to
this misery, for the confusion of their conceited soueraignetie, and
provocation of their Envy and Malice, to do further mischief: especially, to
take heed if any such suspected seek unto us; to be straight-handed toward
them, not to entertain them in our houses, not to relieve them with our
morsels: Especially, if we discern them as their nature and need is, to be
free mouthed, Note.
and light fingered, to crave of the best, and not to be satisfied, and to be
bold and impudent, etc.

And therefore here it stands us upon to use a Christian courage in all our
Actions, not to fear their curses, nor seek for their blessings, for after
these things do the Gentiles seek, etc. Jude 8.
yet not with ratings or reuilings, but, The Lord rebuke thee Satan. If we do
good to any, let it be especially to the household of Faith: and so to examine
such of their belief, Gala. 6. 10
of their experimental knowledge concerning salvation, and so we may by Gods
mercy, Witches will not endure this usually.
both prevent our selves from being hurt by them, and happily discover them,
and hasten their confusion.

And therefore if we have got any inkling of their leagues or spirits, or
prayers, etc. we are in no case to conceal this, Be liable to his malice.
lest we be confederate with Satan: or at least, for our infidelity, and
carnal wisdom, but in the name of God let us manifest what we know (if
occasion serve) to the Magistrate: especially if there be any hurt done, we
are bound in conscience to justify God; to bring his Judgments to light, to
hasten his enemies to their confusion, and procure any lawful case to his poor
afflicted servants.

Thus may we preserve our persons from the malice of Satan's Instruments.

SECTIO IIII.
Preservatives for houses.

COncerning our houses, because it is the policy of Satan to work by
degrees, and so by shaking our faith, and distracting, or hindering us in holy
duties, to disquiet or fear us; and thereby to work upon our Infidelities,
and distempers, bringing us thereby to neglect of holy means, and provoking to
impatiency, whereby we may give the Lord occasion to leave us to his snares:
Therefore has he used to haunt and molest our dwelling places, with
Apparitions and strange annoyances of noise etc.

And therefore it is very fit to prevent him herein by holy means. First by
an holy dedication.


And these are, First, the dedication of our houses: and this is done,

1 Not only by conscionable prayer unto God, when we come unto them: 2 but
also by solemn vowing and consecrating them to the service of God, as in the
first epistle of Paul to Timothy chap. 4. verse 5.

3 To make choice of our habitations where we may enjoy the powerful
ordinances of God. And,

4 If we come to any houses where any monuments of Idolatry have remained,
thence to remove them.

5 Yea, if (as the manner was in Popery) for the very building of their
houses, to fashion them according to the Idolatrous temples: If in such cases
we alter so much, as may take away the resemblance of Satan's Throne: I think
it (saving better Judgments) though for the public, in indifferent things,
we are to leave things to the Magistrate, to be ordered and disposed of by
him: yet in our private affairs, where we have power in our hands, I say, I
think it may stand with Christian wisdom and courage.

6 But howsoever, we may not be ouer-curious in these things, I do speak as
a fool: I take it, nay, I dare avouch (by the grace of Almighty God) that we
shall undoubtedly much sanctify them by holy order, and discipline in the
Family, by holy Exercises of Prayer and Meditation in the Word, catechizing
of the Families, purging out incarnate devils thence, I mean profane and
rebellious servants, Psalm 101. that hate to be reproved, not buying their
service so dear, as to give them liberty to profane the Sabaoths, to let them
live in ignorance, profaneness, etc. lest for these things the wrath of GOD
come upon us, and the Lord leave us to be afflicted by evil Angels.

This in general has been the practice of the Saints, and out of the
particulars of their practice these particulars may be avouched, as Deuter. 20.
5. We have run for the dedication of the house, wherein was acknowledged,
that we received it as the free gift of God: not that great Babel which we
have builded for the honor of our name, Dan. 4. Psalm 49. etc. But that which
God of his mercy has given unto us, 1. Chron. 29. and therefore we should
give it unto him again, in consecrating it to his service. Examples we have of
Abraham building an altar where he dwelt, to worship God, Genes. 12. 8. of
Noah when he came out of the Arc to inhabit the earth, that great possession
which then the Lord restored, and enfranchised him withaall, Genes. 8. 20. of
Jacob, when he came to Bethel, which he consecrates as an house unto God,
though otherwise it was the house of his habitation.

So did Hezekiah sanctify the people, when they came to receive the Passover,
fearing lest they had not glorified him in their families and habitations, 2.
Chron. 31.

So did Jacob purge his family of Idolatry, casting out all the Idols of his
wife Rebecca, etc. Genesis chap. 35. verse. 1. 2.

Thus of the remedies preservative.

SECTIO. V.
Restoratiue Remedies general.

NOw the Restoratiue means follow, and these are either 1 General concerning
whole Countries.

Or else, Special, respecting particular persons.

The General remedies to dissolve the works of Satan are.

1 The free liberty of the Gospel, Luke 10. v. 18. Satan like Lightning
falls down thereat: So does Moses to this end commend the reverend and
obedient hearing of the Lords Prophets, Deuteronomy. 8. 18.

2 Conscionable execution of Justice, against all other offenders, but
especially against these, and among these against the Good Witch: she is the
means of increasing the other: and yet it is lamentable to observe, that the
Good Witch is spared, and accepted usually of all, because she helps at a
pinch, holds life and present hopes, though the Badde Witch now and then,
because we would not loose our present happiness, we cannot endure
afflictions, is haled to judgment.

Thus of General Restoratiues.

SECTIO VI.
Particular follow for private persons.

THough not absolute and necessarily effectual, as was the gift of casting out
of Devils which ceased with the Apostles and Prime Churches: yet profitable
and convenient to be used, even unto the worlds end of all Christians, very
comfortable in the issue and success thereof.

These are,

1 To search out the true cause of this affliction, namely their sins, Lam.
3. 39. 40. 1. Sam. 5. 15.

2 To approve our faith in the free mercy of God by hearty Prayer and
Fasting, for pardon especially of sin, and remouall of the affliction, as may
stand with Gods glory, submitting herein to the will of God, 1. Sam. 16.

3 Submitting patiently to the affliction, and comforting our selves with the
special protection of our God, and faithful promise that this shall turn to
our good, assuring our selves that the Lord will not suffer us to be tempted
above our strength, but will grant in his good time a joyful issue: not
measuring our estate in Gods favor simply by the success herein, much less
by the affliction it self, which is common to all, but resolving, though he
kill us, yet to trust in him, and trying our selves by the different bearing
and qualifying of the affliction that it has

1 More weaned us from the world:

2 More humbled us in a hatred of sin.

3 More provoked us to hunger after heaven.

4 More purged and prepared us thereunto.

And thus of the true Remedies.

CHAP. IIII.
Of False Remedies.

SHall we now take some view of the False and superstitious Remedies, used by
the Genttles, and increased by the Papists, to release and prevent these
mischiefs?

Surely, never more need to display and confound these practices, and yet to
name them, is sufficient to confute them: Apostolic power herein.


Which are they?

Examine we the Foundation.

First, in Imitation of Apostolic callings, there is also presumed Apostolic
power, to work miracles, to cast out devils, and so by a miraculous gift, to
heal such mischiefs as do proceed from Witches.

Unto which we reply, Refuted,
that that extraordinary calling ceasing, the effect cease withal:

As 1 being not necessary for these Times, seeing they were ordained only for
the Confirmation of the Doctrine of the Gospel, newly planted and to be rooted
in the hearts of Infidels, or to be justified thereby against their forged
miracles; which being now approved and acknowledged of the Christian Churches,
and having a constant and ordinary Ordinance of the Word, to instruct the same
sufficiently.

There is no need of such extraordinary Signs, so witnesses the Spirit, 1.
Cor. 14. 28. That change of tongs, and some general Miracles, are for a Sign
not to them that believe, but to them which believe not: as if the holy Ghost
should say, that the Gospel in the first preaching thereof, was accompained
with strange and miraculous operations, as a Sign to manifest the power
thereof to the confusion of all the feigned miracles of the Gentiles, wherein
they vaunting, might be detained from embracing the glorious Gospel of Jesus
Christ, as being offered to the world without Efficacy, from base and
contemptible means: but that the power of the Lord being manifest in the
weakness of his servants by these miraculous operations, as it was sufficient
to make known unto them, that the Gospel was nothing inferior to the Oracles
of the Devil, seeing it was honored with such excellent and supernatural
works: so by the inward working thereof in their conscience, in discovering
the secrets of their hearts, and meeting with their hidden, false and secret
corruptions, which of all others was the greatest Miracle:

It might thereby gain the true Esteem among them, that GOD was in, and with
the means: 1. Cor. 14. 25. 26. and thereby might prove effectual to convert
the unbelieving, as the Lord had ordained him unto salvation. Acts Chap. 13.
Verse 46, 47, etc.

Secondly, 2 Reason.
As it is not necessary that these gifts should now remain: so if they did
remain, they might then challendge the effectualnesse of the Apostles
preaching, as if that the Gospel were not sufficiently confirmed by them,
seeing still it needs to be confirmed by miracles.

3 And seeing the Promise and the Gift go together, 3 Reason.
therefore, in that the Promise was only made to the Apostles, concerning
those times, to do those things, and not to the generations of the churches
succeeding; therefore seeing the Promise was only in force unto them, Mark 16.
it follows also necessarily, that the gift was limited accordingly.

And therefore, though it be pretended, that the Church of the Jews 1.
Objection from the jews answered.
had this power, and why not then the Church of the Gentiles, under Christ,
seeing Christ was nothing inferior to Moses? yet seeing no certainetie can be
gathered out of the Word, of any such Jewish power, but that rather they are
condemned herein, as doing it by the help of Satan, and so our Savior in
that reply, drives out one nail with another; and when they accused him to
cast out Devils, Mat. 12. 27
by help of Beelzebub, returns it upon them, By whom then do your children
cast them out? As if he had said, Cast the Beam out of your own eyes. It is
you that cast out devils by the help of Beelzebub, and would you excuse your
selves by condemning of me? or do you measure me by them? Therefore they shall
be your Judges, Acts 19. 13
they shall justify me whom you condemn, their master has acknowledged me
to be the Son of God, though they work by Satan, and therefore shall rise up
in judgment against you, that condemn me to work by Satan, who by them has
justified me, to be the mighty power of God.

As for that they allege, Objection from the Promise answered.
That such tokens shall follow them that believe: In my name they shall cast
out devils, etc. Mark 16. 17. This is to be understood concerning the church
immediately after Christ, to be fulfilled only unto them, and their immediate
Successors; for some short time, so long as the Church continued under Heathen
Governors and Persecutors, which were to be convinced and bridled by these
mighty works. 3 Objection from experience answered.
And therefore, though in all Ages of the Church, there have appeared always
some, that have cast out devils; yet has this been, not by the Power of God,
which ceased in the decay of zeal and synceritie, with the Primitiues; but by
the Power of Delusion, through the efficacy of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
whereby Antichrist then rising, and advancing himself in the hearts of Gods
people, as being given up thereto for their disobedience to the Gospel, by
means of these fained and devilish wonders, confirmed in the hearts of the
unstable people, Colloss. 2. 23.
his voluntary Worship, 1. Tim. 4 2.
and Doctrine of Devils* and so enabled himself thereby above all that is
called God.

And that these are but lying wonders and deceiuable may appear yet further by
the means whereby they are wrought.

The first whereof, Is the Name of Jesus, 2 Proved false by the means employed
in them.
by the virtue whereof the Devil is pretended to give place, and against his
will to be thrust out of possession. Wherein, though we deny not, Note.
that it is lawful to call upon The Name of Jesus in Prayer, An Objection
answered.
for the deliverance of any, that are possessed, and bewitched, yet that we
may presume, that our prayer shall take effect, otherwise then may stand with
GODS glory, and the good of the Church: this is contrary to the Nature of the
thing we pray for, which being a Temporal, ought to be begged, but with
Condition only, if God will, as may stand with his glory, as in the six and
twenty chapter of Saint Mathews Gospel: and also, contrary to our duty and
allegiance, which do pray, That the will of GOD may be done in all things,
that our wills may be subject unto his.

And seeing the Pupists will have this Name of Jesus effectual, Note*
not so much, The error of Papists.
because it is inuocated by a Believer, having Faith and understanding to call
on GOD aright; As only, by the very Name uttered in so many letters and
syllables; though without Faith, yea without Understanding, which by virtue
hereof, shall be able, being repeated, to cast out Satan without exception
or resistance. This certainly can be no Miracle, but a Satanicall delusion.

1 Because the Name of Christ, thus barely pronounced without faith and
understanding, has no warrant from the Word.

2 Neither does it allow unto any ordinary Christian any such special calling
heereunto.

3 Nay, it is flat contrary to the nature of the Word, which is only
effectual, not when it is spoken, and barely pronounced, but when it is
understood and believed both of the Deliverer, and the Receiver also, as that
and other like Scriptures are to be understood, Philip. chap. 2. verse. 10.
Hebr. 4. 2.

Much like may be answered concerning the relics of Saints: Relics of
Saints rejected.
another Remedy which they have, to cast out devils. For howsoever they
allege, that a dead man was raised at the Grave of Elizeus, 2. Reg. 13. 21.
that Peter's shadow and Paul's handcherchiefs did many strange things: yet does
not this prove, that their Relics may do the like. Act. 19. 21.


First because the times are now different, Act. 5. 15.
there is no need of such means, as was in those days.

Secondly, The Gift is therefore ceased, as serving for necessary times, and
the Relics, are for the most part counterfeit, and therefore they can produce
but counterfeit Miracles.

Touching the Sign of the Cross, Sign of the Cross disclaimed herein,
howsoever this be applied to cure in these cases;

Yet, this is blasphemous impiety, to ascribe to the Creature, what is proper
to the Creator. Namely to do Miracles.

Neither the Apostles, nor the Son of Man himself, his Godhead being set
apart, being able to do these things, but only the Finger of GOD. Exodus 8.
Matthew. 12.

As for the use of Holy water, Grains, Salt, Images, Agnus Dei, etc. To this
purpose the Truth is, Other Remedies rejected, as Holy Water, Grains, etc.
these are profane superstitions, because they are not sanctified by the Word,
to that end: That which Elisha did by casting in Salt, being not from the
virtue of the Salt, which was not hallowed but by an extraordinary calling, and
gift enabling there unto.

Lastly, Exorcisme refuted.
whereas also it was ordinary among the Papists, to use Exorcismes to this end;
Namely, to adjure and command the Devil in the Name of God, to go from the
Party. This is now ceased, because the Gift of Miracles, as also the promise
annexed to the Gift is ceased withal.

For the better understanding hereof observe we farther herein; That howsoever
by these deceitful Remedies afflicted parties seem to be relieved, and
delivered from Satan's power: yet indeed it is nothing so.

This appears:

Because, though the torments may cease, yet the Devil leaves not the
Parties, but only cease for a time willingly, to establish men in Error,
and in worshipping of himself, and so enters deeper into them.

And this is the Effect of all such Remedies as are procured by Coniuration,
and the Charms and spells thereof: whereby though the Devil seem to be bound
from hurting, yet the party thereby indeed is more bound to his power and
malice, and though he seem by the virtue of such holy Names of Jesus, etc. to
be cast out, yet does he only cease to afflict the body for a time, that so he
may procure greater confidence in this his Trade: And thereby take possession
both of body and soul.

It may be here then demanded, Quaere.
Whether seeking acquaintance with the Witch, Concerning the releeuing of
witches.
and using of her to our houses be dangerous, and whither (I say) It be
lawful to relieve them, or no: If we suspect them to be such, seeing it is
conceived that they have power over us by the same?

To which we answer, that in our Belief we are first bound by the Law of GOD
to do good to the Household of Faith, Esaias. 58.
Gal. 6. 10. and so after these, to relieve where there is most corporal need,
As for the releiuing of these Witches, seeing suspicion may deceine: therefore
we may not simply neglect these, If they be only suspected; so we do it from
a good ground: Namely, obedience to Gods Commandment; and a compassion to
them, especially to do their souls good: Adjoining some spiritual
Exhortation withal, to instruct them if they be ignorant, to deter them
from such damnable and odious courses. Avoiding wisely

Vain glory to be seen of men, as Matthew. 6. 5, 6, 7. Especially taking heed,
that we relieve them not, as the Gentiles were wont to worship their gods;
Tull. Ne noceant.
that they may not hurt us, in carnal policy, seeking to bind the^ to us: as
knowing that Fear in this case, as it may give just cause to the Lord, to
leave us into their hands, for the punishment of our infidelity: so if our
bodies escape, yet a worse thing may certainly follow; Namely, the stealing
away of your hearts from God by this means, and so the enthralling of our
souls under the power of Satan.

And being wise also, in the manner of our relief, whereby we may happily try
them:

1. Namely to give them only for necessity, of the meanest, seeing these
being puffed up with their consorted powers, Note.
think nothing to good for them. As I have observed, they must fare of the
best, etc,

2. And to keep our selves within the bounds of man's authority, to see them
releiued at their houses, and that by setting them a work, and so paying them
an ouer-plus for it, that they may provide for themselves: For hereby happily
you may also discern the^, As being an idle and vagrant generation, always
gadding: their own house is a Wild-cat, they must needs be stirring whom the
Devil drives.

3. And lastly, to relieve their bodies as upon any just occasion not to
conceal their wretchedness, but to accuse and draw them to the Judgment
Seats, for the salvation (if it may be) of their poor souls.

And though Judgment may sease upon them: yet so long as they live they may be
relieved, only with the coursest, and that for necessity, especially here an
Interpreter, one of a thousand prove their best Purueyor to minister a word in
due season, for the comfort of the soul.

CHAP. V.
Of a Principal Remedy against Witchcraft: Namely, the due Execution of
Justice upon the Offenders.

THus have we showed both what deceitful and dangerous Remedies have and may
be used, to ease this affliction.

As also what Lawful Remedies are to be applied hereto.

It now remains, that we adioyne A special public Remedy, for the
preventing and rooting out of this mischief; Namely, Execution of Justice.

And here first, Let us determine, what measure of punishment is due to this
Sin.

Secondly, we will add some Motives to encourage the godly Magistrate, to the
Execution of the Punishment.

SECT. I.
Of the punishment of Witches with death. What Punishment is due to Witchcraft.

The Word of GOD does clearly prove, That thou shall not suffer a Witch to
live. Exodus 21. 18.

And so the practice of Holy men, has been agreeable thereunto in the due
Execution of this sentence against them in all ages. As appears:

Not only among the Heathen, who even by the Light of Nature were endued for
the very safety of Life, to punish this Sin with Death.

But especially among Christians where generally such Malefactors are
condignely punished.

And that this practice ought to stand in force, Proved.
appears.

1. Because, this being a Judicial Law whose penalty is death, seeing they
have in them a perpetual equity, and do seem to maintain some moral
precept, is Perpetual: As serving to maintain the Equity of the three first
Moral Precepts of the first Table; which cannot be kept, unless this Law be
put in execution.

2. This Judicial Law, has in it the Equity of the Law of Nature, and
therefore is perpetual: It being natural that an Enemy to the State, a
Traitor, etc. Should die the death.

And such is a Witch, unto God, the King of Kings.

3. The Witch is an Idolater, wilfully and in a most presumptuous manner, as
renouncing God willingly, and chosing Satan to be her Sovereign Lord,
therefore according to that Law, she is to be stoned to death, Deuteronomy. 17. 3.
4. 5.

4 The Witch is a seducer of others to Idolatry, as appears by their common
practice both upon their friends to whom they usually bequeath their spirits,
and upon all whom they instruct, to rest in charms, etc. And therefore to be
put to death, Deuter. 13. 6. 9.

5 Nay, she is a murderer both of souls and bodies; and therefore, in this
respect, does also deserve death.

SECTIO. II.
Answer to Objections against this Execution.

1 ANd therefore, though the devil do the mischief, yet is the Witch
confederate and accessarie thereto: nay (in her own conceit) Principal and
Mistress: and therefore by the Law of Accessories, is to die the death.

2 Therefore, though they should repent, yet die they must, to justify God,
and prevent further ensnaring: that though their body perish, yet the soul may
be saved, 1. Cor. 5.

3 Though she repent not, yet seeing she must have some time of repentance;
though she do not, yet is Justice to proceed without respect of persons. In
zeal to Gods glory, and love of sincerity, so Moses, Exo. 32. 28. and
Phinehas, etc. Number. 25. 8.

And this sincerity of Justice does require: That though death and such hurts
ensue not, Note.
yet for the offense done to God, in combining with Satan, etc. the parties
are to be executed accordingly. For so the word does plainly imply: and
heretofore the Law has been defective in this case: Man's Law reformed herein.
Anno 1. Iacobi
yet blessed be God, for a further perfection herein: and will not the Lord
daily perfect his work? If we believe, shall we not see greater things then
these? Well,

1 Let this instruct the godly magistrate to have an eye, especially to the
Blesser, that reigns among us: And to draw the people to the true and lawful
means of helping soul and body, by rooting out of these Good Witches, which
are rife almost in every parish, and placing in stead thereof a conscionable
Minister, as that the people may require the Law at his mouth, that he may
pray to the Lord for them, that they may be healed.

2 Let this teach him to punish sin, of conscience, not for by respects,
meeting with the Witch, as an Idolator offending against God, not so much as a
murderer sinning against man.

3 Let his own safety move him heereunto, who as he has been, even so
still by the execution of Justice, may be free from these Monsters.

4 And lastly, Let the glory of God (in aduauncing the Gospel) especially
here prevail, which is by no kind of thing more undermined then by Witches.

Is glorious in nothing more then in rooting out Antichrist the great Coniurer
and deceiuer of Gods people, and banishing superstition the very bed and
nursery of witchcraft.

The end of the second Book.
THE MYSTERY OF WITCHCRAFT.

The third Book.

Discovering, The several Uses of this Doctrine of WITCHCRAFT.

LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1617.

OF THE DIVERSE USES OF THIS DOCTRINE OF WITCHCRAFT.
The third Book.
CHAP. I.
First, it serves for reproof, and that many ways.

SECTIO I.
As first of the Atheism, and Irreligion that ouerflowes in the Land.

Does not Satan's Policy in this trade of Witchcraft, First the Atheist.
pretending to afflict and hurt, but, when he is seen by the Witch: and then
to hurt only the body, or goods; Plainly obscure and abolish out of the minds
of men, the Providence of the Almighty, as if Satan were not subject to God,
and sent by his providence, that he were not countermaunded by the power of
God, but only subject to the Witches power? Does not this exalt her in the
place of God, provoke the people to fear and love her, etc?

2 And seeing the hurt appears only by his cunning to be done to the body,
does not this nourish the people in this Atheism, that either their souls are
in no danger, all is well with them, or they need not trouble themselves
thereabout, seeing the devil does not trouble them? nay, does not this nourish
this conceit in their minds, that they have no souls, or else, that they are
mortal? they end with this life, and therefore use all means for the
maintenance hereof, and then care is taken sufficiently.

3 Does not this convince the Atheist that dreams of General Grace;

All shall be saved; seeing by this Doctrine and Practice of Witchcraft: It is
now apparent, That not only naturally we are the bondslaues of Satan, but that
many purposely yield up themselves to his cursed will, renounce their
salvation, to become his slaves, bind themselves to eternal damnation, and so
are made ofttimes fearful spectacles of the Divine vengeance, being carried
away by the devil, and haled violently to destruction?

4 Does not this justly confound that, common delusion, That there is no hell,
but to be in debt, in prison? etc.

Does not this convince such as live in that profane and fearful manner, as
if there were no God to Judge them, no devil to torment them? Do not their
desperate courses plainly discover to whom they do belong? Are they not of
their father the Devil, because his works they do, are they not running
headlong to Hell, by their desperate impenitencie? does their damnation sleep,
that so turn the grace of God into wantonness? Has not the god of this world
blinded them, that they cannot obey the truth? Are they not appointed to
perdition that thus crucify the Lord of life? Is there any more sacrifice left
for sin for such, but even violent fire to consume the adversaries? Herbrews
cha. 10. 26. 27. Jude verse 4. John chap. 8. 44.

SECTIO VIII.
It is a plain conviction of the contempt of the Word.

FOr as the Lord, when Pharaoh would not believe his servant Moses, did
therefore give him up to be deluded by his Sorcerers and Enchanters, who doing
such wonders in show, as Moses did in truth, did thereby harden Pharaohs
heart, and so ripened his sin and iniquity: even so it is just with God,
because we despise his Word, and contemn his true Prophets: therefore to leave
the common people generally to be hardened by such fained wonders as the
prophets of Satan make show of in the world, that they might be effectual,
to increase transgressions against the Lord, and so to ripen them to the day of
vengeance.

Thus did the Lord give up Saul, for his disobedience and contempt of the Word,
to seek unto Witchcraft, 1. Sam. 28.

Whereby he ripened his sin, and drew on speedy vengeance upon himself, and
Gods People for his sake, 2. Sam. 29.

Thus was Ahaziah left to seek help of the god of Ekron, that so he might
receive of the Lord the Sentence of his destruction, 2. Reg. 2.

SECTIO. III.
Of Reproof.

IT reprooueth the Idolatry and false worship of the Times, conuincing the
falshoode and abomination of Popery, and justifying the truth and virtue of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

As that, first, where superstition reigns, and is not yet weeded out, there
we see Witchcraft to be magnified, and so to abound as in the Orcades among
the Heathen.

But where the Gospel has got footing, Zach. 13. 3 4.
there all unclean spirits depart, gross Witchcraft is banished, Authority
prevails, to the rooting out thereof: the Word prevails to heal our
infidelity, and so secure us from their dangerous snares.

And yet (which is to be lamented) we see the Good Witch still to get ground,
even because she helps, and satisfies the flesh: does not this argue plainly,
what God we worship principally, even our pleasure, our riches, our health? Is
not the Good Witch respected, because she supplies these? And is not our belly
then our god? the wedge of gold our hope? Do we not for our own sakes
respect the Blesser? Is it not a plain worship, yea Idolatry which we commit
with her?

SECTIO IIII.
It condemns the gross profaneness and disobedience of the Ages present.

1 IN that the Infernal spirits are more obseruant and diligent for the hurt
of the soul, then we are for the salvation thereof: they are compassing
continually, omitting no base offices to serve their Mistress turns.

2 The abundance of Witches, the horrible sottishness and wilfulness of the
people which run to these Blessers, that are given up by God the Lord, to
forsake the true means of their salvation, and fly to devilish helps: does
not this plainly argue the general disobedience of the people; and therefore,
because they receive not the love of the truth, therefore God has left them to
these strong delusions, to believe lies, as in the second epistle of Saint Paul
to the Thessalonians in the second chapter and eleven verse.

Surely, as the Lord gave up Saul to a spirit of Error to be tormented, and
mis-guyded thereby, because he forsook the everliving Lord, and disobeyed his
Prophets: So is it just with Almighty GOD, to give up the people to be
besotted with this judgment, even because they have detayned the truth of God
in unrighteousness, and reproached the same by their profane and most
abominable conversation.

SECTIO V.
Reproof of Hypocrisy.

IT reprooueth the Hypocrisy and fearful Dissimulation that reigns even
among professors.

And that first, as Satan pretends subjection to the Coniurer and Sorcerer,
when indeed his purpose is to be Master of all: Even so the Hypocrite, how
soever he pretend subjection to the Lord, yet his purpose is to serve his own
lusts, to advance himself above all that is called God, to bring men into
bondage, to smite them on the face, 2. Cor. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12.

2 As Satan pretends many things to be done by the Witch, which indeed are
done by himself, that he may bring the Witch into danger, abuse others by her,
and conceal his wickedness more cunningly: even so does the Hypocrite father
much upon God, which is but the device of his own brain.

And does not this plainly convince the hypocrisy of the Times, that whereas
the Good Witch is far more dangerous then the Bad, yet because the Blesser
helps, and serves turn, to maintain life; etc. therefore she must escape:
whereas the Bad Witch, because she is hurtful, therefore she must be
punished. Does not this argue, that not for conscience sake, but for our own
respects Justice is executed, Satan's power is oppugned?

And does not Satan, Math. 23.
when he pretends to do most good, then do most hurt? surely so does the
hypocrite, under color of long prayers, devour widows houses; Even as the
Blesser, under pretense of Good prayers, enthralleth the soul, so does the
hypocrite, by pretense of formal prayers and bodily worship detain men in
wilworship, and all profaneness to the ruin of soul and body.

CHAP. II.
A second general use, is for Instruction, That first we would leave to avoid
the Causes of Witchcraft. Which are
1. Ignoraunee. 2. Infidelity. 3. Malice. 4. Coueto usnesse. 5. Curiosity,
etc. 6. Pride, etc.
Concerning Ignorance of GOD.

THat this is a cause of Witchcraft, appears:

Because, 2. Tim. 2. 23, 24. 2. These. 2.
through the Ignorance that is in us, we are led captive by Satan at his
pleasure, as being subject justly to his strong delusions, because we have not
received the Love of the Truth; because we know not whom to worship, how to
worship God a right; therefore does the God of this world blind us because the
Gospel is hid from us. 2. Cor. 4. 5, 6.

And does not Witchcraft usually prevail; when either there is no means for
knowledge, or else the Truth of God is detayned in unrighteousness, and so for
our disobedience we are justly given up to such Delusions, remember what has
formerly been observed to this end.

The Remedy thereof is:

1. To have the word of God dwell plentifully among us; both in the Public
ordinances of the Preaching and Expounding thereof; as also in the Private
Reading, and conferring of the same in our Families.

2. To have the Power thereof, to Rule us in all our ways: Gal. 6. 6.
To yield obedience thereunto, to hearken to this voice alone, and to cleave
thereunto constantly: Endeavoring so to walk, as we have received Christ
Jesus. Col. 2. 4. And to be daily cast into the mould thereof. 2. Cor. 3.

CHAP. III.
Touching Infidelity.

THat this is also a Cause of this fearful Judgment, appears:

1. Because by unbelief, we lie open to Satan's power. 1. Pet. 5. 8, 9.

2. Through unbelief in God, we are brought to believe in him, to embrace and
adore him as the God of this world. 2. Cor. 4, 5, 6.

3. Hereby we provoke the Just Lord to leave us to his power, to be ensnared
of him in all deceiueablenes of Error, and damnable Impiety.

4. This is the special bond whereby Satan ties his Proselites unto him, and
they that seek help from them, they must believe that they can help them, etc.

And therefore, the Remedy thereof is:

1. As to learn to know God in Jesus Christ. Ioh. 17. 2.

2. To labor above all things to be found in Christ Jesus. Psalm. 3. 10.

1. By seeing our selves in our selves to be utterly lost by the Law. Romans 7.

2. And feeling our state to be most desperate and irrecouerable.

3. Groan we earnestly under the burden thereof. Matthew. 11. 28.

4. And hunger we after Jesus Christ to be eased thereof. Matthew. 5.

5. Seeking unto him in his blessed and precious promises: to be eased of our
sins.

6. Meditating seriously on the power and virtue of his Sacrifice, which he
has offered for our sin.

7. And applying the same, to our particular soars and diseases.

8. Resting in Jesus Christ alone, 1. Cor. 1.
as our only and sufficient Savior.

9. And rejoicing in him above all the treasures in the world, as in the most
precious Pearl. Matthew. 13.

10. Laboring to approve our love unto Jesus Christ.

1. By forsaking all things for his sake, our beloved son; yea, if it be
required, even life, and all. Matthew. 19.

2. Being ready to take up his Cross, and follow him. Matthew. 16. 22.

3. Denying still our own wisdom and righteousness, that we may be found
in him. 1. Cor. 3. 18.

4. And for thy sake, loving the brethren. Heb. 3. 13.
1. Plucking them out of the fire. 2. And exhorting each other daily; waiting
with great patience their Conversion, Heb. 10. 14.
and maintaining the Fellowship with all meekness of wisdom, and holiness
of Conversation. 2. Tim. 2. 2.

In all Constancy and Patience, working out our salvation. Phi. 2. 12.

CHAP. 4.
As for Malice.

THat this is an occasion of Witchcraft, Apppeareth: 1. Because.

1. Depriueth us of the Love of God, and so causing the Lord to hate us, we
are given up to this damnable practice.

The rather, because it is both a present and effectual means (as we think)
to execute the utmost of our revenge and it is also a most daungegerous means
to color our Malice, while it so brings it about, that partly for Fear, we
are forced to relieve such Instruments, that they may do us no harm, and we
are drawn to seek help from them in our extremities, whereby their Malice
being concealed, is more increased, and being often disappoynted by Satan, is
more inflamed, sealing up to these cursed Captives their eternal damnation:
and hastening hereby the vengeance of the LORD upon them, both in the Pining of
their bodies, by this their confounded Malice, and prouoaking them to malign
GOD the more, the more they are disappoynted, whereby his wrath is more kindled
against them: they are hereby more eager upon Satan to execute their rage, more
deeply obliged unto them, by new employments and at length more desperately
confounded by him, in their detection and punishments.

Learn we therefore to remedy this sin, Thus:

1. Labor we to have the love of Christ shed abroad in our hearts, Romans 5. 2.
that so for his sake, we may love one another.

2. And consider we, Romans 12.
That vengeance belongs unto God, he is able to right our wrongs, he is
only for to do it.

3. Consider we not so much, what hurt may arise from the Creature, as what
good may redound unto us thereby; and whether we receive not daily good from
the hands of our God, sufficiently to counteruaile the evil of the Creature?
Whether our GOD be not able to recompense any evil from the Creature,
whatsoever? Whither he cannot turn it to our great good?

4. Give we not way to the least passion of anger, or discontent, least our
yielding to these passions, draw our confirmed malice.

5. And be we wise to set bounds to our unreasonable desires, least being not
satisfied therein, we break out to envy, and so to malice others.

6. Especially labor we to apprehend the favor of God in Jesus Christ: that
so being at peace with his Majesty, and gayning true contentedness in our
estates, we may possess our souls in patience, and maintain the Unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace.

7: And Practice we especially the Love of our enemies; strive we to overcome
evil with good, to forgive our enemies, to pray for them, etc,

8. Enuring our selves to bear afflictions.

9. And weaning our souls from the love of the world.

10. Still endeavoring to make even with our God, and to be prepared against
the coming of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. V.
A fourth Cause of Witchcraft is Covetousness.

1. A As excluding through distrustful and insatiable desires, the protection
of the Almighty.

2. Exposing to desperate contempt of the Word, in all fearful impiety.

3. Hereby enraging and provoking the Conscience to just revenge.

4. Whereby despair seasing on the soul, is become hereby a pray unto Satan,
upon hope of present release.

5. Being forced by such insatiable desires to use unlawful means to compass
the same, is therefore bayted by Satan with fit matter hereunto: What will he
not promise to fetch over the poor soul? What will not the soul part with to
enjoy the present payment? What Is this birthright to it, since it dies for
hunger, give it the present, and take the future who list. Genesis 27.

The remedy therefore of Covetousness is:

1. First, To convert our Desires to heavenly objects; and so to affect that
dureable and true riches.

2. And so discerning daily our want of grace, we shall still be coveting the
best gifts. 1. Cor. 12.

3. As for earthly things, Desire we only our daily bread, as for to morrow
let it care for it self, Matthew. 6.

4. And cast we our care on God, because he cares for us. 1. Pet. 5.

5. Let our Request be made manifest unto God, Phil. 4. 7.
who will not fail us, nor forsake us.

And learn we to be contented with our estates, submitting to the will of God
in all things.

Consider we the Judgments of God, upon th Covetous persons, he is a spoyler
of others, and therefore shall be spoiled: he pines himself and robs others;
his children shall be vagabonds, and his memorial perish. Psalm. 109.

Meditate we often on the divine Providence extending to the briutish and
dumb creatures. Matt. 6.

And consider we seriously of the Love of God, in Jesus Christ; who if he have
provided heaven for us, will he deny us these things? Matt. 6. 33.
And seeing with all our care we win nothing, Psalm. 127 1.
without his blessing, labor we rather to use well what we have, then to be
coveting more: that our little being blessed, may be sufficient unto us. Psalm.
37.

And therefore seek we the blessing of God, by renewing our right in Christ
Jesus, and daily sanctifying of the Creature, by the Word and Prayer: and so
shall the mind be quieted in the smallest treasure. 1. Tim. 4. 5.

CHAP. VI.
A fifth Cause of Witchcraft is Curiosity, And that because:

Hereby the mind is delivered from necessary knowledge, to scarch after vain
and hidden mysteries.

And so is nourished in wavering, and uncertainty in Judgment.

And thereby is easily removed from such sound Principles and grounds of Truth
as it has received some taste of out of the Word of God. And so is brought by
degrees to forsake GOD, and his holy governance, as crossing corruption and
confounding carnal wisdom.

And so is justly forsaken of God, and thereby given up by the power of Satan
to be deluded.

And so justly deluded, by such vain pretense of extraordinary skill and
knowledge; as through pride of heart is affected through discontent ensuing
from an enraged conscience, is greedily embraced to give present satisfaction.

And thereby is provoked, with any future harms, to procure present ease and
content.

Hereupon future hopes are deluded, and so desperately rejected concerning
Salvation, upon a vain persuasion, of what this extraordinary knowledge will
advance us to. Namely to be as Gods to know good and evil especially if here
any possibility shall appear to execute such power, by doing wonderful
things, as may exalt us to this conceit of Divine Excellency.

And this is furthered by a base Esteem of such knowledge as concerns
salvation, as being ordinary, common to all, obuious to every capacity. And
therefore seeing, all shall not be saved: hereupon we are easily ensnared to
seek after further knowledge, to look for Revelation, to search into hidden
mysteries.

Here Satan closes with a profane heart, tenders means of the hidden
Mysteries, colors them with holy Names, and glorious pretenses; as of
subjection to man, etc. And so easily preuailes upon an unstable soul, to
draw it with some covenant with Satan to some liking of this skill, especially
being carried so covertly, likely to prevail so effectually.

The Remedy hereof is.

To inform the judgment thoroughly by the blessed word.

And so to be brought in subjection by the power thereof, to the denial of
carnal wisdom, with an holy resolution in all things to be guided by it.

To magnify the mercy of God, for so plain and easy a Rule to them that will
understand, and to cleave to this Rule alone for direction in all our ways.
Psalm. 8.

6. Neither leaning on the Right hand after dreams, and speculations: Neither
leaning on the left hand to humane traditions as if the word were insufficient.
Being still humbled in the sense of our saylings, to what is commanded, and for
our ignorance of that we should know: And Living by Faith, in expectation of
what is promised.

Endeavoring as we have received Christ, so to walk in him.

CHAP. VII.
The last and Principal Cause to draw us into this deadly snare, is Pride, and
vain glory.

1 AS being both the ground of all the other evils.

2. Being the first sin that entered into the world, and discovered our
fearful bondage under Satan.

3. Being the last sin that we shall put of, and therefore when Satan has done
with all other, he begins with this.

4. Being the sin that accompanies our best actions, to deprive God of his
glory and our selves of the comfort of the^.

5. Giving the Lord occasion to leave us to Satan's power, for this our great
blasphemy and sacrilege.

6. Giving Satan occasion the rather to prevail in regard of such pretenses
and maskes which this sin has to shroud it self under, as thankfulness of
God: Joy in his blessings: furtherance of others good in communicating with
the^, what God has vouchsafed unto us. And being his most effectual bait to
ensnare us in this dangerous Covenant, because by Pride we are blinded that
we cannot see our misery, nor any danger lies upon us: and therefore are
more easily drawn to make up the measure of it.

By Pride, we are provoked to conceit our own excellency so far as to think
nothing good enough for us: and we think the Lord does us wrong, in not
respecting us accordingly. And therefore we will right our selves, and
entertain what is offered, though it be by Satan, yet we presume to make it
serve our turns, we conceive so highly of our selves, that nothing can
defile, nothing prevail to our hurt. Is it not our great preuiledge to command
Satan? shall it not make for our glory, to hurt and help at our pleasure? Will
it not please us highly, to hear, The Voice of GOD, and not of man.

Thus does Satan by Pride, draw vs-into his snare.

And therefore learn we to Remedy this great evil. As:

First, labor we to discern thoroughly our cursed Nature, take we an often
view of that poisonous fountain, and though in regard of outward conformity
and fair show, we may have cause to lift up our heads, yet when we look
thoroughly within, we may hang the^ down with shame.

2. Consider not the good we do, so much as the evil we daily commit, yea, that
end that acco^panies our best actions.

3 And acknowledge we, that whatsoever good we have, I it is undeserved on our
part, 2 we daily deserve to be stripped of it.

4 Remember we, the most glorious creatures have been ouer-taken with this
sin, and therefore, let us fear our selves most, when we enjoy greatest
favors.

5 And yet trust God most, when he seems to do least for us.

6 Laboring to do all things as in the presence of the Almighty: And,

7 Avoiding very carefully the applause and estimation of men.

8 Not measuring the grace of God by outward complements.

9 Nor despising the least grace in others, though we far exceed them.

10 Abounding in thankfulness to God, even for the least of all his mercies.

11 And daily reckoning with our selves for the abuse of his blessings.

12 Walking faithfully and diligently in the Callings which GOD has placed us
in.

13 And submitting to those afflictions, that are incident thereto.

14 Meditating often on the humiliation of Jesus Christ.

15 And on that fullness of glory that makes for us in heaven.

CHAP. VIII.
Conuinceth natural corruption.

AND does not this Doctrine of Witchcraft, describe unto us the truth of our
natural condition, that we are the very slaves of Satan, and vessels of
wrath, following the prince that rules in the children of disobedience, and so
being led captive by him at his will? Ephesians chap. 2. verse. 1. 2.

Yea certainly, though we should never so much wash our selves with Niter, and
stand upon our sincerity, yet the bleating of the sheep, and lowing of the
oxen, I mean, such running to Blessers, and closing with cursers, our fearing
these, and worshipping the other: our refusal of knowledge, and lawful means
for help, and seeking to these devilish and most unlawful remedies are
apparent Evidences, that his servants we are whom we thus subject unto, him we
acknowledge to be our Master, our Lord, and Savior, whom especially we seek
unto, in the time of our trouble.

CHAP. IX.
That hereby we are taught the right use and excellency of Faith.

AND does not this Doctrine of of Witchcraft show us also the true means,
whereby we may be delivered from the bondage of Satan, and so be translated
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God? yea surely.

We are hereby instructed in the excellency of Faith, and so to labor the
attayning and preserving thereof.

As that we may out of the former discourse perceive, that this Faith is it,
which Satan requires of his servants, to bind himself unto them, (if they
will believe in him:) his special aim is at our most precious faith, if he can
shake us herein, if he can cast us from this hold, he makes sure account of
us, he holds us hereby certainly to damnation: Does not this plainly euince
the excellency hereof? does it not by the contrary confirm, how necessary
this is to salvation, that it alone is sufficient hereto, Acts 13.

2 Does not the Blesser require this Covenant of her Proselites, she will
help them: if they believe in her, that she can do them good? etc.

And who are they that are freed from Satan's power, are they not only the
faithful? those which are truly elected, either Satan cannot touch them at
all, or else his afflictions shall tend to their good: well may he afflict the
body, but the soul shall be bettered by it.

And shall not this teach us especially to procure this shield of Faith, that
so we may beat back the fiery darts of the Devil? Ephesians chapter 6.
verse. 12. 13.

Shall it not lesson us, to learn still to live by faith in the Son of God:
not having our own righteousness, that so in him we may be more then
Conquerours, Romans 8. 34. 35. Galat. 2. 20.

CHAP. X.
Hereby we are instructed to a conscionable use of the word of God.

FOr, seeing it is not the Letter and sound thereof only that auailes, for so
(as you have heard) it may be abused by Satan to charming and sorcery, unless
we both understand, and receive reverently, yea treasure it up in our hearts,
and by faith apply it to our selves, for the Peace of our souls: then surely
is it not enough only to hear, and not understand; not enough to understand
only, and not to retain in memory: nay, not sufficient to remember, unless
we believe the same, and so express our Faith, in being transformed thereby
into the same Image from glory to glory, 2. Cor. 3.

And this may serve to admonish us, concerning that customarie and vnreuerent
taking of the name of God in our mouths, apparent in our ordinary speeches;
As oh Lord Jesus etc. which being no less then charms, as it confirms
Witches in their damnable Trade, so it exposes us to be afflicted by them: yea
leaves us to the Judgment of the Lord, even to take that from us which we
seemed to have, of Hypocrites and formal professors to become open blasphemers
and professed Atheists, scorning God, Religion, etc.

CHAP. XI.
Teaches the abuse of the Belief and the Commandments.

AS also we may here be informed concerning the Abuse of our Belief, as
Prayers, which seeing they are repeated without Understanding, and so out of
their right ordinance and use, are they any better then a Charm? Is it not
rather a service unto the Devil then unto God?

May not this admonish Preachers, to apply themselves to the capacity of their
people, to speak with understanding, power and evidence of the Spirit, not
with the enticing words of man's wisdom, lest they approve themselves no
better then Charmers, binding the people faster under the Power of Satan, by
nouzeling them in Ignorance, Pride, Infidelity, Profaneness, etc. 1. Cor. 2.

And the People also may here have their lesson; not to live in ignorance, but
to embrace the light of the Gospel, whereby Satan's forgeries are detected, and
graciously prevented*

Whereby they may be diuerted to the true and holy means, not only for the
bodies good, but especially for the help and salvation of the poor soul.

CHAP. XII.
Teaches to make conscience of sin.

WE are hereby also taught to make conscience of all sin, and to have respect
unto all GODS commandments; laboring daily to be renewed by repentance: and
so interest our selves daily in the favor of God by Jesus Christ: that seeing
afflictions follow sinners, and Satan has no power over us, but by our
corruption, and corruption being suppressed, and daily maistered by repentance
and faith in Christ, preuents Satan's power:

Therefore: As it is best to avoid so, in the next place, if we have sinned,
let us do so no more, lest a worse thing do befall us, lest the Lord leave us to
Satan's power, even to be smitten by evil angels John 5.

CHAP. XIII.
Teaches the deepenesse of Satan.

SEeing the Policy of Satan is notably discovered herein, in hiding his
power, cloking his tyranny and cruelty against the soul, by tampering about
these pety matters of the body, diuerting us dangerously from the spiritual
combat which Satan has against the soul, to look only to bodily harms, as
if we had no souls, but bodies only, that were in danger. May we not hence
learn the deepenesse of Satan? Does not this teach, that Satan plays the
hypocrite, making show to help, when he intends most hurt, and pretending
only to hurt the body, when he intends the hurt of the soul, should not this
teach us less to regard the flesh, and to have more care for the soul: to
arm it especially by prayer and repentance: to watch over our thoughts, etc.
secret corruptions, etc. whereas we usually pray for our cattle, which was but
a policy of Witches, to make us believe, that by prayer they were preserved
from Witchcraft; whereas indeed that blind and ignorant prayer, was but a
color of Satan's help, shrowding his assistance under that pretense of Divine
worship. Had we not now more need to pray for our selves, not crossing and
Blessing, etc. as the manner was in Popery, but rather crossing our
corruptions, and mortifying our lusts, whereby we shall best prevent the
power of Satan?

CHAP. XIIII.
And have we not hence matter of Trial, both for our private, and generally
for the Church of Christ?

YEa certainly; for our selves, we may discern, whether we have saving grace,
or no. For seeing (as you have heard) Satan and his instruments, may do
wonderful things: Therefore let not this content us, though we had even a
miraculous faith, seeing to such it shall be said, Depart from me, I know you
not, Mat. 7. 22. 23. but rather, let us get better evidence of saving grace,
laboring that our names may be written in Heaven, Luke 10. 17. and taking the
true and only path of holiness thereunto, even true faith in Jesus Christ,
working by love, and keeping us to the end, constant and immovable unto the
day of Christ, 1. Cor. 15. verse. vlt.

And seeing devils and false prophets may do such wonderful things, therefore
learn we hence, to discern of GODS truth, and his holy Spouse: namely the
true Church, not that that is confirmed by wonders and signs, for such is the
synagogue of Antichrist, but that which continues in the Apostles 1 Doctrine,
and 2 Fellowshippe 3 in breaking of Bread and 4 Prayer, Act. 2. 44. 45. 46. etc.

CHAP. XV.
And may not the Saints of God thereby learn how to behave themselves under
afflictions.

NAmely, as not to presume, but that it may befall them: no faith can simply
privilege from the correction of the Almighty: so if the Lord shall exercise
them herewith.

They are 1 to examine the special cause thereof: And so,

2 By Repentance to make their peace with God.

3 Begging instantly the sanctifying of the affliction: And,

4 So the Remouall of it, as may stand with Gods glory.

5 Not measuring, either the favor of God simply, by the remouall thereof; or
his anger by the continuance thereof, or their remouall thereby. But comforting
themselves, though it take away the miserable life, yet living and dying we
are the Lords: Happy if we go to heaven though in a fiery chariot.

CHAP. XVI.
How to prevent Sorcerie.

SEeing there is naturally in every Christian the seeds and grounds of such
evils, which may draw, as by these degrees, 1 to the approbation of this trade
2 to use though ignora^tly, the very spells and charms hereof; 3 to retain
under pretense of Charity, these cursed instruments, and so to grow familiar
with them, to conceive well of their prayers, etc. Seeing (I say) by these
degrees, and such like; unstable souls may easily be ensnared, and drawn on
to this devilish compact: therefore let us learn also to prevent this
fearful league. To this end,

Let us take heed of living in gross and wilful ignorance: And while we have
the light, let us embrace it conscionably, lest we be given up for our
disobedience to these strong delusions.

2 Let us be thoroughly persuaded of the providence of God, not only in
general, ruling and disposing all things, so that every creature is at his
command, not so much as an hair of our heads can be touched unless the Lord
dispose.

3 But specially apprehend we that providence of the Almighty, whereby he has
taken the soul of man into his especial protection; as having elected us to
salvation, before the foundations of the world were laid, and that in Jesus
Christ, to the praise of his glorious grace: that so we may neither think our
souls to be at our own dispose: much less may give way unto Santhans
suggestion, as to have them disposed at his pleasure: especially seeing he
has no right thereto: nay, is the maine enemy, and murderer thereof from the
beginning, chap. 8. of Saint John.

4 And so let us learn to resign up our souls daily into the hands of our
God; How to resign up our selves into the hands of God.
by casting our care upon him: and, 1. Pet. 5.

Daily making even with him, by unfeigned repentance.

Submitting daily to his blessed will in all things: and,

Making our requests daily manifest unto him.

Contenting our selves with his gracious dispensation: and yet still hungring
continually after his glorious presence, Psalm 42. Philip. 1. 23. 24. 2.
Corint. 5. 1. 2.

And so committing our selves in well-doing into the hands of our faithful
Creator, 1. Pet. 4.

5 Make we conscience especially of holy duties, as to do them, 1 of
knowledge, 2 with all holy preparation, 3 with all reverence and intention, 4
with all humility and obedience, 5 especially being well persuaded of what we
do, 6 and principally of the acceptance of our persons therein, etc. above the
same.

Seeing, as whatsoever is done ignorantly or profanely, is no better then a
sacrifice to the devil: so it is just with God for this profaning of his
ordinance, to yield us up to strong delusions, even 1 to rest in the work
done, 2 to flatter our selves, that the doing thereof may excuse us for any
gross filthiness: 3 to think that God will be pleased with any Idol service:
4 so to make a mock of God and his ordinances: 5 and therefore justly to be
given up to the power of Satan, to the satisfying of our lusts: 6 to abuse holy
titles and prayers to the effecting hereof: and so by degrees to be brought to
this execrable skill; in steed of serving God, to submit wholly to Satan,
intertaining any colorable and accursed means for the compassing hereof.

And thus of the Uses for Instruction.

CHAP. XVII.
A third general use, is for consolation.

And that, Either in general to the Church of God.

1. THat Satan's power is limited by the Lord, for the Trial of the Elect, and
purging out of hypocrites and profane persons out of the Church; and therefore
comfort we our selves in the supreme Power of our God. Tread we Satan under
our feet, as a Captive laid bound to our hands, by our Captain Jesus Christ.

2. Assure we our selves; that the power that is now so curbed, shall once for
ever be destroyed: The Lord shall tread Satan under our feet. Romans 16. 1. Cor.
15. 54, 55, etc.

Secondly, here is exceeding comfort* That Satan cannot prevail effectually
upon any to their condemnation, unless with full consent they yield
themselves wholly to his subjection. And if

Otherwise, he afflict them against their wills, it shall howsoever, turn to
their good. Christ will be unto them both in life and death an advantage: and
therefore, here is matter of exceeding comfort unto the Saints, that seeing they
are not their own, but are bought with a price, therefore none can take them
out of the hands of Christ. 1. Cor. 6.
If Satan therefore shall move them to close John 17.
with him, to give way to him, their answer is ready: They are not their own,
let him ask their master leave: they cannot give way to him, he comes too
late; they have couenanted with Christ Jesus already; he has deserved all
service at their hands, he is sufficient to requite them, nay he has
provided their wages already, no less then a Kingdom is prepared for them;
yea, a Kingdom immortal and undefiled, which fades not.

And if Satan should take advantage of our weakness and corruption, and
thereupon challenge us to belong unto him, to yield subjection to him: our
answer is ready, We are not our own. It is not I but sin dwells in me:
Let Satan therefore take my sin, for that indeed is of him yea, he shall
answer for my infirmity, because his malice provoked it, his cunning allured
me to it. As for me, wherein I am now my self, I delight in the Law of God
concerning my Inward man: I hate the evil that I do, even worse then the
Devil, and I shall desire to be found in Jesus Christ, that my sin may be
pardoned, and my corrupt Nature healed: That Satan's power may be abolished,
and corruption may be swallowed up of glory.

CHAP. XVIII.
Conclusion to the Wise and Humble Reader.

THus have thou at length (Dear Christian) some Part of my poor Observations,
concerning this Mystery of Witchcraft. Wherein for thy better satisfaction,
and mine own greater humiliation: As I am not ashamed to acknowledge, that
which thou can not but discern; As his Majesty's Daemonologie, Mr. Perkins,
Mr. Gifford, and others.
That I have borrowed most of my Grounds: For the Proof and Discovery of the
Doctrine of Witchcraft, from the Painful and profitable Labors of the
Worthies of our Times* that have waded before me herein, to confirm the
Authority thereof, against the Atheism of these evil days: that so each
might have the perfect honor of their own Pains. So have I thought good, to
ad such experiences and collections of mine own partly gathered out of such
Treatises as to this purpose have been published from time to time touching the
Discovery and Conviction of Witches: And partly digested from particular
observation of the hand of God, upon Parties afflicted, that so the Doctrine
may be made more profitable, for the edification of the Church. Wherein I have
spared the several Allegations, and particular testimonies herein, least the
Volume might swell too much, and so prove tedious, and triuial: Referring thee
and my self, for warrant herein unto those manifold Treatises which have bin
frequently published to this purpose, and are usually to be had upon the
Stationers Stalles. And if any thing over and besides has been added out of my
particular observations from such general Passages, and private Meditations,
for the further fastening of this Doctrine upon the conscience of the wise
Christian, that he may not dwell in the general speculation thereof to increase
curiosity, and so nourish Atheism: but rather may be provoked to a more holy
use of the same, by observing the general Method, and deepnesse of Satan
herein to ensnare unstable souls. As I desire the^ herein with me, to magnify
the free grace of God; So I entreat them in the bowels of Jesus Christ, to make
the use thereof. That whereas the speculation of Truth, without conscience of
profiting thereby, is the means to deprive us eue^ of the knowledge thereof
(which I take to be a maine reason, why this Doctrine so generally
acknowledged, both by Heathen and Christians is notwithstanding questioned and
opposed; because it meets with particular corruptions and crosses carnal,
and politic designs) that therefore thou would still conioyne the
Spiritual use thereof, with the knowledge of the same. Observing herein, not
so much what Witches may do for the hurt of the body, but what snares in the
harm of the body they lay for the soul: By withdrawing the mind from the
knowledge and love of the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ; and bewitching the
same, with the love of superstition that would feign, and by this means (as
has bin observed) is very likely to prevail among us, observing wisely, that
such oppositions, as have been made against this manifest Truth, have not bin
so much in regard of The Literal Truth it self, as in respect of such
Spiritual consequence of more sacred and necessary Trueths which depend
thereupon. As the power of the Gospel in prevailing against Witchcraft, and so
therein confounding all formal worship, and Popery. The effect of the Gospel
following necessarily upon the doctrine, Namely, The day of Judgment; the
punishment of the wicked in hell, etc. The authority of the Magistrate, in
punishing these Hel-hounds, etc. Wherein as thou may observe the wonderful
wisdom of God, in confounding the craftienesse of Idolaters, that while with
one breath they are glad to beg this testimony from hell, for the justifying of
their hellish idolatry and worship, in advancing of their lying miracles; and
so do approve, to this end of this doctrine of Witchcraft, yet even with
another; they would feign blow away this truth again, because it makes to the
confirmation of the Power of the Gospel, as discovering the Iuglings, and
treacheries therein: so let this advice thee, not to rest in the Form of
Religion, but to labor to embrace the power thereof: and to make use of these
spiritual Observations: to this end. Promising thee, that as I have endeavored
to discover some part of Satan's deepnesse herein, so (if the Lord spare health
and liberty) shall thou be shortly furnished with a more plentiful discovery
of Satan's Delusions against the whole practice of sanctification to settle thy
conscience: whereof thou have for the Information of thy judgment the some In
the first Part of the Christians daily Sacrifice.
formerly delivered unto thee. And so I heartily commend thee to the grace of
GOD, which is able to build thee further in the power of Godliness, and so to
present thee blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Praying thee to pass by such faults of Form and Complement, as my manifold
infirmities and want of leisure may give occasion of, and to amend such other
of Impression as thou shall hereby be furnished. And so again; craving thy
hearty Prayers for the continuance, both of Public and Priuate-Libertie, I
commend thee unfeignedly to the blessing of our good God, who will for his
glory reserve Light in Israel, for the full demolishing of the Kingdom of
Antichrist; and for the glorious and more perfect advancement of his holy Son
JESUS, in all his Ordinances: To whom be praise and Obedience throughout all
the Churches. And in whom I rest.

Thy poor Remembrancer at the Throne of Grace. THO. COOPER


