WORK FOR A Mass Priest.

IN.DOMINO

CONFIDO.



LONDON Printed by William Jones, dwelling in Redcrosse street. 1617.

WORK FOR A MASS PRIEST.
1. SIR Priest, is not this of In Symbolo To. 2. operum Athanasij edit
Commelinae An. 1600.
Athanasius good Divinity, filius a patre solo est, non factus nec creatus?
The Son is of the Father alone, not made, nor created. If so, then I pray you
tell me, how without blasphemy Discip. de Tempore set. 111. Cassanaeus Gatal.
Gloriae Mundi part. 2. consid. 3. fol. 4. Biel. sect. 4. in Can. Missae.
you can say, Sacerdos est creator sui creatoris: A priest is the Creator of his
Creator: meaning Christ the Son of God.

2. Again, if it be current Divinity which the same Loco supra citato.
Athanasius delivers; Christus, Deus ex substantia patris: homo ex substantia
matris. Christ is of the substance of his Father, as he is God; and of the
substance of his Mother, as he is Man: Tell me where the wit of your John the
22. was, when Horae B. virg. salve santa facies fol. 68. edit Par^f 1526
he said, Rex fit ex pane. The King (meaning Christ the King of heaven) is made
of bread: and why you are not ashamed to retain in the De consecrat. d. 2. c.
72. virum sub.
Canon Law these words, Corpus Christiet sanguis ex panis et vini substantia
efficitur. The body and blood of Christ is made of the substance of bread and
Wine.

3. Thirdly, if it be true which De ciuitate dei l. ^. c. 29.
S. Austen says, That God is nusquam inclusus, penned in, in no place: and that
the great Euripedes in Cyclope Act. 4
Cyclops (when Ulysses told him, that the Wine which he had in his Bottle was
the god Bacchus) did not without cause in a wonderment reply? What? A god in a
bottle? I pray tell me, why you pen up your Sacrament, which Allen de
sacrificio Euch. cap. 41. and Bristow Motive 26.
you acknowledge for your God, in a Pixe or in a box. Of a Be in a Box I have
heard much by many; but of a God in a box I never heard but by Papists?

4. Fourthly, if it be evident that they are no gods, whose Priests keep their
Temples with doors, and with locks, and with bars, lest their gods should
be spoiled by Robbers, as Baruk. cha. 6. ver. 17.
Baruk says in his 6. Chapter, which goes for Canonical Scripture with you:
If they who cannot defend themselves from thieves and Robbers deserve not to be
reputed gods, as the same Verse 56.
Author says: If Hom. 57. in Genesis 31.
Chrysostom justly derided Laban when he said, O excellentem insipientiam!
Tales sunt dii tui vt quis eos furart possit? Non erubescis dicere, Quare
furatus es deos meos? O notable foolerie! Are thy gods such gods as may be
stolen? Art thou not ashamed to say, why have thou stolen my gods? Why should
not you, and your fellows, Sir Priest, be whoopt at for holding the Sacrament
to be God, which for fear of stealing you Lyndwood Prouinc. con. titul. l. 3.
de custodia Eucha. cum clau ura in c. dignissimum.
would not have hung over the high Altar under a Canopie, but reserved in a
surer place under lock and key.

Fifthly, if it be evident, that they are no gods, which cannot be preserved
from rust and worms: which feel not when things which creep out of the earth
eat them, as it seems by Chap. 6. ver. 11 and 19
Baruk before mentioned: seeing it is the Joseph. Angles, Flores quaest.
Theologi^in 4. sent. part. ^. q. de suscep. Euch. ad 3. difficult* 2. p. 96.
general doctrine of your Church, That worms may breed in your Sacrament:
that brute-beasts, Dogs, Hogs, Mice, Chouhges, may eat it: Are you not
singular odd Caps, to Allen and Bristow locis supra citatis.
hold the Sacrament for your Lord and your God?

Ecquemtam amentem esse putas, qui illud quo vescatur deum credat esse?
Think thou there is any man so mad that holds it for his god whereof he
eats, says Apud Cic. l. ^. de Not. deorum.
Cetta? Quomodo quis sanae mentis deum nuncuparit id quod vero deo oblatum
tandem ipse comedit? How can any man of reason think that to be God, which he
offreth in sacrifice to the true God, and afterward eats thereof himself,
says Quaest. 11. in Leuit.
Theodoret. And if this be true, Sir Priest, do not you deserve to be sent to
Bedl^m for eating the Sacrament, which you call your Lord and God? Auerroes (
Espencaeus de Euch. l. 4 c. 3.
they say) professed, that he had traveled a great part of the world, and that
he had seen many men of different Religions, and yet he found not any
Christiana deteriore^, aut ta^ fatua^, worse or foolisher then the Christians:
qui^ deum suum que^ colunt dentibus deuorabant, because they tare him with
their teeth, whom they worshipped as their God I verily believe he wronged the
christians of his time, charging them with that whereof they were not guilty:
but if he had lived since your Religion got footing, and meant of you, he had
spoken nothing but the truth, and his censure had been justifiable.

7. The God of right believing Christians is 1. Ioh. 5. 10.
life it self, and gives life to others, even Ioh. 6.
everlasting life to them who eat him spiritually. Yet your god is such a god,
that a man eating him after your fashion, he may easily be poisoned by him.
And I pray you then, how should your god be reputed the God of right believing
Christians?

That a man may be poisoned, by eating, after your fashion, your god, the
Sacrament, I mean; it is plain by diverse examples, for

Henricus Archiep. Eboracensis cum diuina celebraret mysteria, hausto in ipso
calice (vt aiunt) veneno obiit. Henry Archb. of York died (as they say) of
poison, by drinking of the Chalice when he administered the Sacrament, says
Hist. Angl. in vita Steph. ad An. 1154. p. 122
Matthew Paris.

Victor tertius fuit extinctus per venenum in calicem missum. Pope Victor the
third was killed with poison in the Chalice, says In Chron. ad An. 1095.
Polanus and Fascic. Temp. ad An. 1094.
others.

Henricus 7. Imperator (vt communis fert opinio) per paenitentiarium suum,
immixto veneno in calice, dum ab ipso Eucharistiam sumeret extinctus est. The
Emperor Henry the 7. (as the common report goes) was killed by his ghostly
father, who put poison into the Chalice when he delivered unto him the
Communion, says the Ad An. 1314
Author of the Appendix to Polonus.

8. A Guitmundus l. 2. de Sacram.
Synod of BB. in Italy decreed, That when the true flesh of Christ and his true
blood appears at the celebration of the Sacrament in their proper kind, both
the flesh and the blood should be reserved in the midst of the Altar for
especial Reliks. Now I would know of you Sir Priest, what time or reason you
have to make a Relike of your god? of the Reliks of Saints I have heard some
talk, but of the Reliks of God, or rather that God himself should be kept for
a Relike, I think never man heard, but out of a Papists mouth.

9. I read that you Sum Angelica verbo. Missa Nu 18. vide etiam verb.
Eucharistia sect. 3: Nu. 5.
prescribe, Si Musca vel Aranea cadat in calicem post Consecrationem etc. If
either Fly, or Spider, fall into the Chalice after words of Consecration, so
that there be fear of poisoning, or provocation to vomit, the Priest shall
take sanguinem illum et igne combur at cum aliqua stupa vel panno linneo, in
ipso madefacto: that blood, and burn it by the help of some Tow, or Linen
rags dipped in it. Now whether it be poisoned or not poisoned, whether it be
such as will provoke vomit, or not provoke vomit, as long as the species
remains, it is your god. And how then can you clear your selves from burning
of your god?

10. I hear Conc. Trent. sess. 22. Can. 1.
you teach, That in your Mass, Christ is truly and properly sacrificed by you.
And with all I hear Bell. lib. 1. de Missa cap. 2.
you teach, that whatsoever is truly and properly sacrificed, if it be a live
thing, it is killed. Now I would gladly know of you, if this be thus, how you
can excuse your selves from killing of Christ? For Christ, whom (as you say)
you sacrifice truly, and properly, is a live thing.

11. I hear you Bell. l. 4. de Euch. cap. 16.
teach, That there is no Transubstantiation except he be a Priest who
consecrates, and Idem l. 1. de Sacram. in genere c. 27.
have an intent to consecrate. Now, seeing it is confessed by some of your
selves, Paulus Langius in Crhon. Citizensi ad An. 1514. Ioh. Franc. Leo in
Thesauro fori Eccles. part. 3. de prohibit and premijs Nu. 57
that some have taken upon them the name of Priests, who were none: some Bodin
Daemonoman. l. 4. cap. 5. Nich. de Plow. decret. doctore Tract^ de Euch.
being Priests have used the words of consecration without intent to consecrate.
I would know how any lay Papists can possibly know when your Hoasts are
transubstantiated, and when he may safely adore it, because except there be
transubstantiation, he commits Idolatry in adoring: adoring bread and wine the
Creature, in stead of the Creator.

12. I read in your books, k That the Virgin Mary, sola plus potest apud Deum
impeirare, quam omnes sancti in Coelo: Can of her self alone prevail more
with God then all the Saints in heaven besides: yea I read, that Chrysostom. a
visitat. Tom. 2. I. de verbis dominae ad filium in nuptuis ca. 2.
velocior est nonnunquam salus, inuocato nomine Mariae, quam inuocato nom ne
Domini Jesus vnici filii eius: oftentimes men find more present help upon
their praying to our Lady, then upon their praying to Jesus Christ. And that
Discip. de Temp ser. 161. de Sanct. s.
Nihil nos Deus voluit habere quod per manus Mariae non transiret: Gods will is,
we shall have nothing but what passes through the Virgin Mary's fingers.

Now if this be true, I would know why men should not pray to the Virgin Mary
only, who is so gracious and omnipotent: and cease to trouble, if not Christ,
yet the rest of the Saints, which in comparison of her are so grace-lesse, and
impotent?

13 I read in your Rhem. Annot in 2. Cor. 1. 11.
books, that you hold it absurd to say: That the interc^ssion of our fellows
beneath, are more available then the prayers of those that be in the glorious
sight of God above. Now if it be indeed absurd to say so, I would gladly know
of you, why S. Paul desired the Romans 15. 30.
Romans, the 2. Cor. 1. 11.
Corinthians, the Ephesians. 6. 19.
Ephesians, the Colos. 4. 3.
Colossians, the 1. These. 5. 25. and 2. These. 3. 1.
Thessalonians, the Heb. 13. 18.
Hebrews, all of them his fellows beneath, to pray for him: and desired none
of the Saints in the glorious sight of God above to pray for him? And why S. I
am. 5. 16.
James advised them to whom he writ, That one of them (beneath) should pray for
another: and required them not to pray to the Saints in the glorious sight of
God above for help?

14. I have read in your books, that your Pope is called Conc. Horent. sess.
vlter Turre cremat. sum. de Ecclesial. 2 c. 80.
Caput vniuersalis Ecclesiae, Idem lib. 2. cap. 86.
Pater Ecclesiae, Ibid.
Filius Ecclesiae, z Sponsus Ecclesiae, Matter Ecclesia: the head of the
Catholic Church, the Father of the Church, Bell. lib 2 de To. pont. ca. 31.
the Son of the Church, the Spouse of the Church, the Church our Mother. Now I
would know of you, how he can be the Church her self, and yet head of the
Church, and the Churches husband: how he can be father to the Church, and yet
a son of the Church: how without committing Incest, the father may marry his
daughter, the brother may marry his sister, the son may marry his mother.

15. I read in your books, Cande labru^ aureum Tit. de Satisfact. Nu. 17.
impres. Brixiae an. 1595.
solum Deum nosce quae sit iusta poenitentia that God only knows how long
every sin deserves to be punished in Purgatory; though Discip. de temp.
ser. 156. d
some take upon them precisely to set down, that every sin deserves* 2555.
days purgatory torments. And yet I read, that the Pope grants Indulgences in
this manner. Qui hoc vel illud fecerit liber abit animam vnam a Purgatorio: He
that does this, or that, shall deliver a soul, or more, out of purgatory. Now
I would know how your Pope comes to know, That souls are so near the time of
their delivery, that the doing of this, or that, will suffice to make eauen
for the remainder of their punishment, or rather, whether you be not of my
mind, that the Pope in granting such Indulgences, plays the K. and the people
in making reckoning of them, play the Fools.

16 I read in your books, that your Pope, for delivering of souls out of
Purgatory, prescribes sometimes no more, but the saying of a Mass at such an
Altar in such a Church: or the saying of a Pater Noster twice or thrice, etc.
Now I would know, with what justice God could keep him in such horrible
torments as are in Purgatory, for want of the saying of a Mass, or two or
three Pater Nosters: who^ in mercy he meant to deliver upon the saying of a
Mass, or two or three Pater Nosters?

17 And seeing I read in your books, Anton. part. 3 Tit. 22. cap. 5. sect. 5.
That your Pope has power to empty Purgatory at once: and if the saying of a
Mass and a Pater Noster will help to empty it: I would know, how you can
excuse your Pope from unspeakable uncharitableness, and hard hartednes: in that
he himself says no more Masses, nor Pater Nosters for Christian souls, then
he does: nor sets more of his Priests on that work. I do not doubt, but if
such commodities would redeem souls, the Carmelits should have no cause to
brag of their privilege, which is, These. Carm. Paris. impress. An. 1601. test
Moulins in defense of the Catholic faith Art. 21.
that none of them shall lie longer in Purgatory then the Saturday following
their departure: for the Pope might deliver every man the same day he dyed.

18 I have a Ho. B. verg. secund. vsum Sarum. impres Paris. an. 1526.
book of yours, wherein their are many pardons granted upon saying of certain
prayers, some for skores some for hundredth of days: some for hundreds, some
for thowsands of years. Among which there is fol 66.
one for 1000000 years: and an fol. 144.
other promising as many years of pardon as there are bodies buried in that
Church yeard where the prayer is said, which may amount to a numberles number,
tho perhaps not so many as Treatise of diverse matters concerning Land. cap. of
the whole pardons of Rome granted by diverse Popes. Sur de con.
Pope Sylvester granted to the Church of S. John Laterans, who at the hallowing
of it, granted so many years of pardon thereto, as there fell drops of water
that day, albeit never man saw a greater rain then fell that day. Now I would
know of you, why any man should trouble himself with saying of those
prayers, which have petty pardons of days, or some hundreds of years,
assigned them? Me thinks it were enough to say that prayer which has 1000000
years of pardon: and the other Churchyard prayer, which comes to a Nemo
scit, and to let the rest sleep in the deck.

19 I read in your Bell. lib. 2. de monach ca. 30.
books, That your Votaries break their vows, if they marry: but not, if they
keep whoores. Now I would know of you, whether this does not argue plainly,
That your Votaries vow against Marriage, which the Scriptures call honorable:
and not against Whoring, which is of it self damnable?

20 I read in your books, Tho: Aquin. comment. in Tit. 1.
That he is more capable of holy Orders among you who has kept two Whores, then
he who has married a widow, or two wives. And if this be thus, may we not say
with your in cap. Quia circa. extra. de Bigamis.
gloss, Nota mirabile, quod plus habit luxuria, quam castitas. Observe a
strange thing, Whoredom has greater privilege then Chastity.

21 I have heard it credibly reported, That your BB. may absolve from any sin
committed against the Law of God, but not from every trespass against the
Papal Sea. Now if the report be true, I desire to know, why he should be denied
the lesser, to whom the greater is granted: And why you should be angry at us,
if we say, that according to your opinion, Trespasses against the Pope, are
more heinous then trespasses against God.

22 I have heard it credibly reported, That the Jews are licensed to have
Synagogues at Rome: where Protestants cannot be allowed to have a Chapel. Now
if this report be true also, I would gladly know of you, why the Jews should
have such favor above the Protestants: seeing the Jews rail blasphemously on
Christ Jesus, of whom the Protestants never spoke nor thought evil, but
always honorably.

23. But to come nearer you Sir Priest, I am told, That your Priests take this
oath, Bulla. Pij 4. ^up. forms profess fid. constit 30. in summa constit. sum.
pon^a Greg. 9. vsque ad Sixth. 5
Ego N. sacram scripturam iuxta eum sensum que tenuit, and tenet sanct a matter
Eeclesia, cuius est iudicare de vero sensu and interpretatione sacrarum
scripturam admitto, nec eam vnquam nisi iuxta vnanimem consensum patrum
accipiam and interpretabor, that is, I such a one, do take the holy Scriptures
in that sense, which my holy mother the Church, whose duty it is to judge
which is the true sense of Scripture, has taken it, and takes it in: neither
will I ever take it in other sense then such as the Fathers give thereof with
joint consent Now if you do so, I would gladly know, how you can clear your
selves from perjury, seeing it is plain you sometimes take q Bell. lib. 1 de
purg. cap. 3.
and expound Scripture in that sense, which never father gave of them, as for
example, Micah 7. ver. 8. 9. which you allege for Purgatory. For no Father
did ever so expound it. Sometimes you take and expound them in that sense,
which is contrary to some Fathers, as when Bell. lib. 1. de purg. cap. 7.
you expound the words in the 24. of the Proverbs ver. 16. of falling into
sin, which Austen says is not so. For Non de iniquitatibus sed de
Tribulationibus loquitur, says de Civit. Dei lib. 11. cap. 31.
Austin. Sometimes you take and expound them in that sense, which is contrary
to all the Fathers, which we find to have interpreted them, as when you take
Ioh. 10. 16. v Ioh. de Paris. Tract. de potestate regia et Papal. cap. 3.
Stapleton Antidot in Evang. Ioh. cap. 10.
Christ's words, which he spoke of one Shepherd, to be meant of your u Pope, and
not of Christ himself. For the vide Rayn. Apolog. these. Nu. 24.
Fathers say, that by that one Shepherd Christ meant himself.

24. Again Sir Priest, I am informed that your famous B. Simancha writes thus.
Instit. cathol. cap. 45. Nu. 14. impress. valissolet. An. 1552.
Hereticis fides a priuato data seruanda non est-nec fides a magistratibus data
seruanda est haereticis: faith made to an heretic by a private man, is not to
be kept-neither is that Faith which is made to an heretic by Magistrates, to
be kept. Though I have seen a I. R. in his overthrow of pulpit Babels etc.
printed 1612. part. 1. chap 4.
book of yours, wherein this is utterly denied, yet I am credibly informed it is
very true. Yea I am informed, that your Pope Martin the 5. writ to Alexander
Duke of Lituania Apud Co hlaeum l. 5. hist. Hussirarum.
thus; Scito te mortalitater peccare si seruabis fidem datam haereticis. Know
thou sinnest mortally if thou keep thy oath with heretics. Now, if this be
thus, I would gladly know, you holding Protestants for heretics, why you
should look that any Protestant should trust you further upon your oaths, then
he would trust a dog with a shoulder of Mutton.

25 They say you teach Symancha Institut. Cathol. cap. 45. Nu. 28.
haereticum esse priuatum dominio naturali, Civilly, Politico. That an heretic
is deprived of all his jurisdiction whether Natural; Civil, or Politic: and
Nu. 27.
omni debito obligationis et obsequii, freed from al debt due by bond or
service: in so much that the children, and servants, and subjects of heretics,
owe no duty to their Parents, Ministers, or Princes: that good wives need not
lie with their husbands. That such as are indebted, need not pay their debts to
their Creditors, Custos arcis, et vasillus liberatur a Domino haeretico, cui
fidelitatem prom^serat* ibid.
That keepers of Forts or Towns may surrender them into the enemies hands. And
if this be your doctrine, can you be angry, If Protestant Princes, and their
Subjects, who have wives, and children, and servants, and money in other men's
hands, do wish you al vltra Garamantas and Indos.

26 You Bell. lib. 4. de verbo Dei non scripto ca. 2.
teach, Sir Priest, That the Word of God is partly written, partly unwritten.
And the written word, you call Scripture: the unwritten Tradition. Yet you
undertake to prove diverse of your opinions both by the Scripture, and by
Tradition: as for example, Praying to Saints: Praying for the dead: setting up
of Images in Churches: worshipping of Images set up, etc. Now I would know with
what honesty you can allege Scripture, for that which you say is a
tradition: or tradition, for that which you say you have Scripture? Can one and
the same thing be written, and not written?

27 You brag much of the Church, as though it were yours only, and not ours.
You Gretser trac. de agnoc. scrip. Canon ca. ^. col. 1888.
tell us, that infallibilitas verbi dei ex Ecclesiae testimonio pendet. The
infallibility of the word of God depends upon the Churches testimony: that
the Church is, Iudex omnium controuersiarum, Judge of al controversies. And yet
when we urge you to deal plainly with us, and to tell us what you mean by
the Church, you 3 answer: Per Ecclesiam intelligimus Pontificem Romanu^, by
the Church we mean the Pope of Rome. Now is not this a jest?

28 You Idem lib. citat. cap. 6. col. 1905. and defen. Bell. lib. 3. c. 10. To.
1. col. 1450. 4 Baron. Annal Tom. 6. 5 Epist. ad Clem. 8. missa An. dom. 1593
quae habet. ad finem tom. 6. Annal. Baronii. 6 Number. 6.
tell us, that Clemens 8. was called by Gabriel Patriarch of Alexandria,
tertius-decimus Apostolorum gloriosi domini nostri Jesus Christi, et quintus SS.
Euangelistarum, the 13. Apostle of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and the
5. Evangelist, and your 6 Cardinal Baronius approues of the Patriarks
intitling of your Pope so. Now I would know, if Clemens the 8. deserved to be
called the 13. Apostle, and the 5. Evangelist, why the other Clements, and
especially Clemens the first, yea and all the rest of your Popes may not be
thought to have been Apostles and Evangelists?

Bell. lib. 1. de sanct. beatit. ca. 13.
29 They say, you burn Incense to your Images. And if that be so, I would
know, why you should not be held Idolaters, seeing to burn Incense to a thing
has been held as much as to offer sacrifice unto the thing. And sacrificing
unto any thing but God only has been always reputed Idolatry. Exodus 22. 20.
Austin de Civ. Dei lib 10. c. 4. Horae. B. virg. impress Paris. in 4. Anno
1526. fo. 62. 63


30 I have seen a prayer of yours Sir Priest, which as the Rubric says, was
showed unto S. Austen by revelation of the holy Ghost: and of which you give
out, that who bears it about them, shall not perish in fire nor water,
neither in battle, nor judgment, nor shall die sudden death, nor be
poisoned with venom. Now this being thus, I desire to know what difference
between you and sorcerers?

Hosius lib. 3. de autho it sac. script. Pigh. Ecclesi. Hierarchi. Stapl. Apol.
ad Illiricum.
31 I am told you commend the Collier, who being asked by the Devil or by a
Cardinal (some say the one, some say the other) how he believed, returned
answer, as the Church believes: and being asked how the Church believed,
replied, as he believed: running still the round, vouchsafing no other answer,
but I believe as the Church believes, and the Church believes as I believe. Now
if this be true, I desire to know why the whole pack of you should not be held
for fools, seeing belief in gross, is but gross divinity. Sure I am, lib.
5. cap. 20.
Lactantius laughed at the^ as fools, who being asked a Ad maiorum iudicia
confugiunt.
reason of that which they believed, could give none, but rested in their
forefathers judgments, quod illi sapientes fuerint, illi probauerint, illi
sciuerint quod esset optimum: because (forsooth) they were very wise, and they
approved of that which they held, and they knew what was best to be holden:
concluding that such did se ipsos sensibus spoliare, and ratione abdicare, that
is, make fools of themselves.

32 The last point wherein I desire to be satisfied by you is, What you are
able to reply, upon the Jesuits Watson in his Quodlibers, page 100.
behalf, to Sixtus Quintus: who couuenting the General of their order before
him, and expostulating the case with him, why his Order called themselves
Jesuits; and receiving answer, that the people called them so, they
themselves not taking that name unto them, but the name of Clerks of the
society of Jesus: replied upon the General prettily (to give the devil his
right) asking, why they durst be so saucie as to 1. Cor. 1. 2.
take that unto themselves, seeing the Apostle witnesses, that all Christians
are called into the society of Jesus. Me thinks, the Popes Replica, will admit
no Replica on the Jesuits part. And therefore your Jesuits are as faulty in
taking upon them in special to be of the society of Jesus, as if they had
refused to be called Ignatians of their lame founder Ignatius, and scorned the
name Christian, derived of Christ, as to common: and taken unto themselves the
name Jesuit, of Jesus, which yet was held utterly unlawful Lyndwood
Constitut. prouincial. lib. Tit. de Consuetudine huius autem.
many years before your Jesuits were hatched.

FINIS.

