THE DANGER OF POPERY: OR, A SERMON PREACHED at a Visitation at Ashford in
Kent, upon 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12.

Wherein the marks of Antichristianisme and signs of truth are opened and
applied, and the Question of the saving and damning of those that follow
Antichrist is explaned by the Scriptures.

By ROBERT ABBOTT, Preacher of the Word of God at Cranebrooke in Kent.

APOC. 14. 10. The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God. LONDON,
Printed by I. L. for Philemon Stephens, and Christopher Meredith and are to be
sold at the Golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1625.

TO THE REVEREND and Right Worshipful Doctor KINGS LEY, Archdeacon of
CANTERBVRY my loving friend; ROBERT ABBOTT wishes all increases of
faithfulness in Gods Church here, and glory hereafter through Jesus CHRIST.
Right Worshipful and Reverend,
WHat you thankfully and lovingly accepted when it was preached, comes, you
see, in another form; craving a second veiw. Though what I intended could not
all be spoken in the allotted time, yet may it all be seen. If you think it
may be useful in this secure age for any of the Clergy under you, your
countenancing of it may encourage others to read it. I doubt nothing of your
love either to me, or mine, much less to the common good. This poor Sermon
will (I hope) be found to aim at good, because at God, and against Antichrist.
It is true, it might have been the work of far more able, but not more
willing. Therefore as such a work it is tendered unto you, from him who desires
to continue to God a faithful soldier against the Pope of Rome, and to your
worship

A poor friend and fellow-helper in the work of Christ Jesus, ROBERT ABBOT.

The danger of Popery, or a Sermon preached upon 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12.
That all they might be damned, which believed not the truth, but had pleasure
in unrighteousness.

THE Wiseman, who (as Solomon says) has his eyes in his head, may easily
perceive that in these words there is a fearful danger, when they say (that
all they might be damned): and a full description of those which are in
danger, when they say, they are such who believe not the truth but had pleasure
in unrighteousness. Concerning which it is impossible that either we should be
profitable learners or speakers except we take a short veiw of the whole
chapter without which we cannot aptly understand this present text.

In the chapter therefore you may conceive The chapter analyzed.
with me two points: first, a doctrine; and secondly an use. The doctrine
concerns Antichrist; and comes in thus. There were seducers (as it seems)
in the Primitive Church, who would have persuaded the Christians that the day
of judgment was at hand. And hence afterward grew that Atheistical question
in Peter, where is the promise of his coming? Now to 1. Pet. 3. 4.
prevent the danger of them, the Apostle gives an admonition, forced upon their
hearts with a grave and powerful charge, that they would not Verse 1.
be troubled with such a suggestion upon what pretense soever. For what he
says, he gives a Verse 2.
double reason: the first drawn from the effect of that conceit; it would
deceive them: and the Verse 3.
second, from the proper reasons of that effect; which are those things which
must happen before Christ's coming to judgment; and these are two. The first
is that Apostasy or leaving (...). Romans 10. 20.
our standing, and by faith we stand: and the Apostle expounds it when he
says, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith. The 2. Tim.
4. 1.
second is the revelation of Antichrist: and so comes in the doctrine
concerning him. Which doctrine is first propounded, and secondly amplified. It
is propounded both by setting down what he shall be, and what he shall do. In
respect of his estate natural he shall be a Man: in respect of his estate
sinful and cursed, he shall be a man of sin, the son of perdition. Now,
for what he shall do both by opposition and ambition, the text says, that he
shall oppose and exalt himself, as you may see.

Secondly the Apostle does amplify this doctrine, Verse 4.
both by the corrupting causes of Antichrist, and by his furtherances and
means of advancement, as also by the persons who shall give him intertainment.
As for the corrupting causes they are three: first the persons, to who^ he
should have binne known, that is, the Thessalonians, who remembered not what
Paul had taught them concerning him. Secondly the person Verse. 5. Verse. 6, 7.
Aetas Antichristi nascentis sub Benifacio 3. exultantis sub Adriano 7.
regnantis sub Hildebrando. triumphantis in Leone 10. Crak. defens. con. Spal.
cap. 4. page 21. v. 8. Verse. 9. Verse. 10.
which hindered his Revelation, that is, he which with-helde, to wit, the
Roman Emperor, who did decline as the Roman Papacy crept up. Thirdly, the
person hindering his progress that is, the Lord, who shall consume him with
the spirit of his mouth and abolish him with the brightness of his coming. Now
for the means of Antichrists advancement, the Apostle sets them down to be
these too (which we find to be true in our own experience when we look
upon the advancement of Popery) to wit, signs and lying wonders in forged
miracles, and deceaueablenes of unrighteousness in gilded lies. Lastly,
touching the persons who shall give Antichrist intertainment; they are
described, by their condition, they are (says the text) in a perishing estate;
by the causes of it, namely, their own sin (they received not the love of the
truth) and gods judgment (who therefore sent them strong delusion); and lastly,
they are descibed by the Issue of all, that is, damnation, in this verse which
is propounded Verse. 1, 2.
unto you. So that this follows upon those miserable Antichristians, to be
damned.

Antichrist is revealed, God fights against him, The Sum of the chapter
concerning Antichrist.
men willingly slight the truth, the Devil fights for him, men believe lies
and follow him, and God damnes them. This is the Sum.

Let not the following use be hungered after till the proper place of it. For
the present, think with your selves that every man is apt to harken after
others danger: and therefore if we hear Tunc tua res agitur, and,
of robbery or murder ye inquire who it was? Seeing then that in these works ye
hear of danger, of killing of bodies and souls, and robbing them of god and
happiness, diligently attend to two things:

1. The persons in danger, they who believe not the truth but have pleasure in
unrighteousness. 2. The danger of the persons, that all they might be damned.
The order of the Apostle is (I know) by this means inuerted, yet this I take
to be the most proper and natural way of handling, first to know a thing
before we know the adiunct of it, first to know a man before we can know his
danger.

Antichristians? I answer from The persons in danger.
the text.

They are described here by Infidelity in respect of the word of God; and by
evil belief in respect of the word of Antichrist. Which description that you
may conceive, consider the four terms of it. First, what is meant by the
truth: secondly, what by not believing the truth: thirdly, what is meant by
unrighteousness: fourthly, what by taking pleasure in unrighteousness. By
truth you must understand the doctrine of the Gospel contained in the
Scriptures. Thus Christ expounds Ioh. 17. 17.
it, sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is truth; which word is so called
in three respects. First in respect of the undeceivable nature of it. All
other doctrines are either false, or may be vain, or fruitless. They are
false if they oppose the religion of the Scriptures. They may be vain, whether
they be natural or civil, if they do possess us, and captiuate or pervert
our understanding: for these have their places if they do prepare us for
higher Modo praeparent ac non detineant ingenium.
employments, and do not imprison us from God and his more saving truth.
Secondly, the word is truth in respect of the employment which God has given
it in the Church to be a rule and square of all saving truth. As Moses must
build according to the pattern, so must we lay the ground of all saving Heb.
8. 5.
and wholesome truth according to the Scriptures.

Therefore when Christ meant to destroy by degrees and to deface the
deformities of Antichrist, he gives John, as a tipe of the Ministry of the
Gospel, Apoc. 10. 8, 9.
the little book to eat which is the word of God. He gave him not the great
Popish volumes of decretals, which, together with the spirit of prophecy in
the Popes own breasts do make up the word of Antichrist, but the little
volume of the holy Scripture which makes up most fully the word of the Lamb.

Lastly, it is called truth in regard of the work of it: because it does
confound error and work sincerity in judgment, heart, tongue, affections;
and the whole conversation of those, who without prejudice, do cleave unto it.
For though some thorough the just judgment of God, are given over to the
blindness of their minds, and rebellion of their wills, and so do not submit
unto the word, as those who resisted the holy Ghost, yet so many as are
ordained Acts. 7. 5^. Acts. 28. 23. 24. Act. 2. 47.
unto life and shall be saved, are by this means at some times or other
reclaimed from their false courses and added to the Church.

^. These. 2. 10.
the not receiving the love of the truth that they might be saved, here he
calls, not believing the truth. Besides the power of believing, is called a
Ioh. 1. 12.
receiving by John, when he says, that as many as received him to them he gave
a right to be the sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. The
contrary to this not believing is expressed by three significant phrases,
namely, sealing, grafting, hiding. Esaias says; Seal up the Law among my
Disciples. Esa. 8. 15.


The fowls pecke the wheat in the stony ground, but that which is sealed up
is not easily come by to be stolen away. James says, receive with meekness
Iam 1. 21.
the word which is graffed in you. As the graft is received of the stock into
one body; so the word must be incorporated into us; and not to be separated
from us but to our ruin. The Psalmist Psalm. 119. 11.
says that I have hid thy promise in my heart, that I might not sin against
thee. As blessed Mary kept Luke 2. 19. 51.
the sayings of Jesus Christ in her heart: so David kept the promises of God by
faith. When the truth is not thus sealed up and hid in our hearts by being
taken into our nature, that we may live and die with it, but the smoke of the
bottomless pit is suffered Apo. 9 2.
to darken our souls? then are we said not to believe the truth.

Ioh. 8. 46.
says, which of you can rebuke me of sin? as we see by the opposition
there, but if I say the truth why do ye not believe me? so unrighteousness
in particular in this place, as we see by the opposition here, not believing
the truth, but having pleasure in unrighteousness. And falsehood may be called
unrighteousness, both because it carries us from the rule of righteousness
which should inform our Quod efficit tale illud ipsu^ est magis tale
understanding and reform our hearts and whole conversation that we might have
an accepted righteousness: as also because it is a fearful cause of
unrighteousness. The Romans abusing the law of Nature, and turning the truth
of God into a lie, To. 1. 24, 25.
were given up in their hearts, unto lusts, uncleanness: and other Gentiles as
well as they, having their cogitations darkened, and hearts hardened for Ephesians.
4. 18, 19
want of saving truth, gave themselves unto wantonness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness.

Thus you understand unrighteousness, one thing more will clear all, and that
is, what may be meant by taking pleasure in it?

Antichrist, as effeminate persons give themselves to the pleasing enticements
of harlots. For there are three sorts of the followers of Antichrist: Some that
are simply seduced, such are they who are said to dwell on the earth, that is,
in the visible state and condition of the Church, who were Apoc. 13. 14.
deceived by the signs and great wonders of the beast. Some that are by fear
and torture compelled, such are those small and great, rich and poor, Apoc.
13. 16, 17.
bond and free, whom he made to receive his mark, or else they should neither
buy nor sell. Some also there are that are carnally minded, who live in
pleasure with the whore of Babel; such as are said to commit fornication with
her, and to be drunk with Apoc. 17. 2.
the wine of her fornications, and to wax rich with the abundance of her
pleasures. Of these does the Apoc 18. 3.
holy Apostle speak in this place.

Thus have I (as God has enabled me) opened unto you the words of the
Apostle; by which you may perceive that the text drives at the description Who
are Antichristians.
of Antichristians, and tells us that they are such as receive not with high
estimation and reverence the word of the Lamb but make a religion and take
delight in the word of the beast.



First, their slighting of the word of God in the Scriptures (as most of us
know). For as the Pope does unyoke himself from it by the spirit of Prophecy,
as he is that Caiphas; by the spirit of interpretation, as he is the Church; by
the spirit of infallibility as he is Christ's Vicar; by pretended tradition as
he is the Churches Treasurer; and by (...). 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
the power of dispensation as he is that lawless person: so his followers from
him do disgrace and discountenance the Scriptures that they may walk in
darkness without control: Are we not daily acquainted Pseudo-scriptu: a late
Popish book so called.
with their pleading against the Scriptures, and with their deriding of us for
our constant appeals unto it? Hence is it that they fill themselves with much
dirt to cast in our faces for the Scriptures sake.

Ebion, Corinthus, Menander, Arius and heretics of all times. Sol. Why
heretics appeal to the Scriptures.
We answer, that it is true that heretics do take this course and that for
three causes.



Psalm. 119.
more willingly hear then all the world. Heretics therefore being willing to
propagate their errors will corrupt such friends as are most dear to the
parties whom they would have to embrace them.

Thirdly, because they have been thus far acquainted with the doctrine of
the Church, that they know it makes the Scriptures a spiritual judge
pronouncing under God as from living oracles, what is necessary to be held and
practiced in all fundamental matters of faith and obedience. For these reasons
(I say) have heretics run unto the Scriptures: yet for all that as Christ
objected Scripture in truth against the Scribes, Pharisees, and devil who
objected it against him in hypocrisy: even so must we.

What though mine enemy say that he has part in mine inheritance, and that
this and this piece of land is his, shall I therefore beggar my self and
resign it over unto his spoil? shall I not rather search out my evidences and
clear the truth of my right and the falsehood of his claim by those means
which the kingdom where I dwell will afford? what though a Bastard say that he
has right of inheritance to my land: shall I therefore renounce all my own
birthright?

So though all the enemies of faith and bastards in the Church, shall claim a
right in our inheritance and portion of the Scriptures shall we therefore
forsake all our liuelyhood and comfort in them? shall we not rather labor by
the benefit of those gifts which God has given, (not to the Pope and his
adherents) but to the true Church of God, to wit, the gift of interpretation,
tongues, wisdom, knowledge, prayer, and the like, to clear the impostures of
falsehood and the glory of truth?

tempt Christ from the Scriptures abused? unjust or uncharitable Suites are
sufficiently condemned by Law though wrangling persons will still pretend law
to maintain them: so are all Heresies sufficiently condemned in Scriptures
though Heretics seek to maintain them by Scriptures abused.

Christ would 2. Tim. 3. 17. Math. 12. 3. Math. 22. Math* 4.
not have used it to that end; neither would the Pharisees nor Sadduces, nor
the Devil be put to silence by that means. Secondly, many thousands have binne
convinced by it to the rectifying of their judgments. And if some are obstinate
shall we say that it is not in the Scriptures power to convince? Noe; rather
it is Gods justice Act. 7. 51.
to punish their obstinacy and to give them over to perishing as those that
resist the truth.



It is the law which does judge of claymes, titles, inheritances, trespasses,
and the like; and the Judges do not make the judgment of the Law but
pronounce it: And so the Ministry of Gods Church and people does but pronounce
the judgment of the Scripture.

And if sometimes it does pronounce amiss (as it may do though it take never
so good heed to the word of God, in those things which are not necessarily
believed unto salvation) it is not because the scripture does not exactly
judge, but because we know in part and are not perfectly 1. Cor. 13, 12.
enlightened, and so may miss of the right meaning in some things; as the best
Judges in some cases may miss the right meaning of the law.

Papists believe lies.
how the Papists slight the truth (and yet in vain) to pull upon themselves
the first badge of Antichristians. (...).


The second is their delighting in that Lie of Antichrist which is here called
Unrighteousness. Antichrist is that great Theife who comes Ioh. 10.
not in by the door into the fold: look therefore as a theife puts out the
candle that so being deceived he may deceive others; so does Antichrist put
out the light of the scriptures (so much as he can) that his wretched lies and
seducements may the more easily be settled upon himself with his followers.
All false religions are lies, but there is no religion in the world (that I
know) which makes lying a part of their religion P^ae frauds: pia mendacia
but that of Rome. They have their Aequiuocation, their godly deceites and
lies; such as are made and told for the advancement of religion, and to stir
up devotion. Hence do they belie their adversaries both in their lives,
doctrine, and deaths; as we know in Luther, Calvin, Beza, Rob. Co^. cen.
quo^undam script. et multi abi.
bishop King, and others. Hence do they counterfeit false Fathers, and purge
the true ones to make them speak as they please. Hence do they thrust thousand
of lies upon the poor people, as the history of Loreto, where we read of Pope
^ulius, having performed his devotion in our Ladies Hist. of Lor lib. 2. cap. ^2
Chapels, by her protection was preserved from a Cannon* shot which beat down
his Consistory where he was and yet hurt not his Fatherhood: and of the
Dalmatian Priest (that man of Chap. 18.
true simplicity and great devotion) who having his bowels plucked out of his
body by the cruel Turks, because he would not abjure Christ, took his guts in
his hand (if any will believe it) and so went a journey of many days to
Loreto, and there was cured. They have also their Legends both in Latin and
English, and other Languages, which have binne and are of daily use to abuse
the credulous people. There we read of the power of S. Patricks Prayer, which
made a sheep bleate in the man's belly that had stole it. There we read of the
noble knight who L^genda au de S. Patr. pa. 37 Vbi supra de Annunciat. page 38.
See Beards ^tract. from the Romans Rel. D. Featly hi^ append. to Fish* net page
30. 31 32. An old post. Manuscrip.
could learn no other lesson than these two words Aue Maria; but to make
amends, he did retain them with so great devotion that when he was dead and
buried, a Lilly sprung out of his tongue, every leaf whereof had Aue Maria
stamped upon it with golden letters, to the amazement of the beholders. I might
tell you of a certain heretic who was converted to the faith by seeing S.
Anthonies Horse worship the Host, that is, the bread in the Sacrament: and of
S. Francis his Lamb which used to go to the Mass and kneel down to the
elevation: and of a little child that did start out of the Sacrament when one
did cut it, of an evil mind; which after a goodly procession entered into the
form again and so was devoutly received of the paenitent offender. I could
fill you with such Romish lies to make you loath again: all which the poor
people, being seduced, do suck in under the pretense of the spirit of
infallibillity* for Bellarmine tells Ample de^l. of Christ, doct chap, 6. p.
124.
us that the Church of Rome is the holy Church and the Spouse of God, and has
the holy Ghost for her Master; and therefore there is no danger that she
should be deceived, or that she should do or teach others to do any thing
that were against the Commandments of God. Under this pretense, what
superstitious seducements Tria ignorantiae principia: In^er Philosophos, co^tra
neg^ntem principia: inter medicos, vi^tus specifica: Inter theologos ecclesia
catholica. Sr. Walt. Rayl. Preface.
shall not be swallowed down without examination? If, as the Philosopher
cries out to those that would dispute, it is a Principle: so if the Papist can
but allege his Catholic Church, it is sufficient to dampe all doubts, and to
work entertainment to all lies, be they never so palpable and notorious.

Let them go (my brethren) with these two badges of Antichristians, to wit,
their sleighting the Truth of the Lamb, and their believing the word of the
Beast: Let us pity and pray for them, that so many as are of the number of
his sealed ones, might be pulled out of these miserable snares, and go out of
Babylon, that they be not Apoc. 18. 4.
partaker of her sins, and so of her plagues.

that we may prove our selves not to be Antichristians. It is the Truth
alone, in which the sufficiency of our Souls is communicated unto us.

The ancient Christians perceiving that worldly men did place their
sufficiency in their wealth (to signify, that that sufficiency which comes
to us by our riches, comes not from them, but through Christ) stamped upon
their Coin a Cloud with this voice or Motto, This is my beloved Math. 3. 17.
Son in whom I am highly delighted: So we may stamp Christ upon Truth, as
being that wherein we have fellowship with him who is our plentiful
redemption, and the sufficiency of our bodies and souls by Truth.

But you will say, how may we be assured that Quest. How we may know our
religion to be the truth.
our religion is the truth, that so we may receive it to the comfort of our
souls? I answer; there are three things which may settle a quiet and humble
spirit.

Act. 2. Act. 3. Acts 7. Acts 10. Act. 13 etc.
the Articles of our religion with the Sermons and Apologies of Peter, and Paul
and the rest of Gods servants. If it be so that their doctrine was sufficient
to convert Jews and Gentiles and to bring them into covenant with God; and our
doctrine be wholly and entirely one with theirs, why should any that have not
the spirit of contention and contradiction doubt that our religion is not the
truth?

Pet, Geisteranus in actis Synod. Dor. page 282.
which drives not at this. Though that foolish heretic in the Synod of Dort
could not see how the doctrine of three in one could further godliness, yet
Christ teaches that even that abstract article does it: for when he prays to
his Father, that as He and his Father are one, so they Ioh, 17. 21, 22, 23.
may be one in them, does he not teach, that the Unity in Trinity does
further our unity in our selves and the mystical body? Now if true religion
be tried by this general nature of it we shall find two things. First, that
Popery (which is a religion whereby Christ is professed to be the Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world, and men are baptized into the name of
Christ, but he is applied by the false means of merit, penal satisfactions,
masses and indulgences, and we are made one in his body by a false and usurping
Prince in stead of Apostles, Ephesians. 4 11, 12.
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers) this Popery, I say, is not the
art of living well. For first it hides the rule of living well, that is, the
certain will of God in the Scriptures by ouerclouding them with uncertain
tradition. Secondly, it carries us away from God to the creatures as
Hee-saints, Shee-saints, Maskes, Images, thorough which it is great difficulty
to pierce to God by their muddy distinctions. Thirdly, it keeps their
followers blind so as they know not what they do in their Latin service: and
Bellar. lib. 1. de Iustif. cap. 7. fides melius per ignorantia^ quam per
notitiam definitur. Ephesians. 4. 18.
their faith is better defined by ignorance then knowledge. Fourthly, it gives
liberty to many sins, as ignorance whereby they are made strangers from the
life of God, Incest, fornication, perjury, rebellion and what not, seeing they
have those who are subject to the like passions, who, as Judges, of sins
committed after Baptism, Bellar. ample declar. cap. de paen. page 210
can appoint penances satisfactory to God and pronounce absolute absolutions.
Secondly, though Popery be not an Art of living well, yet our religion (whereby
Christ is honored by resting in him alone for salvation, and flying to these
means of application which he has appointed as the word, faith, Sacraments of
Christ (who alone has power to set seals to the covenant of grace, and
prayer) this religion (I say) wholly aims at good life. As the truth does so
it aims Ioh, 17. 17.
at the sanctification of the heart: not only repressing the outward acts of
sin by the contrary exercises of godliness and righteousness, as the act of
whooredome by continency, the act of drunkenness by sobriety, the acts of all
sins by watchfulness, fasting, and prayer and the like: and not only
struggling at the corruptions of the inferior faculties and brutish powers of
the soul: but opposing the very enmity of the mind, ignorance of the
understanding, darkness and variety of thoughts, stupiditie and fury of
conscience, rebellion of wills, and if there be any other disorderlinesse (as
there is too much) either in soul or body, that does exalt it self against
God and his most holy and righteous law.

Lazars at the poole of Bethesda for the descending of the Angel) that we
ouer-slip not the acceptable time and the hour of salvation. And this we are
able to do, being a matter of outward discipline, and yet we do not. When
the Blessing is given, we are with Esau hunting; in which respect we may be
justly left in our sin. Again, though we say that we are not justified by
our works, yet they are the necessary fruits of our sanctification, and the
necessary way to salvation, without which no man shall see the Lord. And
though we abhor the thoughts Heb. 12. 14.
of Merits in the notion of the Church of Rome, yet we say that we cannot
comfort our hearts without the presence of Good works, for other necessary
uses. And how can the doctrine of Tit. 3. 14.
assurance of salvation, and perseverance, lead to sin, when we cannot be
assured but by holiness, nor persevere but in the use of the holy means of
salvation?



As first, in resting upon the Traditions of the Church. We are sure that the
Scripture is the Word of God: we have the testimony of men, but the
testimony of God is greater; for it is embraced by enemies as well as by
friends, and is confirmed by the Miracles of Christ, and his Apostles: but we
cannot be so assured of Traditions.

Secondly, in dry Communions. We are sure that Christ ordained two distinct
signs, and that God is pleased when we do what he requires: but we cannot
be assured, that God is pleased with half Communions (that is, the Popish
receiving of the Bread without the Wine) under pretense of Concomitancie; no,
though we were sure that Christ were corporally present: because the Lords
Supper is a seal and sign of our crucified Lord, when his body and blood
were severed; as he says, This is my body Luke 22. 19, 20.
which is given for you, and, This is my blood which is shed for you.

Thirdly, in the Popes Monarchical headship. We are sure that Christ is the
head of the Church; because it is his office, and he is of infinite power and
influence, yea and present with Secundum esse personale
us by his divine power and virtue. But we cannot be assured that the Pope is
the head of the Church; no not in respect of outward administration Ephesians. 4.
11. 12.
and government: because God has not sanctified one man only, but many for
the gathering of the Saints, and edification of the body of Christ. Though in
respect of Christ the government of the Church is Monarchical, yet in respect
of Christ's Bishops and Ministers it is Aristocraticall.

Psas. 250.
tongue shall praise the Lord) yea and the Papists will confess it; for even
they have some prayers in vulgar tongues, as their Manuel of godly prayers,
Jesus Psalter and the like. But we cannot be assured of Gods accepting service
in an unknown tongue: because though God understand it, yet the people cannot
with understanding say, Amen. 1 Cor. 14. 16. They may give a fainte, lazy,
hasty, and ignorant Amen. but not zealous. Godw. Mos. and Aar. page 90, 91. Ex.
20. 5. Leuit. 26. 1. Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 19. and 5, 8. Es. 40.




that we may call upon God, because he has bidden Psalm. 50.
us, and has promised to hear and to help us; yea, and the Papists
themselves hold this lawful: But we cannot be assured, that calling upon the
Saints pleases either God, or them, or that they do hear, or can help. The
like we may say of the Adoration of the Host, especially because we know not
the Priests intention; and of many other Articles of their Trent Faith: whereof
if we cannot be assured, how can they give us comfort either in life or death?

Thus you see (in some measure) how you may be assured that our religion is the
truth. If now you will ask me, how then it could possible be that the world
could so much be deceived by Rome. I answer: because the smoke of the
bottomless Apoc. 9. 2.
pit had darkened the Sun and air, and the Lambs horns were upon the head of
Antichrist that Apoc. 13. 11.
foul beast. Look therefore as if a Traitor carry the colors of a Prince in
war, all the common soldiers do flock unto him, guard him, and fight under
his Banner, till the Traitor be known and the Treason be discovered: So the
Popes of Rome retaining the common principles of faith* Communia fidei
principia. Cypr.
and manners, and professing themselves to be Colour-bearers to Jesus Christ,
without which they could not so easily have insinuated themselves into the
hearts of the World (their Profession giving good occasion of enquiring after
them, and cleaving to them); most of the Western Professio opportunum fuit
inquirendi exordium.
Christians, whom he had wrought by power and policy, flocked unto him: but
when his pretenses were discovered, and they would no longer take his part
against Christ, then he makes a faction and head against us in the Council of
Trent, and excommunicateth us (like the Jews that cast out their brethren and
said, Let the Lord be glorified) as if it were our fault that Esa. 66. 5.
Columba Noae, page 28, 29, 30.
we would not drink his poison, and not his, who was so uncharitable and
treacherous, as to offer it unto us who did fly unto him for shelter. Yet let
not this his furious and Antichristian course dismay us, but let us in despite
of all his power and policy, believe the truth of the Lamb, and stop our
ears against the unrighteousness of the Beast; or else let us hearken to what
does follow to be handled, That they might all be damned.

Antichristians. The danger of Antichristians.
Such as have poisoned heads rejecting the word of truth, and poisoned hearts
taking pleasure in falsehood, which is manifested two ways: first by an eager
pursuit of the things of Antichrist without examination; as if they should
say, we will be thus; because we will be thus, doting upon a spirit of
infallibility: secondly, by a cruel quelling, killing, and sacrificing the
opposers with fire and sword, (superstition being naturally cruel) of such (I
say) that the Apostle says

But you will say that the text says they shall only be judged. The Popish
R^emists say so indeed: They would have the punishment of the followers of
Antichrist be as small as they can; Whether Antichristians shall only be judged.
and I cannot blame them: for it is natural to every creature to seek to
preserve it self; but it will not serve their turn here: for first, the
greatness of the sin, which is the contempt of the Gospel, calls for
infinite more than judging. For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and
every Heb. 2. 2. 3.
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward, how shall
we escape if we neglect so great salvation? Secondly, the greatness of the
judgment going before shows that this can be no less then damnation: for
what else can 2 Thessalonians ^. 11 (...).
follow strong delusions which infatuate a man, and are sent in wrath? Thirdly,
as the word it self does signify to judge, so to punish and condemn. Paul
says, what have I to do to judge them that are without. i. punish by
excommunication or otherwise. 1 Cor. 5. 12.
Again, whooremongers and adulterers God will judge, that is punish. So Christ
says, though he Heb. 1^ 4.
judge them not who contemn his Gospel, yet his word shall judge, that is,
condemn them. Ioh. 12. 47. 48.
Pilate says to the Jews, judge him according to your own law, that is,
condemn him. So In the new translation.
also in many other places as well as in this text, and that according to the
judgment of our English Church which is not to be slighted.

From hence then (for the clearing of the text) Whether all Papists shall be
damned.
will arise this duestion; whether all Papists shall be damned? I answer; God
forbid we should delight to imbrue our heads or hands in the blood In my Sermon
called the trial of true religion
of any. The cruelty of their false religion and the mercy of ours is well
enough known, as I have showed elsewhere. Therefore we say three things. In my
Sermon called the trial of true religion.
First that there are common principles in the Church of Rome, which being
known, and accompanied with hearts willing to be informed in the truth, purposes
and endeavors to know and do a right and holy obedience to what is known by
those principles so far as they are come, may bring men to salvation. For who
doubts but that the Belief, the ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, and the
Sacraments do comprehend all saving fundamental points of Faith and practice?
These therefore being in the Church of Rome (though with much corruption) upon
the former limitations may affoard grounds of salvation to them to whom God
gives power with an honest heart to receive them. Secondly we say that in the
midst of Popery God has reserved a remnant according to the election of grace,
which is called the Temple of God, and Gods people, who by these means, have
attained 2 Thessalonians 2. 4. Apoc. 18. 4.
to salvation. Thirdly, we say, that such have not bin members of the Popish
Apostasy (wherein every living thing died) though in the Roman Church: for
having knowledge of the Apoc. 16. 3.
common principles and being ignorant, or at the least not so fully stated in
the pernicious errors of the Popish corruptions, though they have bin in that
Church, yet they have not been of it, as many of our forefathers from age to
age.

When therefore the holy Ghost says, that they shall be damned, we must (by
the help of the same holy Ghost in his word) distinguish of Persons, of
doctrines, and of times.

1 Persons.
the beast and the number of his name, that is, such as are in outward
communion with him, Apoc. 13. 17.
who though they are deceived, yet they may have docible hearts and minds
willing to learn when our provident God does offer opportunity. Secondly,
such as worship the Beast and his Image and receive his marks, that is, such
as are in inward fellowship and mystery with him, Apoc. 14. 9, 10.
being by wilfulness and resolution, as it were, imbowelled in that state: of
these the holy Ghost says, that they shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God.

Doctrines, Fundamentu^ ^^ Veritatis 2. Salutis. 1. Cor. 3. 12.
either the foundation of truth, such are all doctrines which have ground in
the word of God; ignorance of much of which may stand with salvation, so that
it be not affected: and they who know most do not know all: or else the
foundation of salvation, such are all doctrines which do concern the causes
of our salvation, and the necessary means of application. It is the ignorance
of these which does breed perishing.

Other doctrines again are upon the foundation, as the Apostle speaks of
building on the foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, timber, 1. Cor. 3.
12.
hay, or stubble, that is, variety of doctrine which has been or is of worth
and use, as these things whereto it is compared. And of this as there has
been much (as gold and silver) in every age of the Church, so there has been
much (as hay and stubble), by sophistical speculations, forged traditions,
humane inventions, and frivolous and fryarly interpretations of the holy
Scriptures. Such trash is to be swept away as dung out of the streets, that it
might not defile our Pulpits, but that the glory of the word of God might
appear (if it were possible) as out of the mouth of Jesus Christ or of his
Apostles.

Other doctrines lastly are against the foundation, and that not only of truth
but of health also. Such are all those which draw from Jesus Christ and that
honor which is due unto him as the Savior of his people. Such is the Papal
Monarchy which blemishes Christ's kingdom; traditions as the object of faith
which blemisheth Christ's prophecy; merits, adoration of the cross and Images,
sacrifice of the Mass, Invocation of the Saints and Angels, and all other
idolatrizing points of Antichrist, which blemish Christ's Priesthood, besides
other faults. To take pleasure in and to be given over obstinately to these
things cannot stand with salvation.

Times.
restoring of the Gospel, when the holy city was trod under foot, and the
state of the Church Apoc. 11.
was despicable in the eyes of the world: then as God gave his people less, so
he required less at their hands. Secondly, the times after the restoring of
the Gospel. First, the beast appeared, that cursed Antichrist, in his
Pontificalibus; then Apoc. 13.
the Lamb stood up upon Mount Syon, with his sealed ones; then the everlasting
Gospel was preached; Apoc. 14.
and next, when the Gospel is once restored, Verse. 6.
woe to them that take delight in the Whore, for they shall be tormented with
fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb, and the Verse.
10, 11.
smoke of their torment shall ascend evermore, and they shall have no rest,
day nor night, which worship the Beast and his Image.

Thus you have now seen the danger of Popery, and how hard a matter it is to
bring them that follow it, into Christ's Fould: How many windings and turnings,
and how many distinctions to and fro must be used to bring them but into the
judgment of Charity, concerning Gods looking upon them for good.

What therefore shall I now say? Let me first lend a word to all in general;
and next, to my brethren of the Ministry in particular. To all (I say) suffer
the word of exhortation, both concerning our selves, and others: Antichrist
shall be damned, let not our souls enter into their secrets. As the wicked man
shall not meddle with the Christians joy, so let not the good man meddle with
the Antichristians woe.

I know (my brethren) that this Conceit expressed in these general terms,
That a Papist so living and so dying may be saved, has filled our hearts with
worlds of indifferency: So that as the Arminians have their middle knowledge
(as Scientia media. Lect. Pride. page 23. 24. etc.
if there could be any cut betwixt a thing and nothing, a being and no being)
so have we had our indifferent conceits either of Protestancy or Popery as the
world shall serve and the wind shall turn. Has their been so much striving
unto blood in vain? Have so many martyrs lost the crowns of their martyrdomes
when they have laid down their lives at the feet of the Pope and his image
rather then to yield unto the Roman abominations? Have so many glorious David's
fought the battles of God against that uncircumcised Philistime in vain?
Have so many John's and blessed preachers of the Gospel spent their time and
strength in eating of the little book and venting it again to be as vials
upon Apoc. 10.
the throne of the beast in vain? No No: godly witnesses have not writ in
vain; victorious Kings have not fought in vain; Constant martyrs have not
dyed in vain. They have all striued as for life and death, salvation and
damnation. Though salvation may be found in the Church (as I have said) yet how
hardly? If it be an hard matter to find it any where, as, in truth it is;
because the law is against it which, were it not for the Mercy seat Christ
Jesus, would rise out of the Arc and accuse us: and because the creatures are
against it which are abused by us and do call for vengeance: and because even
we our selves are against it in our pronenesse unto sin and delight in it) then
how hard and hard again is it to find it in the stye of the beast and amongst
the followers of Antichrist where there are so many killing poisons against it!
As therefore the Psalmist sung, We is me that I remain in Psalm. 120. 5.
Meshech and dwell in the Tents of Kedar: so may such as lodge with the beast
justly say with grief of heart. But as for us that live out of the smoke of
the pit in the shining rays of the Gospel, let us at the Glassie sea sing the
song Apoc. 14. 2, 3, 4.
of Moses, and of the Lamb praising Gods power as the Lord God Almighty, and
his goodness as the King of Saints, who has delivered us from the iron furnace,
and begun to take vengeance of that man of sin.

Paul makes in this place, that is, thank God, when we can prove by
sanctification 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13, 14.
of spirit and faith of truth, whereunto men are called by the Gospel to
obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, that they are the elect of God, and
so are not in this perishing estate by the works of Antichrist. We are in a
natural bond as dug out of the same pit by descending from Adam: we are in
a civil bond, as being members of the same Church and Commonwealth: and we
are of the same gracious bond as being members of the same body whereof Christ
Jesus is the head. All these ought to move us to thank our God when we see
men flock from Antichrist to the assemblies of the Saints, as doves to their
windows: and to exhort them to stand fast in that Christian course which they
have undertaken by embracing the doctrines of the Gospel delivered 2 Thessalonians. 2.
15.
unto us, by what means soever: and also by praying that they may be confirmed
by being Ver. 19, 17.
comforted in the way of grace, that all Gods people with joyful hearts may
say Amen, Amen.

Peter, feed 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4.
the flock of God which depends upon you, caring for it not by constraint
but willingly; not for filthy Lucre but of a ready mind: not as though you
were Lords over Gods Heritage, but that ye may be examples of the flock. If I
should do nothing but repeat these words it were plentifully sufficient. But
oh how hardly are we drawn unto our duties! Shall I not therefore press it in
particulars? First then, as pitying the misery of Antichristrans, let us feed
the flock of God by the word of God. Every thing is best fed with that meat
which is best suitable with the nature of it, and so is Gods flock. Therefore, in
the fear of God give them the word of God. Christ has shed his blood for
them: is it not therefore pity that Antichrist should defile or destroy them.
Therefore hear the word of the Lord ye Priests after Gods own heart: Preach,
Catechize, and live against the Pope of Rome.

First, feed by preaching, that is, by speaking unto men to edification,
exhortation, and comfort: 1 Cor. 14. 3.
wherein as a brother to brethren let me give my advice as one that has
obtained mercy. Let us labor to speak the word of God in the spirit of power
and of a sound mind: we may 2 Timothy 2. 7.
find by woeful and daily experience how hard a matter it is to make poor
people to understand the word of God. As therefore Mannah must descend from the
clouds that the people may eat of it: so must we lay aside all cloudy
speculations and descend to vulgar apprehension, that the people to whom we
intend good may take what is their own and go their way. Let us be as solid
as we can; as the Apostle says take heed to 1 Timothy 4. 13. 16. Prach. pl^a by
S. Hier.
reading and to doctrine: but as in the building of the temple (as it is well
observed) there was hewing in the mountains, but when it was set up, not an
Ax, or Saw, or Hammer in Jerusalem (because it was to be a ^ipe of the
kingdom of peace): so though we use all sorts of wrighting and wrighters in
our private studies, yet let us not muster and obtrude them in troops for
ostentation in the pulpit, least as Asahels dead 2. Sam. 2. 23.
body it make the people stand still, and cause them to say as Ahimaaz of the
death of Absolon, 2. Sam. 18.
I saw a tumult but I knew not what. It is a true speech of a reverend Divine,
that learning never spoils a good sermon: but when it is communicated either
with affected eloquence, and unusual words, or in such an abstruse manner of
speaking as if we meant to work admiration and astonishment rather then
edification, we may perhaps get the garlands of praise and goodwill rom them
that live more in the ear than in the heart, but we shall never procure the
conversion 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19.
of souls, which is the crown and seal of our Apostleship or ministry. 2.
Cor. 3.


To stir us up therefore to preach and thus Motives.
to preach think with me (as I often have done) of these four motives. First,
that our people as we also break Gods commandments every day both in
thought, word, and deed; as every child can say. They break them all in Adam
by communion, who in that one sin violated the whole law of nature. Yea since
they were cut off from the old Adam, and graffed into Christ by faith they
break them by disposition, and To. 5. 12.
if they do not fall into the outward act, noe thanks to themselves, who are
as prone unto it as a chained fox to kill young chickens, but unto our God who
does either restrain and bridle us, or renew and sanctify us to better
employments.

Secondly, let us consider that our people being Tit. 3. 3. (...).
thus in sin and error are like unto madmen. For all the world cannot
persuade them otherwise till God persuade Iaphet: yea they Genesis 9. 27.
will sometimes run upon death it self in the 1. Cor. 13. 3.
maintenance of their fooleries: yea and further they like madmen will raise
great stirs upon ridiculous matters. For as the Robe of Caesar is said more
to trouble Rome than his death, and an apple to set all Greece on fire: so the
Church in Christ's time was troubled about fasting; in Mat. ^. Act. 15.
the Apostles time about stranguled and blood; in the next times about the
celebration of Easter between the East and West Churches, and after that about
the rites of Baptism, to wit, whether Heretics could truly baptize: and
truly Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 25. and lib. 6, cap. 3.
these trifles have benne the fuel of contention from time to time, and that
not only in the church but also among the people, as if madness and not matter
did sway on all sides to the disturbing of the common peace.

Thirdly, let us consider that when our people are come to knowledge they know
a great deal more then they can make use of for their good. Eccles. 4. 8.
As a covetous man has no power to take comfort of his estate: or as children,
fools, and impotent persons may have great honors and revenues, but know not
how to use them: so ordinarily where the diligent hand is to disperse the good
word of God there may be, and is a rich treasure of precious knowledge in many
of our people who know only to know without further profit. For there is great
difference betwixt knowledge for understanding, and wisdom for practice; as
we see in those that knew the way of the Lord and judgment of their God, Ier.
5. 5.
yet they altogether brake the yoke and burst the bonds: And again, in those
who said they were Ier. 8. 8, 9.
wise, and that the Law of the Lord was with them, yet they rejected the word
of the Lord in power.

us: and as an huswife finds in her window a Copweb the next day though she
has there swept down one the day before, even so do we the webbes of sin.

Now then can we consider the fearful breaches of Gods commandments, and
that with spiritual phrenzy and madness, can we consider that when (thorough
the assistance of God) we have wrought them to knowledge it is an infinite
work to bring them to practice: or can we think that our work as the work
of a neat huswife in an earthen room is never at an end, and yet can we be
idle and not feed the flock of God by preaching? If they miscarry thorough
our default, it adds to our guilt, yea a guilt guided with blood, in which
respect Hosea called wicked Priests murderers in the way; and Hosh. 6. 9.
from which Paul with good conscience cleeres himself, saying, I take you to
record this day that Act. 20, 26.
I am pure from the blood of all men.

Secondly, feed by Catechizing, that is, by contracting religion into a sum
as Christ did Math. 22. 37. Ioh. 3. 16.
the Law and the Gospel, that there may be a clear and brief speaking unto
men to instruction. Before the Law, Adam catechized Abel; which I Luke 1. 4.
gather thus. Paul says, by faith Abel offered up a better sacrifice then
Kain. Now faith must warrant Heb. 11. 4.
the person which it cannot do except there be holiness; and it must warrant
the action which it cannot do without the word: yet then there was no written
word but that which was delivered from man to man by way of Catechizing and
instruction. After the Flood, Abraham catechized his Family: of whom, if you
ask me Genesis 18. 19.
whether he taught them? I answer, Yes; from the testimony of God himself.
If you ask me what he taught them? I answer, That we know that he had a
perfect Body of Catechism given Genesis 17. 1, 2.
him by God, when he says, I am God all sufficient, walk before me, and be
thou upright. For whereas the sum of Catechism does consist in faith, and
obedience; I am God all-sufficient, does comprehend all the Doctrine of Faith;
it implying his sufficiency, to create, to redeem, and to apply: Walk before
me, and be thou upright, does comprehend the second, both in respect of the
matter, and of the manner of performance. If lastly you will ask me, with what
fruit and success he catechized? I answer, his son went Genesis 24. 63.
out to pray; and he had a praying servant, and a Ver. 12. Ver. 26. Ver. 33.
servant that gave thanks to God, and would not eat his meat, before he had
done his masters business.

In the time of the Law, God commanded Catechizing, Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
or whetting the Law upon them, that it may pierce the hearts of their children
to understand and affect it, as the word in the original signifies. And if we
will believe the Rabbines, there were not in Jerusalem, from Antiochus to
Christ, under four hundred houses for Catechizing. In which Exercise they are
said to observe Wei. Christ. Syn.
this order, according to the capacity and age of them whom they did instruct:
At five years old they were Sons of the Law, to read it: Filii Legis.
At thirteen they were called the Sons of the Precept, to understand the
Law. Then they received Filii Praecepti.
the Passover as a Sacrament (for even children did eat it, as a remembrance
of their deliverance out of Egypt) and then also they were purified. At
fifteen years old they went to deeper points of the Law, and Talmudicall
Talmudistae.
doubts. Seeing then that it was used both before the Flood, and after it; in
the time of the Law, and after; let us with an heavenly desire to propagate the
Truth, rowse up our spirits to do so likewise.

I read of a certain Heretic, who in Winter Gowl. Catal. test.
season did swim through a certain River, to some to whom he might derive
his falsehood: and shall we be cold and sluggish, and suffer a little water to
quench our love to communicate the Truth? Oh that it might be the happiness of
this time, that as our late renowned Sovereign did limit afternoon Exercises
upon the Lords day to Catechizing upon the grounds of Religion; so all
Ministers might be held unto it, either by themselves, or others! Why should
the people perish for want of knowledge, and be left lying in such a temper,
that they are fit matter for every Priest, Jesuit, or Sectarie to work upon?
As therefore the woman said to David, Help O King; so say I, Help by our
dread Sovereign you that are to be conuocated to that end.

Consider with your selves what Hegesippus says, to wit, That by virtue of
Catechizing there was never a King but received alteration in his Heathenish
Religion within forty years after Christ. Therefore Julian when he meant
Acta Syn. Sess. 1. 5. page 29.
to suppress religion invented not new torments but put down Schools and
Catechizings. The Papists have confessed that all the ground we have gotten
of them is by catechism: and the the little ground they have gotten of us is
by a more diligent requiring and practicing of it. Therefore the judgment of
the Churches in the Synod of Dort, touching this, is worthy to be written in
our hearts especially of our own, that we may no longer be bunglers but as
Masterbuilders 1. Cor. 3. 10.
we may lay the foundation, yea such an one as upon which Antichrist may never
be 1. Pet. 5. 3. Gal. 2. 14.
suffered to build to the damnation of our people.

Lastly, let us feed by example: that ye may be examples of your flock, says
Peter. Reasons may persuade but examples will draw more forecibly.

Let us therefore set copies to our people of humility, and holiness. First,
let us be humble, not domineering over Gods heritage; but instructing with
meekness the contrary-minded, and carrying our selves to Christ's lambs in
love: that as Antichrists Proctors have humility in show, so we may have it in
truth. It is well observed that the pride of the Jewish doctors came Christ,
Synag.
in with the ruin of the Jewish Church: For, when revelations ceased they
usurped state and titles; one was called the light of the world, another our
holy Doctor, a third the illustrious, a fourth the rock of help; and they
called and accounted others but the people of the earth, and the Populus
terrae. Romans 2. 19. Crak. defens. contra Spal. page 89, 90.
blind: so (dividing the times of the Church into 3. periods; the first which
went before Antichrist, wherein there was nothing decreed or received as a
doctrine of faith which is not ours; the second wherein by degrees Antichrist
came unto his highth, and in which some pleaded for Christ and more for that
man of sin; the third wherein Antichrist began to decline) in the second
dark and leaden times the Church of Rome thorough the whole Hierarchy of it
did swell with titles, which was accompanied with the ruin of men's souls. Let
us take heed in time. Pride we see has bin a miserable Symptom twice.

Oh thou chief Shepherd of our souls drive it and keep it from us, and work
our hearts highly to esteem rather the flourishing of the Church by solid and
powerful preaching and catechizing even amongst the poorest of Gods people.

Let our second copy be holiness to the Lord unto our people. If holiness to
the Lord becomes Gods house for ever, why not his nearest servants. As
therefore the Jews in the preparation to their passover, did for four hours
Godw. Moses and Aaron, lib, 3. cap. 4. page 135. Christ. Syn.
search out all leven out of their houses; and then for two hours cast it out
of their houses; and lastly, curse all the leven which they had not seen and
could not find: so let all the Priests of the Lords house be careful to
search, to purge, and to execrate all the leven of wilful and reigning sin,
and to oppose and mortify the least sins, that we may be Priests after Gods
own heart as Jeremy speaks. Let Popish Priests be eminent for a Player-like
gravity and holiness so long as they are acting their massing part; but let
us be stars in Gods right hand having an inward principle of the light of
holiness in us from Christ, and shining forth holily unto others, not only in
the pulpit and prayer, but in our whole course. What would we answer to such
Colossians as should say to Archippus, Thou that teach Col. 4. 17.
another, teach thou not thy self? thou that Romans 2. 21, 22
preachest a man should steal; do thou steal? thou that say a man
should not commit adultery do Verse. 23.
thou commit adultery? thou that abhorrest idols committest thou sacrilege?
thou that gloriest in the Verse. 24.
Law, thorough the breaking of the Law dishonourest thou God? For the name of
God is blasphemed amongst the Gentiles thorough you. Let us tell our
consciences plainly: have we another way to heaven then we teach our
neighbors? Take heed; I say, take heed: amongst all that were accessory to
Christ's death, the black gown, I mean Judas, was punished first. Therefore
labor against unholiness, pray against it, and fast against it. And oh that
it might be the glory of the Church of these times to procure public fastings
and prayings as other Churches have against all our sins? What though it be a
time of rejoicing in regard of our blessed King and government. Yet anointing
the face does not mis-become a fast, nor I think public thanksgiving a day
of humbling. Physicians have their preservatives to prevent diseases as well as
their cures when they are come. Seeing then it cannot but pity us to see Syon
in some places in the dust; to see the holy Temple defiled, Gods enemies Psalm.
79. 1.
to laugh when the blood of his Saints is Ps. 80. 5, 6.
shed like water, and they remain are fed with the bread of tears, and have
given them to drink in great measure: to see Antichrist roar (in the Idol
Mass) in the midst of their congregations, and to set up the signs and marks
of the beast: And lastly, to see the plague whereby God does most immediately
triumph in justice over his enemies, to begin to set footing again amongst us:
seeing, I say, we see these things whose heart does not hunger to make the
body more hungry, and that not only privately but publicly: especially
considering that our sins, even all our sins as well of the Church as
Commonwealth does call for these or greater miseries upon us.

I will say but one thing more to my self and to you (my brethren like me by
office) to persuade to a greater degree of holiness, and then I end. Consider
that the person does much commend and gain much upon the affections of the
hearers. Antichrist commendes it as a principal Champ. of the calling of BB.
and Pastors.
principle, that first we must look to the person teaching, before we look to
the thing taught, that so they may bring in a seeming formalitie to outface
true doctrine. And therefore as when Elishah accused the Israelites of
Idolatry, they called him bald-pate (implying belike that he wanted Jewish
formalitie according to the Law, because he had that blemish: so when we charge
the Papists with sinning against the word of God, they say that we fail in
histories and customs in our entrance. But truly this is a silly ground thus
to embrace persons before doctrins.

For first Christ has taught us that what persons so ever they are if they
build up the kingdom of Christ they must go on. For when John complained to
him, saying, Master, we saw Mar. 9. 38, 39, 40.
one casting out devils in thy name which follows not us: Jesus said, forbid
him not, for whosoever is not against us is on our part.

Secondly, in the New Testament none but the enemies of the Gospel look more
to the persons then to the Doctrine: For the Priests and Elders said to Christ,
By what authority do thou these things; and the Synod at Jerusalem ask
Peter and John, By what power and in what name have Math. 21. 23.
ye done this: but of the true worshippers of God we hear no such thing.
Which I speak not, as if Act. 4. 7.
ordinarily we ought not to ask after men's authority (for this were the next
way to leap from the Shop-board into the Pulpit, with Brownists and other
Sectaries) but to show that Doctrine must be preferred before Persons.

Thirdly, the Eunuch and Lydia did not ill in hearing Philip and Paul, without
enquiring after their Persons. They knew, that Christians should not give an
account at the day of Judgment of the Persons, they have heard but of their
obedience or disobedience to their wholesome Doctrine: yea, they knew that it
was better to be led to Heaven by a man of no Pomp, then to Hell by a Pope,
under pretense of infallibility.

Lastly, most glorious Persons may be full of deceit; they that come in Sheep
clothing, may be inwardly ravening Wolves: yea, Watchmen may Matthew. 7.
be blind and dumb Dogs, that cannot bark, Es. 56. 10, 11.
and greedy Dogs, that can never have enough. From the Prophets even to the
Priests they may Ier. 6. 13.
all deal falsely; yea, and there may be a conspiracy of her Prophets (as in
the Council of Ezekiel. 22. 25. Act. 20. 30.
Trent) in the midst of the Church.

Thus you may see, that it is a silly slight, when Rome would have us chiefly
look to the Person teaching, before the thing taught; yet thus far it holds,
that the Person does much commend the Work: For the Apostle said not in vain,
Continue in the things which thou have learned, 2. Tim. 3. 14.
knowing of (whom) thou have learned them, that is, God, yea, and (it may be)
me, Gods Minister, who have been in thy Soul by the spirit of Power, which
has effectually concurred with my service.

Oh therefore, that our Persons may be such, that we may sweetly settle our
Works upon the hearts of those that hear it, that when the chief Shepherd
shall appear, we may receive an incorruptible 1. Pet. 5. 4.
Crown of Glory. I will end with Paul: I charge thee before God and the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou 1. Tim. 5. 21.
observe these things, without preferring one to another, and do nothing
partially.

FINIS.

