A brief exposition of such Chapters of the old testament as usually are
read in the Church at common prayer on the Sundays, set forth for the better
help and instruction of the unlearned. By Thomas Cooper Bishop of Lincoln.

Whatsoever things are written before time they are written for our learning
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.

Romans 15. Imprinted at London by H. D. for Rafe^ Newbery dwelling in
Fleetestreete.

An Epistle to the Reader.
I Am not of that opinion (good christian Reader) that I think the scriptures
of God, as touching the substance of doctrine contained in them, be of such
difficulty to the learned and skillful in the tongues, that they may not, with
the assistance of Gods grace and mean diligence, easily atttaine to the
understanding of them. But for so much as God works now by ordinary means,
and not by miraculous inspiration, as he did in the Apostles time, it can not
be denied but that to the unlearned reader or hearer that wants the help of
knoweledge and understanding, they may bring some difficulty, as well for the
matter in sundry particular places, as generally for the phrase and manner of
penninge far differing from other writers. Wherefore I thought it would not
be unprofitable to the Church of Christ, nor unpleasant to the Godly, if, for
the help and furtherance of such unlearned persons, I did set forth some
brief and plain exposition of the Chapters of the old testament, which
usually are red in the Church on the appointed days of common prayer.

Beside the motion of some godly persons, and other causes, wherewith I have
been induced hereunto, one principal is this, that the adversaries of the
Gospel, when they are by us blamed for keeping the people of God in ignorance
of the Scriptures; and having their common prayer in a strange tongue, have
nothing more ready, then this answer, that the common people do not only
hear the Psalms and other parts of the Scripture even now that they be in
English with as little fruit and small edefying, as they did before, but also
with some peril of conceiving erroneous and false opinions by hearing those
things which they do not understand. This answer, as it is untrue in a
great part, (for that we see many now, which conceive good instruction and
sweet comfortes by hearing the Scriptures read, where none did before,) so I
cannot deny, but in some it is to true, But surely in such persons as either
upon (...) opinion mislike the service and state of religion, or else as men
given over to the cares of the world and lusts of the flesh have no sense of
God or godliness. Otherwise there is no man so simple but that by learning the
Scriptures, although he understand not the whole matter, nor every clause
thereof, yet he shall light upon some parts whereby he may gather both good
instruction of his faith, and profitable lessons for the amendment of his
life. Yea, and the very Godless wordling that is furthest from all true sense
of Religion and holiness, shall hear those terrible threatninges of Gods
justice, that when God shall touch him by sickness or other affliction, be
he never so desperate, shall make his conscience to quake. But that the more
good might be wrought in men's hearts, and the less evil conceived in
erroneous opinions, I thought some such traueile as this is might be a very
good means, and especially where they lack the presence of some learned and
discrete man to teach them. In this doing albeit my conscience did bear me
witness of a good meaning, and did put me in hope to do some good thereby:
yet, to confess the truth, I both was and yet am somewhat abashed to give my
traueiles abroad unto the world. I know how dainty these days are, and have
felt by experience how waiwarde and uncharitable many be in scanning of other
men's doings, very ready to shake every fillable and letter, and without any
just cause at all to object heinous and blasphemous crimes. If I please not
such persons (gentle Reader) thou may not greatly marvel, For in deed
neither do I seek it, neither think my self hable to do it. I write not to
them, I write to the good and modest Christian that delights in reading and
hearing of the word of God, and lacks those ordinary helps, whereby he may
the sooner attain to the understanding of it. And, this my purpose considered,
I trust, shall be sufficient to move the godly learned of the Church to
interpret my doings to the best, and to take this my small traueile in good
part, although they find not in it a number of things, which are of
necessity to be looked for in such works, as are laid forth for learned men
to traueile in They shall not find here, either eloquence in penning, or great
show and variety of learning, or curious trial and conference of expositions
and translations, or large discourses of difficult matters in controversy.
These things the wise and learned know are fitter for mother kind of writing,
then for this. They shall find here a brief and easy exposition of the
text, whereby the unlearned reader may not only the sooner attain to the true
sense and meaning of the holyghost, the author of the Scriptures, but also
learn some godly instructions out of the same. If I had written to the
learned, I would have endeavored to my power in some other points to have
satisfied their expectation: but in this I have tempered my self wholye to the
understanding of the most simple. My meaning was before I had published any
part, to have written of so many of the Chapters as are read on the days of
common prayer, and also of the Psalms. But for so much as my health and some
other necessary businesses will not suffer me to do it with so much speed as
my desire was, I thought it not good in the mean time to stay from them that
need the help hereof, so much as I have presently done. The residue as God
shall give me strength and leisure, I mind in convenient time to finishe, and
so I leave thee to the direction of Gods holy spirit, and these my doings to
the charitable judgment of the godly.

Vale
Faults escaped.
Fol. 32. b. for Capter, read Chapter. 33. a. for the same and distinctly,
read, plainly and distinctly. 64. a. for continuance, read countenance. 79. a.
for felicie, read felicity. 82. b. for Waruell though, read no Waruell though.
101. for where, read were. 111. a. for If, read it. 113. a. for peregrinage,
read pilgrimage. 119. a. for ta observe, read to observe. 124. b. for mercy
God, read mercy of God. 127. a. for Isaac old, read Isaac waxed old. 139.
b. for be the life, read by the life. 143 b. for then the undertaking, read
then by the undertaking. 147. a. for interpret, read Interpreters. 175. b.
for fellows, read followers. 239. a. for, that Woises here utters that is,
read, that Woises utters is, and leave out that. 241. b. for but oblation,
read but an oblation. 242. b. for had not gathered, read had now gathered.
261. a. And made to them his low, leave it out. 279. a. for of his flock,
read of his stock. 293. b. had ruled, leave out had. 296. b. for to be
thought that, read to be thought but that. for in his flock, read in his
stock. 320. b. for moysting, read moisture. 321. b. for this their beauty,
read this the beauty. 322. a. for by this benefit, read by his benefit.
337. b. for the chil, read the children. 354. a. for benefices, read
benefits. 355. b. for endue, read endure. 350. a. in the.11. side of Ddd. for
continuance, read countenance. 380. b. for riches his benefits, read riches
of his benefits. 382. b. for other Jews did, read other Jews did think.
IN the Copy that the Printer used, sundry applications of the text were
stricken out, because I thought them somewhat troublous to the unlearned reader,
and because the quotations in the margent that were made for the confirmation
of such applications, were not so plainly stricken out, they printed the same
quotations, and thereby it comes to pass, that sundry of them in the margent
are not fitlye to the places which they are set against, as these especially
that follow.

Fol. 2. b. Deuteronomy. 3. b. 15. Psalm. 77. d. 41. Fol. 4. a. Esaias. 66. a. 3. Psalm.
51. d. 17. Psalm. 39. b. 9. Fol. 13. b. lo. 10. a. 3. 2. Tim. 2. c. 19. 2. Pet.
2. b. 9. Fol. 14. a. 1. Tim. 4. a. 1. Fol. 17. a. Jacob. 4. e. 9. Psalm. 74. b.
8. Fol. 18. a. 1. Reg. 20. e. 30. Fol. 24. b. Eccle. 7. b. 14. Fol. 25. a.
Exodus 5. e. 21. Romans 7. b. 13. Fol. 57. a. Jacob. 4. c. 10. Fol. 104. b. Dan.
14. a. 8. 10. Fol. 206. a. 1. Cor. 7. d. 19. Gal. 6. d. 15. Fol. 207. a Io. 4.
d. 24. 2. Cor. 3. d. 17. Phil. 3. a. 3. Esaias. 43. b. 7. Fol. 215. b. Psalm. 108
d. 29. Psalm. 110. a. 1. Luc. 1. g. 68. Ephe. 1. a. 3. Fol. 232. a. Ephe. 4. a.
4.
The first Sunday in Aduent at Morning prayer.
Esaias. 1. THe vision of Esaias the son of Amos, which he

2 Hear, Deuteronomy. 31. a. 1
O heavens, and hearken O earth: for the Lord has spoken, I have nourished and
brought up children, and they have done unfaithfully against me.

3 The Ox has known his owner, and the Ass his masters cribbe: ( but)
Israel has not known, my people has given no heed. 4. Ah sinfullnation, a
people laden with iniquity, a seed of the wicked, corrupt children: they have
forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy one of Israel unto anger, they
are gone backwarde.

5 Why should ye be stricken any more? ( for) ye are ever falling away: every
head is diseased, and every ha^^ heavy.

6. From the sole of the foot unto the head there is nothing sound in it: (
but) wounds, blaynes, and pu^ifiyng sore: they have not been sained, neither
wrapped up, neither molified with the ointment.

7 Your land is wasted, your Cities are burnt up, strangers Esaias. ^. b. 5
and it is made desolate, as it were the destruction of enemies ( in the time
of war.) 8 And the daughter of Sion shall be left as a cotage in a vineyarde,
like a lodge in a garden of Encumbers, like a besieged City. Gene, 19. c. 24
9. Except the Lord of hosts had left us a small remnant, we should have
been as Sodoma, and like unto Gomorra. 10 Hear the word of the Lord ye
Lords of Sodoma, and hearken unto the law of our God thou people of Gomorra.
11 Why offer ye so many sacrifices unto me will the lord say? Psalm. 50. c. 23
I am full of the burnt offerings of weathers, Mich. 6. b. 7
and of the fatness of fed beasts, Ier. 6. e. 20
I have no pleasure in the blood of bullocks, Amos. 5. c. 22
lambs, and goats.

12 When ye come to appear before me treading in my courts, who has required
this at your hands?

13 Offer me no mo oblations, for it is but lost labor: incense is an
abominable thing unto me, I may not away with your new Moons, your
sabbathes, and solemn meetings, your solemn assemblies are wicked.

1. Pet. 3. d. 12
15 When ye hold out your hands, I will turn mine eyes from you: and though
you make many prayers; yet I will hear nothing at all, Esaias. 59. a. 3. Agge.
2. c. 14
seeing your hands are full of blood. 16 Wash you, make you clean, put away
your evil thoughts out of my sight: cease from doing of evil.

17 Learn to do well, Mich. 6. b. 8
apply your selves to equity, deliver the oppressed, help the fatherless to
his right, let the widows complaint come before you.

18 And then go to, Psalm. 4. a. 5
says the Lord, let us talk together: though your sins be as red as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow: and though they were like purple, they
shall be as white as wool. 19 If ye be willing and obedient ye shall Psalm. 73.
d. 17
for the mouth of the Lord has spoken ( it.) 21 How happens it then that
the faithful City which was full of equity, is become ( unfaithful) as a
whore? Righteousness dwelt in it, but now murderers. 22 Thy silver is turned
to dross, and thy wine mixed with water. 23 Thy princes are wicked and
companions of thieves: they love gifts altogether, and gape for rewards: Psalm.
50. c. 18 Esaias 5. e. 23.
As for the fatherless they help him not to his right, neither will they let
the widows causes come before them. 24 Therefore says the Lord God of
hosts, the mighty one of Israel: Ah, I must ease me of mine enemies, and
avenge me of mine adversaries.

25 And I shall lay my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and
take away all thy tin.

26 And set thy judges again as they were sometime, and thy senators as they
were from the beginning: and then thou shall be called the righteous City, the
faithful City.

27 Sion shall be redeemed with equity, and her conuertes with righteousness.
28 But the transgressors, and the ungodly, and such as forsake the Lord,
shall altogether be utterly destroyed. Esa. 65. a. 3
29 For ye shall be confounded for the trees which ye have desired: and ye
shall be ashamed of the gardens that ye have chosen.

30 For ye shall be as a tree whose leaves are fallen away, and as a garden
that has no moystnesse.

31 And the very strong one ( of your Idols) shall be as towe, Math. 3. c. 12
and the maker of it as a spark ( of fire) and they shall both burn together,
and no man quench them.

The exposition upon the first Chapter of Esaias.
The vision of Esai the son of Amos, Verse. 1.
which he saw upon Judah. etc. THe first verse conteynet^ the title, which
briefly notes what the thing is, by whom it was uttered, against what place
and people, and in what time.

It is a vision, that is, a prophecy or revelation declared by almighty God:
and therefore not to be esteemed as any ma^s devise, and uttered by Esaias the
son of Amos descending of the royal line of the kings of Judah. Who
prophesied in the reigns of Ozias, Ioathan, Achas, and Ezechias, as it may be
thought by the space of fourscore years. And uttered this prophecy against
the nation of Jury, and Jerusalem the chief and royal city thereof: that
is to say, against that Nation that God had chosen of all other for his
peculier people, and had mainteyned and preserved it with great benefits, and
yet now was fallen from his true worship, unto Idolatry, sin, and
wickedness. And therefore says he.

Hear O heavens, and hearken O earth: Verse. 2. 3. 4. Deuteronomy. 32. a. 1
for the Lord has spoken. etc. That he may the more earnestly move that dull
and hard hearted people, he begins with a tragical exclamation and calls
heaven and earth to witness against them, as if he had said. For So Much as the
unthankfulness and wicked stubburnnesse of this people is such, as they will
give no ear to the word of God, earnestly calling them to repentance, I
turn my speech to you (O heavens) and speak to thee (O earth.) Though heaven
be (...) of, yet ^^ely it will hear, though the earth be hard and stony, yet
it will relent and be moved: but this people will not bend, this Nation will by
no means be reclaymed. Deuteronomy. 32. b. 15
*Yea they are more dull and vn^^nsible in the understanding of Gods will, and
of his great goodness toward them, than the (...) beasts are. For what Ox
does not from (...) himself to his master, that keeps him? What Ass does
not acknowledge and love those that feed him? But my people (says the Lord)
whom I have cherished, Esaias. 5. a. 4.
whom I have *fostered as my *children, Gal. 4. a. 6.
with all care and tenderness, do not only with unthankful minds forget my
benefits, but with stony and stubburne hearts refuse to hear my calling,
Deuteronomy. 14. a. 1
and in all manner of wickedness bend themselves against me, and strive to
provoke my wrath and indignation against them.

Why should ye be stricken any more? for ye are ever falling away: Verse. 5.
etc. From the beginning of the fifth verse to the tenth, Verse. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
he does greatly amplify their wayward stubburnnesse, declaring that as they
could not be woonne to repentance, nor moved to turn to their gracious Lord
by consideration of his exceeding great benefits toward them: so neither
could they be reclaymed, nor any thing at all moved with the grievous plagues
and punishments, which to that only purpose (as a merciful father) he had
brought upon them, but rather by the same his plagues, they increased in
stubburnnesse, and waxed every day worse than other. And therefore says he, To
what end should I plague or scourge you with adversity any further? Verse. 5.
seeing your obstinacy is such, as you will increase in wickedness, and still
heap sin upon sin, and offense upon offense.

The Realm of Jury may well be resembled to a man's body: the head and heart
whereof is the City Jerusalem, and the King and Princes with the residue of
the inhabitants thereof: and the other cities and towns as the inferior
members. All which I have grievously touched with my severe justice and sharp
punishments, so that from the * crown of the head, to the sole of the foot,
Verse. 6. Deuteronomy. 28. d. 35
from the highest City, to the lowest Village, from the noblest person, to the
basest subject, there is none but he has felt the bitter smart thereof, and
that in such sort as no Physician is hable to cure, or heal their festured
sores, that is, nor King, nor Counsaylour, nor Prince, nor Priest, nor
Prophet, can help the misery of this kingdom, and restore it to the
prestinate state and integrity again. Verse. 7.
Their land lies waste, their Cities are burnt with fire, strangers possess
their Country, their possessions are spoiled, Verse. 8.
their royal City Jerusalem is left desolate, as a lodge in a vineyard, or a
Cotage in a Cucumber garden, that has no house near unto it, their people are
slain, their glory decayed, their strength consumed, Verse. 9.
yea, if the Lord of his great mercy had not * left the^ some comfort, through
the promised seed of Messiah, Romans 9. f. 29 Genesis 19. c. 24
their desolation had been even as the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, and
yet I say, all this notwithstanding are their hearts nothing moved to repent
or to turn to the Lord for mercy.

Hear the word of the Lord ye Lords of Sodoma, Verse. 10.
and hearken. etc. And for that they did flatter themselves in the Verse 10. 11.
12. 13. 14. 15
mids of this great wickedness with a vain opinion of hypocritical
justice, and superstitious worshipping of God, as though by such means they
should win his favor toward them: The Lord plainly shows that he does
loathe and abhor their sacrifices, and offerings, their festival days, and
their solemn meetinges, yea though they were commanded by his own law,
Luc. 16. d. 15
so long as they were void of * inward holiness of heart and mind, Deuteronomy. 6.
a. 5
and distayned with sin and wickedness both before God and the world. Esa.
29. d. 13
In which place the more to move them, Psalm. 77 d. 41
almighty God seems to labor with diversity of words to let them
understand how little account he makes of such external worshipping, being
destitute of true holiness, and right worshipping in spirit and in truth.
Why offer you (says he) so many sacrifices. etc. I am full of them, I have no
pleasure in them, Who required them at your hands, Offer no more, It is but
lost labor, Esaias. 66. a. 3
It is * abominable unto me. I may not away with them, Psalm. 51. d. 17
They are wicked. I hate them, They make me weary, Psalm. 39. b. 9
I cannot abide them. I will not hear your prayers, I will turn mine eyes
from you.

By all which words, God shows how little he regards hypocrisy, where
true holiness wa^teth.

Then from the sixtenth verse, Verse. 16. 17 18. 19. 20.
to the.xxj he shows what is the right way to win his favor. Make you
clean, (says he) put away your wicked thoughts and devises, Cease from doing
evil, Learn to do good, Apply your selves to equity, Deliver the oppressed,
Help the fatherless, Hear the widows complaint. For these are the true
fruits of right repentance. And then, If your sins were as red as scarlet,
in token that you had deserved blood and confusion, they shall be as white as
snow, in testimony that by Gods mercy ye be cleared from them. This if you
will do, the Lord will look favorably on you and prosper you, but if you
continue obstinate and rebellious, as hitherto you have done, the sword of
Gods wrath shall utterly devour you, (for his own mouth has spoken it) and
therefore think not that it is man's word only.

How happens it then that the faithful City which was full of equity.
Verse. 21.
etc. From the.xxj. to the end of the Chapter Esaias prophecieth, that god
having destroyed the naughty, and rebellious people, will restore and reform
the kingdom of Israel by Christ Jesus the true Messiah, and by him give them
true justice and integrity. And that he may the more aggrauate their present
fault in so wicked reuolting from God, the Prophet, in the person of God
himself, by admiration wooondreth, how it comes to pass, that that City,
which before time has been joined to almighty God as a faithful, pure, and
chaste spouse, has now forsaken him, as a light strumpette, and given over her
self to all corruption and naughtiness. In so much that there is neither in
Prince nor people any integrity or upright dealing, but altogether corruption,
unfaithfulness, counterfeyting, forgerie, dissimulation, falsehoode, deceyte,
oppression and briberie: and that is it, that he means, when he says, Verse.
22.
Their silver is turned to dross, and their wine is mixed with water. Meaning
thereby, that their sincerity and integrity in all manner of dealing, is turned
to falsehoode and forgerie. And therefore, Verse. 24. Deuteronomy. 28. g. 63 Prou. 1.
c. 26
with sorrow and groaning, he protests, that he will ease his stomach, * and
be revenged of this his froward and stubburne people, which, for that cause he
calls now his enemies. And yet least such as have some fear of GOD should
have their consciences to much shaken with this terrible threatening, Verse. 25.
26 27. Esaias. 30. d. 18 Psalm. 2. c. 13 Esa. 57. d. 16
he does * comfortably qualify the grieuousnesse thereof, signifying that he
will not clean destroy his Church, but with the fire of affliction will purge
the dross and corruption from it: that they which fear God, and have the
grace of repentance, by this means, being put in mind of their duty, and
separated from the wicked and obstinate, may serve him more truly and
sincerely in all manner of Godliness. Verse. 28. 29. 30. 31.
And notwithstanding, he plainly says, that the wicked transgressors, that
have forsaken God, and cleaned to superstition and Idolatry (for that he
means by their trees and gardens which they had chosen) shall not escape the
scourge, but he destroyed and brought to confusion together with their Idols.

Under trees and in groves or gardens, they were wont to sacrifice to their
Idols.

Out of this Chapter are these lessons to be taken. 1 First, that we do not
trust and glory in the bare names of Christen men, the Church of Christ, the
people of God, the children of God, for these names are burdens unto us and
notes of unthankfulness (as the like were to the Jews) if we serve not God
sincerely according to our profession, and therefore cannot turn away the
displeasure of God from us, which he justly conceiueth for our sins.

2 Secondly, that we be not negligent and contemptous in hearing the word of
God, and preaching of his holy will, calling us to repentance, lest he call
heaven and earth, and his insensible creatures to witness against our
obstinacy, as he did against the Jews.

3 Thirdely, that we be not unmindful of the great benefits of God from time
to time bestowed upon us, but that with thankful hearts and obedient minds,
we acknowledge and confess the same, least we be justly in the sight of god
esteemed more dull and thankelesse, than the brute beasts are to their
masters and keepers.

4 Fourthly, when God shall for our sinfulness, fatherly chastise us with any
scourge of adversity, whether it be with war, sedition, trouble, sickness,
poverty, vexation of mind, or any other affliction, public or private, of
purpose by that loving correction to bring us home to him again by repentance,
that we do not stubburnely stand against him, as the Jews did, but with
humble and repentant hearts submit our selves and fly to him for mercy
through Christ Jesus our Savior.

5 Fifstly, that we flatter not our selves and think to win Gods favor by
external and superstitious worshipping of God, being inwardly destitute of
true faith toward God, and unfeigned love or upright dealing toward our
brethren. For God does here notably declare how he lotheth, and abhors such
manner of hypocrisy.

6 Sixthly, when want of repentance, and the multitude and greatness of our
sins shall provoke the justice of god, to lay his heavy hand upon us by
raising up of cruel Tyrannes, or bringing in of foreign enemies by his just
judgment, to spoil our country or people, that we conceive this comfort of
his great mercy, that he will not utterly and for ever destroy his Church,
and the number of them that fear him, but by this means will purge them from
their own corruption, and from the infection of the wicked ones, that they may
more sincerely serve him in spirit and in truth.

The first Sunday in Aduent at Evening prayer.
Esaias. 2. THe self same word that Esaias the son of Amos

2 And ( this) shall come to pass in the latter dates, The hill of the Lords
house shall be prepared in the height of the mountains, and shall be higher than
the hills, and all nations shall prease unto him.

3 And a multitude of people shall go, * speaking ( thus one to another) Come,
Psalm. 94. a. 1 Heb. 3. a. 13 Esa. 54. c. 13 Psalm. 128. a. 6 Luc. 24. g. 47 Romans
15. d. 19 John. 5. c. 27 John. 16. a. 8 Psalm. 118. 165
let us ascend to the hill of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and
* he will instruct us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for * out
of Sion shall come a law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. 4 And
shall * give sentence among the heathen, and shall * reform the multitude of
people: they shall break their swoordes also into mattocks, and their spears
to make sythes: And one people shall not lift up a weapon against another,
neither shall they learn to fight from thenceforth.

with evils) from the east, and with sorcerers like the Philistines, and in
strange children they think themselves to have enough.

7 Their land is full of silver and gold, neither is there any end of their
treasure: their land is also full of horses, and no end is there of the^^
charrettes.

8 Their land also is full of vain Gods, Hier. 10. c. 14 Psalm. 115. a, 4
Psalm. 135. d. 15
and before the work of their own hands they have bowed themselves, yea even
before the thing that their own fingers have made.

9 There kneeleth the man, there falls the man down ( before them:)
therefore forgive them not.

10 Get thee into the rock, and hide thee in the ground for fear of the
Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty.

11 The high looks of man shall be brought low, Jacob. 4. d. 6 Psalm. 131. a. 1
and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down: and the Lord alone shall be
exalted in that day. 12 For the day of the Lord of hosts ( shall be) upon all
the proud, lofty, and upon all that is exalted, and he shall be brought low.



15 And upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall. 16 And upon all the
ships of Tharsis, and upon all pictures of pleasure. 17 And the pride of man
shall be brought down, and the loftiness of men shall be made low, and the
Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.

18 As for the Idols he shall utterly abholishe.

19 And they shall creep into holes of stone, and into caves of the earth for
fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he arises to
destroy ( the wicked ones of) the earth. 20 In the self same day shall man
cast away his Gods of silver, and his Gods of gold into the holes of Mowles
and backs, which he nevertheless had made to him self to honor them. Luke.
23. d. 29
21 And they shall creep into the cliftes of the rocks, and into the tops
of the hard stones for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty,
when he arises to destroy ( the wicked ones of) the earth. Math. 10. c. 18


22 Cease therefore from man in whose nosthrilles there is breath: for wherein
is he to be accounted of.

The exposition upon the second Chapter of Esaias.
The self same word that Esaias the son of Amos saw upon Judah. Verse. 1.
etc. IN the first verse is contained the same matter that was in the first of
the Chapter before.

In the three next verses Esaias prophecieth Verse. 2. 3. 4. etc.
of the kingdom of Christ, the advancement of his Church, and the conversion
of the Gentiles, that should be in the latter days, that is, when the
ceremonial law, and the figures and sacrifices appointed by Moises should have
an end in the truth of the very Messiah Christ Jesus the savior of the world.

The Temple of Jerusalem was builded by Solomon upon mount Sion, and was the
only chosen place, where God would be specially woorshipped and served: so
that in sundry places of the Psalms, Psa. 131. c. 8. 13 Psalm. 3. a. 6 2. Par.
7. c. 16 Psalm. 20. a. 3 Psalm. 78. g. 68 Psalm. 83. a. 8
it is said, that The Lord had chosen * Sion for his habitation because of the
Arc of his presence there in the temple reserved. For this cause in the
scriptures Sion and Jerusalem are taken for the type and figure of the true
Church of God under Christ. Heb. 12. f. 22
As saint Paul to the Hebrews. You are come to the mount Sion and to the
City of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
company of angels, and unto the congregation of the first borne. That is to
say, to the blessed Church of Christ. Wherefore in this place by the Hill of
the Lords house, that is, mount Sion, is meant the Church of Christ, the
congregation of the faithful, which at the coming of Christ should be
advanced above all the kingdoms of the earth, and enlarged with great glory,
by the conversion of the Gentiles from their Idolatry, to the faith of Christ,
throughout the whole world.

The glory and advancement of the Church which is here so highly spoken of,
must not be thought to consist, in the honor, power, and riches of the
world, (wherein the Church is always contemptible) but in the heavenly
doctrine, strong faith, true worshipping of God, charity, patience,
constancy, and all Godly gifts of grace, which meruelously shined in the
Godly fathers, and first professors of christian Religion, that followed after
Christ in all Nations and Countries of the earth. For as Christ's kingdom is
spiritual: so is the glory of the same spiritual and not worldly.

When the Prophet says, Come let us ascend to the hill of the Lord, he, to
the reproof of the Jews, does note the readiness and willingness of the
Gentiles (in whose person this is spoken) not only to embrace the faith of
Christ themselves: but also cheerfully to encourage other to the same. Which
may appear in this, that by the preaching of the Apostles within thirty
years, (as Eusebius says) all the Nations of the earth were woonne to the
faith of Christ, and the receiving of his Gospel. And he will instruct us in
his ways. Hereby is to be noted, that the chief care and study of the true
church of Christ, ought to be in the instructing of his people, what his ways
are, and not to lead the^ into men's fantasies, or into their own devises.

Out of Sion shall come a law, and the word of the Lord. etc. The law of
grace and truth, that is, the Gospel of christ Jesus *began first in
Jerusalem. Math. 5. f. 35 Luke. 2. g. 46
There christ preached in the Temple, there he wrought many miracles, Act. 2.
a. 1
*there he sent down the holyghost upon his Apostles. From *thence he sent his
messengers and preachers of his Gospel into all parts of the world, Mark.
16. c. 15 Math. 28. d. 19
to reform the people and bring them by repentance from Idolatry and
wickedness to the true worshipping of God, and virtuous conversation of life,
that is, to make them subjects to the kingdom of Christ.

They shall break their swoordes into mattocks, Verse. 4.
and their spears. etc. As the Gospel is a doctrine of reconciliation and
peace making between God and us, through Christ Jesus our savior: so does it
pacify and quiet men among themselves also. In so much that they which be the
true members of the kingdom of Christ do not use to strive by fighting and
war for their private quarelles, but live together in unity, love, and
concord. Or if any do otherwise, it is a great burden to their consciences,
and an evident note of their imperfection. Insomuch as they show themselves not
to have that * badge or cognizance, John. 13. d. 35 1. John. 4. c. 13
whereby the servants and subjects of Christ's kingdom are known. And yet
does not this place prohibit Princes and Magistrates to make war for the
maintenance of justice and godliness. For they have the sword put into their
hands by God, whose ministers they are, for the defense of them which are
committed to their charge, the widow, the fatherless, and the poor and
innocent oppressed.

Come ye O house of Jacob, Verse. 5.
and let us walk in the light of the Lord. In this fifth verse the Prophet by
emulation of the Gentiles, provoke the Jews under the name of the house of
Jacob, to embrace the faith of Christ, and walk in the light of his Gospel.
As if he had said: Behold strangers whom we esteemed as a foolish people,
that always worshipped Idols, and lived in all uncleanness, with how great
desire forsake they their Idols and seek after the true God? Are not we
ashamed, that we are the last, that are joined to Christ and his Church? To us
the law was given, to us the Prophets preached, Christ was borne among us, he
is our heritage, come, let us embrace him, if we glory to be of the house and
posterity of Jacob, it should be assured to us that Christ is that promised
seed. For Jacob prophesied, Genesis 49. b. 10.
Hunc fore expectatione^ Gentium, that he should be the expectation of the
Gentiles, and now you see our father Jacobs promise fulfilled, etc. Let us
walk therefore in this light of the Lord: for this Savior is the true light.
But as Christ says in the third of S. John's Gospel, John. 3. c. 19. John. 1.
b. 10.
This is the condemnation, that the light came into the world, and the world
loved darkness, more then light.

Wherefore in the four next verses the Prophet Verse. 6. 7. 8. 9
foreseing the obstinacy of the Jews in refusing Christ, and their delightin
witches, sorcerers, and soothsayers, more than the superstitious Chaldees and
Philistines, and the confidence in their riches, and strength of horses and
chariots, and trust in foreign friends, and woorshipping of Idols: foreseeing
(I say) all these things, and also, that the secret but just judgment of
God for the same, had given them over, he says he will not pray to god for
them, but leaves them to his justice, and desires him not to pardon them
their obstinacy and wickedness. Therefore forgive them not, says he.

Get thee into the rock, Verse. 10. etc.
and hide thee in the ground for fear of the Lord, etc. The Prophet does
here insult upon the stubburne Jews, as if he had said, Oh you wicked
generation, seek refuge, if you can, in the rock, seek corners to hide you
in the caves of the earth, and though you do find such places, you shall not
escape from the wrath and indignation of God. Yea, if you were shut up and
enclosed in a rock, the justice of God would find you out, and plague you
for your sins. And not you only, but all the proud of the earth, who in the
glory and security of their wealth, set up their faces against the living
God. Were they as high as the Ceders of Lybanus, yea, or any mountains in the
whole earth, Were they as strong and stiff necked as the Oaks of Basan, Were
they of as great force as fenced Castelles and Towers, or as gorgeous as the
ships of Tharsis, or as high minded and lofty as Lucifer, The mighty Lord of
hosts shall put them down, and make them bend, and his glory only shall
be advanced in the day of his wrath.

As for your Idols, Verse. 18. etc.
they shall be destroyed and brought to confusion, and your selves, that have
made them your gods, and put your trust and confidence and your whole delight
in them, shall see so little help of your misery by them, that you shall be
ashamed of them, and cast them into holes and cliftes of rocks to hide them,
and your own gross folly from the face and majesty of the Lord.

Therefore leave of the trust and confidence that you have conceived in your
selves or in any strength of man, and put your trust in the Lord alone.

For man's life is brickle and frail, even as the breath passing out of the
nosthrils.

Out of this Chapter are these lessons to be learned. 1. First we have to
learn the authority and truth of Gods holy word, and his Prophets which so
many hundred years before did so euidentlye tell of the kingdom of Christ,
the conversion of the Gentiles, and the rejecting of the Jews, which from the
beginning had been accounted the chosen people of God.

2 Secondly, that the chief study of the church of Christ, ought to be, to
instruct the people of God in his ways, and on the other part, that it is
their duty, that associate themselves unto the Church, not only to learn
his ways, but also to walk in his paths, and to declare their profession in
the behavior of their life.

3 Thirdely, that they which be the Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, and
the true members of the Church of Christ use not by strife, and contention,
fighting and war to seek one the hurt of the other: but study to live
together in unity and concord, charity and brotherly love, as the children
of one father and heirs of one kingdom.

4 Fourthly, that we beware least through our obstinate refusing of the Gospel
of Christ we be given over by almighty God, and cast into perpetual induration
and utter confusion as the Jews were, in whom we see even to this day a
dreadful example of Gods severe justice.

5 Fifthly, that witchcraft, sorcerie, soothsaying, and confidence in worldly
strength and riches, are odious to almighty GOD, for that these things do
lead men from that trust and confidence that they should have in God alone,
and turn the glory of God unto creatures, which is directly against the first
commandment.

The second Sunday in Aduent at Morning prayer.
Esaias. 5. Math. 21. d. 33
My beloved friend has a vineyarde in a very fruitful plenteous ground. 2
This he hedged, and gathered out the stones from it, and planted it with the
choysest vine: In the mids of it builded he a tower, also made a wine press
therein: and he looked that it should bring him grapes, and it brought forth
wild grapes. 3 Now O Citizen of Jerusalem, and man of Judah, judge I pray
thee betwixt me and my vineyarde. 4 What more could have been done for it,
that I have not done? wherefore then has it given wild grapes, where I looked
to have had grapes of it?

5 Well, now I shall tell you how I will do with my vineyarde: I will take
the hedge from it that it may perish, and break down the wall thereof that it
may be trodden under foot. Esaias. 1. b. 7
6 I will lay it waste, it shall neither be dug nor cut, but bear thorns
and briers: I will also forbed the clouds that they shall not rain upon it.

7 As for the vineyard of the Lord of hosts, it is the house

8 Woe unto them that join one house to another, and bring one land so nie
unto another, that there is no more place: Will ye be placed alone in the
mids of the earth?

9 These things are in the ears of the Lord of hosts: of a truth great and
fair houses shall be without any dweller in them. 10 And ten acres of vines
shall give but a quarl, and thirty bushels of seed shall give but an Eph^^.

11 Woe be unto them that rise up early to follow ^^kennesse, continuing until
night, till they be set on fire with wine. 12 In their feasts are harpes and
lutes, tabrets and pipes, and wine: but they regard not the work of the
Lord, and consider not the operation of his hands.

13 Therefore comes my folk into captivity, Deuteronomy. 4. b. 7 Hier. 5. a. 4.
because they have no understanding: Their glory is family^^ with hunger, and
their multitude dried up with thirst.

14 Therefore gapeth hell and opens hit mouth marvelous wide, that their
glory, multitude, and wealth, with such as rejoice in her, may descend into
it.

15 Thus has man a fall and is brought low, Esa. 2. b. 10. 11
and the high look of the proud shall be laid down.

16 But the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy
is sanctified in righteousness.

17 Then shall the sheep eat as they were wont, and the rich men's wastes
shall strangers devour.

18 Woe be unto them that draw wickedness with cords of vanity, and sin as
it were with a cart rope.

19 Which use to speak on this manner, 2. Pet. 3. a. 4 Hier. 2. c. 8 Hier. 17.
c. 15
Let him make speed and hasten his work, that we may see it: let the
counsel of the holy one of Israel come and draw nie, that we may know it.
20 Woe be unto them that call evil good, and good evil, which make darkness
light, and light darkness, that make sower sweet, and sweet sower.

21 Woe be unto them that are wise in their own sight, Prou. 3. a. 7 To. 12. d.
16
and think themselves to have understanding.

22 Woe be unto them that are strong to suppe out wine, and expert men to set up
drunkenness.

23 Woe be unto them that give sentence with the ungodly for rewards, but
condemn the just cause of the righteous. 24 Therefore like as fire licketh up
the straw, and as the flame consumes the stubble: even so their root shall
be as corruption, and their blossom shall vanish away like (...) for they have
cast away the law of the Lord of hosts, and despised the word of the holy
one of Israel.

25 Therefore is the wrath of the lord kindled against his people, and has
stretched forth his hand upon them, yea he has smitten them: and the hills
did tremble, and their car^a^^s did lie torn in the open streets: and in all
this the wrath of God has not ceased, but his hand stretched out still. 26
And he shall give a token to a people of a far country, and shall hiss
unto them from the end of the earth: and behold they shall come hastily with
speed.

27 There shall not be one faint nor feeble among them, no not a sluggish nor
sleepie person: there shall not one of them put of his girdle from his loins,
nor loose the latchet of his shoe. 28 His arrows are sharp, and all his bows
bent: his horse hoo^es are as flint, and his cart wheels like a whirle wind.
29 His cry is as it were of a Lion, and he roreth like Lions whelps: they
shall rore and hantch up the pray, and no man shall recover it, nor got it from
them.

30 In that day he shall be so fierce upon him as the raging of the sea: then
one shall behold the land, and lo darkness and sorrow, and the light is
darkened in the heavens thereof.

The exposition upon the fifth Chapter of Esaias.
Now will I sing my beloved friend a Verse. 1.
song of my friend etc.

THe parable of the * vine used by the Prophet in this fifth Chapter, Hier. 2.
e. 21 Math. 21. c. 33 Mark. 12. a. 1 Luke. 20. b. 9
does, under figurative and borrowed speech, contain in effect the same matter
that was uttered in the beginning of the first Chapter, that is, the great
goodness of God toward the Nation of the Jews, the unthankfulness of the
people, and the plague or punishment threatened for the same. And even the same
three things have you here to note.

The beloved friend that the Prophet speaks of in the first verse, Verse. 1.
2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
is God himself, the vineyarde is the house of Israel, the chosen vine the
people of Jury, the (...) that it was planted in, the land of promise flowing
with milk and body: the the hedge or bound that he set about it, was the
providence of God and defense of his good Angels, together with princes
magistrates and laws both politic and other by him appointed. The stoning was
the casting out of the Idolatrous Chanaanites, and other heathen enemies before
them. the tower that he builded, was the name of God, and majesty of his
presence among them. The watchmen in the tower, were his prophets which were
sent in his name to forewarne his people of all danger iminent to them, either
from God or their worldly enemies. The vine press was sincere and true
doctrine according to the law of god with the knowledge of his true worship
which he gave to them only of all the Nations of the earth.

And therefore when God had thus husbanded, fenced, and dressed his vine, he
might justly look for sweet grapes out of the which pleasant and acceptable
^uy^e should have been pressed to his delight and glory.

The sweet grapes that God looked for, were true faith, and worshipping of the
name of God, obedience to his holy commandments, a charitable and loving
mind toward their neighbors. In government of the commonwealth integrity,
and diligent keeping of the laws, punishing of the wicked, defense of ye
widow, fatherless, poor, and innocent. But contrary to the hope and
expectation of this heavenly husband, the unkindly vine brought (...) and
^inking wild grapes, that is, infidelity, and mistrust in GOD, superstition,
Idolatry, murdering of his prophets and messengers, hatred, grudge, and
malice among themselves, oppression, cruelty, briberie, extortion
covetousness, drunkenness, banketting, and all voluptuous and filthy living,
yea, and above all, contempt and hatred of Gods word. Wherefore god justly
threatens, that he will take away from them the care of his divine providence,
and the government of good laws and princes wherewith they were defended, that
they may so lie open to the spoil of their enimyes.

And also that he will not send any more among them his prophets, nor the
heavenly dew of his grace and wholesome doctrine, whereby before time they
were instructed. Finally, that he will take all his good gifts and benefits
from them, wherewith before they were aboundantlye blessed.

In the residue of the Chapter the Prophet vpbraydeth them with the particular
wild grapes with which the lord was displeased, Verse. 8. 9. 10.
as Covetousness, and Extortion, Drunkenness, and Banketting, Security and
contempt of Gods word. etc.

As touching Covetousness, Psa. 38. b. 9. 10 Math. 19. e. 23 Amos. 5. c. 11
Esaias. 1. f. 23 Jacob. 1. b. 11
he reprehendeth the greedy heart and mind that thinks it has never
enough. For otherwise it is not sin to have two howses, or two pieces of
ground, so it be not with the oppression or injury of our neighbor. But to
have so covetous a mind that he thinks all to little for himself, and
therefore (as Chrysostom says) would take from the poor, if they could, the
very use of the son, and are grieved to see their neighbors use the common
elements of the world, that it is, that the Prophet here so sharply
rebukes, and therefore threatens that God will make their fair gaye houses
desolate, and their land barraine unto them, which they have purchased with so
great injury and oppression of other. Deuteronomy. 28. d. 38 Mich. 6. c. 15 Agge. 1.
a. 6
In so much that * ten Acres of vines shall scant yield one quart of wine, and
thirty bushels of seed scant one pecke.

The second vice is Drunkenness, Verse. 11. 12. 13. 14. Luke. 21. g. 34 Romans
13. d. 13 Gal. 5. c. 18.
* and banketting, with music and wantonness, which the Prophet threatens
that God will punish with captivity and extreme famine and hunger, in so much
that both rich and poor shall die for hunger in great multitudes. For that is
it he means when in the.14. verse he says. Hell gapeth and opens her mouth
wide to receive the number of them that shall die, as it were in a general
plague or murreyne.

By Glory, he means Rich and Noble: By Multitude, the commons and poorer
sort.

The seuententh verse is a * consolation of the poor and godly which were
oppressed by the covetous and wicked drunkardes, Verse. 17. John.10. a. 3. 2.
Tim. 2. c. 19 2. Pet. 2. b. 9
and shall remain after their plague and take the fruition of that wealth that
the wicked were constrained to leave as waste. For by the names of sheep, and
strangers, he means the Godly that were left after the punishment of the
wicked: and had their houses and lands taken from them, into the which they
were now restored again.

The third sower grape is Obstinacy in sin and manifest derision and
contempt of god and his word. That is it that the Prophet means when he
says,

Woe be to them that draw wickedness with cords of vanity. Verse. 18. 19.
etc. That is, that with vain allurements do lead their minds to increase
in wickedness, and add sin to sin, whatsoever persuasion shall be made to
the contrary. As by thinking that that is no sin which in deed is sin, or
that that is but a small offense and pardonable which is an heinous and
grievous offense before God. Which at the length break out of this, 1. Tim. 4.
a. 1 Judas 5. d. 1. 18
that they * deryde and scoff at the threatening of Gods justice. And say, O
you Prophets and Preachers, you threaten Gods plague to come upon us, but in
the mean season we enjoy our pleasant life: so that God does show himself
rather to be content with our manner of living then with yours, or if he do not,
when his plagues light upon us then tell us of them, but it appears they are
* long in coming, Eze. 12. g. 27 2. Pet. 3. a. 4.
and god is not so ready to punish as you say he is.

The residue of the sower grapes are not only the cloking of vices with the
fair names of virtue, Verse. 20. 21. 22.
and disgracing of virtues with the foul names of vices: but also pride,
selfelyking, and bryberie in Magistrates which are plain in the text. Against
all which he threatens his grievous plagues, and says, Verse. 26. 27. 28. 29.
30.
He will destroy great and small, strong and weak among them, that is, both
root and branch.

And after that, to their utter confusion, he will bring upon them a mighty
army of strangers, Nations dwelling far of, which shall be lusty,
courageous, and fierce, earnestly bent against them, and well appointed in all
manner of weapons, munition, and furniture. Which is meant of that host that
Vespasian and Titus brought to the siege and destruction of Jerusalem.

The second Sunday in Aduent at Evening prayer.
Esaias.24. Ose. 4. b. 9
2 And the priest shall be as the people, and the master as the servant, the
mistress like the maid, the seller like the byer, he that lends upon
usury, like him that boroweth upon usury, the creditour as the dettour. 3
The land shall be clean wasted and utterly spoiled: for so the Lord has
spoken.

4 The earth is sorry and consumes away, the world is feeble and perishes,
the proud people of the earth are come to naught. 5 The earth also is become
unprofitable under the inhabitours thereof, which have transgressed the laws,
changed the ordinannce, broken the everlasting covenant.

6 Therefore has the curse consumed the earth, and they that dwell therein are
fallen into trespass: Wherefore the inhabitours of the earth are perished with
drougth, and few harp is at an end. 9 They shall drink no more wine with
mirth, strong drink shall be bitter to them that drink it. 10 The City of
vanity is broken down, every house is shut up, that no man may come in.

11 In the streets is there a crying because of wine, all cheer is vanished
away, the mirth of the land is gone.

12 In the City is left desolation, and the gate is smitten with destruction.
13 For in the mids of the land, even among the people it shall come to pass
as at the shaking of Olives, and as the grapes are when the wine harvest is
done.

14 They shall lift up their voice, and make a merry noise:

15 Wherefore praise ye the Lord in the valleys, even the name of the Lord
God of Israel in the Isles of the sea.

16 From the uttermost part of the earth have we heard praises and mirth,
because of the righteous: and I said, I know a thing in secret, woe is me:
the transgressors have offended, the transgressors have grievously offended.

17 Fearfulness, the pit, and the snare are upon thee, O thou that dwell
on the earth. 18 It will come to pass, that whosoever escapes the fearful
noise, shall fall into the pit, and he that comes out of the pit, shall
be taken with the snare: for the windows from on high are open, and the
foundations of the earth are moved.

19 The earth is utterly broken down, the earth has a sore ruin, the earth
quaketh exceedingly.

20 The earth shall reele to and fro like a dronkarde, and shall be removed
like a tent, and the iniquity thereof shall be heavy upon it, it shall fall,
and not rise up again.

21 And in that day shall the Lord visit the host above that is on hie,
John. 48. g. 44
and the kings of the world that are upon the earth. 22 And they shall be
gathered together as they that be in prison, and they shall be shut up inward,
and after many days shall they be visited. Luc. 21. e. 25
23 The moon shall be abashed, and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts
shall reign in mount Sion and in Jerusalem with worship, and in the sight of
such as shall be of his counsel.

The exposition upon the. 24. Chapter of Esaias.
Behold the Lord makes the earth wast and empty, Verse. 1. 2.
he turns it. etc. IT is not unknown, that until the coming of our savior
Christ the Jews only were the Church and chosen people of god, and the
Gentiles, that is, al other nations of the earth (of which number we also are)
were as strangers from god, given over to Idolatry and wickedness, and had
no true sense nor knowledge of God and his right worship. But after that the
Jews obstinately had * refused Christ and his Gospel preached unto them, Luc.
19. b. 14 John. 9. e. 28 Math. 23. d. 37
and the Apostles were sent to publish the same into the whole world, the
Jews by Gods just judgment, were rejected to be no more of the Church of god,
and the other Nations of the earth before time kept from the true knowledge of
God, were then received and chosen as his Church and people.

Of this rejecting of the Jews, and of the horrible desolation of their
Country and City Jerusalem. For their obstinacy in refusing Christ the true
Savior offered unto them, and of the calling of the Gentiles, does the
Prophet speak in this Chapter.

This plague of Gods heavy judgment upon the Jews, does the Prophet set
forth in form of a waste or desolation made in war. For albeit the Jews
after their rejecting were in deed by war under Vespasian and Titus, brought
to miserable waste and desolation: yet is this place not only to be
understood thereof, but also and specially of their Spiritual calamity being
utterly refused to be the people of God, and turned out of all that heavenly
riches, glory, bless, and comfort that they had before through the law,
promise, and covenant of almighty God made unto them. Which was a far more
grievous plague than the spoil of their Country, and subversion of their
City. For by that, the glory of Gods kingdom among them was rased and
defaced.

In war, men either are slain or cast out of their Country, the land is
made waste from inhabitance, goodlye buildinges are overthrown. There is no
regard of priest or people, master or servant, maistresse or maid, rich or
poor. etc. all sorts are spoiled and feel the plague thereof. And then
needs must the inhabitants lament and mourn, and the whole Country be
turned into an horrible and miserable form and shape. As this was the outward
waste, so was the Spiritual desolation no less, but rather more grievous. For
they were bereft of all that majesty and glory that they had before God, they
remained no longer the people of God. Few of them came to the knowledge of
salvation. Both priest and people, master and servant, and al other sorts
without difference were cast of from God, and the benefit of all his
blessings. To conclude, kingdom and priesthood, and all the treasures of
heavenly knowledge were taken from them. And that not by the hand of any
mortal Prince, but by the mighty power of God. For the Lord (says he) shall
make waste the land, and the Lord has spoken it.

The cause is added in the fifth verse, They have transgressed the laws, They
have changed the ordinances, They have broke the everlasting covenant. That is
to say: They have transgressed the law of the ten commandments
prescribing the true worship of God and duty toward their neighbors, they
have not kept the ordinances appointed for the government of their common
weal and external form of Religion, they have broken the everlasting
Covenant and testament, whereby God had bound himself for ever to be the God
of Abraham, and of his posterity. For they rejected that happy seed of
Abraham, Genesis 18. c. 18. Act. 13. g. 47. Gal. 3. b. 8. Eccle. 44. d. 25
* Christ Jesus, in whom promise was wade that all the nations * of the earth
should be blessed. This was of all other the most grievous offense. For they
that reject Christ and his Gospel, reject from them selves all hope of
Salvation.

Therefore has the curse consumed the earth, Verse. 6.
and they that dwell, etc. This curse is that which God threatens. Leu. 26. c.
16. Deuteronomy. 28. b. 16
* Leu. 26. and * Deuteronomy. 28. against them that keep not his law. Cursed shall
thou be in the City, and cursed in the field, cursed shall be the fruit of
thy body, and the fruit of thy land etc.

The wine fails, Verse. 7. 8. 9.
the vine has no might, all they that have been merry. etc. By the decay of
wine, mirth, solace, and minstrelcie: he signifies that he will take from them
all those his creatures wherein they did delight and take pleasure, Jacob. 4. c.
9 Psalm. 74. b. 8
and cast them into * lamentation, sorrow, and mourning, and want of all
comfort, both before God in conscience, and before the world outwardly.

The city of vanity is broken down, Verse. 10. 11. 12. Psalm. 9. b. 7
every house is shut up. etc. The destruction of Jerusalem and the sorrowful
desolation thereof is described in these three verses.

For in the mids of the land, Verse. 13.
even among the people it shall come. etc. Because he has before prophesied of
the destruction of the land and kingdom of Jury, and of the reiection of
that people, least it might be thought that God should have no face or
countenance of a Church in the whole world: he signifies here both that some
re^^^an^ of the Jews should be saved, as S. Paul writes, Romans 11. a. 5
and also that he will raise up a more ample and glorious church of all the
other Nations of the earth, which shall give praise and glory to his name.

This is it that he means in the.13. verse, when he says, That it shall fall
out as in the latter end of harvest, some Olives and some clusters of grapes
will be left on the trees, being but a small portion in comparison of the
whole. Even so some of the Jews should receive Christ and be saved, and those
but few in respect of the whole Nation that were rejected.

In the Verse. 14. 15 Psalm. 114. c. 12
. 14. 15. and 16. verses, by those that shall cry out of the west, and praise
the Lord in the valleys, and in the Isles of the sea, and from the uttermost
parts of the earth. He means the number of the Gentiles in all places, that
professing the Gospel and salvation by Christ, shall give praise and glory to
the name of God for the same.

I know a thing in secret, Verse. 16.
I know a thing in secret, woe is me. etc. Here the Prophet breaks out to
sorrowful lamentation for the rejecting of his people and countrymen from the
favor of god through their obstinate transgression, Romans 9. a. 2
as if he had said, * woe is me for that I do with sorrow and heaviness of
heart foresee that at the revealing of the Gospel by Messiah, many other
nations embracing the same, few of my Countriemen shall receive the sweet
comfort thereof. For they shall heynously and grieuouslye transgress in
contemning and refusing Christ the Messiah and Savior. And therefore God shall
by his just wrath refuse and cast of them also from the number of his people.

Fearfulness, Verse. 17.
the pit, and the snare are upon thee, O thou that dwell, etc. To this place
Esaias has prophesied, as it is noted before, of the rejecting of the Jews and
calling of the Gentiles, to the knowledge of GOD. Now he tells what shall
become also of the other wicked inhabitours of the earth, and kingdoms of the
world which shall continue in wickedness after the gospel published, and the
kingdom of Christ spread and enlarged by Christ and his Apostles: and
especially toward the latter end of the world. Verse. 23.
When the Church and kingdom of Christ, who is the Lord of hosts shall be
set up in Sion and Jerusalem, that is, in the Church of God, with so great
majesty and heavenly brightness, that it shall far pass the Sun and the
Moon: then shall these troubles happen to the wicked of the world. Amos. 5.
e. 19 Esaias. 15. d. 9 1. Re. 20. e. 30
He that shall escape the fearful noise shall fall into the pit, and he that
scapeth the pit shall light into the snare, that is, they shall have no
quietness nor rest, but shall run out of one calamity into an other until
they perish utterly. For even as in the general deluge, so shall the windows
of heaven be opened, and God shall power down his plagues upon the wicked and
vurepentaunt contemners of the Gospel. And the very earth it self and the
powers and kingdoms thereof shall stagger and reele, and in the end consume
and take a new shape. For the iniquity thereof shall be as an heavy burden
unto it. etc.

The third Sunday in Aduent at Morning prayer.
Esaias. 25.

2 Thou have made a City a heap of stones, Esaias. 26. a. 5
and brought a strong town into decay: the habitation of strangers have thou
made to be no City, neither shall it be buywed any more. 3 Therefore shall
the mighty people give glory unto thee, the City of the valiant heathen
shall fear thee.

4 For thou have been a strength unto the poor, and a succor for the needy
in his trouble, a refuge against evil weather, a shadow against the heat: for
the blast of raging men is like a storm that casts down a wall.

5 Like as the heat in a dry place wastes all things: so shall thou
suppress the noise of aliauntes, the heat ( is abated) with the shadow of
the cloud ( even so shall God) assuage the noise of the cruel tyrannes.

Luc. 14. d. 23
even of most pleasant and dainty dishes. 7 And in this mountain shall the
Lord destroy the covering that all people are wrapped in, Apoc. 7. c. 27
and.21. c. 4
and the hanging that is spread upon all nations.

8 As for death he has destroyed it for ever, and the Lord God shall wipe
away tears from all faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he take away out
of all the earth, for so the Lord has said. Ephe. 2. a. 13
9 And or that day it shall be said, Lo this is our God, we have waited for
him, and he shall save us, this is the Lord in whom we have hoped, we will be
merry and rejoice in the salvation ( that comes) of him.

10 For in this mountain shall the hand of the Lord cease, and Moab shall
be threshed under him, even as straw is trodden to dung on the dunghill. 11 And
he shall stretch out his hand in the mids of them, as he that swimmeth
casts out his hands to swim: and with the strength of his hands shall be
bring down their pride.

12 The strong hold also and defense of thy walls has he overthrown and
cast down, and brought them in the grouned, even unto dust.

The exposition upon the.xxv. Chapter of Esaias.
Thou art my Lord my God, Verse. 1.
I will magnify thee, I will give thanks: etc. THe Prophet in this Chapter
foreseeing in spirit, Judas. 6. c. 14 1. Reg. 12. b. 11 Exodus 6. a. 6. Math. 2.
c. 13 Exodus 2. b. 10 Dan. 6. f. 21
and earnestly considering the marvelous * preservation of the church and
kingdom of Christ even in the midst of the furious raging of this world,
could not but break out to the great praise and extolling of the same his
wonderful goodness and clemency, saying: Thou art my Lord my God. etc.

The thing for the which he extolleth Christ Jesus the Messiah and savior (for
he is that Lord and God to whom he speaks) is, that he maruelously preserves
his Church and people, Titus. 1. a. 2 2. Cor. 1. d. 20 Romans 4. d. 21 2. Par. 6.
a. 4
and fulfilleth all his counsayles and promises *truly and faithfully. For
albeit they seem often to be prolonged and deferred, so that the faithless
judge them to be false and vain, yet in the end they prove always most firm
and true, and are fulfilled with great glory.

These counsayles and promises consist in two points. The one is, that Christ
will overthrow and utterly confound all Empires, and Kingdoms of the world,
all Princes and Tirannes and all other whatsoever they be that afflict and
persecute the Godly that profess his name, and of this speaks he in the
second and third verses.

The other point is that he will * deliver and preserve from all evil his
Church and people seem they never so miserable poor and contemptible in the
world, Luke. 1. g. 71 Psalm. 17. e. 28 Psalm. 21. b. 6
and of this speaks he in the other parts following.

Thou have made a city an heap of stones, Verse. 2.
and brought a strong town. etc. By the time past the Prophet signifies what
GOD does presently, and always will do in his Church, and by the singular
number speaking of one City, he means many: so that the sense is: I
therefore praise thee O thou Messiah and Savior, my Lord and God, that by thy
mighty power, thou do overthrow and bring to utter confusion the great
Cities, principalities, and powers of the world that persecute thy Church, and
afflict thy people, and repel thy Gospel. This is it that thou promisest to
Abraham our father saying. Genesis 12. a. 3.
I will bless them that bless thee, and I will curse them that curse thee.
etc. And therefore all powers that will not * submit themselves to thee, Psalm.
72. d. 2 ^
shall perish and come to desolation.

Therefore shall the mighty people give glory unto thee, Verse. 3. the City
of, etc. Great principalities and Cities contemning and persecuting thy word,
are therefore brought to confusion, that other by their example may learn to
fear thy name, and acknowledge thy majesty and mighty power.

For thou have been a strength unto the poor, Verse. 4. 5.
and a succor for, etc. This is the second part of the counsayles and
promises of Christ that he faithfully perfourmeth, that is, that he preserves
and succoureth his people in all their affliction, and therefore to the great
comfort of all that are troubled in conscience or otherwise is called here, The
strength of the poor, The succor of the needy, A refuge against evil
weather and tempestuous troubles, A shadow against the heat of persecution, to
save and keep his people. And here is it to be observed diligently, that the
people of GOD are often afflicted and persecuted in this world: and therefore
that all which will submit themselves to the kingdom of Christ must look for
* no better entertainment here, 2. Tim. 3. c. 12
and yet with strong faith conceive this comfort that their king, their Lord
and God, will either mightilye deliver them presently, and be revenged of
their enemies: or else give them that strength of spirit, that they shall not
only patiently suffer that which shall be laid upon them, Colo. 1. a. 12 2.
These. 1. a. 5 Act. 5. g. 41
but also as S. Paul says, * Glory in their afflictions, that God has
thought them worthy to suffer for his names sake.

And in this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast,
Verse. 6.
etc. The Mount here spoken of, is the hill of Sion, whereby the Church is
figured. The feast, is the feast of his Gospel published, and calling all men
to the sweetness of everlasting life, which was first preached in Jerusalem
by Christ himself, where also he bestowed the dainty and delicate dishes of
his holy spirit and heavenly graces to all them that received his Gospel:
that is to say, The heavenly food of Christ himself. John. 6. g. 58 Romans 5.
b. 11 Romans 5. d. 18 Ioh. 10. e. 28
(* John. 6. Remission of sin, *Reconciliation, Acceptance, * Justification
before God, The assured gift of everlasting * life, and The inheritance of the
kingdom of God.

In this Mountain therefore was the table as it were first spredde for this
heavenly banquet, and from thence were the messengers sent into all parts of
the world to bid the ghestes, Math. 22. a. 4 Luke. 14. d. 16
as Christ signifies by a parable. Math. 22. and Luke. 14*

And in this Monntaine shall the Lord destroy the covering, Verse. 7. 8.
etc. The covering and hanging or the mourning garment wherein all men are
wrapped, is Corruption and Sin, whereby sorrow, danger, shame, and reproach
is come unto them, and by which, death also has invaded them. Romans 6. d. 23
* For death is the reward of sin. But the danger both of the one and of
the other, and the sorrow, weeping, and heaviness that comes by them, Eze.
19. d. 12 Ose. 13. c. 14 1. Cor. 15. g. 55 Heb. 2. d. 14.
is clean taken away by Christ Jesus, as S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 15. * Where
is thy sting, O death? O hell, where is thy victory? The sting of death is
sin, the power of sin is the law, but thanks be to God, that has given
us victory by Christ Jesus. Therefore with glad and thankful hearts the
Prophet makes the people of God, and subjects of the kingdom of Christ to
rejoice and triumph for the same, saying:

Lo, Verse. 9.
this is our God, we have waited for him, and he shall deliver us, etc. Here
the Prophet notes the three sacrifices, wherewith the Church of Christ and
his people do worship him 1 The first is Faith and Belief of heart, noted in
this word, We have waited for him, that is with constant faith we have abidden
his coming, being assured that he would deliver us.

2 The second is Confession with the mouth. For we must not only believe in
heart that Christ Jesus is the savior of the world, as S. Romans 10. b. 10
Paul says, but also confess with mouth, and therefore says the Prophet
here, Lo this is our God, etc.

3 The third is Triumphant gladness in heart and conscience for the salvation
happened by christ our Savior, which is uttered in these words. We will
rejoice and be merry in the salvation. etc.

For in this Mountain the hand of the Lord shall abide, Verse. 10. 11. 12.
etc. By the hand of the Lord he understands the power and majesty of
Christ that shall remain always in his Church, Mat. 28. d. 20
For I am with you (says he) to the end of the world, that is in virtue,
power, and majesty of his Godhead, though, as touching his humanity, he be
absent in heaven on the right hand of God the father. By the name of Moab that
should be threshed and trodden under like a dunghill, he means all the
enemies and adversaries of Christ and his Gospel, upon whom our Savior Christ
shall stretch out his hand like one that swimmeth, that he may thresh them and
beat them as it were to dust, and bring to confusion all their glory and
great strength. The Moabites were the sworn and perpetual enemies to the
Israelites, and therefore by that name does he note all the adversaries of the
people of God.

The third Sunday in Aduent at Evening prayer.
Esaias. 26. IN that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah, Prou. 18.
c. 11 Zach. 2. a. 5
salvation shall God appoint in stead of walls and bulwarks.

2 Open ye the gates, Psalm. 118. b. 19
that the righteous people which keeps the truth may enter in.

3 By an assured purpose will thou preserve perfect peace, Romans 5. a. 5
because they put their trust in thee. 4 Put ye your trust always in the Lord:
for in the Lord God there is strength for evermore. Esaias. 25. a. 2
5 For he has brought down the high minded Citizens: as for the proud city
he hate brought it low, even to the ground shall he cast it down, and bring
it unto dust. 6 The foot, even the foot of the poor, and the steps of such
as be in necessity shall tread it down.

7 The path of equity will thou grant unto the full ( O thou most righteous)
thou shall order the path of him that is righteous. Prou. 16. a. 1 Hier. 10. d.
23
8 Yea in the way of thy judgments, O lord, have we put our trust in thee: thy
name also and the remembrance of thee, is the thing that our soul longs for.

9 My soul has longed for thee all the night, Psalm. 63. a. 2 and. 143. a. 6
and with my spirit which is within me will I seek thee early in the morning:
for when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitours of the world shall
learn righteousness.

10 Shall the ungodly man be favored, which has not learned righteousness,
but ^^th wickedly in ^he earth where nothing ought to be done but that which is
righteous? he shall not see the glory of the Lord. 11 Lord when thy hand is
lift up to strike, they see it not: but they shall see it, and be confounded
with the zeal of the people, and the fire that consumes thine enemies shall
douour them.

12 Lord unto us thou shall provide peace: Phil. 2. a. 13
for thou also* have wrought all our works in us. 13 O Lord our God, other
Lords besides thee, has subdued us: but we will be mindful only of thee,
and of thy name.

14 The dead will (...), they that be out of life will not rise again,
therefore have thou visited and rooted them out and destroyed all the memory
of them.

15 Thou have increased the people, O Lord, thou have increased the people,
thou art glorious, thou have sent them far of unto all the costs of the earth.
Leu. 26. g. 43
16 Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out their prayer when
thy chastening was upon them. John. 16. c. 21
17 Like as a woman with child that draws nie toward her travail is sorry
and cries in her pains: even so have we been in thy sight O Lord. Romans 8.
d. 22
18 We have been with child and suffered pain, as though we had brought forth
wind: for there is no salvation in the earth, neither do the inhabiters of
the world submit themselves. 1. Cor. 15. d. 35
19 Thy dead men shall live, even as my body shall they rise again: awake and
sing ye that dwell in dust, for thy deawe is even as the deawe of herbs, and
the earth shall cast out them that be under her.

20 Come my people, Genesis 19. b. 10. Apoc. 6. d. 16.
enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee, hyde thy self
for a little while, until the indignation he ouerpast. 21 For behold the
Lord is coming out of his place, Mich. 1. a. 3
to visit the wickedness of such as dwell upon earth: the earth also shall
disclose her bloudes, and shall no more hide them that are slain in her.

The exposition upon the.26. Chapter of Esaias.
In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah, Verse. 1.
We have a strong city, etc. AFter that the Prophet in the former Chapter
has recyted the benefits that come to them that acknowledge* Christ the true
Messiah and savior, he now makes a song or psalm in meeter, wherewith the
faithful, in that day, may comfort themselves, and arm their consciences
against the temptation and offense rissing in the world by the prosperity and
success of the wicked. For where before it is promised, that Christ in his
kingdom shall take away all mourning, sorrow, and weeping from his people, and
deliver them from all misery and oppression, and contrariwise, that he will
threshe down the wicked to dust: to them that look into the outward face of
the world, and as natural men only consider the thing, it may seem to be all
clean contrary, and the wicked to flourishe and prosper in all felicity, and
the good and godly to be kept under in shame, sorrow, Luke. 16. e. 19
and misery. As it appears in the * Parable of good poor Lazarus, and the
rich proud glutton. Against this offense, as I have said, does the Prophet
here arm and comfort the people of God. Verse. 1. 2. 3.
The first comfort is this. We have a strong City, salvation shall God
appoint in steed of walls and Bulwarks. That is, howsoever the countenance
of the world seems toward us, howsoever the wicked seem to be in great
strength and glory, and we in great weakness and misery: yet have we a
strong City, a mighty City, the Church of God, the heavenly Jerusalem, in
which the Lord God himself our salvation is in steed of Wales and
Bulwarks, against all the pride and strength of the world, as he says also
by his Prophet Zachary. Zach. 2. b. ^
2. I will be a fiery wall round about them, and a glory in the mids of
them.

This City is the Church, the foundation thereof is Christ and his doctrine,
the walls and bulwarks the might and majesty of Christ, against which the
gates of Hell, Math. 16. c. 18s
and all the * powers of Satan cannot prevail. The gates to enter into this
City, is the preaching of the Gospel, and that not in one place only, but in
all places of the world, and wheresoever the Gospel is preached, there is a
gate to enter into this City of God. The way to enter is by faith to embrace
the gospel of Christ. The Citizens that do enter are all faithful, which are
* justified by faith in the blood of Christ. Romans 3. d. 25 1. John. 1. c. 7
Ephe. 1. b. 7
And of them is it that he speaks in the second verse.

Open you the gate that the righteous people may enter in. Verse. 2.
etc. Wherefore when these gates be opened, by the messengers of God and
preachers of his gospel, let all that tender their health and salvation make
speed to receive it, that they may enter into this City where only the sure
strength of God is for ever more to save and deliver.

For he has brought down the high minded Citizens: as for the proud, Verse. 5.
etc. This is the second argument of consolation in this Psalm to stir up
the people of God to confidence and constancy against the tentation before
mentioned. For he describes how mightily Christ overthrows the wicked, that
seem to themselves and to the world to be in greatest glory and felicity.
He has pulled down (says he) the high minded Citizens. This is it that the
blessed virgin speaks in her song. Luke. 1. e. 52 Iosu. 10. d. 24
He has deposed the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble and
meek. And yet was not she that spoke thus of her self greatly exalted in
sight of the world, but remained simple and poor. But in the kingdom of
Christ and in heavenly glory before God, she was exalted to a very high
degree, and contrariwise the enemies of the Gospel, and the proud of the
world, that is, the obstinate Jews and other adversaries were in the same
respect thrown down, and afterward also in the world by gods mighty hand
grievously plagued.

The path of equity wylt thou grant unto the just, Verse. 7. 8. 9.
O thou most righteous, etc. The right way and the path of equity, which
Christ our Lord grants to his subjects, is the preaching of his gospel,
in that must they walk; that will go the straight way to heaven: All other
ways be but errors and wicked seducings, what countenance soever be set upon
them. Therefore say the saints of God, In the way of thy judgments (O Lord)
that is, in the truth of thy Gospel, have we put our trust in thee, thy name
also and the remembrance of thee, is the thing that our soul longs for,
Psalm. 1. a. 2 Iosu. 1. b. 8 Psalm. 118. 97.
and that not once in a year, * but day and night continually. For then only
may men learn justice truly when thy judgments are in the earth, that is,
when thy doctrine and Gospel is preached sincerely and truly.

This place is diligently to be noted that we may thereby be more inflamed to
the whole some doctrine of the Gospel. For the most part think it a matter
smally apperteining to them, and turn over the care thereof to Ministers and
such old men as can do little else, then come to the Church, and hear
preachinges, and are, as they say, past the world. And they themselves follow
their worldly businesses, their Marchandies, their husbandry and other
occupations, and feel nothing at all that longing and greedy desire of god
and his Gospel, that the prophet here speaks of.

Shall the ungodly man be favored, Verse. 10.
which has not learned righteousness, etc. Shall grace and mercy be offered
to the wicked? shall the Gospel be preached, shall remission of sin in Christ
Jesus, shall the favor of God and eternal life be declared unto them, when as
they will not learn to do justice, they will not amend, they will not accept
the mercy of God? But although the even, plain, and smooth way of Gods holy
word be offered them, yet will they still wander after their own paths to
error and * ungodliness: Prou. 27. c. 22 Eccle. 7. b. 14
and will not see the glory of the Lord.

Lord when thy hand is lift up to strike, Verse. 11.
they see it not: but they shall see it, etc. That is, when thy mighty hand
is lifted up in the marvelous works of glorifying thy son by miracles, by
his wonderful resurrection from the dead, by the sending of the holyghost, by
publishing of the Gospel throughout the world, Exodus 5. e. 21. Romans 7. b. 13
and by thy heavy plagues threatened to all the * refusers thereof, they yet
will not see and understand it. But when that the same Christ thy son shall
come in his majesty, and reveal his glory to the whole world: then shall
the wicked contemners of christ be ashamed, Sap. 5. a. 2. Sap. 3. a. 3
in such sort, that they shall * pine away with envy of those things, that
they shall see to happen to the people of God, and be devoured and consumed with
eternal fire.

Lord unto us thou shall provide peace: Verse. 12. 13
for thou also have wrought, etc. Before, he had spoken of the wicked, but now
he adds the other part of the contrary comparison, what shall be done to the
faithful and godly. As if he had said, The ungodly shall be ashamed and pine
away and be consumed with fire, but unto us the faithful and godly, our Lord
and Savior Christ gives * peace, John. 14. d. 27 Luke. 22. c. 29
that is, perpetual * felicity and tranquillity. For Christ has obtained for
us of God the father all those blessings, that we have not only bodily, but
also and specially spiritual: that is, Ephe. 1. b. 7 Romans 4. b. 8.
* remission of sins, * imputing of Christ's justice to us, and the spirit
of GOD to * mortefie the lusts of the flesh, Romans 8. c. 13 Romans 5. a. 1
whereby we have * peace and quietness of conscience before God and the world.

The dead will not live, Verse. 14.
they that be out of life will not rise again, etc. Here enters the first
part of an other contrary comparison between the wicked and the godly, and in
this verse he says of the wicked, that they do die, and live not again, for
their resurrection shall be to them a death perpetual, and no life. And
although they seem to prosper, and flourishe long on earth, to the annoyance
of the godly: yet the Lord visits them in due time, Psalm. 9. b. 7 Psalm. 33.
c. 16
* and rooteth the memory of them out of the earth, so that they shall never
rise again to glory.

Thou have increased the people, Verse. 15. 16. 17.
O Lord, thou have increased, etc. This is the other part of the comparison
touching the godly, as if he had said, Thou (O lord christ) destroyest the
wicked and rootest out their memory, nevertheless thou do gather thy
Church, and increase the number of thy people, that thy glory may be spread and
extended to the uttermost bounds of the earth. And yet do thou not gather
them to rest and quietness of this life, but to great vexation and affliction:
and therefore do they resort to thee in their trouble, Psalm. 61. c. 8
* and pour out their prayers to thee in the time of thy chastening. For * thy
chastening they do acknowledge it to be whatsoever comes. Job. 2. c. 10 Job.
1^. c. 21
Although it be the hand of the wicked: yet they know it to proceed from thy
fatherly providence to their great benefit and commodity, that their faith
may be increased, and their spirit styrred up to call upon thee.

Thy dead men shall live, Verse. 19.
even as my body shall they rise again, etc. The wicked although they flourish
for a time in this world, yet shall they not live in bless after the
resurrection of the dead, but shall die for ever. But the godly, that have
lived here in trouble, and dyed in thee, shall rise again to life, and joys
everlasting.

Come my people, Verse. 20. 2^
enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors, etc. This is a consolation
in the person of Christ exhorting his people, patiently for a time to bear the
affliction and trouble of this life, and to enter into the closets and secrets
of their hearts, and call upon the name of the Lord, for the succor and
strength of his holy spirit, until the time of his indignation be past. Esaias.
13. b. 11 Ose. 1. b. 4 Luke. 12. a. 2 Genesis 4. b. 10. Apoc. 6. c. 10
For the Lord in short time will come * to visit the wickedness of the
earth, and the earth shall no longer keep secret but * disclose the blood and
cruelty that has been shown to the saints of God, that his justice may
proceed against them for the same.

The fourth Sunday in Aduent at Morning prayer.
Esaias. 30. Esaias. 8. b. 10
that they will take a secret advise and not out of my spirit, and therefore
add they sin unto sin.

2 Even they that walk to go down into Egypt, and have asked no question at
my mouth, but seek strength in the might of Pharao, and trust in the shadow of
Egypt.

3 Therefore shall the strength of Pharao be your confusion, and the trust in
the shadow of Egypt your shame.

4 For his Capitaynes were at Zoan, and his Ambassadors came unto Hanes. 5
They were ashamed of the people that could do them no good, 2. Re. 18. d. 21
Hier. 17. b. 5 Exe. 29. a. 6
and that might not help them nor show them any profit, but were their
confusion and rebuke. 6 The burden of the beasts of the South. In a land of
trouble and anguish, from whence shall come the young and old Lion, the viper
and fierce serpent that flies against them, that upon coltes bear their
riches, and upon camels their treasures, to a people that can do them Esaias. 8.
a. 1
8 Now therefore go thy way, and write this before them in a table, and note it
in a book: that it may finally remain and be kept still for ever.

9 For this is an obstinate people, Esaias. 1. d. 10
and dissembling children, children that refuse to hear the law of the Lord.

10 For they say unto the seers, See not: and to them that be clear of
judgment, Look not out right things for us: but speak fair words unto us,
look out errors.

11 Get you out of this way, depart out of this path, and turn the holy one of
Israel from us.

12 Wherefore thus says the holy one of Israel, Because your hearts rise
against this word, and because you trust in wrong dealing and perverse
judgment, and put your confidence therein. 13 Therefore shall ye have this
mischief for your destruction and fall, like as an hie wall that falls
because of some ryft or blast, whose breaking comes suddenly. 14 And the hurt
thereof is like an earthen Psalm. 2. b. 9
so that in the bursting of it, there is not found one sheuer to fetch fire
in, or tos take water withal out of the pit. 15 For thus says the Lord God,
even the holy one of Israel, Exodus 14. c. 13 1. Chr. 20. c. 5
In repentance and in rest shall ye be safe, in quietness and sure confidence
shall be your strength, but ye have had no list thereto.

16 For ye have said, No, but we will escape through horses, therefore shall
ye fly: and we will get us up upon swift beasts, and therefore shall your
persecutors be swifter.

17 A thousand shall fly at the rebuke of one, Leu. 26. a. 8. Iosu. 23. a. 3
and at the rebuke of fi^se shall ye all fly, till ye be left as a ship mast
upon the top of a mountain, and as a breaken upon a^ hill.

18 Therefore ^oth the Lord cause you to wait, Romans 2. a. 4
that he may have merry upon you, to the intent that he may have the
preeminence when he is gracious unto you: for the Lord is the God of judgment.
Blessed are all they that hope in him. 19 If the people remain in Sion and at
Hiesrusalem, thou shall not be in (...): but at the voice of thy complaint
shall he have mercy upon ^hee, and when he ^^reth it, he shall give thee an
answer.

20 And though the Lord give you the bread of trouble, and the water of
adversity, thy rain shall be no name s^ scant, but thine eyes shall see thy
rain.

21 Yea and th^^e ear shall hear the talking of him that Deuteronomy. 4. a. 1
This is the way, walk y^ in it, turn not aside neither to the right hand,
nor to the left.

22 Ye shall destroy also the covering of your silver Images, and the decking
of your golden Idols, even as filthiness shall thou put them away: and thou
shall say unto it, Get thee hence. 23 Then shall God give rain unto thy seed,
that thou shall sow the ground withal, and bread of the increase of the
earth, which shall be fat and very plenteous: in that day also shall thy
cattle be fed in large pastures.

24 The oxen likewise and the young Asses that ear the ground, shall eat
clean prouender, which is purged with the wind and the fan. 2. Pet. 3. b. 7
25 Finally, upon every hie mountain and hill shall there be rivers, and
streams of waters in the day of the great slaughter when the towers fall.

Esaias. 10. a. 5
which (...) other men with the (...).

(...) And it shall come to pass, that whither soever he goes; the rod shall
rleaue unto him which the Lord shall lay upon him with tabrets and harpes: and
with great war shall he fight against his host. Math. 25. c. 30
33 For the fire of hell is ordained from the beginning, yea even for the king
is it prepared: this has the Lord set in the deep, and made it wide, the
burning whereof is fire and much wood: the breath of the Lord which is like a
river of brimstone does kindle it.

The exposition upon the.30. Chapter of Esaias.
Alas for those disobedient children says the Lord, Verse. 1.
that they will take, etc. AT what time the Assirians under * Senacherib, 4.
Reg. 19. a. 1 Esaias. 36. g. 37 2. Par. 32. a. ^
in the time of Ezechias, invaded Jury, and put Jerusalem in great fear, *
many of the Princes and people were very earnest to have sel^^ for succor
into Egypt* and might hardly be persuaded otherwise. Esaias. 36. b. 6
And (...) they were commanded by God in their distress to put their trust in
him, and not seek help at the heathen and godless people, that were (...)
Esaias in this (...) from that put (...) and says, Verse. 1. 2. 3:
(...) dicut children (says the Lord) that contemning my word whereby I have
promised them help against the Assirians, will (...) follow their own (...)
of my holy spirit, seek aid of straung^^^ for their defense, and so add
(...) upon sins not only disobeying my word in taking that advice, but
stubburnely refusing my calling back from the execution (...) purpose. They
(...) and confidence that they should have in me, and follow their own
counsel and seek their own strength by the power of the * Egyptians. Iere.
42. b. 14 Deuteronomy. 17. d. 16 Ps. 146. a. 3. 4 Esaias. 20. a. 5
But that vain shadow of Pharoes power and the Egyptians, shall be their
confusion.

Yea they send their Princes in embassage to the farremost parts of Egypt,
Verse. 4. 5.
that is, to Zoan and Hanes with rich presents and gifts in servile manner to
crave aid of a godless people, that shall neither be willing nor * hable to
help them. Esaias. 31. a. 3


The burden of the beasts of the South. Verse. 6. 7.
In a land of trouble, etc. The Prophet does not only reprove their doing,
but amplifyeth their folly, showing that they take great and dangerous
iourneyes, with their beasts l^aden with treasure to pass into Egypt through
the wilderness (which is here noted by the land of anguish and trouble) and
by the ways were assaulted by Lions and other wild beasts* and (...), with
great hurt and danger: And all to bie the help of them that ^^re not hable to
succor them, whereas they might have had the ready help of God at home, If,
according to his word and preaching of his Prophet, they would have called
upon him, and put their trust in hims.

Now therefore go thy way write this before them in a table, Verse. 8. 9.
etc. These words be spoken in the person of God to the Prophet, willing him
to write this prophecy, and to set it in the sight of the people, that it
might remain for an everlasting memory against them, and that all ages might
thereby understand what an * obstinate, stubburne, and waywarde people this
was, Act. 7. f. 51 Hier. 7. f. 26
that, by no preaching or teaching of the Prophets of GOD, could be withdrawn
from their unfaithful devises.

For they say unto the Seers, Verse. 10.
Se not: and to them that be clear, etc. By the name of Seers, and those that
understand he means the Prophets and Preachers that God had sent unto them.
In this place therefore Esaias painteth forth the waywarde obstinacy and
contempt of Gods word before mentioned. In so much that they did not only
turn away their eyes, their ears, and all their senses, from the doctrine of
his truth, but also derided the same, and desired to have it utterly rooted out
and taken away. Of which virulent fury of the wicked ryseth all affliction, 1.
Reg. 13. a. 4 2. Reg. 1. b. 9 2. Pa. 26. d. 19 Acts. 7. f. 54 Math. 14. a. 3
persecution, and trouble against the prophets and messengers of God. For when
once they can not abide the truth, then seek they all means to * vex them,
by whom it is offered and brought unto them.

Look not out right things for us: Verse. 10.
but speak fair words unto us, etc. It cannot be thought that any people can
be so obstinately blinded, Hier. 22. e. 21 Ose. 12. b. 5 Math. 19. b. 14
that they will with so * open words * protest that they will not here the
truth, Psalm. 35. a. 3 Esaias. 28. c. 12 Hier. 44. d. 16
under the name of the truth, or, that they will with plain words desire to
be deceived, and be led into error by flattery: but rather with a
countenance of hypocrisy will detest the truth under the name of falsehood
and error, because it is to them sharp and unpleasant, and, under the name
of truth and godliness desire to have * erronr and falsehoode, 1. Tim. 4. a. 3
being to them more pleasant and acceptable, Mich. 2. c. 11
because it is more * agreeing to their fantasies. But the Prophet here
pulls of their visarde, and lets them be seen, as they are inwardely in
heart and mind, in deed abhorring the truth.

Wherefore thus says the holy one of Israel, Verse. 12. 13 14. 15. 16
Because your hearts rise, etc. In these verses next following is denounced a
grievous threatening of God against such wilful and obstinate refusers and
contemners of his word. Seeing, says he, your wickedness is such, thus
says that holy god, that has chosen Israel for his peculier people: Because
you have refused this my word and promise, whereby I have undertaken to
preserve and deliver you from your enemies, in all your adversities, and put
your trust in wrong dealing and perverse judgment by seeking help of
Idolatours with money and riches: therefore, I say, shall extreme destruction
come upon you. And as an high wall, if it begin to have a clift, falls
suddenly before men beware o^ it: so you, which by the blessing of God have
been hitherto high and notable, because you have begun to be cleft with the
breech of vufaythfulnesse, and wickedness, shall fall upon the sudden to
extreme confusion. Psalm. 2. c. 9 Apoc. 2. f. 27
Yea, and even as an * earthen vessel so broken, by the fall of a great stone
upon it, that one sharde or shiuer is not left so big as to carry a cole of
fire on, or to take water out of a pit: so you, I say, that have hitherto
been the vessels of Gods great mer^ie, shall be so oppressed and destroyed,
that scant any remnant shall be saved, Verse. 17.
yea, in the end you shall be brought to so small a number, that you shall be
but here and there one, as it were a maste of a ship upon a mountain, or a
beacon upon an hill. Which shall remain only as a token of the great
calamity that by Gods hand shall fall upon you.

Therefore does the Lord cause you to wait, Verse. 18.
that he may have, etc. Here the Prophet declares a cause, why they should
leave the help of strangers, and put their trust in him: that is, because he
has determined to save them from the Assirians, if they will ^arie in their
City, and call upon him for help. The Lord, says he, causes you to wait,
and deferreth his doing, not that he intends to forsake you, but that he may
merrifully, and with the more glory of his judgment deliver you.

Therefore should ye be of good cheer, Psalm. 2. c. 12 Hier. 17. a. 7
and look for the help of the Lord. For * blessed are they, and good shall
come unto them, that put their trust in the Lord. Verse. 19.
For this I do assure you, says the prophet, if the people remain in
Jerusalem with quiet trust in God, 1. Cor. 10. c. 13 2. Pet. 2. b. 9
* though for the time they feel some trouble, hurt, and scarcity by the
enemies besieging them: yet shall they not perish, and be oppressed, but, at
their first complaint and calling upon him, Verse. 20.
he will have mercy on them. And although the Assirians shall seem so to have
wasted their country, that they shall not have any sustenance to live by: God
yet will so mercifully deal with them, that he shall give them plenty of
food, with rain and prosperous weathering to maintain ye same. Yea, Verse.
21. John. 8. b. 12 John. 14. a. 6 Phil. 1. a. 6
and as a pastor following his flock does guide them with his (...) unto the
right way: so shall the Lord send them Prophets, Princes, and Rulers, that
shall govern and guide them, that they in their doings may go neither on the
right hand nor on the left, but keep the straight and true way. Verse. 22.
But the Lord does not only require of them, that they should remain with
quiet trust and confidence in him, Iud. 10. b. 7 3. Reg. 14. d. 15 1. Cor. 10.
b. 7 Gal. 5. d. 20. 1. Cor. 6. b. ^
but also that they should destroy and cast away their filthy Idols, the *
worship whereof has led them from the true service of God, and so caused them
grievously to offend, and to stray from the right way of his word appointed.

Then shall God give rain unto thy seed, Verse. 23. 24
that thou shall sow the ground, etc. Again the Prophet does put them in
mind of that great and good blessing of plenty and success of all things,
that God would send them, if they would forsake their own waywarde doings,
and turn to him by repentance. These be the blessings of wealth and
prosperity that he promises to them, Deuteronomy. 28. a. 1 Leu. 26. a. 4
that follow his will. Deuter. 28. and Leuit. 26.

Finally, Verse. 25.
upon every high mountain and hill there shall be rivers, etc. The Prophet
says, that at that time that god shall destroy great multitudes of the
Assirians, and pull down their high towers, that is, overthrow their mightiest
Princes, then shall there be great store of water and springs on all the hills
of Judah, whereby their dry lands may be made battle and fertile. Yea, when
God shall have delivered them out of danger and restored them to their former
liberty.

Then shall the light of the Moon be as the light of the Sun, Verse. 26.
etc. That is, God shall pour upon his people so great joy and gladness, that
the sun and moon shall seem to them to be far brighter than before they
were. For to those that are in danger and heaviness, the sun and moon do
seem dark and dim, and when they be delivered, al things for joy, seem
more bright and comfortable. And because these particular deliueraunces of the
Jews from their enimyes, often in the Prophets are figures of the great
deliverance of the people of God from their spiritual enemies by Christ Jesus:
this whole place may well be interpreted of the happy and * spiritual
success, Acts. 2. c. 17 Esaias. 44. a. 3 Ephe. 1. a. 3
that by Christ, shall come to the faithful, and of the great brightness of
his holy spirit, which then should shi^e far more plentifully, then ever it
did before.

Behold the fame of the Lord comes from far, Verse. 27.
and his presence, etc. This is an other cause why that people should stay
themselves in the trust of God, and not seek other foreign aid and strength.
For that he will destroy the Assirians and come upon them as a dreadful and
terrible God, his countenance, his words, yea the very breath of his mouth
shall be so terrible to them, that although they be a mighty nation, yet shall
they not be hable to abide it, but that he will shake and sift them, and as it
were with a * bitte in their mouths so turn them, Eze. 29. a. 4
that with all their power they shall fall down and come to nothing. Verse. 30.
Yea the Lord shall cause his terrible voice to be heard among them, and shall
so stretch out his arm upon them, as he shall most dreadfully declare his
grievous anger toward them: Exodus 9. c. 23 Psalm. 10. b. 7 Verse. 32.
even as if he had sent down flames of devouring fire, * lightning and storms
of hail from heaueu to consume them. And this scourge of Gods wrath shall not
depart from them whither soever they go: Insomuch that the very king himself
shall be touched with it, and be partaker of that hell and devouring fire, that
the justice of God has prepared for them everlastingly.

The fourth Sunday in Aduent at Evening prayer.
Esaias. 32. Behold, a king shall govern after the rule of righteousness,

3 The eyes of the seeing shall not be dimmse, and the ears of them that hear
shall take diligent hesede. Esaias. 29. f. 18


4 The heart of the unwise shall attain to knowledge, and the imperfect tongue
shall speak plainly and distinctly.

5 Then shall the foolish niggard be no more called gentle, nor the churl
liberal. 6 But the niggarde will speak niggardly, and his heart will work
evil, and play the hypocrite, and imagine abominations against God, to make
the hungry lean, and to withholde drink from the thirsty.

7 The weapons of the churlish are evil, he deuiseth noisome Prou. 17. b.
8 But the liberal person imagines honest things, and comes up for
liberality unto promotion.

9 Up ye rich and idle women, hearken unto my voice, ye careless daughters
mark my words.

10 Many years and days shall ye be brought in fear O ye careless women:
for the vintage shall fail, and the harvest shall not come. 11 Be abashed you
that live in abundance, tremble you that live careless, cast of your raiment,
make your selves bare, and put sackecloth about you.

12 For as the infantes weep when their mothers ^ea^es are tried up: so shall
you weep for your fair fields and fruitful vineyardes. 13 My peoples field
shall bring thorns

14 The palaces also shall be broken, and the greatly occupied cities desolate:
The towers and bulwarks shall become dens for evermore, where wild Asses
take their pleasure, and sheep their pasture. 15 Unto the time that the
spirit be powered upon us from above, and that the wilderness be a fruitful
field, and the plenteous field be reckened for a wood. 16 Then shall equity
dwell in the desert, and righteousness in a fruitful land. 17* And the work
of righteousness shall be peace, Romans 5. a. 1 Hier. 33. c. 16
and her fruit rest and quietness for ever. 18 And my people shall dwell in
the Innes of pe^ce, and in sure dwellings, in safe places of comfort.

19 And when the hayle fallesh, it shall fall in the wood, and the City shall
be set low in the valley.

20 O how happy shall ye be when ye shall safely sow your seed beside all
waters, and drive thither the feet of your Oxen and Asses.

The exposition upon the.32. Chapter of Esaias.
Behold, Verse. 1. 2.
a king shall govern after the rule of righteousness, etc. IN this Capter
Esaias literally speaks of the happy state and government of the kingdom of
Jury and Jerusalem, that should be under Ezechias, after God had delivered
them from the danger and invasion of the Assirians. But prophetically he
means of the kingdom of Christ the Messiah and savior. For albeit Ezechias
was a good and godly Prince, and his people well and wisely guided by him: yet
was there not under him nor can there be in any worldly (...) such perfection
as is (...). Therefore he refers them, as I have said, to the spiritual
kingdom of Messiah, under (...) all these things shall be performed. Verse. 2.
He shall govern according to the rule of righteousness, (...), that is to
say, his (...)lance of equity. He (...) against the coldenesse of worldely
(...) to succor them in the blustering storms of tentation, Verse. 3.
a Pleasant river with his grace to (...) Verse. 4.
(...) among his people.

Then shall the foolish niggard be no more called gentle, Verse. 5. 6. 7. 8
nor the churl, etc. In the kingdoms of the world there is great hypocrisy
and dissimulation, and as Cato once said, they lee^e the true and proper names
of things, and lauishing of other men's goods is called liberality, ^ and
rash, boldness is termed valiantness, covetousness, thrifty sparing, etc.
and al foul vices (...) with the fair tytles of virtues. But in the kingdom
of messiah it shall not be so, Luke. 3. e. 35*
* the visardes of hypocrisy shall be shaken of, 1. Cor. 14. e. 25
and every (...) and known by their (...) and operations. Heb. 4. c. 12


(...) and y^ ^e women, Verse. 9.
and ^earken unto my voice ye careless, etc. (...) in this place leaves (...)
of the (...) and turns to the (...) Jews. By the rich (...) the great and
wealthy (...) which and both hear Christ's, Mat. 23. d. 37 Luc. 13. g. 34
Math. 11. c. 21 Luke. 10. c. 13
(...) curitie for ever. Verse. 10.
Many years and days shall you be troubled because the vintage shall say le;
and (...) shall not come in. The law of Moises even from the beginning
mannred, dressed and prepared the Israelites along time, as it had been a
(...)* that when the Messiah should come they should receive him, and bring
forth fruit accordingly, (...) it falls out clean contrary. For when he
shall come, he shall find no grapes there, but wild grapes and thistles.
Therefore so great calamity shall come upon you, Verse. 11. 12. 13.
as you shall be astonished therewith: and, through extreme sorrow, torment your
selves, pull of your garments, and wear sackcloth upon you. ^
You shall be wayle your (...) time battle, but now (...) your vines, your
lands, (...) christ the Messiah had * (...) Act. 2. c. 11. 1^
his spiritie upon hi^ Apostles at the time (...). Verse. 15. 16. 17.
Insomuch that Verse. 19.
if there fall any Psalm. 90 a. 1
(...) * they shall be so armed with the spirit of God, and strength from
above, that it shall not hurt them. Oh how happy shall you then be, when this
great plenty, tranquillity, and quietness shall come among you, so that both
Ox and Ass, both Jew and Gentile, shall join together in the profession of
one faith.

The first Sunday after Christmas at Morning prayer.
Esaias. 37. 2. Reg. 19. a. 1
and went into the temple of the Lord. 2 But ^e sent (...) the chief over the
householde (...) the f^rthe, with the (...) clothed (...), Jonas. 3. a. 5
unto the Prophet Esaias the (...) (...)

Esaias. 31. b. 9
and he shall go again into his Country, (...) will I destroy him with the
sword in her own land. 8 Now when Rabasakeh returned, 1. Sa. 23. c.
he sword the king of Assiria laying stege to Libnas: for he had understanding
that he was departed from Lachis.

9 And there came a rumor that Tharakas king of Ethiopia was come forth to
war against him: and when the king of Assiria heard that, he sent other
messengers to king Ezekia with this commandment. 10 Say thus to Ezekia king
of Judah, Let not thy God deceive thee in whom thou hopest and say,
Jerusalem shall not be given into the hands of the king of Assiria. 11 For
lo, thou know well how the kings of Assiria have handled all the (...) that
they have subverted: and hopest thou to escape?

12 Were the people of the Gentiles whom my progen^tours conquered, delivered
at any time through theft Gods? 2. Re. 17. a. 6
( As namely) Gosan, (...) and the (...) and Au^? 14 Now when (...) had on this
manner. Exodus 25. c. 1^
) 16 O Lord (...) which (...) is God of all the kingdoms of the world, for
thou only have (...) heaven and earth. 17. Gene. 1. a. Baruc. 1. c. 13.
(...) Lord and (...), open (...) words of (...), which has (...) to
blaspheeme the living God. 18 It is true O Lord that the kings of Assiria have
conquered all kingdoms and lands.

19 And cast their Gods in the (...): for those were (...) Gods but the works
of men's hands, of wood or (...) therefore have they destroyed them. 20 Now
therefore (...) O Lord our God from the hands of (...) that all the kingdoms
of the earth (...) know that thou only art the Lord. 21 Then Esaias the son
of Amos fent unto Ezekia, saying: Thus says the Lord God of Israel, whereas
Zach. 2. b. 8 Math. 25. d. Act. 9. c. 14
whom have thou defied and blasphemed? Against whom have thou lifted up thy
voice, and exalted thy proud ^ookes? even against the holy one of Israel.

24 Thou with thy servants have blasphemed the lord, and thus hold thou of
thy self* I will cover the hie mountains and sides of Libanus with my
horsemen, and there will I cut down the hie Ceder trees, and the fairest Fur
trees: I will up in the height of it and into the chiefest of his (...) If
there be no water, I will grave and drink: and as for waters of defense, I
will dry them up with the feet of mine host. 26 Yea, have thou not heard
what I have taken in hand and brought to pass of old time? That same will I
do now also, and waste, destroy, and bring strong Cities unto heaps of stones.

27 For their inhabitours shall be like lame men brought in fear and
confounded: they shall be like grass and green herbs in the field, like
the hay upon house tops, that withers before it be grown up. 28 I know thy
ways,

30 I will give thee also this token ( O Ezekia) this year shall thou eat
such as grows of it self, and the second year that which springs again
of the same, and in the third year ye shall sow and reap, yea, ye shall
plant vineyardes, and enjoy the fruits thereof. 31 And such of the house of
Judah as are escaped shall come together, and the (...) shall take root
beneath, and bring forth fruit above.

32 For the escaped shall go out of Jerusalem, and the remnant from the mount
Sion: and this shall the zeal of the Lord of hosts bring to pass. 33
Therefore thus says the Lord concerning the king of the Assirians, He shall
not come into this City, and shall shoot no arrow into it, there shall no
shield hurt it, neither shall they call ditches about it.

34 The same way he came he shall return, and not come 2. Re. 19. g. 35 Eccle.
48. d. 22 Esaias. 31. b. 8 2. Ma. 15. d. 22
35 And I will keep and save this City ( says he) for mine own, and for my
servant David's sake. 36 Thus the angel of the Lord went forth, and slew of
the Assirians host an hundred four seore and five thousand: and when men rose
up early in the morning, behold they (...) and all my full of ^eads (...).

37 So Sennacherib the king of the (...) brake up and dwelt at Nini^e. 38
Afterward it chanced as he prayed in the temple of Nesroch his God, that
(...) and Sarazer his own sons ^^ue him with the sword, and fled into the
land of Armenia; and Asarhaddon his son reigned in his steed.

The exposition upon the.xxxvij. Chapter of Esaias.
When Ezechias heard that, Verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
he rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth, etc. THis Chapter is annexed to
the former as a part of the same history, the declaration whereof is so plain
and easy to be understood; that the text needs no exposition at all. Only
you have to observe certain good and whole some lessons to be gathered out of
it. Number. 25. b. 7 Exodus 32. f. 29 John. 2. c. 17 Number. 14. b. 6
And first you have to note in Ezechias, and his people a great * zeal for the
glory of the name of God, wherewith they may seem to be more touched then
with their own misery and distress. For all the while their country was in
spoiling, as they showed themselves somewhat troubled, so yet did they not
declare so great sorrow. But after that they heard the name and power of the
God of Israel so blasphemed, they rent and toare their clothes, and, after the
manner of the Country thereby declared extreme sorrow, detestation, and
abhorring of so great wickedness. This zeal of Gods holy name and glory
should we follow, Psalm. 68. b. 10
and be * earnestly moved in heart and mind, Psalm. 119. 139
when we hear the Gospel of Christ and the truth of his word reviled and
evil spoken of, but the manner of the world is otherwise. Men are much moved
with their own reproaches, and seek reuengement of every light word and small
injury, but for the hinderance of Gods glory and of his word we make small
account.

Secondly, here is to be observed and diligently to be learned, by the example
of the good king Ezechias, and his people, what we ought to do in our great
misery and distress, that is, not neglecting such means as God has given,
and by his word allows to help us, to put our whole trust and confidence in
God, Psalm. 120. a. 1 Psalm. 121. a. 1 Jonas. 2. a. 3 2. Cor. 1. b. 10
and with repentant hearts and humble minds to * fly to him by earnest
prayer, and calling upon his blessed name for help. For so here does Ezechias
and his people, and with all, seeks means to confirm and strengthen their
faith being somewhat shaken, with the instruction of Gods holy word and
promises. For that cause does he here send to Esaias the Prophet, by whose
mouth God gives them great comfort, and wills them not to fear. For says
he in the Lords name, I will raise up a wind against him, and he shall hear
a rumor that shall carry him back into his Country again: and yet shall he
not so escape, for even there I will destroy him.

Say thus to Ezekia king of Judah, Verse. 10. 11 12. 13.
Let not thy God deceive thee, etc. Hear we have to learn, that God
oftentimes, after promise and comfort of deliverance given, does, for the time,
increase and double, as it were, the affliction of his people, as he does here
to Ezechias, and his subjects by this second message, being in deed more
terrible and blasphemous than the former. And yet does he not this, that he
minds to break promise, Math. 15. c. 22 Luke. 18. a. 2 Heb. 12. d. 11 Job.
6. a. 8 Psalm. 26. d. 14
or to forsake his people, but for to* exercise and try their faith, and to
stir them up to more earnest prayer and calling upon his name: and that in
the end their deliverance may be both to his people more pleasant, to
himself more glorious, and to the adversaries the greater confusion.

Now when Ezekia had received the letter of the messengers, Verse. 14.
etc. Here is to be learned the nature and condition of a true* faith, Romans 4.
c. 18 Iud. 8. a. 8 Math. 15. d. 27
which rises against the greatness of tentation, as it is written that the
stock of the Palm tree does; against an heavy burden laid upon it. God
increases the danger; and Ezechias increases his faith and feruencie in
prayer. Neither does he give over, as the manner of the flesh is, but patiently
continues and wayteth for the coming of Gods mighty hand and fulfilling of
his promise, and resorteth to his old succor and sanctuary of prayer and
calls upon God. Verse. 16. 17 18. 19. 20. Heb. 11. f. 33 Hier. 5. a. 3 Ose.
13. b. 4
In whom you may learn also the manner of true prayer, first proceeding out
of a * constant and a strong faith, secondly directed to the * ouely living and
true GOD, thirdely notsomuche desiring their own deliverance and worldelye
benefit, as the * setting out of the glory and name of God. Math. 6. b. 9
Luke. 11. a. 2 Esaias. 8. c. 13
For to that end the whole course of his prayer tends.

This is the answer that the Lord has given concerning Sennacherib, Verse.
22.
etc. As Ezechias continues in constant faith and prayer, so does the Lord in
comforting and promising help by the mouth of his Prophet, until their full
deliverance be wrought, which not long after he puts in execution mightily
and miraculously. Wherein we have to observe the force * and strength of
constant, Math. 17. c. 21 Psalm. 49. c. 15 Jacob. 5. d. 17
earnest, and faithful prayer, which is such, that albeit God does for the
exercise thereof defer his working, yet in the end, if ordinary means
want, he will miraculously by his Angels from heaven work the help and
deliverance of his faithful people calling upon him, rather then they shall
perish in their danger, and their enemies triumph over them.

Thou with thy servants have hlasphemed the Lord, Verse. 24. 25.
and thus hold thou, etc. The Lord by his prophet reprooueth the pride and
blasphemy of the tyranne, and rehearses the proud brag that he made of
himself. By the mountains and sides of Libanus, he means the kingdoms and
cities of those people, that Sennacherib had conquered: and by Ceders and Fur
trees, and the chiefest of their wooddes, he understands their kings,
princes, and strong holds. By the consuming of their fensiue waters, he notes
that by policy and labor he derived away, and turned the course of such
waters, as were lettes and stays to his purpose.

Have thou not heard what I have taken in hand and brought to pass, Verse. 26.
27 28. 29.
etc. The Prophet in the person of God reprooueth the proud brag of the
Assirian Prince. Do thou think, says the Lord, that thou by thy own
policy and wisdom have conquered so many Cities and kingdoms? Ex. 6. 7. 8.
etc Baruc. 3. b. 16. Sap. 12. a. 2 Psalm. 43. a. 1
have thou not heard what I have done in times past? I * have before time
declared by my Prophets that I would destroy wicked kingdoms, and punish the
naughtiness of men by the spoil of their Cities, yea and with the rod of
Chasticement to correct even mine own people, Psalm. 78. a. 1 Luke. 19. g. 44
and bring their Cities to heaps * of stone, that have I now done by thee, as
by mine instrument. Wherefore, although thou think thy self to have done
great feats by these conquests, and turnest all this to thine own glory: It
was not thou, but I, that did it. For thou had not been hable without me to
have woonne one poor town. I know thy ways, thy going forth, and thy
coming home. I did first set thee in thy royal throne, and then stirred thee
to undertake these great enterprises against the kingdoms of the earth; for
their punishment. And now I see thou do not acknowledge me, but set up
thy countenance and blasphemous mouth against me, as a furious and mad man.
Therefore, I tell thee, Eze. 29. a. 4 Eze. 38. a. 4 Psalm. 3. a. 7 Psalm. 57. a. 6
I will put a * ring in thy ^os^, and a bitte in thy lips, that albeit thou
show thy self never so wild and wanton a Colt, I will turn thee even the same
way that thou came.

I will give thee also this token (O Ezekia) this year shall thou eat, etc.
Verse. 30.
Least Ezechias and his people should be discouraged with the long delay: God
signifies, that the war should yet continue three years, and that in the
mean time he would almost * miraculously maintain them from famine. 4. Reg.
7. d. 19
The first year, by that which grows of it self, the second, by that which
falls of the former harvest, and the third year in which the war should
be ended, and they delivered, by their ordinary and quiet labor and travail
of the ground.

Thus the angel of the Lord went forth, Verse. 36.
and slew of the Assirians host, etc. Here is declared the execution of that
promise, that god had made by his prophet Esaias, and the miraculous deliverance
of his people: wherein we have to note, first the severe justice of God against
a proud and blasphemous tyranne, killing in one night by his angel.185000. of
his soldiers. Secondly, the long suffering of God, Sap. 11. d. 24 Romans 2. a.
3 2. Pet. 3. b. 9
who suffered Sennacherib, to go * unpunished three years, that if he would
have repented, he might have found mercy. Thirdly, that the wicked sometime
escape from mean danger, and by Gods providence are reserved to greater. As
hear Sennacherib escapes killing by the Angel, and is murdered of his own
sons in the service of his * Idolatrous Gods, Sap. 14. d. 27
because he would not acknowledge the true God.

The first Sunday after Christmasse at Evening prayer.
Esaias. 38. ABout this time was Ezekia sick unto death, and the 2. Reg. 20. a.
1 2. Chapter 32. a. 14
and said, Thus commands the Lord: Set thine house in order, for thou must
die and not escape.

2 Then Ezekia turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto the Lord. 3.
And said, Remember O Lord I beseech thee, that I have walked before thee in
truth and a steadfast heart, and hane done the thing that is pleasant to thee.
And Ezekia wept ^ore. 4 Then said God unto Esaias.

5 Go, Jonas. 3. b. 10
and speak unto Ezekia, The Lord God of David thy father sends thee this
word, I have heard thy prayer, and considered thy tears: behold I will put
fiftene years mo unto thy life. 6 And deliver thee and the City also 3. Reg.
2. g. 4. Re. 20. c. 11
7 And take thee this token of the Lord that he will do it as he has spoken.
8 Behold, I will turn the shadow of Ahaz dial that now is laid out with
the Sun, and bring it ten degrees backward: Iosu. 10. e. 11
So the Sun turned ten degrees backwarde, the which he was descended before.

9 A thanksgiving which Ezekia king of Judah vvrote, when he had been sick
and was recovered.

10 I thought I should have gone to the gates of hell when mine age was
shortened, and have wante^ the (...) of my years 11 I spoke within my self, I
will never visit the Lord ( the Lord I say) in this life: I will never see
man among the dwellers of the world. 12 Mine age is (...) together and taken
away from (...), I have hewn of my life ( by my sins) like as a weauer
cutteth of his web: he will with pining sickeness^ make an end of me, yea
he will make an end of me in one day. Job. 4. b. 9.
13 I thought I would have lived until the morrow, but he bruised my bones
like a Lion: and in one day thou will make an end of me. 14 Then chattered I
like a swalowe, and like a Crane, and mourned like a Dove, I lift up mine eyes
into the height: O Lord ( said I) my sickness keeps me down, (...) thou
me. 15 What shall I say the Lord has made a promise to me, yea and he him
self has performed it: I (...) therefore so long as I li^e sremember this
bitterness of my life. 16 O Lord to all those that shall live hereafter, yea
to all men shall it be known, that even in those years I have a joyful life,
and that it was thou that causedst me to sleep, again thou have given life to
me.

17 Behold, bitter as gall was my pensiveness, so sore longed I for health,
and it was thy pleasure to deliver my life from the filthy pit: for thou it is
( O Lord) that have cast all my sins behind thy back. Psalm. 6. a. 5 68. b.
115. b.
18 For hell prayseth not thee, death does not magnify thee: they that go
down into the grave praise not thy truth. 19 But the living, yea the living
knowledge thee, as I do this day: the father tells his children of thy
faythfulnesse. Luke. 1. g
20 To heal me it is the Lords work, and we will sing my songs in the house
of the Lord all the days of our life. 21 And Esaias said, Take a plaster of
figs, and lay it upon the sore, so shall it be whole.

22 Then said Ezekia, O what a miracle is this, that I shall go up into the
house of the Lord.

The exposition upon the.38. Chapter of Esaias.
About this time was Ezechias sick unto death, Verse. 1.
and the Prophet Esaias, etc. IN this Chapter we have the example of an other
grievous tentation of the good king Ezechias. Who being delivered from the
danger of the Assirians, as is declared in the former Chapter, read at morning
prayer, is now cast into a grievous and dangerous sickness: yea, and has
the Prophet sent unto him, to denounce, as it were from the mouth of God
himself, that he should assuredly die. At what time this sickness happened
it is not certain, whether before the siege of Jerusalem or after. But more
likely it is that it happened afterward. For otherwise so notable a
circumstance in the time of ye siege could not have been among other omitted.
Psalm. 33. d. 19 Acts. 14. d. 22 Jacob. 1. a. 2
By this example we have to learn that God * often sends many and grievous
tentations even to the good and godly, sometime by war, sometime by
sickness, sometime by unjust infamy and reproach, sometime otherwise. In all
which we must learn constantly to continue in faith and prayer and never to
despair. For that GOD of his fatherly providence does it, (not for our hurt
and hinderaunce) but for the trial and increase of our faith.

Then Ezechia turned his face toward the wall, Verse. 2.
and prayed, etc. It is not to be merueled that Ezechias was touched with *
sorrow by the message of death declared to him by the prophet. He was a natural
man, and therefore abhorred death in his flesh, he feared it to be some token of
Gods displeasure toward him, because the prophet brought him that message from
god. He had not yet made perfect the good reformation of his country, that he
had begun: and finally he had yet no issue to succeed him.

Remember O Lord I beseech thee, Verse. 3.
that I have walked before thee in truth, etc. Here Ezechias in this distress
(to our good example) resorteth to his old Sanctuary of prayer and calling
upon God. Neither does he, as it may seem, in his prayer either quarrel with
God, as dealing hardly with him, or glory in his own worthiness and virtues.
But rather comfort himself and stirs up his faith against that
tentatio^, which happily Satan then did put into his mind, that he should be
rejected and reprobated of God, and therefore, says he, that all that he did
proceeded from a good heart and mind, and respected therein the good will and
pleasure of God, according to his holy word: 1. Tim. 1. d. 19 2. Cor. 1. c. 12
Act. 23. a. 1
wherein he might well and did comfort his troubled mind with the * testimony
of a good conscience, and yet not so, that he would thereupon stand in
judgment before God.

Then said God unto Esaias, Verse. 4.
etc. This alteration of sentence is not to be thought mutabilitie or
inconstancy in GOD, who by the same Prophet before had denounced death to the
same party. For the threatenings and promises of God are oftentimes
conditional and not of determinate purpose in himself, and therefore upon the
fulfilling of the condition may they without note of inconstancy be altered.
As it appears in the threatening of the Ninevites, Ion. 1. a. 1. etc Ge. 20.
a. 3 etc
Ionae. 1 and of the king of Gerar. Genes. 20. which afterward by their
repenting and turning to God was altered, and so was it here with Ezechias.

I will put fiftene years more unto thy life. Verse. 5. 6. 7. 8
And deliver thee and the City also, etc. Behold the effect of earnest
prayer, and the ready and merciful goodness of GOD toward them that call
upon him, who does not only hear his prayer, but also confirmed his promise
thereof by a notable and strange miracle.

A thanksgiving which Ezechias king of Judah wrote, Verse. 9.
when he had been sick, etc. This good king Ezechias would not pass over
with silence the great benefit that God showed in restoring him to his health,
and by his Example teaches, what all good men should do, when they feel the
great mercies of God wrought in them: that is, not only to make it known to
them that we live withal, but also to cause it to remain in remembrance to
posterity, that Gods name thereby may be the more glorified, Exodus 15. a. 1 1
Sa. 2. a. 1 etc 2. Reg. 22. a. 1. Io. 2. d. 1. etc. Luke. 1. g. 68 Luke. 2. e.
29 Luc. 1. e. 46
and other the better comforted. Thus did * Moses, this did * Anna Samuels
mother, thus did * David * Jonas * Zachary, * Simeon, and the blessed virgin
* Marie. In the first part of this prayer he rehearses the pensive and
sorrowful cogitations that he conceived in his heart in time of his sickness,
through the fear of death and hell. In the latter, he acknowledges the
mighty work of God and yealdeth praises for the same.

I thought I should have gone to the gates of hell when mine age, Verse. 10. 11.
etc. By these words it may appear in what sort Ezechias did behold death,
and why he showed himself so pensive therein: that is, because he thought
himself out of the favor of GOD, and therefore in danger of hell fire. For
death in deed is terrible to them that in such sort consider it: but to them
that in strength of * faith behold it joined with the favor of God, Prou. 14.
d. 32 Phil. 1. d. 23
it is very pleasant, and therefore said Paul. I desire to be dissolved and
to be with Christ.

Mine age is folden together and taken from me like a sheepeheards cottage,
Verse. 12.
etc. By this manner of speech he signifies that God had determined to take
this worldly life from him, in short time, and to transfer him to another
place, as the manner of sheepeheardes in that country is to remove their Cotes
from place to place, as they change the Pasture, and place of feeding their
Cattle.

I thought I should have lived till the morrow, Verse. 13.
but he bruised my bones, etc. I was, says he, in so great despair of my
life, that at night I was in doubt, through the vehemency of my sickness,
whether I should live until the morning. Yea I was so far past as I was not
hable to speak distinctly, but uttered a confuse chattering like the noise of
a Swallow or Crane, and a mourning like the noise of a Dove.

Thou it is O Lord that have cast all my sins behind thy back. Verse. 17.
etc. Here Ezechias plainly confesses, what the cause was of his sickness
and of his restoring to health. John. 5. c. 14 1. Cor. 11. 30.
* Sin was the cause of his sickness, and the mercy of God forgiving the
same and turning them from his sight was the cause of his deliverance.
Wherefore it cannot be thought, when before he says, he walked in truth and a
steadfast heart before God, that he sought thereby to be justified in the sight
of GOD, but rather as I have said before, that he uttered those words in
comfort of himself, that he was not utterly rejected of God, albeit he were
then punished.

For hell prayseth not thee, Verse. 18.
death does not magnify thee, nor they that go down, etc. The Sense of this
verse is vtterd in many of the Psalms, Psalm. 6. a. 5 Psalm. 87. c. 11 Psalm.
117. c. 17
as in the. * 6. the. * 87. and the. * 117.

The dead shall not praise thee, nor all that go down into the pit. etc.

By which words and the like, neither David nor Ezechias deny that the
spirit of the dead have their actions before God to his glory, or affirm
that they perish together with the body: But they signify, that those that be
dead, buried and laid in the grave, overwhelmed with earth, have no longer
their bodily Actions in the Church of God here in this world, nor cannot set
forth among men living here the clemency, mercy, and goodness of God toward
them, to the praise and glory of his name in this world, like as the living
may. The dead, as touching their body, are in y^ grave, as touching their
souls, they are in heaven, but so as they cannot* return into the world to
preach, Luke. 16. f. 27
declare, and set forth to men the majesty, justice, and mercy of God.

The.2. Sunday after Christmas. at Morning prayer.
Esaias. 41. BE still you I lands and hearken unto me: let the

5 The Is^es saw and did fear, and the ends of the earth were abashed, drew
(...), and came hither.

6 Every man helped his neighbor, and said to his brother, Abraham my
beloved. 9 Thou art he whom I led from the ends of the earth: for I called
thee even from among the glorious men of it, and said unto thee, Thou art my
servant, I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.

10 Be not afraid, Esaias. 44. b. 8.
for I am with thee: Melt not away as wax, for I am thy God to strength thee,
help thee, and keep thee with the right hand of my righteousness.

11 Behold, all they that resist thee shall come to confusion and shame, and
thine adversaries shall be destroyed and brought to naught. 12 So that who so
seeks after them, shall not find them, thy destroyers shall perish: and so
shall they that undertake to make battle against thee be as that is not, and as
a thing of naught. 13 For I the Lord thy God will strengthen thy right hand,
even I that say unto Esaias. 44. a. 2.
and thou despised Israel: for I will help thee says the Lord, and the holy
one of Israel thy redeemer. 15 Behold, I will make thee a treading cart and a
new stayle, that thou may threshe and grind the mountains, and bring the
hills to powder.

16 Thou shall fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the whirle
winde-shall scatter them: but thou shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall delight
in the holy one of Israel. Genesis 23. c. 14
17 When the thirsty and poor seek water and find none, and when the tongue
is dry of thirst, I give it them says the Lord, I the God of Israel forsake
them not.

18 I bring forth flooddes in the hills, Esaias. 35. b. 7 43. 44. a. 3
and wells in the plain fields: I turn the wilderness to rivers, and the
dry land to conduites of water. 19 I plant in the wast ground trees of Cedar,
Box, Myrre, and Olives, and in the dry I set Fur trees, Elmes and
Hawthornes together.

brings them to pass. 21 Stand at your cause says the Lord, and bring
forth your strongest ground, says the king of Jacob. 22 Let them bring forth
their Gods, and let their Gods tell us what shall chance hereafter, yea let
them show us the things that are past what they be, let them declare them unto
us, that we may take them to heart, and know them hereafter. 23 Either show us
things for to come, and tell us what shall be done hereafter, so shall we know
that ye are Gods: do some thing either good or bad, so will we both knowledge
the same, and tell it out. 24 Behold ye are Gods of naught, and your making is
of naught: yea abominable is the man that has chosen you.

25 Nevertheless, Esaias. 43. a.
I have waked up one from the north, and he shall come from the east, he shall
call upon my name, and shall tread upon princes as upon clay, and as the
potter treads down the mire. 26 Who declared this from the beginning, and we
will know him: or from the old times, and we will confess and say that he is
righteous? but there is none that shows or declares any thing, there is none
also that hears your words.

27 The first is he that shall say to Sion, Behold, behold they are present:
and to Jerusalem it self will I give an Evangelist. 28 But when I consider,
there is not a man among them, nor any that can give counsel, nor that when I
examine them that can answers one word.

29 Lo wicked are they, and vain, with the things also that they take in
hand, yea their Images are but wind and vain things.

The exposition upon the. xlj. Chapter of Esaias.
Be still you Islandes and hearken unto me: Verse. 1.
let the people lay their. etc. Esaias in this Chapter imagines god to stand in
place of judgment, as it were, at the bar pleading his own cause against
the Idols and false Gods of the Heathen, and all the worshippers of the same.
Which he does to this end, not only to confound the heathen for the vanity
of their worshipping of Idols, stocks and stones, but also to confirm and
establish his own people of the Jews and other in the true worship of him
self being the only, living, and almighty God, maker and governor of all
things. And therefore as being in place of judgment he thus begins. Be
still and keep silence all you inhabitours of the Islandes, and other parts
of the earth, that worship your false Gods. Lay your strength together, arm
and furnish your self with as good matter as you can for your defense, to
answer that I shall say, and then will I plead the cause with you even in
judgment of the world, etc.

Who raised up the just man from the east, verse. 2. 3. 4.
and called him to go forth. etc. This is his first reason against the
heathenish worshippers of Idols. By ye just man he means ye Patriark Abraham,
whom God called out of his country of Mesopotamia from Idolatry wherein he was
bredde, Gene. 12. a. 1. Acts. 7. a. 3
and caused him to go into the land of Chanaan and there to worship the true
god, where also, although he were in a strange land utterly unknown, god did
so prosper and defend him, that he made even kings abashed to work him
villainy, as it appears in Pharao king of Egypt. Gen, 12 and Abimelech king
of Gerar Genesis 20 and 21. (...). 12. d. 18 Genesis 20. b. 9 Genesis 21. c. 13.
yea and at another time gave him force and hability to put to flight and chase
four kings at once, which had carried away prisoner his cousin* Loath. Gen 14.
Genesis 14. c. 16.
which easy victory god utters here by this spech: Scattering them like
stubble with his bow.

The force of this example is thus: This marvelous calling, defending and
prospering of one mean man in a strange Country against so noble and mighty
persons, and the making of him so notable a man among them done and wrought by
me only, yea and the true service and honor wherewith he worshipped me the only
living God, could not be unknown to all your Idolatrous nations thereabout.
For he preached and declared these things as a Prophet, Verse. 5.
and gave you to understand by whose power it was done, yea, you saw it, you
knew it, and were abashed at it: and therefore should you have sought to have
learned at his hand, while he was among you, the knowledge and service of
that mighty God, that did so advance and * defend him, 1. Sa. 14. a. 6.
in far other manner than your Idols were hable to do. Verse. 6.
But you were so far from thus doing, that you comforted and encouraged one
another forward in your wicked Idolatrye, and joined your helps together to
make up your graven and carved Gods. Verse. 7.
The Carpenter who had carved the stock, spoke to the Goldsmith to lay on the
plates of silver or gold, that it might seem a gay God, and the Goldesmith
instructed the hammer man to set it on fynely and smooth, and to soulder it
surely, 1. Sam. 5. b. 5. Acts. 19. e. 24
and set it fast with nails, and *this did you altogether take conference to
set forward your worshipping of Images and Idols, as you yet continue. And
therefore are you in the judgment even of men *inexcusable, Romans 1. c. 20
that by this means knowing the power of the true God, you have not yielded to
do condign worship to him, but run on yet still in your own vain and
*gross fantasies. Romans 1. c. 23 Sap. 12. d. 24
Hereby ought we also to learn dearly beloved, even in these our days, in
how great danger we are, and how inexcusable before god, if we, having so
great opportunity to learn the truth of the doctrine and gospel of Christ do
neglect the same, and follow on still in the desire of our old superstition
and Idolatry. The calling, preserving, and defending of Abraham was not so
great, nor the publishing of the true knowledge of God by him so notable, as
the publishing, prospering and defending of his Gospel has been in these
latter days against Popes, Princes, Prelates, and al powers of the earth. And
therefore may God more justly stand in judgment with us to our utter
condemnation, if we do not acknowledge his goodness.

But thou Israel art my servant, Verse. 8.
thou Jacob whom I have chosen. etc. Least that Gods people of the Jews and
other faithful of his Church should be discouraged with the pride and
prosperitye of the Heathen, and their cruelty against them: Here does he
comfort and assure them that he will help and defend them also as notably
and with as great terror to the wicked, as he had done their father Abraham.
Genesis 22. c. 16 Psalm. 104. a. 8 Luke. 1. g. 73 Heb. 6. a. 17 Verse. 9.
Shewinge that he had *bound himself by Covenant to be the mighty and
defending God not only of Abraham but also of his posterity. And putting them
in mind of their wonderful deliverance out of Egypt, whence he led the^
through the desert into the land of Chanaan which he had promised before to the
seed of his loved servant Abraham. Verse. 14.
Therefore (says he) be not afraid thou little silly worm Jacob. Though my
Church and people that put their trust in me seem never so simple and
contemptible, Psalm. 21. b. 6 1. Cor. 4. b. 9
and even as very worms of the earth in sight of the gay me^ and great powers,
and as it were * Lions of the world: 2. Tt. 4. d. 17
yet are they my people and the sheep of my pasture. And therefore will I and
^he holy one of Israel my son Christ Jesus their Redeemer, preserve and
defend them, Verse. 15.
yea, I will make them as a treading Cart, and as a new stayle where with corn
is threshed, Iosu. 10. d. 24
that they may thresh, *grind, and beat to dust Mountains and Hills, that is,
the high and mighty Empires, kingdoms and principalities of the world, think
they themselves never so strong. They shall fan and scatter them abroad with
a whirle wind to utter confusion. For so have you seen it come to pass by
all those mighty Monarchies and Principalities, that from time to time have
vexed and persecuted the Church of God. Therefore (says God) faint not, but
put thy trust and rejoice in me, and in the holy one of Israel Christ Jesus
the true Messiah and Savior, and we will not suffer you to miscary.

When as thirsty and poor seek water and find none, Ver. 17. 18 19
and when their, etc. Here God promises the Jews in captivity of Babylon,
and other of his Church, that he will not only defend them from persecution,
and pull down their enemies, but relieve them with such things as they want,
and supply their hunger, thirst; and other necessities both worldly and
spiritual. But this place is specially to be understood of the spiritual
graces of God in satisfying the poor, hungry, and thirsty consciences with
the blessed water of salvation: That is, the true knowledge of God, and the
(...) by Christ Jesus. Of which water Christ himself speaks in the fourth of
S. John: John. 4. b. 14
Which shall be made a fountain of water springing to eternal life. Such
fountaynes raised God in many dry and barraine mountains, when he spredde
abroad his true knowledge among the Gentiles. As first; for example, in the
Empire of Babylon, Dan. 2. g. 47
by occasion of a *dream expounded by Daniel, by the miracle of the young men
preserved in the *fiery furnace, Dan. 3. g. 28
by the deliverance of Daniel from the *Lions. etc. Dan. 6. f. 20
By which the worshipping of the living god was acknowledged and commanded.
Mat. 28. d. 19 Mark. 16. d. 15
But especially he opened these fountaynes, when he * sent abroad his Apostles
and other furnished with the spirit of God to publishe the doctrine of
salvation in all the parts of the earth, whereby not only a number of
thirsty consciences were refreshed, but their barren souls also made
fruitful, and brought forth fair and goodly trees of all sorts pleasant to
behold and yelding good fruits to the glory of God and to the comfort of his
people. Verse. 20.
And all this, only did the mighty hand of God.

Stand at your cause, Verse. 21.
says the Lord, and bring forth your strongest ground, etc. The Prophet in
the person of God turns his speech again to the gods of ye Gentiles and to
the idolatrous worshippers of them: 3. Reg. 18. c. 27
and * wills them to stand to their cause, and say the best for them, that
they could to prove them Gods. And because their greatest glory was in
prophesying and telling things to come, he does Challenge them eue^ in that very
point, whereby he gives to understand that their predictio^s were either in
things natural, such as wise and skilful worldly men might by observation
foretell, or else they were frivolous, vain, and uncertain: and to be
interpreted on both parts. Insomuch that even their Oracles of Apollo,
accounted of all other the most certain, were esteemed even among themselves
by a common proverb as Shipme^s hoses that might be fashioned to diverse
purposes. 3. Re. 20. d. 23 1. Re 28. b. 14 2. These. 2. c. 11
For by such subtle means the devil did *delude those, that were given to the
worshipping of Idols. And always are they such as tend to the confirmation of
vanity and superstition, and never to the correction of wickedness and vice.
2. Pet. 1. d. 21.
But the * Prophecies of the living God are always, not only certain and true,
but also of such matter as far passes either the common course of nature, or
human observation: noting things with the circumstances and distinction of
times, persons, and places. And always are directed to the maintenance of true
religion and vertuousnesse of life, and punishing of superstition, Idolatry,
vice, and wickedness. Such are the prophecies of Daniel, certain hundred
years before telling of the four great Empyres and the destruction and end
of the same. Such were the prophecies of Esaias, Hieremie, and other concerning
the captivity of Babylon, and the deliverance of the people of God after a
certain appointed time. Such was the prediction of all the Prophets generally
touching the true Messiah, Esaias. 11. a. 1 Mich. 5. a. 2. Genesis 4. 9. b. 10 Zach.
9. b. 9 Esaias. 61. a. 1 Zach. 12. c. 10 Psalm. 15. c. 10 Psalm. 21. c. 18 Psalm.
67. b. 19.
and Savior Christ Jesus, with the * stock that he should come of, the *
place and * time of his birth, the manner of his * estate and life, his
miraculous * works, his * death, * his resurrection, and * ascension. Wherefore
the God of Israel is the true God, and the Idolles of the Gentiles are
nothing, neither are hable to do any thing, but by the delusion of the Devil
to the deceyuing of the wicked and naughty men by Gods just judgment, because
they would not know the truth.

I have waked up one from the north, Verse. 25.
and he shall come from the east, etc. That God may show himself only to
have the universal knowledge of things to come, he in this place (to the
terror of the Devils by whose delusion the Idols of the Gentiles do stand)
prophecieth of the coming of Christ the Messiah, whom he rayseth up and shall
bring unto him from the East, and from the West, of all sorts of people of the
heathen: which together with him, shall call upon the name of the true and
only living God. So says Christ, Math. 8. Many shall come out of the east and
out of the west, Mat. 8. b. 11 Luke. 13. f. 29
and sit in the kingdom of God with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. This prophecy
we see was fulfilled by Christ, and the like hereof never uttered any of the
Gentiles Gods. But GOD himself it was that first gave knowledge hereof at
Sion, Verse. 27.
and at Jerusalem: and there first declared, that these people of the Heathen
Nations should come unto him, and as it were Poynted to them with his finger
saying: Behold they are present. This did he by Christ the principal
Evangelist, and after by other sent abroad from Jerusalem into the whole
world. This has God pleaded his cause with the Gentiles and in the end
concludes them and their Gods to be wicked and vain.

The 2. Sunday after Christmas at Evening prayer.
Esaias. 43. Esaias. 41. b. 9 Deuteronomy. 7. a. 6 and. 26. d. 18
I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine own. 2 If thou go through the
water, I will be with thee, the strong floudes shall not ouerwhelme thee: and
if thou walk through the fire, it shall not burn thee, and the flame shall
not kindle upon thee.

3 For I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel thy savior: I gave
Egypt for thy deliverance, the Ethiopians and the Sabees for thee: 4 Because
thou wast dear in my sight, and because I set by thee and looued thee: I will
give over all men for thee, and deliver up all people for thy sake. Esaias. 41.
d. Math. 8. b.
5 Fear not, for I am with thee, I will bring thy seed from the East, and
gather thee together from the West.

6 I will say to the north, Esaias. 29. d. 32 Gal. 3. a.
Let go: and to the south, keep Namely) all those that be called after my name:
For them have I created, fashioned, and made for mine honor. 8 Bring forth
that people which is blind and yet has eyes, Luke. 14. e. 21.
which are deaf although they have ears. Ephe. 2. c. 12
9 If all nations come in one and be gathered together, which among them shall
declare such things, and tell us the things that are past? let them bring
their witness, so that they be just: else let them hear, and say, It is truth.
10 You are my witnesses says the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen:
therefore be certified and give me faithful credence, and consider that I am he
before whom there was never any God, Ose. 13. b. 10.
neither shall be any after me. 11 I am, even I am the only Lord, and beside me
there is no savior. 12 I gave warning, I made whole, I taught you when there
was no strange God among you: and this record must ye bear me your selves,
says the Lord, Io. 10. f. 36
that I am God. 13 And even he am I who was from the beginning, and there is
none that can take any thing out of my hand: I do the work and who shall be
able to let it? 14 Thus says the Lord the holy one of Israel your Esaias. 5. d.
For your sake I have sent to Babilo^, and brought it down: all they are
fugitive with the Chaldees, whose sorrowful cry is in their ships. 15 I am
the Lord your holy one, which have made Israel, and am your king.

16 Thus says the Lord, Iosue. 3. c. Exodus 14. e. 21 Esaias. 10. a.
even he that makes a way in the sea, and a foot path in the mighty waters.

17 It is he which brings forth the charets and horses, the host and power
of war, that they may fall together and never rise, and be extinct, like as
towe are they quenched.

18. Remember not things of old, and regard nothing that is past. 19 Behold
I shall make a new thing, and shortly shall it appear, and shall you not
know it? I will make a way in the desert, and rivers of water in the
wilderness 20 The wild beasts shall worship me, the dragons and the young
Estriches: for I shall give water in the wilderness, and streams in the
desert, that they may give drink to my people whom I chose. 21 This people
have I made for my self, and they shall show forth my praise.

22 For thou Jacob would not call upon me, but thou had an unlust toward
me O Israel. 23 Thou gave me not thy beasts for burnt offeringes, neither
did honor me with sacrifices: Esaias. 1. d. Hier. 17. c
I have not been chargeable unto thee in offerings, neither gri^^ous in
incense. 24 Thou boughtest me no dear spice with thy money, neither powredst
the fat of thy sacrifices upon me: but thou have laden me with thy sins,
Psalm. 14. a. Hier. 33. b. 8.
and wearied me with thy ungodliness.

25 Where as I yet, even I am he only that for mine own selves sake do away
thine offenses, and forget thy sins, so that I will never think upon them.
26 Put me now in remembrance, for we will reason together, and show what thou
have for thee to make thee righteous. 27 Thy first father offended sore, Genesis
3. b. Nu. 20. d. 24.
and thy rulers have sinned against me.

28 Therefore I profaned the princes of the sanctuary, I did curse Jacob, and
gave Israel into reproof.

The Exposition upon the. xliij. Chapter of Esaias.
But now the Lord that made thee, O Jacob, and he that fashioned thee, etc.
Verse. 1.
FOr so much as the small number of the good and godly people, had just cause
to be in great fear, through the prophecy of their Captivity in Babylon
before declared, and to dread thereby the subversion of the whole Church of
God then living: the Prophet in this place under the person of God does add a
singular and great comfort. By the name of Jacob and Israel he understands
the whole Church of God. For he speaks here not only to the Jews for the
comfort of their deliverance from the captivity of Babylon: but also and
specially to all the faithful of his Church, Romans 4. b. 11
which be the true * seed of Abraham, as Paul says, and the right succession
of Jacob, to whom this promise was made, Genesis 22. d. 18.
In thee and in thy Seed all the Nations of the earth shall be blessed. And
again, Gene. 28. c. 15.
I will be thy keeper whither so ever thou go. Of which promises he puts
them in mind, when he calls them by the name of Jacob, as he does also
comfort them not a little, in that he says, he is their * Creator, Maker,
Ephe. 2. b. 10.
and Redeemer, and calls them His own. For God cannot neglect those that he
has fashioned to his own Image, and redeemed with so precious a treasure, and
purchased to be his own people, Therefore says he:

If thou go through the water, I will be with thee, Verse. 2.
the strong floods shall not, etc. By the terms of * Water and Floods, Psalm.
87. b. 7
Fire, and Flames, he understands al manner of Tentations, Troubles and
Afflictions, that any way either in Soul or body might come unto the^: and
assures them yt they shall not miscarie by any of them.

I gave Egypt for thy deliverance, Verse. 3. 4.
the Ethiopians and the Sabees, etc. That is such care and love have I had
toward my Church and faithful people, that to deliver and preserve them, I
have afflicted Egypt, Aethiope, Sabaea, and many other mighty Princes and
Kingdoms, and in like manner will deal with all other Nations that shall work
trouble to them. Therefore be not dismayde, but be of good comfort.

I will bring thy seed from the East, Verse. 5. 6. 7
and gather thee together, etc. Here is plainly prophesied the Calling of the
Gentiles to the faith of Christ, and the gathering of the dispersed children of
God from all the quarters of the earth. As if he had said, you fear that if
Jerusalem, (as my Prophet has said) be destroyed and the people led
captive, and Princes of the earth persecute them: that there shall be no
Church nor any that shall live to serve God. But fear it not, Mat. 28. d. 20
I will be with them even to the end of the world, to bring the seed of my
people together, and to * gather the members of my Church out of all the
quarters of the earth, Psalm. 49. a. 5. Psalm. 105. g. 45 Psalm. 146. a. 2
from the East and from the West. And I will say to the North, give me my
children, that thou have kept in blindness, as if they had had no eyes, and
let them come and see the light of the truth. And to the South will I say,
forbid not them to come and hear that I call by the preaching of my Gospel,
though before they were deaf and heard not.

This is it that Christ speaks of. Mat. 8. b. 11.
Many shall come from the east and from the west, and rest with Abraham and
Isaac in the kingdom of God. This is it that is spoken in the Acts of the
Apostles. You shall be my witnesses in Jerusalem and in all Jury, Act. 1. a.
8.
and Samaria and to the uttermost parts of the earth. Wherefore God promyseth
here the great enlarging of his Church and faithful people.

If all Nations come in one and be gathered together which among them. etc.
Verse. 9.
As in the 41. Esa 9. 41. a. 1.
Chapter, So here the Prophet imagines God to speak before a Judge, as if
he had said, I have declared two arguments of my Deity, that is, that I am he
which from the beginning declared to the Patriarchs, that I would send my
Son the true Messiah and savior of the world, and that I would deliver my
Church and people, not only from the perils, that shortly shall be in the
Captivity, but also increase the number of them out of all the parts of the
world. Part of these things you see fulfilled already: the other shall as
assuredly come to pass. Therefore go to, let all Nations and people of the
world come together which worship stocks and stones and Gods of their own
making, Esaias. 41. f. 22.
and let us hear whether their Gods or their soothsayers enspired with the
Devil be hable to declare or tell (...) any such things, let them bring forth
their witnesses to iustifye the matter. Verse. 10. 11. 12. 13.
But you my people can (...), and your consciences can be witnesses, that these
things which I have spoken for my self and against the worshippers of Idols,
are true. Therefore mistrust not, fear not, put your confydence in me, stick
to the true worshipping of me. For I am the true God that never had beginning
nor shall have ^^ding, Job. 1. ^. b. ^^ Io. 10. c. 28^
that made all things, that preserves and maintains all things, and * out
of whose hands no power can take any one man that I will save. etc.

For your sake I have sent to Babylon and brought it down: all they, Verse. 14.
15. 16. 17.
etc. He speaks of that is to come, as if it were past and done. For he here
tells how he will deliver his people from the captivity of Babylon. The
sense is, you are in great fear, my people, for your captivity, that shall be
in Babylon, but I have already devised your deliverance. I will in convenient
time send Darius and Cyrus, the Medes and the Persians into Babylon with
mighty power which shall utterly overthrow the whole power of Babylon and
Chaldey, and transferring the Empire to the Persians, shall by their noble king
Cyrus deliver you. This will I your God and redeemer do for you, etc.

Remember not things of old, Verse. 18.
and regard nothing that is past. He prepares here to utter a prophecy of the
coming of Christ, as if he had said. Remember not things done before time, I
have wrought great benefytes for you, I have delivered you out * of Egypt.
Exodus 20. a. 2.
I brought you through ye red sea, I co^ducted you through the wilderness into
the land of Canaan, I gave you victory over your enemies, but * remember not
these benefits in comparison of that I will now tell you, Iere. 23. b. 7.
I will work a new thing that shall far pass these. Verse. ^^ 20
I will make a way in the deserte, and rivers of water in the wilderness. The
wild beasts shall worship me, etc. That is, I will not only deliver you
from the Captivity of Babylon, and bring you home safe through dangerous
ways and passages, which may justly be compared to any of the former
benefits: but in those Nations and Countries also which hitherto have been as
deserts or wildernesses without all good culture of godliness, and dry and
barraine without any Springes of Gods good graces and wholesome instructions:
In those places, I say, will I tread out a true pathe, and high way to
heaven, and wildise vrasweete springs and plentiful ryuers of heau^enly
doctrine by the preaching of the Gospel of Christ. In so much that those
people which for their rude and savage barbarousnesse, and for the fylthinesse
of their lives might well seem wild beasts, Dragons and Estreches, shall lay
aside their detestable and naughty Idolatry, and their foul and fylthie
vices, and become true worshyppers of my name and notable examples of all
virtuous life to the advancement of my great glory and praise.

For thou Jacob would not call upon me, Verse. 22. 23. 24
but thou had an unlust toward. etc. Least the people of God being puffed
up and swelling in their own conceptes, should think this great and strange
matter was wrought for their* * Deserts or worthiness, Deuteronomy. 9. a. 4
he says plainly, that they had (...) such thing; either by calling upon his
name, or by offering of sacrifyces, or burning of Incense, or bying of costly
Spices for the holy Oil commanded Exodus 30. Exodus 30. c. 25.
nor by any other manner of service, in respect whereof this singular and
inestimable benefit was wrought, but rather by their sins, had altogether
deserved the contrary, and provoked God to just wrath, and therefore, that
this thing proceeded of Gods mere mercy and exceeding love toward Mankind,
for his own felfes sake, as he says, For his own selfs sake putting away
their sins out of his remembrance: so that neither their own Worthynesse,
nor the justice of their ancestors could deserve it. For as Adam was a
sinner, (...) all the other that they came of, and both governors and people
had geeuously offended God.

The. 1. Sunday after the Epiphanie, at Morning prayer.
Esaias. 44. SO hear now O Jacob my (...)

3 For I shall pour water upon thy dry ground, Esaias. 35. b. 7 11. and. 14. c
Eze. 36. d. 25 Joel. 2. f. 28 Acts. 1. b. 27.
and rivers upon the thirsty: I shall pour my spirit upon the (...), and my
blessing upon thy stock.

4. They shall grow together like as the grass, and as the willowes by the
waters (...) On^ shall say, I am the Lords: another shall call himself (...)
the third shall subscribe with his hand (...) give himself under the name of
Israel.

6. Thus has the Lord spoken, (...) and his redeemer the Lord of hosts:
(...) last, Esaias. 12. a. Apoc. 1. b. c. Esaias. 48. c. 1^ Reave. 22. ^. Esaias. 43.
b.
and besides me there is no God. 7 If (...) he like me, let him call forth the
thing past, and openly show it, and lay it plain before me what has (...) I
appointed the people of the world, and what shall be shortly, or what shall
come to pass (in tune long to (...)) (...) things? 8 Be not (...) told you
hitherto and warned you? ye (...) your selves: is there any (...) I should not
know (...) Esa. 42. b. 10. Sap. 13. c. 13
(...) and makes also a God thereof to honor it, and a grauuen Image to
kneel before it.

16 One piece he burns in the fire, with another he r^steth flesh, that he
may eat rest his belly full: with the third he warmeth himself, and says,
Aha, I am well warmed, I have been at the fire. 17 And of the res^^ue he
makes him a God, and a graven Image for himself: he kneeleth before it, he
worshippeth it, he prays unto it, and says, Deliver me, Esa. 42. a. 16.
for thou art my God. 18 Yet men neither consider nor understand, because
their eyes be stopped that they can not (...), and their hearts that they
cannot perceive.

19 They (...) not in their minds, for they have neither knowledge nor
understanding to think thus, I have brent one piece in the fire, I have baked
bread with the coals thereof, I have roasted flesh withal and eaten it: and I
will now of the residue make an abominable Idol, and fall down before a
rotten piece of (...). 20 Thus does he but lose his labor, (...) turn him
aside, so that (...) to think, Do not (...) Israel, (...) Esa 9. 43. d. 25.
Genesis 2. a. 1. Esaias. 45. c. 18.
them backwarde, and make their cunning foolishness.

26 He does set up the purpose of his servant, and fulfilleth the counsel of
his messengers: concerning Jerusalem he says it shall be inhabited, and of
the Cities of Judah they shall be builded again, and I will repair their
decayed places.

27 He says to the depth, Be dry: and, I will dry up water floods. 28 He
says of Cyrus, he is my heardman, so that he shall fulfill all things after
my will: he says also of Jerusalem, It shall be builded: and of the temple,
It shall be fast grounded.

The exposition upon the. 44. Chapter of Esaias.
But hear now O Jacob my servant, Verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.
and Israel whom I have chosen. etc. FOrsomuche as God in the end of the
former Chapter had charged his people with Sin and grievous (...), and that
for the same some (...) should come upon them by their captivity in Babylon:
Here in this place he does add sweet words, and a gentle and merciful
mitigation and comfort, saying as it were, Albeit grievous (...) shall come
upon thee being led away captive (...) Babylon, yet hear now, what I thy Lord
and (...), that have * (...) and preserved thee, Job. 31. b. 15 Psalm. 21. b. 10
Psalm. 70. b, 6. 7
by my divine providence, even from thy mothers womb, will do for thee my
chosen servant. Albeit thou Jacob art nothing in thy self, and that no
nobility in thee or worthiness (...) deliver thee from this wrath and great
calamity: yet the adoption and choice that I thy heavenly father of my mere
mercy in my Son the Melsias and Savior, have vouchedsafe to make of thee,
man be of sufficient force to deliver thee, and to turn all the benefits of
the forgiveness of thy sins upon thee, that is, not only thy wonderful
dispatch out of Babylon, Verse. 3.
but also the watering with the knowledge of the true doctrine of Salvation,
and the gift of my holy spirit: whereby thou and all those that by faith shall
show themselves to be thy true posterity, and of the number of mine elect,
shall grow and prosper in all goodness, submitting their selves to the
profession of my holy name. Esa. 41. c. 10. Esa. 43. a. 1. 65
Therefore * fear not, nor flit not from my true worshipping to the Service of
ye Idols of Babilo^, (...) Verse. 6.
Esaias. 41. a. 4. Apoc. 1. b. 8
3 Reg. 15. b. 12 Dan. 14. a. 4.
(...) in face of the world. Wherefore I say again, be not afraid, I have
told you and warned you before. Put your trust in me.

All caruers of Images are but vain, Verse. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. etc.
and the carved Images that they love, etc. Unto the end of the twenteth
verse. In this second part of the Chapter, GOD does sharply and grievously
reprove, and at large scornefully deride the fond blindness, Baruc. 6. b.
19. 26. 48. 56. 67
and furious rage and madness of those that make Gods, Idols, or Images for
themselves to worship. And as it is pleasant in this place to consider, how he
painteth out the busy vanity of them, that make the Idols and the fond and
importunate desire of those that long for them, and the insensible grossness
of such as be given to the worship of them: Even so may it seem horrible in
the sight of God and man, that man endued with reason, and the most honorable
creature of god should ever fall to so extreme Blindness, as that he will
adventure with his own hands to make him a God, or an Image to worship as
God. But some will say, no man was ever so blind to think the images Gods, or
to worship them as Gods, and so cry the Papists at this day for their
defense, and say they have Injury, when they be so charged. And yet surely is
their defense herein no better, than the defense of the Heathen and Gentiles,
whom God here thus mocketh and reprooueth. For they had the same answers and
pretenses, and yet is it evident, that both the one and the other do so rage in
their madness, that so soon as they be made by a Mortal, wicked, and Sinful
man, they think them to have a certain divine Grace in them, and therefore do
they Cap and kneel unto them, call upon them, Baruc. 6. b. 19.
Burn incense, and set up candels and other gifts before them, and run
Hundreds of miles to worship them. And if they should show and declare to the
world the very True worship to the Living God, they could not set it out by
more evident means. Wherefore (dearly beloved) earnestly consider with your
selves, how pitifully you have been abused in the time of Papistrie, Exodus 20.
a. 4 Leu. 26. a. 1. Deuteronomy. 5. a. 8. Deuteronomy. 27. c. 15
and by Gods *commandment given straightly to the contrary, and by this place
of the Prophet now read, Learn you how wickedly, and how displeasantly you
have done in his sight.

Consider this O Iacoh, Verse. 21. 22. 23. 24.
and Israel, for thou art my servant, etc. Now God returns to an other
warning and comforting of his people, that seeing the Idols of the Gentiles, and
all that worship them, seem they for the time never so prosperous, are in
deed in the sight of God vain, wicked, and odious, and seeing that he is the
gracious Lord that has Made them, 2. These. 2. c. 13 Apoc. 5. c. 9 1. Io. 2.
b. 12 1. Io. 4. c. 18
Preserved them, *Chose^ them to be his servants, *redeemed them, and forgiven
their sins: That they should not *fear, nor starte *from him by any
temptation or affliction, but in their hearts rejoice and give thanks
continually for this his great goodness and mercy toward them, which is
such, as not only they, but also in their behalf, *Heaven, Psalm. 149. a. 1.
Earth, Mouutaines, Woods, Trees and all the other creatures of God should
triumph and be glad of, and give glory and praise unto his name.

Toward the end he does in plain and flat Verse. 26. 27. 28.
words renew the promise of their deliverance from Babylon, and says, he
will fulfill the words of his servants the Prophets, and that their City
Jerusalem should be repaired again, their Temple builded, and that it should be
done by a king of the Persians named Cyrus. Surely this is a notable place to
confirm the certainetie of Gods providence in disposing of things, Tit. 1. a.
2. 2. Pet. 1. d. 21 Romans 1. a. 2 3. Re. 13. a. 2
and the *truth of his word and Prophets in foretelling the same. For these
words were uttered by the Prophet long before Cyrus was borne. From the death
of Esaie under Manasses unto the birth of Cyrus was above an hundred years: and
a good space before, the City of Jerusalem was destroyed, and the people led
captive into Babylon. yea, when the Jews themselves for the most part could
not be persuaded that such misery should come upon them, and therefore hated and
persecuted the Prophets, and when as yet no man could dream that either the
Empire should fall from the Babilonians, being now in their great pride, to the
Persians, which were yet of no great name, or that there should one rise among
the Persians, whose name should be Cyrus: Then I say so long before, in so
incredible and so unlikely a time was this promise and prophecy uttered, to
the great assurance of Gods truth, and mighty providence not only in this
matter, but in all parts of his holy word, given us by the same spirit of
truth that this was.

The 1. Sunday after the Epiphanie, at Evening prayer.
Esaias. 46. 1. Sam. 15. a. 4 Ier. 50. a. 2
to ouerlade them, and to make them weary. 2 They are sunk down and fallen
together, for they may not ease them of their burden, therefore must they go
into captivity.

3 Hearken unto me O house of Jacob, and all ye that remain yet of the house
of Israel, whom I have borne from your mothers womb, and brought you up from
your birth.

4 It is even I which shall bear you unto your last age: Exodus 20. a. 1.
I have (...) you, I will also nourishe you, bear you, and save you. 5 Whom
will ye make me like, or to whom will ye make me equal or compare me, that I
should be like him? (...) 32. a. 3.
6 Take out silver and gold out of your purses, and way it, and hire a
Goldesmith to make a God of it, that men Esaias. 44. c. 13 Baruc. 6. c. 25.
and set in his place, that he may stand, and not move out of his place; and
if one cry unto him, he gives no answer, and delivers not the man that
calls upon him from his trouble. 8 Consider ^hys well, and be ashamed, go
into your own selves.

9 Remember the things that are past since the beginning of the world, that I
an^ God, and that there is else no God, yea, and that there is nothing like
unto me.

10 In the beginning of a thing I show the end thereof, and I tell before,
things that are not yet come to pass: My devise stands steadfastly
stablished, and I fulfill all my pleasure. 11. I call a bird out of the East,
and the man by whom my counsel shall be fulfilled out of strange countries;
as I have spoken, so will I bring to pass: as soon as I think to devise a
thing, Exodus 16. a.
I do it. 12 Hear me O ye that are of an hie stomach, but far from
righteousness:

13 I shall bring forth my righteousness, it is not far, and my health shall
not carry long away: I will lay health in Sion, and in Israel my glory.

The Exposition upon the xlvj. of Esaias.
Bell is fallen, Verse. 1. 2.
Nabo is broken down, whole images were a burden, etc. FOr so much as GOD by
his Prophets had threatened that Jerusalem should be destroyed, and the people
led Captive into Babylon: Esaias, in this chapter and others, does instruct
and exhort such as were faithful of the people of God, Jacob. 4. e. 10. 1.
Pet. 5. b. 6. Phil. 4. c. 12
that they should not be *offended with their own (...) that God, for the it
offenses, had sient upon them, Psalm. 36. a. 1. Psalm. 72. b. 12.
al it with the *prosperity and success of Babylon, and so by that occasion
fall from the worshipping of the true God to the Idols of the Gentiles.
Therefore he here denounces that Bell and Nabo, the great golden Idols of the
Chaldees, in whom they put their trust, shall be pulled down and carried away
in Carts and upon beasts backs by Cyrus and the Persians in the conquest of
Babylon, and in the transferring of the Empire unto the Persians. That means
he when he says, Their Image shall be a burden for the beasts, etc. and that
the same being made of Gold were so heavy that they should weary even strong
cattle, and cause them to sink under the burden.

Hearken unto me, Verse. 3. 4.
O house of Jacob, and all ye that remain yet of the, etc. God does here warn
his people again, what great difference is between the vain Idols of the
Gentiles and himself, 1. Pet. 5. b. 7.
who has ever had *care for them and preserved them, even like a most tender
mother, yea far more carefully and tenderlye then any carnal mother can do.
Esa 9. 49. d. 15
* For as the mother bears the child in the womb, brings it forth into
the world, feeds, cherishes, and keeps it so long as it is not able to
provide for it self: so when it comes to age, she shakes a great part of
her care away.

But God bears us in the purpose of his Election, brings us forth with the
knowledge of our redemption in Christ Jesus, feeds and cherishes us with the
continual food of his heavenly doctrine, saves us, and caryeth us in his
arms from all danger by the might of his prouydence, and that not only in
infancy and yo^ng age, as mothers. do, but in old age, and in all Times. as
It may well appear by the preseru^^^on (...) his Church, even in these latter
and dangerous days against all the assaults of (...) and his instruments.

Whom will you make me like, Verse. 5. 6. 7. 8
or to whom will ye make me equal. etc. Seeing that the tender mercy and
goodness of God toward his people is such, as he has declared, he does here
sharply reprove them that forsaking his true worship, prescribed in his law,
seek to honor him in Idols and Images, and thereby to make him so *vile that
they compare and resemble him to the basest of his creatures. Act. 17. g. 29.
Romans 1. c. 23.
And therefore he does here again deride and scorn their industry and
readiness to bestow all manner of *cost and charges, Dan. 3. a. 1.
and to pull out of their purses Gold and Silver to set forth Idolatrous
worshipping of God by Images, whereas they will make great danger to bestow
any thing to advance Gods holy word and true worship according to the same.

This is a notable place against all such as seek to defend the use of
Images, by saying that they do not think them to be Gods, nor worship them as
Gods, but that they do worship God in them and by them. For here you
understand that God neither will be *resembled by any Image, nor worshipped in
it. For first the making of Images to worship of directly against the
commandment of God. and secondly he cannot be pleased with any worship, (...)
which is directed to him in in (...) Name of (...) Only * son Christ Jesus,
Io: 14. b. 13.
and not under. the pretense of any Image.

Remember the things that are past since the b^ginning of the world, Ver. 9.
10.
etc. This is an exhortation to such of his people as were inclined to the
worshipping of Images Remember (says he) that which I have told you of the
vanity of Idols and Images, and consider that they have their beginning of
mortal and * wicked men, Deuteronomy. 27. c. 15.
not hable to help themselves, and that I your God am * everlasting without
beginning, Esa. 44. a. 6.
and without ending, knowing and vnderst anding all things, and that there is
no Image wherein I can be worshipped, 2. Cor. 4. a. 4
but only the * express Image of my Deity my son Christ Jesus your Savior
and the true Messiah. Wherefore yet again I say unto you, beware, of the
Idolatry of the Gentiles, Psalm. 32. c. 11
and cleave fast unto me. For * my devises shall steadfastly be established, and
I will fulfill all my pleasure, and whatsoever I have declared to you by my
Prophets for your comfort. Yea even as I have promised you, I will bring a
Bird out of the East, Verse. 11.
that is, a noble king of the Persians, that shall with great power break into
Babylon, trausferre the Empire from them, and restore you to your Country
again. And not only this, but I will also in convenient and short time bring
forth my justice and saving health, and set my salvation in Sion and my glory
in Jerusalem by the coming of the Messiah and Savior of the world.

The 2. Sunday after the Epiphanie, at Morning prayer.
Esaias. 51. HEarken unto me ye that hold of righteousness, and Genesis 21. a. 2
Romans 4. a. 3 Genesis 12. a. 2
2 Consider Abraham your father, and Sara that bare you, how that I called him
alone, and blessed him, and increased him. 3 Therefore shall the Lord comfort
Sion, and repair all her decay, making her desert as a Paradise, and her
wilderness as the garden of the Lord: Mirth and joy shall be found there,
thankesgyuing and the voice of praise. 4 Have respect unto me then O my people
both high and low, and lay thine ear unto me: for a law and an ordinance
shall go forth fro me to lighten the gentiles. Esaias. 2. a. 3
5 It is hard by that my health and my righteousness shall go forth, and the
people shall he ordered with mine arm: the Islands ( that is the Gentiles)
shall hope in me, and put their trust in mine arm.

6 Lift up your eyes toward heaven, Math. 24. c. 29 2. Pet. 3. d. 7.
and look upon the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanishe away like
smoke, and the earth shall ware old like a garment, and they that dwell therem
shall perish in like manner: but my salvation shall endure for ever, and my
righteousness shall not cease. 7 Hearken unto me ye that have knowledge Mat.
10. d. 26 Luke. 12. a. 7
thou people that hear my law in thine heart: fear not the reuylings of
men, be not afraid of their blasphemies. 8 For worms and mothes shall eat
them up like cloth and weell: but my righteousness shall endure for ever, and
my saving health from generation to generation. 9 Wake up, wake up, and be
strong O thou arm of the Lord, wake up, like as in time past, ever, and since
the the world began. Esaias. 14. d. 22. Exodus 14. c. 16.
10 Art not thou the same arm that have wounded the proud, and hewn the
Dragon in pieces? Art not thou even the same which have dried up the deep of
the Sea, which have made plain the sea ground, that the delivered might go
through? 1. Esd. 1. b. 3.
11 Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall turn again, and come with joy
unto Sion, continual joy shall be on their head, and mirth and gladness
shall be with them, and sorrow and woe shall fly from them. 2. Cor. 1. c. 14.
12 Yea I, ( even) I am he that in all things gives you consolation: Esa. 40.
a. 6. 1. Pet. 1. d. 24.
what art thou then fear a mortal man and the child of man, which goes
away Esaias. 48. a. 2.
15 I am the Lord thy God that divide the sea, and his waves shall rage, whose
name is the Lord of hosts.

16 I have put my words in thy mouth, Esaias. 49. a. 2.
and have defended thee in the shadow of my hand, that I may plant the
heavens, and lay the foundation of the earth, and say unto Sion. Thou art my
people. 17 Awake, awake, and stand up O Jerusalem, Ier. 25. c. 15.
thou that from the hand of the Lord have drunken out the cup of his wrath,
thou that have supped of and sucked out the slumbring cup to the bottom.

18 For among all the sons whom he has begotten, there is not one that may
hold it up, and not one to lead it by the hand of all the sons that he
has nourished.

19 Both these things are happened unto thee, but who is sorry for it? yea
destruction, wasting, hunger, and sword, but who will comfort thee?

20 Thy sons lie comfortless at the head of every

21 And therefore thou miserable and dronken (howbeit not with wine) hear
this: 22 Thus says the Lord, thy Lord and God, the defendour of his people,
Behold I will take the slumbring cup out of his hand, even the cup with the
dregs of my wrath, that from henceforth thou shall never drink it more. 23
But I will put it into their hand that trouble thee, which have spoken to thy
soul, Stoop down, that we may go over thee, make thy body even with the
ground, and as the street to go upon.

The Exposition upon the. lj. Chapter of Esaias.
Hearken unto me ye that hold of righteousness, Verse. 1. 2. 3
and ye that seek, etc. THe good and godly people in the time of Esaias, seeing
themselves few in number, and hearing by the Prophets, that they should be
led captive into Babylon, greatly feared that all faithful and true
worshippers of GOD should in that persecution be utterly consumed: Therefore
God here speaks to them, and comfort them, signifying that he will not
only in that trouble of Babylon preserve his chosen and elect of the Jews,
but also not long after, greatly increase the number of his Church, by the*
access of all Nations, Io. 10. c. 16. Eze. 37. f 22
that he would call to the light of his truth, and to his true worship by the
promised Messiah, and Savior of the seed of Abraham. And first he wills
them to consider The rock wherout they were hewn, and the den whereout they
were dug, that is as he expounds himself, Abraham their father, and Sara
their mother of whom they descended: and that God called Abraham being but one
man* out of his Country, Genesis 12. a. 1.
and suffered him to live in Chanaan, to the age of an hundred years, and his
wife fourscore without children: and yet that he so increased him, that his
issue proved innumerable as the * sand of the sea. Gene. 15. a. 5 Gene. 32.
c. 12
And by this example he wills them and all other faithful to understand, that
though his Church and people appear to the world to be never so much afflicted,
or to be brought to so low an ebb, yet he will increase and multiply it with
exceeding numbers, and bring them out of misery and trouble unto great joy,
mirth, and comfort. Yea that he will repair the ruin and decay of his
Church, and make their desert, and wilderness, a Paradise and garden of
pleasure. The ruin and decay of Sion, are ye lost sheep of the house of
Israel, which Christ and his Apostles restored. The Desert and Wilderness,
are the Gentiles, which of old had refused the true knowledge of God, and
therefore were as strangers to the promise of salvation. But the se deserts
God made pleasant Gardens by the teaching and publishing of his Gospel. This
is it, that he promises when he says, Verse. 4.
A law and ordinance shall go forth from him to lighten the Gentiles.

The time is even at hand that my health and righteousness shall go forth,
Verse. 5. 6. 7. 8
etc. Be of good cheer my people says God, and be not overwhelmed with the
heaviness of your affliction. It is even at hand that not only my saving
health shall go forth to preserve you, but the might and strength of mine arm
also by the preaching of the Gospel to govern and guide all other Nations.
Math. 12. b. 21
Inso much that the * inhabitants of the Islandes and other countries shall
believe in me, and put their trust in my name. And do you not mistrust this
health and salvation that shall come to you by the Messiah. 2. Pet. 1. b. 10.
For * heaven and earth with all the inhabitours thereof shall vanish away as
smoke, but the justice and salvation wrought by the son of God, shall be most
certain and continue for ever. Therefore my people that vuderstand
righteousness, Mat. 24. a. 9 John. 15. c. 20. Luc. 21. c. 16 Mat. 5. a. 11.
fear not the * reuilings, raylinges and reproaches of men, that shall fall
upon you for the profession of my name and truth. For your enemies shall be
consumed as a garment with mothes, and my saving health that you trust in,
shall stand steadfast for ever and ever.

Wake up wake up, Verse. 9.
and be strong, O thou arm of the Lord, etc. In these three verses next
following God comfort his people with the example of their deliverance out
of Egypt. But his manner of utterance is with great majesty, figuratively
turning his speech to his own divine power: the sense whereof is this. Thou
mighty power of God, that many times since the beginning of the world have
showed thy self, raise thy self now in this great anguishe and care that his
people are now in. Verse. 10.
Is not that mighty arm hable to deliver his servants now in this misery,
Exodus 12. c. 29.
which before time did * wound the pride of Egypt? and with thy woonderous
works hew in pieces that dreadful Dragon Pharao? and dried up the sea, and
made it to stand as *walls on each side of thy people passing through, Psalm.
135. b. 13
and resolved the same again to the confusion of thy enemies? Verse. 11.
Therefore let not the Redeemed of the Lord fear, but that they shall with joy
return again to Sion, and there remain with much mirth and gladness.

It is I, Verse. 12. 13.
it is I, that in all things gives you consolation: what art thou then, etc.
God sharply rebukes his people for Timorousness and continual mistruste in
all their adversities. It is I, says he, it is not Abraham, nor Moses, nor
Aaron, nor any of my Saints your Predecessors, but even I my self the mighty
God your Lord that does always * comfort and help you. Psalm. 9. b. 9.
Seeing then the Idols, that your enemies trust in, are so Vain, as I have
told you, and they themselves so Frail and mortal, and on the contrary part,
I your Lord your assured God, so mighty and of so great force, as I have always
declared my self, as well in the creation of the world, as in the preservation
of you, and delyuerance out of Egypt from your proud oppressor, whom I then
brought full low, and made him glad to hasten you away out of the Exile that
you then were in, Verse. 14. 15. Exodus 12. c. 36
and gave you the * treasures of his people, that you might not want bread and
sustenance by the way: seeing, I say, all this is so, why do you still
mistruste and fear the power of vain men, seem they in the world never so
terrible? Remember therefore my promises, whereby I have assured you, that I
will deliver you, and acknowledge you for my people.

Awake, Verse. 17.
awake, and stand up O Jerusalem, thou that from the hand, etc. The Lord
here comfort his people in telling them, that he will take the scourge of his
wrath from them, and lay it upon their enemies. By the Cup, and by drinking,
it is usual both in the old testament and new to understand Affliction, as
in Hier. 25. Ier. 25. d. 15.
Take this cup of wine of my fury at my hand. etc. And Christ himself in his
agony. Mat. 26. Let this cup pass from me, etc. that is, Math. 26. d. 39
this scourge of my Cross and passion. The plain sense of this place is: O my
Church, be of good comfort, for albeit thou have for a time through my wrath
for thy sins been grievously afflicted, and no man either would or could
comfort and help thee, Verse. 18. 19.
yet after I shall come through thy repentance, of my mercy pardoning thy
sins, this my bitter Cup of affliction shall be taken from thee, Psalm. 78. b.
6
and * poured upon the heads of those that have oppressed thee to their utter
confusion. By the Slumbring or poisoned cup, he means the grievous
adversities, that has so touched and weakened them as they are not almost
hable to stand, but stagger and reele as they go, as it were men half dead.

Thy sons lie comfortless at the head of every streate like a taken
venison, Verse. 20. etc.
etc. In these verses he describes the great misery, that the Jews were in
at their captivity in Babylon, not only cruelly murdered in all Cities, but
pyning for hunger and dying in the streets, as it appears by the history of
Tobie. Tob. 1. d. 21.


The. 2. Sunday after the Epiphanie at Evening prayer.
Esaias. 53. John. 12. e. 38. Romans 12. c.


2 For he did grow before the Lord like as a branche, and as a root in a
dry ground, he has neither beauty nor favor: when we look upon him, there
shall be no fayrenesse, we shall have no lust unto him.

3 He is despised and abhorred of men, Esaias. 52. c. 14. Heb. 5. a. 2
he is such a man as has good experience of sorrows and infirmities: We have
reckened him so vile, that we hid our faces from him.

4 Howbeit, Math. 8. b. 7. 1. Pet. 2. c. 24.
he only has taken on him our infirmity, and borne our pains: yet we did
judge him as though he were plagued, and cast down of God.

5 Whereas he ( notvvithstanding) was wounded for our offenses, 1. Cor. 15. a. 3
and smitten for our wickedness: for the pain of our punishment was laid
upon him, and with his stripes are we healed. 6 As for us we are all gone
astraye like sheep, every one has turned his own way: but the Lord has
thrown upon him all our sins.

7 He suffered violence, and was evil entreated, and did not open his mouth:
he shall be led as a sheep to be slain, Iere. 11. d. 10. Math. 26. f. 63 Act.
8. f. 32
and not open his-mouth. 8 From the (...) and judgment was he taken, and his
generation who can declare? for he was cut of from the ground of the living,
which punishment did go upon him for the transgression of my people.

9 His grave was given him with the condemmned, Math. 27. e. 38
and with the rich man at his death, whereas he did never violence nor (...),
1. Pet. 2. d. 19 John. 12. c. 23. Romans 8. d. 17
(...) him with infirmity, that when he had made his (...) of the Lord shall
prosper in (...) hand.

11 Of the travail and labor of his (...) the fruit and be satisfied: Romans
3. a (...)
my righteous (...) knowledge justify the multitude, for he shall (...) their
sins. 12 Therefore will I give him among the great ones his part, and he
shall divide the spoil with the mighty, because he gives over his sioule to
death, Math. 15. c. Luke 22. d. 37
(...).

The Exposition upon the. liij. Chapter of Esaias.
But who has given credence unto our preaching? Verse. 1.
or to whom, etc. Esaias, in sundry places of his prophecies speaks so
plainly of the vocation of the gentyles to the faith, of the kingdom of
Christ, of his merueylous birth, of his stock and kindred, etc. that he is of
a ancient writers esteemed as an Evangelist, recording things past, rather
then a Prophet foretelling things to come, albeit he was before the coming of
Christ above. 750. years. And yet of all the parts of his prophecies is there
none wherein he does so plainly speak of Christ, of the state of his life, of
his death and passion, and of the fruits thereof, as he does in this present
chapter. Neither is there any place of the old Testament out of the which so
many allegations be made by Christ and his Apostles, as out of this part of
Esaias.

The Prophet in the latter end of the former chapter had said, that as
Christ should be published and known among all the Gentiles, so the state and
manner of his life should be so * base and simple as all men should wonder at
it. Math. 13. g. 55.
Therefore in the beginning of this chapter, as it were under the person of
the Apostles and first preachers of the Gospel, he breaks (...) to a
lamenting of the * small number of them, Romans 10. c. 16.
that at the publishing of this doctrine would give credence to it. So strange
and so * unlikely a thing shall it seem to them to have salvation by one, that
in continuance of the world, appeared so mean a person, as Christ should be,
especially seeing the Prophets in other places described the Messiah as a
myghtie Prince and king.

For he did grow before the Lord like as a branch, Verse. 2. 3.
and as a root in. etc. Shootes or branches do sometime spring up in dry
barraine grounds, but because ^hey have not moisture and fatness of the earth
they prosper not, nor prove fair and large to see to. So Christ, when he came
in flesh, and sprang up here in the soil of this dry and horraine world,
entering his spiritual kingdom, he showed not himself of any notable
continuance and authority, nor flourished in the world with princely majesty
and power, but appeared rather as a thin, slender, and unprofitable shoot,
more meet to be cast into the fire, or to be trodden under foot then to look
for any great fruit of it. Therefore when they beheld him, they saw no
majesty in him, but esteemed him as an abject, Phil. 2. a. 7.
as * an outcast, and as a contemptible person not worthy so much as once to
be looked on. This euydently appears to have been in Christ, as well in the
residue of his life as especially at his death and passion, when they scorned
and (...) when they buffeted him, Psalm. 21. b. 8. Luke. 23. b. 11 Sap. 2. d. 18
and crowned him (...), when they preferred a robber and a murderer before him,
when they cried away with him, away with him, and crucify him, Mat. 27. b. 21
finally, when with great despite they hanged him between two thieves.

Howbeit, Verse. 4. 5.
he only has taken on him our infirmity, and borne our pains. etc. And yet
(says the Prophet in the person of the Church of God) this Co^temptible
Person, whom we esteemed as a worm of the earth, was the only man, that has
(...) upon him out infirmity, and borne our pains. When we saw him not only
so base and simple, Math. 10. c. 25
but so (...) and (...) Gal. 3. b. 13.
Verse. 6.


A sheep of all cattle is most foolish; and the flock being once scattered,
every one runs his way, and not one knows how to Return to the fold,
until he be fet by the shepeherde. By this Similitude he expresses our
waywardness, ignorance and blindness, that being once gone astray from God,
John. 6. e. 44
we neither * can, nor will, nor know how to return to him again, until our
gracious and good pastor Christ Jesus, upon whom God has laid our sins, do
seek us and * Bring us home to the fold upon his shoulders. Luke. 15. a. 5


He suffered violence, and was evil entreated, Verse. 7.
and did not open, etc. The Sheep whether he be shorn or led to the
slaughter, he never byteth nor strugleth, no nor so much as opens his mouth
to bleate, to signify any Misliking: Marc. 14. f. 61
By this he discribeth the great obedience and * patience of our Savior Christ
at the time of his passion, sufficiently declared by the Evangelists. This
place, and certain verses following are interpreted by saint Peter. 1. 1. Pet.
2. d. 22. Act. 8. f. 32.
Pet 2. and Acts. 8. by Philip to the Eunuch.

From the prison and judgment was he taken, Verse. 8.
and his generation, etc. This is to be understood of the Resurrection of
Christ, and deliverance from death and misery. Although Christ was taken,
bound, despiteously entreated, Phil. 2. a. 8.
adjudged to die, and last of all, put to * most reproachful death: yet he was
by Gods mighty hand delivered from misery, from bonds, from death, and
restored to life and glory for ever to endure. Romans 6. b. 9.
For Christ (says Paul) being raised from death, dies no more, death has no
more dominion over him. No man therefore is hable to declare the everlasting
age and continuance of Christ. The cause why he was so Glorified, is in the
latter part of the verse set forth, for that he did vouchsafe to die and suffer
punishment for the sins of the people of God.

His grave was given him with the condemned, Verse. 9.
and with the rich man, etc. By the Rich man is meant the cruel and violent
oppressor, and by the Grave, the manner and place of his death. So that the
sense is, he suffered and was put to death in that place, that was appointed
for the wicked and condemned persons, that use extortion and violence, 1. Pet.
3. d. 18.
whereas he * never did injury, neither uttered deceyte with his mouth.

Yet has it pleased the Lord to smite him with infirmity, Verse. 10.
that when, etc. The death and passion of Christ for our sins, was not the
work of enemies, but of our merciful * God and heavenly father. Romans 8. f. 32
God (says the Prophet) would strike him with infirmity, to the end that
when he had * given his lif^ as a Sacrifice for sin, John. 10. d. 18.
he might see the seed of his faithful posterity made happy for ever, and
that this will and devise of the lord might prosper and be thoroughly wrought by
him.

Of the travail and labor of his soul shall he see the fruit and be
satisfied, etc. Verse. 11.
He declares what fruit Christ shall have by his Death and Passion. For the
labor, travail, sorrow, anguishe, care, and reproach that he sustained, as
well in all the residue of his life as especially at his death, he shall with
joy and gladness behold and be satisfied with true and eternal felicity,
and the fruits of all heavenly goodness and blessings, and that not only
for himself, but for * all them, John. 17. d. 24
that through faith, shall acknowledge the same and believe in him. For it
follows, that this righteous servant of God, Christ Jesus, through his
knowledge shall justify many, that is, shall pay the ransom for their
sins, reconcile them to God, and cause them through the price of his blood to
be accounted just before God. For this in deed is our true Justification, when
we, of our selves sinful, by the mercy of God, in Christ Jesus, are accepted
as just.

Therefore will I give him among the great ones his part, Verse. 12.
and he shall divide, etc. In this verse as in a conclusion the Prophet
recites the chief points of Christ's death, and the benefits that come to
the faithful thereby. First his * obedience in giving over his soul to death,
Phil. 2. a. 8.
Secondly that he was * reputed among sinners, Luk 22. d. 37 Luke 23. s. 47.
and wicked persons. Thirdely that he was an * innocent, 1. Pet. 3. d. 18.
and dyed not for his own sins, but for the sins of Mankind. Fourthly,
that he is now become an * Intercessour for sinners, Romans 8. g. 34. Heb. 7. d.
25
and in the dignity of the high priest according to the order of Melchisedech.
Wherefore says God the father, I will give him his part among the great ones,
and he shall Conquer and subdue Satan with all his power, and take away the
spoil of his Kingdom, and bring to his own subjection all Nations, even to
the uttermost bounds of the earth. Luke 22. d. 37. Marc. 15. c. 28
This verse also is expounded of Christ, by Christ himself, Luke. 22. and
Mark. 15.

The 3. Sunday after the Epiphanie, at Morning prayer.
Esaias. 55. Eccle. 51. d. 23. John. 7. e. 37. Apoc. 22. d. 17
come, bye that ye may have to eat: come, bye wine and milk without any money
or money worth. 2 Wherefore do ye lay out any money for the thing that
feeds not, and spend your labor about the thing that satisfies you not?
Act. 13. e. 34. 2. Sam. 7. e. 13
But hearken rather unto me, and ye shall eat of the best, and your soul
shall have her pleasure in plenteousnesse. 3 Incline your ears and come unto
me, take heed (I say) and your soul shall live: for I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. 4 Behold, I
gave him for a witness among the folk, for a Prince and a teacher unto the
people. 5 Lo, thou shall call an unknown people: and a people that had no
knowledge of thee shall run unto thee, because of the Lord thy God and the
holy one of Israel which glorifieth thee. 6 Seek the Lord while he Ezec.
18. c. 21.
and call upon him while he is nigh.

7 Let the ungodly man forsake his own ways, and the unrighteous his own
imaginations, and turn again unto the Lord, Psalm. 103. a. 4. Esaias. 65. d. 24
so shall he be merciful unto him: and to our God, for he is very ready to
forgive.

8 For thus says the Lord, My thoughts are not your thoughts, and your
ways are not my ways.

9 But as far as the heavens are higher then the earth: so far do my ways
exceed yours, Deuteronomy. 32. a. 2
and my thoughts yours. 10 And like as the rain and snow comes down from
heaven, and returns not thither again, but waters the earth, makes it
fruitful and green, that it may give corn unto the sower, and bread to him
that eats:

11 So the word also that comes out of my mouth shall not turn again void
unto me, but shall accomplish my will, and prosper in the thing whereto I
send it.

12 And so shall ye go forth with joy, and be led with peace: the mountains and
hills shall sing with you for joy, and all the trees of the field shall
clappe their hands.

13 For thorns there shall grow Fur trees, and the Myrre tree in the steed
of briars: and this shall be done to the praise of the Lord, and for an
everlasting token that shall not be taken away.

The Exposition upon the. lv. Chapter of Esaias.
Come to the waters all ye that be thirsty, and ye that have no money, come,
etc. THE Prophet in the former Chapiters had euydentlye spoken of the Gospel
of Christ, and of the benefits that come to his Church by it, now he
earnestly calls and exhorts all men to hear the same, and by faith to
receive it, and not to hearken after other doctrines, whereby they cannot have
true comfort of conscience. What avails it, that Christ dyed for mankind,
and purchased great benefits for them, if they do * not Believe it, Romans 10.
b. 9. Romans 3. d. 22.
nor show themselves destrous to obtain it. Come therefore (says he) to the
waters. etc. By the Water to drink, and by the Bread to eat, he means the
same water and bread that Christ speaks of. John. 4. and 6. Whosoever (says
he) shall drink of the water that I shall gyu^ him, John. 4. b. 14
shall never thirst again, but the water that I shall give him, shall be a
fountain springing to everlasting life. And again as touching the bread. John.
6 I am the bread of life that descended from heaven. John. 6. f. 91
If one eat of this bread he shall live for ever. The Water and Bread then,
whereunto the Prophet in this place calls, is Christ Jesus offered to us in
his Gospel. And by Wine and Milk he understands the same thing. For there
is none other food, whereon our Souls can feed, but Christ and his Doctrine:
in which are comprehended al things, whereby we are nourished to everlasting
life. Here is to be noted, First, that God to this heavenly food calls not
one nor two, Math. 11. d. 28
but * All, excepting no country, no state, no kind or degree of persons.
Secondly, that he calls the^, that be Thirsty, that is, such as long after
it, or greatly desire it. He calls not those, Luke. 18. b. 9
that * swell in trust and confidence of their own worthynesse, and therefore
think they have small need of Christ and his Gospel. No, nor such as live in
* security and delight of worldly Pleasure: 1 Thessalonians. 4. a. 7
and therefore have no care for the favor of God nor desire of eternal life,
but such he calls, as have fear of God in their consciences, and sense of
his wrath against sin. Thirdly, is to be observed that he offerth these
things Freely, without any respect of our * worthynesse, Ephe. 2. b. 8
and therefore says, Come and bye without money.

Wherefore do ye lay out any money for the thing that feeds not. etc. Verse.
2.
As God by his Prophet calls his people to the lively Water and heavenly
Food before mentioned, so does he rebuke them, that they bestow their cost,
labor, and travail to attain that, which in deed is no food, and wherewith
their Souls cannot be relieved, that is to say, that they leave the lively
fountain of Gods mercy in Christ Jesus, and seek after salvation by their
own works, or by ye observation of men's Devises, Traditions, and Doctrines,
wherewith God by his Prophet in another place does protest, Esaias. 29. d. 13.
Math. 15. a. 9.
that * They worship him in vain.

Incline your ears and come unto me, take heed (I say) and your soul, etc.
That which before he uttered Figuratively, he speaks now in plain words,
that is, that they should harken and give dyligent ear unto His doctrine, and
not be led away by the Fantasies of men. Psalm. 88. a. 4 2. Reg. 7. b. 12
For, says he, * I will make my everlasting covenant with you. I once promised
to David my servant, that of his seed I would bring forth a Savior of the
world, by whom I would be reconcyled to all them, that believed in him, and
that I would chose the^ as my Sons and heirs of everlasting life. This
promise or covenant, that by my oath I confirmed, Romans 11. d. 29.
confirmed, I will * keep and perform to you for ever. Cleave therefore to my
doctrine and swerue not from it.

Behold, Verse. 4.
I gave him as a witness among the people, for a prince, etc. This may be
Literally spoken of David; But prophetically it is meant of Christ, John. 18. g.
37. John. 3. b. 11 Apoc. 1. b. 5
whom he says he gave to the people as a *witness, to Justify the promise of
his mercy made unto them, as a Prince to govern and rule them with the
direction of his Spirit, as a Teacher to instruct and lead them into all truth.

Lo, Verse. 5.
thou shall call an unknown people: and a people that had no knowledge, etc.
Esaias prophecieth of the calling of the Gentiles, Math. 28. d. 19 Acts. 22. e.
21 Ephe. 2. d. 17. Mark. 16. e. 15
and says, that Christ by his Apostles shall *call that people, that never
knew him before, and that they shall gladly and readily run after him,
because of the comfortable and sweet Doctrine of the Gospel that he published.

Seek the Lord while he may be found, Verse. 6. 7.
and call upon him, etc. After the publishing of his mercy through the Messiah
and Savior Christ Jesus, he now exhorts the Jews, and in them all other to
turn to God by earnest repentance, while his mercy and goodness is so freely
offered. For if they stubburnly refuse, Math. 21. d. 43 John. 12. e. 35
when God is near at hand, and calls to mercy, he will * afterward turn
his face from them, and be so far of in his displeasure, that he will not
hear their prayers. God is said to be Nigh, when by the Preachers and
teachers of his Gospel he calls to repentance, and exhorts to embrace his
mercy liberally and bountifully offered: And then to be Far of, and hard to
be Found when for their obstinacy, of his justice, he turns his eyes from
them, and will not hear their crying and complaining at all, as he threatens
in the first of this Prophet Esaias. Esaias. 1. d. 15.
The reason which the Prophet uses to move them to repentance, is the
exceeding great * Readiness and inclination of God to mercy and forgiveness,
Psalm. 144. d. 19
especially toward all them, that with Sorrowful and contrite hearts turn
unto him.

For thus says the Lord, Verse. 8. 9.
My thoughts are not your thoughts, etc. I know, says God, you are all
greedy of reuengement, and seek for every small offense to be wreaked, but I
am not so. Your mercy is Wavering and mutable, but mine is Constant and
perpetual. You are merciful by Pangues and passions, but it is of my Nature
and substance to be merciful. Wherefore you may not measure my ways and
cogitations by your own. Heaven and earth are not so far distant, nor so
far unlike, as your corrupt Nature, and mine is.

Like as the rain and snow comes down from heaven, Verse. 10. 11.
etc. By this notable similitude is painted out ye truth, force, and efficacy
of the promise of Gods mercy, which is the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. The rain and snow comes down from heaven, not to be as an idle
spectacle, or to return up into the air again without use or profit, but to
moysten the earth and to make it * fruitful. Heb. 6. b. 7.
This is the use whereunto the providence of God has appointed it, and this
does it perform, whenever it lights on ground that is not altogether
stony and hard. Even so is it with the Gospel of our Salvation by Christ,
which proceeded out of the mouth of God, and was promised by him from the
beginning of the world, and was appointed by his goodness not to be
published, Colof. 1. b. 6 10
* in vain, but so to fall and moysten the field of Gods Church, that it may
be fertile, and in deed bring forth the fruit of remission of sins, Adoption
into ye Children of God, Justice before God and the world, and Assurance of
everlasting life.

This is the true and right use of the Word of God, and of his holy Gospel,
whereby we are assured of his mercy. Neither is there any thing more certain,
than that it shall work this effect, if it light not on hearts * harder than
any stone, Luke 8. a. 6.
and such as through stiffenesse and want of faith, will not receive the
Moisture of it.

And so shall you go forth with joy, Verse. 12. 13.
and be led with peace: the mountains, etc. He numbreth here five kinds of
fruits that shall spring of the doctrine of the Gospel.

The first is, that as Moses led forth the children of Israel out of Egypt:
even so shall Christ lead forth and deliver the faithful people of God, from
the bondage of Satan and all their spiritual enemies, to their exceeding great
joy and comfort.

The second, that he shall not only lead them forth with joy, but in peace
also, and shall make them Quiet in conscience, and set them in such safety,
that neither Trouble, nor Affliction, nor Death, nor Hell shall be hable to
hurt them.

The third, that Mountains and Hills, that is, all the creatures of God, and
even the very Angels in heaven shall triumph and rejoice for this our
Deliverance out of that thraldom wherinto we fell by the offense of our first
father Adam.

The fourth, that the sweet dew of the Gospel for Briers and Thorns, shall
bring forth Fur and Mirre, and other fruitful trees, that is, for wicked,
unjust, and naughty persons, it shall make just, good, 1. Cor. 6. c. 11.
and godly men. Thus says saint Paul, you were whoremasters, adulterers,
wanton persons, worshippers of Images, but now you are washed, you are
sanctified, you are justified by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.

The fifth, that the immortal praise and glory of God shall be set forth in
the Church among his Saints, for this his great Mercies.

The. 3. Sunday after the Epiphanie at Evening prayer.
Esaias. 56. Math. 3. c. 17.
and my righteousness shall be opened.

2 Blessed is the man that does this, and the man's child which keeps the
same: he that takes heed that he vnhalow not the Sabbath ( that is) he that
keeps himself that he do no evil. Esaias. 58. c. 13.
3 Then shall not the stranger which cleaves to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 23. c. 7
say, Alas the Lord has shut me clean out from his people: neither shall the
gelded man say, Lo I am a dry tree. Sapi. 3. b. 14.
4. For thus says the Lord unto the gelded that keeps my Sabbath, ( namely)
that holds greatly of the thing that pleases me, and keeps my covenant.

5 Unto them will I give in my householde and within my walls a better
heritage and name then if they had been called sons and daughters: John. 1. c.
I will give them an everlasting name that shall not perish. 6. Again, the
strangers that stick to the Lord to serve him, and to love his name, John.
8. c.
and to be his servants, and all they which keep themselves that they
vnhalowe not the sabbath, namely that they fulfill my

8 Thus says the Lord God which gathers together the scattered of Israel,
3. Re. 8. c. 13 Math. 21. b. 15 Mar. 11. b. 13. Luke 19 g. 46.
I will bring yet an other congregation to him. 9 Come all ye beasts of the
field, that ye may devour all the beasts of the woodde.

10 For his watchmen are all blind, Iere. 12. b. 9. Ezec. 34. a. ^
they have altogether no understanding, they are aldumbe dogs not being hable
to bark, they are sleepie, sluggish are they and lie snorting.

11 They are shameless dogs that be never satisfied: the shepeheardes also
in like manner have no understanding, but every man turns his own way, every
one after his own covetousness with all his power. 12 Come ( say they) I will
fetch wine, so shall we fill our selves, that we may be drunken: and do to
morrow like as to day, yea and much more.

The Exposition upon the. 56. Chapter of Esaias.
Thus says the Lord, keep equity, Verse. 1.
and do right: for my saving health, etc. THE Prophet in this place declares
what God requires at our hands, Luke 1. g. 75.
when he has showed his mercy and goodness toward us, that is, that we
should not live still in sin and wickedness, but show the * true fruits of
repentance, and lead our life in equity and justice. And his reason and
cause, that he alleges is this, that his saving health and his righteousness
is nigh at hand, and ready to be opened to us. Whereby is to be gathered, that
the narre God is to us in mercy and goodness, Romans 13. c. 11
the narre *we should be to him in virtuous and godly life.

Blessed is the man that does this, Verse. 2.
and the man's child which keeps, etc. In accompting him *happy and blessed,
Psalm. 118. a. 1
that imbraceth this doctrine and lives godly, he gives to understand, that
many will be hard hearted and not follow it: but least their waywardness
should be an hinderanre to the better disposed, he pricketh them forward with
the commendation of the thing by the great Fruit that comes of it, that is,
true Blessedness. And because the Saboth day is the chief sign of the
worship of God, by that he understands all the parts of true piety and
godliness, and not only the outward observation of the day.

Then shall not the stranger that cleaves to the Lord, Verse. 3. 4. 5
say, Alas, etc. Strangers and Eunuchs as appears Deuteronomy. 23. were by the
law excluded from certain privileges among the Jews, Deuteronomy. 23. a. 2
and not had in such credit and estimation as they that were Jews borne.
Wherefore the Prophet by the name of strangers, and Ennuches, or gelded men,
understands all them which in any respect, or in consideration of any reproach
might seem to be unworthy of the grace of God, or to be accounted of the
number of his people. And therefore in this place he shows that the free
grace of God, whereof he has spoken before, should be such, as they also
should be made partakers of it, which before were strangers from God and
seemed not to have any access to the throne of his mercy and goodness. This
is it that Saint Paul speaks of Ephe. 2. Ephe. 2. b. 12.
At that time you were without Christ, as aliauntes, from the common weal of
Israel and strangers from the Testamentes of promise, etc. but now in Christ
Jesus you, which sometimes were far of, are made nighe by the blood of Christ.

God therefore to the fruition of his mercy in Christ Jesus, calls of all
sorts of men even of the meanest and lowest, Act. 10. c. 34.
* without respect of persons, and excludes neither Jew nor Gentile, nor
forrainer nor other, so that they serve him and keep his covenant. To the
gelded men he promises that he will give them a better name then if they were
called Sons and daughters of Israel: meaning that he would give them that
name whereby they should be written in the book of life and accounted Citizens
of heaven and of the householde of God. To the Strangers he promyseth, that he
will bring them into the holy Mount of his Church, and make them members
thereof, that he will make them * glad in his house of prayer by hearing their
desires and satisfying their requests, Esaias. 2. a. 3
that the offerings and Sacrifices of their godly and virtuous works shall be
accepted before him.

Come all ye beasts of the field, Verse. 9. 10. 11 12.
that ye may devour all the beasts of, etc. Now Esaias seeing the people of
God exceedinglye Misled and brought in danger of Gods high displeasure, by
them that should have been their Instructors and teachers: with great heat he
adds a very bitter and grievous reproufe of those to whom the charge and
government of them was committed, and therein comprehends not only Bishops,
Priests, and Prophets, but also Princes, Judges and Magistrates: which two
states God has appointed as two eyes to direct and guide his Church. As if the
Prophet had said, It behooves the Governors of the people of God to be
skillful and * learned, Psalm. 2. c. 10. Malach. 2. b. 7
but these are blind and ignorant, and altogether without understanding. Ezec.
33. a. 2
They should * be Instructors, and Counsaylours to direct the people, but they
are Dumb dogs not able to barck or give warning of any danger. They should be
Watchful, diligent and painful, but they show themselves sleepie and
sluggish, and are given over to Idleness, Ease and pleasure of the world, not
passing what corruption either of life or doctrine grow among their people.
They should as good Pastors * feed their sheep, John. 21. c. 15. Act. 20.
f. 28. Mich. 3. d. 11. Mich. 3. b. 5
but they feed themselves, and through immoderate and greedy * Covetousness
become as shamlesse dogs that never be satisfied, but always craving. 1.
Tim. 3. a. 2. Titus. 1. b. 6 1. Per. 5. a. 3.
They should be * sober and give * example to other of the fear of God and
obedience to his word when they are called to repentance. But they give
themselves to banqueting and with manifest contempt of GOD encourage one an
other to surfeiting and drunkenness, and that with such obstinacy as though
they believed there were no life after this. Therefore will God bring both upon
people and governors wild beasts of the field to devour them, that is,
cruel and Bloody enemies, that shall destroy them.

The. 4. sunday after the Epiphanie, at Morning prayer.
Esaias. 57. THe righteous perishes, and no man regards it Sap. 2. b. 10
good godly people are taken away, and no man considers it, namely that the
righteous is conveyed away from the wicked. 2 He conuneth into peace, and godly
men rest in their chambers, and before the godly man goes peace. Math. 12. d.
39
3 Come hither therefore ye charmers children, ye sons of the adulterer and
the whore.

4 Wherein take ye your pleasure? upon whom gape ye with your mouth, and
bleare out your tongue? Are ye not children of transgression, and a feed of
dissimulation?

5 Ye make your fire under the Oaks, Eze. 16. b. 20. Esaias. 65. a. 7. Iere. 7.
a. 9 Deuteronomy. 18. b. 10 Eze. 20. e. 28. Leuit. 20. a. 2.
and under all green trees, and ye offer children in the vallcis and dens of
stone.

6 Thy part shall be with the stony rocks by the river, yea even these shall
be thy part: for there thou have poured meat and drink offering unto them:
should I delight in that? 7 Thou have made thy bed upon high mountains, thou
wentest up thither, and there thou have slame sacrifices.

8 Behind the doors and posts have thou set up thy remembrance, when thou
had discovered thy self to another than me, when thou wentest up and made
thy bed wider, and with those Idolles have thou made a covenant, and louedst
their couches where thou saw them. Eze. 16. b. 9. Osee. 12. a. 1
9. Thou wentest straight to kings with oil and diverse ointments, (that is)
thou have sent thy messengers far of, and yet art thou fallen into the pit.
10 Thou art weary for the multitude of thine own ways, yet saydest thou
never, There is no hope: thou have had the life that thy hands wrought, and
therefore thou art careless. 11 For whom will thou be abashed or fear, seeing
thou have broken thy promise, and remembrest not me, neither have me in thine
heart? Think thou that I also will hold my peace as aforetime, that thou
fear me not? 12 Yea verily I will declare thy goodness and thy Romans 11. a. 2
and vanity shall take them all away: nevertheless they that put their trust
in me, shall inherit the land, Esaias. 40. c. 15.
and have my holy hill in possession. 14. And therefore thus he says, Make
plain, make plain, and cleanse the street, take up the stumbling blocks out
of the way of my people. 15 For thus says the hie and excellent, even he that
dwells in euerlastingnesse, Esaias. 66. a. 1.
whose name is the holy one: I dwell hie above and in the sanctuary, and with
him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit do I dwell, that I may heal
a troubled mind, and a contrite heart.

16 For I chide not ever, Psalm. 103. a. 9
and am not wroth without end: but the blasting goes from me, and is included
in the body, and I made the breath. 17 I am wroth with him for his
covetousness, I smite him, I hide (...) and am angry, and he turns himself
and follows the way of his own heart. Luc. 15. a. 5
18 I have seen his ways, and I heal him, I lead him, and restore to him
comfort, and to those that were sorry for him. 19 I make the fruits of
thanksgiving, that he may say, Ephe. 2. c. 14.
Peace, peace, unto them that are far of, and to them that are nie says the
Lord, I make him whole.

20 But the wicked are like the raging sea that can not rest, Esa. 48. d. 22.
whose water fometh with the mire and gravel.

21 Even so the wicked have no peace, says God.

The Exposition upon the.lvij. Chapter of Esaias.
The righteous perishes and no man regards it in his heart. Verse. 1.
etc. IN these two first verses the Prophet reprooueth the Negligence and
dullness of the people in considering the work of God, that is, when they see
the good, godly, and righteous men, either cruelly slain by Tyrannes, or
otherwise dying by common death, they weigh not gods meaning and purpose, nor
understand what thereby is pretended to come upon the world. They think the
wicked that live longer, and remain after them are happier than they. But God
takes them away, that they may not behold and be pertakers of those miseries
and heavy plagues, that he will bring upon the wicked. Behold, says God to
good king Josias, thou shall be conveyed to thy grave in peace, 4. Re. 22. d. 20
that thine eyes may not see all the evils that I will bring on this place.

The common sort think the death of the Godly is miserable, Verse. 2.
but the Prophet here affirms that they depart from trouble and misery of
this life, and go to Peace in that place, where they rest in ease and
quietness, as it were men in their Chambers safe from all trouble and danger.
Apoc. 14. c. 13.
Blessed are they therefore that die in the Lord, for they rest from their
labors, but the wicked in their death are cursed, for that the worm of their
conscience never dies.

Come hither therefore ye Charmers children, ye sons of the adulterer. etc.
Verse. 3. 4
In a good part of this Chapter following, the Prophet bitterly inueigheth
against the wicked that derided the word of God and his Prophets, and gave
themselves to witchcraft, sorcery, Idolatry, and false worshipping of God,
Dent. 18. c. 11.
*contrary to his law and holy word. By Charmers children, and Sons of
Adulterers, he understands those, that delighted in charming, and the
spiritual whordome of superstition and Idolatry.

Who is it, says Esaias, against whom you so take pleasure in jesting and
scoffing? whom do you mock? at whom is it, that you gape with your mouths,
and lill out your tongues? you think you do this against me, and such other
the Preachers and Prophets of God, that he sends to call you from your
wickedness. But I will you to understand, that they be not against us, but
against God that sent us. Act. 22. b. 8. Zach. 2. c. 8.
*It is God that you contemn and mock in us. It is God against whom you gape
and lyll out your tongues. You will seem to be the people of GOD, but all this
reproach of your scorninges lyghteth upon him. You will challenge to be of his
Church, and of the number of them that worship him, and yet his word and
doctrine is it against which you show all this dispite. You will seem to be
good and godly, but you are in deed transgressors, hypocrites and dissimulers,
giving the name of Gods true worship to your superstition and Idolatry.

You are not contented to follow the prescript of my holy word, Verse. 5.
commanding you to sacrifice and do worship to me before the * Arc in the
Temple, Exodus 25. b. 22 Exodus 29. g. 42
but you seek strange ways of worshypping, and make your fires under every
Oak and green Tree, and in the Valleys and Dens of Stone, cruelly kill and
offer your children, according to the manner of the Heathen. Verse. 6.
I chose you to be my portion, my part, and my heritage of all the people of
the earth, but so that you should be contented with me your God alone, and
with that Worship that I had appointed. But seeing you have forsaken me, and
contrary to my law made you Images and aulters of stone by the river sides: I
leave you now to your own superstitious devises, and that shall be your part,
that you have chosen. For before them you plentifully powered out your meat and
drink offerings.

Thou, Verse. 7
O Jerusalem, have made thy bed upon high Mountains. etc. That is, thou have
upon the high mountains made thy large Chappelles and Aulters, in which thou
go an whooring and offerest sacrifices to other Gods besides me, Verse. 8.
yea, behind every Chapel door thou hangest up thy monuments of
remembrance to show the great devotion and zeal that thou bear to those
Idols and false Gods before whom thou have discovered thy unfaithfulness
toward me, and have gone on pilgrimage from place to place wheresoever thou
heardest such dens of Idolatry to be. Thus do thou Jerusalem, leave no
place vndistayned with thy wickedness, Groves, wooddes and trees, Wells and
rivers, rocks and stones, mountains and hills, valleys and playnes, and
every place that to thee seems pleasant. Verse. 9.
Yea and above all this mistrusting my aid and help in thy distress, Thou
sendest Presents and messengers for aid and succor to Heathen and Idolatrous
Princes, which have not been hable to deliver thee. Verse. 10.
I have appointed thee but one way of safety, that is, the Obedience of my
law: But thou forsakest that, and traueylest about many ways and devises of
thine own brain, and that so diligently and earnestly, that nothing can make
thee give over, no not though thou see thy labors to be lost and utterly
unprofitable, yet so long as thou can feel thy hands hable to stir, will thou never say, I am now weary of my vain labors, I have done. Whom have
thou feared in all this thy traueyle? Verse. 11.
thou will pretend perhaps, that thou have been abashed of me, but I tell
thee, I will no longer dissemble as before I have done, thou say falsely,
thou have not remembered me, nor are thy sacrifices such as I delight in, Verse.
12.
or such wherewith thou can be helped, but such they are as blind thee, and
make that thou can never know thine own sin and wickedness, but put thee
in confidence of thine own justice. Verse. 13.
Therefore when thou in thy distress shall lament and cry, let all the Heap
of thy hill woorshippes and Idolatrous devises deliver thee, if they can, but
of so little weight are they, and of so small force, that one blast of vanity
shall blow them all away. Consider therefore in what manner of things you have
put your trust.

Nevertheless, they that put their trust in me shall inherit the land, Verse.
13.
etc. This second part of the Chapter is a comfort of the godly that turn to
God by repentance, and put their trust in him. For as the wicked shall perish
and vanish away with their Idols, so shall the faithful that trust in God be
saved and receive comfort.

Therefore thus says the Lord, Verse. 14.
make plain, make plain. etc. As the Prophet here particulerly respects
the comfort of the faithful in his time, so he especially regards the
promise of salvation made in Messiah Christ Jesus. And therefore as in an other
place it is said in the person of John Baptist, Esaias. 62. d. 10 Math. 3. a. 3
Luke 3. a. 4
Parate viam domino. etc. so here in the person of the Apostles and Preachers
of the Gospel, he says, Make plain, make plain, and cleanse the streets,
take all stumbling blocks and offenses out of my peoples way. Remove all
impediments, that is, selfloue, contempt of God and his word, unfaithfulness,
care of the world, delight in pleasure, superstition, Idolatry, false
worshippings, and all other lettes whereby my people are hindered from coming
to me. Verse. 15.
For though I dwell high in heaven, I will not despise the humble and contrite
heart. I will not be *long angry with poor and troubled consciences, Psalm.
102. b. 9.
but with the spirit of my comfort will I relieve them. Verse. 16.
I will not strive with them for ever, I know their wickedness, I made their
spirit or soul, and enclosed it in that brickle body. They are not hable
therefore to abide my displeasure. Verse. 17.
I am wroth with them for the time, and punish them for their covetousness and
other offenses, Psalm. 88. e. 33
not to confound them, but to the end that they should forsake them. But so
corrupt are they, that they go on still in the ways of their own hearts and
will not obey. Verse. 18.
Therefore I might justly destroy them, but I will not, I will prevent them
with my mercy, and I will bring them into the way again, and direct them with
my spirit, I will *restore them to comfort, Deuteronomy. 32. f. 39. 1. Sam. 2. a. 6.
Verse. 19.
and make glad those that be sorrowful in their behalf. I will work the
fruits of praise and thanksgiving by the mouth of preachers, that shall
denounce peace and comfort to all, as well those that be far of as those that
be nigh, as well to Jew as Gentile, and of the Jews as well to them that are
captive abroad, as to them that are in their country at home. Verse. 20. 21.
But the wicked, and they that do not believe, shall have no peace, no
quietness, no comfort, but perpetual torment and anguish of mind, so that
their consciences shall be like the Sea tossed with waves and surges.

The fourth Sunday after the Epiphanie at Evening prayer.
Esaias. 58. Cry now as loud as thou can, leave not of, A lift up thy voice
like a trumpet, Ezech. 3. c. 14.
and show my people their offenses, and the house of Jacob their sins.

2 For they seek me daily, and will know my ways, even as it were a people
that did right, and had not forsaken the statutes of their God: they ask of me
concerning right judgment, and will be nie unto God.

3 Wherefore fast we (say they) and thou see it not? Math. 9. d. 14.
we put our lives to straytnesse, and thou regardest it not?

4 Behold when ye fast, Esaias. 1. b.
your lust remains still, for ye do no less violence to your debtors: lo,
ye fast to strife and debate, and to smite with your fist without mercy: now
ye shall not fast thus, that your voice might be heard above.

5 Think ye this fast pleases me, Zach. 7. a. 5.
that a man should chasten himself for a day? and to hang down his head like
a bulrush, and to lie upon the earth in an hearie cloth? Should that be called
fasting, or a day that pleases the Lord?

6 Does not this fasting rather please me, Deuteronomy. 15. a. 3
That thou lose Eze. 18. b. 16. Math. 25. c. 35
7 To deal thy bread to the hungry, and to bring the poor wandering home
into thy house? when thou see the naked that thou cover him, and hide not thy
self from thine own flesh. Luke 11. d. 41.
8 Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thy health flourishe
right shortly: righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord
shall embrace thee. Prou. 21. b.
9 Then if thou call, the Lord shall answer thee, if thou criest, he shall
say, Here I am: yea if thou layest away from thee thy burdens, and hold thy
fingers, and ceassest from ungracious talking? Zach. 7. b. 9. Math. 5. b. 7
10 If thou have compassion upon the hungry, and refreshest the troubled
soul: then shall thy ^^ht spring out in the darkness, and thy darkness
shall be as the noone day. 11 The Lord shall ever be thy guide, John. 4. c. 14.
and satisfy the desire of thine heart in the Esaias. 56. a. 2.
13 Yea if thou turn thy feet from the sabbath, (thine own) words:

14 Then shall thou have thy pleasure in the Lord, and I will carry thee hie
above the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for the
Lords own mouth has so promised.

The Exposition upon the.lviij. Chapter of Esaias.
Cry now as loud as thou can, and leave not of, lift up thy voice, etc.
Verse. 1.
THe Prophet in this Chapter recites and tells, as it were, even from the
mouth of God himself, the words that he spoke unto him against the Hypocrisy
and other wickedness of his people. Cry, says he, as loud as thou can,
and cease not, deal not coldely and faintly with them, 1. Tim. 5. d. 20 2.
Tim. 4. a. 2. Ier. 48. b. 10
but * vehemently, earnestly, yea, and continually. For of all other,
Hypocrites that stand in opinion of their own justice, are most * difficultly
reclaymed, Io. 9. g. 40.
and most hardly brought to the acknowledging and confessing of their own
wickedness, without which they can never truly repent. Verse. 2.
They will see me good and godly, they will pretend to seek me daily, and to
know and understand my ways, they will ask and desire to learn right
judgment, as though they were in deed good people, and had not forsaken me
their Lord God: Verse. 3.
But all is but hypocrisy and dissimulation. For wherein do they put their
trust in time of my plague and scourge that I send upon them? or how think
they to procure their reconciliation unto my favor again? By confessing their
sins and flying to my mercy as they should do? No, no, but in their works
of Hypocrisy. Wherefore (say they) do we fast, torment, and punish our
selves with straitness of life, and thou do not see it nor regard it? As
though their outward Fasting, or going in hear and sackcloth were a thing so
worthy in my sight, as in respect thereof I should deliver them. Verse. 4.
Fasting is good, if it be used as an outward testimony of that* earnest
repentance and sorrow for your sins, Joel. 2. c. 12. Jonas. 3. b. 5
that inwardly is in deed in your hearts. But if you trust in the worthiness
thereof, To. 9. g. 31. 32.
and think * thereby to deserve my favor, it is wicked and abominable in my
sight. Your fast is a fast of hypocrisy. For in the very day of your fasting,
the lust and affection of your own will does still continue, and you * follow
your suit, strife and contention against your poor brother and creditour,
Math. 12. a. 7.
even for a small trifle, as egrely, fiercely, and cruelly as ever you did, as
though you fasted to show fierceness and violence, and not to use mildness
and mercy. Think you this fasting can please me when you go hanging down
your heads with presence of sorrow and holiness, Verse. 5.
and in your hearts have nothing but fierceness and cruelty?

Does not this Fasting rather please me, That thou lose the wicked bands,
etc. Verse. 6
After God has discovered the hypocrisy of his people, he now shows what ye
right Fast is, that he delights in? and what the true means is to procure
his Favor, which he notes in two points. Esa. 1. e. 17 Mich. 6. c. 8.
The one, that they use * clemency toward their Creditours, and ease them of
the wicked bonds of usury and extortion, wherein they have wrapped them: and
take from them the heavy burdens and yokes by which they do oppress them,
and drive them oftentimes to sell lands, goods, and all that ever they have,
and to leave wife and children in most miserable beggerie. Verse. 7.
The other point is mercy and * liberality to the poor and needy, Luc. 14.
c. 13 1. John. 3. c. 17. 1. Tim. 6. d. 18. Tob. 4. b. 7.
and to such as be in affliction or trouble any way, whom to the uttermost of
their power with their substance they ought to relieve: considering that they
are their own flesh, and creatures of the same God which has given them
abundance. Under these are contained all the works of mercy.

Then shall the light break forth as the morning, Verse. 8. 9.
and thy health flourish, etc. Now follows ample and great rewards,
wherewith they shall be blessed that use these works of mercy. First, their
Light, that is, their felicie and good success shall break out and be evident
to all men. Secondly, their health and good estate shall flourishe and increase
daily more and more. Thirdly their Justice shall have good *testimony and
favor before God: Psalm. 111. b. 8.
who of his mercy will accept it. Fourthly, God shall embrace them, and save
them harmless in * all their necessities. Tob. 4. b. 10. Psalm. 40. a. 1.
Esaias. 65. d. 24.


Fifthly, God will hear their prayers, and be * ready whenever they call upon
him.

If thou layest away from them thy burdens, Verse. 9.
and hold thy fingers, etc. That the things may more deeply sink into
memory, he repeateth again the same works of mercy, and in other words the
same promises of reward. Verse. 10.
In the mids of thy Darkness, that is, of thy Adversity, thy Light, that
is, thy Felicity shall spring up, and thy adversity shall be turned into
felicity.

The Lord shall always be thy guide, thy Patron and Defender* Verse. 11.
In the time of drought and scarcity he shall plentifully satisfy thy hearts
desire, and fill thy bones with marrow and make thee strong. Thou shall ever
Prosper and spring like a new watered Garden, and like a Fountain that is
never dry* Verse. 12.
Yea, thou shall so grow in wealth as thou shall not only advance thine own
decayed family and kindred, but to the benefit of the common weal repair
Places and Ways wasted and fallen to ruin, and so have the name of the
restorer of thy stock and Country.

Yea, if thou turn thy feet, from the sabbath, Verse. 13. 14.
so that thou do not the thing, etc. As the Jews fasted, so did they keep
the Sabbath day, that is, Externally, and in way of hypocrisy, not rightly,
and as God appointed. Therefore he does here also teach them the true manner of
solemnising his holy day. Exodus 35. a. 1.
The * Sabbath was ordained that they should learn to do she will of God,
Exodus 31. c. 14. Leuit. 16. g. 30 Esaias. 56. a. 2 Act. 13. e. 14. 1. Cor. 16. a.
2.
to walk in his way, and to * hear and read his word. But they solowed their
own will, they walked in their own way, they harkened to their own devises,
wherefore, says God, if thou follow not thine own will, if thou walk not in
thine own ways, if thou harken not to thine own devises, but give glory
unto my name: then shall thou keep an acceptable Sabbath in my sight, then
shall thou through peace and quietness of conscience delight in the Lord.
Then will Iaduance thee above other kingdoms of the earth. Then will I feed
the with the fruits of Jacobs heretage, that is, with all those blessings that
are to come by the promised ^eede and Savior of the World.

The 5. Sunday after the Epiphanie, at Morning prayer.
Esaias. 59. Behold the Lords hand is not so shortened that it Esaias. 50. a. 2.
Number. 11. a. 2. Iere. 5. b.
neither is his ear so stopped that it may not hear. 2 But your misdeedes
have separated you from your God, and your sins hide his face from you, that
he hears you not.

3 For your hands are defiled with blood, Esaias. 1. d. 15.
and your fingers with unrighteousness: your lips speak leasings, and your
tongue sets out wickedness.

4 No man regards righteousness, and no man judges truly: every man hops
in vain things, and imagines deceit, conceyueth weariness, Job. 15. d. 35.
Psalm. 7. b. 15.
and brings forth evil.

5 They breed Cockatrice eggs, and weaue the Spiders web, who so eats of
their eggs, dies: but if one tread upon them, there comes up a Serpent.

6 Their web makes no cloth, and they may not cover them with their labors:
their deeds are the deeds of wickedness, and the work of robbery is in
their hands.

7 Their feet run to evil, Prou. 1. c. 16. Psalm. 5. d. 6 Romans 13. b. 15.
and they make haste to shed innocent blood: their counsels are wicked
counsels, harm and destruction are in their ways.



9 And this is the cause that equity is so far from us, and that
righteousness comes not nigh us: we look for light, Deuteronomy. 28. d. 29 John.
12. c. 40.
lo it is darkness: for the morning shine, see, we walk in the dark. 10 We
grope like the blind upon the wall, we grope even as one that has none eyes,
we stumble at the noone day, as though it were toward night in the falling
places, like men that are half dead.

11 We rear all like Bears, and mourn still like Doves: we look for
equity, but there is none: for health, but it is far from us. 12 For our
offenses are many before thee,

13 ( Namely) transgress and dissemble against the Lord and fall away from
our God, using presumpteous and ^rayterous imaginations, and casting false
matters in our hearts.

14 And therefore is equity gone aside, Ose. 4. a. 1.
and righteousness stands far of, truth is fallen down in the street,
and the thing that is plain and open, may not be showed.

15 Yea the truth is taken away, and he that refrayneth himself from evil,
must be spoiled: when the Lord saw th^s, (...) displeased him fore that there
was no equity.

16 He saw also that there was no man righteous, and he wondered that there was
no man to help him: wherefore he held him by his own power, and he sustained
him by his own righteousness. Ephe. 6. b. 11 1. These. 5. a. 8.
17 He put righteousness upon him for a breast plate, he set the helmet of
health upon his head: he put on wrath in the stead of clothing, and took
jealousy about him for a cloak. 18 Even as when a man goes forth wrathfully
to recompense his enemies, and to be avenged of his adversaries, he will
recompense and reward the Islands.

19 They shall fear the name of the Lord from the rising of the sun, and
his majesty unto the going down of the same: for he will come as a violent
water stream which the wind of the Lord has moved.

20 But unto Sion there shall come a redeemer, and unto them in Jacob that
turn from wickedness, Romans 11. d. 26 Psalm. 13. a.
says the Lord. 21 I will make this covenant with them (says the

The Exposition upon the lix. of Esaias.
Behold, the Lords hand is not so shortened, Verse. 1. 2.
that it cannot help, etc. IT is no doubt but the Prophet does in all this
Chapter answer the cogitations of the wicked hypocrites mentioned in the
Chapter before: which did impute the calamity that God had sent upon them,
not to their own sins, 3. Reg. 8. d. 35. Judith. 5. c. 18. Lament. 3. e. 42
as they * should have done, and so been moved to repentance, but to the great
severity and sharpness of almighty GOD toward them. Therefore the Prophet
here shows that God lacks in himself neither Power, nor Will to help
them, but that he is hindered and stayed by their naughtiness and wicked life:
which at large he recites. Verse. 3. Esaias. 1. b. 15.
First he charge them with * Blood, Cruelty, violence and Extortion, which
is to be thought to have been both in Magistrates and private persons. Esa. 9.
b. 15. 16
Secondly, with * untruth, Falshoode and Lying, as well in doctrine by their
Priests and false Prophets, as by other in contractes and bargains. Thirdly,
Verse. 4.
with unrighteousness, and Corrupt judgment through hatred, love or briberie.
Fourthly, that they put their trust in vanity, crafty devises, and wicked
doings.

They breed Cokatrice Eggs, Verse. 5.
and weaue the Spiders web, who so eats, etc. By this figurative Speech he
reproves the studies, endeavors, and works of the wicked, which all are
either as Cockatrice Eggs * poisonous and hurtful, Psalm. 13. a. 5 Romans 3. c.
13.
either as Spiders Webbes under a fair show, Vain, and unprofitable. If a man
use their counsayles, thinking them to be good, they shall work him
destruction, even as the Eggs of a Cockatrice to him that eats them. If a man any way touch them, he shall be in danger of the poisonous infection
that comes of them. Therefore the best way is to shun their Company. Verse. 6.
The Spiders webbes although they be finely and artificially wrought, yet serve
they to no use, neither can men make any garment of them wherewith to cover
them from the weather. So the counsels of the wicked, though they seem
never so finely devised, Ier. 49. b. 7.
yet are they * unprofitable, and will help a man nothing at all.

Their deeds are the deeds of wickedness, Verse. 6. 7.
and the work of robbery, etc. By these words that follow, it may well be
gathered what he meant by ye former figurative Speech. For, Psalm. 13. a. 7 Prou.
1. b. 11
he says, Their counsels are wicked counsels, * harm and destruction is
in their ways. This is the plain effect of the Cockatrice Eggs.

But the way of peace they know not, Verse. 8.
in their goings is no equity, etc. They hate peace and quietness, and be
altogether given to Strife, Contention, Variance, Injury, and violence. Yea,
all their devises and ways are so crooked and overthwart, that they tend to
trouble and business, so that he that follows them shall never be quiet.

And this is the cause that equity is so far from us, Verse. 9.
and that, etc. Hitherto the Prophet has painted out the vices and
wickedness of the hypocrites, that they might the better understand for how
grievous causes God was displeased with them, and that the cause was in them
selves, and not in Gods hard dealing. Therefore he now shows, how great
punishments by Gods just judgment, do light upon them for the same. Iudic. 1.
a. 7. 1. Reg. 15. g. 33. Colos. 3. d. 25.
First that as they have * used other, so they are now by their enemies
oppressed with violence and injury, and the righteousness and help of God is
far from them, and does not deliver them. Secondly, that where through their
hypocritical fasting without repentance, they looked for light, that is, for
felicity and the brightness of Gods help and comfort, they have *
darkness, Eccle. 11. b. 16.
that is, adversity and certain token of his heavy displeasure. Verse. 10.
Yea they are wrapped in so great trouble, calamity and misery, as they are
utterly astonished and at their wits end, and cannot tell what to devise to
help themselves, but are as men blind and in great darkness, that grope by
the walls to get out of a maze or intricate place, Verse. 11.
and can find no way. Thirdely, that, when they see themselves so beset with
misery as they can with no shift ease themselves: they sometimes * break out
for sorrow, and roar like a Bear, Genesis 27. e 34.
sometime they lament and mourn as a Dove, and look for succor and help at
the goodness of God, and yet it is far from them. For seeing they have
deceived the expectation of God in looking that they should repent: meruail
though he * frustrate their hope again in looking for equity and goodness at
his hand. Job. 8. b. 13.


For our offenses are many before thee, Verse. 12.
and our sins testify, etc. The Prophet in way of lamentable complaint
confesses the manifold and great offenses of the people, which yet they
could not be brought in themselves to acknowledge. Verse. 13.
Namely that they departed from the Lord, and rebelled against him with
traiterous imaginations, and would not obey his word. That they used
falsehoode and dissimulation in their hearts, when they spoke fair with their
tongues. Verse. 14.
That Judgment and righteousness was gone far from them, because truth and
equity was clean overthrown, and could take no place among them. Verse. 15.
Yea right and honesty was so hateful, that he which would, upon the fear of
God, refrain himself from evil, and not deal in wickedness as they did,
Genesis 19. b. 9.
was in * danger to be spoiled. Which great enormitie was unto the Lord very
unpleasant.

He saw also that there was no man righteous, Verse. 16.
and he wondered, etc. As the Prophet has showed before, that God of great
and just cause had plagued his people: So now he declares that of his own
good and merciful motion, without the help or entreatie of any man, he is
inclined to deliver them, and does prepare, and as it were arm himself to be
revenged on their enemies. God, says the Prophet, seeing and wondering that
among all his people there was not one worthy the name of a righteous and just
man, that might help and entreat for them, of his own strength and goodness
takes upon him to deliver them. Verse. 17.
And he armeth himself with righteousness as a Breast plate, with health, as
a Helmet, with wrath and displeasure as a coat, with zeal and jealousy
toward his people as a cloak, and so goes on as a mighty Prince, to be
revenged on his enemies, in so terrible manner, that all the parts of the
Earth, Verse. 18.
even the very Islandes and those that be furthest of shall tremble and wonder
at it, yea, and submit themselves unto the majesty of his name. When the
Prophet says, that They shall fear the name of the Lord from the rising of
the Sun, Verse. 19.
to the going down of the same; Diverse do interpret it to be spoken of the
coming of the Gentiles, and all the parts of the Earth to the true knowledge
of God, when that he should send his Messiah and Savior, to subdue, not only
worldely adversaries, Colos. 1. b. 13
but especially *Satan, and all the spiritual enemies of his people, which are
the stirrers of all trouble and affliction against his Church. And in deed in
the promise of every great and notable deliverance, the Prophet uses to end
it with applying of the same, to the deliverance that should be made by the
promised seed, and Savior of the world. 2. Cor. 1. d. 20
*For in him and by him all particular promises took their effect.

But unto Sion there shall come a redeemer, Verse. 20.
and unto them in Jacob, etc. As this may be well understood of the
particular deliverance from the misery and affliction, whereof he has spoken
before: So it is especially meant of the general deliverance and restoring that
should be made by Messiah. Romans 11. d. 26.
For Paul Romans 11. may seem so to interpret it, although in words he be
somewhat diverse, following in deed Septuagin. interpretes. The redeemer of
Sion and of those Israelites, that turn from their wickedness and cleave unto
the Lord is Christ Jesus, who redeemeth them from Sin, Error, Idolatry and
*all manner of ungodliness, Psalm. 129. b. 8. Titus. 2. c. 14.
wherewith they were before overwhelmed.

I will make this covenant with them (says the Lord:) Verse. 21.
My spirit that is, etc. This covenant God makes with all the faithful, not
only of the house of Jacob, (...)
but of all other Nations also, and of his whole Church, that is, that the
grace of his holy Spirit, and the truth of his Word and Gospel, Esaias. 54. b.
10. Iere. 31. f. 33 Heb. 10. c. 16. Psalm. 88. d. 29.
shall *never depart from them. Wheresoever therefore the Spirit of God is,
and the truth of his Word, there is his true Church, and contrariwise
whersoeuer the Church is, there is the truth of his Word, and the grate of his
Spirit. And where his Word is rejected, and man's Devises followed, there is
not his true Church, though they glory in the name of the Church never so
much. This is a notable commendation of the ministry of Gods Word and
preaching of his Gospel, being a portion of Gods covenant with his elect, and
an infallible token of his true Church.

The 5. Sunday after the Epiphanie, at Morning prayer.
Esaias. 64. that the malicious might boil away) as the water does upon the
fire: whereby thy name might be known among thine enemies, and that the
Gentiles might tremble before thee. 3 When thou wroughtest wondrous strange
works, we looked not for them: thou came down, and the hills melted at thy
presence.

4 For ^ite the beginning of the world it has not been heard or per^^y^ed,
neither has any eye seen another God 1. Cor. 2. a. 9.
(...) thee, which duest so much for them that put their trust in thee. 5 Thou
helpest him that does right with cheerfulness, and them that think upon thee
in thy ways: but (...), thou have (...) angry, for we offended, and have been
ever in sin, Romans 3. d. 24. Psalm. 14. b. 11.
though the world have cleaued to them, yet shall we be saved. 6 We are all as
an unclean thing, and all our righteousness are as filthy rags: we fall
euersec^^^^ as the leaf, for our sins carry us away like the

8. But (...), Romans 9. c. 20.
O Lord, thou father of ours, we ar^ thy clay, and thou act our potter, and
we all are the work of thy I. and Be not to sore displeased O Lord, and keep
not our offenses to long in thy remembrance: but consider that we all are thy
people. Psa. 79. a. 9. Iere. 10. d. 24 Mich. 3. c. 12.
10 The Cities of thy Sanctuary lie waste, Sion is a wilderness, and
Jerusalem a desert.

11 Our holy house which is our beauty where our fathers praised thee is brent
up: yea, all our commodities and pleasures are wasted away. 12 Will thou not be
entreated O Lord, for all this will thou hold thy peace, and scourge us so
sore?

The Exposition upon the. 64. Chapter of Esaias.
O that thou would cleave the heavens in sunder and come down, Verse. 1
etc. THis Chapter is a parcel of that matter that was contained in the
former. For from the seventh verse of the.lxiij. Chapter unto the end of
this, is a Prayer made by Esaias for ye people, to use in time of their
grievous affliction, Iere. 13. c. 18. Judith. 8. c. 14. Dan. 9. a. 3
in which they are taught with how great *humbleness and sorrow of heart they
should confess their sins, for which, that Plague was sent. Secondly, at
whose hands they should look for deliverance: Esaias. 43. b. 11. Ose. 13. b. 4.
Math. 11. d. 28 Psalm. 77. a. 7.
that is, *at Gods hand alone. Thirdly, how they should comfort themselves and
*strengthen their faith, with the Memory of those wonderful acts, that God had
done for them and their fathers before time. In this place they break out to
an earnest wish. Oh, say they, that thou would cleave the heavens in
sunder, and come down, when our fathers were oppressed in Aegipt, though they
looked for no such goodness at thy hand, yet thou did vouchsafe to come
*down from heaven to deliver them, Exodus 3. b. 8.
and that with so great Majesty and Terror through thy wonderful works, that
thy name was known and dreadful, not only to thine own people *but also to
thine enemies, Iosu. 2. b. 9. Exodus 13. d. 18. Psa. 77. f. 51.
whom thou did mightily consume. In the *Desert also thou wast continually
with them to defend them. And when thou purposedst to publish thy law unto us,
thou came down from Heaven with so great Majesty of thunder and lightning,
that as water boyleth and consumes over the fire: so did the Mountain * Sinai
seem to melt away being in a great smoke with thy presence. Exodus 19. d. 18.
Deuteronomy. 4. b. 11.
O that thou would now do the like in working our deliverance, that thy
name might be known, and thy Majesty feared, even among the myghtiest of
thine enemies, etc.

The rest of the Chapter following is plain and easy to be understood.

The Sunday called Septuagesima at Morning prayer.
Genes. 1. IN the beginning God created heaven and earth. ^ 2 And the earth was
without form, Act. 14. c. 15. Psalm. 33. a. 6. Eccle. 18. a. 1. Heb. 11. a. 3.
and (...) boyde: and darkness ( was) upon the face of the deep, and the
spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. 3 And God said. Let there be
light: and and there was light. 4 And God saw the light that it was good: and
God divided the light from the darkness.

5 And God called the light day, and the darkness night: and the evening and
the morning were the first day.

6 And God said, Let there be a Firmament between the waters, Psalm. 136. a. 6
and let it make a division between waters and waters. 7 And God made the
Firmament, and set a division between the waters which ( were) under the
firmament, Psalm. 33. b. 8
and the waters that ( were) above the firmament: and it was so. 8 And God
called the firmament heaven: and the evening and the morning were the second
day.

9 And God said, Psalm. 148. a. 4
Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together into one place, and let
the dry land appear: and it was so. Psalm. 33. a. 7
10 And God called the dry land the earth, and the gathering together of the
waters called he the seas: and God saw that it was good.

11. And God said, Let the earth bring forth budde and green herb apt to
seed, and fruitful trees, yielding fruit after his kind, which has seed
in it self upon the earth: and it was so. 12 And the earth brought forth
green herb apt to seed after his kind, and tree yelding fruit, which had
seed it in self after his kind. 13 And God saw that it was good. And the
evening and the morning were the third day

14 And God said, Psalm. 136. b. 7. Deuteronomy. 4. b. 10.
Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven, that they may divide the day
and the night, and let them be for signs and seasons, and for days and years.

15 And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven, that they may
give light upon the earth: and it was so.

16 And God made two great lights: a greater light to rule the day, and a
less light to rule the night, and ( he made) stars also. 17 And God set them
in the Firmament of the heaven, to shine upon the earth.

18 And to rule the day and night, and to make difference between the light
and the darkness: and God saw that it was good. 19 And the evening and
morning were the fourth day. Iere. 31. d.
20 And God said, Let the waters bring forth moving creature that has life,
and foul that may fly upon the earth in the open firmament of heaven.

12 And God created great whales, and every living and moving creature, which
the waters brought forth after their kind, and every fethered foul after their
kind: and God saw that it was good. 22 And God blessed them, saying, Be
fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters of the sea, and let foul
multiply in the earth. 23 And the evening and morning were the fifth day. 24
And God said, Let the earth bring forth living creature after his kind,
cattle, worm, and beasts of the earth after his kind: and it was so.

25 God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after his
kind, and every thing that creeps upon the earth after his kind: and God
saw that it was good.

26 God said, Colos. 3. b.
Let us make man in our Image, after our likeness, and let them have rule of
the fish of the sea, and of the foul of the air, and of cattle, and of all
the earth, and of every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth.

27 So God created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him,
1. Cor. 11. a. 7. Math. 19. a. 4. Eccle. 17. a. 1
male and female created he them. 28 And God blessed them, and God said unto
them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenishe the earth, and subdue it, and
have dominion of the fish of the sea, and foul of the air, and of every
living thing that moves upon the earth. 29 And God said, Behold, I have
given you every herb bearing seed, which is in the upper face of all the
earth, and every tree in the which is the fruit of a tree bearing seed, (
that) they may be meat unto you.

30 To every beast of the earth also, and so every bird of the air, and to
every such thing that creeps upon the earth, which does live, I have given
every green herb for meat: and it was. 31 And God saw every thing that he
had made: and behold, it was exceeding good. And the evening and the morning
were the sixth day.

The Exposition upon the first Chapter of Genesis.
In the beginning GOD created heaven and earth, Verse. 1.
etc. THis book is called Genesis, because in the very first entrance thereof
by the course of six days work is declared the Beginning, Creation, and as
it were, the first Nativity of heaven and earth, and all things therein
contained, by the mighty word and wisdom of God made and framed of Nothing.
Which the Spirit of God moved his faithful servant Moses to do, thereby as
well to refell that general and gross error of the Idolatrous Gentiles
throughout the whole world, which gave themselves over to the * worship and
service, To. 1. c. 23. 25. Esaias. 45. a. 7. Psalm. 148. c. 12 Psalm. 82. d. 17
Iosu. 2. b. 11.
either of common and base creatures, either of false and vainly devised Gods:
As also to *show that the God of Israel was the Only, True, and Almighty God,
maker of Heaven and of Earth, and all the parts thereof.

In that he says: In the beginning God made heaven and earth, etc. we have to
learn, First that the world is * not of everlasting Continuance, 2. Pet. 3.
b. 10.
as some vain Philosophers have taught, Heb. 1. c. 11.
but that being made by God, certainly it had a beginning, and even as
certainly shall in due time have an end. Psa. 102. d. 26 27.
As it is said, Psalm. 102. In the beginning, O Lord, thou lay dest the
foundation of the earth, and the heavens be the works of thy fingers, They
shall perish, but thou shall continue for ever, etc. Secondly, that it was not
made of it Self, by Chance, or otherwise, as Democritus dreamed, but by the
workmanship of some other beside it self. Thirdly, that it was made by God,
that thereby we might be admonished of his great Wisdom, Power, and goodness
toward Mankind, to whose use principally these things might seem to be
framed. Fourthly, that it was made of nothing, and therefore we may not Imagine
as some wickedly have done, that there was a Matter whereof the world was made
coeternall with God himself before all Beginning.

And here it is to be wished that all Christian hearts would enter into a
perfect Consideration of this Work of God in Creating of the world, so that
when they looked up into heaven and saw the Sun, the Moon, the Planets, the
Stars, and all the furniture thereof keeping their orders and courses, they
would think earnestly with themselves, that they saw the marvelous
workmanship of God their heavenly Father, Maker, and Creator of all things.
And when they consider the Air, the Water, the Earth, and all things therein
contained in their kinds and places and offices distincted, that they would
Remember the same was made by the same our God and gracious Lord to the use of
us mortal men. By this means should they discende from the faith of their
Creation, Sap. 11. d. 25 1. Pet. 5. b. 7. Sap. 6. b. 8. Psalm. 35. b. 7
to the faith and belief of Gods divine * Providence and tender Love and care
that he bears toward mankind, which in all afflictions is the most assured
stay and comfort. Esaias. 12. b. 4 Psalm. 8. a. 4. Psalm. 104. a. 2.
This did David to his great consolation, as well in the eight Psalm, as in
the. 104. and many other.

And the spirit of GOD moved upon the face of the earth, Verse. 2
etc. The confused Heap of heaven and earth was without shape, imperfect, and
dark, and yet not utterly dead, but was endued with the strength of Gods
spirit, and so made lively to continue unto the worlds end.

And GOD said, Let there be light: Verse. 3
and there was light. We may not here conceive that God has any corporal
Voice, or such manner of Speech as does proceed by tongue, and lips, from
mortal men. For to Speak, in God, is nothing, but with an assured and
effectual will, to determine with himself, and to do that he has
determined. We have here to learn also that all things were made by the
mighty power of Gods word, that is to say, by the Wisdom, Purpose, and
Counsel of God, which was Christ Jesus, the second person in Trinity, as
saint John does expound it in his Gospel. In the beginning (says he) was the
Word, John. 1. a. 1.
and the Word was with God, and God was that Word. The same was in the
beginning with God, and all things were made by it. etc.

And God saw the light that it was good: Verse. 4.
and God divided the light, etc. This manner of Judgment God gives of all
things that he made, he says not, God saw that they were pleasant,
beautiful, and fair, but that they were * Good. Eccle. 39. e. 34.
Whereby we may learn that God did not so much respect his own glory in the
fairness of his works, as he did the benefit and and Commodity of Mankind
to whose use he made them.

Let there be a Firmament between the waters, Verse. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.
and let it make a division, etc. Let there be a Firmament, that is, as the
Hebrew speaks. A Stretching out or a Setting abroad between waters and
waters. Unto this manner of speaking the Scripture often alludeth, as Esaias. 42.
Esaias. 42. a. 5.
He that made the heavens and spread them abroad, Esaias. 40. e. 22
etc. And in the 40. Chapter. He spreads out the heavens as a covering, he
stretches them out as a Tent to dwell in, etc. Psalm. 104. a. 3.
And Psalm 104. He stretches out the heavens as a Curtain. Wherefore it may
well be gathered that this Firmament is nothing but a large Stretched out space
between waters and waters, between waters above, and waters beneath, and such
as we see between the clouds which are the upper waters, and the Sea and
Ryuers which are the nether waters by Gods ordinance gathered into their
appointed places. All that is above us is divided into two parts, the one
called Ether, which is the upper part of the Firmament wherein the Stars and
Planets are, the other called the Air, which is again divided into three
parts. The upper Region next the Firmament, The middle Region where the
Clouds and upper waters by Gods providence are stayed, to the great benefit
of the world, and The nether part left for the commodity of Gods Creatures to
live and breath in. The upper waters are reserved as well to make the earth *
Fruitful, Act. 14. c. 17.
by sending them down in due season according to his gracious providence, as
also by his justice in way of punishment to work the Plague of Sinful men, as
we evidently see in the example of the * general Deluge, Gene. 7. d. 21.
and in sending unseasonable weathering to take from us the fruits of the
earth. Sap. 10. a. 4
Eccl. 40. b. 10


Let the earth bring forth budde and grene herb apt to seed, Verse. 11. 12
and fruitful, etc. When we see these fair and manifold Commodities of the
earth, the green Grass, the bewtifull Flowers and herbs, the Fruits of
Trees and Grain to the singular benefit of man and beast: we must not think
that the same comes by course of Nature only, but by the singular Providence
of God sending the same to the Relief of his creatures. For the sweet comfort
of this place, read Psalm. 104. Psa. 104 b. 14
He causes grass to grow for cattle, and herbs for the use of men, that he
may bring forth Food out of the earth, both Wine that makes glad the heart
of man, and Oil to make him have a cheerful countenance, and also Bread to
strengthen men's hearts. God has made not only fruits of one kind: but of
Innumerable sorts, that we might thereby understand the bountiful goodness
and riches of his mercies toward us.

Let there be lights in the Firmament of heaven, Verse. 14. etc.
that they may divide, etc. Et sint in signa, etc. The use and benefit of the
Moon, Sun, and Planets, is not only to give light unto the world, but to
make distinctions of Times and seasons, as Summer, VVinter, Autumn, and the
Spring, also Years, Months, VVekes, days, and hours, which distinction much
serves to the use and commodity of man's life.

And God made the beast of the earth, Verse. 25.
and every thing that creeps, etc. Hereby we have to learn that the
Providence of God stretches not only to Man, Beast, Fish, Foul and such
like, but to the very smallest things, and of least estimation, as Worms,
Flees, Fleas, and other Vermin whatsoever: be they in man's fight never so
contemptible. For God uses the same at his pleasure, either to the benefit,
or to the punishment of Mankind, as it may very well * appear by sundry of
the Plagues of Aegipt, 1. Exodus 8. a. 3 16. 18. 19.
wherein he used these things for his instruments.

And God said, Verse. 26.
let us make man in our Image, after our likeness, etc. After God had created
and made perfect all the Furniture of Heaven and earth, and by his wisdom
marvelously distincted each thing in his kind, place, and office, he lastly
comes to the Making of mankind, as that thing unto whose use principally al
other his creatures might seem to be framed. That he in the use of them might
understand the great goodness of his Lord and Maker toward him, and for the
same yield unto him true Worship and glory. Concerning Man, he notes here
briefly 3. things, his Creation, his Dignity, his Blessing and increase.

Of his Creation it will be spoken in the next chapter more particularly. Of
his Dignity above all other Creatures, this is one evident testimony, that he
says not, let Man be made, as he said before of other things. Let there be a
light: Let there be a Firmament etc. But to declare unto us, that it was a
Work of greater worthynesse, He as it were, calls in co^sultation his
Wisdom, that is, the second person in Trinity, and his Virtue or VVoorking
Power, that is, his Holy spirit; and says, Let us make man. So that in the
making of Man, is a more perfect token given of the Three Persons in Trinity,
then in the Creating of any other part of the world. And further to declare
the Dignity of man, Genesis 5. a. 1.
He was made according to the * Image of God: Colos. 3. b. 10
whereby we may not think, Genesis 9. a. 6. 1.
as some wicked heretics have done, that God has a like proportion of body,
Cor. 11. b. 7
as we see man to have. Eccle. 17. a. 6.
For that is not the Image or likeness that is here spoken of, but as God was
Wise, Just, Merciful, Good, Innocent, Holy, Immortal, so was Man made by
God, wise, just, merciful, good, innocent, holy, immortal: and to express a
more perfect likeness he was made of power, and appointed Lord and Ruler over
all the other Creatures of the world. This Image, by the fall of Adam was
almost clean blotted out, 1. Cor. 15. f. 45
and restored again by the * second Adam Christ Jesus to that perfectness that
this frail and mortal life might bear, carrying continually about with us in
our bosoms the *stings of our corruption, To. 7. d. 23. 24
lyricking us forward still to ungodliness. The blessing of increase and
multiplying that God gives unto Man; declares that he was made Male, and
Female, to the end that by lawful procreation they might fulfill the earth,
and raise up a large and great Church or congregation of holy Creatures, to
give Honor and glory to their Lord and maker. Wherefore it cannot be thought
that Marriage and the lawful joining of Man and Woman is an evil or an
unclean thing, but the lawful and good ordinance of God himself. And
therefore well says Saint Paul. Heb. 13. a. 4.
Honorable in all persons is Wedlock and the bed undefiled, but
VVhooremaysters and Adulterers God will judge.

God saw every thing that he had made and behold they were exceeding, Verse.
31.
etc. This Judgment of God, that here he gives upon his works, pronouncing
them to be all very Good, ought to be unto us a Rule that we presume not to
speak or think otherwise of them, and show our selves therein unthankful to
our God and maker. If there be either fruits or herbs, or beasts that we
account and call Evil or Hurtful, it rises either of our Vnperfitnesse that
understand not the right use of them, or else of the Curse of God for the
Sin and fall of Adam, by which, as Man himself, so diverse other Creatures
are fallen from that Perfection in which they were first made by GOD, So that
the Sin of Man and not Gods creation is cause thereof.

The Sunday called Septuagesima at Evening prayer.
Genesis. 2. THus the heavens and earth were finished and all the host of
them. Exodus 20. b. 11
2. And in the seventh day God ended his work which he had made. Deuteronomy. 5. b.
14.
And the seventh day he rested from all his work which he had made. Heb. 4. b.
4.
3 And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he
had rested from al his work which God ordened to make. 4 These are the
generations of the heavens, and of the earth when they were created, in the
day when the Lord God made the earth and the heavens.

5 And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of
the field before it grew: For the Lord God had not ( yet) caused it to rain
upon the earth, neither ( was there) a man to till the ground.

6 But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the
ground. 1. Cor. 5. f. 45.
7 The Lord God also did shape man of the dust of the ground, and breathed
into his nosethrilles the breath of life, and man was a living soul.

8 And the Lord God planted a Garden eastwarde in Eden, and there he put the
man whom he had shapen.

9 Moreover, out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that was
fair to sight, and pleasant to eat: The tree of life in the midst of the
Garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil. 10 And out of Eden there
went forth a river to water the Garden, and from thence it was divided, and
became into four heads.

11 The name of the first is Pison, the same is it that compasse^h the whole
land of Hauilab, where there is gold.

12 And the gold of the land is very good. Eccle. 24. d
There is also Bdellium, and the Onix stone. 13 The name of the second river is
Gihon: the same is it that compasses the whole land of Ethiopia. 14 The name
of the third River is Hidekel, and it goes toward the east side of Assyrta:
and the fourth river is Euphrates. 15 And the Lord God took the man, and put
him into the garden of Eden, that be might work it, and keep it. 16 And the
Lord God commanded the man, saying, Eating, thou shall eat of every tree of
the garden. 17 But as touching the tree of knowledge of good And evil thou
shall not eat of it: For in what day so ever thou eatest thereof, thou shall
die the death.

18 And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone, I
will make him an help like unto him.

19 And so out of the ground the Lord God had shapen every beast of the
field, and every foul of the air, and; brought them unto man, that he might
see how he would call them: For likewise as man named every living thing, so
was the name thereof. 20 And the man gave names to all cattle, and foul of
the air, and to every beast of the field: but for man found he not an help
like unto him.

21 The Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept, and he
took one of his ribs, and closed up the place with flesh in stead thereof.

22 And the ribbe which the Lord God has taken from man, 1. Cor. 11. b. 9.
made he a woman, and brought her unto the man.

23 And man said, Math. 19. a. 5.
This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, Marc. 10. a. 7. 1.
she shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man. Cor. 11. a. 8.
24 For this cause shall man leave his father and his mother, Ephesians. 5. c.
and shall be joined with his wife: and they shall become one flesh. 25 And
they were both naked the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.

The Exposition upon the.ij. Chapter of Genesis.
Thus the heavens and earth was finished and all the host of them, Verse. 1.
etc. Seeing, that when Man was made, the whole world had his perfection and
ending, it may appear that all things by Gods goodness were made for man
and to his use: which consideration o^^ght to move men to be thankful unto
God for so great and inestimable Benefits, Math. 5. b. 16. 1.
and to * Cor. 10. g. 31
do all things to his Honor and glory, according to the end of their
Creation. For as the world was made for Man: So Man was created to set forth
the praise and glory of God. By this word Host he means the Furniture of
heaven and Earth, and the Multitude of all Gods creatures belonging to them
both. And therefore when God is often in Scripture called* The Lord of Hosts,
1. Reg. 1. a. 3.
it is meant he is the Lord and maker of all Creatures, Esaias. 1. f. 24
and has them all at his commandment either to defend his people, or to
work punishment upon his Enemies.

And the seventh day he rested from all the works that he made, Verse. 2.
etc. Very well says Augustine, God rested the seventh day from the work of
Creation, but he never Cease from the rule of his governance. For the same
God that in the beginning made Heaven and Earth, and all Creatures contained in
them, does now also continually Preserve, Maintain, and govern the same.
Therefore we are no (...) now daily bound to thank God for the Preservation
of his Creatures to our use, then we were at the beginning for Making of them.
We may not think that Creatures once made do preserve and prosper themselves
by a course of Nature only, but that it is the finger of God, and his gracious
Providence, that wo^^eth continually in them. Act. 17. f. 28.
By him, says Saint Paul, we have our Being, Heb. 1. a. 3.
we Live, and we Move. And to ye Hebr. Sustayning all things by the word of
his power.

And God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it: Verse. 3.
because, etc. There are 4. causes why God sanctified the seventh day. 1 The
first because he ceased from the making of any mo new Creatures. 2 The second,
for the Worthynesse of mankind, whose creation and making was the End of the
whole world.

3 The third, that it might be an institution and ordinance of a worship due
unto God on the behalf of Man, whereby he should set forth his praise and Glory,
and acknowledge his inestimable goodness toward him. 4 The fourth, that it
might be a Figure of Immortality, and of our eternal Rest with God in heaven
after the end of the world.

For the Lord God, had not yet caused it to rain upon the earth, Verse. 5.
etc. At the beginning, things that grew on the Earth were brought forth by
God without rain, and without labor of man's hand, but afterward God gives
in commandment, that Man should. Manure the Earth, and God did send Rain to
season and moist it. Wherefore Men must Labor and traueile, Plant and Sow,
and not look to eat the fruits of the Earth *in Idleness. 2. These. 3. c. 10
1.
And yet must he not so trust in his work and labor as though it could be of
any force, Tim. 5. c. 17
or work benefit unto him without the goodness of God in Seasoning the
Earth, and prospering his labors and traualles. The providence of God will have
both to go together, Man's painful labor, and Gods gracious working.

The Lord also did shape man of the dust of the Ground, Verse. 7.
etc. Here Moses returns again to the work of the sixth day, and expounds
now that he left unspoken before, that is, that God made the body of Man of
the dust of the Earth. He had before said that God did make Man according to
his own Image, which was the greatest Dignity that could be given unto Man,
But now least, by that pretense, he should be puffed up with Pride, he sets
before his eyes his Base and simple beginning, Job. 10. b. 9. Psalm. 102. c. 14
Genesis 18. d. 27. Sapi. 10. a. 2. Tob. 8. b. 8.
that he came of the * Dust of the Earth. And therefore has no cause to glory
in his own worthiness. And if he be any thing more than any other common
Creatures, that the Praise thereof is to be given to God alone.

Therefore to beat down the pride of Man's corrupt Nature, Eccle. 10. a. 9.
very well says Jesus Sirach. Why art thou so proud, O thou Dust and Ashes.

And the Lord God planted a Garden Eastwarde in Eden, Verse. 8. 9.
etc. In this that God did set Man in a Paradise or Garden of pleasure, it
makes much to the advancement of Man's dignity, and the settinge forth of
the great Favor of God toward him, who would not have his principal
Creature, whom he had made as Lord of all other, to inhabit in a common
place of the Earth, but in a plat framed of purpose, and replenished with all
manner of pleasure and delight according as is here discribed by Moses. Where or
in what part of the world this Paradise was, or whether it do at this day
remain or no, we may not be Curious to search or determine. It may well be
thought, that that place of delight and pleasure, that was prepared for Man in
his Innocence, when he sinned and fell from the obedience of God his maker,
was defaced, partly by the * Curse, Genesis 3. c. 17.
that for the same fell upon the Earth, partly by the general Deluge
ouerflowing the whole land, and all the parts thereof. And if we should
assign it to any place, it is most likely to have been about the coasts of
Mesaporamia, and Armenia. etc. where the Rivers Euphrates and Tigris are. The
Tree of Life planted in Paradise, may be thought to be that, by the fruit
whereof, if man had not Sinned, he should have continued Immortal. The Tree of
knowledge of Good and Evil, was that tree which God to try the Obedience of
Adam did Forbid him to taste of, and took the name of that miserable event
that after fell unto him by his Disobedience. For thereby he understood evil,
and was ashamed of himself.

And out of Eden there went forth a river of water, Verse. 10. etc.
etc. For So Much as the Rivers that bear those names at this day, and flow
into the parts here mentioned have their heads and beginninges far asunder:
it is moved as a doubt how they are reported here to have one head and
spring. For answer hereunto we must understand that in the time of the
general Deluge, when all the fountaynes of the Earth brake out, by the
providence of God, to drown the world for sin: it is not unlikely that this
Spring also and the Ryuers that grew thereof by the continuance of the Deluge
did alter, and varied their course, and took also other beginnings then before
they had. Some other think, that at the same Deluge the sea swelling to drown
the Earth, did ouerwhelme that place where Paradise was, and from whence these
Ryuers had their beginning, and that it so remains at this day, either where
the red Sea is, or in some parts of the Sea there bordering.

And the Lord God commanded Man, Verse. 16. 17
saying, eating thou shall eat, etc. It is not to be thought that God had
Inspired the diuin^ knowledge of good and evil into the fruits of this tree:
but it is to be understood, that it was a type or Figure of perfect knowledge
of good and evil, which becomes the wisdom of God alone, being hable to
declare the perfect causes of all things, both generally and particularly,
whereunto God would not have Man arrogantly to aspire, as a thing far above
his Condition, and therefore commanded him under a great pain not to taste of
this fruit. Augustine and others judge that the name was given to this tree by
the event that followed. For Man by the tasting of that fruit, to his own
great harm, by experience learned the difference between the goodness of
obedience, Leuit. 22. b. ^. Heb. 2. a. 2.
innocence, felicity, immortality, and the * evil of disobedience,
sinfulness, misery, and death.

And the Lord said, Verse. 18.
it is not good for man to be alone, I will make him an help, etc. Seeing that
God had made Man as he did other Creatures, to this end, that he should
multiply and increase upon the face of y^ Earth: it was not fit and
convenient for him to be alone: therefore God of his great goodness respecting
this his purpose in creating of Mankind, says, he will make an Helper to
Adam, like himself. The woman lawefullye joined to Man brings three Helps,
which he cannot have without her.

1 The first is the Helping to Procreation and multiplying of mankind.

2 The second is, that she is a lawful Remedy against whoredom and al filthy
and unclean lusts. To avoid fornication (says Paul) let each man have his
wife. 1. Cor. 7. a. 2
And again. It is better to Marry than to burn.

3 The third Help is Comfort in sickness, in affliction, and in all
household cares and troubles, as in education of children, and keeping the
family in order. In this place have we the Institution and notable commendation
of matrimony by God himself, even before the fall of Adam. Which makes
greatly against all such, that, under a color of hipocrisy in the Spirit of
Antichrist, deprave the Institution of God, and make Marriage a Wallowing in the
Flesh, or a Permission only for the avoiding of a greater evil. etc.

For this cause shall man leave his father and his mother, Verse. 24.
and shall be joined, etc. After the Institution of matrimony, Moses adds
the Indissoluble bond and knot whereby the husband and wife are fastened
together by the ordinance of God, Math. 19. a. 5. Marc. 10. a. 7. Ephe. 5. g.
31.
and shows, that it is * straighter, than any other conjunction in the
society of mankind. Inso much that it is a less offense to forsake Father
and Mother, and to leave them succourlesse (which notwithstanding ought by
Gods commandment to be honored) then it is to do the like toward his
lawful married Wife. Wherefore let them look well, what they do, that are
ready for Light and Small causes to Separate man and wife. Seeing that Christ
himself says, Math. 19. a. 9.
that Whosoever is separated from his wife, saving for fornication, and
marieth another, commits adultery.

The sunday called Sexagesima, at Morning prayer.
Genesis. 3. ANd the Serpent was subtiler then every beast of the field which
the Lord God had made, and he Wisd. 2. d. 4.
yea, has God said, ye shall not eat of every: tree of the garden? 2 And the
woman said unto the Serpent, We eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden.
3 But as for the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God
has said, Ye shall not eat of it, 2. Cor. 11. a. 3
neither shall ye touch it, least peradventure ye die. 4 And the Serpent said
unto the woman, Ye shall not dye the death. 5 For God both know, that the same
day that ye eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods,
knowing good and evil.

6 And s^ the woman, seeing that the same tree was good to eat of, and pleasant
to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, took of the fruit
thereof, and did ^ate, and

7 Then the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked,
and they sowed Fig leaves together, and made themselves apernes.

8 And they heard the voice of the Lord God, walking in the Garden in the
cool of the day (...) Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of
the Lord God amongst the trees of the garden. 9 And the Lord God called Adam,
and said unto him, Where art thou? 10 Which said, I heard thy voice in the
garden, and was afraid, because I was naked, and hid my self. 11 And he
said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Have thou not eaten of the same
tree, concerning the which I commanded thee that thou should not eat of
it? 12 And Adam said, The woman whom thou gave ( to be) with me, she gave
me of the tree, and I did eat. 13 And the Lord God said unto the woman, Why
have thou done this? And the woman said, The Serpent beguyled me, and I did
eat.

14 And the Lord God said unto the Serpent, Because thou half done this, thou
art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field: upon thy
belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life.

15 I will also put enmity between thee and the woman, between thy seed and
her seed: and it shall tread down thy head, and thou shall tread upon his
heel.

16 But unto the woman he said, In multiplying, I will multiply thy sorrow and
thy conceptions. In sorrow thou shall bring forth children: thy desire (
shall be) to thy husband, and he shall have the rule of thee. 17 Unto Adam he
said, Because thou have hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of
the tree concerning the which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shall not eat of
it: cursed is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all
the days of thy life. 18 Thorn also and thistle shall it bring forth to thee,
and thou shall eat the herb of the field.

19 In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou be turned
again into the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: For oust thou art, and
into dust shall thou be turned again. 20 And Adam called his wifes name Heua:
because she was the mother of all living.

21 Unto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord God make garments of ski^^es,
and he put them on.

22 And the Lord God said, Behold, this man is become as one of us, in
knowing good and evil: And now least peradventure he put forth his hand, and
take also of the tree of life and eat, and live for even:

23 The before the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden* to dress,
the ground whence he was taken.

24 And so he drove out man, and at the East side of the Garden of Eden he set
Cherubins, and a fiery two edged sword, to keep the way of the tree of life.

The Exposition upon the.iij. Chapter of Genesis.
And the Serpent was subtiler then every beast of the field, Verse. 1.
which the, etc. IN this chapter are 3. things contained. First, the
temptation, seducing and transgression of mankind wrought by the Serpent.
Secondly, the Condemnation and punishment of Man, Woman, and the Serpent.
Thirdly, the the Casting of Man out of Paradise. As touching the first, Saran,
enemy to Mankind, and envying the happy estate, that he was in by the
sufferance of God, abused the Serpent as his fittest I^strument to deceive man,
and Seduce him from the obedience of God. For we may not think, that the
Serpent did this of his own motion, nor phantastically dream, that beasts of
the field Could then use a distinct Speech, to declare there minds, as here
the Serpent does: But God for Causes, to his secret wisdom only known,
suffered the Devil to abuse the tongue of the Serpent, as he afterward did
suffer him to be a * lying spirit, 3. Reg. 22. c. 21
in the mouth of the false Prophets to deceive Achab. And as the good Angel
of God, miraculously * opened the mouth of Balahams Ass to Speak unto his
master. Number. 22. c. 2^
And if it shall seem strange to any man, that Eua was not afraid to talk
with the Serpent, he must understand that before Adam fell from God by
Disobedience, the beasts of the field were not so terrible to Man, as since
that time they have been. Yea, it may well be gathered, that the Serpent was
more familiar with Man, then any other beast, and that the Devil Craftily
took that occasion to work by him, and the woman sooner seduced and overcome,
as well by that, as by hearing of him to speak, Contrary to the manner of
other beasts: This I gather by that punishment of the Serpent that God after
pronounces: I will set enemitie between thee and the woman, etc. For thereby
it may appear, that, before, there was a Certain inclination of kindness
and familiarity, between them, more, then in other.

In this temptation of Adam in Paradise, we have to learn, that no Place is
free to man from temptation, yea that the Devil, then works most perilously,
and most preuayleth, when we are in the state of Prosperity and Felicity, and
therefore at that time we ought by all means most diligently, to beware of him.
For by Prosperity we soonest forget our selves, and are most easily intrapped.

And the Serpent said unto the woman, Verse. 4.
ye shall not die the death, etc. Here let us diligenly note, How Satan not
only at this time, but in all ages deals toward God, and his holy word. When
the will of God is delivered unto his people, Act. 20. f. 29 Math. 13. d. 28
Gal. 3. a. 1. Gal. 1. b. 6.
by his true and sincere word, * then immediately does the Devil by his
Instruments seek to Corrupt, and falsify the same, either by manifest
impugning it, as untrue, or by writhed interpretations drawing it to another
Sense, then it was spoken in, and al to seduce the people of God, from his True
worship and obedience. From this root comes those things, that of late has
been taught in the Church, when God had said* Thou shall make unto thy self
no graven Image: Deuteronomy. 5. a. 8. Exodus 20. a. 4. Leuit. 26. a. 1
thou shall not bow down unto them, etc. The Serpent with his lying tongue
impugneth it, saying: Thou may with great holiness, fill the Churches and
places of prayer with Images, and go in Pilgrimage to them, and worship them by
kneeling, by offering, by sensing and all other means of honor* Math. 26. c.
27 Marc. 14. c. 23 1. Cor. 11. f. 25. Luke 22. b. 17.
When Christ said in the * institution of the Sacrament, Drink you all of
this: Nay says the Serpent, The lay men may not drink of this, but Priests
only. When the word of God teaches us that Christ* Heb. 10. c. 14.
with * one oblation made perfect all that be Sanctified: The instruments of
Satan Cry, nay, we must have a daily Sacrifice Propiciatorie in the Mass,
as well for the quick as for the dead. This is the perpetual manner of the
Devils working against Gods holy Word. Therefore; Christian men must beware,
that in the true worship of God, they be not drawn away from the obedience of
his True, and Sincere Word, by any Interpretations, seem they never so gaye
in the judgment of man.

Then the eyes of them both were opened and they knew that they, Verse. 7. 8.
etc. The eyes of men are 3. ways opened to see. First, by the doctrine of
Gods holy word: For so Christ said unto Paul, that he would send him to the
Gentiles to open there eyes that they might turn from darkness to light.
Act. 26. d. 18.
Secondly, our eyes are opened by Affliction and Trouble to descend and look
into our own bosoms, and see and Confess what we are. Esaias. 28. c. 19.
For trouble and vexation (says the scripture) gives understanding, as it
appears in the example of the * prodigal son. Luke 15. d. 18.
Thirdlye, our eyes be opened, by the gnawing of our own Consciences after
sin Committed, where as the Devil before the offense done, does blind our
understanding. And so were the eyes of Adam and Eve now opened, that they saw
their own nakedness, and felt the Corruption of their nature, which they
sought to remedy, not by seeking unto God, but by their own Devises in
covering their nakedness with Fig leaves. This property, our Corrupt nature
draws Continually from our first parents, that though we see our own
wickedness, in the judgment of our Conscience, yet we will not * easily
confess it, 1. Reg. 15. d. 20
and fly unto God for remedy, Luke 5. b. 8.
* but fly rather from God, and seek to hide it, and heal it by all the
means and shifts that we can of our selves devise.

And Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord, Verse. 8.
etc. Note what Sin works in man, after it is Committed, First, his
Conscience with grievous remorse accuses, and Condemns him in his own
judgment. Then it extinguesheth the trust and Confidence in the goodness of
God, and makes him with a desperate and astonished mind to fly from God, from
whom, notwithstanding, he Can in * no wise hyde himself. Psalm. 138. b. 7
And lastly, when he Can not escape, Jonas. 1. a. 3
he seeks by stubborn hypocrisy to excuse himself by other, yea rather to
lay the fault upon God himself, then with humble submission to acknowledge his
fault.

And the Lord God called Adam, Verse. 9.
and said unto him, Where, etc. This is an example of the great goodness of
God, that when we wickedly have offended him, and seek to hide our selves from
him, with danger to fall into further mischief, he mercifully calls upon us
by sundry means to come unto him by repentance.

And the Lord God said unto the Serpent, Verse. 14. 15.
because thou have done this. etc. After the fault of disobedience was by Adam,
and his wife very hardly Confessed, God proceeds to Condemnation and
punishment. And first begins with the Serpent, as the principal Instrument
of this mischief, in whose punishment are four parts noted, That, he, was
cursed above all other beasts of the earth: that he should go upon his belly
creeping: That he should eat dust all the days of his life: and That there
should be enemitie between the woman, and him, and between the seed of the
woman, and his seed. This kind of Punishment, as it is literally understood
of the Seed of the woman, and of the natural Serpent, so mistically, and in
way of prophecy, is it to be understood of the great Serpent Satan, and the
true and blessed seed of woman Christ Jesus, Osee. 13. d. 14. 1. John. 3. b. 8.
1. Cor. 15. g. 55
* who in deed crushed the head of Satan and brake all the power of his
kingdom. And yet is it permitted to the same Serpent, that he shall Tread
upon the heel of the seed of woman, that is, that He in the world should
Persecute and trouble the professors of the name of Christ, and so much as he
could work them Sorrow, but yet not so, that he can prevail against them, for
that they have obtained victory over him in Christ Jesus.

But unto the woman he said, Verse. 16
In multiplying, I will multiply thy, etc. The Woman was the second Instrument
and worker of Disobedience, therefore, God proceeds next to Her judgment,
saying, In sorrow shall thou bring forth thy children, etc. God of his mercy
does so punish woman in bodily Pain, 1. Tim. 2. d. 15.
that both * her soul may be saved, and the Propagation and increasing of
mankind not hindered thereby. God did justly Debase her to the Subjection of
her husband, by him to be guyded and ruled, because she had so lightly given
place to the lying *allurement of the Serpent, 2. Cor. 11. a. 3.
thereby to Satisfy her own lust and affection.

Unto Adam he said, Verse. 17.
because thou have hearkened to the voice of thy wife, etc. THe Serpent
offended by the Instinction and act of Satan, the Woman, by the Seducing of
the Serpent, Adam, not by the deceyte of the Serpent, but willingly to please
his wife, displeased God. 1. Tim. 2. d. 14*
For Adam (as saint Paul says) was not seduced, but woman was ^educed by the
Serpent. But neither was the Serpent excused because he was wrought thereto by
Satan, nor the Woman because she was beguiled of the Serpent, nor Adam because
he was not Seduced, but studied to satisfy y^ disordered affection of his
wife: But they all by Gods judgment sustained their just reward and
punishment. Wherefore, we must beware how we condescend to break the law of
God * upon any excusable Pretense, 1. Reg. 15. b. 9.
whatsoever it be. God will be obeyed, he will not be Satisfied with our fair
Excuses and Pretenses.

Cursed is the ground for thy sake, Verse. 17. 18*
in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days, etc. God cursed not Man as he
did the Serpent, but for man's Sin and disobedience Curses the Earth, to the
end that that Creature which at the beginning to man's behoof was blessed with
fertility, and increase, might now by the hardenesse and barrenness thereof
drive sinful man to labor for his food, and in the Sweat of his brows to
eat his bread. Wherefore, whenever dearth or scarcity Comes, by reason
that the earth in due time does not yield the fruits thereof, we must
understand and learn, the Cause thereof is in our own * sinfulness, Psa.
106. d. 34 Gene. 13. b. 10
for that Gods just judgment for our offenses will not suffer the labors of
our hands to prosper with us.

For dust thou art, Verse. 19.
and into dust thou shall be turned again, etc. This is a notable Sentence to
beat down the pride of man, that we hereby considering what we are of our
selves * by our first parents, 1. Cor. 15. c. 22 Romans 5. d. 12.
may be made humble, and lowely in our own sight, and not be puffed up with
pride toward any man, but rather Contemn the insolency of the world, and
take in good part all misery and Calamity, that in this flesh shall fall unto
us, looking continually to that felicity that is * purchased for us by Christ
Jesus our second Adam. Romans 5. b. 11. 15. 17. 18. 19.
It cannot be, that we shall feel the sweetness of the felicity of our
redemption by Christ Jesus, except we feel in deed with humble hearts what we
are by the disobedience of our first father, that is nothing but Dust and Ashes.

And the Lord said, Verse. 22.
behold this man is become as one of us in knowing good, etc. By this event we
may learn, with how evil success man does yield to the disobedience of God,
at the persuasion of Satan, and his wicked instruments. They where promised to
be Gods: but, after they had eaten, they were so far from the glory of God,
that they were debased under the Condition of Man, and made almost equal with
Beasts. They were promised the Knowledge of good and evil, whereby they should
ascend to perfect Wisdom, but they became more mad and foolish, than other
common Creatures, they understood what was Good, but by the miserable loss of
that goodness which before they had, they knew by experience in Sin what was
evil, but that Knowledge and experience they bought with the Loss of eternal
Felicity and Love of God.

Therefore the Lord God sent him forth of the Garden of Eden, Verse. 23.
etc. It was the just judgment of God, to Cast Adam out of Paradise, because
he neglecting the consideration of so great Dignity and felicity, wherein he
was placed, did transgress the Law of Paradise forgetting whence he was taken,
and into what Place he was transferred.

At the East side of the Garden he did set Cherubins, Verse. 24.
and a fiery two edged, etc. God might by some privy means have kept Adam
out of Paradise, and from the tree of Life, but his pleasure was, by this
outward and sensible way, to Cut of from Adam all hope of atteyning the same
hereafter: that thereby, he might the sooner submit himself to the will and
pleasure of God. Man's stubburnnesse hops and attempteth many things
impossible, which he would not do, if he did see before his eyes invincible
resistance, as in this place the Angel and the fiery sword Was.

Sexagesima Sunday at Evening prayer.
Genesis. 6. ANd it came to pass, that when men began to be multiplied in the
upper face of the earth, there were daughters borne unto them. 2. And the
sons of God also saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they
took them wives, such as they lyked, from among them all. 3 And the Lord
said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, because he is flesh: yet
his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.

4 But there were Gyantes in those days in the earth: yea and after that the
sons of God came unto the daughters of men, and had begotten children of
them, the same became mighty men of the world, and men of renown.

5 But God saw that the malice of man was great in the earth, and all the
imagination of the thoughts of his heart ( was) only evil every day. 6 And
it repented the Lord that he had made man upon the earth, and he was touched
with sorrow in his heart. 7 And the Lord said, I will from the upper face of
the earth, destroyman whom I have created: from man unto cattle unto worm, and
unto fowls of the air: For it repents me that I have made them.

8 But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord.

9 These are the generation, of Noah. Noah ( was) a just man, and pefect in
his generations, and walked with God.

10 Noah begat three sons, Sem, Ham and Iaphath.

11 The earth also was corrupt before GOD, and the same earth was filled with
cruelty. 12 And God looked upon the earth, and behold it was corrupt: for all
flesh had corrupted his way upon earth. 13 And God said unto Noah, The end of
all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with cruelty through
them, and behold I will destroy them with the earth. 14 Make thee an Arc of
Pine trees: Habitations shall thou make in the Ark, and shall pitch it within
and without with pitch. 15 And of this fashion shall thou make it: The length
of the Arc ( shall be) three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty
cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits. 16 A window shall thou make in
the arc, and in a cubite shall thou finish it above: but the door of the

18 With thee also will I make my covenant: and thou shall come into the Arc,
thou and thy sons, thy wife, and thy sons wives with thee. 19 And of every
living thing of all flesh, a pair of every one shall thou bring into the ark,
to keep them alive with thee, they shall be male and female.

20 Of feathered fowls also after their kind, and of all cattle after their
kind, of every worm of the earth after his kind, two of enery sort shall
come unto thee, to keep ( them) alive. 21 And take thou with thee of all meats
that is eaten, and thou shall lay it up with thee, that it may be meat for
thee and them. 22 Noah therefore did according unto all that God commanded him,
( even) so did he.

The Exposition upon the sixth Chapter of Genesis.
And it came to pass, Verse. 1. 2. 3
that when men began to be multiplied in the upper, etc. THe sons of God, in
this place, are taken to be the sons of Seth and his godly posterity, which
professed the name of GOD and his true worship. And the daughters of men, are
understood to be the Daughters of Cain, and his ungodly Generation, which
contemned the name of God, and gave themselves to the lusts of the world. So
that the sense is, that the whole world was Corrupted, and given over to their
sensual pleasure. For, not only the wicked generation of Cain, and his
offspring, but the posterity of the godly also, forsook the fear of God, and
without all regard of Conscience, only, to satisfy their Carnal lust, Exodus
34. b. 16 Deuteronomy. 7. a. 3 1. Cor. 5. b. 6 Genesis 3. a. 6. ^. Reg. 11 a. 4.
and pleasure, took wives of the daughters of the ungodly worldlings, *which
seduced them from the true worship of God and virtuous life, to the Contempt of
God, and all Corruption and wickedness of the flesh. Therefore GOD justly
breaks out in displeasure against mankind, and says, that His spirit
should not always or for ever thus strive and travail with them, as hitherto
he had done, to bring them to amendment, because they were altogether fleshly
and incorrigible, and given over to the wicked devises of their own minds.
Wherefore, he does appoint them *a determinate time, Jonas. 3. b. 4
within which, if they did not repent and amend, he would surely destroy
them. And this time was the space of one hundred and twenty years.

And there were Giants in those days upon the earth: Verse. 4.
yea and after that, etc. THe Giantes were not only men of very big Stature,
but also of great Might, Authority and power, by reason of their strength, and
used their force to the tyrannical oppression of other with great violence.
Such became many of them, that were of the posterity of the Godly, and took
wives among the daughters of the wicked and ungodly: so that to their fleshly
and sensual pleasure in Choice of their wives, they added extortion and
violent oppression of other, and especially of the Power sort. Thus God
oftentimes deals by just judgment for the Sins of the people* sending
Tyrannes and oppressors to bear rule over them. Job. 34. d. 30.


But God saw that the malice of man was great, Verse. 5. 6
etc. And it repented him, etc. By this, we see the (...) of Sin is, to provoke
the heavy wrath of God against us, and to Cause him to repent of all his
goodness, that he has showed toward us. Moses says not, The malice of man
was upon the earth, but the malice of man was Great upon the earth. Esaias. 30.
d. 18* Sap. 11. d. 24 Luke 13. b. 8
Whereby we learn that the goodness of God is such, that it does * Long
suffer the malice of men, and does not by and by punish the same, unless it
does greatly increase and show it self incorrigible. When Moses says, It
repented God, etc. We must understand that there is not either Repentance or
Sorrow, or any such mutable affection in God, but that the scripture often
speaks of God, according to the capacity and manner of mortal men, that we
may the more easily Conceive what is meant. And the manner of men is, by the
Deed to judge of the Affection of the mind.

When we see a Potter break and destroy some vessel that he has made, we
judge, that he Repents him to have made it, and sees somewhat that he does
greatly mislike in it. Even so, because God the Maker of the world, and Framer
of Mankind, determined, for Sin by the instinction of Satan increasing in men,
utterly to Destroy him from the face of the earth, whom before he had made and
loved: In respect of This fact, I say, and not in respect of Mutabilitie in
God, Moses used these words. It Repented him to have made man, etc

But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. Verse. 8.
etc. This clause has a singular Comfort for all good men, that live in such
times of general Corruption, as was before the Deluge, before the destruction
of Sodom, and now in these Latter days. For albeit, the universal
Sinfulness of the world does pull upon the wicked, the just and terrible
Plagues of God, yet, of his fatherly goodness, he will not Neglect those, that
truly Fear him, but will provide for them, Genesis 7. a. 1 Genesis 18. d. 16.
though they be but Few, yea though it be but * One alone, as it appears in
Noha and Loath.

Noah was a just man, Verse. 9.
and perfect in his generations, and walked, etc. This place shows a notable
Commendation of Noah, that he was a Just man, and in Comparison of men of his
time, a sincere and vprightman, void of C^aft and de^ey^e, and given to
Justice, and truth, contrary to the (...) of that time, 2. Par. 6. c. 14 Deuteronomy.
13. a. 4. Genesis 17. a. 1.
to Propose God, and his holy will as a certain Rule to follow in all his life.

And God looked upon the earth, Verse. 12. 13.
and behold it was corrupt, etc. Because the Wrath of God is Horrible, and the
end of all flesh was at hand: Moses uses here an earnest repetition of the
great Wickedness of the World, that Gods Justice in punishing might the more
appear, when he says, He will destroy them with the earth that they dwell in.

Make the an Arc of Pine trees, Verse. 14. etc.
habitations shall thou make in the Arc, etc. In these words that follow to
the end of this Chapter, Moses describes the Instrument, and Means whereby
God saved Noah, and the residue of the faithful, that is, the Manner and
Proportion of the Arc.

Now so small a compass, as is here mentioned might contain so great a number
of beasts, or how the same beasts came to Noah, or how they were maintained
with food, when they were there, with a number of such vain and curious
questions we must leave to the Heathens, and wicked Heretics, which by such
means have sought occasion to discredit the Scriptures, and marvelous works
of God. And such as he faithful, and have the fear of God, must with
Reverence, in this, and such other great workers of God, acknowledge not only
(...), or two, (...) number of extraordinary, (...) and (...) doings, beyond
the compass of Man's reason and capacity. And not by and by to think, that
all is false and vain that our weakness is not hable to yield an accounte of.
Rather let us learn this lesson, that Admightie GOD to punish the wicked and
sinful persons, and to preserve and sane such as believe and trust in him,
Deuteronomy. 29. a. 5. Iosu. 6. c. 20 Iosu. 10. c. 13 Dan. 3. g. 94. 2. Pet. 2. c. 16.
both can and will Alter and * turn the Natures and possibilities of all his
Creatures, as (...) sundry * examples left for our instruction in the holy
Scriptures, he has declared.

The sunday called Quinquagesima, at Morning prayer.
Genesis. 9. ANd God blessed Noah, and his sons, and said unto which is)
the blood thereof, shall ye not eat.

5 And surely your blood of your lives will I require: at the hand of every
beast will I require it, and at the hand of man, at the hand of man's brother
will I require the life of man. 6 Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed, for in the image of God made ^e man.

7 But be fruitful, and multiply you, breed in the earth, and increase
therein. 8 God spoke unto Noah, and to his sons with him saying. 9 Behold, I,
even I stablishe my covenant with you, and with your seed after you.

10 And with every living creature that is with you, in foul, in cattle, in
every beast of the earth which is with you, of all that go out of the arc,
whatsoever living thing of the earth it be. 11 And my covenant I make with you*
that from henceforth all flesh be not rooted out with the waters of a floode,
neither shall there be a floode to destroy the earth any more* or. And (...).
This is the token of the covenant which I make between me and you, and every
living creature that is with you for ever.

13 I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token between me
and the earth. 14 And it shall come to pass, that when I bring a cloud upon
the earth, the bow also shall be seen in the same cloud.

15 And I will think upon my covenant which is between me and you, and every
living creature in all fl^she: and it shall no more come to pass, that waters
make a floode to destroy

19 These are the three sons of Noah, and of them was the whole earth
euerspread. 20 Noah also began to be an husbandman, and planted a Vineyarde.

21 And he drinking of the wine, was dronken, and uncovered within his Tent. 22
And Ham the father of Chanaan, seeing the nakedness of his father, told his
two brethren

25 And he laid, Cursed be Chanaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his
brethren. 16 He said moreover: Blessed be the Lord God of Sem, and Chanaan
shall be his servant.

27 God shall enlarge Iapheth: and he shall dwell in the tents of Sem, and
Chanaan shall be his servant.

28 Noah lived after the floode three hundred and fifty years.

29 And all the days of Noah, were nine hundred and fifty years, and he died.

The Exposition upon the ix. Chapter of Genesis.
And God blessed Noah, Verse. 1. 2.
and his sons, and said unto them, etc. AFter the History of the general
Deluge or drowning of the world for sin declared in the former Chapiters:
Moses in very good order now comes to speak of the next age and world
following, 1. Cor. 10. c. 11
in the * latter end whereof we now (...). And he begins his discourse at
that thing that is first, and of greatest Majesty, that is, at the Comfortable
speech that GOD had to Noah and his Children in blessing them, and Confirming
their hearts against that great fear, that they might well Conceive upon the
drowning of the world, and Destroying of mankind from the fa^e of the earth.
For by this, that GOD does so largely comfort Noah by blessing him, it may be
gathered how greatly his mind was before troubled. This Blessing does not
only Comprehend the grace of Fertility and increase by multiplying upon the
earth, but the opening also of the purpose of God in Restoring the world
again by Noah and his children, whom he so marvelously and graciously had
preserved to that end. Therefore that they might not Doubt or fear in their
hearts, he declares the state and end of their life to come, willing them To
increase and multiply and replenishe the earth. Yea, and to their further
Comfort delyuereth to them in subjection, Genesis 1. c. 19. 30 Psalm. 8. b. 7.
* all the beasts of the Earth and Fishes, of the Sea to their use and
Commodity. Of this blessing and gracious gift of God, it Comes, that all
beasts and Cattle do with such obedience, and so Conveniently serve to the
use and benefit of our life: The Oxen to be accustomed to the yoke, the
Horses, and other beasts to Carriage, Kine to yield unto us their milk, and
Sheep their flises to clothe us, yea and the same (...) all the residue of his
Creatures to be unto b^ as Food and (...). And therefore it behooves us in
these things * thankfully to acknowledge and praise the exceeding goodness and
Liberality of our good and gracious Lord toward us. Psalm. 3^. a. 1


Every thing that moves or lives shall be meat for you, Verse. 3.
even as the, etc. By this some gather that men before the floode did not eat
Flesh, but lived only by fruits and Herbs of the ground, and that now
only, and not before, God gives leave to man to eat flesh. Herin, as I will
not greatly contend, so yet it seems not to me so likely. For it is evident,
that in y^ General blessing, God made man Lord, and Master of all his
Creatures, and that Beasts were killed as well for Sacrifice, as to have their
Shinnes to make them Clothes: And then Can it not well be thought, that the
Flesh of the same beasts was unprofitably Cast away, but served to the use of
man's food.

But flesh in the life thereof, Verse. 4. 5. 6.
which is, the blood shall ye not eat, And surely, etc. This forbidding to
eat Blood is a part of Discipline, Act. 15. f. 29.
to accustom the people of God to Lenity and myldenesse among themselves. For
if (...) they should have (...) to eat the Blood of beasts, it might be
(...), people that it would have (...) murder and cruelty among themselves.
And therefore does he (...), Deuteronomy. 12. b. 16 1. Reg. 14. e. 33
. For says he, whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed
(...) By which (...). Romans 13. a. 4.
(...) think by this saying, that it is lawefull for Private persons in way of
Revenge to Kill any be he never so Great an offendour.

Behold I, Verse. 9. etc.
even I stablishe my covenant with you, and with your seed. etc. (...), in
the minds of Noah (...) his po^teritie, and least they should Do^ when they
law the air ouercast with clouds, that God (...) again Destroy the world
with water: of his great goodness he does here assure Noah and all his
children, and all other that in lime should come of them, yea, and all living
creatures, made to the use of man, that he will no more in that Sort ouerwhelme
the earth with water. This Promise and covenant does he set forth with earnest
words and often repetition, that it might of (...) the better believed (...)
and more assured credit thereof (...) the same by a Sign or Sacrament,
oppoynting the Rainebow in the (...) his coneuant. By the (...) estimable
goodness toward them. Who is (...) thereof.

Noah also beg^nne to be an husband man, Verse. 20.
and planted a Vineyarde, etc. By these words it is not to be, understood,
that Noah (...) of God although he were aged, he beg^n^ to be take himself
again to the Manuring of (...) earth and made a Vineyarde* etc.

And he drinking of the wine was dronken, and uncovered within his, Verse. 21.
etc. In that Noah drank Wine he did not offend, for it was lawefull to use
the benefits of God, and the * labors of his (...) 1. Tim. 4. a. 4. Psalm.
127. a. 2.
^span

Hereby, Prou. 31. a. 4. Esaias. 5. c. 11. Esaias. 28. b. 7 Ose. 4. b. 11. Gal. 5.
d. 21. (...)
may we learn how (...) nothing but to go from Tavern to Tavern, eating and
drinking until they have so ouercharged themselves, as, beside other
Filthiness with great shame they are driven to v^^ode their intemperate
stomachs. No merueyle though God punish such exceeding grievously as he
shreatneth. Esaias. 5. Esaias. 5. c. 13. Verse. 22.


And Ham the father of Chanaan seeing the nakedness of his father, etc. Thus
God punishes indiscreet Parents; that (...) Sap. 3. c. 12.
Eccle. 41. b. 10.
Pr^^ (...)
Prou. 19. c. 18. 1.
Reg. 3. c. 13.
, as he had done.

(...) Prou. 10. a. 1.


And Sem and Iaphet taking a garment, Verse. 23.
laid it upon their shoulders, etc. As in Ham we have a Pattern of a lewd and
unnatural son: so have we in Sem and Iaphet an example of good and godly
children, not only nothing at all delighting in the reproach of their Father,
but being heartily sorry for the same, and with all Reverence, Shamefastness,
and modesty, *seek ^o hide that vncomelynesse, Eccle. 3. a. 6. 7
that had happened unto him. And this in deed is the office of good children,
not as Ham, to Discrie and blase abroad the Shame of their parents: but, with
(...) Secrecy and honesty, to hide such blemishes, as shall happen unto them.

And Noah awooke from his wine, Verse. 24. etc.
etc. and said cursed be Chanaan, etc. This is the Curse of Ham, and his
wicked Posterity, as a dew reward of his vndewtifulnesse toward his father,
And also she Blessing of Sem and Iaphet wherewith God prospered them, as well
for this their Reverence toward their Pa^entes, as for their other Obedience
to the (...) of God. This curse of Ham, and the blessing of Sem (...) Iapher*
with their poslepitie was uttered by Noah in way of prophecy. For Ham (...)
the father of the inhabitants of the land of Chanaan, that was subdued by the
mighty hand of God, and delivered in subjection to the Israelites, after their
coming out of Egypt. Of Sem (...) the people of Israel whom God merueilously
preserved, and brought into that land of promise, where they were Lords over
the posterity of Ham. Of Iaphet and his progeny came, the most part of the
Gentiles, which a long time were separated from the knowledge of God, and so
divided from their brethren of the Jews and of the posterity of Sem. But at
the coming of Christ, by the sweet voice of the Gospel, Io. 10. c. 16.
they were brought under one * Sheephearde and one Fold, and so according to
the blessing of their father Noah dwelled in the tents of Sem, Act. 13. g. 46.
Math. 10. a. 6.
and were partakers of the promises * first made to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. So that this is an evident testimony of the Calling of the
Gentiles, even by the mouth of the holy Patriarch, so many hundred years
before in deed it was performed.

The sunday called Quinqua gesima* at Evening prayer,
Genesis. 12.

2 And I will make of thee a great people, and will bless thee, and make thy
name great, that thou shall be a blessing. 3 I will also bless them that
bless thee, (...) curse the that curse th^^, and in thee shall (...) of ye
earth be (...).

4 And so Abr^^ departed as the Lord^had (...) him^ and Let (...) with him: and
Abram was (...) and five years old when he departed out of Haran.

5 And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Let his brothers son, and all their
substance that they had in possession, and the souls that they had begotten in
Haran, and they departed, that they might come into the land of Chanaan: and
into the land of Eh^^aan they came.

6 Abram passed through the land, unto the place of Sichem, unto the plain of
Mor^h. And the Chanaanite (was) then in the land. 7 And the Lord appearing
unto Abram, said, Unto thy seed will I give this land: and there builded he
an altar unto the Lord which appeared unto him.

8 And remoouing thence unto a mountain that was eastwarde from Bethell, he
pitched his tent, having Bethell on the west side, and Hai on the east: and
there be buylding an altar unto the Lord, did call upon the name of the Lord.

9 And Abram took his journey, going and iourneyng toward the south. 10 And
then there was a famine in that land, and therefore went Abram down into
Egypt, that he might soiourne there: for there was a griouous famine in the
land. 11 And when he was come near to enter into Egypt, he said unto Sarai
his wife, Behold, I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon.

12. Therefore shall to come (...), that when the Egipti^^ (...) wife, and they
will she is his, but they save thee alive. 13 Say I pray thee, that

14 And so when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egiptians (...), for she was
very fair.

15 The princes also of Phara^ saw (...), and commended h^^ before Pharad: and
the woman was taken into Phara^^ house. 16 (...) for her sake: and he had
sheep, (...), and maid servants, (...).

17 But the Lord plagued Pharao and his house with great plagues, because of
Sarai Abrams wife.

18 And Pharao calling Abram, said, Why have thou done this unto me? 19 Why
did thou not tell me that she was thy wife? why saydes thou, She is my
sister? and so I might have taken her to be my wife? Now therefore behold,
there is thy wife, take her and go thy way.

20 And Pharao gave his men commandment concerning him: and they conveyed him
forth, and his wife, and all that he had.

The Exposition upon the.xij. Chapter of Genesis.
And the Lord said to Abram: Verse. 1.
Get thee out of thy Country, etc. GOd would not have his chosen servant
Abram, whom of his singular grace he had appointed to a great purpose, any
longer to be Tempted, Troubled, and Afflicted among the wicked Chaldees, Act.
7. a. 2.
though they were of his kindred: Genesis 15. b. 7.
And therefore * wills him to depart. Judith. 5. a. 8.
Heb. 11. b. 8.


Here we have to note, that, when it pleased God to Call one, whom he might
appoint to be Father of the faithful, he did not choose him out of the
Posterity of the Wicked; but from the Generations of the Godly, though they
were now fallen to great corruption, and lived in Idolatry. And this person
does God call Freely, not in respect of any Worthiness or dignity in the
party. For there are not here recited any merits or deser^es in Abram why God
should so it but (...) proceeded only of the Mere grace, and Free election of
God.

By this departure of Abram out of his wicked Country, If may seem to be
drawn into question, whether a godly man may live among his wicked Country
men or no, but is bound in conscience to depart from them, when Vice and
naughtiness does increase. To this, it may be answered, that there are two
causes, for which a godly man may and ought to Forsake the Company and
habitations of the wicked. 1 The one is, if he can not be out of danger of
Life and Conscience among them, ^or have any hope to Prevail and do Good by
drawing them to repentance. 2 The second, if he have the (...) of gods
commandment calling him, and good Opportunity to Spread the glory of God,
and study of his true worship in an other place. Otherwise, if these causes be
not, as they were both in Abram, I think he is not bound in conscience to
depart, but without Sin may Tarry among them, Genesis 19. a. 1.
as Loath did in Sodom.

And I will make of thee a great people, Verse. 2. 3.
and will bless thee, etc. This Blessing that God here promises to Abrain is
in words very great and notable, But if we look to the manner of perfourming
it, in the face of the world, it will seem somewhat strange to man's reason.
He promises Abram Multiplying, and Blessing, if he depart out of his Country,
but it might seem more likely, that he should grow to wealth and power, if he
Ta^yed in his Country. Furthermore, when he dyed in the land of his
peregrinage, he was in deed welthy and rich, but he scantly left One Son to
perform the great Blessing of the increase of his Seed. Yea, and the same
Son having like condition as his father had, left but One son behind him
partaker of the Promise; And lastly when some show of great increase appeared
in the sons of Jacob, by Hunger and Famine, Ge. 46. a. 1. etc
they were * driven to go into Egypt, and there in deed increased in great
numbers, but yet under the cross of Trouble and Affliction: as it is read;
Exodus 1. c. 12
The more that they did ^ppresse them, the more they mereased and multiplied.

This must we diligently consider i^ the blessing of Abram, that we may learn,
how God blesses his in this world, least we fall into the judgment of
carnal men, and think them Happy and blessed, which in deed are cursed and
unhappy* For Gods Blessing does not always go with the Wealth of the world,
nor his Curse with Affliction and trouble, but most commonly in clean
contrary manner. For it is profitable for the Elect of god, often, in this life
to be under the bridle of Affliction and Trouble. Psalm. 118. b. 71
It is good for me, says David, that thou have Humbled me. Who would have
esteemed Joseph happy, Genesis 37. f. 28.
when he was * sold into Egypt; and there a long time kept in Prison? Or
David, when he was Ten years Persecuted of Saul? 1. Reg. 23. d. 25
Or in time of his kingdom, 2. Reg. 2. b. 8. 2.
when he was troubled with so many Wars and * Rebellions? Reg. 15. e. 12 2.
But as the kingdom of God is Spiritual, Reg. 20. a. 1. 3.
so are his Blessings for the most part Spiritual, Reg. 1. a. 5.
and not according to the judgment of the (...).

And in thee shall all the kindredes of the earth be blessed, Verse. 3
etc. This place is diligently to be imprinted in the minds of the faithful,
as one of the sweetest Promises of our Free blessing in Christ Jesus, that is in
all the Scriptures. We be taught in these words to learn the riches and
abundance of Gods mercy, who does not restrain his blessing to any one
House, kindred, or Nation, but does freely impart it to All the Kindreds of the
earth. Therefore when Christ sent his Messengers to bestow this blessing,
Math. 28. d. 19
he said, Marc. 16. d. 15
Go into the whole world, and declare these good tidings To all creatures.

Moreover, this blessing here promised is our Justification. Galat. 3. b. 8.
For says Saint Paul, * The scripture foreseeing that God justified the
Nations of the earth by faith, preached of the same to Abraham before, saying:
In thee shall all Kinreds of the earth be blessed.

Thus Blessing then to saint Paul is Justifying, and Blessed are Justified.
And this Iustifiyng by S. Paul, Romans 4. a. 6.
is by Faith and * not by our Works. To conclude, the foundation of this free
blessing or Justification is the seed of Abraham, Gal. 3. c. 16
* Christ Jesus. Wherefore we see, that God him self in this place to Abraham
is the First preacher of our Free out some great consideration, why God did
now chiefly plague the Chananites after that Abram and other good, and godly
persons were come among them. Genesis 18. c. 26.
It might seem more likely that God for the * Iustes sake would have spared
them, Act. 27. d. 24.
or that all things, Exodus 32. d. 14
for their cause, should have gone the more Prosperously with them. But seeing
it pleased God otherwise, we must think that Gods patience was greatly stirred
against them, both by some marvelous increase of their Stubburnnesse, and
wickedness, and also by the malicious and froward Abusing of the Godly. For,
so we see it oftentimes by the providence of God, that, when Gods truth and his
holy will is preached, and taught in the world, by his notable and worthy
instruments, some great Adversity and Plague does follow to the punishment of
the stubburnnesse, and blasphemy of the wicked against it. The causes of which
plagues the Malice of the world, to their further condemnation, not seeing
their own Sinnefulnesse, does blasphemously. Impute to the true Doctrine of
God, and to the good and godly persons publishing the same. Thus was it in the
time of Hieremie, Ier. 44. d. 16
and of the Prophets. Thus was it in the Primitive Church. Thus it is now in
these Latter days.

And when he was come nere to enter into Egypt, he said unto Sarai, Verse. 11.
12. 13
etc. Here, first, we have to note that even Godly men coming among the
Wicked, or into place of danger, though they put their trust in God, yet are
they not void of care and fear, 1. Reg. 21. d. 13
and * Devise by all means they can, how they may Shun and avoid the same.
Secondly, we have to consider the Violence and Malice of the wicked, which to
satisfy there Filthy, and fleashly Lust, whyll not spare to commit any
Mischief, either by Murder or otherwise. Thirdly, it may be doubted how a
godly man can devise to save himself by a Lie, for answer whereunto,
understand you there are three kinds of Lying. 1 First, when we utter an
Untruth. 2 Secondly, when we deny a Truth. 3 Thirdly, when Truth is
dissembled, and for the time upon considerations concealed. The two first ways
no man can use without sin, nor ought to save himself by them. The third
way Abram did use, concealing that Sarah was his wife, and yet uttering no
untruth in saying she was his sister. But neither in this, nor yet in that,
that follows, is it to be thought, that Abram was void of some Imperfection,
proceeding of to much timorousness and want of confidence in the promises of
God. For how can it stand with perfect Sincerity, for his bodily safety, and
hope of better intertainement in a strange place, to hasarde the Chastity of
his faithful, true, and loving Wife, and give occasion both to her, and to the
Prince, or other of the Egiptians, to commit adultery.

Saint Paul says We may not do ill that good may come thereof. Romans 3. b. 8.
We have not therefore any color here in Abram, whereby we may be encouraged for
any cause, to use the like dealing: but rather a plain example, that even Holy
men are subject to * Frailetie and weakness of Faith, Genesis 19. b. 8.
and thereby sometimes do that, which is Evil, and can not be defended.

And so when Abram was come into Egypt the Egiptians beheld the woman, Verse.
14.
etc. Mark here the vanity of Worldly and fleshly persons. Abram undoubtedly
was a man of comely Stature, Grave in countenance, and of much Humanity and
courtesy in behauior. And Saray his wife a Sober matron Modest, Chaste, and
virtuous, of far more beauty of mind, than she was of body. And yet these
fleshly men had no consideration of those gifts, Iudit. 10. d. 18 Da. 14. a.
8. 10
but, with unchaste affections, * cast their eyes altogether upon her
fairness. And even for the same take her, without further consideration, to
be a Present for the Prince himself, whereby may appear a great corruption of
that kingdom, as well in the Prince as in the People. For had not the Prince
showed himself in life to be such a one, as, to satisfy his fleshly lust and
pleature, he regarded neither honesty nor godliness, but only the beauty of
the person: The Egiptians would never have been so ready to have told the
King, nor he to have taken her into his house upon their report. Therefore it
is well said that the Offense of a Prince is a Double Offense, as well for the
evil, that is in the thing it self, as that it is an Example to draw many to
the like evil.

For * such as the Prince is, such are the People. Prou. 29. b. 12.


But the Lord plagued Pharao and his house with great plagues, Verse. 17.
etc. God that is the author of Marriage, is defendor of the Innocence and
Chastity of the godly, and sharp Punisher of the breakers thereof, as saint
Paul says. Heb. 13. a. 4.
* Fornicators and adulterours God will Judge. Therefore with grievous plagues
does he punish Pharao and his household for intertayning Abrams wife, and
purposing unlawful Marriage with her, though it were to him unknown, that she
was Wife to an other man. What Plagues then may they look for at Gods hand,
that bend there whole endeavor to Allure the known Wives of other men to
wickedness and Filthy Lust, and take the same almost to be no Sin, but a
Solace and Pastime. Surely they can not look for so great punishment as God in
his just measure of time will cast upon them.

The first Sunday in Lent at Evening prayer.
Genesis. 19. them) rose up to meet them, and he bowed himself with his face
toward the ground.

2 And he said, Oh my Lords, turn in I pray you into your servants house,
and tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early to go
your ways. Which said, Nay: but we will bide in the street all night.

3 And he pressed upon them exceedingly, and they returning into unto him,
entered into his house: and he made them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread,
and they did ea^e.

4 And before they went to rest, the men of the city ( even) the men of Sodom
compassed the house round about, both old and young, all people from ( all)
quarters.

5 And they calling unto Lot, said unto him, Where are the men which came in
to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them.

6 And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him. 7 And
said, Nay, I pray you brethren, do not ( so) wickedly. 8 Behold, I have two
daughters which have known no man, them will I bring out now unto you, and
do with them as it ( seems) good in your eyes: only unto these men do
nothing, for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof.

9 And they said, Stand back: And they said again. He came in as one to
soiourne, and will he now be a judge? we will surely deal worse with thee
then with them. And they pressed sore upon the man ( even) Lot, and came to
break up the door. 10 But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into
the house to them, and shut to the door.

11 And the men that were at the door of the house they smote with blindness
both small and great: so that they were wearied seeking the door. 12 And the
men said unto Lot, Have thou here any besides? son in law, and thy sons,
and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou have in the city, bring them out of
this place.

13 For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is great before
the face of God: for the Lord has sent us to destroy it. 14 And Lot went out,
and spoke unto his sons in law which mari^d his daughters, saying, Stand up,
get ye out of this place: for the Lord will overthrow this City. But he seemed
as though he had mocked unto his sons in law. 15 And when the morning
arose, the Angels caused Lot to speed him, saying, Stand up, take thy wife,
and thy two daughters which be at hand* lest thou perish in the sin of the
city. 16 And as he prolonged the time, the men caught both him, his wife, and
his two daughters by the hands, the Lord being merciful unto him: and they
brought him forth, and set him without the city. 17 And when they had brought
them out, ( the angels) said, Save thy self, and look not behind thee,
neither ^ary thou in all this plain ( country:) Save thy self in the
mountain, least thou perish. 18 And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so my Lords.
19 Behold thy servant has found grace in thy sight, and thou have magnified
thy mercy which thou have showed unto me in saving my life: Behold I cannot
be saved in the Mountain, least some harm fall upon me, and I die. 20 Behold
here is a city by to fly unto, even yonder little one: Oh let me escape
thither: Is it not a little one, and my sa^le shall live?

21 And ^e said unto him, See, I have received thy request as concerning this
thing, that I will not overthrow this city for the which thou have spoken.

22 Haste thee, and he saved there: for I can do nothing, till thou be come
thither. And therefore the name of the city is Zoar. 23 And the sun was now
risen upon the earth, and Lot was entered into Zoar. 24. Then the Lord rained
upon Sodom and Gomorrhe brimstone and fire, from the Lord out of heaven: 25
And ouerthr^we those cities, and all that plain region, and all that dwelled
in the cities, and that that grew upon the earth.

26 But Lots wife following him, looked behind her, and was turned into a
pillar of salt. 27 Abraham rising up early, got him to the place where he
stood before the presence of God. 28 And looked toward Sodom and Gomorrhe,
and toward all the land of that plain country, and beheld, and lo the
smoke of the country arose as the smoke of a furnasse. 29 And it came to
pass, that when God destroyed the Cities of that region, he thought upon
Abraham: and sent Lot out from the midst of the overthrow, when he
ouerthrewe the cities in one of the which Lot dwelled. 30 And Lot departed out
of Soar, and dwelled in the Mountain with his two daughters: for he feared to
tarry in Soar, but dwelled in a cave, he and his two daughters. 31 And the elder
said unto the younger, Our father is old, and there is not a man in the earth
to come in unto us, after the manner of all the world. 32 Come, let us give

34 And on the morrow the elder said unto the younger, Behold, yesternight
lay I with my father: let us make him drink wine this night also, and go thou
and lie with him, that we may raise up seed of our father. And they made their
father drink wine that night also.

35 And the younger arose, and lay with him: and he perceived it not, neither
when she lay down, neither when she rose up. 36 Thus were both the daughters
of Lot with child by their father. 37 And the elder bare a son, and called
his name Moab: the same is the father of the Moabites unto this day. 38 And the
younger bare a son also, and called his name Bennami: the same is the father
of the children of Ammon unto this day.

The Exposition upon the xix. Chapter of Genesis.
And there came two Angels to Sodom, Verse. 1. 2. 3
and Loath seeing them, arose up, etc. IN the beginning of this Chapter is set
before us a worthy and notable example of * hospitality, Esaias..58. b. 7 Romans
12. c. 13. 1. Tim. 5. b. 10. Ezec. 16. f. 49
diligently to be considered, as well for the great Humanity declared in it,
as also because of that Admonition that ye Apostle gives to the * Heb. Heb.
13. a. 2.
By hospitality says he some unawares have received Angels into their
intertainment. By which words we are instructed not only to use Hospitality,
but also are directed to consider the Examples of Abraham and Loath that the
same thing may happen by Gods good Prouydence to us, that did to them: that is,
by that occasion to have the great blessing of God and Deliverance from his
dreadful plagues. This must we do as Loath and Abram did, Readily, Willingly,
Earnestly and Humbly.

And before they went to reast, Verse. 4. 5.
the men of Sodom compassed the house, etc. This place is diligently to be
weighed, that the heinous and Horrible Sin of the Sodomites may be
understood, and by it, the Justice of Gods judgment worthyly considered.
First, they assault the house of a Just and Innocent man their neighbor, and
that not by Authority of any Officer and Magistrate, but of their own private
affection to satisfy their wicked unnatural, and filthy lust. And this did
not two or three, but the whole Multitude of the City, declaring an universal,
and General corruption, even from the child to the old gray hears, without
restraint or correction of any Law, Officer, or Magistrate. So that beside the
greatness of the offense generally spredde, there appears an open Impunitie,
whereby all men were suffered to give themselves over to Filthiness, and that
with such impudency, that they openly declared themselves to have * no regard
either of God or of man, Prou. 18. a. 3.
but with bold and Shameless faces, and with filthy mouths in open speech
breathed out that wickedness, that of it self is horrible to be thought and
conceived in the mind.

Bring the men out unto us, Verse. 5.
say they, that we may know them, etc. * Such Impudency in Sin is always an
assured token that the grievous plague of God is at hand. Iud. 20. a. 3. 5.
And last of all, when they were by just Loath godly and virtuously persuaded to
the contrary, they did not only with Indurate hearts reject his Admonition,
but with reproach and threatening used violence against him. Wherefore their
sin may well appear to have come to full Ripeness, and most justly to have
pulled on their heads the dreadful vengeance of God from heaven.

Let us moreover call to our remembrance that Christ himself compares * the
days of Noe, Luke 17. f. 27. 28.
and Loath unto these latter days, in which we now live, and does resemble
them in deep Security, and excessive Sensual pleasure rising of great wealth
and riches. Consider therefore this our age, and behold how General
Corruption that there is in abusing the good gifts of God to all Losenesse of
life and sensuality, even from the child cockered up in wantonness, unto the
old man, that has worn his age in the same. Consider what Security, what
Impudency, yea and Impunitie in doing wickedness, and what Obstinacy and
stubburnnesse there is, in contemning and disdainfully with mockes and scorns
rejecting all good and * godly Admonition to the contrary, Ier. 7. e. 24. 25
Ier. 44. a. 5. 16 Psalm. 49. c 18. Math. 23. d. 37 2. Pa. 24. e 20
by whom soever it be made. Surely it cannot be, but that this State must
speedily draw either the End of the world and the general Day of judgment,
or some Terrible plague from heaven for the wickedness of mankind.

And Lot went out of the door unto them and shut the door after him, Verse. 6.
7. 8
etc. In Loath we have the example of a Godly man dangerously aduenturing his
life to the fury of wicked persons, that by all persuasion he might withdraw
them from their mischievous purpose. But in this may seem some great blemish
and imperfection, that he did offer the Chastity of his daughters to be
distayned with the Villainy of these vuchast Sodomites. For although villainy
practiced with the Maidens had been far less grievous, than that which they
offered to the strangers: Romans 3. a. 8.
Yet S. Paul says, We may not do evil that good may come of it. He ought
in deed faith and courtesy to his Ghestes, and should, by all lawful
means, have Defended them, but he was no less Bound to his Daughters, then
to the Strangers, but rather in nature much more. Fathers have authority over
their Daughters, but not to cause them to suffer villainy and Dishonestie in
their bodies and souls against the law of God. But it is to be thought that
the good man was so astonished with the outrageous wickedness of the Sodomites,
that he could not well tell what to do, and therefore in these great Troubles
of his mind to have made this Unlawful Offer.

But the men put forth their hand and pulled Loath into the house, Verse. 10. 11.
etc. When Good men be in great distress in resisting the naughty attempts of
the wicked, then God either * by the hands of his Angels * or by other means
of his divine providence delivers them, Act. 5. d. 19 Act. 22. e. 18. Act.
23. d. 16
as he does Loath here in this place, striking the filthy Sodomites with
blindness.

And the men said unto Loath, ^s. 12. 13. 14
have thou here any besides? son in law, etc. Here appears the bountiful
goodness of God toward the faithful, who is not only ready to deliver them
from the destruction of the wicked, (as he does here unto Loath) but * also to
impart to them his Purpose, Genesis 18. c. 17.
and for their sakes to save other, if they do not stubburnely refuse and
deride the grace of God, as the sons in law of Loath are in this place
declared to have done. In the offer of the Angels, you have to observe the
inestimable goodness of God. In the doing of Loath, the Readiness of the
faithful to call the wicked by repentance to save themselves. In his sons in
law and other, Indurate hearts and Contempt of God and all godly admonition.

And when the morning rose, the Angels caused Loath to speed him, Verse. 15.
etc.
etc. If man Linger, and by the dullness of the flesh be slack to depart from
confusion, and to take the right way to save himself from the Plagues of God,
if the parties be not stubburnely given over to wickedness, the ready mercies
of God does by all means Hasten him, and prick him forward, and in a manner
Draw and compel him to the same, as you see the Angels do here by Loath,
Bringing him out of the City, Hastening him by words, Telling him the
danger, Showing him what he shall do.

And Loath said unto them, Oh not so my Lord, Verse. 18. etc.
etc. Loath fearing least by going so far as the hill he should in the mean
time be wrapped in the danger, before he could come thither: after a
thankful acknowledging of the goodness of God toward him, desires a
shorter space, and that he might save himself in the little City or town not
far of, Jacob. 5. d. 17.
by the same event, 1. Reg. 7. b. 8.
called after Zoar. 3. Reg. 8. c. 23.
And that we might understand how * forcible ye prayers of good men are with
God, Exodus 17. c. 11
it was granted him: 3. Reg. 13. b. 6.
Notwithstanding the same was one of the Sinful Cities, Job. 42. c. 10.
that GOD was purposed to have destroyed. Prou. 15. d. 29
Yea and the Angel says, Act. 9. g. 40.
he could do nothing until Loath came thither: 4. Reg. 4. f. 35.
declaring, that not only the gates and powers of Hell, but not so much as the
Angels of heaven can be suffered to do any thing repugnant to their health?
whom God will Save and Deliver.

Then the Lord rayned fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrah, Verse. 24. 25.
etc. The terriblenesse of the punishment declares how Horrible and Loathsome
their Sin was in the sight of God. Strange and detestable sins are by the
Justice of God plagued with rare and dreadful punishments, that all
posterity may by their Example be taught to beware. Ezec. 16. f. 49
* Because they had abused the goodness of God, in giving them Fertility,
Plenty and Wealth, and had turned his creatures (which they should have used
with thankfulness) to the fulfilling of their foul and filthy lust in all
manner of sensuality: therefore God Rayneth upon them now, and casts down
from heaven not the sweet dew and moisture to increase the fertility and
plenty of the earth, but Stinking Brimstone and fire to bring desolation both
upon them, and the land where they dwelled.

But Loths wife following him looked behind her, Verse. 26.
and was turned, etc. God by his Angel had commanded that they should not
look back, Luke 17. g. 32.
in token of their willing and * speedy departure from the company of the
wicked. Luke 9. g. 62.
But Loths wife because she Believed not the Angel, Exodus 12. e. 33.
or that she Doubted it would not come to pass, or else otherwise of a
Curious and carnal affection desired to see the thing, or in remembrance of
her Sons in law and daughters, or of the Goods that she had left behind, did
Look back and lingered on the way, and so was turned into a salt stone as a
perpetual memory and Example how unpleasant Disobedience is to God.

And the elder daughter said unto the younger, Verse. 31.
our father is old, etc. This Incestuous act of Loths daughters and their
father, may seem not only strange but Horrible to be Committed by them, who
did yet, as it were before their eyes behold the heavy hand of God, for the
like uncleanness in the Sodomites. But that the less offense may be taken here
at, and some doubts answered, we will briefly examine the history in this
manner. This doing of Loath and his daughters may be considred three ways,
either in respect of the fact it self, or of their knowledge or ignorance, or
of their intent and Loath he knew not what he did, and so the scripture says,
He knew not when they came to bed, or when they rose: and therefore can he
not be condemned of wilful Incest. And yet his drunkenness may not be so
Excused, but that he must needs be noted of Vntemperancie. For although after
so great fear and trouble of mind in himself and his daughters, he might
drink wine more then usual, to comfort his spirits, yet he should not in
any wise have gone so far, as to have been drunk therewith, and incited to
Unclean

The first Sunday in Lent at Evening prayer.
Genesis. 22. AFter these sayings, God did tempt Abraham, and said

2 And he said, Genesis 11. d. 17.
Take thy son, shine only son Isahac whom thou love, and get thee unto
the land Moriiah, and offer him there for a whole burnt offering upon one of
the Mountains which I will show thee.

3 Then Abraham rose up early in the morning, and sadled his Ass, and took
two of his young men with him, and Isahac his son, and cloue wood for the
whole burn offering, and rose up and got him to the place which God had
appointed him. 4 The third day Abraham lift up his eyes, and saw the place a
far of. 5 And said unto his young men, Bide here with the Ass, I and the
ladde will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.

6 And Abraham took the woodde of the whole burnt offering, and laid it upon
Isahac his son: but he himself took fire in his hand and a knife, and they
went both of them together. 7 Then spoke Isahac unto Abraham his father, and
said, My father. And he answered, Here am I, my son. He said, See here is
fire and wood: but where is the beast for a whole burnt sacrifice? 8 Abraham
answered, My son, God will provide a beast for a whole burnt sacrifice: and
so they went both together.

9 And when they came to the place which God had showed him, James. 2. d. 21
Abraham buylt an altar there, and dressed the woodde, and bound Isahac his
son, and laid him on the altar above upon the wood. 10 And Abraham
stretching forth his hand, took the kni^e to have killed his son.

11 And the angel of the Lord called unto him from heaven, saying, Abraham,
Abraham. And he said, Here ( am) I.

12 And he said, Lay not thy hand upon the child, neither do any thing unto
him: for now I know that thou fear God, and have for my sake net spared
thine only son.

13 And Abraham lifting up his eyes, looked, and behold, behind ( him) there
was Ram caught by the horns in a thicket: and Abraham went, and sooke the
Ram, and offered him up for a whole burnt offering in the steed of his
son. 14 And Abraham called the name of the place, The Lord will see. As it
is said this day, In the mount will the Lord be seen, 15 And the angel of
the Lord cried unto Abraham from heaven the second time.

16 And said, Luke 1. g. 73.
By my self have I sworn says the Lord, Heb. 6. b. 11.
because thou have done this thing, and have not spared thine only son. 17
That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying, I will multiply thy
seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea side,
and thy seed shall possess the gates of his enemies.

18 And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, Act. 3. e.
25.
because thou have heard my voice.

19 So turned Abraham again unto his young men: and they rose up, and went
together to Beer-saba, and Abraham dwelt at Beer-saba. 20 And after these
things, one told Abraham, saying, Behold Milcha, she has also borne children
unto thy brother Nachor. 21 Hus his eldest son, and Buz his brother, and
Camuel the father of the Syrians.

22 And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Iidlaph, and Bethuel. 23 And Bethuel
begat Rebecca. These eight did Milcha bear to Nachor Abraham's brother.

24 And his concubine called Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, Thahas,
and Maacha.

The Exposition upon the.xxij. Chapter of Genesis.
After these sayings God did tempt Abraham and said unto him, Verse. 1.
etc. MOses in this Chapter sets forth a singular and rare History, and in
deed wonderful, whether you consider God commanding ye thing, or Abraham
obeying, and ready to perform it. In that he says, God tempted Abraham, we
must understand, Math. 4. a. 1. 1. These. 3. b. 5.
that God tempts not * as the Devil and his Ministers do, Act. 5. a. 3.
to induce a man to sin, but to Try and Prove his faith, and that not
because he is ignorant, what is eue^ in the Secrets of man's heart. But either
that he may know his own weakness, as he did to the * Israelites in the
desert, Deuteronomy. 8. a. 2.
or to the end, that, that thing which is excellent in him, may be notoriously
known, to the example of all other, and to the advancement of his glory. And
so does he in this place tempt Abraham to set before the eyes of all posterity
a singular example of Faith and Obedience.

Take thy son, Verse. 2.
thine only son Isahac whom thou love, etc. This Tentation ryseth by
sundry degrees to an exceeding great trial of the faith of Abraham, to kill
any Innocent person may seem an unjust and cruel thing: much more to kill,
not one of his Aliance and kindred only, but his own natural Son, yea,
and his Only son, and that only son, that he, at the appointment of God,
loved so tenderly, Genesis 21. b. 12.
and upon * whom the Fulfilling of the promise and blessing of God did seem to
depend, this, I say, was a marvelous trial of his faith. And it was no small
tentation also, that it might seem incredible, that the true and living God
should now delight in the sacrifice of man's blood: It was never before done.
Nor Adam, nor Abel, nor Noe, were willed to do the like, Yea, God him self
had showed, Genesis 9, a. 5. 6.
Genesis 9. that he detested the shedding of man's blood. Therefore Abraham might
have suspected that this commandment was not of God, but of the Devil, to
draw him and his son to the displeasure of God, and to defeat and overthrow
the fulfilling of the blessing of all the Nations in earth by his seed. Heb.
11. d. 19.
But so * strong was Abraham's faith, as all this could not shake it, no not
though both he and his wife were past children by the course of Nature.

Then Abraham rose up early in the morning and sadled his Ass, Verse. 3. 4. etc.
etc. This is in Abraham an example of a wonderful Obedience. It may appear,
that this man, even from the beginning of his calling, had settled his mind
both constantly to Believe whatsoever God promised, (were it never so impossible
to human reason) and also wyllingly to obey that he was commanded by him,
though it seemed never so loathsome, displeasant, and odious in the sight of the
world. Genesis 12. a 4
He * forsook his natural country, He lived wyllingly as an exile in a
strange land, being pressed with * famine, Genesis 12. b. 10.
He bare it patiently and went into Egypt, He by the appointment of God, put
from his his elder son * Ismaell whom he loved, Genesis 21. b. 14.
and settled his hope altogether upon the younger. And now shows himself
ready to offer his life also at the commandment of the Lord: Such is the
faith and obedience of the saints of God. For they always cleave to the
sincere and Simple word and commandment of God. If there be any thing
therein, that seems difficulte, strange, or absurd, that they leave to the
wisdom and providence of God, to the understanding whereof they are not hable
to attain. And in deed right Faith and Obedience are grounded and stayed upon
these two things, that is, the Truth, and the Omnipotency of God. If his
promise seem impossible, and thereby shake our faith, it is Stayed up by the
consideration of his Truth. For he can not * but speak that is True, Titus. 1.
a. 2.
seem it never so impossible. And again if we doubt of the truth, we
strengthen our selves with his Omnipotency: and therefore appear it to man's
weakness never so untrue, yet God is hable to perform it. With these two
pyllers did Abraham stay up his faith and set forward is ready obedience,
that is declared in all this history.

And Abraham stretching forth his arm took the knife to have killed, Verse.
10. etc.
etc. Now the purpose of God is opened, and the matter declared, that
whatsoever GOD caused Abraham hitherto to do, was not to this end, that his
son should be Sacrificed, but that his faith and Obedience toward God should
be tried and testified to the world. For when Abraham had prepared and done
all things, and was now in readiness to have offered up his Son in
sacrifice, the Angel of God, even in the very point, staieth him, saying: Lay
not thy hand upon the child, now I know that thou fear God. In which
words, he shows also, that the fear of God is the Root of true obedience.
God knew before, that Abraham did fear him: but by this manner of speaking the
scripture gives us to understand, that GOD does not regard the Show and
pretense of his fear and worship, Romans 2. b. 13.
but the true * Practice of the same in deed, Iac. 1. d. 22.
that the world also may understand the same and * glorify God therein. Math.
5. b. 16.
They are detestable to God, that pretend to fear and worship him, and do not
in deed but by hypocrisy and dissimulation. Therefore does he extol here the
Faith of Abraham, that showed so notable proof thereof.

And Abraham lifting up his eyes looked, Verse. 13. 14.
and behold there was, etc. God of his singular providence, by such means as
his wisdom only knows, prepared this Ram to be their upon the sudden,
to be offered in the place of Isaac. And Abraham to make a solemn and
perpetual Memorial not of his own Doing, but of gods Mercies: changes the
name of the place, calling it, The Lord will see, to signify, that God is
ready, and at hand always to His, and sees them in their distress and need.

And the Angel of the Lord cried to Abraham the second time. Verse. 15. etc.
etc. This is the fruit of Abraham's faith and obedience, that by the Mouth of
the Angel of God he has Confirmed unto him the great Blessings that God
before had promised. But for so much as the reason why God does here so bless
Abraham is added in this wise. Because thou have done this thing, and have not
spared thy only son, etc. There may seem two great Doubts to be moved.
First, how this may stand with the Free Promise of the same blessing made to
Araham cap. 12. Genesis 1^. a. 2.
before he showed this obedience. Secondly, because this part of the blessing (
In thy seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed) does appertain to
the Spiritual and Heavenly blessing in the Savior of the world Christ Jesus:
It may seem by the words that the same blessing did depend upon this Fact of
Abraham, so that, if he had not this done, that promise had not been performed.
For he says, Because thou have done this thing, etc. and because thou have
heard my voice. But this may seem very absurd and repugnant to the
Scriptures that the Saving of the world by Christ, should be granted because
of the Obedience of Abraham and not of the Free mercy of God.

To these doubts we must answer, that, with out exception, these Promises
were made and in dew time performed of the free mercy of God, and love
toward, not Abraham alone, but all mankind also: not regarding their
Worthiness, but his Own goodness. And when God says, Because thou have done
this thing, and because thou have heard my voice, we must understand, that
God, for our imbecillitie and weak capacity in heavenly matters, speaks in
this place, as he does in many other, after the Manner of Men. For a man
oftentimes has a favorable inclination to love an other, and that of his own
motion, without any consideration of desert in the person, and upon the same
love toward him, does freely promise him some good benefit and pleasure. But
when he sees the good will of the party toward him again, he is greatly
Delited therewith, and the more he does declare it by his ready service, the
more he is incensed to perform his Liberal Promise to him, and to assure him
of the same.

In ye like manner does God deal here with Abraham. The principal Causes of
these blessings, and the Performance thereof are the Truth and Free mercy God
as it may appear in that they were made to Abraham not only * before he did
this, Genesis 12. a. 3.
but before Isaac was borne. The second cause that moves God here to repeat
them, and to confirm Abraham in the assurance of them, was his * Faith and
obedience in this place declared. Iere. 5. a. 3.


After these things one told Abraham, Verse. 20. etc.
behold Milcha, she has, etc. This may seem strange to the worldly Man,
that Abraham forsaking his country at the calling of Almighty GOD, and having
the promise of great increase of his seed: at the length when he was an
Hundred pears of age, has but One son, and Nahor his brother, who tarried
behind, and had no promise of God, has by that time a Number of children. So
the Blessings and Promises of God, in this life seem not to take such force,
but the ungodly be more happy then they. But the only son of Abraham, was
not given by the Common Course of Nature, as Nahors were, but of the mighty
Power of God, above all Nature or reason: and, before the birth of the Child,
he had the Promises of gods blessings and the assured covenant of God, Genesis 17.
a. 7
that he would be * His God, and the God of his Seed, which was a far greater
Felicity, then the Multitude of Nahors children.

The second Sunday in Lent at Morning prayer.
Genesis. 27.

2 And he said, Behold, I am now old, and know not the day of my death. 3.
Now therefore take I pray thee thy weapons, thy Quiver and thy Bow, and get
thee to the field, that thou may take me some veneson.

4 And make me well tasting meats such as I love, and bring it to me, that I
may eat, that my soul may bless thee before that I die. 5 But Rebecca heard
when Isahac spoke to Esau his son: And Esau went into the field to hunt
veneson, and to bring it. 6 And Rebecca spoke unto Jacob her son, saying,
Behold, I have heard thy father talking with Esau thy brother, and saying.

7 Bring me veneson, and make me dainty meat, that I may eat, and bless
thee before the Lord, before my death.

6 Now therefore my son hear my voice in that which

10 And thou shall bring it to thy father, that he may eat, and that he may
bless thee before his death.

11 Then said Jacob to Rebecca his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is a
hearie man and I am smooth.

12 My father shall peradventure feel me, and I shall seem unto him as though
I went about to beguile him, and so shall I bring a curse upon me, and not a
blessing.

13 And his mother said unto him, Upon me be the curse my (...): only hear
my voice, and go and fetch me them.

14 And ( Jacob) went, and fet them, and brought them to his mother: and his
mother made pleasant meat, such as she knew his father loved. 15 And Rebecca
fet goodly raiment of her oldest son Esau, which were in the house with her,
and put them upon Jacob her younger son.



25 Then said he, Heb. 11. d. 20.
Bring me, and let me eat of my sons veneson, that my soul may bless thee,
And he brought him, and he eat: and he brought him wine also, and he drank.

26 And his father Isahac said unto him, Come near, and kiss me my son. 27
And he went unto him and kissed him: and he smelled the savor of his raiment,
and blessed him, and said, See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a
feelde which the Lord has blessed. 28 God give thee of the deawe of heaven,
and of the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine. 29 People be
thy servants, and Nations bow to thee: be Lord over thy brethren, and thy
mothers children stowpe with reverence unto thee: cursed be he that curses
thee, and blessed be he that blesses thee.

30 As Soon as Isahac had made an end of blessing Jacob, and Jacob was scarce
gone out from the presence of Isahac his father, then came Esau his brother
from his hunting.

31 And he also had made a pleasant meat, and brought it unto his father, and
said unto his father, Let my father arise, and eat of his sons veneson,
that thy soul may bless me. Then his father Isahac said unto him, Who art
thou? He answered, I am thy son, thy first borne Esau.

33 And Isahac was greatly astonished out of measure, and said, Which ( is he)
and where is he then that has hunted veneson and brought it me, and I have
eaten of all, before thou came? and have blessed him, yea, and he shall be
blessed.

34 When Esau heard the words of his father, he cried aloud and bitterly above
measure, and said unto his father, Bless me, I also ( am thy son) O my
father.

Genesis 25. e. 33
36 And he said again, Is not he rightly named Jacob? for he has undermined
me now two times: ( First) he took away my birth right, and see, now he has
taken away my blessing also. And he said, Have thou kept never a blessing for
me?

37 Isahac answered and said unto Esau, Behold, I have made him thy Lord,
and all his brethren have I made his servants: Moreover with corn and wine
have I established him: what shall I do unto thee now my son?

38 And Esau said unto his father, Have thou but that one blessing my father?
bless me, I am also ( thy son) O my father. So lifted up Esau his voice, and
wept.

39 Then Isahac his father answered and said unto him, Heb. 11. a. 20.
Behold thy dwelling place shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the
deawe of heaven from above.

40 And through thy sword shall thou live, and shall be thy brothers servant:
and it shall come to pass, that thou that his father blessed him withal. And
Esau said in his heart, The days of sorowing for my father are at hand, then
will I slay my brother Jacob. 42 And these words of Esau her elder son were
told to Rebecca: And she sent, and called Jacob her younger son, and said
unto him, Behold, thy brother Esau as touching thee does comfort himself (
full purposing) to kill thee. 43 Now therefore my son, hear my voice: make
thee ready, and fly to Laban my brother at Haran. 44 And tarry with him a
while, until thy brothers fierceness be swaged.

45 And until thy brothers wrath turn away from thee, and he forget the
things which thou have done to him, then will I send and fet thee away from
thence: why should I be desolate of you both in one day? 46 And Rebecca spoke
to Isahat, I am weary of my life for the daughters of Heth: If Jacob take a
wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these ( which are) of the daughters of
this land, what good shall my life do me?

The Exposition upon the.xxvij. Chapter of Genesis.
And it came to pass, when Isahac old, and his eyes were dim, etc. THis
whole history that Moses sets forth in this Chapter so largely, may seem
at the first to conteyne no great matter of weight, but only the Slight and
Craft of a mother, and her son, causing the Father to transfer the blessing
of his Heritage upon one, that he would not have done it unto. But if with
Reverence, as our duty is, we look into the scriptures of God, and lay aside
vain and wicked cogitations, we shall see in this place the work of the
wisdom and Providence of God using the Blemishes and frailties of the Godly,
unto his glory, and to the perfourmance of his determined purpose and promise.
For as the Patriarchs were Godly men, Eccle. 44. c. 16 17. 18. etc.
and in the * singular Favor of GOD, so had they, as men, their Imperfections
and offenses: which God undoubtedly misliked, and yet, of his mercy, pardoned,
as in other Chapters before is declared. The like is here now in this place,
as well in Isaac as in Rebecca, and Jacob her son. Therefore no person can by
them take Example of the like doing, but rather learue a Godly lesson to be
more ware of themselves, and to take heed least to the Hasarding of the Favor
of God they do that, which shall be contrary to his holy Will and displeasant
unto him.

When the two children were borne, the determined purpose of God was declared,
Genesis 25. c. 23.
and his Election made manifest, Osee. 12. a. 3
* That the elder, Romans 9. c. 12.
Esau, should be Servant unto Jacob the younger. This was revealed unto Rebecca,
and not unknown to Isaac the father. And yet this notwithstanding, of a
Carnal affection and love toward his elder Son, he sought to Transfer the
blessing of God and heritage of pre-eminence in the covenant of God unto him:
Wherein he might seem to overthwart the Election of God, which could not be
done without some offense, and therefore GOD did suffer him to be Deluded by
his Wife and Child. And yet this human affection in Isaac was joined with a
constant faith in the favor of God, whereby he believed that as well himself as
other Patriarks were ordained y^ good instruments of God, by their blessings to
denounce and declare the Heritage and Succession of the Covenant of God made to
Abraham and his Seed.

And Rebecca spoke unto Jacob her son saying, Verse. 6. 7. etc.
behold, I have heard, etc. Moses here declares, by what Craft the blessing
was transferred to Jacob from Esau. And truly this dealing of Rebecca is not
without blame. For albeit she could not rule her husband, and Cause him to
yield to the declared purpose of God, in preferring Jacob the younger brother:
yet should she not have used so uncomely and unlawful means to work the
thing by Counterfeyting and Untruth.

If she * knew, Genesis 25. c. 35.
as she did in deed, that it was the Immutable purpose and election of God,
She should have patiently looked, and have abidden until God had wrought it by
such ways as he thought good, if she could not by any godly persuasion have
brought it to pass. But such Frailetie God often in his Saints of his great
mercy pardons, when it is not done of Malicious mind and purpose, as surely
it was not in Rebecca, but of a desire by some means or other to bring that to
effect, which she knew was the will of God.

Then said Jacob to Rebecca his mother, Verse. 11. and ^
Behold, Esau my brother, etc. Jacob did to easily yield to his Mothers
persuasion, and, as in his words, he showed, that he feared his father, and was
loathe to enter his displeasure: so he should have feared GOD much more, and
Considered, what a blemishe it was to purchase his blessing by Cou^terfayting
and untruth. For although he respected a right end, that is, to attain that,
Genesis 25. c. 23.
which was the * promise of God: yet by Such means he should not have done it.

Then said Isaac unto Jacob come near, Verse. 21. 22.
and I will feel thee my son, etc. Isaac did suspect, that he was abused,
and therefore Tries the matter by all means he can. But it pleased God to
dull his senses, partly to show, that Man labors in * vain to overthwart
his Purpose, Genesis 45. c. 8.
and that which he is determined to have: Genesis 48. d. 18.
partly, Prou. 21. d. 30.
that, by this manner of correction, he might punish and Chastise his
Immoderate affection toward Esau his elder son.

God give thee of the dew of heaven, Verse. 28. 29.
and of the fatness of the earth, etc. Under these worldly blessings the
ancient fathers contained the Heavenly promises, Albeit they be not vitered so
Plainly, as they have been sense in the time of the Gospel. For Gods will was
to deal with the^ under tipes * and figures of worldly things. 1. Cor. 16. b.
11
And therefore the land of Chanaan and the Fertility thereof is a tipe of the
heavenly and everlasting Felicity with God, and the Subjection of enemies does
signify the Conquest and overthrow of our Spiritual enemies to whom we were
thrall and in danger.

When Esau heard the words of his father, Verse. 34. etc.
he cried alowde, etc. A man might think, that Gods mercy would have been
moved with this * heavy and sorrowful complaynt of Esau, Heb. 12. d. 17.
for the loss of his fathers blessing: but it is evident, that this
lamentation did not proceed of a Sound faith and true Repentance, but rather
of a proud mind and of a Desperate fury and rage, as it may appear by the
Hatred that he protested, and by the bitter words and grievous Threatenings
that after he used against his brother, Manacing that after his fathers death
he would assuredlye kill him. And of what affection he was, and how smally he
esteemed his birth right and the felicity that might come thereof, he
declared, when he Sold the same to Jacob his brother for a mess of wortes.

And she called Jacob her younger son and said unto him, thy brother, Verse.
42. 43.
etc. The blessing that Isaac had given to his younger son might seem of
Small force, seeing he was brought even now presently into so great Fear to be
Slain by his brother: and this was undoubtedly no small temptation and trouble
to the mind of Rebecca, that she saw her son, whom she so tenderly loved,
by her Fact to be brought in danger of Present death. But yet did she and her
son so much esteem this Blessing, that rather then they would yield it up to
Esau to have his favor, he was Contented to go into voluntary Banishment and
she to forgo the Presence and Company of her son, that she so much esteemed.
By this example in Jacob we must learn to take patiently, Ge. 12. c 10. 12
if after the hope of Gods blessing and of his favor, Genesis 32. c. 9. 11
*immediately the Cross of affliction do follow, Ge. 37. a. 5. 20
and not for the trouble and danger of the world to forgo the sweet
promises of God. Exo. 5. b. 3. 9.
Neither must we seek to purchase the quietness of this life with the Loss
of Gods Heavenly Blessing. Ioh. 9. d. 33. 34.


The second Sunday in Lent at Evening prayer.
Genesis. 34.

2 Whom when Sichem the son of Hemor the Heuite Lord of the country saw, he
took her, and lay with her, and defiled her.

3 And his heart lay unto Dina the daughter of Jacob, and he loved that
damsel, and spoke kindly unto her.

4 And Sichem spoke unto his father Hemor, saying, Get me this maiden unto my
wife. 5 And Jacob heard that he had defiled Dina his daughter (his sons being
with their cattle in the field) and Jacob held his peace until they were
come. 6 And Hemor the father of Sichem, went out unto Jacob to commune with him.

7 And when the sons of Jacob (coming out of the field) heard it, it
grieved them, and they were not a little wroth, because he had wrought folly in
Israel, in that he had lain with Jacobs daughter, which thing ought not to be
done. 8 And Hemor communed with them, saying, The

12 Ask freely of me both dowry and gifts, and I will give according as ye
say unto me, so that ye give me the damsel to wife. 13 But the sons of
Jacob answered to Sichem and Hemor his father, talking amongst themselves
deceptfully: because he had defiled Dina their sister.

14 And they said unto them, We can not do this thing,

15 But in this will we consent unto you: if ye will be as we be, and all the
males amongst you be circumcised.

16 Then will we give our daughters unto you, and take your daughters to us,
and will dwell with you, and be one people. 17 But and if ye will not hearken
unto us to be circumcised, then will we take our Daughter, and go our ways. 18
Their words pleased Hemor, and Sichem his son. 19 And the young man differde
not to do the thing, because he had a lust to Jacobs daughter: he was also
most set by of all that was in his fathers house.

20 Then Hemor and St^^em his son went unto the gate of their city, and
co^muned with the men of their city, saying. 21 These men live peaceably among
us, and dwell in the land, and do their occupation therein: and behold, the
land is large enough for them, we will take their daughters to wives, and give
them our daughters.

22 Only herein will they consent unto us for to dwell with us, and to be one
people, If all the males that are among us be circumcised, as they are
circumcised?

23 Shall not their goods and their substance, and all their cattle be ours?
let us only consent unto them, and they will dwell with us. 24 And unto Hemor
and Sichem his son hearkened all that went out of the gate of the city: and
all the males were circumcised, whatsoever went out

26 And slew also Hemor and Sichem his son with the edge of the sword, and
took Dina out of Sichems house, and went their way. 27 And the sons of Jacob
coming upon the dead, ^
spoiled the city, because they had defiled their sister.

28 And took their sheep, oxen, and their asses, and whatsoever was in the
city, and also in the fields.

29 And all their goods, and all their children, and their wives took they
captive, and made hauok of all that was in the house. 30 But Jacob said to
Simeon and Leui, Ye have troubled me, and made me to be abhorred of the
inhabitours of the land of the Chanaanite and the Pherezite: and I being few
in number, they shall gather themselves together against me, and slay me, and
so shall I and my house he destroyed. 31 And they answered, Should he deal
with our sister as with an harlot?

The Exposition upon the.xxxiiij Chapter of Genesis.
Dina the daughter of Lea, which she bare unto Jacob, went out to see, etc.
MOses in this Chapter sets forth a great tentation that happened unto Jacob,
far more troublesome and dangerous, then that was of the fear of his brother
Esaus displeasure. He was now at some quietness in the company of his wife,
children, and family, and so had remained a good time, doing undoubtedly the
duty of a good and godly Governor of his household. But suddenly falls out
this trouble and reproach of the Rauishing of his daughter Dina, much surely to
the grief of his mind, that did so dearly esteem the Chastity of his
daughter. By which we may understand, both what danger may come to young
women by Idle gadding and Gasing abroad without the company of some grave
Persons to Ouersee them: and also, that even good men sometime have so waiwarde
and overthwart Wantons to their children, as will not well be brideled within
order, when their Parents have done all that they can. And yet may there seem
some negligence in Lea her mother, that she did suffer her so Loosely to go
abroad.

And Sichem spoke unto his father Hemor, Verse. 4.
saying get me this maiden, etc. The heart of this young Gentleman was so set
upon this Maiden in intemperate heat of love, that he could not satisfy
himself by her defyling and rauishment, but now seeks to have her to wife,
and that in a manner by force. For although both his father and he used Fair
words and great promises: yet he keeps her at home in his house and would
not suffer her to return to her father. If he had sought to have married her
before the Villainy offered, there had been no great evil, but first to work
so great reproach to the People of God, and his Chosen Patriarch, and then to
seek under a fair color a forcible Marriage made the offense the greater.

And Hemor the father of Sichem went out unto Jacob, Verse. 6.
etc. A godly Father and a good Prince or governor would first have sharply
corrected his Son, and then afterward have done that might have seemed
agreeable to reason and godliness. But it may appear this Hemor was a
cockering father, and a Loose governor, and that the like examples of
wantonness had been common there without punishment. And therefore the same
provoked God of his just judgment to suffer so great a Plague to come upon
them, although the Sons of Jacob which were the instruments thereof can not
be excused of outrageous Fury, that for the offense of Oue person destroyed
and spoiled the Whole City.

And Hemor communed with them saying, Verse. 8. etc.
The soul of my son, etc. In that Hemor so earnestly labourethe to Jacob and
his Sons for the marriage of Dina, and made so great offers, it may appear,
that even among the Heathens and Infidels, it was thought necessary to have
the Consent of Parents to the Marriage of their Children, Much more should that
reverence be used among Christians, and them that profess the Fear of God.

But the sons of Jacob answered to Sichem and Hemor talking among, Verse. 13.
14.
etc. It is not to be merueiled, if the sons of Jacob were much grieved to
have so great a reproach and villainy wrought to their fathers House, neither
are they in that any thing to be blamed; yea, if there had been any ordinary
Magistrate to have punished so great an outrage, they might and ought with safe
conscience to have complained to him. But I see not, by what authority they
could take the sword of Reuengement in their *own hands, and so far
exceed the Measure of Justice, as to destroy an whole City for the offense of
one. Well might they be the Instruments of Gods Justice, for causes to them
unknown, but that does not excuse them, who followed their own affection and
desire of Reuengement.

In that they do dissemble here and pretend consent of Marriage, if the
Sichemites would be circumcised, it does increase their fault, and they make
the ordinance of God a color to work their affection. Genesis 24. a. 3.
For their consciences did tell them, Genesis 28. a. 2. 2.
that neither conveniently they might * marie with the Inhabitants of that
Country, Cor. 6. c. 14.
neither in deed that they did mean so to do, but to be revenged, they
suffered the Sacrament of Gods Covenant to be Distayned of the Faythlesse and
Heathen persons.

Their words pleased Hemor and Sichem his son, Verse. 18. etc.
etc. When Hemor the Prince and his Son, and all the residue of the people at
their persuasion did so easily yield to the motion of Jacobs Sons wo^^ any
further instruction: it is evident they had no conscience at all, nor passed
what Religion they received, nor what God they worshipped, so they might be in
hope either to satisfy their bodily pleasure, or to attain some Worldly
Commodity and richesse. For these were the only causes and respects that
moved them. And where such minds are both in Prince and Subjects, there can
not want abundance of all evil. Wherefore, albeit it be not expressed in the
text, it may well be gathered there were great Vices generally among the^, that
provoked the Wrath of God against them.

And the third day while they were sore, Verse. 25. etc
two of the sons of Jacob, etc. Albeit only the two sons of Jacob are here
named, it is not likely they did the thing alone, but that they were the chief
causers and Capitaynes, and had other of their brethren and of their fathers
family with them, without their fathers consent, or at the leastwise
pretending that they would do nothing but fetch home their Sister, who was
there unjustly detayned, and not making him privy of their whole purpose.

But Jacob said to Simeon and Levy, Verse. 30.
ye have troubled me and made me, etc. Jacob chasticeth his Sons, and shows
how Rashly and indiscreetly they have done, and into how great danger they had
brought both him and themselves, and all that ever apperteyned to them. And
surely if GOD had not of his divine Providence marvelously Preserved his
people, less danger could not have followed, then Jacob speaks of. But the
Rashness and Heat of young men is such, that they are so blinded with the
desire of their own fantasies and affections, as they regard no perilles,
nor think any Council to be like to their own.

The third Sunday in Lent at Morning prayer.
Genes. 39. Joseph was brought unto Egypt, and Putiphar a Lord of Pharaos, and
his chief steward, an Egyptian, bought him of the Ismaelites which had
brought him thither. 2 And God was with Joseph, and he became a luckie man,
continuing in the house of his master the Egyptian. 3 And his master saw that
God was with him, and that God made all that he did to prosper in his hand. 4
And Joseph found grace in his masters sight, and served him: And he made him
ouerseer of his house, and put all that he had in his hand. 5 And it came to
pass from the time that he had made him ouerseer of his house, and over all
that he had, the Lord blessed the Egyptians house for Joseph's sake: and the
blessing of the Lord was upon all that he had in the house, and in the field.

6 And therefore he left all that he had in Joseph's hand: and he knew nothing
with him, save only the bread which he did eat. And Joseph was a goodly
person, and a well favored. 7 And after this, his masters wife cast her cyes
upon Joseph, and said, ( come) lie with me.

8 But he refused, and said unto his masters wife, Behold, my master woteth
not what he has in the house with me, and has committed all that he has to
my hand.

9 There is no man greater in the house then I, neither has he kept any thing
from me but only thee, because thou art his wife: how then can I do this
great wickedness, and sin against God? And after this manner spoke she to
Joseph day by day: but he hearkened net unto her to sleep near her, or to be
in her company. 11 And on a certain day Joseph entered into the house to do
his business, and there was none of the household by, in the house.

12 Then she caught him by the garment, saying, lie with me. And he left his
garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out. 13 And when she saw that he
had left his garment in her hand, and was fled out.

14 She called unto the men of her house, and told them, saying, See, he has
brought in an Hebrew unto us to do us shame: for he came in to me to have lain
with me, and I began to cry with a loud voice. 15 And when he heard that I
lift up my voice and cried, he left his garment with me, and fled away and
got him out.

16 And she laid up his garment by her, until her Lord came home. 17 And she
told him with these words, saying, This Hebrew servant which thou have
brought unto us, came unto me to do me shame. 17 But as soon as I lift up
Psalm. 103. b. 18
he waxed wroth. 20 And Joseph's master took him, and put him in prison, in
the place where the kings prisoners lay bound: and there continued he in
prison.

21 But the Lord was with Joseph, and showed him mercy, and got him favor in
the sight of the Lord of the prison.

22 And the keeper of the prison committed to Iosephes hand all the prisoners
that were in the prison house: and whatsoever was done there, that did he.

23 And the keeper of the prison looked unto nothing that was under his hand,
seeing that the Lord was with him: For whatsoever he did, the Lord made it to
prosper.

The Exposition upon the.xxxix. Chapter of Genesis.
Joseph was brought unto Egypt, Verse. 1.
and Putiphar a Lord of Pharaos, etc. MOses in this Chapter begins to set
forth a notable example in Joseph of the Providence and wisdom of God,
turning the envious and Malicious endeavors of Joseph's brothers unto the work
of his Glory and preservation of his people. God was determined, that after
certain years, Deuteronomy. 28. b. 15 Leuit. 26. b. 14
for the * Sinfulness of men there should by his just judgment come upon all
that part of the world a general Plague of Dearth and Scarcity, Malach. 2. a. 2
in which there was great danger that Jacob and his sons and family, being
the posterity of the seed of Abraham, to whom he had made his Covenant,
should Perish and die for Lack of sustenance. Therefore, many years before
taking occasion of his brothers Malice, he * sends Joseph before into Egypt,
Psa. 104. b 17
and there after some trouble, at the length aduaunceth him to great Power and
honor, that he might be an helper and Succourer for his Father and brethren,
in the time of their great Distress. The Brothers of Joseph neither foresawe
any evil to come, nor sought for any thing in their doings, but the Satisfying
of their own Envy and Malice toward him, but God used their Malice for the
instrument of his glory.

And God was with Joseph, Verse. 2. 3. 4
and he became a luckie man, continuing in the, etc. By this example in Joseph
we have to learn that God oftentimes Suffers those that he loves most
dearly, and by whom he will set forth the Glory of his name, 1. Reg. 19. b.
12 Dan. 6. e. 16.
to be cast unto * Trouble and Affliction. 1. Reg. 23. d. 36
But yet he is so careful for them, that he does not only Stay the power of
the wicked toward them, but also works them Grace, Favor, and Credit, even
with Heathens and ungodly persons, Exodus 12. f. 36.
such as this Putifer the Egyptian and the keeper of the prison were. Psa. 105.
g. 44
So that under his * very Enemies, 3. Reg. 18. c. 13.
he does preserve his elect and chosen.

Joseph, was now become a Bondeman, and afterward is made a Prisoner, and yet
God increases him with his blessings. Whereby we may understand, that God
has a love and care of his, though they be never so base, so simple, and so
Miserable in the world.

And the Lord blessed the Egiptians house for Joseph's sake, Verse. 5. 6.
etc. God for his electes sake does not only oftentimes Spare the godless and
Wicked Persons, but also * blesses them with increase of worldly benefits,
G^n. 30. e. 30.
by that means to assuage their furious and Tyrannical spirits toward them,
that they may live in more Quiet and comfort underneath them.

And after this his master wife cast her eyes upon Joseph, Verse. 7. etc.
and said, etc. Now falls out a new temptation to Joseph by his masters
wife, through which he was cast into greater trouble, then ever he was before.

In Putifars wife yo have y^ example of a wicked and Adulterous woman, who
although she had a Noble man to her husband, that honored and loved her: yet,
of a sinful and shameless nature, being a Woman, Woeth this godly yongman
her own Servant, and entiseth him to horrible Aduterie, moved only thereunto
by the good gifts, and blessings of God as well in the Body, as in the mind
of Joseph. And in this her devilish purpose gives not over by sundry
repulses, but with impudent Obstin^^^, contrary to the nature of Womanhead,
contynueth in the same, even to the using of Violence to the young man. And when
she saw his Constancy to be such, as by no way she could win him, with
shameless Malice to cloak and color her own wickedness (as the * manner of
such persons is) she accuses him to her husband, Prou. 30. c. 20
that he would have Ravished her, and by that occasion, caused him to be cast
into prison.

In Iosepth you have ye example as well of a faithful servant, as of a Chaste
young man, having the fear of God before his eyes. For albeit he were unmarried,
in the Heat of young years, and provoked by his Lady and Maistres at sundry
times, watching fit occasions of secreasie for so lewd a purpose: yet could
he never be won to yield to such unthankful Villainy toward his Master, of
whom he had been intertayned with so great favor. Yea, and when by the Malice
of the woman the matter was brought to extremity, he rather chose both to *
leese the Favor and credit with his master, 2. Cor. 6. b. 8.
and to abide all Misery, Imprisonment, yea and Death also, then any way to
have his Conscience touched with so Foul a sin before God.

And Joseph's master took him and put him in prison, Verse. 20.
in the place, etc. This was great Lightness and rashenesse in Putifar either
by the blind Rage of Jealousy, or by Immoderate affection and Credit toward
his lewd wife without just and further Examination to condemn a servant, whom
he had of long time Tried so Faithful and profitable, and in whom he had
seen the evident tokens of Gods Favor and assistance in all his doings.

But the Lord was with Joseph, Verse. 21, 22.
etc. and got him favor with, etc. God never leaves his, Psalm. 90. c. 15
but in the * deepest afflictions is with them, Psalm. 33. d. 19
and procures them relief.

The third Sunday in Lent at Evening prayer.
Genesis. 42.

2 And he said, Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt: get you
down thither, and bye us corn from thence, that we may live, and not dye.

3 So went Iosephes ten brethren down to bye corn in Egypt. 4 But Benjamin
Joseph's brother would not Jacob send with his other brethren: for he said,
Lest peradventure destruction come upon him.

5 And the sons of Israel came to bye corn among other that came: for there
was dearth in the land of Chanaan, 6 And Joseph was governor in the land,
and sold to all the people of the land. And Iosephes brethren came, and bowed
themselves with their faces down to the ground before him. 7 When Joseph saw
his brethren, he knew them, and made himself strange unto them, and spoke
roughly unto them, saying, Whence come ye? They answered, Out of the land of
Chanaan to bye vittayle.

8 And Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him. 9 And Joseph
remembered his dreams which he dreamed of them, and said unto them, Ye are
spies: and to see where the land is weak, is your coming.

10 And they said unto him. Nay my Lord, but to bye vittayle thy servants
are come. 11 We are all one man's sons, and mean truly, and thy servants
are no spies.

12 And he said unto them again, Nay: but to see where the land is weak, is
your coming.

13 And they said, We thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one man
in the land of Chanaan: and behold the youngest is this day with our father,
and one no man weteth where he is. 14 And Joseph said unto them, That is it
that I spoke unto you when I said, Ye are spies.

15 Hereby ye shall be proved ( by) the life of Pharao, ye shall not go hence
except your youngest brother come hither.

16 Send out one of you, which may fet your brother, and ye shall be kept in
prison, that your words may be proved whether there be any truth in you: or
else, ( by) the life of Pharaoye are but spies. 17 And he put them altogether
in ward three days. 18 And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do,
and live: ( for) I fear God.

19 If you be true men, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your
prison: and go ye, carry corn ( to put away) the famine from your household.

20 But bring your youngest brother unto me, and so shall your words be tried
true, and ye shall not die. And they did so. 21 And one said to another, We
have verily sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear him: and therefore is this
trouble come upon us.

22 And Ruben answered them, saying. Saw I not unto you, that you should not
sin against the la^, and ye would not hear? and see, now his blood is
required.

23 They were not aware that Joseph understood them: for he spoke unto them by
an interpreter.

24 And he turned from them and wept: and turned to them again and communed
with them, and took out Simeon from amongst them, and bound him before their
eyes.

25 And Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and put every man's
money in his sack, and to give them vittaile to spend by the way: and thus
did he unto them.

26 And they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence. 27 And as
one of them opened his sack for to give his ass proue^der in the Inn, he
espied his money, for it was in his sackes mouth: 28 And he said unto his
brethren, My money is restored to me again, for lo, it is in my sack. And
their heart failed them, and they were astonished, and said one to another, why
has God dealt thus with us?

29 And they came unto Jacob their father, unto the land of Chanaan, and told
him all that befell unto them, saying. 30 The man ( who is) the Lord of the
land, spoke roughly to us, and took us for spies of the country.

31 And we said unto him, We mean truly, we never were spies. 32 We be
twelve brethren, sons of our father: one is away, and the youngest is this
day with our father in the land of Chanaan. 33 And the Lord of the country
said again unto us, Hereby shall I know that ye mean truly: Leave one of
your brethren here with me, and take ( food) to put away the famine from your
housholdes, and get you away. 34 And bring your youngest brother unto me, that
I may know that you are no spies, but mean truly: so will I deliver you your
brother, and ye shall occupy in the land. 35 And as they emptied their
sackes, behold, every man's bundell of money was in his sack: And when both
they and their father saw the bundelles of money, they were afraid.

36 And Jacob their father said unto them. Me have ye robbed of my children:
Joseph is away, and Simeon is away, and ye will take Benjamin away: all these
things are against me. 37 Ruben, said unto his father, Slay my two sons, it I
bring him not to thee again: deliver him to my hand, and I will bring him to
thee again. 38 And he said, My son shall not go down with you, for his
brother is dead, and he is left alone: if destruction come upon him by the way
which ye go, ye shall bring my gray head with sorrow unto the grave.

The Exposition upon the.42. Chapter of Esaias.
And he said, Verse. 2.
behold, I have heard there is corn in Egypt, etc. THe house of the good
Patriarch and godly father Jacob was subject to the necessity and danger of
the Famine, Genesis 12. c. 10.
even as * before it had happened to Abraham and Isaac. Genesis 26. a. 1.
So God is wont often to make his good and godly persons partakers of the
common Calamities to the end that that rod, which is to ye wicked a Punishment
and correction, may be to them an Exercise of their Faith and patience, Ier.
37. c. 14.
to their greater benefit: Ezech. 4. b. 8.
So it fell out to * Jeremy, Dan. 3. b. 18.
Ezechiel, Daniel. We have here also to observe the course of Gods Providence
falling out to truth, when men least think of it. Joseph's * Dream, Genesis 37.
b. 7.
that moved his brethren to envy him, is now upon this occasion to be
fulfilled. Joseph was now of great authority in Egypt, without whose consent,
no Corn could be sold. And Jacob, although unknowing, is moved by the
Instinction of God to send his sons into Egypt to bye corn, by which
occasion they must needs come to Joseph and Honor him as Lord of the land.

So went Joseph's ten brethren, Verse. 3. 4.
etc. but Benjamin Joseph's brother, Jacob, etc. You have here the Example of a
Fatherly and tender Love toward his younger son, whom he would not rashely
commit to Danger, either by reason of his Tender age, or other Incident
occasions, more like to fall to him, then to his other Children.

And Joseph's brethren came, Verse. 6.
and bowed themselves before him, etc. The Dream that Joseph told to his
brethren Cap. 37. Genesis 37. b. 7. 9
is here performed, but utterly as yet unknown to themselves, as often
Prophesies are fulfilled by the Ignorance of men in Gods affairs. It was
prophesied that the Jews should Reject and put to death Christ the Son of God,
which they did in deed by Ignorance. For if they had known it they would not
have crucified the Lord of glory. Act. 3. c. 17.
Act. 1. Cor. 2. b. 8.
3. 1. Cor. 2. The Apostle propheseth, That in the latter days some should
attend to false spirits and doctrines of Devils. 1. Tim. 4. 1. Tim. 4. a. 1.
And so we see it to have fallen out, but not with ye Knowledge and Confession
of them, that do it, who obstinately stand in this that they Defend nothing
but Truth and Godliness. Psalm. 50. a. 5.
But * God will be always justified in his Prophecies and Promises, Psalm. 61. a.
9.
and all * Men shall be found Liers. Psalm. 115. a. 11.


When Joseph saw his brethren he knew etc. Verse. 7. ^
and spoke roughly unto them, etc. This might seem to be of (...), or upon
desire of Reuengement, that Joseph uses the (...) Roughly. But we (...) the
Acts of good men by the (...) at the first, until we see the End of their
doings. For oftentimes, they have other causes (...) then commonly to all men
are known. Christ him self spoke * Math. 15. c. 24 26.
Roughly to the (...) the first (...) in the End he (...) with Clement.

Joseph knowing by his (...) the Wickedness of his Brethren, might (...)
Doubt, whether they had (...) the (...) his yonge^ brother (...) To boulte it
out, whether it (...).

And Joseph remembered his dreams, Verse. 9.
that he dreamed of them, etc. Joseph (...) before* Therefore being put in
(...) of them now, he so deale^^y (...) his brethren, as, when they should be
opened unto them, thee might not only simply Believe them, but with Fear
(...) Reverence acknowledge the Tri^^ of GOD in them, with (...) of their (...)
Malice.

Hereby you shall be proved be the life of Pharao, Verse. 15. 16.
ye shall not go hence, etc. It may seem justly to be called into question,
both how Joseph might without blame, Dissemble as he does in this (...), and
also use this Profane and (...) Oath by tho life of pharao.

Surely I think Many Singular factes of the ancient Potria^kes before the law
published are not to be draw^e into commen Examples for us now to (...). It may
be, that they had certain (...) of God, by which they were moved to do some
things otherwise, then the common precept requires. Neither is it necessary
for us to Justify all their Factes as good. For they (...) in a Heathnish
manner. Psalm. 62. b. 10


And be put them, Verse. 17.
altogether in Ward three days, etc. While we read this, we may be admonished
to (...) of us. Psalm. 112. a. 7.
For God may * turn our State and give to him (...) to be Revenged, Iudic. 16.
g. 28
as we see here in Joseph and his brethren. Judith. 14. c. 11
It was an easy matter for Ten of them to work, Eccl. 4. c. 14.
violence to One poor child. But so God had done, that it was even as easy
for Joseph to have requited the^, if he had (...) of God then the (...)

And Joseph said unto them, Verse. 1^.
the third day this do and live, etc. Joseph shows in this place an Example
of Godliness, and of (...) (...) Verse. 21.
(...)

Here appears the * good effects of (...) the Security and forgetfulness
of our Sinful acts, Psalm. 77. d. 38. Psalm. 82. d. 15 Psalm. (...) 71. Esaias.
26. c. 16. Os^. 6. a. 1. 2. Par. 33. c. 12.
and wicked (...) Baruc. 3. a. 1 Iona^. 2. e. 8.
at Gods hand by (...) before this Trouble did with deep Security forget the
(...) Sap. 4. d. ^^, v
but * now they can say, Verily we have offended against our brother. etc.

And he turned from them and wept: Verse. 24.
and (...) ^ 2. These. 1. b. 6. 7.
(...) Verse. 25. 26.


And Jacob said my son shall not go down with you, Verse. 38.
etc. We may see here again, how Greatly Jacob was troubled with Sorrow for
his child. He saw his householde in great Distress of Famine, and yet had he
almost rather die, then hasarde his Son. Whereby we may understand, that
Natural Affections are not in Holymen, to be Reproved, so long as they be
joined with the L^ue and Fear of God: Romans 1. d. 31. 2.
And therefore are they * not to be (...) as the Stoikes fondely (...). Tim. 3.
a. ^.
Hereof have we a notable example in this History of Jacob and Joseph, in the
Chapters following. If it had pleased God to let Jacob know, that this matter
was wrought by his son Joseph, all that now (...) him, would have turned to
his (...) and joy. But so it pleased him, by this Trouble, Prou. 17. a. 3.
to * exercise his Servant, and as it were to Prepare him to the great: Sap. 3.
a. 5.
Joy that was (...) to come, that it might the (...) more Pleasant unto him,
when* he saw all things to fall (...) expertation.

The fourth sunday in Lent at Morning prayer.
Genesis. 43. AND the (...) was great (...) the land. (...) pass, when they
had (...) the their father said unto them, Go again ( and) bye us a little
food. 3 Judas answered him, and said, The man did solemnly protest unto us
saying: Ye shall not s^e my face except my brother ^e with you. 4 If thou will
send our brother with us, we will go down and (...) thee food.

5 But if thou will not send him, we will not go down for the man said unto
us, Ye shall not see my face except your brother be with you. 6 And Israel
said, Wherefore dealt ye so cruelly with me, as to tell the man that ye had
yet a brother? 7 They answered, The man asked us straightly of our ( state) and
of our kindred, saying, Is your fat her yet (...) And we (...) him according to
the ((...)) of these (...) any mean know that he would say, Bring your
brother down ( with you?) 8 Then sand Judas unto Israel his father, Send
the lad with me, that we may arise and (...) and that we may live, and not die,
yea both we and thou, and also our meanie. 9 I will be (...) and set him before
(...) ^yes, Genesis 44. g.
then let me (...) for ever. 10 Truly except we had made (...) this we had
turned the (...)

11. And (...) of the land in your (...) curtsie of bawme, and a curtsie of
honey, spices and myrre, nuts and almondes. 12 And take double money in your
hand, and the money that was brought again in your sacks, take it again with
you, peradventure (...) some oversight.

13 Take also your brother with you, Genesis 32.
and arise, and go again unto the man. 14 And God almighty give you mercy in
the sight of the man, that he may delcuen you your other brother, and this
Beniami^: and thus I am as (...) is quite robbed of his children* 15 (...) the
present, and twice so much more money in their hand, with Benjamin, and rose
up and went down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph. 16 When Joseph saw
Benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of his house, Bring these men home and
slay, and make ready: for these men shall dine with me at noone. 17 And the
man did as Joseph had, and brought the^ unto Iosephes house. 18 When the men
were brought into Iosephes house, they were afraid and said, Because of the
money that came in our sackes mouths at the first time are we brought in: that
he may seek occasion against us, and violently lay hands upon us, to bring us
in bondage, and our asses also. 19 Therefore came they to the man that was the
ruler over Joseph's house, and communed with him at the door of the house. 20
And said, Oh sir, we came down hither at the first time to bie food. 21 And
as we came to an Inn, we opened our sackes, and behold every man's money was in
the mouth of his sack ( even) our money in full weight: and we have brought it
again in our hand.

22 And other money have we brought also in our hand to bie food: but we
cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.

23 And he said, peace be unto you, fear not: your God, and the God of your
father, has given you that treasure in your sackes: I had your money. And be
brought Simeo^ out to them. 24 And the man led them into Joseph's house, and,
gave them water to wash their feet, and gave their asses prouender.

25 And they made ready their present against Joseph came at noone: for they
heard ( say) that they should ^ate bread there. 26 When Joseph came home,
they brought the (...) to him which was in their hands, and (...) the before
him.

27 And be asked them of (...), and said, Is your father that old man which
you (...) good health? and is he yet alive? 28 They answered, Thy servant our
father is in good health, and is yet alive. And they bowing themselves, made
their (...). 29 And he lifting up his eyes, beheld his brother Benjamin his
mothers son, and said. Is this your (...) brother of whom ye spoke unto me?
And he said, God be merciful unto thee my son.

30 And Joseph made haste (for his heart did melt upon his brother) and s^aught
( where) to weep: and entre^ into his chamber, and wept there. 31 And he
washed his face, and came out and refrayned himself, and said, Set on bread.

32 And they prepared for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for
the Egiptians which did eat with him, by themselves: because the Egiptians may
not eat bread with the (...), for that (...) to the Egyptians. 33 And they
sat before him, the (...) borne according to his age, and the youngest
according to his youth: and the men (...) themselves.

14 And h^ sent rewards unto them from before himself: But (...) so much as
any (...) with him.

The Exposition upon the xliij. Chapter of Genesis.
And it came to pass when they had eaten up the corn which they had, Verse. 2.
etc. IT may seem doubtful how so Little a portion of Come, as (...) Asses
did bring so Long a journey; could s. long a' time* find to great a Number as
were of Jacobs retinewe. For besides the.lxvi. persons that descended of his
body, Genesis 46. c. 36.
as is mentioned Cap. 46 it can not be but that he and they had a great number
of servants. But we must consider that the servants might be fed with Herbs,
Roots, and Acornes, as the manner of the East parts is in the time of
distress. And that the Corn that was brought, was in Sparing manner employed
to the sustenance of other his Sons and Nephews. Eccl. 4. c. 17. 18 2.
This was a * hard temptation, Pet. 2. b. 9.
that this Godly Father, whom God had taken by his promise into his
Protection, was now brought to so great a Necessity for want of Sustenance,
yea and in that land wherein God had promised his Abundant blessing. This in a
frail man might have shaken the credit of that notable promise. Genesis 35. b.
11.
Cap. 35 I am thy God increase and multiply. I will bless thee. It is
profitable for us in time of Affliction to consider such Examples of the holy
Fathers, that we may learn by the like Armor of trust in the providence of
God, and pacient expectation of his blessed will to Overcome such Tentation
even as they did.

If thou will send our brother with us, Verse. 4. 5.
we will go down, etc. It may seem Contrary to the dewtie of Good and
obedient Children so precisely to prescribe a Condition unto their father: but
for so much as they were driven to this Necessity by the straight charge that
Joseph gave them not to come without their brother, they durst not yield
without Condition. Genesis 42. g. 38.
And because Jacob had * before so stiffly stood in the refusal to send
Benjamin, they do now the more plainly declare their Necessity with the
cause thereof, and that without any just Reproof of Obstinacy or
Disobedience.

The man asked us straightly of our state and of our kindred, Verse. 7.
saying, etc. Because Jacob accused his sons of Cruel dealing toward him, in
telling that they had a younger brother, they Excuse and clear themselves, by
declaring, 1 First, the Curious Questioning, that the man used to them of their
State and Kindred: whereeby they were Driven to answer. 2 Secondly, that they
were in that case they might not choose to answer, and that according to the
Troth. 3 Thirdly, that they could not Surmise that he would have said unto
them. Bring your younger Brother.

Then said Judah to Israel his Father, Verse. 8.
send the lad with me, that, etc. Judah persuades his Father, to yield to the
sending of Benjamin, 1 First, by the Necessity of dearth and Hunger, wherein
he and all his did stand. 2 Then the undertaking upon his peril the safe
Bringing home of the young man. 3 Lastly, by the hurt and Hinderance that they
had already Sustained by this his delay. And therefore the father now after
his affection is somewhat Quailed, upon better consideration yields to that
before he refused, and as a wise man Instructs them in what manner they should
go, Genesis 32. b. 5.
and what they should do to * appease the Rigor of the Governor, and to
shun such danger as might seem to be toward them. And yet not trusting
altogether to this policy, prays to Almighty God most heartily to Prosper
them, and send them mercy in his sight.

When the men were brought into Joseph's house they were afraid, Verse. 18. etc.
etc. A conscience * guilty of wickedness, Sap. 17. c. 11.
and a man put in fear is always Suspicious, and surmiseth that every thing is
done to his harm, though it be far otherwise. So Joseph's brethren, being in
fear, Suspect evil and danger to come of that which in deed was done of
Gentleness, and therefore seek, so much as they can, to prevent it by offering
again their Money, that they carried away with them in their sackes.

And he said, Verse. 23. 24.
peace be unto you, fear not: your God, and the God of your, etc. An example
of a godly, faithful, and gentle Servant. Because he saw them in a great
fear he comfort them, and wills them to be of good cheer, assuring them
of that which they Doubted of, and as for their Money that was in their sacks,
he wylleth them to Thank their GOD for it, by whose goodness it was wrought.
And yet understanding his masters Purpose, as a faithful servant, does not
bewray the same unto them.

And he asked them of their welfaire and said, Verse. 27. etc.
is your father that old man. etc. In these Questions of Joseph and in the
residew of his dealing declared in this place toward his brethren, Genesis 17. c.
18. Genesis 46. d. 29 Tob. 7. a. 7. 8. Romans 9. a. 3.
you may perceive the * Force of gentle and Natural Affection toward such as
by Nature we are Bound unto: and yet the same by Joseph with great wisdom
and Moderation for certain purposes repressed and dissimuled for the time. Such
affections therefore may well stand with Wisdom and Godliness, and in
sundry places are Praised in the saints of God.

And they prepared for him by himself, Verse. 32.
and for them by themselves, and for, etc. They prepared for Joseph by
himself, as a Prince and great Person. For them and the Egiptians severally,
John. 4. a. 9.
because the Egiptians did Disdain and Abhor to eat with the Hebrews. In
which part we have to note, first, touching Joseph, Sap. 10. c. 14. Psa. 104.
b. 18 Psalm. 112. a. 6.
That, although from very Poor e^tate, yea, * and out of the Prison he was
adualiced to high Dignity, and undoubtedly retained the same humbleness of
mind, that was in him before: yet, he was content, and thought it no Burden to
his Conscience to observe the Comeliness of his estate, and to sit Severally
as a great Piere and State of the Realm. 2. Reg. 2. a. 4. Esther. 2. c. 17.
Dan. 2. g. 48.
The like we see in David, Hester, Daniell, etc. Honors annexed to Power and
dignity they Refused not, but with modesty and gentleness in the fear of
God used the same. The cause why the Egiptians Disdained the Hebrews was for
that they were Grasiers and keepers of cattle, as is mentioned Cap. 46. Genesis
46. d. 34.
which might seem to proceed of a great Pride in the Egiptians, wherewith
Joseph as a wise man does seem to bear, least by Struggling against that which
he could not mend, he might take away that Opportunity that he had purposed to
work the Relief, and singular Benefit of his Father and Brethren. Some
write, that the Egiptians worshipped Sheep as Gods, and therefore did hate the
Hebrews because they did not only feed Sheep, but also Kill and eat them,
so that their lothing of the Hebrews came not only of Pride, but also of
Idolatry and Superstition, because they used Cruelty toward their Gods.

The fifte Sunday in Lent at Morning prayer.
Exodus. 3. Moses kept the sheep of Iethro his father in law

3 Therefore Moses said, I will go now, and see this great sight, how it
comes that the bushe burns not.

4 And when the Lord saw that he came for to see, God called unto him out of
the midst of the bushe, and said, Moses, Moses? And he answered, Here am I.

5 And he said, Draw not nigh bither: put thy shwes of thy feet, for the
place whereon thou stand is holy ground.

6 And he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face: for he was afraid to
look upon God.

even) unto the place of the Chanaanites, and Hethites, and Amorites, and
Pherezites, and Heuites, and of the Iebu^ites.

9 Now therefore behold the complaint of the children of Israel is come unto
me: and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egiptians oppressed them.

when) I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of
your fathers has sent me unto you: And if they say unto me, what is his name?
what answer shall I give them?

14 And God answered Moses, I am that I am. And he said, Thus shall thou say
unto the children of Israel, I am has sent me unto you. 15 And God spoke
further unto Moses. Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel. The Lord
God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob
has sent me unto you: This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial into
generation and generation. 16 Go, and gather the elders of Israel even) into a
land which flows with milk and honey. 18 And they shall hear thy voice:
then both thou and the elders of Israel shall go unto the king of Egypt, and
say unto him, The Lord God of the Hebrews has met with us, and now let us
go we beseech thee three days journey into the wilderness, and do sacrifice
unto the Lord our God. 19 And I am sure that the King of Egypt will not let
you go, no not in a mighty hand.

20 And I will stretch out my hand, and smite Egypt with all my woonders which
I will do in the mids thereof: and after that he will let you go.

21 And I will get this people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that
when ye go, ye shall not go empty.

22 But every wife shall borowe of her neighbor and of her that soiourneth in
her house, Jewels of Silver, and Jewels of Gold, and raiment: and ye shall put
them on your sons and daughters, and shall rob the Egiptians.

The Exposition upon the third Chapter of Exodus.
Moses kept the sheep of Iethro his father in law priest of Madian, Verse. 1.
etc. AS in the other Chapters before have been declared the great Oppression
and Misery of the children of Israel in Egypt, so in this Chapter and the
residue following, is set forth the great and merciful Goodness of Almightye
God delivering them from the same. And as touching Moises, whom God had chosen
to be his Instrument herein, we may in him learn how God uses commonly to
deal with his Elect. This Moses was at this time of all men in the world most
acceptable to God, whom even from his mothers womb he had chosen to be the
Deliverer of his people, and the Publisher of his law. And yet it pleased him
to suffer the same Moses to be in Banishment * forty years, Act. 7. c. 23.
not only among heathen persons, but in the poor and hard condition of a
Sheepehearde. And yet may we not think, that God at the same time did Contemn
Moses, but undoubtedly had great Care of him, and while he was in the travail
of a Sheepeheard, Genesis 37. f. 28. 1. Reg. 21. d. 10 Dan. 2 b. 13. Math. 2. c.
13.
did prepare for him an Office far above the Dignity or majesty of any
earthly Prince. The like we see in Joseph, in David, in Daniel, and in our
savior Christ himself.

And the Angel of the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire, Verse. 2. 3.
etc. When God of his goodness was disposed to Deliver his people out of Egypt,
because of (...) matter of Great weight, and in the sight of (...) Impossible,
the Egyptians being Mighty (...) and the Israelites Poor and miserable, and
for that Moses might doubt of his Calling to so great a purpose: God uses at
the beginning a stravnge and wonderful Miracle of a Fire burning in a bush,
and yet the bush not consumed therewith. I think it not so profitable to
recite the Allegories, that many interpreters do mention in this place. For the
true and simple (...) is, as I have said, that God purposing to call Moses to
Deliver his people, does Confirm him there in by this Miracle of the burning
Bushe, that he might not Doubt, but that the voice that spoke (...) him was in
deed from God, and not by the Delusion of any Man.

And when the Lord saw that he came to see, Verse. 4.
God called unto him, etc. It is no repugnancie, that the Scripture before
reported, that the Angel appeared in a Fla^e office, and here in this place
^yth, that God Called Moses. For God speaks by his Angels, as he does by his
Prophets and other Ministers. God is the Master and Instructor, and the Angel
is the Minister in the name and authority of God doing the Message.

When he says, The place is holy, he means not that the Ground or earth was
of it self more Holy or acceptable to GOD than any other place was. (...) God
minded in that place to Reveal himself and his holy Will unto Moses, and
afterward in the same place to Publishe his law and blessed Word, and
therefore he does call it Holy. For like cause ^acob called the Place where in
a * dream he saw^^ ladder going up to heaven, Genesis 28. d. 17.
and the Lord standing at the top of it, by the name of The terrible house
of God and gate of heaven.

Jerusalem is * called the Holy City, Math. 27. f. 53
because Gods word and his true worship was there declared. Take away the
Word of God, and his divine Presence, and the Place of it self is Indifferent
as other are.

As touching that God wills Moses to put of his Shoes, by that token or
ceremony of his Bare feet he would strike into him a Reverence toward that
Vision, that in the name of God appeared unto him: And also that he should now
resign, and give over that State, that he was in at that time, and submit
himself wholly to the Will of God, now at this time revealed unto him, and to
this present calling to be the Deliverer of his people. Ruth. 4. b. 7.
For in ye.4. of Ruth, the putting off of the Shoe is a token of Resigning or
giving over his Right to an other.

I am the God of thy father, Verse. 6.
the God ^f Abraham, the God of Isaac, etc. This is that notable Sentence which
Christ uses in the Math. 22. d. 32
.22. of Math. to prove the Resurrection, and that the Soul lives after it is
Depart^d from the body, and therewith stopped the mouths of the Saduces.

And the Lord said, Verse. 7. etc.
I have surely seen the trouble of my people, etc. Such is the goodness of
God, that when help and succor seems utterly Desperate, then he offers
his mercy, and mightlly Delivers, even when his people Least think of it.
Thereby are we taught at no time to Despair of Gods Help, seem it never so
Hard or Impossible to the world. Then is Gods Glory most set forth, when in
greatest Difficulty he Delivers. The Israelites were now more Unjust in the
sight of God ^hen that they might Hope for any Relief at his (...) For they
had almost Forgot GOD and his true Worship. And is the world they were more
Weak and Miserable, then either three, many man see them, could Devise which
ware it ^ought he wrought. In this great Distress God calls ^^ses, and
offers their Deliverance, not in respect of any Worthiness in them, but
partly of his great Pity that he took of their misery and a^^^iction* partly
for the truth of his * Promises, Genesis 12. a. 2. Genesis 26. a. 4. Genesis 32. c. 12.
that he had made to their Forefathers* Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And herby
teaches us, to the great strengthening of our faith, that although there be
much unworthiness in us, yet* for his truths sake, and for the Glory of his
name; he will fulfill his Promises, and work the safety of his people against
all the gates of hell.

Come thou therefore, Verse. 10.
and I will send thee unto Pharao, etc. Here Moses is called to this office
of a Deliverer of the people of GOD, and we by him are taught not Ambiciously
to offer our selves to any high Office or Function, but diligently to follow
that State, that we be in, and look in all things for the Calling of God,
either by himself, or by his Officers, to whom he has given Authority.

And Moises said unto God, Verse. 11.
what am I to go unto Pharao, etc. This Refusal was not of Disobedience to the
will and calling of God, but a Confessing and acknowledging of his Infirmity,
as afterward G^deon and othere did. Iudi^. 6. c. 15.
As if he had said, I am but a poor Sheepehearde, and sea^t hable to keep my
sheep from the wild beasts of the Desert: But the Egyptians are a Mighty
people, and their king a stern and Proud Tiranne: therefore, O Lord, I see a
great unfitness in my self for such a purpose. As it is Sin to withstand
the Calling of God, so is it a Virtue to acknowledge his Weakness and
Dishabilitie.

And he answered, Verse. 12.
for I will be with thee: and this shall be a token, etc. If God had promised
Moses an infinite number of mighty Armies to work this exployte, it had not
been half so much as that in this place he offers. Romans 8. f. 31.
* For if God himself be with us, all the Power of ye World is in vain
against us. He does also strengthen his Weakness with further assurance that
this his calling should be of such Force, and of so good Effect in the end,
that in the same Place, He and they together, should Worship their God, that
has Delivered them.

And Moses said unto God, Verse. 13. etc.
when I come unto the children of Israel, etc. Moses being now well Confirmed
for himself, and his own Calling, desires also that he may be hable by some
evident means to Assure the Israelites of the same, least, when he came unto
them and declared, that he was appointed their Capitain and Deliverer, they
should Refuse him, and ask from what God he was sent. For the Israelites being
brought up a long time among Idolatours in Egypt, had almost forgot the True
and living God of their fathers. Therefore Moises desires to know here the
Name of God, which was some Timorous Curiosity in Moses, and therefore God by
his answer signifies, that he should Stay himself upon his Word and
Promises made both now to him, and before time to his and their forefathers
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, rather then to enquire for his name, whose Nature,
Majesty, and Power is unspeakable, and not to be uttered by any Name.
Wherefore God answers I am, that Iam, and say unto the children of Israel, I
am, has sent me unto you, etc. That is, the Beear and the only Unsearchable
Substance that has his being of himself and of none other: and of whom all
things that are *have their Being, Act. 17. f. 28.
Life, and Moving, Even I that eternal God that is now, and ever has been,
who in the beginning made Heaven and earth and gave Life and Being unto all
Creatures, and that afterward made his Promise and Covenant to your fathers
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that he would be their God and the God of their
Seed, Psalm. 104. a. 8.
that God I say, * mindful of his promises, and pitying your miseryes, has
now sent me unto you to be your Captain and guide to deliver you out of that
great Tyranny and Cruelty wherewith you are now Oppressed in Egypt.

And they shall hear thy voice, Verse. 18.
then both thou and the elders of Israel, etc. Now he Instructs Moses what
he shall pretend to Pharao in his message, that he may suffer them to go.
Wherein it may with some offense appear as though God did teach Moses to Lie.
For the chief purpose was not in the Desert to do Sacrifice to God, but to
convey themselves away out of Egypt, into the land of Chanaan. For answer
whereunto we must consider. 1 First, that Peculier things done Extraordinarily,
by the Inspiration or commandment of God, are not to be taken as General
Rules or examples for all men to follow. 2 Secondly, there is a difference
between Lying and Dissimuling. A godly, and wise Man in time and place may
Dissemble and not utter his Purpose: But none saving wicked and vain persons
do Lie. Genesis 12. b. 7. Psa. 104. a. 11. 1. Par. 16. b. 18
As touching the Land of Chanaan promised *to them by God, what did it
appertain to Pharao to know? In that Moses is taught to say, they should go
three days journey into the wilderness to Sacrifice to God, it was no
Untruth. Exodus 24. b. 5.
For in Exodus 24. it is declared they did so.

And I am sure the king of Egypt will not let them go, Verse. 19.
no not in a mighty etc. God tells Moses of this before, least when it
should so fall out hereafter, it might shake Moses his faith, and make him to
Doubt of his calling. So God uses often to Forewarne his Elect of such Storms
as are to come, least in the time of their troubles they should Faint and
Mistrust his gracious Promises of comfort and blessing. So our Savior Christ
told his Apostles, when he sent them to preach. Mat. 10. b. 17.
They shall deliver you up (says he) unto their counsels and shall whip you.
Io. 15. c. 20.
And again. Ioh. 15. If they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also.
Io. 16. a. 2.
And Ioh. 16. The time shall come when they that kill you shall think them
selves, to do acceptable service to God.

These things have I told you ( says Christ) that when they come to pass,
Io. 16. a. 4.
you may not be offended therewith, but remember that I have forewarned you.

And I will stretch out my hand and smite Egypt with all my wonders, Verse. 20.
etc.
etc* He does again Comfort Moses with the promise of his Mighty
assistance, and the great Success that he will work for him and his people.
But this may seem strange, that God says he will help the Israelites to
Spoil and Rob the Egiptians. We must learn that the Eternal God and Lord
of Heaven and Earth, that made the Law, is not bound and tied by his own
Law. Therefore that the Israelites do by the appointment of God, is no Breach of
his law, but a work of Obedience to his holy will.* Psalm. 23. a. 1
GOD is Lord of all things, neither has any Man any thing, but that he has
at Gods hand, and that not in perpetual Possession, but so of Loan for the
time that he may without injustice take it away from any. It was Justice also
before God that they, which had been Enriched by the Oppression and injury of
the people of God, should also by the appointment of God have their Injurious
gotten Goods taken from them by the same People. But I must often repeat
this, that such Extraordinary Acts done by the especial Commandment of God,
are not to be drawn into the Example of common life.

The fifth Sunday in Lent at Evening prayer.
Exodus 5. Moses and Aaron went in afterward and fold

3 And they said, The God of the Hebrews has called us: let us go we pray
thee three days journey into the desert, and do sacrifice unto the Lord our
God: least he smite us with pestilence or with the sword.

4 Then said the King of Egypt unto them, Wherefore do ye Moses and Aaron let
the people from their works? get you unto your burdens. 5 And Pharao said
furthermore, Behold, there is much people now in the land, and you make them
leave their burdens.

6 And Pharao commanded the same day the taskmaysters which were amongst the
people, and the officers saying. 7 Ye shall give the people no more straw to
make

11 Go your selves and gather you straw where ye can find it: yet shall none
of your labor be minished.

12 And so were the people scattred abroad throughout all the land of Egypt,
for to gather stubble in stead of straw.

13 And the taskemaisters hasted them forward, saying, Fulfill your work,
your daily taskes in their due time, as if you had straw. 14 And the officers
of the children of Israel which Pharaos taskemaisters had set over them, were
beaten. And they said unto them, Wherefore have ye not fulfilled your task in
making of brick both yesterday and to day, as well as in times past?



18 Go therefore now, and work, and there shall no straw be given you, and yet
shall you deliver the whole tale of brick. 19. And the officers of the
children of Israel did see that they were in wors^ ca^e, after it was said, Ye
shall minishe nothing of your brick, of your daily task in due time. 20 And
they met Moses and Aaron, which stood in their way as they came out from
Pharao.



22 Moses returned unto the Lord, and said, Lord, wherefore have thou so
evil entreated this people? And wherefore have thou sent me? 23 For since I came
to Pharao to speak in thy name, he has fared foul with this folk: and yet
thou have not delivered thy people at all.

The Exposition upon the.v. Chapter of Exodus.
Moses and Aaron went in afterward and told Pharao, Verse. 1.
Thus says, etc. AFter Moses and Aaron had now purchased Credit with the
Israelites, Exodus 4. g. 31.
as is mentioned in the *former Chapter, they enter now into the execution of
their office for the deliverance of the people of God, and speak unto Pharao
for them. This was in them a great Obedience unto God in a matter very unlike
for them to bring to pass in the sight of the world, and joined with their
great peril and danger in dealing with so stern and Obstinate a Tyranne.
Their obedience to the calling of GOD sprang out of a Constant* Faith in the
promises of God by Miracles confirmed unto them. Heb. 11. e. 26. 27.
By the same means must we also learn to frame our selves to the Obedience of
Gods Calling, though it seem to be joined with never so great danger. And yet
although they have the calling and commandment of God to deliver his people:
they do not stir the Israelites to Rebellion, Iere. 29. b. 7.
and will them to arm themselves against the Tyranne, were he never so Cruel
and iniuryous, but in curteis manner entreat him, that they may have license
to depart into the wilderness. But what obtained they, by their endeavor?
First Pharao Co^temneth and despises the God of Israel: Verse. 2.
Who (says he) is the Lord that I should hear his voice? Then he charge
Moses and Aaron as authors of Sedition saying, Wherefore do ye let the
people from their worke^ etc. Verse. 4.
Lastly he Oppresses the people far more Grievously then he did before. For
he causes them to gather straw and stubble, and yet to make their Full task
of Brickes, as they did before.

These things happened not without the Knowledge of God, Exodus 3. d. 19.
for he said before, * I know that Pharao will not let you go. But Gods
pleasure is in this manner of Deliverance of his people to set up a Spectacle or
Example to all ages to learn in what Sort he will usually deliver his people
out of the kingdom of Satan, Wickedness, and Error. First, he sends abroad
his Messengers, Prophets, and Preachers to publish the sweet voice and
Promises of his Word and Gospel, Then, when they begin to execute their
office, and men somewhat hearken unto them, the Devil by his Instruments
Raises greater trouble and Affliction then ever they had before, so that many
minds be therewith greatly Offended. Yet in the end, Luc. 21. c. 15. Act. 6.
c. 10.
God by the *Mighty power of his Spirit and holy Word overthrows the
kingdom of darkness and Delivers his people out of the Tirannie of Egypt.

And the officers of the children of Israel did see that they were in worse,
Verse. 19.
etc. These officers of the Israelites by this Cruel answer did not
acknowledge the wicked and Obdurate heart of Pharao against the holy will of God,
as they should have done, and with Patience Comfort themselves and their
brethren: but after the manner of old Adam Murmr against GOD, quarreling with
his servants Moses, and Aaron, and laying all the cause of the trouble upon
them, Wherein they show an example both of Impiety, and Unthankfulness.
Impious it was to lay the fault of their affliction and misery upon them that
were the Ministers of Gods blessing, and of their gracious Deliverance. Great
unthankfulness might it appear, seeing Moses and Aaron did hazard their Lives
for their great Benefit, to Call and account them Tormentors and Murderers of
the people. Verse. 21.
For, say they, You have put a sword into their hands to kill us. But this is
and has been the Course of the world always. The cause of all Mischief,
when it ryseth after the publishing of the word of God, is Cast upon the
Ministers and Preachers of the same, and in steed of thankful minds, they
have all Spite and Reproach that can be done or spoken against them. 3. Reg. 18.
c. 17 Iere. 20. a. 2. Act. 23. a. 2. Act. 28. ^. 22. Act. 19. e. 29.
So was it in the time of the Prophets* So was it in the time of Christ and his
Apostles, So was it in the time of the Primitive Church, as it may be declared
by infinite examples.

Moises returned unto the Lord and said, Verse. 22. 23.
Lord wherefore have thou so, etc. Moses here, in part does Well and godly, in
part he shows his Weakness, Mistrust, and infirmity. He does Well in this,
that he both not Storm and rage against those (...) S^aunderers, * nor does
not requite evil with evil, Romans 12. d. 21.
and also that he does not give over his calling, and Flee from God, but rather
runs to him for Succor and comfort: For so the Text says, He returned to
the Lord. He shows his Weakness, in that he seems not througly to
Remember the words of God Before spoken to him, Exodus 3. f. 19.
when God said, I know that Pharao will not deliver you, no not in a mighty
hand, and therefore he does complain and quarrel with God.

Wherefore (says he) have thou so evil entreated this people, and why have
thou sent me? As though any thing had happened which God had not Before told
him should come to pass: and yet God does not Sternely rebuke Moses, but
mercifully (...) with his Infirmity, and strengthens him with the Renewing of
his Promise, and signification that he will now begin to show his mighty
power against Pharao, for their deliverance.

The sixth Sundaye in Lent at Morning and Evening prayer. Exodus 9. 10.
for) upon horses, upon asses, upon camelles, upon oven, and upon sheep, there
shall be a mighty great (...). 4 And the Lord shall do wonderfully between
the beasts of Israel and the beasts of Egypt, so that there shall nothing
die of all that pertayneth to the children of Israel. 5 And the Lord
appointed a time, saying, to morrow the Lord shall finish this word in the
land. 6 And the Lord did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of
Egypt dyed: but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one. 7 And
Pharao sent, and behold, there was not one of the cattle of the Israelites
dead: And the heart of Pharao was hardened, and he did not let the people go. 8
And the Lord said unto Moses and Aaron,

9 And it shall be dust in all the land of Egypt, and shall be swelling sores
with blaynes both on man and beast thorowout all the land of Egypt. 10 And they
took ashes out of the furnace, and stood before Pharao, and Moses sprinkled
it up into the air: and there were sw^lling ^ores with blaynes, both in men
and in beasts.

11 And the sorcerers could not stand before Moses because of the blaynes: for
there were b^tches upon the enchaunters and upon all the Egyptians. Exodus 4. d.
21.
12 And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharao, and he harkened not unto them, as
the lord had said unto Moses. 13 And the Lord said unto Moses, Rise up
early in the morning; and stand before Pharao, and thou shall tell him. Thus
says the Lord God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

14 Or else I will at this time sends all my plaguey upon thine heart, and upon
thy servants, and on thy people: that thou may know that there is none like
me in all the earth.

15 For now I will, stretch out my hand, that I may smite thee and thy people
with pestilence, and thou shall perish from the earth. Romans 9. d. 17.
16 And in verse deed for this cause have I kept thee* for to show thee my
power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the world.

17 Yet exaltest thou thy self against my people, that thou will not let them
go? 18 Behold, to morrow this time I will send down a mighty great hayle,
such a one as was not in Egypt since the foundation thereof was laid, unto
this time. 19 Send therefore now, and gather thy beasts, and all that thou
have in the field: for upon all the men and the beasts which are found in
the field, and not brought home; shall the hayle fall, and they shall die.

20 And as many as feared the word of the Lord amongst the servants of Pharao,
made their servants and their beasts ^lee ^^to the houses. 21 But he that
regarded not the word of she Lord, left his servants and his beasts in the
field.



23 And Moses stretched forth his rod unto heaven, and the Lord thundered and
hayled, and the fire ran along upon the ground, and the Lord hayled in the
land of Egypt.

24 So there was hayle, and fire mingled with the h^^le so grievous, and such
as there was none throughout all the lan^^ of Egypt since people inhabited it.

25 And the hayle smote throughout all the land of Egypt, all that was in the
field* both man and beast: and the hayle smote all the herbs of the field,
and broke all the trees of the field. 26 Only in the land of Gosen where the
children of Israel were, was there no hayle.

27. And Pharao sent and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I
have now sinned: the Lord is righteous (...) I and my people are ungodly. 28
Pray ye unto the Lord, that these thunderings of God and hayle may be (...):
and I will let you go, and ye shall ^ar^e no longer.

29 ^^yses laid unto him, As Soon as I am out of the City, I will spread
abroad my hands unto the Lord, and the thunder shall cease, neither shall
there be any more hail: that thou may know how that the earth is the Lords.

30 But I know that thou and thy servants yet fear not the face of the Lord
God. 31 And so the flax and the barlie were smitten, for the barley was shot
up, and the flax was boulled. 32 But the wheat and the rye were not smitten,
for they were late sown. 33 And Moises went out of the City from Pharao, and
spread abroad his hands unto the Lord: and the thunder and hayle ceased,
neither rayned it upon the earth. 34 And when Pharao ^awe that the rain and
the hail, and thunder were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart,
he and his servants. 35 And the heart of Pharao was hardened, neither would he
let the children of Israel go, as the Lord had said by the hand of Moises.

The.6. Sunday in Lent at Evening prayer. Exodus 10.
ANd the Lord said unto Moses, Go into Pharao:

3 And so Moses and Aaron came into Pharao, and said unto him, Thus says the
Lord God of the Hebrews: How long will thou refuse to submit thy self unto
me? Let my people go, that they may serve me.

4 Or else if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will I bring
Grasshoppers into thy coasts.

5 And they shall cover the face of the earth, that it can not be seen: and
they shall eat the residue which remains unto you and is escaped from the
hayle, and they shall eat every green tree that bears you fruit in the
field.

6 And they shall fill thy houses, and all thy seruaents houses, and the houses
of all the Egiptians, after such a manner, as neither thy fathers, nor thy
fathers fathers have seen since the time they were upon the earth unto this
day. And he turned himself about, and went out from Pharao.

7 And Pharaos servants said unto him, How long shall he be hurtful unto us?
Exodus 8. a. 1. Exodus 9. a. 1.
Let the men go, that they may serve the Lord their God: know thou not yet
that Egypt is destroyed? 8 And Moses and Aaron were brought again unto
Pharao, and he said unto them, Go and serve the Lord your God: but who are
they that shall go?

9 And Moses answered, We will go with our young, and with our old, and with
our sons, and with our daughters, and with our sheep, and with our Oxen we
must go: for we must hold a feast unto the Lord.



12 And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the land of
Egypt for Grasshoppers, that they may come upon the land of Egypt, and eat all
the herbs of the land, and all that the hayle left behind.

13 And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the Lord
brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all that night: and in
the morning the east wind brought the grasshoppers.

14 And the grasshoppers went up over all the land of Egypt, Psalm. 104. c. 30
Sa..16. b. 9. Joel. 1. a. 4.
and remained in all quarters of Egypt very grievously: before them were there
no such grasshoppers, neither after the hayle had left: there was no green
thing left in Exodus 9. f. 28. Exodus 8. b. 8
and against you. 17 And now forgive me my sin only this once, and pray
unto the Lord your God, that he may take away from me this death only.

18 And ( Moses) went out from Pharao, and prayed unto the Lord. 19 And the
Lord turned a mighty strong west wind, and it took away the grasshoppers,
and cast them into the red sea: so that there was not one grasshopper in all the
coasts of Egypt. 20 And the Lord hardened Pharaos heart, Exodus 4. d. 21
so that he would not let the children of Israel go.

21 And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thy hand unto heaven, that
there may be upon the land of Egypt darkness which may be felt.

22 And Moses stretched forth his hand unto heaven: and there was a thick
darkness upon all the land of Egypt three days. Sap. 17. a. 5.
23 No man saw another, neither rose up from the place where he was by the
space of three days: But all the children of Israel had light where they
dwelled.

24 And Pharao called for Moses and ^ayde, Go, and

25 And Moses said, Thou must give us also sacrifice and whole burnt
offerings, for to do sacrifice unto the Lord our God. 26 Our cattle also
shall go with us, and there shall not one hoof be left behind: for thereof
must we take to serve the Lord our God, neither do we know with what we must
do service unto the Lord, until we come thither. 27 But the Lord hardened
Pharaos heart, and he would not let them go. 28 And Pharao said unto him, Get
thee from me, and take heed unto thy self that thou see my face no more:
for whenever thou come in my sight, thou shall die. 29 And Moses said,
Let it be as thou have said, I will see thy face no more.

The Exposition upon the.ix. and.x. Chapter of Exodus.
The Lord said unto Moses, go unto Pharao, for I have hardened, etc. IN
these two Chapiters read this day in the Church, are recited sundry of those
plagues wherewyth God Punished Pharao, and wrought the Delivery of the People
out of Egypt. And because God was determined to set his People at Freedom,
Job. 4. b 9.
and was hable * with one Breath to have confounded Pharao and ouerthrown the
Whole power of the Egiptians, a man might marueyle, why he did Defer the time
so long, and work so many Mean miracles, whereas he might have brought it to
pass with one Mighty and terrible work. Seeing especially that God did know
that Pharao would not repent and yield. To this cogitation, GOD himself
answers in the.13. 14. 15. and 16. verses of this nynth Chapter. Go thy
ways, says God to Moses, and tell Pharao, etc. let my people go and serve
me, or else at this time I will send al my plagues upon thine heart, and upon thy
servants, and on thy people: that thou may est know there is none like me in all
the earth, etc. And in very deed, for this cause have I kept thee to show
thee my power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the world. Here
have we an evident cause, why GOD did so long Suffer the wicked and obdurate
heart of Pharao: that is, that God might * set forth his Glory, Romans 9. d. 17.
and by this terrible Example be known to the whole world That he was a
Mighty God, and hable to break the power of their Enemies, were they never so
Obstinate and Stiff hearted against him.

That he was a Severe God, Leuit. 26. c. 1^
and * would terriblie punish the Obdurate and unrepentant sinners, Yea though
they be never so great Kings and Princes. That he is a Wise God, that can Turn
the wicked Malice and Obstinacy of sinners to the Working of his greater
glory. That he is a Careful and merciful God toward his people, and for
their defense and deliverance will not stick to Break and Pull down even
Mighty Princes and people. There is also an other cause why God does here
Suffer Pharao, and at other times Bear with other Grievous sinners, and only
for the time punish them with Light and Mean plagues, and this is, By his
great Lenity, Sufferance and Mildness, if it might be, to bring them to
repentance, or otherwise, if they will not repent, that they shall declare
themselves to the world to be Inexcusable, and God in his Judgment, when he
does confound them, to be a just God. Of this Cause speaks Paul Romans Romans
2. a. 4.
2. Either despisest thou the riches of his goodness and long sufferance, not
knowing that the kindness of God leads thee to repentance, etc.

When God is said To harden the heart of Pharao, we may not think that God
does Force and Compel Pharao to sin, or that the blame of his obstinacy,
and unrepentant heart can justly be laid upon God, Job. 34. a. 10. Sap. 14. a.
9. Psalm. 5. a. 5. 6.
*For God does neither work Sin himself, nor would have it to be Wrought of
other: But God by his servants Moses and Aaron offered to Pharao his holy
word, and great miracles, and he, being of nature Wicked and waywarde from
God, and utterly destitute of his holy Spirit) of which al Inclination to
goodness comes) did more and more Harden his heart, and Withstand the will
of God. For the Corrupt nature of man, without the singular grace of God, when
he hears Gods word and will declared to him, does not only not yield unto
it, but more and more stormeth against both the Word it self, and the
Messengers that bring it. 1. Cor. 2. d. 14.
For natural man understands not those things that are of God, no nor
cannot. Wherefore when we see in these Chapiters that all endeavor is used both
by God and by his servants to persuade Pharao, and yet that he is nothing
Moved either by his Word, or by his threatenings, or by his Miracles, or by ye
counsel and advertisement of Moses and Aaron, yea or of his own subjects:
we are taught that all the Works and endeavors of Man to bring sinners from
their obstinacy unto the Embracing of Gods holy will, is all Vain, unless it
please God also to work by his holy spirit. Wherefore we must submit our
selves to the mighty hand of God in his secreat judgments, and continually
in our prayers *crave the assistance of his grace and good spirit, Psalm. 142.
b. 1^
which may so work in us that both we our selves may humbly Receive the word
of GOD, and that our endeavor to persuade other, may by him be Effectual.

Moreover, when there happens unto us unseasonable Weathering, Plagues, and
other sicknesses of sundry sorts, terrible Nail, Thunder, and Lightning,
Murraine of cattaile, Destruction of corn or fruits, by blast, Vermin, or
otherwise, we must by these examples learn, that they come not by Chance, or
by natural causes only: but that they are Sent of God as Punishments of our
Sin and Disobedience to the will and word of God, Sap. 12. a. 2.
and as * Means to bring us to Repentance, or else that God will lay on us
continually mo of his Plagues, until he bring us to Utter confusion, as he
did Pharao and the Egyptians. All whose Disobedience sprange of this Root,
that they Contemned the word of God brought unto them by his servants. The
Contempt whereof, if repentance did not prevent it, God has always punished
with Induration and utter Desolation.

When we read that the Israelites were clear from all those grievous Plagues
with which the Egyptians were punished, we must to our comfort consider, that
GOD oftentimes Preserves his people from those Miseries, that he casts upon
others. And yet, if we look into the common course of the world, Ier. 12. a.
1. Job. 21. a. 7. Habac. 1. a. 3.
we shall see, that the * Wicked are in more Felicity, and more Free from
punishment, then the good and godly. And this tentation has often * shaken the
minds of the Saints of God, Psalm. 72. a. 5.
as it appears in sundry Psalms.

What then shall we say to this? Surely the Common ordinance of GDD is, that
the Godly should be in Happiness and escape Plagues, and the Wicked only be
Punished. And if this common ordinance of God be altered, It is either because
they that profess the name of God be* Sinful, Number. 14. f. 41
and Live not according to their Calling: or else that Gods good and fatherly
will is, by such Chasticing and Affliction of this life, to keep his servants
in Obedience, and to Quicken their Faith, and put them in mind of the Heavenly
felicity and life everlasting. Prou. 30. b. 9. Deuteronomy. 32. c. 15.
The Care and Cogitation whereof in time of *Prosperity is more Cold and
Slack in us then our duty requires.

Easter day at Morning prayer.
Exodus. 12.

3 Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of
this month every man take unto him a lamb according to the house of the
fathers, a lamb thorowout every house. 4. If the householde be to little for
the lamb, let him take his neighbor which is next unto his house, according
to the number of the s^^les, every one of you according to his eating shall
make your count for a lamb. 5. And let your lamb be without ^^^mish, a male
of a year old ( which) ye shall take out from among the sheep, and from among
the goats. 6 And ye shall keep him in until the four^enth day of the same
month: and every assemble of the congregation of Israel shall kill him about
even. 7 And they shall take of the blood and strike it (...) two ( side)
posts, and on the upper door post, in the houses where they shall eat him. 8
And they shall eat the flesh the same night, roast with fire, and with
unleavened bread: and with sour herbs they shall eat it.

9 See that ye eat not there of raw, nor sodden with water, but roast with
fire: the head, feet, and purtenance thereof.

10 And ye shall (...) nothing of it remain unto the morning: That which
remains of it until the morrow, shall ye burn^ with fire. 11 Of this manner
shall ye eat it, With your loins g^rded, and your shoes on your feet, and
your staff in your hand, and ye shall eat it in haste: for it as the Lords
Passover. 12 For I will pass through the land of Egypt this same night, and
will smite all the first borne of Egypt from man to beast, and upon all the
Gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I ( am) the Lord.

13 And the blood shall be unto you (...) token in the houses wherein you are:
and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be
upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt. 14 And this day shall
be (...) holy for an ordinance for ever. 15 Seven days shall ye eat vnleaue
ned bread, so that the first day ye put away leaue^ out of your houses: For
whosoever eats leauened bread from the first day unto the seventh day, that
soul shall be rooted out of Israel. 16 The first day shall be an holy
convocation unto you, and the seventh day shall be an holy convocation unto
you: and there shall be no manner of work done in them, save about that only
which every man must eat, that only may ye ^oe. 17 And ye shall observe the
feast of unleavened bread: for this same day have I brought your armies out of
the land of Egypt, therefore ye shall observe this day, and all your children
after you, by an everlasting decree. 18 The first month, and the fourtenth day
of the month, Leuit. 23. a. 5. Number. 28. c. 16.
at even ye shall eat unleavened bread, unto the one and twenty day of the
same month at even again.

19 Seven days shall there be no leaneued bread found in your houses: and who
soever eats leauened bread, that soul shall be rooted out from the
congregation of Israel, whether he be a stranger or ^orne in the land.

20 Ye shall eat no leauened bread: but in all your habitations shall ye eat
unleavened bread.



22 And take a (...) Heb. 11. f. 28.
and dip it in the blood that is in the basin, and strike the upper post of the
door, and the, two side posts with the blood that is in the basin: and none
of you go out at the door of his house until the morning.

23 For the Lord will pass over to smite the Egiptians: and when he sees the
blood upon the upper door post and the two side posts, he will pass over the
door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come into your houses to plague you.

24 Therefore shall ye observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy
sons for ever. 25 And when ye be come to the land which the Lord will give
you, according as he has promised, ye shall keep this service.

26 And when your children ask you, What manner of service is this that ye do?
27 Ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, which passed over
the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt* and he smote the Egiptians, and
saved our houses. And the people bowed themselves, and worshipped. 28 And the
children of Israel went Sap. 18. b. 5. 10
29 And at midnight the Lord smote the first borne in the land of Egypt, from
the first borne of Pharao that sat on his seat, until the first borne of the
capt^^e that was in prison, and all the first borne of cattle.

30 And Pharao rose in the night, he and his servants, and all the Egyptians,
and there was a great cry in Egypt* for there was not a house where there was
not one dead.

31 And he called unto Moses and Aaron by night, saying, Rise up, and get you
out from amongst my people, both you and also the children of Israel: and go,
and serve the Lord as ye have said. 32 And take your sheep and your droues
with you as ye have said: and depart, and bless me.

33 And the Egyptians forced the people; that they might sen^e them out of the
land in have: for they said, We be all ( but) dead men. 34 And the people
took their dough before it was sowred, which they had in store, being bound
in clothes upon their shoulders. Exodus 11. a. 2
35 And the children of Israel did according to the saying of Moises* and they
borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment. 36
And the Lord gave the people fouour in the fight of the Egyptians, so that they
gr^^nted such things as they had re^^red: and they robbed the Egyptians.

37 And the children of Israel took their journey from Ramesis to Suchoth,
six hundred thousand men of foot, beside children. 38 And a great multitude
of sundry other nations went also with them, and sheep and oxen, and
exceeding much cattle. 39 And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which
they brought out of Egypt, for it was not sowred: For they were thrust out of
Egypt, and could not tarry,

41 And when the four hundred and thirty years were expyred, even the self
same day departed all the hosts of the Lord out of the land of Egypt. 42 It
is a night to be observed unto the Lord, in the which he brought them out of
the land of Egypt: This is that night of the Lord, which all the children of
Israel must keep throughout their generations. 43 And the Lord said unto
Moises and Aaron, This is the law of Passover: there shall no stranger eat
thereof. 44 But every servant that is bought for money, after that thou have
circumcised him, shall eat thereof.

45 A stranger and an hired servant shall not eat thereof. 46 In one house
shall it be eaten, thou shall (...) none of the flesh out of the house,
neither shall ye break a bo^e

51 And the self same day did the Lord bring the children of Israel out of
the land of Egypt with their (...).

The Exposition upon the.xij. Chapter of Exodus.
And the Lord spoke unto Moises, Verse. 1.
etc. Saying this Month, etc. THe History of the oppression of the children
of Israel in Egypt, and their marvelous deliverance from ye tyranny of
Pharao, described in the former Chapters, does, as it were, in a lively Image
set before our eyes our spiritual deliverance from the tyranny of Pharao the
devil, and from the heavy burdens of Sin and Wickedness, wherewith we were
overwhelmed in the Egypt of this world. Our Pharao is the Devil, our Egypt
is this world, our bondage is the subjection to Satan and his kingdom, our
taskes of Brick, are the grievous burdens of our sins, our Moises is
Christ, our Deliverance is the Conquest that our Savior Christ made of Sin,
Satan, Hell, and Death, by the merit of his passion. And as the night before
the Israelites were Delivered, it pleased God to ordeyne them a Sacrament,
whereby they should from time to time call into their remembrance the great
benefit of God showed unto them, and yield most hearty thanks to him for the
same: Even so our savior Christ, the night before he went to his passion,
thereby to work our deliverance, Mar. 14. c. 24 Luc. 22. b. 19. 1. Cor. 11. e.
24.
* ordained the holy Sacrament of his last supper, whereby we might confirm in
our memory the work of our redemption, and set forth his death until his
last coming. This Sacrament of the Jews, now here discribed in this Chapter,
is called the Passover, because by the sprinkling of the door posts with the
blood of the lamb, God willed his Angel to Passover the houses of the
Israelites, and not to strike them with that punishment, wherewith he plagued
the Egyptians. In like manner when Almighty God sees the blood of the
Innocent Lamb his dear son Christ Jesus, sprinkled upon the door posts of
our Consciences by Faith in his Passion, the execution of his wrath due for
sin does pass and not light upon us, as it does upon the Reprobate and
Wicked, that have not Faith nor Believe his Gospel. But for so much as this whole
Sacrament of the Jews Passover, is nothing but a comfortable and sweet
preaching to us of the death of Christ, and the mystery of our redemption, I
think it good to note some chief and particular points thereof unto you.

The Pascall lamb, as I have said, is Christ Jesus, 1. Cor. 5. c. 7.
for so says saint Paul. Our Passover is offered Christ Jesus, And for this
cause also John ye Baptist poynting unto him, John. 1. d. 29.
said: Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World.

This Lamb must be without spot, Verse. 5.
to note thereby the innocence of our Savior Christ, who therefore of saint
Peter is called The Immaculate and undefiled 1. Pet. 1. d. 19.
Lamb, For in him there was no sin, although he took upon him the Burden
of all our sins. Verse. 5.
This lamb was taken From among the sheep, to declare the humanity of
Christ, who was taken out of the flock of that breed that God before had
blessed in Abraham. And therefore says saint Paul to the Hebrews. Heb. 2. d.
16.
He took not the nature of Angels upon him, but the seed of Abraham.

The Passover was killed in the evening, Verse. 18.
and latter part of the day, and so Christ came to redeem and deliver Mankind
toward the latter end of the world. Verse. 7.
The blood of the Lamb Sprinkled upon the door posts, as is before said,
is the blood of Christ, by faith, sprinkled in our consciences. Verse. 9.
As the flesh of the Lamb might not be eaten raw, so must not Christ be
received as a raw, an imperfect, or an insufficient Sacrifice, only for
original sin, or for our sins before Baptism only, or for the sins of
some, and not of other: But for a sufficient Sacrifice and full Satisfaction for
all the sins of the whole world, that either has been, Heb. 10. c. 14.
or hereafter shall be. For as Paul says to the Hebrews. With one oblation
once made, he made perfect all that be sanctified. Verse. 8.
The Lamb must be eaten with bitter herbs, in signification that the
receiving of Christ by faith, in this world is joined with the bitterness of
Affliction and Trouble. For whosoever will live holily in Christ Jesus shall
suffer persecution. 2. Tim. 3. c. 12.
Nothing must be left of the lamb until the morning, Verse. 10.
to note that we must repent and believe in Christ, while we be in this life,
and not defer the matter to another time. For Christ can not be beneficial
to them, that in this life do not acknowledge him. Verse. 15.
The Paschall Lamb Must be eaten with unleavened bread: to declare that the
faith of Christ may not be mixed either with the Soreness of error and false
doctrine, or with corruption of Sinful and wicked life, but altogether with
truth and sincerity. Therefore Christ gave his Disciples warning That they
should beware of the * leaven, Luc. 12. a. 1. Marc. 8. b. 15.
that is, the corrupt doctrine of the Pharisees and Saduces. 1. cor. 5. c. 8.
And saint Paul to the Corinth. Our passover is offered Christ Jesus. etc.
Therefore let us solemnize the feast, not in the leaven of malice and
craftiness, but in the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. The loins
of them that eat the Passover must be gyrded, as prepared to a journey, in
token that they that do receive Christ, must be as Pilgrims in this life, and
in readiness to pass out of the Egypt of this world, into the land of promise
our heavenly Heritage. Heb. 13. c. 14.
For we have not here a City or place to dwell in, but we must look always
to the heavenly Jerusalem that our Savior has purchased for us. Luc. 12. c.
35.
And therefore, Luke 12. Christ warns us, That we should have our loins
gyrded, and lamps in our hands, like unto servants, that are ready looking
for their master when he vvil come. This feast of the Passover was ordained
to be kept once every year, not only, that the people should themselves call
to remembrance their Delivery: but also by that occasion, from time to time
instruct their youth, and teach them to understand Gods great goodness
toward them, and his Miraculous works by his myghtie hand wrought for them.
Wherefore we also at the solemnising of the memorial of our Passover should
not only * 1. cor. 11. f. 26.
set forth the death and passion of Christ and the great mercies of GOD thereby
brought unto us: but teach our youth and children also, that they may in like
manner understand the Benefit of our redemption in Christ, and the sweet
comfort that rises thereof.

And Pharao called unto Moses and Aaron by night saying, Verse. 31 etc.
rise up, etc. Here is the effect of Gods mighty working for his people, and
the fulfilling of his promise, that the obstinate and hard heart of Pharao,
which had set himself against Gods purpose, was now so broken, that he was
not only wylling to let the Israelites go, but also did Hasten them away to
depart with speed: so that they could not have time to prepare themselves
either bread or meat for the journey, in so much that they were feign to take
their dowe before it was sowred, and carry it on their shoulders. And in
remembrance of this fulfilling of their promise, and of their speedy
deliverance, he willed them ever after to Solemnise the feast of unleavened
bread.

And the children of Israel did according to the saying of Moses, Verse. 35. 36.
etc. In this place is to be observed the fulfilling of an other promise of God
made not only to Moses in the third Chapter of this book, Exodus 3. a. 8.
Genesis 15. c. 13 Act. 7. a. 6.
but to Abraham also many years before. Gene. 15. Know thou says God, that
thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not his, and the people
thereof shall keep them under in bondage, and shall afflict them four hundred
years: but I will judge that people, and afterward they shall depart with
great substance. This promise is here fulfilled. For the Israelites depart with
great Treasure, that they borrowed of the Egiptians. As touching the doubt how
the Israelites might spoil the Egiptians by borrowing their Jewels, and not
minding to come again, I have spoken in the exposition of the third Chapter.
Verse. 21. 22.

And the children of Israel took their journey from Ramesis to Sucoth, Verse.
37. 38.
etc. God had promised to Abraham, that he would multiply his seed as the
stars of Heaven, which we see in this place also notably fulfilled. Jacob
entered into Egypt but with sixty and six persons, Genesis 46. c. 26.
and now although they lived in great servitude and bondage many years, in so
much that their men Children were slain and murdered. yet they be now grown
to this great number of men beside Children.

The dwelling of the children of Israel, Verse. 40. 41.
while they dwelled in Egypt, etc. This number of years is not to be accounted
from the entrance of Jacob into Egypt with his family, for that was but two
hundred and ten years: But the reckening must begin from that time that Abraham
went into Egypt because of the Famine, and from the time that the Promise was
made to him for the blessing of his seed. Genesis 15. a. 4. Gal. 3. c. 17.
Genesis 15. This may appear by the words of S. Paul. Gal. 3. This I say that
the law, which began afterward beyond 430. years, does not disanull the
testament, etc.

When Paul says. The law that was made afterward, he means after the
Promise made to Abraham, whereof he had spoken in the words immediately before.
So that from the promise made to Abraham unto the making of the law, was but
little above.430. years, And then all that time can not be assigned to the
dwelling of the children of Israel in Egypt after Jacob came thither. But
because the seed of Abraham was so many years Pilgrims in strange lands,
therefore is it so said in this place.

Easter day at Evening prayer.
Exodus. 14. ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying.

2 Speak to the children of Israel, that they turn and pitche their tents
before Pi-hahiroth between Migdol and the sea; over against Baal-sephon: and
before that shall they pitch by the sea.; For Pharao will say of the children of
Israel, They are tangled in the land, the wilderness has shut them in. 4 And
I will harden Pharaos heart, that he shall follow after you, and I will get me
honor upon Pharao, and upon all his host: The Egiptians also shall know that
I am the Lord. And they did so. 5 And it was told the king of Egypt, that the
people fled: And the heart of Pharao and of his servants turned against the
people, and they said, Why have we done this, that we have let Israel go out
of our service?

6 And he made ready his charet, and took his people with him. 7 And took
six hundred chosen charrets, and all the

8 And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharao king of Egypt, and he followed
after the children of Israel: but the children of Israel went out with an high
hand.

9 And the Egiptians followed after them, and all the horses and charets of
Pharao, 2. Match. 4. a. 9
and his horsemen, and his host ouertooke them pitching of their tent by the
sea, Joshua. 24. a. 6
beside Pihahiroth before Baal-sephon. 10 And when Pharao drew nigh, the
children of Israel lift up their eyes, and behold, the Egiptians followed after
them, and they were sore afraid: and the children of Israel cried out unto the
Lord.

11 But they said unto Moses, because there were no graves in Egypt, have
thou therefore brought us away for to dye in the wilderness? Wherefore have thou
served us thus for to carry us out of Egypt? 12 Did not we tell thee this

13 And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and behold
the salvation of the Lord which he will show to you this day: For ye that
have seen the Egiptians this day, shall see them no more for ever.

14 The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace. 15 And the
Lord said unto Moses, Wherefore cryest thou unto me, speak unto the
children of Israel that they go forward. 16 But lift thou up thy rod, and
stretch out thy hand over the sea, and divide it asunder, and let the children
of Israel go on dry ground through the midst of the sea. 17 And behold I (
even) I will harden the heart of the Egiptians, and they shall follow after
them: and I will get me honor upon Pharao, and upon all his host, and upon
his charets, and upon his horsemen.

18 And the Egiptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I have gotten me
honor upon Pharao, upon his charets, and upon his Horsemen.

19 And the angel of God which went before the host of Israel, removed and
went behind them: and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face,
and stood behind them. 20 And came between the tents of the Egiptians, and
the tents of Israel, Psa. 104. d. 39
and it was a cloud and darkness, and gave light by night: and all the night
long the one came not at the other. 21 And Moses stretched out his hand over
the sea, and the Lord caused the sea to go back by a very strong east wind
all that night, and made the sea dry ( land) and the waters were divided. Psalm.
77. b. 13.
22 And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry (
ground,) and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand and on their
left hand. 23 And the Egiptians followed, and

24 And in the morning watch, the Lord looked unto the host of the Egiptians
out of the pillar of the fire and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the
Egiptians.

25 And took of his charet wheels, and carried them away violently. So that
the Egiptians said, Let us fly from the face of Israel: for the Lord fights
for them against the Egiptians. 26 And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out
thine hand over the sea, that the waters may come again upon the Egiptians,
upon their charets, and upon their horsemen. 27 And Moses stretched forth his
hand over the sea, and it came again to his course early in the morning, and
the Egiptians fled against it: and the Lord ouerthrewe the Egiptians in the
midst of the sea.

28 And the water returned, and covered the charets, and the horsemen, and all
the hoaste of Pharao that came into the sea after them, so that there remained
not one of them. Esaias. 11. d. 16.
29 But the children of Israel walked upon dry ( land) through the midst of
the Sea, and the waters were a wall unto them on the right hand of them, and
on the left.

30 Thus the Lord delivered Israel the self same day out of the hand of the
Egiptians: 1. Mac. 4. a. 9.
and Israel saw the Egiptians dead upon the sea side. Psalm. 105. b. 12
31 And Israel saw that mighty power which the Lord showed upon the Egiptians:
and the people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord and his servant Moses.

The Exposition upon the. 14. Chapter of Exodus.
And the Lord spoke unto Moses, Verse. 1. etc.
saying, etc. For Pharao will say, etc. IN this Chapter is described the great
danger, that the Israelites were in after their departure out of Egypt, at the red sea, and their merueylous deliverance from the same. Whereby we see,
that, although Moses and the children of Israel did follow the calling of God,
and were guyded by his angels at their departure, yet were they not quite out
of peril and danger: Yea rather, because Pharao had delivered them against
his will by Gods mighty hand, he pursues them now more eagerly, and does his
best to work them greater peril. Even so those which Christ has delivered
out of the bondage of Satan, by the might of his power, have not yet their Full
tranquillity and quietness, but rather, because he was forced to deliver
them, he stryueth by all his ministers to work them greater trouble.
Therefore, we must not imagine, that as soon as we follow Gods calling in this
life in the professing of Christ and his Gospel, that we are by and by in the
land of promise flowing with Milk and Honey. Genesis 12. b. 10. Genesis 42. a. 2 1.
Sa. 21. a. 3. 2. Reg. 15. c. 14
But yet still remains to us, while we are here the dangers of enemies, of
the Sea, of the wilderness, of hunger, of thirst, of cold, of hear, etc. as
we see happened to the Israelites for our instruction. Again as we see this
danger happened to the Israelites not without the knowledge of God (for he
tells Moses of it before hand): Even so we must understand, that those
troubles, that happen to us, Come not without the certain knowledge and
providence of God. Therefore we may not * murmr, 1. Cor. 10. b. 10 Exodus 16.
b. 7. Number. 11. a. 1.
as the Israelites did, and mistrust God, or impute the same to evil fortune,
to the Devil, or to evil men, but patiently look for Gods purpose therein,
with sure trust of his help, if the same be either for his glory or for our
commodity. Lastly, God does not send such troubles and dangers to his
people, for that he means to forsake them, and leave them succourlesse to
their enemies, but rather that he may glorify his name and set forth his
exceeding mercies and saving health toward them, that follow the calling of
his holy word.

And it was told the king of Egypt, Verse. 5. etc.
that the people fled, and the heart, etc. Here may we learn the Disposition
of the wicked, which after the example of Pharao and the Egiptians, being
sometime broken with the plagues and punishments of God, with hypocrisy, for
the time, seem to repent them, and to leave their evil. But so soon as Gods
heavy hand is taken from them, and any occasion given of mischief, as saint
Peter says, 2. pet. 2. d. 22.
They fall as Dogs to their vomet, and Hogs to their vvalovving in the
mire. For such it were better never to have known the way of Justice, then
after knowledge to forsake it. Moreover, the wicked have great hope in their
Deuillish attempts: but God turns it to their own confusion as we see here
by Pharao and the Egiptians.

And when Pharao drew nighe, Verse. 10. etc.
the children of Israel lift up, etc. The nature of affliction is, as fire, to
Try the good and sound hearts from hypocrites and dissimulers, which follow
the profession of God for the worlds sake. Some of the children of Israel call
upon God, as knowing in him to be their only aid: Othersome, and the more
part, forgetting Gods mighty works so lately done for them, repent them of
their following of God, and Rail at their guide and leader Moses with
spiteful reproaches. But he, as a good and merciful Governor does not storm
with them, nor requite them with that which in Justice they might seem to
deserve, but Comfort them with the repeating of the promises of God and the
assurance of his mighty help: thereby teaching us, that in time of adversity
their is no surer comfort then to call to our Remembrance the sweet promises
of God made unto his people, and the example of such things, as he has done
for them.

And the Lord said unto Moses wherefore criest thou unto me, Verse. 15.
etc. The text says not that Moses Cried in his prayer, nor that any voice
was heard come from him, But he cries in the ears of the Lord that Prays in
faith with a fervent and earnest mind, though no voice be hard to other in
his prayer. And such earnest * calling upon God with heart and mind does always
prevail and takes effect before God, Act. 10. a. 4. Jacob. 5. d. 16.
as we see here that Moses prayer does.

Speak unto the children of Israel, Verse. 15. etc.
that they go forward, etc. Here now God* shows his mighty arm stretched
out to the deliverance of his people, and works 3. great and wonderful
Miracles. The first, that the Angel of God, which directed the pyller of fire,
Psa. 104. d. 38
and the cloud before the people of Israel, does now suddenly withdraw
himself back, and is placed between the Egiptians and the camp of Israel,
so that on the part of Israel in the night time there was a light and
brightness that they might see to do any thing, that they thought good: and
on the part of the Egiptians was so great darkness, that they did scant see one
the other, much less were hable to do any thing against the Israelites. The
second Miracle was that by the stretching out of Moses rod, Verse. 21.
there came such a strong wind, as stayed the waters of the Sea, that the
children of Israel might pass through upon the dry land. Verse. 23. 24.
The third is, that when the Egiptians desperately, as men blinded with the
fury of their own wickedness, did follow the Israelites to the Sea, the
Angel of God so abashed them, that they were ready to fly from the face of
Israel, and then, Moses at the appointment of God stretching out his rod, the
waters returned upon them in such sort that the Egiptians with all their power
were drowned in the sea. By these Miracles the name of God was glorified
throughout the whole world, and he known to be both a mighty and merciful
God in the defense of his people, and also a severe Lord in punishing such as
did resist his holy will. The tone of which two things ought to strengthen our
faith in time of adversity, and to make us to put our assured trust in God, as
one that by his mighty power Can, and of his merciful goodness Will deliver
us. The the other should stir up in us the fear of God, and cause us in time
to repent, and to embrace his word and calling, least, for our unrepentant
hearts, he deal with us, as he did with Pharao and the Egiptians.

The first Sunday after Easter at Morning prayer.
Numeri. 16. AND Corah the son of Isaar, the son of Caath, Eccle. 45. c. 18.
went apart with Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab, and On the son of
Peleth, the son of Ruben. 2 And they rose up before Moses, with certain of
the children of Israel, two hundred and fifty, which which were capitaynes of
the multitude, famous in the congregation, and men of great renoume.

3 And they gathered themselves together against Moises and Aaron, and said
unto them, Ye take to much upon you, seeing all the multitude are holy every
one of them, and the Lord is among them: Why lift ye your selves up above the
congregation of the Lord? 4 And when Moises heard it, he fell upon his face. 5
And spoke unto Corah, and unto all his company, saying, To morrow the Lord
will show who are his, who is holy, and who ought to approach me unto him: and
whom he has chosen, he will cause to come near unto him. 6 This do
therefore: Take you fire pannes, both Corah and all his compainie. 7 And put
fire therein, and put incense in them before the Lord to morrow: And the man
whom the Lord does choose, the same shall be holy. Ye take to much upon you ye
sons of Leui.

Mum. 3. b. 12
9 Seems it but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel has separated
you from the multitude of Israel, and brought you to himself, to do the
sceruice of the tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the multitude,
and to minister unto them?

10 He has taken thee to him, and all thy brethren the sons of Leui with
thee: and seek ye the office of the priest also?

11 For which cause both thou and all thy company are gathered together
against the Lord: And what is Aron, that ye murmr against him? 12 And Moses
sent, and called Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab: which said, We will
not come up. 13 Is it a small thing that thou have brought us out of the
land that flows with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness: except
thou make thy

15 And Moses waxed very angry, and said unto the Lord, Turn not thou unto
their offering: I have not taken so much as an ass from them, neither have I
hurt any of them. 16 And Moses said unto Corah, Be thou and all thy company
before the Lord, both thou, they, and Aaron, to morrow. 17 And take every man
his censer, and put incense in them, and bring ye before the Lord every man
his censer, two hundred and fifty censers: thou also and Aaron, every one his
censer. 18 And they took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and laid
incense thereon, and stood in the door of the tabernacle of the congregation
with Moses and Aaron. 19 And Corah gathered all the congregation against them
unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the glory of the
Lord appeared unto all the congregation. 20 And the Lord spoke unto Moses
and Aaron, saying. 21 Separate your selves from among this congregation, that I
may consume them at once.

22 And they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of Spirits of
all flesh, has not one man sinned? Will thou be wrath with all the multitude?

23 And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying.

24 Speak unto the Congregation, and say, Get you away from about the
tabernacle of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. 25 And Moses rose up, and went unto
Dathan and Abiram: and the elders of Israel followed him.

26 And he spoke unto the congregation, saying, Depart I

27 And so they gate them from the tabernacle of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, on
every side: And Dathan and Abiram came out, and stood in the door of their
tents, with their wives, their sons, and their little children.

28 And Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that the Lord has sent me to do all
these works: for I have not done them of mine own mind. 29 If these men die
the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all
men, then the Lord has not sent me. 30 But and if the Lord make a new
thing, and the earth open her mouth, and swallowe them up with all that they
have, and they go down quick into the pit: then ye shall understand that
these men have provoked the Lord. 31 And as soon as he had made Deuteronomy. 11. a.
6. Number. 26. b. 10 Psalm. 106. c. 17
32 And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses,
and all the men that were with Corah, and all their goods.

33 And they and all that they had went down alive unto the pit, and the
earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the congregation.

34 And all Israel that were about them, fled at the cry of them: and they
said, Least the earth swallowe us up also.

35 And there came out a fire from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred and
fifty men that offered incense.

36 And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying:

37 Speak unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, that he take up the
censers out of the burning, and scatter the fix here and there, for they are
hallowed.

38 The censers of these sinners against their own souls: let them make of
them broad plates for a covering of the altar: For they ffered them before
the Lord, and therefore

41 But on the morrow, all the multitude of the children of Israel murmured
against Moses and Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the people of the Lord. 42
And when the multitude was gathered against Moses and Aaron, they looked
toward the tabernacle of the congration: and behold, the cloud covered it,
and the glory of the Lord appeared.

43 And Moses and Aaron came before the tabernacle of the congregation. 44 And
the Lord spoke unto Moses saying. 45 Get you from among this congregation,
that I

46 And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a censer and put fire therein out of the
altar, and pour on incense, and go quickly unto the congregation, and make an
atonement for them: For there is wrath gone out from the Lord, and there is a
plague begun. 47 And Aaron took as Moses commanded him, and ran into the
mids of the congregation: and behold the plague was begun among the people,
and he put on incense, and made an atonement for the people. 48 And when he
stood between the dead and them that were alive, the plague was stayed.

49 They that died in the plague, were fourteen thousand, and seven hundred,
beside them that died about the conspiracy of Corah. 50 And Aaron went again
unto Moses before the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the
plague was stayed.

The Exposition upon the.xvj. Chapter of Numbers.
And Corah the son of Isaar, etc. went apart with Dathan and Abiram, etc. THe
Scripture in this place sets forth unto us an example of repining Of the
wicked, and of rebelling against the good Magistrate and ordinance of God.
Wherein we have to mark, that no Prince or Magistrate can be so good and
upright, but that wicked and lewd subjects, blinded with their private
affections, will rebel and * pick quarrels against him. 2. Reg. 15. a. 3.
Moses and Aaron were chosen and appointed by GOD himself: they had the
continual assistance of Gods holy Spirit, and Angels guiding them and working
with them. They were painful and diligent in their office, very careful for
the good estate of the people, Number. 12. a. 3.
verie^ mild and merciful in their government, and Far from all
covetousness, briberie, and corruption. And yet did Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,
with many other rebel against them, reproved them, and discredited them in all
their doyngs as ambitious, proud, cruel, and false. In this example we have
to observe: First, that the * roots of rebellion commonly are, 2. Reg. 15. a.
4.
Pride and selfeliking, Envy and ambition. For pride causes men to have a
great liking of themselves, and to think themselves more Worthy men to be in
honor and dignity than any other. And therefore moves them partly to
Envy, partly to Disdain other, and ambitiously by stir and rebellion to
seek that, which by other quiet means they cannot get. That this was the
root of this rebellion here mentioned, it appears by that Moses speaks to
them. Verse. 7. etc.
You take to much upon you, you sons of Leui. Seems it but a small thing
unto you, that God has separated you, and taken you to his own service, but
that you must seek the office of the priest also? In these words, he touches
their Pride and Ambition. Secondly, we have to mark what Instruments Rebels
commonly use against good Princes and Rulers, that is to say, Lying, and
Dissimulation. By Lying they spread false and vn^eue reporrtes of the Prince,
2. Reg. 16. b. 7.
that he is Proud, that he is Covetous, Eccle. 10. d. 20
yt he is Cruel, that he Oppresses the commons, etc. Yea and deprave all his
well doings, to bring him the sooner in Hatred with the people, and to cause
them to mislike him which commonly with every apparent cause, are easily carried
to the desire of alteration of Princes and Rulers, especially if they use
severity of Justice in punishing. By Dissimulation they cloak their own
Ambitious purpose of aduauncing themselves, and pretend forsooth, that they
do all for the Love and safeguard of the common weal, and for Pity toward the
poor commons, and for their ease and relief, when as in deed they seek
nothing but the setting up of themselves, or the wreaking of malice on some,
that be in honor and dignity. By this bayte the common subjects are allured
to take part with them, and headelong to thrust themselves, not only to
danger and slaughter, Romans 13. a. 2.
but also to the just * vengeance of God, that commonly follows for the
same. These means do Corah, Dathan, and the other use against Moses and
Aaron.

For first they say unto them, You take to much upon you, wherein they note
Pride and Ambition in them. And again in the. 13. Verse. Is it a small thing;
that thou have brought us out of the land that flovveth with milk and honey,
to kill us in the Wilderness, but that thou make thy self Lord over us
also? In these words of an obstinate stubburnnesse, even against his own
conscience, Dathan obiecteth to Moses ambitions seeking of principality,
where as in deed he saw, by the wonderful works wrought by him, that he
was called thereto by God. But this is of Exceeding malice, that he ^ayeth
against him, as a great fault, that thing which was the Worthiest act that
ever he did, that is the Delivery of the Israelites out of the miserable
bondage of Egypt. And yet this wicked Rebel calls it here a bringing of the
people out of A land flowing with milk and honey. An horrible Bondage and
Oppression, in dispite of their governor, is termed a state of great
felicity, and all of purpose to make him odious to the people. Their
Dissimulation appears in this, that whereas they seek nothing but
principality, and the high Priesthood, they pretend favor and love toward
the people. All the people say they are holy every one of them, as if they had
said, they are all the people of God, and therefore why should you govern
them so sternely? why should you so oppress them? And again, You bring forth
the people to kill them in the Wilderness. As though the Pity of the people
had moved them to that purpose, and not rather their own ambitious mi^ds. By
this, common people may learn to Beware of the dissimuled pretenses of such as
be Capitaynes in Rebellion. Prou. 24. c. 21
And for their own ambitious purpose seek to lead them to unquietness,
Titus. 3. a. 1.
trouble and danger.

It is not unprofitable to consider how Moses as a good Governor and having a
clear conscience, did in this trouble behave himself, he is not greatly
Astonished or dismayed, nor seeks any unlawful or extraordinary means to
repress them. But first, he was assured in his conscience he was called and
appointed to that office by God, and therefore he resorteth to him in earnest
prayer. For the Falling down upon his face mentioned in the fourth verse, was
not for Fear of the Rebel, but an earnest prostrating himself before God,
praying for his assistance. Then he Reproves the Rebels and tells them of
their fault, how greatly they do against their Duty, and how Unthankfully
toward God, and thereby exhorts them to quietness. He sends for some of
the other Rebels Dathan and Abiran to have dealt with them in like manner, if
they would have come unto him: But they stubbernly refused it. Lastly, seeing
they would not yield to reason or persuasion, with an assured confidence of
the goodness of his cause, he puts it into Gods hand by his mighty power
to determine and end the matter. This should all good Princes and Rulers in ye
like case follow. First, 2. Reg. 15. g. 32*
to * call upon God earnestly and faithfully, then to use all the quiet means
they can by reason to persuade them. And if that will not serve, as seldom
times it does, (such is the fury of Rebels) then with an assured confidence
in the providence of God, and the right of their cause, being Gods appointed
governors, by battle or other like means to commit the thing to His hand
to determine, who never has hitherto used to give sentence or success on the
part of the Rebels.

And Corah gathered all the congregation against them etc. Verse. 19.
and the glory, etc. The very confidence, that Moses showed in the Goodness
of his cause, might well have Abashed their rebellious spirits, Much more,
when they saw the glory of the Lord appear on the part of Moses, and to
speak unto him, they should have been abashed and given over their wicked
purpose. But such a fury does always follow the minds of Rebels, that though
they see never so present danger, they will as Corah and his company do, as
it were, Face God himself and never give over, until by the just judgment of
God, they bring themselves to utter confusion.

And as soon as he had made an end of speaking, Verse. 31. etc.
the ground cloue, etc. By this dreadful punishment of destroying the
principal doers, by the swallowing of the Earth, and with fire from heaven,
God declares, and would have it known to the world, how he does Hate and
D^test* Pro. 24. d. 22.
* such as rebel against their Princes and Rulers appointed by him to govern
them, which he afterward more amply declares. Verse. 41.
For when, even the next day following the people murmurd against Moses and
Aaron and that punishment wherewith God had plagued the Rebels: Gods wrath
was so kindled against them, that if the earnest Prayer and endeavor of Moses
and Aaron had not been, he would have utterly destroyed them All from the
face of the earth. And yet could not Moses with such speed appease his wrath,
but.xiiij. thousand of them were slain to the terrible Example of all other,
that in any age should follow their evil doing. And in deed, if we look into
the histories of all times, 2. Reg. 17. f. 23 2.
we shall find, that Rebellions and Insurrections have ended in the utter
destruction of them, Reg. 18. c. 14 2.
that have been the doers of it. Re. 20. g. 22 3.
For they strive not against the Magistrate, but against God that ordained him.
Reg. 2. g. 44
For whatsoever powers there are, Romans 13. a. 1.
they are of God. Paul. Romans 13.

The first Sunday after Easter at Evening prayer.
Numb. 22. ANd the children of Israel departed and pitched in the fields of
Moab, on the other side of Iordane from Iosue. 24. b. 9.
2* And ^alue the son of Ziphor saw all that Israel had done to the Amor^tes.

3 And the Moabites were sore afraid of the people, because they were many and
they were strikon with scare of the children of Israel. 4 And Moab said unto
the elders of Madian, Now shall this company ^ick up all that are round about
us, as a^ore (...) up the grass of the field. And Balac the son (...) was*
king of the Moabites at that time. Deuteronomy. 23. a. 4. 2.
5 He sent messengers therefore unto Balaam the son of Beor to Pethor, Pet. 2.
c. 15.
which is by the river of the land of the children of his folk, to call him,
saying, Behold, there is a people come out of Egypt, and behold they cover
the face of the earth, and dwell it over against me.

6 Come now therefore I pray thee, and curse me this people, for they are to
mighty for me, so it may be I shall be hable to smite them, and to drive them
out of the land: For I wore that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and whom
thou cursest is cursed. 7 And the elders of M^ab, and the elders of Madian
departed, having the ( reward) of the soothlaying in their hand: And they
came unto Balaam, and told him the words of Balac.

8 He answered them, Tarry here this night, and I will bring you word, as the
Lord shall say unto me. And the Lords of Moab abode with Balaam.

9 And God came unto Balaam, and said, What men are these with thee? 10 And
Balaam said unto God, Balac the son of Ziphor king of Moah has sent unto me
( saying,) 11 Behold, there is a people come out of Egypt, and covers the
face of the earth: come now therefore, and curse them for my sa^e, so it may
be that I shall be hable to overcome them in battle, and to drive them out.

12 And God said unto Balaam, Go not thou with them, neither curse the people:
for they are blessed.

13 And Balaam rose up in the morning, and said unto the Lords of Balac, Get
you unto your land: for the Lord will not suffer me to go with you.

14 And the Lords of Moab rose up, and went unto Balac and said, Balaam would
not come with us.

15 And Balac sent again a greater company of Lords, and more honorable then
they. 16 Which came to Balaam, and told him, Thus says Balac the son of
Ziphor, Oh let nothing let thee, but come unto me.

17 For I will greatly promote thee unto great honor, and will do whatsoever
thou say unto me: come I pray thee curse this people for my sake.

18 And Balaam answered and said unto the servants of Blalac: Number. 24. c. 13
If Balac would give me this house full of Silver and Gold, I can not go
beyond the word of the Lord my God, to do less or more. 19 Now therefore I
pray thee, tarry ye here this night, that I may wit what the Lord will say
unto me more. 20 And God came unto Balaam by night and said unto him, If the
men come to call thee, rise up and go with them: but look what I say unto thee,
that shall thou do. 21 And Balaam rose up early, and sadled his ass, and
went with the Lords of Moab.

22 And the wrath of God was kindled, because he went: and the angel of the
Lord stood in the way to be against him as he rode upon his ass, and his
two servants were with him. 23 And when the ass saw the Angel of the Lord
stand in the way, and having his sword drawn in his hand, the ass turned
aside out of the way, and went out into the field: And Balaam smote the ass,
to turn her into the way.

24 But the angel of the Lord stood in a path between the vineyardes, and
there was a wall on the one side, and another on the other. 25* And when the
ass saw the Angel of the Lord, she thrust her self unto the wall, and crushed
Balaams foot against the wall: and he smote her again.

26 And the Angel of the Lord went further, and stood in a narrow place,
where was no way to turn either to the right haude, or to the left. 27. And
when the ass saw the angel of the Lord, she fell down under Balaam: and
Balaam was wroth and smote the ass with a staff.

28 And the Lord opened the mouth of the ass, 2. Pet. 2. c. 15.
(...) she said unto Balaam, What have I done unto thee, that thou have
smitten me now three times?

29 And Balaam said unto his ass, Because thou have mocked me: I would also
there were a sword nomine hand, for even now would I kill thee. 30 And the
ass said unto Balaam, Am not I thine ass which thou have ridden upon since
the first time unto this day? Was I ever wont to do so unto thee? He said,
nay. 31 And the Lord opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the angel of the
Lord standing in the way, having his sword drawn in his hand: he bowed
himself therefore, and fell flat on his face.

32 And the Angel of the Lord said unto him, Wherefore have thou smitten the
ass these three times? Behold I came out to withstand thee, because ( thine
heart) has declined out of the way before me. 33 And the ass saw me, and
turned from me now three times: or else if she had not turned fro me, I had
surely slain thee, and saved her alive.

34 Balaam says unto the angel of the Lord, I have sinned, for I wis^ not
that thou stoodest in the way against me. Now therefore if it displease she, I
will turn home again.



36 And when Balac heard that Balaam was come, he went out to meet him unto a
city of Moab, which is in the border of Ar^on, in the uttermost coast.

37 And Balac said unto Balaam, Did I not send for thee to call thee: and
wherefore came thou not unto me? Am I not hable in deed to promote thee unto
honor?

38 And Balaam made answer unto Balac, Lo, I am come unto thee: and can I now
say any thing at all? The word that God puts in my mouth that shall I
speak.

39 And Balaam went with Balac, and they came unto a city of streets. Number. 23.
c. 16.
40 And Balac offered oxen and sheep, and sent ( thereof) to Balaam, and to
the Lords that were with him. 41 And on the morrow Balac took Balaam; and
brought him up into the his places of Baal, that thence he might see the
uttermost part of the people.

The Exposition upon the.xxij. Chapter of Numb.
And the children of Israel departed and pitched in the fields of Moab, Verse.
1.
etc. IN the end of the former.xxi. Chapter it was said, that Schon king of
the Amorhites did conquer and take from the king of Moab all his land, even
unto Arnon, which, as may in this place appear, is not so to be taken, but
that there was a portion of land yet remaining to the Moabites, over which
Balach, their king raygned. But in likelihood, his kingdom was not so mighty,
that he durst with his power, wythstande the Israelites, and therefore he
craves of the Madianites and other his neighbors, that they would join with
him against them. Gen 19. g. 37.
The Moabites descended of one of the daughters of Loath, and the Madianites
came from Abraham by Cethura, Genesis 25. a. 1.
and therefore were they as kin unto the Israelites, and should in curtesse,
even by the Law of nature, have used more gentleness unto them passing
through their Country.

The History of this Chapter, and of the next following, comprehends many
matters worthy the observing. First, it shows that Satan by his instruments
cease not, continually by Violence and force, by craft and subtlety, by all
the means he can, to work trouble, danger and confusion to the people and
Church of God. And on the contrary part it sets forth, how God as a
careful protector does Defend the same, and turns all the endeavors of
their enemies to their greater commodity and benefit. As here he turns
their (...) that was purposed into a notable blessing, He sent messengers
therefore to Balaam the son of Peor. etc. Verse. 1.
It is not likely that this Balaam as some do gather, should have dwelt in
Mesopotamia. For that country is a great number of miles from Moab, so that it
could not well be, that he could have been twice sent for, within so short space
as the circumstances of this History do signifye. It may be, that he dwelt
in the country of Madian or there about Eastwarde from Moab, so that by that
occasion the king of Moab did the sooner here of his fame: which from the other
place so many hundred miles of, Number. 31. b. 8.
he could not do. We read cap. 31. that Balaam was s^aine among the
Madianites, and thereby he may appear to have been of that country. Neither is
it to be thought that this Balaam was an ordinary Prophet of God, and endued
with the spirit of continual prophecy and charge of doctrine, as the other
Prophets were: For, 2. Pet. 2. 2. Pet. 2. c. 15.
he and his fellows are condemned. I think rather he was a Southsayer or
Sorcerer, which used the help of evil spirits, and by them did some strange
things, that brought him in admiration with the Heathnishe people of those
parts. And yet, when the cause of Gods people came in hand, it pleased God by
his holy spirit, for the time, to Bridle his wicked affection, to stop his
covetous mouth; and to use his tongue even against his will, as an instrument
to bless his people, and by prophecy to show to his enemies the cause why he
did so singulerly preserve them, that is, because the true Messiah should
descend of them. And this interpretation can not seem strange and repugnant
to the scriptures, that God for the time puts his spirit of Prophecy even
into the wicked, to their further condemnation. For, we read in Samuel, 1. Sa.
19. d. 20.
when Saul sent his men to apprehend David, although they went to an evil
purpose, yet the spirit of God entered into them, so that they prophesied, yea
and the reprobate Saul himself following after them with the same mind did
prophecy also, whereof rose this common saying. Is Saul also among the
Prophets?

He answered them, Verse. 8.
Tarry here this night and I will bring you word, etc. At the first sight
there does appear a great show of Holiness that he will not go with them, no
nor give them any answer, until he knew Gods pleasure therein, but all was
but Hypocrisy. For, he would gladly have gone with them for covetousness of
the great rewards that were promised to him. But the spirit of God Brideled
his covetous mind, and ouerruled his tongue and doings, that his Heathen
enemies might thereby learn their Vanity and foolish striving against him
and his people.

Get you unto your land, Verse. 13.
For the Lord will not suffer me to go with you, etc. Here Balaam bewrays
somewhat his Hypocrisy. If his mind had been Syneere, and had made unto them
a free answer, that they striued in vain against those, that God had blessed,
they would never have sent unto him the second message: but by a doubtful
answer he did the more inflame them. For when he says, God would not suffer
him to go with them, he signifies there was a good will in himself, if that
he might have done it, and therefore thought they, by further entreaty and
more Hope of gain, to persuade him.

Then Balac sent again a greater company of Lords and more honorable, Verse.
15. etc.
etc. By the former plain answer that God gave, willing Balaam not to go,
both Balach the king of the Moabites should have learned his vain travail
against the people of God, and Balaam the Prophet also to have changed his
covetous affection into a sincere mind, in following that thing, which he
understood to be Gods pleasure. But the Heathen king thought God to depend
upon man's pleasure, Jacob. 1. c. 17.
and that he would have been * mutable as man was: And the Covetous prophet
increasing his hypocrisy, retained the same corruption of mind that he did
before. When Balaam said;, If Balach would give me his house full of silver
and gold, I can not go beyond the word of the Lord, etc. It might seem to
have proceeded of a great Holiness and submission to the will of God. But if
he spoke it Sincerely, why did he tempt God again with a new question? Did he
think God mutable, and to be woonne to wickedness as himself was? Surely his
endeavor does declare no other opinion to have been in him, but that the
^pirite of God would also be Double and mutable as the evil spirits were,
whose council he had before used. And therefore, he shows, that he had no
sound faith or fear of God, but only was carried away with his Covetous
desire, if God would in any wise have suffered him. But it may then be said,
why did God yield unto him, and bid him go with those second Messengers?
Truly not because he Lyked either the mind of Balaam, or the thing it self,
but that he gave over an obstinate man to the affection of his own mind, that
both he and they that sent for him, might with more shame and grief Learn the
will of God, which at this first answer, they would not receive.

And the wrath of God was kindled, Verse. 22.
because he went: and the Angel, etc. By this we may understand, that God
lyked not the endeavor of Balaam, and therefore not only with greater danger
brings him to learn his pleasure, but to his reproach causes a very Ass
to see and utter that, which he blinded with covetousness, would not
conceive. And whereas, touching the * speaking of the Ass, 2. Pet. 2. c. 16.
the Devil may put into our hearts some ungodly cogitations to the discredit
of the holy scriptures, we must stay our selves upon these words, And the
Lord opened the mouth of the Ass. If then it were ye Lords doing, it is not
here told as any ordinary doing, but miraculously, as the woonderful work of
God (...) the abashing of his enemies, and comfort of the faithful that fear
God. We think it no great matter for a man to cause a Pie or Popingay to utter
certain distinct words and speeches. We may not then judge it so Incredible
a matter, if it be attributed to God for his glory sake, and to reprove the
wicked, yt he makes an Ass to speak: seeing especially that the Fynest
tongued man, if Gods gift had not been in the beginning, could no more have
framed his tongue to speech, then now an Horse or an Ass can do. The Lord
therefore is Lord of speech and utterance, and can at his pleasure, give it to
those creatures that have it not, and take it from them that have it, as it
appears by Zachary. Luc. 1. b. 20
Luc. Math. 15. c. 31.
1. and a number of other, Marc. 7. d. 37
which in the time of Christ, by his providence were borne dumb. Neither is it
to be accounted a much greater miracle to make an Ass speak, then to restore
to the use of his tongue a man dumb borne. They then, that with scorn will
discredit this, will in like manner Discredit all the Miraculous works of God.

And when Balac heard that Balaam was come, Verse. 36. 37.
he went out to meet him, etc. This place declares how Obsequious and full of
submission those persons are to their false Prophets, which beside the true
fear of God are given over to Superstition. The King here comes forth for
honors sake to (...) upon the way. Like honor we (...) the Emperor and
sundry other (...) Kings have given to the Popes. But (...) or never read,
that the like reverence (...) used to the true Prophets and Ministers (...) For
the world more loves and honoreth that is (...) and evil, then that which is
pure and good.

The second Sunday after Easter at Morning prayer.
Numb. 23. ANd Balaam said unto Balac, Build me here seven Balaam) said unto
him, I have prepared seven au^sers, and have offered upon every altar an ox
and a ram.

5 And the Lord put a saying in Balaams mouth, and said, Go again to Balac,
and say on this wise.

6 And when he went again unto him, ^o, he stood by his whole burnt
sacrifice, he and all the Lords of Moab.

7 And he ^olie up his parable, and said, Balac (...) Number. 22. a. 2.
out of the mountains of the Cast, ( saying) Come, (...) Jacob for my sake,
come and defy Israel. 8*s How that (...) him, whom (...) or how shall I defy
him, whom the has no^. ^^fied? 9 For from the top of the rocks (...) from
the hills I behold him: lo, the people (...) themselves, and shall not be
reckened among (...). 10 Who can tell the dust of Jacob, and the number of the
fourth part of Israel? I pray God that my soul may die the death of the
righteous, and that my last end may be like his. 11 And Balac said unto
Balaam, What have thou done unto me? I took thee to curse mine enemies, and
behold, thou have blessed them altogether.



13 And Balac said unto him, Come I pray thee with me unto another place,
whence thou may see them, and thou shall see but the utmost part of them, and
shall not see them all: curse them out of that place for my sake.

14 And he brought him into a field where men might see far of, to the top
of an hill, and built seven aulters, and offered an ox and a ram on every
altar.

15 And he said unto Balac, Stand here by thy whole burnt sacrifice, while I
meet ( the Lord) yonder.

16 And the Lord met Balaam, Number. 22. g. 38
and put a word in his mouth, and said, Go again unto Balac, and say thus.

17 And when he came to him, behold he stood by his whole burnt sacrifice,
and the Lords of Moab with him. And Balac said unto him, What has the Lord
said?

18 And be took up his parable, and answered, Rise up Balac, and hear, and
hearken unto me thou son of Ziphor.

19 God is not a man that he should lie, 1. Cor. 1. b. 9.
neither the son of man that he should repent: should he say and not do?
or should ^e speak and not make it good?

20 Behold I have taken upon me to bless: for he has blessed, and it is not
in my power to alter it.

21 He beheld no vanity in Jacob, nor saw transgression in Israel: The Lord
his: God is with him, and the joyful shoute of a King is among them.

22 God brought them out of Egypt, they have strength as an Unicorn. 23 For
there is no sorcerie in Jacob, nor soothsaying in Israel, according to this
time it shall be said of Jacob and Israel, What has God wrought?

24 Behold the people shall rise up as a Lion, and heave up himself as a
young Lion: he shall not lie down until he eat of the pray, and drink the
blood of them that are slain.

25 And Balac said unto Balaam, Neither curse them, nor bless them at all.

26 But Balaam answered and said unto Balac, Told not I thee, saying, All that
the lord speaks, that I must do?

27 And Balac said unto Balaam, Come I pray thee, and I will bring thee yet
unto another place, if at all it will please God that thou may thence curse
them for my sake.

28 And Balac brought Balaam unto the top of Peor, that looks toward Iesimon.

29 And Balaam said unto Balac, Make me here seven aulters, and prepare me
here seven oxen, and seven rams.

30 And Balac did as Balaam had said, and offered an ox and a ram on every
altar.

The Exposition upon the.xxiij. Chapter of Numbers.
And Balaam said unto Balac, Verse. 1. etc.
build me here seven aulters and prepare, etc. THere may appear some
Heathnish pomp and superstition in erecting of these seven aulters, and
appoynting for Sacrifice seven oxen, and seven rams: because the true Saints
of God never used the like, and God him self by his commandment had
appointed Moises to make but one altar, Exodus 20. d. 24
whereon his people should offer sacrifices unto him. Therefore this false
Prophet does here also bewray himself in his show of Gods worship, to have
mixed Heathnish Superstition and Magical devises of his own. And yet
nevertheless, that it pleased God, in some respect, to suffer him to be the
instrument of the holy ghost, to utter ye truth of his blessing of his people,
and the promises made before to Abraham and other of the Increase and
prosperous success of their seed: that their wicked enemies to their further
condemnation might have some Understanding thereof.

But God met Balaam, Verse. 4.
and Balaam said unto him, I have prepared, etc. It may seem very strange,
that God would in any point communicate with the fylthynesse of Balaams
devises. 3. Cor. 6. c. 14. 1.
For there is no partaking between light and darkness, Cor. 10. c 20
and God detesteth all society with Devils. Yet although God hate the wicked
corruption of Balaam, it did not let him, but that in some Particular thing he
might use him to his purpose. For this meeting of Balaam was no token of Gods
favor, neither that he did Allow the superstition of the seven aulters and
sacrifices: But as he often used wicked persons for instruments of his glory,
So does he now use the mouth of this false Prophet, to publishe unto the
Infidels and Heathens the promise and covenant that he made with Abraham and
his seed. By this means he proclameth great comfort to his people, John. 18.
c. 14.
even out of the mouths of their * enemies, and by the endeavors of them that
with all means they could, did seek their confusion.

And he took up his Parable and said, Verse. 7. 8
Balac the king of Moab, etc. By a Parable is understood an Hie kind of
Speech, which by the instinction of the holy ghost he used, therewith the more
to Abash and wound the heart of the wicked king Balac, that he might the sooner
know, not only how Foolish, but how vain also his endeavor was to strive
against God, and to have that people cursed, that God had blessed. Number. 22. b.
6.
And whereas * Balac had said of Balaam, that whomsoever He blessed, was
blessed, and whomsoever He cursed, was cursed, In this place to the further
reproach and grief of that naughty king, Balaam with his own mouth renounceth
that prerogatine, and says plainly, he can not Curse him, that God has not
cursed, giving that Power and honor to God, and showing that in this respect he
is not Ruler of his own tongue, but that God for his people sake, had Brydeled
both his will and his speech.

Lo, Verse. 9.
the people shall dwell by themselves, and shall not be reckened among, etc.
When he says they shall dwell by themselves, his meaning is not, that they
shall dwell in solitariness, but that they shall hold themselves contented
with their own state, and trusting in their God, whom they worshipped, should
not need nor desire the protection and help of any other people. And therefore
it follows, that they should not be accounted among Nations, Deuteronomy 4. b. 7.
* because no nation or people should be worthy to be compared unto them,
Psalm. 147. a. 8.
for that they were adopted and chosen as the only people of God, whom he
would take under his defense and protection.

Who can tell the duste of Jacob, Verse. 10.
and number the fourth part of Israel, etc. By the Dust of Jacob he
understands the great Multitude wherewith God would bless that people, and
therein he alludeth to the promise of God made to Abraham, Genesis 22. d. 17.
* that he would multiplye his seed as the Sand of the sea, etc.

And Balac said unto him, Verse. 13.
come I pray thee with me unto another place, etc. In this that follows, we
have to note the blind obstinacy both of Balac in his superstition, and of
Balaam in his covetous affection. For albeit, God had evidently now at two
sundry times declared his purpose: yet neither the wicked king would be
satisfied, nor the false Prophet persuaded to leave his tempting of God. But
both of them, by superstitious changing the place, endeavor to make God show
himself mutable, and as it were, by their superstitious Importunity, to win
his favor from his people, and to make him to yield to their lewd and
naughty affections. Therefore God makes the false Prophet to pronounce
sentence against himself, and that obstinate and wicked king, in saying: God
is not a man that he should lie, neither the son of a man that he should
repent: should he say and not do? or should he speak and not make it good?
etc. And yet all this would not satisfy them, such is the manner of the
obstinate and reprobate sinners, that no teaching nor declaring of the holy
will of God, can make them so to change their minds, but that they will more
and more continue in their Deuillishe and naughty purposes.

And the joyful shoute of a king is a mong them, Verse. 21.
etc. By this he means that the Majesty and might of God as their loving king
and governor is among them, for their assured defense, to their great joy and
comfort.

According to this time it shall be said of Jacob and Israel, Verse. 23.
what has, etc. That is to say, According as at this time it is said, what
wondrous works has God wrought for this people? so shall it more and more be
said hereafter. For God has promised for Ever to be their God, and to deal
Wonderfully for them.

He shall not lie down until he eat of the pray, Verse. 24.
and drink the blood, etc. In this verse he notes that the People of Israel
shall be Valiant, strong and mighty as a Lion, and hable to conquer and spoil
their enemies, that unjustly do assault them, and by violence seek to do
them wrong.

The second Sunday after Easter at Evening prayer.
Numbers. 25.

2 Which called the people unto the sacrifice of their gods: And the people did
eat, and bowed down to their gods. 3 And * Israel coupled himself unto Baal
Peor, Deuteronomy. 4. a. 3
and the indignation of the Lord was kindeled against Israel.

4 And the Lord said unto Moses: Take all the heads of the people, and hang
them up before the Lord against the sun, that the wrath of the Lords
countenance may be turned away from Israel. 5 And Moses said unto the judges
of Israel, Every one slay his me^ that were joined unto Baal Peor. 6 And
behold, one of the children of Israel

8 And went after the man of Israel into the tente, and fhrust them thorough,
both the man of Israel, and also the woman, even through the belly of her: And
the plague ceased from the children of Israel. 1. Cor. 10. a. 8
9 And there dyed in the plague twenty and four thousand.

10 And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying:

11 Phinees the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, Eccl. 45. f.
23 1.
has turned mine anger away from the children of Israel, Ma. 2. f. 54
while he was zealous for my sake among them, that I had not consumed the
children of Israel in my jealousy.

12 Wherefore say, Mala. 2. a. 5
Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace. 13 And he shall have it and his
seed after him, even the covenant of the priests office for ever, because he
was zealous for his Gods sake, and made an atonement for the children of
Israel. 14 The name of the Israelite thus killed, which was slain with the
Madianitish woman was Zamri the son of Salu, a lord of an house and kindred of
Simeon. 15 And the name of the Madianitishe woman, that was slain, was Cozbi,
the daughter of Zur, a head over the people of his fathers house in Madian.

16 And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying:

17 Vex the Madianites, and smite them.

18 For they trouble you with their wyles, which have beguiled you by deceyt in
the cause of Peor, Nu. 31. a. 2.
and in the cause of their sister Cozbi, the daughter of a lord of the
Madianites, which was slain in the day of the plague for Peors sake.

The exposition upon the.xxv. Chapter of Numeri.
And Israel aboade in Sittim, Verse. 1.
and the people began to commit whoordom. etc. THe offense that is described in
this chapter to have been committed by the children of Israel, may seem to be
wroughte by the * wicked policy of the false prophet Balaa^, Nu. 31. c. 16.
who seeing before that the favor of god was much inclined to the Israelites,
did advertise the Moabites, to suffer their wives and daughters to be carnally
abused by them, to the end that their God being * displeased with their
whooredome and adultery, Psalm. 5. a. 5.
might forsake them, Job. 4. b. 8. 9.
and so leave them to the danger of their enemies. Heb. 13. a. 4
This was a marvelous way wardnesse in the Israelites, Exo. 5. d. 21. Exo. 15.
d. 25 Exo. 16. a. 2. Exo. 17. a. 3 Nu. 14. a. 2. Nu. 13. e. 26 27. Ex. 17. b.
11. 13
that neither with adversity, Exo. 5. d. 21.
nor prosperity they could be retained in their duty toward God. Exo. 15. d. 25
In adversity, they * sundry times murmured against God. Exo. 16. a. 2.
And now in prosperity being come to a * fertile country, Exo. 17. a. 3
and having great success of * victory, Nu. 14. a. 2.
they are carried away with looseness and wanton lust toward strange women,
Nu. 13. e. 26 27.
Ex. 17. b. 11. 13
and thereby provoke the heavy * wrath of God against them. Job. 31. b. 11. 12


Wherefore by this example, we are admonished in both states of Fortune to
beware, and to call earnestly unto God for the assistaunce of his grace, that
we be not carried from the remembrance of our duty, either with the grief of
the tone, or with the pleasantness of the the other. In this example also we
have to observe how perilous the company of * wicked women is, Pro. 5. a. 3.
4.
not only for the grieuousnesse of whoordome it self, Pro. 7. d. 25. 26. 27.
but also for the peril: that is, Eccl. 9. b. 8. 9
least we be led also by the poisoned pleasure thereof utterly to * forsake
God, Eccl. 19. a. 2. 3.
and to contemn his holy law and true worship. Reg. 11. a. 1.


And the Lord said, Verse. 4.
take all the heads of the people, and hang them. etc. Justly does Saint
Paul. 1. Cor. 10. b. 8
1. Corinthians. 10. admonish us to beware of whooredome and fornication, least
the like peril of Gods wrath do light upon us also.

The common multitude of the offenders were slain by hand, as after does
appear: but the heads and ryngleaders of the people to that wickedness, that
is, the Princes, Magistrates, and rulers, Eccl. 19. a. 3.
who should have stayed and punished this foul offense, Ezec. 14. b. 8
are by God commanded to be hanged up against the sun, Nu. 5. d. 27
that their * punishment might be the more grievous, Nahu^ 3. a. 6
to the terror of other. Deu. 19. d. 20
For the prince or great person offends double, both in the filthiness of
the deed it self, and also in the example whereby he draws a number to the
like naughtynesse. Such as the great persons are, such commonly are the
people. Wherefore well says wisdom cap. Sap. 6. a. 7. 9
6 The mighty persons shall myghtily be punished. A notable lesson is here to
be gathered of al them, which at this day make so small account of fornication,
whooredome, and adultery, as though it were no sin at all: yea as though it
were a praise or glory to them to be known and taken to be such persons.

And behold one of the children of Israel came and brought unto. Verse. 6. 7.
8. 9
etc. This was a notable spectacle of the contempt of God and all good men,
when Moses and the people were before the door of the Tabernacle bewayling
and lamenting the wickedness that was increased among them, and by their
prayers and tears, sought to turn the displeasure of God from the^: this man,
as it were in despite of them all, and of God himself, in their syghtes
brought a strange strumpet into his tent to be abused of himself and of his
children. By this example it may appear, Prou. 18. a. 3.
that wickedness was grown to a very * high degree among them, seeing that
they had therein cast away al shame * and fear of God. Ec. 1. e. 27. 28
This was none of the common sort of people that committed this outrage. Psalm.
13. b. 7.
He was a lord, and a noble man of the house of Simeon, and the strumpet also
was a Lady or Ge^tlewoman, the daughter of Sur, an head ruler of the
Madianites. Whereby it appears, what kind of persons do soonest break out to
such foul examples of the contempt of God. And as the offense committed was
grievous, so was the Author and manner of the punishment extraordinary.

For Phinees was a priest and no civil Magistrate: Nu. 1. g. 50. etc.
his * office was to serve God in the temple, Exo. 28. g. 43
and not by death to punish offenders: yet because the example of the
wickedness was horrible, he was stirred up undoubtedly by the spirit of God, in
the vehemency of his zeal for Gods cause, to use an extraordinary punishment
of those persons, that with such despite of Gods law and true worship, did
grieve the hearts of all good men in their heuie distress. And therefore
though this fact of Phinees be greatly praised both here and in other * places
of the holy Scripture, Psa. 105. e. 30 1.
yet being but a peculiar instinction of God in this one cause, Ma. 2. f. 54 1.
Ma. 2. f. 54 1. Cor. 10. b. 8
it is not to be taken as an example commonly of all persons to be followed. For
if every private man should take upon him to punish offenses, and that by
death, it would grow to very great disorder. But Magistrates and they to *
whom God has committed the sword, Romans 13. a. 4
may here learn, with how earnest zeal they should see to the repressing and
punishing of sin and wickedness, and not as commonly they do, either wink
at it without punishment, or so triflingly punish it, that it is rather a
mockery than a punishment.

Then God spoke to Moses, Verse. 10. 11.
saying: Phinees the son of Eleazar. etc. By this God shows, that Phinees
was led by his instinction to the zealous execution of that punishment, and
therefore does not only show him self to like well of it, but also rewards
him with the * perpetual annexing of the high priesthood to him and to his
house and posterity. Ec. 45. d. 28. 29. 30.
Here good princes and magistrates, may learn, that God with great blessing,
will reward the just, and with sharp punishment correct the authors of
wickedness and vice.

The third Sunday after Easter at Morning prayer.
Deuteronomie. 4. NOw therefore hearken O Israel, unto the ordinances and laws
which I teach you for to do them, that so ye may live, and go in and possess
the land which the Lord God of your fathers gives you. 2 Ye shall put nothing
unto the word which I command you, neither shall you take ought from it, that
ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God which I command you.

3 Your eyes have seen what the Lord did against Baal Peor: Nu. 25. a. 4.
Josu. 22. e. 17
for all the men that followed Baal Peor, the Lord thy God has destroyed from
among you.

4 But ye that cleave unto the Lord your God, are alive every one of you this
day. 5 Behold I have taught you ordinances and laws, such as the Lord my God
commanded me that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to possess it.

6 Keep them therefore and do them, for that is your wisdom and understanding
in the sight of the people, that they may hear all these ordinances, and say:
Surely it is a wise and understanding people, it is a great nation.

7 For what other nation is so great, that gods come so nie Deu. 6. d. 21.
but teach them thy sons, and thy sons sons. 10 Specially the day that
thou stodest before the Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me,
Gather me the people together, and I will make them hear my words, that they
may learn to fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, Ephe.
6. e. 1. Exo. 19. c. 12.
and that they may teach their children. 11 Ye came and stood also under ye
mountayn, and the mountayn burnt with fire even unto the mids of heaven, and
there was darkness, clouds, and mist.

12 And the Lord spoke unto you out of the mids of the fire, Exo. 20. c. 18
and ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude, but heard a
voice only.

13 And he declared unto you his covenant which he commanded you to do, (
even) ten commandments, which he

17 The likeness of any manner of beast that is on the earth, or the likeness
of any manner fethered foul that flies in the air. 18 Or the likeness of any
manner worm that creeps on the earth, or the likeness of any manner fish that
is in the waters beneath ye earth. Deuteronomy. 7. a Sap. 14. a Job. 21. c
19 Yea, and lest thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou see the
sun, the Moon, and the stars, with all the host of heaven, should be
driven to worship them, and serve them, and should worship and serve the
things which the Lord thy God has made to serve all nations under the whole
heaven. Genesis 1. b


20 But the Lord has taken you, and brought you out of the iron furnace, Deu.
34. c. 4
even out of Egypt, to be unto him a people and inheritance, as ye be this
day.

21 Furthermore the Lord was angry with me for your words, and swear that I
should not go over Iordane, and that I should not go in unto that good land
which the Lord thy

24 For the lord thy God is a co^suming fire, He. 12. d. 29.
and a ielous God.

25 When thou shall beget children, and thy children beget children, and shalt
have remained long in the land, if ye do wickedly, and make any manner of
graven image, and work evil in the sight of the Lord thy God, to provoke him
to anger: 26 I call heaven and earth to record against you this day, that ye
shall shortly perish from of the land whereunto you go over Iordane to
possess it: ye shall not prolong your days therein, but shall utterly be
destroyed. 27 And the Lord shall scatter you among the people, and ye shall be
left few in number among the nations whither the Lord shall bring you.

28 And there ye shall serve Gods which are the work of man's hand, wood and
stone, which neither see nor hear, nor eat, nor smell. 29 If from thence thou
shall seek ye Lord thy God, Sap. 1. a. 1.
thou shall find him, * if thou seek him with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul. 30. When thou art in tribulation, and when all these things that be here
spoken of are come upon thee, even in the latter days if thou Le. 26. g. 44
31 (For the Lord thy God is a merciful God) he will not forsake thee,
neither destroy thee, nor forget the appointment of thy fathers which he swear
unto them.

32 For ask of the days that are paste, which were before and since the day
that God created man upon the earth, and ( ask) from the one side of heaven
unto the other, if ever there came to pass such a great thing, or whether
any such like thing has been heard as this.

33 Did ever any people hear the voice of God speaking out of the mids of a
fire, as thou have heard, and yet lived?

34 Or has God assayed to go and take him a people from among nations, by
temptations, by signs, by wonders, by war, Psalm. 136. b 12
by a mighty hand, by a stretched out arm, and by great sightes, according to
all that the Lord your God did unto you in Egypt before your eyes?

35 Unto thee it was showed that thou might know that the Lord is God, and
that there is none other but he.

36 Out of heaven he made thee hear his voice, Exo. 19. c. 9.
that he

37 And because he loved thy fathers, he chose their seed after the^, Exo. 13.
c. 14.
and brought thee out in his sight wc his mighty power * out of Egypt. 38 To
thrust out nations greater and mightier than thou before thee, and to bring
thee in, and to give thee their land to inheritance, as it is come to pass
this day.

39 Understand therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the
Lord is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath, neither is there any
other.

40 Thou shall keep therefore his ordinances and his commau^dements which I
command thee this day, y^ it may go well with thee, and with thy children after
thee, and that thou may prolong thy days upon the earth, which the lord thy
God gives thee for ever. 41 Then Moses severed three cities on the other side
of Iordane toward the sun rising.

42 That he should flee thither which had killed his neighbor unawares, Nu.
35. a. 6.
and hated him not in times past, and therefore should he flee unto one of the
same cities, and live.

43 Namely Bezer in the wilderness eue^ in ye plain country of the tribe of
Ruben, and Ramoth in Gilead of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Basan of the
tribe of Manasse.

Number. 21. e. 24. 26.
47 And possessed his land, and the land of Og king of Basan, two kings of the
Amorites, which were on the other side of Iordane toward the sun rising.

48 From Aroer which is by the bank of ye river Arnon, unto mount Sion which
is Hermon. 49 And all the plain on the other side Iordane eastward, even unto
ye sea which is in the plain under the springs of the hill.

The Exposition upon the fourth Chapter of Deuteronomie.
Now therefore, Verse. 1. 2.
hearken O Israel unto the ordinances and laws. etc. THis whole Chapter
contains nothing but an earnest exhortation to the children of Israel not
only with diligence to harken to the ordinances and laws of God, 1. cor. 7. d.
19. gal. 6. d. 15. 16
but also in deed to * observe and perform the same, because the law of God
is a doctrine of practice and not of hearing only. The condition of their
reward is added, that so they might live and possess the land. For the
promises of God made to them were * conditional, Deu. 11. d. 22 27.
and depended upon their obedience unto his ordinances. And in the second verse
this is notable, that he straightlye charge them, That they do not add any
thing to his law, nor Take any thing from it. Thereby declaring that God will
be worshipped only according to his word, and that all unnecessary
traditions of men's devises do * hinder Gods word, Mar. 7. b. 9. 13.
and carry men from the simple truth thereof.

The first reason of exhortation that Moses uses, is the example of the great
and sharp punnishment that God used upon them that revolted from him and fell
to the worshipping of Baal Peor the Idol of the Madianites and Moabites as it
is written Number. 25. Number. 25. c. 9
The second reason is in the fifte verse, by the authority of the law maker
God himself. For he says, I have taught you ordinances such as the Lord my
God has commanded me: and thereby wills them so to esteem the laws not as
the commandments of * men only, 1. these. 2. c. 13.
but of God that appointed them. The third reason is in the. 6. and 7. verses
by the renown and fame of great wisdom, and of the singular favor and ready
help of God toward them, which should be spread of them among all nations to
their great comfort and commendation. In the. 9. verse he concludes with
admonition, Deu. 11. c. 19.
that they should not only themselves diligently remember the laws of God, but
also * instruct and teach their children and posterity in the same. Psalm. 77.
a. 7.


Specially the day that thou stoodest before the Lord thy God in Horeb. Verse.
10. 11. 12. 13. 14.
etc. In these verses is contained an other reason to move the^ by the
remembrance of the * terrible manner, Heb. 12. e. 17.
and solemn majesty that God in their sight and hearing did use in the
publishing of his law with thunder, and lightening and earthquake, with fire,
clouds and darkness. In so much that they confessed themselves not to be *
hable to abide the dredful majesty thereof, Exo. 20. c. 19.
as it is largely declared in the.20. of Exodus.

Take therefore good heed unto your selves as parteining unto. Verse. 15. 16.
17. 18. 19.
etc. He straightly charge them to beware upon danger of their souls
health, that they did not make unto themselves the Image of any thing in
heaven, in earth, or in the water under the earth. And signifies that, by the
wisdom and providence of God, Jo. 4. d. 24. 2. cor. 3. d. 17.
in the publishing of the law, Phil. 3. a. 3.
they heard a voice only and saw * no figure, Esai. 43. b. 7.
least they should take upon them by that figure to represent God, which would
not be represented by any worldly thing. This commandment he sundry times
repeateth, to the end to beat into their minds how odious Idolatry and the
worshipping of Images and false gods was unto him.

Furthermore the Lord was angry with me for your words. Verse. 21. 22. 23.
etc. By his own example Moises wills them to beware, how they fell into the
displeasure of God by disobeyng his holy will. Nu. 20. b. 11. 12.
For if the severity of his justice was so sharp * toward Moises for a little
mistrust in his promise, Deu. 1. f. 37.
how much more would it be upon them, if they did fall from his true worship
to Idolatry, Ps. 105. e. 32.
and to the open disobedience of his laws and ordinances?

For, He. 12. g. 29.
says he, the Lord is * a Consuming fire to destroy the obstinate and
disobedient, and a Ielous God that will not suffer his glory to be given to
other.

When thou shalt beget children. Verse. 25. 26. 27. 28.
etc. I call heaven and earth to witness. etc. Moses in this place moves
them to the diligent observing of the law of God, Ex 32. f. 28.
by laying before them the threatenings of Gods justice and * punishments, deu.
11. c. 16. 17
that shall come upon them for the contrary: Nu. 25 a. 2. 9
that is, Jud 2 a. 3. 11.
That they should perish from the land whereunto they were going, Jud. 3. c. 8
14
and should not therein prolong their days. Jud. 4. a. 3.
That the Lord should scatter them in subjection of other nations. Jud. 6. a. 1.
2
That he would give them over to the insensible worshipping of stocks and
stones, Jud. 8. f. 27.
and the works of men's hands. 3. reg. 11. b. 11.
In which point we of this latter time have to learn, 3. reg. 14. c. 10
that the gross Idolatry, 4. Reg. 16. a. 3
that has grown by pilgrimage and worshypping of Images, 4. Reg. 17. c. 25.
26.
has been the * just plague of God sent upon men, 4. re. 19. g. 37
because they departed from the obedience of Gods holy word, To. 1. c. 21. 24
unto worshipping of him by their own devises, and traditions of men.

If from thence thou shall seek the Lord thy God, Verse. 29. 30 31.
thou shall find him. etc. Least when the punishments before mentioned for
their offenses, by Gods just judgment should light upon them, they should
dispeire of the mercy of God, and so cut of the occasion of repentance, in
this place he says, when god does cast the^ out into strange nations, Ez. 18.
e. 21. 32
if they do * repent them of their wickedness, Ps. 50. d. 18.
and seek after their Lord and God, that he will receive them to his mercy.
For God is to his people a merciful father and not a terrible judge. Haba. 3
a. 2.
And * when he punishes, he does it not to destroy them, but by a * fatherly
correction to pull them from their disobedience and wickedness, Sa. 11. b. 10.
11
which whenever they shall do, the bosom of his mercy and goodness is
ready to receive them.

For ask of the days that are past. Verse. 32. 33. 34. 35.
etc. and ask if ever there came. etc. There is nothing that can more move
either a godly person, or any man of common sense and reason to love and obey
one, than to consider his great works and benefits done for his defense and
deliverance out of thraledome and miserye. Deu. 7. c, 18.
Therefore Moses wills the children of Israel to descend into earnest *
consideration with themselves, Deu 8 c. 11.
how great and marvelous works God had done for them. Psa. 77. a. 9.
That he chose them first as his peculiar people among all the nations of the
earth: that, when they were holden in miserable * captivity under the tyranny
of the Egiptians, Exo. 5. c. 14.
of his mere mercy without any regard of their worthynes, Exo. 9. a. 6. 10. 23.
and far beyond their hope or expectation, Exo. 10. a. 4. 22.
he by mighty * power delivered them. By his own voice with great majesty of
signs and wonders he published his law unto them, that they might not be
ignorant of his holy will and commandments.

He maruellously gave victory unto them against mighty * kings and Nations, Nu.
21. a. 3. 24. 33.
and to bring them into a blessed land and country, (...). 24. c. 12. ^^ud 5.
c. 16. Psa. 43. b. 8.
by his power and not * their might: he turned out the inhabitants thereof
before them. Therefore if after so great and many benefits they should revolt
from this so gracious, merciful, and mighty a God, they should show
themselves very unthankful, and worthy of great punishments.

The^ Moses severed three Cities on the otherside of Iordane. Verse. 41. 42.
43.
etc. Because it seemed not just in the sight of God, that they, which had
committed manslaughter unwillingly by casualtie and chance, should be punished
as wilful murderers, or those that wittingly do kill men, or commit any other
heinous offense: Therefore God appointed Moses to assign six Cities, that
might be as sanctuaries for such persons to resort unto for their salftie. Of
which, these are three that Moses here in this place speaks of. Nu. 35. b.
14 Deu. 19. a. 2. Josu. 20 a. 2
Of the ordaining of these Cities of refuge, you may read Number. 35. Deuteronomy. 19.
Joshua 20.

The third Sundaye after Easter at Euenyng prayer.
Deuteronomy. 5. them in deed. 2 The Lord our God made a covenant with us in Horeb. 3
The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us: even with us,
which are al here alive this day. Exo. 19. a. 5.
4 The Lord talked with you face to face in the mount out of the mids of the
fire.

5 And I stood between the Lord and you the same time, and showed you the word
of the Lord: For ye were afraid at the sight of the fire, and went not up into
the mount, and he said: Exo. 20. a. 2.
6 I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt from the
house of bondage.

7 Thou shall have none other gods in my presence.

8 Thou shall make thee no graven image, Leui. 26. a. 1.
or any likeness of that which is in heaven above, or that is in earth beneath,
or that is in the waters beneath the earth.

9 Thou shall neither bow thy self unto them, nor worship them: for I the
Lord thy God am a Ielous God, visiting the wickedness of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation among them that hate me.

10 And show mercy upon thousands among them y^ love me, Exo. 34. b. 7
and keep my commandments.

11 Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: Jere. 32. c. 18
for the Lord will not hold him giltlesse that takes his name in vain. Leu.
19. b. 12.
12 Keep the sabbath day, that thou sanctify it as the Lord thy God has
commanded thee.

13 Six days thou shall labor, and do all that thou have Leui. 23. a. 3.
Exo. 20. b. 8. 9. 10.
14 But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: thou shall not do
any work, thou nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy man servant, nor thy
maid, nor thine Ox, Jere. 2. a. 2. He. 4. a. 4.
nor thine Ass, nor any of thy ^^ttell, nor ye stranger that is within thy
ga^es: that thy man servant, and thy maid may rest as well as thou.

15 Remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and how that the
Lord thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand and a stretched out
arm: For which cause the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep ye Sabbath day.
Exo. 20. b. 12. Luck. 3. a. 8.
16 Honor thy father and thy mother, as the Lord thy God has commanded thee,
Mat. 15 a. 4
that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee in the
land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Mat. 5 d 21
17 Thou shall not kill.

18 Thou shall not commit adultery.

19 Thou shall not steal. 20 Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor. Romans 7. b. 7.
21 Thou shall not lust after thy neighbors wife, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors house, his field, his servant, or his maid, his Ox, his Ass, or
ought that thy neighbor has.

22 These words the Lord spoke unto all your multitude in the mount out of the
mids of the fire, of the cloud, and of the darkness, with a great voice,
and added no more ( thereto:) and wrote them in two tables of stone, and
delivered them

24 And ye said, Behold, the Lord our God has showed us his glory and his
greatness, Exo. 19. d. 18
and we have heard his voice out of the mids of the fire: we have seen
this day that God does talk with man, and he yet lives.

25 Now therefore why should we dye? that this great fire should consume us: If
we hear the voice of y^ Lord our God any more, we shall die. 26 For what flesh
has it been that ever heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the
mids of the fire (as we have done) and yet did live?

27 Go thou and hear all that the Lord our God says, and tell thou unto us
all that the Lord our God says unto thee, Exo. 19. a. 8.
and Jere. 14. b. 7.
29 Oh that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and
keep all my commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with
their children for ever. 30 Go and say unto them, Get you into your tents
again: 31 But stand thou here by me, and I will tell thee all the
commandments, ordinances, and laws which thou shall teach them, that they
may do them in the land which I give them to possess.

32 Take heed therefore that ye do in deed as the Lord your God has
commanded you, and turn not aside either to the right hand, or to the left:
33 But walk in all the ways which the Lord your God has commanded you,
that ye may live, and that it may go well with you, and that ye may prolong
your days in the land which ye shall possess.

The exposition upon the.v. Chapter of Deuteronomie.
And Moses called all Israel, Verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
and said unto them, hear O Israel, etc. Moses purposing in this chapter by
repetition to call to their remembrance the law and commandments, that god
gave unto his people in Horeb: In these fine first verses, in way of a preface,
he exhorts and admonishes them diligently to harke^ to the laws and
ordinances of God, and that in such sort as they may in deed* perform them,
Act. 10. f. 35.
and not only by hearing receive them. Romans 2. b. 13.
For they conteyne that blessed covenant, whereby both God did more evidently
and notably bind him self to be their god, tha^ he did before time to their
fathers: and they also with like protestation submitted themselves to be his
people, so that they could not now without great blame fall from his obedience.

I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Verse. 6.
7. 8. 9. 10. etc.
etc. Almighty God, that his law might have the greater reverence and majesty
with his people, Psa. 45. a. 10
in the first entrance he *challenges to himself the authority of a Lord and
God over them, Psalm. 49. b. 8
I am says he, Ps. 94. a. 6. 7 Ps. 85. b. 8. 9.
the Lord thy God, *thereby giving the^ to understand that they ought of right
to submit the^ selves to his will and pleasure. Secondlye he puts them in
mind of the great benefit of deliverance, that they had received at his hand,
*thereby the more to move and allure them to obedience. Psalm. 17. a. 1. Ps. 85.
c. 11. 12
By these ten commandments we may fully and perfectly learn those things
whereof by the law of Nature we have but a single and bare taste only, Deuteronomy.
6. b. 5. mar. 12. c. 30 Luc. 10. e. 27 Psa. 5. a. 4. 6 Job. 4. a. 8. 9. Esa.
13. b. 11. Luc. 13. f. 27.
that is: First, that we owe a *perfect love, reverence, and fear toward God.
Secondly, that he is pleased with godliness and justice, and displeased *with
wickedness and dishonestie. Thirdlye, by examining our lives according to this
rule of his perfect justice, that we are of our selves* unworthy to be
esteemed his creatures: Dani. 9. b. 7.
seeing that we do not in our obedience fulfill that end *whereunto we were made
by him. Ephe. 2. b. 10 Titus. 2. c. 12.
And for so much as God the law maker is spiritual, in this his law he speaks
not only to our body in requiring external justice, but also to our soul,
requiring inward and spiritual integrity, and in deed such purity as the
Angels in heaven have: as it may appear by Christ's own interpretation* Matthew.
Mat. 5. g. 48. Mat. 22. d. 37
5. and likewise when he says* Thou shall love God with all thy heart, with all
thy mind, with all thy soul. etc.

Moreover to the right understanding of these commandments, we must not only
consider the evils that by them God forbids, but the virtues and good things
that are contrary unto the evil. For in forbidding the evil, he commands
the good. As for example, when he says, Exo. 20. b. 14.
* Thou shall not commit adultry, he does not only prohibit all unclean
acts and thoughts, but also commands the contrary, that we should
moderate our whole life in all chastity, purity, and continency, yea and to
our powers prohibit uncleanness in other also.

These words the Lord spoke unto all your multitude in the mount. Verse. 22.
23. 24. 25. 26. etc.
etc. That the wayward people might not discredit the law of God, and make the
less account of it, because he was the minister thereof: Moses in this place
puts them in mind, that God himself with his own *voice gave these
commandments in the hearing of them all, Exo. 20. a. 1. 19. 20.
and that with so great *terror and majesty of thunder, Heb. 12. c. 18. 21.
lightening, fire, and earthquake, that they themselves confessed they were not
hable to abide it, and therefore earnestly desired, that Moses might be a
mediator between God and the^ in the delivery of his laws, binding
themselves with this* promise, Iosu. 24. f. 24
that they would accept and fulfill those laws, that he, in the name of God,
should deliver them, wherefore he wills them to take heed that they did in
deed perform those things that God had commanded, and not to turn aside from
them, de. 17. c. 10. 11
either* on the right hand or on the left: Deu. 28. b. 14
that they might enjoy the promises that God in like manner had made unto them.

Oh that there were such an heart in the^ that they would fear me. Verse. 29.
etc. It is God only that is hable to mollify the stome hearts of men, and
give them pliant and obedient wills to fulfill his commandments. What may
it mean then, that God in this place both wish to his people such an heart as
would fear him, seeing that he only can give it and they of themselves not able
to have it? Surely he does not signify hereby, 2. Cor. 3. b. 5. Phil. 2. b. 13.
that men of their *own free wills are hable to frame their hearts to the
perpetual love and fear of God. Jo. 15. a. 5. Psalm. 9. b. 19.
But he, speaking after the manner of men, declares, that it is a thing rather
to be wished, than to be looked for, that the wayward people of the Jews should
for ever be obedient to his laws and ordinances.

God by wishing that his people might, or by commanding that they should keep
his commandments does not signifye, that they have of themselves power to do
them, but by the commandment they may learn, what they should do, Psa.
142. b. 11 Rom 8. a. 3. Romans 7. d. 24
and in finding want in themselves be driven to seek ability* where it is to
be had, that is, at the mercy and grace of almighty God.

The fourth Sunday after Easter at Morning prayer.
Deuteronomy. 6. THese are the commandments, ordynaunces, and

2 That thou might fear the Lord thy God, Deu. 10. c. 20
and keep all his ordinances and his commandments which I command thee, thou
and thy Son, and thy sons son all the days of thy life: that thy days
may be prolonged.

3 Hear therefore O Israel, and take heed that thou do it, that it may go
well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as the Lord God of thy
fathers has promised thee, a land that flows with milk and honey.

4 Hear O Israel, the lord our God is lord only.

5 And thou shalt love the lord thy God with all thine heart, Mar. 12. c. 20
Mat. 22. d. 37 Luc. 5. c. 27. de. 11. d. 18. 19
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

6 And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart: 7
And thou shall show them unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou
art at home

8 And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as
frontlettes between thine eyes.

9 And thou shall write them upon the posts of thy house, and upon thy gates.
10 And when the Lord thy God has brought thee into the land which he swear
unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isahac, and Jacob, and shall give to thee great and
goodly Cities which thou buildedst not.

11 Houses full of all manner of goods which thou filledst not, and we^^es
dug which thou diggedst not, vineyardes and Olive trees which thou plantedst
not, and when thou have eaten and art full.

12 Then beware lest thou forget the Lord which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt from the house of bondage.

Exo. 10. c. 20.


14 See that ye walk not after strange Gods, Luc. 4. b. 8.
the Gods of the Nations which are about you.

15 (For the Lord thy God is a Ielous God among you) least the countenance of
the Lord thy God be moved to wrath against thee, and destroy thee from the face
of the earth.

16 Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, Mat. 4. b. 7. Luc. 4. b. 12. Exodus
17. a. 7
as ye did in the place of temptation. 17. But you shall diligently keep the
commandments of the Lord your God, and his testimonies, and his ordinances
which he has commanded thee.

18 And thou shall do that which is right and good in the sight of the Lord:
that thou may prosper, and that thou may go in, and possess that good
land which the Lord swear unto thy fathers. 19 To cast out all thine enemies
before thee, as the Lord has said. 20 And when thy son asks thee in time
to come, saying: What means these testimonies, ordinances, and laws, which
the Lord our God has commanded you? 21 Then thou shall say unto thy son:
We were Pharaos bondmen in Egypt, and the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a
mighty hand.

22 And the Lord showed signs, and wonders, great and evil upon Egypt, upon
Pharao, and upon all his household,

25 Moreover, this shall be our righteousness before the Lord our God, if we
take heed, and keep all these commandments, as he has commanded us.

The exposition upon the.vj. Chapter of Deuteronomie.
These are the commandments, Verse. 1.
ordinances, and laws, which. etc. Moses purposing to exhort the
Israelites, to a diligent and faithful observation of the law of God,
begins with the repetition of that whereof he has before sundry times
spoken; that is, that the laws which he does so earnestly admonish them to
keep, Leu. 18. a. 4 Leu. 20. b. 8 de. 5. d. 32. 33
are *not his, nor devised of his own brain, but such as were delivered him
of the Lord, and of that Lord, which had not only ever showed himself their
gracious and good God, Josu. 24. a. 2. 6. 7. etc.
but also *chosen them to be his peculiar people, and undertaken to defend
them from all their enemies: and therefore, that they could not without most
just blame refuse obedience thereunto.

And for so much as Saint Paul says, Romans 15. a. 4
Whatsoever is written, is written to our instruction, I think there is no
better manner of exposition, seeing the text is plain enough of it self, than
to apply the same unto us. We have far greater cause by our obedience to set
forth the glory of God than they had.

First then, as Moses exhorts the Israelites, we must fear God. For as
Solomon says: Prou. 1. a. 7
The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom. This fear will not only beat
down our pride and confidence in our selves: but also, will be as a bridle
to stay us from evil, and to repress the wicked iustes and affections that
rise in us, contrary to the law of God. * Fear of the Lord represseth sin,
Eccl. 1. c. 27.
(says Jesus Syrach) Chap. 1. And Solomon, Prou. 8. b. 13.
Proverb. 8. Fear of the Lord does hate evil. Contrariwise, where fear of
God is not, men run headlong to all wickedness, yet must not this fear be in
the faithful a bond and servile fear, wherein we think of God only, as he is
a terrible judge, for so Satan *and the wicked do fear God: Jacob. 2. d. 19
But our fear must be joined with the earnest love of God. We must not only
fear God for his justice, 1. Io. 4. d. 18.
but we must* love him also for his mercy and goodness toward us. And
therefore Moses afterward adds, Verse. 5.
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy might.

This Love of God in the faithful *does far more earnestly bridle them from
the disobedience of gods holy laws, Exodus 1. b. 14
than fear can do. Sap. 6. c. 19.
For they that by a sure faith, Ecc. 2. c. 18. 19
have the true sense of Gods infinite mercies toward them, and thereby
unfeignedly love him, Phi. 3. b. 7. 8.
are more* ready to please God, Romans 8. g. 35
and to show themselves thankful to him, Psa. 68. b. 10
than fear of his justice can make them loathe to displease and offend him by
sin and wickedness. Psa. 118. 137
The one of these, Act. 5. g. 41.
that is Fear, must repress and keep under old Adam, and the carnal man.
The other, that is, Love, does set forward and encourage the spiritual and
new man, that is begotten in Christ Jesus.

Moreover, Verse. 7. Eccl. 3. c. 22. Exo. 13. b. 9. Le. 6. b. 12. 13 de. 11. c.
18. 19 Josu. 1. b. 8. Psalm. 118. 97. 1. Timo. 4. d. 15. 16.
for so much as our corruption is so great, and our inclination unto evil so
ready, that we soon forget our duties toward God: after Moses his counsel,
we must seek by all means that we can, to* imprinte his holy will in our
hearts, to set it before our eyes, and to make it* continually, as it were
to ring and sound in our ears. This will best be done by the diligent
reading, hearing, and meditating of the holy Scriptures, by which the will of
God is learned. For this cause David says, that He is blessed which
delights in the law of the Lord, Psalm. 1. a. 1.
and exercises himself therein both day and night. Verse. 7. 8. 9
This is it, that Moses means, when he bids the Israelites, that they
should Talk of the laws of God in their house, By the way, Lying down to
bed, Rising up in the morning, That they should be as a sign in their
hands, as a Frontlet before their eyes, and Write them on their door posts,
That is, by all means they can, to make them selves famyliar with them, that
by the flesh and the world they might not be drawn to forgetfulness
thereof.

And when the Lord thy God has brought thee into the land. Ver. 10. 11. 12
etc. This is an other good Instruction that Moses uses to the Israelites,
and behooves us also to follow: Psa. 32. b. 5. 6 Act. 17. f. 28. Act. 14. c. 17
that is, that with earnest consideration we call to mind the *inestimable
benefits that God has done for us, which are far greater and of more
worthiness, than are these worldly benefits which God here is reported to
have done for the Israelites. For he does not only continually from time to
time bestow upon us the like worldly and outward blessings to our no small
comfort and quietness in this life, Ephe. 1. a. 3 Gala. 1. a. 4 Romans 1. b. 11.
Coloss. 1. b. 15.
but has also enriched us with his spiritual* treasures and blessings, as the
*deliverance from the tyranny of Satan, sin, and Antichrist, ephesians. 1. c. 12.
17 1. Pet. 2. b. 9. Romans 8. c. 17. Jacob. 2. b. 5 1. Pet. 3. d 22
*the knowledge of his holy word, and *light of his Gospel, whereby we are to
be made the children of God, and *heirs, not of the land of Chanaan, and the
fruits and pleasures thereof: but of the celestial Jerusalem, the kingdom of
God, and eternal life with Christ Jesus in heaven. And if the consideration of
worldly benefits might be so good a stay unto the Israelites, how much more
ought these to be unto us, if we think our selves worthy the name of
christians?

See that you walk not after strange gods, Verse. 2.
and the gods of the nations. etc. As the Jews, and by them all other are
forbidden to worship strange gods: so are we also to woorship the living God
with strange worship, that is, with any other worship, than he himself in his
holy word has appointed. We must beware therefore, that we fall not away
from Gods true worship *in spirit and truth, Jo. 4. e. 23. 24
unto idolatry, 4 Re. 17. e. 29
superstition, and fond* devises of men, thereby thinking to please God. For as
god is a ielous God, and will be worshipped alone, and not with other false
Gods, so is he a severe God, and delyghteth more in single obedience to his
word, than in sacrifice, superstition, or any of man's devised holiness,
though it seem never so pleasant in the sight of the world, or to be done of
never so good an intent.

* Saul when he spared the fat beasts of the Amalekites for sacrifice, 1. Re.
15. e. 21
might seem to have done it for a good purpose. But God did so much mislyke
it, that for the same he cast him both out of his favor, and out of the
kingdom of Israel.

And when thy son asks thee in time to come, Verse. 20.
saying: What mean. etc. It is not sufficient for us to know the true worship
of God our selves, Exo. 24. c. 12 Leui. 11. b. 11. deu. 4. b. 9. 10 Ecc. 30.
a. 2. 3 Eccle. 22. a. 3. Deu. 11. c. 19. Genesis 18. c. 19 1. Pa. 28. b. 9. 2.
Reg. 12. f. 25 Dani. 13 a. 3. Tob. 1. b. 10 Tob. 14. c. 8.
but we must desire also to instruct *and teach other, and especially our
own *children, that Gods true Religion may be delivered from hand to hand,
and so be enlarged to our posterity. How far from this are a great number
of such as will be called Christians, and neither can nor will teach their
sons and daughters themselves, nor yet procure them to be instructed by
other, no nor to come thither, where, by order they are appointed to be
taught the principles of christian faith.

Surely it must needs be thought, they have small fear of God, little sense
of the mystery of our redemption in Christ, no regard of the good estate of
their children, or of the salvation of their own souls. They should teach
their children in like manner as Moses here commands the Jews, and say:
We were of our selves, Ephe. 2. a. 3 Sap. 12. b. 10. Iere. 13. d. 23.
and of our* own natures, as bondeslaues, and subject to Satan, sin, and
Hell, And it pleased Almighty God of his exceeding great mercy, without any
regard of woorthynesse in us, to send down his only and dearly beloved
son from heaven to take flesh of the blessed virgin, and here lived in this
world in great contempt and reproach, and at the last was put to most cruel
death, by his passion, paying the ransom for our sins, and for us satisfied
the Justice of God. Romans 5. b. 11.
So that we by* him are now reconciled to God, have remission of our sins,
and in his sight are reputed just, and appointed heirs of eternal life with
Christ Jesus. For this cause do me* assemble together in the house of Prayer,
Ps. 108. d. 29 Ps. 110. a. 1.
and use the Sacraments and mysteries of our Religion, thereby to call into
our remembrance this inestimable benefit, Luke 1. g. 68. Ephe. 1 a. 3.
and to* give thanks unto him for the same, and to pray for the assistance of
his holy spirit, that in all vertuousnesse and holiness of life, we may show
our selves thankful, and study to live according to this our holy vocation,
that the name of God may in us be praised.

This I say, should they teach their children, to make them to understand
why they be called Christians, and what the substance of true religion is.

The fourth Sunday after Easter at Euenyng prayer.
Deuteronomie. 7. WHen the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land whither
thou go to possess it, Deu. 31. a. 3.
and has cast out many nations before thee, the Hethites, the Gergesites,
the Ex. 34. b. 11.
2 And when the Lord thy God has set them before thee, thou shalt smite
them, and utterly destroy them, and make no covenant with them, nor have
compassion on them. 3 Thou shalt make no mariadges with them: neither give thy
daughter unto his son, nor take his daughter unto thy son.

4 For they will deceive thy son, that he should not follow me, and they
shall serve strange gods: and then will the wrath of the Lord wax hot
against thee and destroy thee sodeinly. But thus ye shall deal with them: ye
shall overthrow their aulters, and break down their pillars: cut down
their groaues, and burn their graven Images with fire.

6 For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God: Deu. 14. a. 2.
the Lord thy God has chosen thee, Ex. 19. a. 2. 4
to be a special people unto himself above all nations that are upon the earth.

Genesis 22. c. 16
8 But because the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath which he
had sworn unto your fathers, therefore has the Lord brought you out through a
mighty hand, and delivered you out of the house of bondage, from the hand of
Pharao king of Egypt.

9 Understand therefore, that the Lord thy God, he is God, and that a true
God, which keeps appointment and mercy unto them that love him, Exodus 20. a.
2
and keep his commandments throughout a thousand generations:

10 And rewards them that hate him, to their face, so that he brings them
to naught, and does not defer the time, but rewards him, that hates him,
before his face.

11 Keep thou therefore the commandments and ordinances, and laws, which I
command thee this day, that thou do them. 12 If ye hearken unto these laws,
and observe and do them: the Lord thy God also shall keep unto thee the
covenant and the mercy which he swear unto thy fathers. 13 He will love thee,
and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will also bless the fruit of thy womb,
and the fruit of thy land, thy corn, thy wine, and thine oil, and the
increase of thy kine, and thy flocks of sheep in the land which

14 Thou shall be blessed above all nations: there shall be neither man nor
woman unfruitful among you, nor any of your cattle shall be barren. 15
Moreover the Lord will take away from thee all manner infirmities, Exo. 23. d. 26
and will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt (which thou know) upon
thee: but will send them upon all them that hate thee.

16 Thou shall consume all the nations which the Lord thy God shall deliver
thee: Ex. 9. a. 9. 11
thine eye shall have no pity upon them, neither shalt thou serve their gods,
for that shall be thy decay. 17 If thou say in thine heart, These nations
are mo than I, how can I cast them out?

18 Thou shalt not fear them: Deu. 20. a. 1. Josu. 8. a. 1.
but remember what the Lord thy God did unto Pharao, and unto all Egypt.

19 The great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the signs, and wonders,
and the myghtie hand, and stretched out arm, whereby the Lord thy God
brought thee out: so shall the Lord thy God do unto all Nations of whom
thou art afraid. Ex. 13. d. 28.


20 Moreover, the Lord thy God will send hornets among them, until they that
are left and hyde themselves from thee, be destroyed.

21 Thou shalt not fear them: for the Lord thy God is among you, a myghtie
God and a terrible.

22 For the Lord thy God will put out these nations before thee by a little
and a little: thou may not consume them at once, least the beasts of the
field increase upon thee. Exo. 23. d. 29
23 But the Lord thy God shall give them before thee, and shall destroy them
with a myghtie destruction,

24 And he shall deliver their Kings into thine hand, Jos. 10. b. 8.
and thou shalt destroy their name from under heaven: There shall no man be
able to stand before thee, until thou have destroyed them.

25 The graven Images of their Gods shalt thou burn with fire, Jos. 7. a. 12.
2. Mac. 12. f. 40.
and covet not the gold and silver that is on them, nor take it unto thee,
least thou be snared therein: for it is an abomination before the Lord thy God.

26 Bring not therefore abomination into thine house, least thou be a cursed
thing as it is: but utterly defye it and abhor it, for it is a cursed thing.

The Exposition upon the seventh Chapter of Deuteronomie.
When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land. Verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
etc. FOrsomuche as not only the Israelites but all mankind through natural
corruption are very prone to Idolatry and superstition, Moses as a good
governor and Father, does* forwarne them of one great danger, Sap. 18. c.
19. Mar. 13. c. 23
whereby, if they took not heed, they might soon be carried or led away from
the true worship of God. And that is the league, alliance and mariadge with
Heathens, and such as were of corrupt faith and religion.

For they which willingly join with infidels, do, as it were, draw in one
yoke with them to their own destruction. Draw not (says saint Paul) in one
yoke with the unfaithful. 2. Cor. 6. c. 14
Whereby surely he means joining with them in all those ways, by which we
may be brought into their familiarity. Esa. 52. c. 11. 2. These. 3. b. 6 2.
Ti. 2. c. 19. 1. Esa. 10. b. 11
They that mean faithfully to serve God, must always have *separation between
them and the wicked. Therefore Gods will is, that we should not only with
open consent not join with them, but because of our own frayltie that will
be soon mysledde, to beware of all their allurements.

But because, if we will have no society with the wicked, 1. Cor. 5. c. 10.
we must* leave this life, we must make some difference between such
contractes as do link us unto them, and other, which leave unto us our
christian faith and liberty without danger. So long as we live among the
unfaithful, we cannot shun the society of those things that appertain
unto common life, as it appears in Loath, but if we go further by leagues of
nygh frendshippe, and *joining in defense one of the other, 3. Re. 22. a. 4.
Ex. 34. b. 12. 2. Par. 19. a. 2
or in marriage or such like, surely we open a wide gap to the devil to
tempte us, and to draw us by little and little to corruption of Faith and
Re;igion, or at the least wise, to stop our mouths, and stay our endeavors
from the defense and furtherance of Gods true worship against superstition and
idolatry.

When Moses not only forbyddeth joining in familiarity with the wicked, but
also wills them to Smite and utterly destroy them, nor to Have any
compassion on them: it may not seem eruell or unjust. They have for their
warraunte the commandment of GOD, who, beside that he is Lord of the whole
world, and had promised the country where the Chanani^es dwelt, unto his
people to inhabit, four hundred years before: for their wickedness might
justly have destroyed them, as he declares to Abraham. Genesis 15. Ge. 15. c. 13.


And if then from that time to this the space of four hundred years of his
great mercy God gave them respite to repent, and they continued still in
wickedness, and increased their sins to full measure, this straighte
punishemente, that God here and in other places commands, can not in any
wise seem cruelty, and extremity: but to out example, a token of his *just
judgment against the obstinate and unrepentant sinner. Psalm. 118. 75. 156.


If God say, Leu. 18. d. 25.
Leui. 18. That the earth did spue them out for their sin, as being weary
of the stenche thereof: the people of GOD as his instruments might justly
destroy them, and pulled danger upon them selves, when they did not. For
oftentimes God vpbraydeth them with sharp reprofe, for that they spared those,
that he would have punished.

For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God. Verse. 6. 7. 8
etc. In this part Moses putteh them in mind that God has chosen them among
all nations of the earth to be his peculiar people, and declares with what
cause he was moved so to do, and to what end. The cause of Gods election,
Ephe. 1. a. 5.
he shows to be his *only love, mercy, and truth, and not any respect of
woorthynesse, honor, or multitude in them. For, they were the waywardest, the
basest, and the smallest people of a great multitude.

Only of his mercy he called Abraham the father of the faithful, and set his
love upon him, and promised with assurance of an oath that he would be *his
God, Genesis 17. a. 7.
and the God of his seed, and then he would give the *land of Chanaan, Genesis
12. b. 7:
as an heritage unto his seed. Psa. 104. a. 11
Therefore to fulfill this his promise, as a true and faithful Lord, though
they otherwise deserved, he has remained their good God, and given to them his
law, that they might not be ignorant of his holy will. etc. The end whereunto
God did chose them, was not that they should continue in superstitious
idolatry and wickedness: but that they should be an *holy people unto him,
Leu. 11. g. 44 1.
and study to observe his laws and ordinances, Pet. 1. c. 15.
and for that purpose has he from time to time ben so gracious and merciful
unto them. Ephesians. 1. a. 4.
The same admonition must we also learn to apply unto our selves, God of his
mere mercy, and not of our* worthiness, To. 9. f. 25. 26
has chosen and called us to be his people, Osee. 2. d. 23.
and members of his Church, and partakers of all those promyses, that he has
made to mankind in Christ, and that not to this end to continue in sin and
sensual life, for he has not called us to uncleanness, says Saint Paul,
1. These. 4. b. 7
but to *live before him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
life. Luke. 1. g. 75.
And *we are his work builded on Christ Jesus, Ephe. 2. b. 10
to those good works, which he has prepared for us to walk in.

Understand therefore, Ver. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13 14. 15.
that the Lord thy God is God, and that a true. etc. The people of Israel are
here advertised, that God their Lord is a true and a just Lord, and that he
sits as* judge of the whole world. Psa. 95. b. 13.
And as of his truth he has and will fulfill* all that he has promised them:
To. 4. d. 21.
so would he of his iustice*rewarde the good, Job. 33. d. 26.
that obeyed his laws and ordinances, Psa. 61. b. 11.
and would punish the contrary. To the fulfillers of his will he promises
the blessing of the fruit of their womb, their land, corn, wine, and oil,
the increase of their kyne, sheep, and other cattle, the taking away from
them all manner of *syckenesses and infyrmities: Psa. 102. a. 34
and especially such lothesome and noisome sores and diseases, Exo. 23. e 25.
26. etc.
as they knew were among the Egyptians, Finally, *victory over their
enemies, De. 20. a. 4.
and all felicity of this life. Nu. 10. b. 9.


If we do not see the promise of worldly felicity, and this general decree
of God always to take place among the faithful, but that the better sort of
men are often in more misery, and the* wicked worldlings in more prosperity:
Ps. 72. a. 3. etc
we must consider first, Job. 4. d. 18.
that* no man, no not the best, does so fulfill the law of God, that he can of
justice require to have the reward due thereunto. Secondly, Job. 1. b. 9.
that either the *devil of spite works trouble in this world to the servants
of God, Apo. 2. c. 10.
because he is well assured he can not hurt the^ in the life to come, or else
the fatherly providence of Almighty God does think it more saife for his
children in this wicked world to be under the cross and affliction, Psa. 77.
d. 38
that they may the *more often remember him, Psa. 119. a. 1.
and not be carried away with the fair allurementes of this life wherewith
Satan, Esai. 26 c. 16
as by a poisoned bayte, does draw his impes unto him. Act. 14. d. 22


If thou say in thine heart, Verse. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.
these nations are more than I. etc. Because it might seem a very difficulte
and almost impossible matter, that the Israelits should conquer and drive out of
their country such a number of mighty people, as dwelt in the land of
promise, God by the mouth of his seruannt preuenteth that cogitation, Exo. 14.
c 14.
and assures them, that he will be their helper and assister, Deu. 1. e. 30.
and* will fight for them against those sinful people, Ios. 23. a. 3. 10
and that not only by ordinary means of war, but also that he would bring
hornets, and other noisome flies and vermin to weerie and consume them. And
for confirmation of their faith herein, he wills them to remember the Strange
signs, and wonders, and the Mighty hand, and Stretched out arm, that in their
knowledge and sight he used against Pharao and the Egyptians, at the time of
their deliverance. By this also we have to learn, so often as GOD wills us
to do that thing which in face of the world may seem hard and difficulte and
above our power to bring to pass, Jud. 6. c. 14.
that we* despair not, but with strong faith undertake it, To. 4. d. 20. 21 1.
being well assured, Reg. 14. a. 6
that the same GOD, that wylled us to do it, Ma. 14. d. 29
is hable also to bring it to pass by us.

The graven Images of their Gods shall thou burn with fire. Verse. 25. 26.
etc. Before, God forbad the^ to worship the gods of the Gentiles, 4. Re. 23.
a. 4 15. 20. etc.
now, he commands to*destroye and *burn with fire their Images, Deu. 12. a.
2. 3 Ie. 43. d. 12. 13
yea and in token of their utter detestation of such idolatry, Exo. 32 e. 20
not only to alter their shape and figure in melting them, De. 27. c. 15.
but not so much as turn to their own use the matter that they were made of,
lest by having the matter in some price, they should be snared, and somewhat
the more enclyned to Idolatry. Although this were but a politic precept for
the time to the Jews: yet may we gather thereby, how loathsome, odious, and
detestable Idolatry is to God.

The fifthe Sundaye after Easter at Morning prayer.
Deuteronomie. 8. ALL the commandments which I command thee live, and
multiplye, and go in, and possess the land which the Lord swear unto our
Fathers.

2 And thou shall remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee this
forty years in the wilderness, Deu. 29. a. 5.
for to humble thee, and to prove thee, and to know what was in thine heart,
whether thou would keep his commandments, or no. Exo. 16. d. 15
3 He humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, Number. 11. b. 7
and fed thee with Manna, which neither thou nor thy fathers knew of: Mat.
4. a. 4
to make thee know that a man does not live by bread only, Luc. 4. a. 4.
but by every ( word) that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord, does a
man live.

4 Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, Deu. 29. a. 5.
neither did thy foot swell these fourtye years.

5 This also shalt thou consider in thine heart: that as a man chastises his
son, so the Lord thy god chastises thee.

6 Therefore shall thou keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, that thou
walk in his ways, and fear him.

7 For the Lord thy God brings thee into a good land,

8 A land wherein is wheat and barlie, vineyardes, figge-trees, and
pomgranates, a land wherein is oil olive and honey.

9 A land wherein thou shall eat bread without scarceness, neither shalt
thou lack any thing: a land whose stones are Iron, and out of whose hills
thou shalt dig brass. 10 When thou have eaten therefore and filled thy
self, thou shall bless the Lord thy God, for the good land which he has
given thee. 11 Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, that thou would
not keep his commau^dements, his laws, and his ordinances, which I command
thee this day. Nu. 15. c. 18. 1.
12 Yea, and when thou have eaten and filled thy self, Cor. 10. a. 7
and have buylt goodly houses and dwelt therein:

13 And when thy beasts and thy sheep are waxen many, and thy silver and
Gold is multiplied, and all that thou have is increased: 14 Then beware least
thine heart rise, and thou forget the Lord thy God which brought thee out of
the land of Egypt, and from the house of bondage.

15 And which was thy guide in the great and terrible wilderness ( vvherin
were) fiery serpents, scorpions, and drouth without any water: But he
brought out water for thee out of the rock of flint: Exo. 16. d. 17
16 He fed thee in the wilderness with Manna, Ex. 17. a. 2.
which thy fathers knew not, for to humble thee, and to prove thee, and that he
might so do thee good at the latter end. 1. reg. 2. b. 9.
17 Least thou should say in thine heart, My power and the might of mine
own hand has prepared me this abundance: 18 But remember the Lord thy
God, for it is he which gives thee power to get substance, for to make good
the promise which he swear unto thy fathers, as appears this day. 19 And if
thou forget the Lord thy God, and walk after strange Gods, and serve them,
and worship them: I testify unto you this day that ye shall surely perish. 20
As the nations which the Lord destroyed before your face, so ye shall perish,
because ye would not be obedient unto the voice of the Lord your God.

The exposition upon the.viij. Chapter of Deuteronomie.
All the commandments which I command thee this day. Verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
6.
etc. FOrsomuche as the Israelites were not now far of from the land of
Canaan, Moses puts them in mind thereof, and signifies that the same God
which did require them to be obedient unto his law was now even at the point
to fulfill his promise, and to set them in possession of that country, and
therefore, that they should be more willing and ready to follow him, and to
observe his ordinances.

He wills them also to have in remembrance how God used them in the
wilderness for the space of forty years, Exo. 20. c. 20
by hunger, thirst and some other aduersityes* trying them whether they would
remain his faithful and obediente people or no. Ju. 2. d. 21. 22 1.
For God did not bring them into those distresses, Pe. 1. b. 6. 7
and lack of food and other things necessary, because he hated them, but as a
good father, to prove them and humble their hearts before him, and that they
might learn and understand, that man lives not by bread only, but by every
word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. For though there were no food
in the world to sustain man's life, yet is God hable by his divine providence
miraculously to preserve us. As he did feed them in the wilderness with
*Manna from heaven, Exo, 16. d. 15
a food that neither they nor their forefathers ever heard of: and caused the
stony* rock to yield them water to quench their thirst, Exo. 17. b. 6.
yea and moreover caused their raiment in forty years space never to *wear
or consume, Deu. 29. a. 5.
nor their feet to swell or be grieved with contynuall travail.

These strange things wrought he, that they might learn to put their trust
in him, and be well assured, that so great danger could never come unto them,
but that he was hable, and readily would deliver them out of it, if they did
faithfully serve him. And therefore Moses wylleth them to harken unto this
their gracious Lord, to fear him, and to walk in his ways.

For the Lord thy God brings thee into a good land. Verse. 7. 8. 9.
etc. Moses describes unto them the *fertile and plentiful country, Ex. 3.
a. 8.
that God had provided for them, Nu. 13. f. 28.
flowing with abundance of all fruits, commodities and delectable pleasures:
Deu. 6. a. 3.
that they might be the more *willing and ready to show their thankful
obedience toward him. Je. 11. a. 4. 5.


If the same land of Canaan be not at this day so fertile, as is here reported,
nor answerable to many parts of Moses his description, but lies in a great
part wast, as some trauailers declare, we may not think it strange. For
beside the mutation that naturally may come to any country in the space
of.3000. years, it pleased God of his goodness at this time here mentioned, to
make it y^ more fruitful because of his chose^ people, that he promised to
place there, which good blessing may well be thought to have continued so long
as his people kept his commandment, and continued in any tolerable obedience
of the laws and ordinances by him appointed.

But when they both fell from the true observation of the outward law, and
also rejected the true Messiah and Savior of the world, no marvel, if that
curse fell both upon them and their land, which, before, God had oftentimes
threatened, whereby great alteration thereof might fall.

When thou haste eaten therefore and filled thy self, Verse. 10.
thou shall bless. etc. The Israelites are here warned in the time of their
prosperity, Exo. 32. b. 6.
and the enjoying of Gods benefits, that they show themselves thankful, Neh.
9. e. 25
and ernestly to take heed that in time of their* wealth they wax not wanton
and forget God, Eze. 16. f. 49 3.
by whose goodness they are in that felicity. reg. 14. b. 7.


How necessary this admonition might then be to them and is also presently to
all other, the common course of man's life right well declares. What one among
an hundred is there, which by wealth and continual success does not wax
insolent and forget his duty toward God? Moises in his song chap. 32. of this
book, says of the Israelites. Thou art well fed, Thou are growe^ thick,
Deu. 32. c. 15.
Thou art even laden with fatness: and he has forsaken God his maker, and
Regarded not the Lord of his salvation. In which words he prophesied before
hand, what would come to pass among them, and therefore ernestly he wills the^
here to take heed. When thou have eaten and filled thy self, says he, and
builded goodly houses. etc. Bevvare least thy heart rise, and thou forgette
the Lord thy God.

Here he notes whereby me^ in such case ar moved to forget God, that is, Rising
of their heart with pride and insolency of mind. For few there are, that in
great wealth and prosperity can hold themselves within the bounds of
modesty and humbleness, 2. pa. 26. c. 16.
but so sone as they perceive them selves to flourish and be * aloft, Judit. 1.
c. 7.
their mind also in such sort swells with selfliking, Pro. 1. d. 32.
that they do not only contemn other, but let slip also the fear of God
himself, and by little and little are carried on, through the allurement of
Satan, that they clean fall from him. 3. reg. 11. a. 14
Let Solomon hereof be a notable example: and Christ himself said, That it was
as hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God, Ma. 19. d. 24
as for a Camel to go through a needels eye. Therefore Moses calls the
Israelites to remembrance, and wills them not to forget what they were in
Egypt and in the wilderness, and how lovingly and mercifully God then dealte
for them, Deuteronomy. 2. b. 7.
and gave them * all things at their need, that by that means they might the
sooner acknowledge him to be the * author and worker of al their prosperity,
Psalm. 22 a. ^.
and so continne in his true worship and obedience. Otherwise if they go from
their Lord and God, and give themselves to the worshipping of strange gods, he
protests and denounteth to them, that they shall assuredly perish, and be
destroyed, in like manner as they had seen God to work the confusion of other
nations before their faces. For where the mercy of God and his bountiful
goodness either is abused, or will not prevail, his Justice and severity
must needs take place.

The fifth Sundaye after Easter at Evening prayer.
Deuteronomy. 9. Hear O Israel, thou passest over Iordane this day, to

2 A people great and tall, Nu. 13. c. 27.
the children of the Anakims which thou know of, and of whom thou have heard
say, who can stand before the children of Anac?

3 Understand therefore this day, that the Lord thy God is he which goes over
before thee as a consuming fire, he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them
down before thy face: So thou shall cast them out, and bring them to naught
quickly, as the Lord has said unto thee.

4 Speak not thou in thine heart, after that the Lord thy God has cast them
outs before thee, saying: For my righteousness the Lord has brought me in to
po^^esse this land: but for, the wickedness of these nations the Lord has
cast the^ out before thee. 5 It is not for thy righteousness sake, or for thy
right heart that thou go to possess their land: But for the wickedness of
these Nations the Lord thy God does cast them out before thee to perform the
word which the Lord thy God swear unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isahac, and
Jacob.

6 Understand therefore that it is not for thy righteousness sake that the
Lord thy God does give thee this good land to possess it, seeing thou art a
stifnecked people.

7 Remember, and forget not how thou prouokedst the Lord thy God to anger in
the wilderness, since the day that Exo. 14. b. 10 Exo. 16. a. 2. Exo. 17. a.
2. Exo. 24. d. 18 Exo. 34. d. 28 Exo. 31. d. 18.
ye have rebelled against the Lord.

8 Also in Horeb ye provoked the Lord to anger, so that the Lord was wroth
with you to have destroyed you.

9 When I was gone up into the mount, to receive the tables of stone, the
tables of the covenant which the Lord made with you, and I abode in the mount
forty days and forty nights, when I neither did eat bread nor drink
water. 10 And the Lord delivered me two tables of stone written with the
singer of God, and in them were contained all the words which the Lord said
unto you in the mount out of the mids of the fire, in the day when ye came
together. 11 And when the forty days and forty nights were ended, the
Lord gave me the two tables of stone, the tables of the covenant. Exo. 32. b.
7.
12 And the Lord said unto me, Arise, and get thee down quickly from hence,
for thy people which thou have brought out of Egypt have marred all* they are
turned at once out of the way which I commanded them, and have made them a
molten image.

13 Furthermore, the Lord spoke unto me, saying, I have seen this people, and
behold it is a stifnecked people.

14 Let me alone that I may destroy them, and put out the name of them from
under heaven, and I will make of thee a mighty nation, and greater than they
be.

15 And I turned me, and came down from the hill, even

16 And I looked, and behold ye had sinned against the Lord your God, and has
made you a molten calfe, and had turned at once out of the way which the Lord
had commanded you. Exo. 32. c. 19.
17 And I took the two tables and cast them out of my two hands, and brake
them before your eyes.

18 And I fell down flat before the Lord as at the first time, Exo. 24. c. 18
and forty days and forty nights I did neither eat bread nor drink
water, because of all your sins which ye sinned in doying wickedly in the
sight of the Lord, in that ye provoked him unto wrath.

19 (For I was afraid, that for the wrath and fierceness wherewith the Lord
was moved against you, he would have destroyed you) But the Lord heard me at
that time also.

20 The Lord was very angry with Aaron also, to have destroyed him: and I made
intercession for Aaron also the same time. 21 And I took your sin, the Calfe
which ye had made, and burnte him with fire, and stamped him, and ground him
very small, even to dust: and I cast the dust

22 Also at the burning place, Exo. 17. a. 4. Nu. 11. a. 4. and. 21. 4.
at the place of tempting, and at the Sepulchers of lust, ye provoked the Lord
to anger.

23 Likewise when the Lord sent you from Cades Barnea, saying, Go up and
possess the land which I have given you: Act. 7. a. 39.
you rebelled against the word of the Lord your God, and neither beloved him,
nor hearkened unto his voice.

24 You have been rebellious unto the Lord since the day that I knew you. 25
And I fell down flat before ye Lord forty days and forty nights, as I
fell down before: for the Lord said he would destroy you.

26 I made intercession therefore unto the Lord, Exo. 34. b. 9.
and said, O lord God, destroy not thy people and thine inheritance which
thou haste delivered through thy great goodness, and which thou haste brought
out of Egypt through a mighty hand. 27 Remember thy servants Abraham,
Isahac, and Jacob, and look not unto the stubbernesse of this people nor to
their wickedness and sin.

28 Least the land whence thou broughtest them, say, The Lord is not able to
bring them into the land which he promised them, and because he hated them,
therefore has he carried them out to slay them in the wilderness.

29 Behold, they are thy people, and thine inheritance which thou broughtest
out in thy mighty power, and in thy stretched out arm.

The Exposition upon the.ix. Chapter of Deuteronomie.
Hear O Israel, Verse. 1.
thou passest over Jordane this day, to go in and possess. etc. THe
Israelites were a proud wayward and unthankful people, sone forgetting Gods
benefits done unto them. Deu. 6. d. 23 Deu. 26. b. 9. Iosu. 24. d. 17
Wherefore the purpose of Moises is in this chapter to * beat into their
memory that they were made the heirs of the land of Chanaan, and came to all that felicity, wherein they either had or should be, only by the free goodness
and mercy of God, for his promises and for his couenauntes sake, and not by
their own strength, or for their own worthiness. In this, to persuade them, he
uses two reasons especially. The one by comparing them with the people of that
country. The other by the example of their own wayward and rebellious doyngs
against God.

As touching the former, he says, the people of that country were far
greater in number, and mightier in power than they were. For many of them were
of the race of the * Giaunt Anac, Nu. 13. d. 34.
strong and mighty persons, as the messengers, that went to view the land,
did bring word: So that they were stricken with fear, Nu. 14. a. 2.
and * murmured against GOD as having brought them to a land impossible for
them by conquest to get. Wherefore if GOD by his mighty hand did work it for
them, they ought to acknowledge they did stand and depend only upon him.
And as they were not hable to work this of their own strength, so could they
not iustlye think, that GOD did it for them of duty or for their own
worthiness, but rather that they had deserved the clean contrary at his hand:
and that he lets the^ understand (as I have said) by laying examples of
their own wickedness and rebellious stomachs against him. The first is their
dealyng at Horeb Exodus. Exo. 32. a. 1. etc.
32. when Moises was gone up into the mountain and there tarried forty days
to receive the exquisite instruction of the law of GOD, and to bring with him
the two Tables of the ten commandments: They in the mean time forced
Aaron to make the^ a Golden Calfe to worship. The second is their offendyng at
the burning place, Number. Number. 11. a. 1
11. where GOD consumed many of them with fire. The third was their murmuryng
for lack of water Exodus. Exo. 17. a. 2.
17. at which time GOD gave them water out of the rock.

The fourth, was at the Sepulchers of lust Number. Nu. 11. d. 20
11. when they longed for flesh, and GOD gave the^ Quails to eat an whole
month together, until it came out at their noses again.

The last is at Cades Barn, Nu. 13. and. 14 a. 4.
Number. 13. When at the return of the Messengers they murmured against God and
against Moises and desired to return into Egipte. The four latter examples
are only briefly touched in verse. 22. 23. The first he stays long upon,
from the.8. verse to the.21. reciting almost the whole story out of Exodus 32.
but altering the order of some particular points, of which before I spoke.

I think good briefly to note, that, if the children of Israel in no respect
of their own worthiness, were made heirs of the land of Cbanaa^, and partakers
of his earthly blessings: much more we may not think, that the Mystery of
our redemption, Reconciliation to God, Remission of sins, Justification
before God, and Assignement to everlasting life, is bestowed upon us, as many
have wickedly taught, in regard of any part of our own good works and
weldoynges, but through faith in the free mercy of God for the merit and
passion of our Savior Christ Jesus. You be saved says Saint Paul Ephesians.
Ephe. 2. b. 8.
2. By grace through faith, and that not of your selves, for it is the gift
of God, not of your works, that no man may glory.

The glory then hereof must be given to God alone. It is a thing of far
greater worthynesse to attain Remission of Sins, and The Kingdom of Heaven,
than it is to possess the land of promise, and felicity in the world.

It is a thing much farther above the power of man to conquer Sin, Satan,
Death, and Hell, than it was to subdue the children of Anac. Therefore, as I
have said, if they were forbidden to respect their own power or worthynesse
in those things that were the less, and but only figures of other, much more
are we by Gods word in like manner charged in those that are the greater
things, and the truth of such as the other did but only signify.

Also in Horeb you provoked the Lord to anger, Verse. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.
etc.
so that the Lord. etc. This is the first example of their transgression at
Horeb in making the Golden Calfe. In which it shall be good to consider what
their offense was, how much God was displeased therewith, and how Moses their
governor behaved himself. Gene. 5. a. 5. Gene. 8. d. 21
As touching the first, although * man's corruption, destitute of the grace of
God, is very prone eue^ to the grossest Idolatry, yet it is hardly to be
thought, that the Israelites, who, so lately before, had seen so many wondrous
works done, as well in Egipte as in the wilderness, by the mighty hand of
the living God: would now suddenly be so bewitched as to forsake him utterly,
and in steed of him worship a Golden Calfe, Exo. 32. a. 4.
and * attribute to it those benefits that they had received of God, before
the Calfe by themselves was made. It is rather lykely, that because they
thought Moses was now gone, and therefore the less esteemed the form of
Religion by him declared, they would have a worshipping of God of their own
devising, and an Image, as they thought, in which they might honor him. For
such is the grossenes of man's wit, that he thinks he has not God present
with him, nor does not rightly worship him, unless it be in some visible
form of himself devised. If they did worship the Calfe as God, it was in
them an exceeding fury and astoniednes of common reason and sense. If they did
only worship God in the Calfe, and thought some divine holiness therein, as
it is most likelye: yet it was a grievous offense and directly against the *
first commandment, Ex. 20. a. 3. 4 Deu. 5. a. 7. 8
which was given them by GOD with great majesty and terror but a little time
before.

For in the first commandment God does not only forbydde strange Gods,
but also strange worshyppyngs of GOD, devised by man contrary to his holy
word.

They brake also the covenant that * before, Exo. 19. b. 8.
they had condescended unto, to follow the worship of GOD appointed in his
law, and not to depart from it, wherefore over and beside their Idolatrous
worship, they might be esteemed false, traitorous, and forsworn persons in
the syghte of GOD. Verse. 13. 14,
Gods displeasure then was just against them, Exo. 32. b. 9. Act. 7. f 51.
for they were, as he says, a * stifnecked people that by no means would be
kept in his true obedience, and therefore purposed utterly to have destroyed
them, and to have put out the name of them from under Heaven. Verse. 20.
Yea, he was exceedyng angrye also with Aaron, and would have destroyed him in
like manner, because he was so timorous and fainte hearted that for any cause he
would yield to be their instrument or helper to work Idolatrye. This offense
of the Israelites God opened first unto Moises, Verse. 12. 13.
saying: Thy people, which thou haste brought out of Egipte have sore
offended, they are turned at once out of the way that I commanded them etc.
And with all declares his grievous displeasure toward them, and that for their
detestable wickedness he minded to take them from the face of the earth. Then
Moises as a good governor, careful for that people which God had committed to
him, fell down before the Lord making earnest intercession for them and said.
Verse. 26. 27. 28. 29.
O Lord god destroy not thy people and thine enheritance, which thou have
delivered through thy great goodness etc. By whose example, we also are taught
the form of true and Godly prayer grounded upon the promyses of God. For God
had said that he had chosen the Israelites for his peculiar people, and that
he would by mighty hand deliver them, to the end that he might set forth the
glory of his name through all the world. He promised also to the Patriarchs
Abraham, Isahac, and Jacob, that he would preserve them and their seed, and
give unto their seed the land of Chanaan. Upon these promises does Moises with
a strong faith ground his prayer, Nu. 14. c. 17 Deu. 26. c. 15.
and earnestly* presses God with the same, and that he would not go from
these promises, though the stifnecked people had deserved the contrary. Adding
also the great reproach that might rise to his name among the heathen from
whence they came, that is, the Egiptians, who would say, That their God was not
hable to bring them into that land, that he had promised them, but because he
hated them, carried the^ forth into the wilderness to slay them.

In which words Moses shows himself also to have a great care of the glory
of God, and therefore that he craves his gracious mercy toward the Israelites
not only for their sakes, but also that he thought, it would make greatly to
the advancement of the glory of God, and staying of the reproach thereof among
the wicked. Such manner of prayer is also of great force and effect with God,
and does appease his wrath, and stay him from the execution of his purposed
plagues against his people offending. And therefore does it follow Exo. 32. Exo.
32. d. 14
The Lord refrained himself from the evil, which he said, he vvoulde do
unto his people. When Moses had in this manner appeased the wrath of god in the
mount, he did not so stay, but, coming down among the people and seeing their
wickedness, in great zeal and vehemence of spirit he cast the Tables of
the law out of his hand, so that he brake them. Which is not to be thought
furye or rage in Moses, but, as I have said, an earnest zeal, and a
declaration of his great grief of heart, that he conceived, not for any
worldely matter, but to see the *glory of God and his true woorship to be so
wickedly distayned and ouerthrown among his own people. Nu. 25. c. 13.
And because he was a magistrate and gouerner, he proceeds further, both to
the destroying and taking away of the Idol: and also to the sharp punishment
of the chief offenders. In such matters where Gods glory is distained,
private persons in deed have to deal by prayer only, as not having the sword
of correction put into their hand, but the magistrate ought not only to use
prayer, but his authority also given him of God to repress the wickedness,
and to *punish the offenders, Romans 13. b. 4
to the example of other. The number of them that Moses executed for this
offense were about three thousand, as it appears Exodus Exo. 32. f. 28.
32. And beside this, he took the Golden Calfe, and buent it, and stamped it
even to very duste, and cast it into the brook, that no memory of so wicked
idolatry might remain.

When Moses says, Verse. 18.
verse. 18. That he fell down flat before the Lord, even as at the first
time, and fasted forty days and forty nights. etc. It is not to be thought
that this his fasting was in time before his second ascending into the hill,
when he was commanded to prepare new tables, otherwise he should appear to
have fasted thryse, which was not true, and therefore that which he adds ver.
25. is but a repetitio^ of that which he speaks, verse. 18 and was performed
in the Mount, when at the appointment of God, he carried up other tables to
have the law of God new written in them. For, because the covenant by their
sin and offense was fordone, it could not be again confirmed, and the
tables of the covenant new written, but with the like solemnity, that was
before: and therefore Moses tarried there forty days and forty nights, and
neither did eat bread, nor drink water.

The Prayer that is added in the later end of the chap. was not used at his
second going up into the mount, as it may seem by the order of the telling of
it here, but it was the prayer that he made at the first time when God declared
his displeasure, and purposed to have destroyed the people. Wherefore it is
evident, the story is here repeted by Moses somewhat interruptly, and not in
the order wherein every thing was done. His purpose was to put them in mind of
the thing which they well knew, and therefore regarded not so much the order
in telling.

The Sunday after the Ascension at Morning prayer.
Deuteronomie. 12. the earth. 2 Ye shall destroy all places wherein the
nations which ye shall possess served their gods, Deuteronomy. 7. a. 2.
upon hye mountains, on hills, and under every green tree.

3 You shall overthrow their aulters, and break their pillars, and burn their
groves with fire, and you shall hew down the graven images of the gods that
they have, and bring the names of them to naught out of that place.

4 Ye shall not do so unto the Lord your God:

5 But ye shall seek the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of
all your tribes, 2. Pa. 7. c. 16.
to put his name there, and there to dwell, and thither thou shalt come:

6 And thither ye shall bring your whole burnt sacrifices, your offerings, your
tithes, and heave offerings of your hand, your vows, your freewill offerings,
and the first borne of your kine, and of your sheep. 7 And there is shall cate
before the Lord your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand
unto, both ye and your housholdes, wherein the Lord thy God has blessed thee.
8 Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day, every man what
seems him good in his own eyes. 9 For ye are not yet come to rest, and to
the inheritance which the Lord your God gives you. 10 But when ye go over
Iordane, and dwell in the land which the Lord your God has given you to
inherit, and when he has given you rest from all your enemies round abouse,
and shall dwell in safety: 11 Then unto the place which the Lord your God
has chosen to put his name there, 3. Re. 8. c. 29.
ye shall bring all that I command you: your whole burnt sacrifices, your
offerings, your tithes, the heave offering of your hand, and all your
special vows which ye vow unto the Lord. 12 And ye shall rejoice before the
lord your God, ye and your sons, and your daughters, your servants, and your
maidens, and the Leuite that is within your gates, forasmuch as he has no
part nor inheritance with you.

13 Take heed that thou offer not thy whole burnte offerings in every place
that thou see. Deu. 10. b 9. and. 18. a. 1.


14 But in the place which the Lord shall choose in one of thy tribes, there
thou shall offer thy whole burnt offerings, and there thou shall do all that I
command thee.

15 Notwithstanding, thou may kill and eat flesh in all thy cities,
whatsoever thy soul lusts after, according to the blessing of the Lord thy
God which he has given thee: both the unclean and the clean may eat
thereof, of the Roe bucke, and of the Heart.

16 Only ye shall not eat the blood, but pour it upon the earth as water. 17
Thou may not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and
of thy oil, and the first borne of thy kine, and of thy sheep, neither any of
thy vows which thou vowest, nor thy freewill offerings, or heaueoffering of
thine hand:

18 But thou must eat them before the Lord thy God in the place which the
Lord thy God has chosen, thou and thy son and thy daughter, thy servant and
thy maid, and the Leuite that is within thy gates: and thou shalt rejoice
before the Lord thy God in all that thou put thine hand to. Eccl. 7. d. 31.
19 Beware that thou forsake not the Leuite, as long as thou lyuest upon the
earth.

20 If, Deu. 19. b. 8.
when the Lord thy God shall enlarge thy border as he has promised thee, thou
say, I will eat flesh (because thy soul longs to eat flesh) thou may
eat flesh what soever thy soul lusts. 21 If the place which the Lord thy
God has chosen to put his name there, be too far from thee, then thou shall
kill of thy oxen and of thy sheep which the Lord has given thee, as I have
commanded thee, and thou shall eat in thine own city whatsoever thy soul
lusts. 22 And as the Roebucke and the Heart is eaten, Deu. 15. d. 22
so thou shall eat them: both the clean and unclean shall eat of them. 23
But take heed that thou eat not the blood: for the blood is the life, and
thou may not eat the life with the flesh. 24 Thou shall not eat it, but
pour it upon the earth as water. 25 Thou shall not eat it, that it may go
well with thee, and with thy children after thee: but thou shall do that
which is right in the sight of the Lord. 26 But thy holy things which thou
haste, and thy vows, thou shalt take, and come unto the place which the Lord
has chosen. 27 And thou shalt offer thy whole burnt offerings both flesh and
blood upon the altar of the Lord thy God: and the blood of thine offerings
shall be poured out upon the altar of the Lord thy God, and thou shall eat
the flesh. 28 Take heed, and hear all

30 Beware that thou be not taken in a snare after them, after that they be
destroyed before thee, and that thou ask not after their Gods, deu. 1. c. 7.
12
saying: As these nations serve their Gods, I will do so likewise. 31 Nay, thou
shall not do so unto the Lord thy God: for all abominations, and that which
the Lord hates, the same have they done unto their gods.

32 For they have burned both their sons and their daughters with fire before
their goods. Josu. 1. d. 13. Deuteronomy. 4. a. 4 Josu. 23 b. 6.
Therefore whatsoever I command you, take heed ye do it: and put thou naught
thereto, nor take ought therefrom.

The Exposition upon the.xij. Chapter of Deuteronomie.
These are the ordinances and laws which ye shall observe and do. etc. AS
Moses before in sundry places had warned the Israelites earnestly to shun
Idolatry and false woorshipping of God, so here, that they might have the
less occasion to be seduced, 4. Re. 18. a. 4 Deuteronomy. 7. a. 5. Exo. 23. f. 24. 2.
Pa. 14. a. 3. 2. pa. 15. b. 8. 3. Re. 18. f. 40
he charge them, when God has brought them into the land of Chanaan, and
given the^ the possession thereof: that they should *destroy all the places,
wherein those wicked nations served their gods, yea and to overthrow their
aulters, break their pillars, burn their groves, hew down their graven
images, and so much as they could, bring the names of them out of memory, that
they remained not among them as stumbling stocks for them to fall at.

Wherein we also have to learn, that to the uttermost of our power, we should
deface the momuments of Idolatry, and yet after the Idolatry and false
worshipping of God is by good order and doctrine taken away, as touching the
outward things that they used, some more liberty is left to christians, than
was to the Israelites. For I do not see, but that christian me^ may well use
churches, and some other things that have been before time wickedly abused, and
apply the same things now to better uses. As the precepts for avoiding of
Idolatry were perpetual, and bind all ages: so this commandment of
destroying the places. etc. was but temporal, and an ordinance to them only
given, and therefore does not bynd all other in like manner, as it did bind them.

You shall not do so to the Lord your God, Verse. 4.
but ye shall seek the place. etc. In this part of the chapter, Moses by gods
Authority appointed to the Israelites a certain order, to be observed in the
external exercise of Gods true worship, whereby it might differ from all false
woorshippyngs of Idolatrous Gods, dispersed throughout the world: and that is
it, that he would have but one Sanctuary, and one Altar, Ephesians. 4. a. 4.
thereby to declare their*vnitie and consent in one faith and religion.
Therefore he appoints but one place* where he will be worshipped, Psalm. 121.
a. 1
and thither he wills them all to resort, and to that place to bring their
offerings.

The choice of this place God reserueth to himself, neither was it appointed
among the people of Israel, until the time of king David, and then chose he
Mount Syon, and the City of Jerusalem, Psa. 78. g. 73.
as it is said, Psalm. 78, He refused the tabernacle of Joseph, he chose
not the trybe of Ephraim, but chose the trybe of Judah, even the hill of Syon
which he loved. And again Psalm. 132. God has chosen Sion, Psa. 132. d.
14
and had a desire that it might be an habitation for him. This is (says he)
my rest for ever, here I will dvvell. etc.

In all the mean time until David's reign the Ark of GOD had not any
settled place, but yet they did woorshyppe GOD, and do Sacrifice where the
Arc and the Tabernacle was. So that every man or every Tribe did not erect a
several altar where they might sacrifice to their God. The sacrifices and
offerings mentioned, verse. 6. are such as by God him self were appointed to
diverse purposes, Leuit. 2. 3. 4. etc. Nu. 15. etc.
as appears Leuit. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. and 7. Number. 15. and in sundry other places.
In all those sacrifices the Priests and Levites that attended upon the service
of God had their portions appointed them: the residue they that offered did
eat with thanks giving and reverence. For by this speech To eat before the
Lord, is noted the holy feasts that they solemnised at sacrifices, as a
difference from their other meals and eatings. For then were they at the
tabernacle where god did principally declare his presence to them, and therefore
were said To eat before the Lord.

Notwithstanding thou may kill and eat flesh in all thy cities. Verse. 15.
16.
etc. God permits the Israelites to eat flesh, such as they like in any
place, so that it were not offered to him in Sacrifice but used as their common
meat. And he puts for example, the Roe and the Heart, which were never
offered to God, and therefore might all sorts of men eat of them: yea even
such as by Gods law were compted unclean, and needed purification by the
order of the law, but of Sacrifices none such might eat before they were
purged. But as God permits them to eat flesh: so he forbids them to
eat the blood, the which he does Leuit. Le. 17. b. 10.
17. far more earnestly. The like *inhibitio^ he used also to Noah after the
deluge, Gene. 9. a. 4.
Which God did to accustom his people to a more myldenesse among
themselves, that they should not be ready to murder and slaughter. For when
by Gods ordinance they had learned to spare the Blood of beasts, they must
needs think it a greater* cruelty to shed man's blood. Hest. 4. a. 4. Dani. 2.
c. 15.
Therefore in Genesis, God immediately after the prohibition to eat the blood
of beasts, Gene. 9. a. 5.
adds, Whosoever sheadeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shead.

Thou may not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn. Verse. 17. 18.
etc. As Moses had showed them, that they might eat flesh, so now he
tells them what they may not eat, that is, their tithe, the first borne of
their cattle, their vows, their freewil offerings. etc. For of all these, so
much as was Gods portion, was allotted to the fynding of his ministers, the
Priests, the Levites, and also the poor people, as may in part appear, Nu.
Nu. 18. c. 21.
18. And therefore they might not eat them at home, Deu. 19. d. 27 1. Cor. 9.
c. 13. Eccle. 7. d. 31.
that they might not defraud the ministers of God, of whom they* ought to have
care, and therefore God charge them that they do not forsake the Leuite: but
the residue of the same * Sacrifices that was not appointed to the Deu. 18. a.
1.
Priests. etc. they are commanded to eat before the Lord, that is at his
Tabernacle, where he chiefly declared his presence.

When the Lord thy God shall enlarge thy border as he has promised. Verse.
20. 21. 22. etc.
etc. Here is repeated the same thing that was spoken Verse 15. 16. that they
might eat flesh according to their ability that God had given them, and how
they might eat it, that is, as a common meat, not as a Sacrifice. There is
added also a more large and earnest* prohibitio^ of eating of blood, Leui. 7.
c. 27. Leui. 19. f. 26
because in the bloudis life, or the vital spirits, so that it may seem
cruelty to eat blood. To eat blood of it self, was not a matter of so
great momente, and therefore when God presses so earnestly the prohibition,
and with so great punishmente, it is evident the Law tends to some other
end, that is, that they might esteem the Lives of all things, and especially
of Man, to be precious. And therefore (says he) The blood is the life.

But thy holy things which thou have, Verse. 26. 27.
and thy vows, thou shall take. etc. This makes the former Precept more
plain, and shows evidently, that the cause which God would have no mo places
of worship than one, was, that the diversity of places and Aultars might not
among that wayward people cause so many Several Gods as they had several
places of worship. Therefore are they willed here to bring al Holy things, that
is, such as be dedicated to God, or appointed for Sacrifice, to that appointed
place where the Lord would choose to be worshipped.

Take heed and hear all these words which I command thee. Verse. 28. 29.
30. 31. 32.
etc. For So Much as the Imitation of that people that dwelled in the land of
Chanaan, might be a great occasion easily to lead them to Idolatry and
worshipping of strange gods, Moses here straightly forbids them not so
much as to Enquire of the manner of their false Gods. For this is lightly the
beginning of all Idolatry, Sap. 14. b. 12.
when men, understanding the simplicity of Gods true worship, curiously
Enquire of men's devises, whether there be any thing in the^ worthy observation,
which they may add, as they think, to beautify the simplicity of Gods
commandment, and so by little and little fall either to flat Idolatry, or to
very Gross superstition. Wherefore God bridleth here this loosnesse of his
people, and says, They may not do so to their Lord God, for he did not only
mislike those false worshippings, but did Hate them, Loath them, and accounted
them Abominable, and especially that Horrible use of Burning their sons and
daughters unto devils.

Therefore to knit up this instruction, God commands them that they should
cleave fast unto his word, and not in any point to alter it, either By
adding any thing thereto, or by taking any thing therefro. As if he had said,
that all studies and endeavors of men to woorship him, Deuteronomy. 4. a. 2.
not proceeding out of this* root of his holy word and law, seemed they never
so godly, were superstitious, wicked, and abominable in his sight. And
therefore they may seem to break the first commandment, and to frame unto
themselves strange Gods, which worship God in any other manner, than in his
word is appointed. Esa. 29. d. 13.
For this cause does Esaie chap. 29 threaten horrible punishment to such
persons. Because (says God) this people has worshipped me with their
mouth, and their hearts far from me, and their fear toward me has
proceeded of the commandments of men, I will do maruels among this people,
1. Cor. 1 c. 19.
For the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, etc. Seeing therefore the
whole worship of God that these many years has been in the Church of Rome,
has been altogether Man's devise beside and contrary to the word of God, 2. Co.
3. d. 14. Jo. 7. g. 47. Io. 9. g. 40.
no marvel if God has so *blinded and astonished thewisedome and understanding
of the chief doctors and best learned of them, that they stand in defense of
very gross errors and superstitions.

The Sunday after the Ascension, at Euenyng prayer.
Deuteronomie.xiij. IF there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of

2 And that sign or wonder which he has said, come to pass, and then say:
Let us go after strange Gods (which thou have not known) and let us serve
them:

3 Hearken not thou unto the words of that prophet or dreamer of dreams:
Deuteronomy. 8. a. 2
For the Lord thy God proves you, to know whether ye love the Lord your
God with all your heart, and with all your soul.

4 Ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear him, keep his
commandments, and hearken unto his voice, you shall serve him, and clean
unto him.

5 And that prophet or dreamer of dreams shall dye (because he has spoken to
t^rlie you away from the Lord your God which brought you out of the land of
Egypt, and delivered you out of the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of
the way which the Lord thy God commanded thee to walk in) and therefore
thou shall put the evil away from thee. 6 If thy brother, the son of thy
mother, or thine own son, or thy daughter, or the wife that lies in thy
bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul unto thee, entice thee
secretly, saying: Let us go and serve strange gods (which thou haste not
known, nor yet thy fathers.) 7 And they be any of the gods of the people which
De. 17. b. 12.
thine eye shall not pity him, neither shall thou have compassion on him, nor
keep him secret.

9 But cause him to be slain: Thine hand shall be first upon him to kill
him, and then the hands of all the people. 10 And thou shalt stone him with
stones that he dye: because he has gone about to thruste thee away from the
Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and from the
house of bondage.

11 And all Israel shall hear and fear, and shall do no more any such
wickedness as this is among you.

12 If thou shalt hear say in one of thy Cities which the Lord thy God
has given thee to dwell in.

13 That certain men being the children of Beliall, are gone out from among
you, and have m^ued the inhabiters of their City, saying: Let us go and serve
strange gods which ye have not known:

14 Then thou must seek, and make search, and enquire diligently: and behold,
if it be true, and the thing of a surety, that such abomination is wrought
among you:

15 Then thou shall smite the dwellers of that city with the edge of the
sword, and destroy it utterly, and all that is therein, and the very cattle
thereof, with the edge of the swoorde: 16 And gather all the spoil of it into
the mids of the street thereof, and burn with fire both the city and all
the sp^yle thereof every whitte for the Lord thy God: and it shall be an heap
for ever, and shall not be built again.

17 And there shall cleave naught of the damned thing in thine hand, that the
Lord may turn from the fierceness of his wrath, and show thee mercy, and
have compassion on thee, and multiply thee, as he has sworn unto thy
fathers.

18 Therefore shalt thou hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep
all his commandments which I command thee this day, that thou do that
which is right in the eyes of the Lord thy God.

The Exposition upon the.xiij. Chapter of Deuteronomie.
If there arise among you aprophete or a dreamer of dreams. Verse. 1.
etc. IN the later end of the former chapter, Moses had willed the people in
any wise to beware of the strange worship of heathen Gods: Now he wills the^
to take heed of false teachers rising among themselves, and seking to ^educe
them from the true worship of God, that in any wise they do not harken or give
credit unto the^, The Devil envying the true honor of God, does not only seek
to blemish and overthrow the same by forain enemies, Act. 20. f. 30 1. Jo. 2.
c. 19.
but also eue^ at * how in the house of God he rayseth False Doctors and
teachers* that under fair titles and goodly pretenses of holiness, may draw
the people of God from his known truth. Wherefore Moses here notes the
colors wherewith the Devil by his ministers in this case uses to deceive
me^, They will take on them the name of Prophets, or such as have revelation
from God by dreams, yea and sometime he will help the^ by Gods sufferance to
*work some strange and miraculous thing, Ma. 24 c. 24
that by such a Sy^ne or wonder, they may gather the greater credit in their
false doctrine. Wherefore God, here fore warns, his faithful people to take
heed of such gaye tales, and to suspecte such fair pretenses, and to cleave
only to his word, Jo. 10. c. 27.
and hearken to *his voice, from which, if their teachers do swerve, and will
them to do that is contrary thereto, they must not believe them, but account
them as wicked Seducers and deceivers. This lesson is so given to the
Israelites, that it may be also an instruction to all the faithful in the
Church of God at all times, and especially in these latter days, wherein the
Holy Ghost has given warning before hand, that Antichrist and his ministers
should use the same means, and that so mightily, that if it were possible he
should Seduce* even the elect of God. Mat. 24. c. 4
When Moses says, The Lord your God proves you. etc. we must understand
that God does not tempt or prove, of purpose to lead or induce to that which
is evil, or to lay stumbling blocks, at which his people may take offense and
fall, but only by such means to examine and ^rie them and to make that known
openly to the World, which he knows to be inwardly in their hearts whether it
be good or evil. So did God tempt Abraham Gen 22. Genesis 22. a. 2.
that his faith might be ^nown ^o al me^. So did Christ tempt the woman of
Chanaa^, Mat. 15. c. 26
when he called her dog, and refused to hear her prayer. And for this and
does S. Paul say, 1. Co. 11. d. 19
1. Cor. 11. that There must be ^^ctes in the church, that they that be proved
may be known. For this cause then God suffers such Soducers to be in his
Church, that by them the Hypocrites and dissimulers may be tried from the
faithful and elect Children of God. The good man may some times, by such
means, fall into error, and be intrapped of the wicked, but it is only in
some part, and for a time, and after returns again by repentance, which god
suffers in him to punish his Negligence, that did not bestow sufficient
diligence in studiyng and meditating in the word of God, or did not Live
severely according to his profession and calling. Verse. 5.
When in the. 5. verse, Moises says, And the Prophet or dreamer of dreams
shall die. 1. Io. 4. a. 1.
etc. He declares that we must not only *discern false teachers from other,
and beware of them, but that they must by the Magistrate be severely punished
to the example of other, least the infectio^ of their corrupt Doctrine do
destroy the souls of many, and disturb the Church of God. In that he
appoints the punishment of Death, we have to note these circumstaunces: That
it must not be executed by every Private man, Romans 13 a. 4.
but by the Magistrate, who has *Authority given of God to punish the
wicked. That not every one that has dispersed some error to the offense of
the godly, is by and by to be taken and put to Death, but such only as be
principal Ringleaders, and seek by all means they can to draw the people of
God to Apostasy and forsaking of his fettled and known truth, and utterly to
subvert the same.

And lastly, that the Crime must be evidently known and tried, and the party
fully convicted. It seems to many, that it is Extremity and trueltie in
matter of Religion and conscience to use the punishment of Death, and they say
that Christ was mild and merciful, and required his Disciples to follow his
steps. In so much that when they desired fire to come from heaven to punish
evil persons he said, Luc. 9. g. 55.
They knew not of what spirit they wear, But let those men consider, that it
was the Lord of al Mercy, that appointed here this order of punishment, and
also let them remember what extreme cruelty it is for a Magistrate to whose
charge God has committed his people, to se the Souls of a number of his
people by wicked Doctrine or other like endeavor to be pulled from God and his
true worship, and lamentably drawn to Hell and perpetual Damnation, and yet
not to cause the Roots and workers thereof to be taken away, that their poison
may not so largely be spread to the great danger of other and the decaie of
Gods glory and truth.

IF thy brother the son of thy mother, Verse. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
or thine own son. etc. The same that was before spoken of false Prophets
and teachers only, is here applied even to every one of ye people: whose
offense although it may seem somewhat the less, because of their Ignorance,
and that they have not the Office of teaching, yet the Forsaking of God and his
truth, and the seking to misleade other with them, is to God always and in all
persons intolerable. But this is to be observed both in this place and
before, that such punishment is not to be used, but where Gods true Religion is
thoroughly known and Settled, as it was at this time among the Jews. This is
to be considered how Earnestly God requires this punishment to be done. For he
wills us not to regard either brother or sister, Deu. 29. c. 18 1. Jo. 3. b.
7.
or child, or wife, or any* persons whatsoever though he be unto us as our
own life. Whereby he declares how earnest our study and endeavor should be to
maintayn his True worship. Al natural affections be they otherwise never so
commendable, Exo. 32. f. 27 Luc. 14. f. 26
yet ought they to *give place to the zeal of Gods glory and to the affection
that we should have to the establishing of the same among his people. Jere.
48. b. 10 Apoc. 3. c. 16
For in gods cause to be *slack and cold in consideration of these persons,
what else is it, than to set our affections against Gods commandments, and to
show that we more esteem our Natural friends than we do God and his Glory.
Wherefore says God, Thou shall not obey him, thine eye, which commonly is the
instrument of pity, shall not spare him, nor take mercy upon him, no, nor
thou shall not hide him or keep him secret, but cause him to be slain: and
yet to make the charge more vehement he adds Thine hand shall be first upon
him to kill him. This he speaks because the manner* was, Jo. 8. a. 5.
that in stoning of persons condemned the witnesses should cast the first stones
at them, to declare that in their conscience, the witness was true.

The cause and end of this seueritye added in the.11. verse, is diligently to
be marked, And all Israel shall hear and fear, and shall do no more any
such wickedness. The good and godly are stayed from evil through the love
of God and reverence of his word: but the other, which are always the more
part, will not be brideled but with* Severity and fear of punishment, Psa.
82. d. 15 Psa. 77. d. 38
whereby we may learn how necessary sharp correction and punishment is in
Christian commonweals. For such is the corruption of man's nature, that where
they see hope of impunitie, they run on headlong to the greatest mischiefs.
But by example of punishment and fear of Justice they be somewhat stayed and
kept in order.

If thou shall hear say in one of thy Cities, Verse. 12. 13. 14. 15.
which the Lord. etc. If the infection of Apostasy and falling from God, do
grow from the false Prophet to the people, and from some of the people to a
whole City, God wills the whole City not to be spared, but to be put to
punishmente and utter desolation. For better it were that a few did perish *
than Gods true worship should be overthrown and his glory decay. Exo. 32. f.
27
But in this place especially, as in the other also, before Men proceed to
punishment, God would have them enquire and search out the matter diligently,
that they did not upon light report rashly condemn men. But if it were found
for a suertie, then that they should smite them with the edge of the sword,
and to declare Gods just wrath against the Reuolters from his known truth
and right worship, and not to spare so much as their Cattle.

And gather all the spoil into the mids of the street thereof. Verse. 16.
17. 18.
etc. God wills the whole furniture and Implements of the City to be
gathered into one place, and burned with fire, Josu. 6. c. 18. etc.
and * not to turn any thereof unto their own use. It may be, God somewhat
herein respected their covetousness, that they might not cover a corrupt
affection of covetousness with a pretensed zeal of Gods justice. But the
principal cause, that Moises here utters, that is, that the people by this
might be more accustomed to the hating and Detestation of that which they saw
God so grievously did abhor.

Whitsundaye at Morning prayer.
Deuteronomie. 16. Observe the month of new corn, that thou may

2 Thou shall therefore offer the Passover unto the Lord thy God (of sheep and
oxen) in the place which the Lord shall choose to put his name there. Exo. 13.
b. 7.
Thou shall eat no leauened bread with it: but seven days shalt thou eat
unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of tribulation (for thou came
out of the land of Egipte in haste) that thou may remember the day when
thou came out of the land of Egipte, all the days of thy life.

4 And there shall be no leauened bread seen in all thy coasts seven days
long, neither shall there remain any thing of the flesh which thou offerest
the first day at even until the morning.

5 Thou may not offer the Passover within any of thy gates which the Lord
thy God gives thee.

6 But in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to set his name in,
there thou shall offer the Passover at even, about the going down of the
Sun, in the season that thou came out of Egipte.



8 Six days thou shalt eat sweet bread, and the seventh day shall be a
solemn assemblye before the Lord thy God: thou shalt do no work therein.

9 Seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee, Leui. 23. c. 16 Acts. 2. a. 1.
and begin to number the seven weeks when thou beginnest to put the sicle to
the Corn.

10 And keep the feast of weeks unto the Lord thy God, with a free will
offering of thine hand, which thou shalt give unto the Lord thy God,
according as the Lord thy God has blessed thee. 11 And thou shall rejoice
before the Lord thy God, thou, and thy Son, thy Daughter, thy servant and thy
maid, and the Leuite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widdowe that are among you, in the place which the Lord
thy God has chosen to put his name there.

12 And remember that thou waste a servant in Egypt: and thou shalt observe
and do these ordinances.

13 Thou shalt also observe the Feast of Tabernacles seven Exo. 23. c. 15.
15 Seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the Lord thy God in the
place which the Lord shall choose: for the Lord thy God shall bless thee in
all thy fruits, and in all the works of thine hands, therefore shalt thou be
glad. 16 Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord
thy God in the place which he shall choose, Exo. 23. c. 14
in the feast of unleaucned because, in the feast os weeks, and in the feast
Tabernacles: and they shall not appear before the Lord empty.

17 Every man shall give according to the gift of his hand, and according to
the blessing of the Lord thy God which he has given thee. 18 Judges and
officers shall thou make thee in all thy cities which the Lord thy God gives
thee throughout thy tribes, and they shall judge the people with just judgment.
19 Wrest not thou the law, Exo. 23. a. 2. Eccl. 20. d. 19 Deu. 1. c. 17. Leui.
19. c. 15 Exo. 23. b. 8.
nor know any person, neither take any reward: for gifts do blind the
eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous.

20 That which is just and right shalt thou follow, that thou may live,
and enjoy the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

21 Thou shalt plant no grove of any trees near unto the altar of the
Lord thy God which thou shall make thee.

22 Thou shalt set thee up no Pillar which the Lord the God hates.

The Exposition upon the.xvj. Chapter of Deuteronomie.
Observe the month of new corn, Verse. 1. 2. 3. 4 5. 6. 7. 8.
that thou may offer the Passover. etc. THe Israelites in this place are
commanded with all diligence to observe the three principal Feasts, wherein
they were appointed especially to resort to the place, that the Lord would
choose, that is, the City of Jerusalem. The first Feast was the Passover,
called here the Month of nevvecorne, and by us noted under the name of Easter.

The second was Pentecost, called here the Feast of weeks and by us
VVhitsontide. The third was the Feast of Tabernacles. As touching the
Passover, there is more large declaration of it upon Exodus. Exo. 12. a. 1. etc.
12. read on Easter day. It was solemnised the first month, that is, the
month of March, and here is called the Month of nevve corn, because fruit
and grain then began to grow toward ripening. For in those countries being
many degrees more Southward and narre the sun, Harvest is much sooner than
with us Northwarde.

At this Feast beside other ceremonies they were appointed to offer unto God a
certain small portion of their ears of new corn, thereby confessyng that
their towardness of Harvest was of Gods only goodness, and also praying that
he would vouchsafe to prosper to their use, that which was on the ground, and
for this cause especially is the time of this Feast called the Month of new
corn. Exo. 12. c. 16. Exo. 13. b. 6.
The principal cause of the Institution* of the Passover was to put them in
continual remembrance of Gods marvelous benefit in passing away his plague
from them, and not striking them when his Angel* killed all the first borne
of Egipte. Exo. 12. c. 29.
At this Feast by the space of seven days they might eat no leauened bread,
whereby they were put in mind of their Hasty dispatch out of Egipte. For
albeit Pharao was obstinately set, not to let them go, yet God by his mighty
plagues so Brake his heart, that he did not only deliver them, but forced them
to depart with such speed, as they could not abide to leven their dowe, but
carried it away on their shoulders, Which their hasty departure ^^s some
trouble to them, and thereof does this unleavened bread put them in
remembrance, and for that cause is called here The bread of tribulation. As for
all other ceremonies appertainyng to this Feast, they are expounded in the
chapter above mentioned.

Seven weeks shall thou number to thee, Verse. 9.
and begin to number. etc. From the day after that the Measure or Portion of
new corn was offered unto the Lord, which I think was in the end of the
Feast of Passover reckning seven full Sabathes or wekes to the next day after
the seven weeks ended are just fiftye days, and was the time appointed for
the Pentecost, called here the Feast of weeks and in Exodus. Exo. 23. c. 15
23: The Feast of Harvest, and with us as I have said, is named VVhitsontide.
The first cause of the ordynance of this Feast was that they might remember
the Liberty that God had given them, and show themselves thankful for the
same. For fifty days after their coming out of Egipte, God gave them the
Law in Mount Sinay, and first ordained them a free State and Policy by
peculiar Laws among themselves, whereas before, they were in bondage and lived
in miserable oppression under the Laws and * tyranny of the Egiptians. Exo.
1. b. 10.
An other cause of the Institution hereof was, that they might offer a new
Oblation unto God, that is two Loaves of new Corn baked, as the first Fruits,
in way of thankesgeuing to the Lord: So that they did not offer only the
Measure of New corn before Harvest, but Oblation also toward the end of
Harueste. And thereby are taught, as We also should be, that the Fruits of
Harueste come not either of the Fertility of the ground, or of their own
Labor and travail, but of the singular Favor and Blessing of God, and
therefore that they should use the same not to Ryote and Drunke^nesse, but with
reverence and * thankesgeuyng. 1. tim. 4. a. 4.
The third cause of the Institution was, that it might be a figure both of the
true Liberty of conscience, and of the spiritual Harvest that was to come,
under the true Moses and Deliverer Christ Jesus. For even as fiftye days after
the delivery of the Children of Israel out of Egipte they had the Law given
them in Mount Sinay: So the fiftieth day after our deliverance from the
Tyranny of Sin and Satan by the Death and Resurrection of Christ, (which
was the true* Passover), 1. Cor. 5. c. 7.
The holy Ghost was sent down from Heaven which might not only write the
eternal law of God in our hearts and make us free Citizens of the heavenly
Jerusalem, Jo. 20. e. 21. Act. 10. g. 42 Psa. 146. a. 2. Psa. 49. a. 5. Mar.
13. d. 27
but also by the Apostles and other good Ministers and laborers, might* gather
together the Spiritual Harvest of God throughoute the whole world, and that
all Faithful might receive the first Fruits of the benefytes of his Death
and Resurrection. We do not therefore Observe this day supersticiously, because
the like was ordained among the Jews, But for that it is an ordinary time
appointed for the people of God to assemble and hear the declaration of those
marvelous works of God, which as at this time were done after the Ascension
of Christ into Heaven. For then did Christ declare and confirm the Majesty
and truth of his Gospel with wonderful Miracles, So that it was euidente
that he only was the true Messiah and Savior that the same Holy Ghost had
spoken of many years before unto the Patriarchs, and Prophets.

And because at the time of Pentecost when the Holy Ghost was given, the
Gospel first began to be published, we may not think that one or two
Festival days is appointed for the perfourmance thereof: but from that first
Pentecost until the worlds end, should be to us one perpetual VVhitsonday,
in which we should with thanksgiving rejoice for our spiritual fredome, and
take in the fruits of Christ's blessed Passion and Resurrection.

Thou shalt observe also the feast of the Tabernacles seven days. Verse. 13.
etc. This Feast of the Tabernacles or Tents was Solemnised the.15. of
September, when they had not gathered in all their fruits, grain, and wine.
All the time of this Feast for the space of seven days they dwelt in Tents or
Bowthes of grene trees, Number. 28. Number. 29. Leuit. 23.
and observed sundry ceremonies and oblations declared Number. 28. 29. Leuit. 23.
and other where. The causes of the ordinance were partly to put them in mind of
their former Condition, Whence they came, and that it was God that first made
them to dwell in Tents in the wilderness, when he brought them out of Egypt.

Secondlye, that they might remember the wonderful miracles and benefits
that God did in maintayning and Preserving them until they came into the land
of Chanaan, where they found in steed of Tents and Tabernacles, goodlye
strong Cities, and fair houses to inhabit: and by this occasion were they
willed to compare the Felicity that they should be in the land of Chanaa^
with the Necessity and hard state that they had before, when they were
constrained to inhabit in Bouthes and Tabernacles, and thereby learn not to
wax insolent, but to give thanks to God the Author of that great blessing.
None of these Feasts might be Solemnised in any place but where the Lord had
chose^to set his name, and would especially be called upon, and that as I have
said, in the time of David, was Jerusalem, Before that, where the Tabernacle
of God was.

Judges and officers shall thou make thee in all thy Cities which the Lord.
Verse. 18. 19. 20.
etc. Now Moises adds certain political orders and instructions for choice
of convenient Magistrates in their common weal, and for the sincere and
upright dealing therein. For seeing the Judgment Seat of y^ Magistrate is, as
it were a sanctuary and a place of relief and succor for the succourlesse,
the poor and needy, and other whatsoever persons oppressed by injury, it
might seem most lamentable, if they coming thither for succor, should light
upon Thieves and Robbers, that will sell right for gain and money. Therefore
Moises wills Magistrates and Judges in any wise to beware of* Partiality
and Briberie, Deu. 1. c. 17.
as y^ thing that shuts up the eyes of discretion and wisdom, and
corrupts al true Judgment. For says he, Gifts do blind the eyes of the
wise, and peruerte the words of the righteous.

Thou shalt plant no Groves of any trees near unto thee. Verse. 21. 22.
etc. The heathen used to plant Groves of wood about the Chapels of their
Idols, and sometime made Pillars to set their false Gods on, wherefore because
God will have his Religion not to agree with the Idolatours worship of the
Gentiles, he briefly forbids those two things.

Trinity Sundaye at Morning prayer.
Genesis. 18. Heb. 13. b


2 And he lift up his eyes and looked, and lo, three men stood by him: and when
he saw them, he ran to meet them from the Tent door, and bowed himself
toward the ground: 3 And said, Lord, if I have now found favor in thy
sight, pass not away I pray thee from thy servant.

4 Let a litle-water I pray you be fet, and wash your feet, and refreshe
your selves under the tree.

5 And I will fet a morsel of bread to comfort your hearts withal, and then
shall you go your ways: for therefore are ye come to your servant. And they
said, Do as thou have said.

6 And Abraham went apace into the Tent unto Sara, and said, Make ready at once
three measures of fine meal, kneade ( it) and make cakes upon the hearth.

7 And Abraham running unto his beasts, fet a calfe tender and good, and gave
it unto a young man: and he hasted to

9 And they said unto him, Where is Sara thy wife? He answered, Behold, in
the Tent.

10 And he said, Genesis 17. c. 19.
I will certainly return unto thee if I live: and so, Sara thy wife shall
have a son. Gene. 21. a. 1.
That heard Sara in the Tent door, which was behind him.

11 Abraham and Sara were both old, and well stricken in age: and it ceased
to be with Sara after the manner as it is with women. 12 Therefore Sara laughed
within her self, saying, Now I am waxed old, shall I give my self to lust,
and my Lord old also.

13 And God said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sara laugh, saying, Shall I of a
suertie bear a child, which am old? 14 Is any thing impossible to God?
According to the time appointed will I return unto thee if I live: and Sara
(shall) have a son. 15 Then Sara denied it, saying, I

16 And the men rising up from thence, looked toward Sodom: and Abraham went
with them to bring them on the way. 17 And the Lord said, Shall I hyde from
Abraham that thing which I do,

18 Seeing that Abraham shall surely be a great and a mighty nation, and all
the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him? Gene. 12. a. 3.
19 I know this also, that he will command his children and his household
after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, and to do justice and
judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that he has spoken unto him.

20 And the Lord said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrhe is great, and
because their sin is exceeding grievous.

21 I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according
to that cry which is come unto me: and if not, I will know. 22 And the men
departed thence, and went to Sodomewarde: but Abraham stood yet before the
Lord. 23 And Abraham drew near, and said, Will thou also destroy the
righteous with the wicked?

24 If there be fifty righteous within the City, will thou destroy, and not
spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein? 25 That be far from
thee that thou should do after this manner, and slay the righteous with the
wicked, and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far lack) of
five? And he said, If I find there forty and five I will not destroy them.

29 And he proceeded to speak unto him again, and said, What if there shall be
forty found there? He answered, I will not do it for forties sake.

30 He said unto him again, Oh let not my Lord be angry that I speak: What if
there shall thirty be found there? And he said, I will do nothing if I
find thirty there.

31 He said again, O see I have taken upon me to speak now also unto my
Lord: What if there shall be twenty found there? He answered, I will not
destroy ( them) for twenties sake. 32 And he said, Oh let not my Lord be
angry, and I will speak yet but this once: What if ten shall be found there? He
answered, I will not destroy (them) for tennes sake.

33 And the Lord went his way as soon as he had left communing with Abraham:
and Abraham (also) returned unto his place.

The exposition upon the.xviij. Chapter of Genesis.
And the Lord appeared unto him in the plain of Memre. Verse.
etc. THis Chapter shows how God appeared by his angels unto his servant
Abraham: Then how Abraham invited and entertained the Angels, thinking them at
the first to have been Men, as they appeared. And lastly, how the Angels
revealed to him the purpose of God to destroy Sodom, and what talk Abraham had
with them.

If we look to the time of this appeara^ce, it may be thought it was shortly
after Abraham had circumcised himself and all his. And thereby have we to
learn how diligent and * ready the providence of God is to Visit, Luke 15. e.
20
Comfort, and Confirm such as by true faith and obedience, have submitted
themselves unto his Religion, and holy ordinances. The chief cause of the
sending of these angels unto Abraham, was to confirm to him and his wife
Sarah, the promise that he had made him of a Child by her, Genesis 17. c. 16.
of whom the Blessed seed should descend. By the way also he reueleth to him
the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha. Why it pleased God to send three
Angels, and not two, or one, we must not with vain curiosity search. It is
not wicked to think that he respected therein the mystery of the holy Trinity,
as many of the anciente Fathers have written: but whether that agree with the
Simplicity of the history, I leave to the judgment of the godly.

In Abraham we have an example of a godly and willing desire to entertain
Strangers, and to relieve them, which is not unfruitful for us to consider.
First therefore Abraham sat at his Tent door in the heat of the day,
undoubtedly not of Idleness, but of purpose to epsy if any trauailers passed
by, that he might entreat them to stay and take some relief. And therefore
when he saw the Angels, thinking them to have been Men, He ran unto the^, He
might have called to them, or sent a servant, but in running himself, appeared
a more godly willingness. And when he came unto them, he bowed himself with
all humbleness, though he had never seen the^ before, and called the one of
them by the name of Lord for reverence, thinking him happily a worthier person
than the two other. If (says he) I have found favor in thy sight, pass not
away. etc. So ready was this godly father to * liberality in entertainment,
Job. 31 d. 32. 3. Jo. a. 5. 6.
that he signifies, they should rather do him a pleasure, than receive any
benefit at his hand, and that it were a reproach to him if they did not
vouchsafe to tarry with him. The things that he promised them were but small, A
little water to wash their feet, and a morsel of bread to comfort the^.
Which he does to that end, that their modesty and bashfulnesse might not think
that they should be chargeable and burdenous to him, and so be the lother to
tarry. Me^ in those countries used to travail commonly bare footed, and
therefore was it ease and comfort to wayfaring men to * wash their feet. 1.
Ti. 5. b. 10.
The place whither he bids the^ to rest themselves was under a tree. Such
was the simplicity of y^ ancient time, they had not yet taken up the wasting
of their substance in building of Gay houses and gorgeous parlers.

This Reverend Patriarch and father of the faithful, whom god used so
familiarly with his angels, dwelt in a Tent or Tabernacle, and had no house at
all, 1. Pet. 2. b. 11 Heb. 13. c. 14
to declare y^ he was but a *pilgrim in this land, and had no place of long
abiding.

And they said, Ver. 5. 6. 7. 8.
do as thou have said, and Abraham went apace. etc. For So Much as it was the
pleasure of god, that it should not yet be known, what the Angels were, as
Abraham was ready and willing to offer them such things as were for the relief
of wayfaring me^, as he took them to be: so do they will him to do as he had
spoken, concealing as yet, that they were the Angels and messengers of God sent
unto him. And Abraham in making the provision, shows the same humblenes and
ready good will, that he declared in the bidding. He went apace to Sarah into
the Tent, He ran unto the beasts, He fet a tender and a good calfe, He
provided all that he had spoken, not only of the best, but with speed. For as
he knew it to be courtesy to entertayne strangers: so he thought it no good
manner to cause them to tarry longer, than happily the necessity of their
business would suffer them. As well by the place before mentioned, as by the
residue of this Entertainment, we may learn, that the world was not yet
grown to such a nicitie, tenderness, and delicacie in feeding, and other
furniture, as by Sensuality men since that are come unto, and especially in
these latter days.

Here some move question how the Angels did eat, or whether they did eat or
no? Seeing that they be celestial Spirits, and have no Bodies, that need
sustenance and feeding: surely Godly Christians must not in such questions be
curious. As gods pleasure was, that they should be taken as men for the time: So
of his divine power, which daily works strange things, he had provided
bodies for them to walk in, and with the same bodies did they eat, although
their Spiritual substance needed no sustenance. And when their appointed
offices were done, the meat and drink vanished away together with the Bodies.

And they said unto him, where is Sarah thy wife, Verse. 9. 10. 11.
he answers. etc. In the former Chapter we read, that Abraham had received
a manifest declaration of the promise of a Son by Sarah his wife. This
promise undoubtedly Abraham believed, but Sarah did not, as may appear by
this place. And therefore the Angel of God asks for Sarah, thereby to have
an occasion to renew and confirm that promise, and also to reprove Sarahs in
credulity, who measured the promises of God by the *likelyhoodes of nature all
power. Luke 1. d. 34.
When the Angel said, that at his return, Sarah should have a Child, it may
be thought, that Sarah listened behind the Tente door, what talk the
Strangers had with her husband. Wherein she by example declares, how hard a
matter it is, to have eue^ the honestest and most chaste Matrones to leave al
manner of womanly Curiosity. Although as a modest and sober wife she stayed
within the Tent, and came not forth to show her self unto the strangers: yet
could she not overcome this tentation of curious desire to know what was
spoken. When Sarah he arde the Angel say she should have a child, she laughed
at it as a vain and unlikely thing, and therein undoubtedly did greatly offend.
For she might well know that promise came from God, being so well agreeing
with that which was spoken to her husband not long before. And therefore by
vnlikelyhode of nature, to deride it as false, was in her much rashness. But
that which follows was of womanly Bashfulnesse, when she being charged, for
her laughing being some what astonished does deny it. Sarah laughed, not aloude
as the manner of dissolute women is, but softly within her self. When it is
said, It ceased to be with Sarah, after the Manner as it is with Women: The
meaning is, she had not those superfluities that all women naturally have, so
long as they by age may have children. As her Chastity is to be reverenced, so
was it a great blame and fault in her not only to * Mistrust the promise of
god, Baru. 1. d. 18.
but also to Laugh it to scorn, because it seemed unlikely to natural Reason.

And the men rising up from thence looked toward Sodom. Verse. 16. 17. 18. 19.
etc. Abraham perfourmeth that, which is the third part of Hospitality, that
is, Courtesy in dismissing his gests. He takes not his leave of them at his
Tent, but perceiving their journey toward Sodom, went part of the way with
the^, which his pains God well requited, opening to him by his Angel the
purpose to destroy Sodom for the horrible sin and wickedness thereof. Shall
I (says the Lord) Hide from Abraham that thing which I do: seeing that
Abraham shall surely be. etc. It may be that one of the Angels to whom
Abraham in all this story had directed his speech, uttered these words in the
hearing of Abraham Wherein he notes two causes why he would reveal this thing
unto him. The one is the great pre-eminence of that promise, that he had made
to him before time of the Increase and multiplying of his seed. Seeing says
he, that Abraham shall surely be a mighty Nation. The other is, For that he
knew him to be so godly a man as would not only himself live in Justice and
judgment, but also would. Instruct his children, and Household To keep the
way of the Lord.

By this, Godly Parents may learn, that it is their Office and duty to see
their families * instructed and taught, Ephesians. 6. ^. 4.
and that in the Way of the Lord, and to be Careful for them, that they may
not only live virtuously and godly while they be children and servants under
them, but after their life too.

But Fathers now a days are far from this care. They devise how to * leave
their children Rich and Wealthye, Psa. 16. d. 16
but of the Instruction and teaching how to keep the way of the Lord they
have, God knows, so small regard as though it did Nothing appertain unto
them.

And the Lord said, Verse. 20. 21.
because the cry of Sodom and Gomorha is great. etc. There is a double Cry
that sounds in the ears of the Lord. The one is the cry of Wickedness and
Sin, and that is it the Angel here speaks of: The wickedness of Sodom
Cried unto God, that is, was so great that it required* Wrath and vengeance
from God.

Sometime the Blood of the oppressed and afflicted Saints of GOD, does in
like manner Cry unto him. For so did the blood of Abel cry unto the Lord.

When the Scripture says, that God comes Down to see or know any thing, we
may not think that there is either Moving of place or want of Knowledge in
God. But then God is said to come Down, when he does apply himself to work
somewhat to our behoof, And then he is said to come to Know or See, when he
so Works, that either Men or his Angels may know. God right well knew that
the Sin of Sodom after his long Patience and Suffering, was come to full
ripeness: but he sent down his Angels, that not only Abraham and Loath, but
the Whole world also by their punishment, should understand how grievous and
detestable their sin was in the sight of God.

And Abraham drew near and said, Verse. 23. 24. 25. etc.
will thou also destroy the righteous. etc. The Saints of God are always Lovers
of mankind and are grieved to understand of the Plague and Punishmente even
of the wicked, whom with all their hearts they would wish rather to Live and
Repent, than to dye in their sins. Therefore Abraham here understanding by
the Angel, that the Visitation of Sodom, and those other Cities was at hand,
shows himself very careful for them, and as it were by the remembrance of
those good and just me^ that might be in it, does move God to have pity on
them, and to spare their plague. Good men do not quickly despair of any,
seem they never so evil. And therefore Abraham thought, in so great a
Multitude, that there must needs have been some mean number of good men, for
whose cause God would extend his mercy also upon the other. If there had been
just men in Sodom, they must have been persons uncircumcised, and no partakers
of the covenant of God. And yet this Reverend Patriarch being himself a just
man, circumcised, of the assured covenant with God, and the Father of the
Faithful, did not in respect of himself contemn such, but made that account
of them, that, if there had been such, he would have God to have spared the
wicked for their sakes.

In Abraham talking with God, we see a certain strife between the Charity and
Love that was in him toward the Sodomires, and the consideration of his own
humbleness and unworthiness in the sight of God. His Charity moved him to
entreat for them. But the consideration of his own unworthiness, being but
duste and ashes, did on the other part abashe him, and therefore does so often
desire pardon of his speech.

What if ten shall be found there? Verse. 32.
He answered, I will not destroy. etc. Some may doubt why Abraham descended not
to a smaller number of six or four, but stayed at ten. But it may be, that he
was stayed with Modesty and ^ash fullness, having so often before excused his
boldness. Or else when he perceived the Angel to yield to ten, he thought
it were unlikely, that in so Great a company, there should not be that number
of Just men.

Or else understanding by the Angel, that there were not ten, he did not
judge them Worthy to be preserved by Gods mercy, and therefore so stayed
himself. But whatsoever the cause hereof was, This is of Gods exceeding great
Mercies, and a singular Comfort to the Just and godly, that the Angel of God,
in punishing the wicked, shall not only Find them out, and Preserve them, Genesis
19. 6. 16.
as appears by * Loath, but also in respect of a small number of them, will
spare the Sinful and wicked, that they may have longer * time to Repent. Sap.
11. d. 24.


This Horrible wickedness of the Sodomites, did not at once increase to so
great an outrage, as it may before be perceived by the Angel, but first began
Riot and Seusualitie, thorough Wealth and plenty of Gods benefits. Then
followed Pride, Cruelty, and Vnmercyfulnesse. And lastly Induratio^, with
Contempt of God, and all godly Aduertisementes, so that they * gave themselves
over to all Fylthynesse even with Delight. Ephesians. 4. d. 19


And the Lord went his way so soon as he had left communing with. Verse. 33.
etc. The other two Angels are mentioned before, Verse. 22. to have departed
toward Sodom, but this third, to whom Abraham had directed his talk, tarried
with him until this time.

So that we have here a testimony of Gods great goodness, who would not have
his Angel depart, before that Abraham had finished even his Last demand. And
then Abraham also departed homewarde, being undoubtedly very pensive and sorry
for the plague that should fall upon the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrha.
But in the mean time, they themselves, whom this thing should have most
nighely touched, were drowned in deep Security, and delighting in filthy
pleasure, to fulfill the same, assaulted the house of just Loath, Luc. 12. c. 20.
Psa. 72. c. 19. Ecc. 5. b. 7. Esai. 30. c. 13
to pull forth the Strangers that were with him. Thus * suddenly, when the
sinful least think of it, does their Plague fall upon their heads, by the
just judgment of God.

Trinity Sundaye at Evening prayer.
The first Chapter of Iosuah. AFter the death of Moses the servant of the
Lord, it came to pass, that the Lord spoke unto Iosuah, the son of Nun,
Moses minister, saying:

2 Moses my servant is dead: now therefore arise, go over this Iordane, thou
and all this people, unto the land the which I to them (the children of
Israel) do give.

3 All the places that the soales of your feet shall tread upon, have I given
you, as I said unto Moses.

4 From the wilderness and this Libanon, unto the great river Euphrates, Deu.
11. c. 24 Josu. 14. b. 9.
all the land of the Hethites, even to the great sea toward the going down
of the Sun, shall be your coast. 5 There shall not a man be able to
withstand thee all the days of thy life: Josue. 3. b. 9.
for as I was with Moses, so will I be with thee, and will not fail thee, nor
forsake thee.

6 Be strong therefore and bold: Genesis 4. c. 16. Deu. 31. d. 23
for unto this people shall thou divide the land for inheritance, which I
swear unto their fathers to give them.

7 Only be thou strong, and of a stout courage, that thou may observe and
do according to all the law which Moses my servant commanded thee: Deu.
5. c. 32.
turn from the same neither to the right hand, nor to the left, that thou
may do wisely in all that thou take in hand.

8 Let not the book of this law depart out of thy mouth, Deu. 17. d. 19 Nu.
32. d. 20
but occupy thy mind therein day and night, that thou may observe and do
according to all that is written therein, for then shall thou make thy way
prosperous, and then shalt thou do wisely. 9 Have not I commanded thee that
thou should be strong and hardy, and not fear, nor be faynte hearted? For
I the Lord thy God am with thee, whether soever thou go. 10 Then Iosuah
commanded the officers of the people, saying. 11 Go through the mids of the
host, and command the people, saying: Prepare you vitailes: for after three
days ye shall pass over this Iordane, to go in and enjoy the land which the
Lord your God gives you to possess it. 12 And unto the Rubenites, Gadites,
and half the tribe of Manasses spoke Iosuah, saying: 13 Remember the word
which Moses the seruante of the Lord commanded you, saying: The Lord your
God has given you rest, and has given you this land. 14 Your wives, your
children, and your cattle shall remain in the land which Moses gave you on
this side Iordane: but ye shall go before your brethren armed, all that be men
of war, and help them: 15 Until the Lord have given your brethren rest as
he has you, and until they also have obtained the land which the Lord your
God gives them, and

16 And they answered Iosuah, Jere. 42. a. 5.
saying, All that thou have commanded us we will do: and whither soever thou
sendest us we will go.

17 According as we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee: only
the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses.

18 And whosoever he be that does disobey thy mouth, and will not hearken unto
thy words in all that thou command him, let him die: only be strong, and of
good courage.

The Exposition upon the first Chapter of Iosuah.
After the death of Moses the servant of the Lord, Verse. 1. 2.
it came to pass. etc. THe first Chapter of the Book of Iosuah conteyneth
three parts. First, the Calling and Comforting of Iosuah: secondly, the
accepting of the Charge by Iosuah, and thirdely, the Submission of the people
unto his government.

After what manner God spoke to Iosuah at this time, it is not in the Scripture
expressed: whether it were by inward inspiration, or by vision, or by the
ministry of an Angel, or some good man. Only we have to understand, that the
words here uttered to Iosuah, proceeded from God, and from his authority, and
teach us these good lessons.

First, that Moses the good servant of God dyed, and went the common way of
all flesh, and therefore that we, Psa. 88. g. 47 Job. 10. d. 20 Phil. 1. d. 23.
that follow, may not look for any * perpetuity or long continuance in this
life, but must look and * long always for the blessedness and Happy estate of
the Life to come, where Death shall * end his kingdom both of Soul and
Body. 1. Co. 15. g. 54
Secondly, we are instructed, what to judge of Moses, after his death, and by
him of all other the Saints of God, that is, to Judge the^ the good servants
of God, and the blessed Ministers of his inestimable Benefits toward
Mankind: but yet not so, that we make them Gods by worshipping of them, by
putting trust and confidence in them, and by calling on them in the time of our
distress. Esai. 42. b. 8.
For those points of * honor belongs to God alone, and can not be given to
other without manifest peril of Idolatry. And therefore it may be thought,
that the providence of God did hide and keep secret the body of Moses from
the Jews, Deu. 34. b. 6
Deuteronomy. 34. that they might not have that occasion to abuse it to Idolatry.

Thirdly, we have to observe by the example of Moses, that albeit God
sometime does punish good me^ temporally for offenses committed, yet he does
not perpetually reject them, but after their death acknowledges the^ for his
servants, Nu. 20. b. 12 Nu. 27. c. 14 Deu. 1. f. 37.
as he did here call Moses, notwithstanding that for his mistrust at ye *
Waters of strife, he did cut him off from enjoying yt la^d of promise.

Fourthly, let us learn, That when good Princes or Magistrates be taken
away, that it is in the hand of God to * place others, Eccle. 10. a. 4
and that his divine Providence has singular care thereof: as we may
understand, as well by this place as by a number of other examples in the
scriptures. God punished Nabuchadnezer. Dan. 4. g. 34
Daniel. 4. Until he understood that the most high ruled in the kingdom of
men, and gave it to vvho^ he lusted.

All the places that the soales of your feet shall tread upon. Verse. 3. 4.
etc. In this place, the Lord as it were, bou^deth out that land and country,
that by his promise he gave to the seed and issue of Abraham. On the East
part, unto the great river Euphrates, unto which the bounds of the dominion of
the Jews were extended under David, and Solomon, and not before. On the West,
with the great Sea, that is, the middle Sea, which is here called Great, in
comparison of those pooles, which in the Hebrew tongue are called Seas, as the
Sea of Tyberias, On the North, with Mount Libanus, On the Southe, with the
Deserts of Arabia, and the Country of Aegypte. In these bounds is contained
the whole land of Chanaan.

There shall not a man be hable to withstand thee all the days of thy life.
Verse. 5. 6.
etc. Forsomuche as Iosuah might justly be abashed to take upon him that
Charge, and government, which besides the way wardnesse of the people, was
joined with so great Difficulty and * danger, Exo. 17. b. 4
it pleases God in this place to Comfort and strengthen him with the assured*
promise of his assistance, Heb. 13. a. 5.
and good Success in his doings against all his enemies whatsoever they be.
Out of which words al good Princes, Magistrates, and Officers, may gather
singular instruction of comfort, to Animate them against the difficulties and
troublous Storms of their charge, which are such, as oftentimes has caused
eue^ Heathen persons rather to desire to live a Private life, than to abide the
hazard and danger thereof. And surely, there is no State of men that needs
so great comfort of the Providence and care of Almighty GOD for them, as
Princes and Magistrates do. Their office is not only to * Establish and Spread
the true Religion and worshipping of God, 4. Re. 23. a. 3. 4. re. 22. b. 13 1.
Re. 23. a. 4. Jere. 22. a. 3.
but also to * repress the contrary. To make and defend good laws against
all kind of enormities. To judge justly, and to defend the cause of the poor
and innocente, against the violence and injury of the oppressoure. Yea and
oftentimes to levy war either against the * foraine enemies, 2. Sa. 10. b.
12 2. reg. 20. a. 6
or to repress wicked and rebellious * subjects, which things if they do
faithfully and diligently, it cannot be but they shall cast themselves into so
great perils and dangers, as will greatly abashe and trouble them, if by this
place and such other they do not * conceive an assured trust in the help and
assistaunce of God, Psa. 118.. 50. 2. reg. 22. a. 1.
whose Magistrates and Officers they be. For this cause does God so often
repeat here unto Iosue, that he should be Strong, and Stout, and Bold, and
of good Courage, for that he would be with him, and not fail him in any
distress. etc.

Only be thou strong, Verse. 7. 8.
and of a stout courage, that thou may observe. etc. Above all things God
will have a Prince or Magistrate to be constante, earnest, and of stout
courage in the observation and maintenance of his holy law, and so to cleave
to his word, that he depart not from it, Either on the right hand, by adding
Superstitious holiness unto it, Either on the left hand, by Altering or
Diminishyng any thing therein contained. For this cause does he so straitely
charge Joshua in this place to bend his study especially to his law, and to
occupy his mind therein both day and night. By which words their * wicked
error is reproved, Psa. 118. 24. 92. 104.
which both dehorte Princes from the Study of the Scriptures, as a thing not
fit for them, and also pull from them the charge to see unto the Maintenance
of true Religion and Holiness, as a matter that little belongs to their
office. But God here does not only require it of Iosue, but also adds a
promise, that So he shall do vviselie, in all that he takes in hand, and make
his ways and doyngs prosperous.

Then Iosuah commanded the Officers of the people, Verse. 10. 11.
saying. etc. This is the second part of the chapter, wherein Iosuah
undertakes the office, and shows example of his Faith and Obedience to the
calling of almighty God. For albeit there might appear many things in sight
of the world to deter him from it, yet, because he had the calling of God
and the promise of his assistaunce, he cleaves to that, and is not driven
back with the appearance of any worldly danger like to fall unto him. Upon
this Pillar ought all good Princes to stay themselves in their calling, and in
doing any thing that apperteineth to their office. Iosuah puts the people
also in mind of their duty, and appoynteth them in good order and Policy
what to do.

Wherein Magistrates also have to learn, that although their chief stay and
comfort be in the providence and promise of God, whose Ministers they are: yet
they may not neglect such lawful and Politic means in doing of things, as
by the which God commonly uses to give Salftie, Success, and Victory to his
people. For, to neglecte ordinary means, so long as a man may have them and
use them, is rather to tempt God, than truly to put confidence and trust in
him.

The Rubenites and Gadites Iosuah appoints to go before their brethren,
because they had their possession assigned them on that side of Iordane, and
forsomuche as they had that pre-eminence, first to know their portion of the
land of Promise, it might seem good reason, that they did abide the greater
burden until their brethren also were settled in their places, that should be
allotted unto them. And so the Rubenites and Gadites did promise to Moses.
Number. 32. by reading of which place, Nu. 32. f. 31.
this will be the better understood.

And they answered Iosuah saying, Verse. 16. 17. 18.
All that thou have commanded us. etc. In this third part of the chapter
the people show their obedience unto that Prince and leader, that was by God
appointed unto them: All things, say they, That thou have commanded us, we
will do. Whereby we may learn an example of obedience to Magistrates, and
not only of obedience, but also of careful love toward them. For that it was
that here moved the people to pray for Iosuah, saying, The Lord thy God be
with thee, as he was with Moses.

Whereby we are taught also to pray to God for the good estate of our Princes,
that we may quietlye live under them, 1. Tim. 2. b. 2
as S. Paul says, in honesty and godliness.

The first Sunday after Trinity at Morning prayer.
Joshua. 10. Josua. 8. a. 3. Josua. 6.
even so he had done to Ai and her king) and how the inhabitours of Gibeon had
made peace with Israel, and were among them:

2 They feared exceedingly, for Gibeon was a great City as any City of the
kingdom, and was greater than Ai, and all the men thereof were very mighty.

3 Wherefore Adonizedec king of Jerusalem sent unto Hoham king of Hebron, and
unto Pira king of Iarmuth, and unto Iaphia king of Lachis, and unto Dabir king
of Eglon, saying. 4 Come up unto me, and help me, that we may smite Gibeon:
for they have made peace with Iosuah, and with the Children of Israel.

5 Therefore the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king
of Hebron, the king of Iarmuth, the king of Lachis, and the king of Eglon,
gathered themselves together, and went up, they with all their hoastes, and
besieged Gibeon, and made war against it.

6 And the men of Gibeon sent unto Iosuah to the host in Gilgal, saying,
Withdraw not thy hand from thy servants, come up to us quicklye, and save us,
and help us: for all the kings of the Amorites which dwell in the mountains
are gathered together against us.

7 And so Iosuah ascended from Gilgal, he and all the people

8 And the Lord said unto Iosuah, Fear them not: for I have delivered them
into thine hand, neither shall any of them stand against thee. 9 Iosuah
therefore came unto them suddenly, and went up from Gilgal all night.

10 And the Lord troubled them before Israel, and slew them with a great
slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them along the way that goes up to Bethoron,
and smote them to Azeka and Makeda. 11 And as they fled from before Israel, and
were in the going down to Bethoron, the Lord cast down great stones from
heaven upon them until Azeka, and they dyed: there were more dead with hayle
stones, than they were whom the children of Israel slew with the sword.

12 Then spoke Iosuah to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered the
Amorites before the Children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel,
Esa. 28. f. 21. Eccl. 46. a. 4
Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Aialon.

13 And the Sun abode, and the Moon stood still, until the people avenged
themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the book of the
righteous? So the Sun abode in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go
down by the space of a whole day.

14 And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the Lord heard
the voice of a man: for the Lord fought for Israel. 15 And Iosuah returned and
all Israel with him unto the camp to Gilgal.

16 But the five kings fled, and were hyd in a cave at Makeda. 17 And it was
told Iosuah, saying, The five kings are found hyd in a cave which is at
Makeda.

18 And Iosuah said, Roll great stones upon the mouth

19 And stand ye not still, but follow after your enemies, and smite all the
hindmoste, and suffer them not to enter into their Cities: for the Lord your
God has delivered them into your hand. 20 And when Iosuah and the Children of
Israel had made an end of slaying them with an exceeding great slaughter,
till they were wasted: the rest that remained of them, entered into walled
Cities.

21 And all the people returned to the host to Iosuah at Makeda in peace,
neither did any man move his tongue against the Children of Israel.

22 Then said Iosuah, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out those five
kings unto me out of the cave.

23 And they did so, and brought those five kings unto him out of the cave, (
even) the king of Jerusalem, the King of Hebron, the king of Iarmuth, the king
of Lachis, and the king of Eglon. 24 And when they brought out those five
Kings unto Iosuah, Iosuah called for all the men of Israel, and said unto the
chief of the men of war which went with

26 And then Iosuah smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on five trees:
and they hanged still upon the trees until the euenyng. 27 And at the going
down of the Sun, Deu. 21. d. 22. Josua. 8. f. 29
Iosuah gave commandment, and they took them down of the trees, and cast
them into the cave wherein they had been hyd: and laid great stones in the
caves mouth, ( which remain) until this day.

28 And that same day Iosuah took Makeda, and smote it with the edge of the
swoorde, and the king thereof also destroyed he utterly: with all the souls
that were therein, and let none remain: and he did to the king of Makeda, as
he did unto the king of Jericho.

29 Then Iosuah went from Makeda, Josu. 6. b. 26.
and all Israel with him unto Libna, and fought against Libna.

30 And the Lord delivered it and the King thereof into

31 And Iosuah departed from Libna, and all Israel with him unto Lachis, and
besieged it, and assaulted it.

32 And the Lord delivered Lachis into the hand of Israel, Josua. 6. c. 21
which took it the second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and
all the souls that were therein, doing according to all, as he had done to the
city of Libna.

33 Then Horam king of Geser came up to help Lachis: and Iosuah smote him and
his people, until none remained of him. 34 And from Lachis Iosuah departed
unto Eglon, and all Israel with him, and they besieged it, and assaulted it. 35
And took it the same day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all
the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed the same day according to all
that he had done to Lachis. 36 And Iosuah departed up from Eglon, and all
Israel with him, unto Hebron, and they fought against it.

37 And when they had taken it, they smote it with the edge of the swoorde, and
the King thereof, and all the towns that perteyned to it, and all the souls
that were therein, and he left none remainyng: but did according to all, as he
had done to Eglon, and destroyed it utterly, and all the souls that were
therein.

38 And Iosuah returned, and all Israel with him to

39 And when he had taken it, and the king thereof, and all the towns that
parteyned thereto, they smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly
destroyed all the souls that were therein, neither let he any remain: even as
he did to Hebron, so he did to Dabir and the King thereof, as he had done also
to Libna and her king.

40 Iosuah therefore smote all the hill contreys, and the South countries, and
the valleys, and the downs, and all their kings, Deu. 20. d. 16
and let none remain of them, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the
Lord God of Israel commanded.

41 And Iosuah smote them from Cades Barnea unto Asah* and all the country of
Gosen ( even) unto Gibeon

42 And all these kings and their land did Iosuah take at one time: because
the Lord God of Israel fought for Israel.

43 And Iosuah and all Israel returned unto the host that was in Gilgal.

The Exposition upon the.x. Chapter of Iosuah.
Now when Adonizedec king of Jerusalem had heard how Iosuah. Verse. 1. 2. 3.
4 5. 6.
etc. IN Adonizedec and the other five kings of the Amorites, that are spoken
of in this chapter, is expressed to us the nature and property of wicked and
obstinate enemies of God and his people. If marvelous things be wrought
against them, they be stricken with * fear, Exo. 15. b. 16 2. pa. 20. e. 29.
and yet will they not submit themselves to the mighty hand of God, and
acknowledge his power: but still increase in wickedness and become more
obstinate, heaping to themselves greater confusion. Josu. 6. c. 20.
These kings had* heard and understood, as well as the Gibeonites, how
maruellously God had dealte for his people against* Seon King of the Amorites,
Nu. 21. d. 24 Nu. 21. e. 34.
and* Og king Basan, and also against the Cities of Jericho, and of* Aye,
Josua. 8. a. 1.
whereby they might have been taught, how vain their cruel and wicked
endeavor of resistaunce would be unto them. But they were so far from that
cogitation, That, because the Gibeonites had* submitted themselves to the
Children of Israel, Josua. 9 b. 8.
they here Ioyu^ in Conspiracy to destroy them and their city. In which
point the Gibeonites set forth unto us the Image of all them, that, forsaking
the Error, Blindness, and wicked obstinacy of the world, do join
themselves to God and his people.

For by and by their very Neighbors, Yea the nighest of their Kin, seek to
Vex and Persecute them with all extremity: and that not because they be
Sinful or evil, or because they are Idolatours, Covetous persons, Adulterers
and such like, (for at those things they can wink well enough) But because
They make peace vvirh Iosuah, and the Children of Israel, Josua. 9. c. 35
that is, * because they Allie themselves to GOD and his people. But in such
cases we must learn by earnest Prayer and intercession to flee for succor
to our Iosuah, Christ Jesus, who undoubtedly will speedily help and assiste us
against such enemies, as Iosuah does here the Gibeonites.

And so Josuah ascended from Gilgal, Verse. 7. 8. 9. 10.
he and all the people of war. For So Much as the Gibeonites were the
confederates of Israel, Iosuah does here the part of a wise, 1. par. 19. b. 13
good, and faithful* Prince, that he is so ready to rescue and help them in
their danger. For if he should have done otherwise, being now become his
Subjects, he should both have omitted his duty toward them, and also have
procured to him and his people, a note of Unfaithfulness toward such as had
submitted themselves unto him, and whom he had received to his defense and
protection. In that he does it with Speed, and comes Suddenly on his enemies
in the night ere they were ware of him, he played the part of a Wise and
Skillful Captain, understanding that in warfare, after men be once in good
readiness, nothing more prevails than spedie dealing with good watching of
opportunity of place and time.

This is not to be omitted, Exo. 4. c. 15. Esa. 41. b. 10
that God is* ready to comfort his good Princes and Governors in their
enterprises for the defense of his people. Fear not them, says God, I have
delivered them into thy hands: Exo. 14. d. 25 2. par. 32. b. 8. Judit. 5. c.
16.
and therefore did he easily obtain Victory of them, yea God will* fight for
them miraculouslie, altering the course of all natural effects, rather than
they should miscarie, or want strength and opportunity to be revenged on his
enemies. As we see in this place by two Notable and strange Miracles, killing
more of the enemies with Hailestones from heaven than the Israelites did with
the sword.

Then said Josuah unto the Lord. Verse. 12. 13. 14. 15.
etc. and he said in the sight of Israel. etc. A question may in this place be
moved, whether Iosuah did well in asking such a strange Miracle of God, or
whether he might seem rather to tempte God in so doing. To which it may be
answered, that undoubtedly he did it by Instinction of the Spirit of GOD in a
strong faith, being persuaded, that it would be to the glory of God. For Gods
purpose was by this Miracle to confirm the Faith of his People, and to abashe
the Chanaanites his enemies, to declare his power to those Heathenishe and
Godless People, and by this Miracle to declare unto them that he was the
only Authoure and worker of all those Miracles, that they before had heard of
in Egipte, and in the wilderness.

And yet the praying for such Miracles is not now to be followed of us. For
God, having now abundantly declared his will and pleasure in his holy Word
left unto us by our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, will have his People to
cleave steadfastly to that, Mat. 12. d. 39
and* not to look for Signs and Miracles from Heaven. But this is notable,
and to our great comfort to be observed, that Iosuah by his Prayer might seem
to have the Sun and Moon and all the Creatures of God at his commandment.

By like force of Prayer Moses opened away through the red Sea Exodus. 14.
Exo. 14. a. 15 Exo. 17. b. 11.
and overcame in Battle the Amalachites, Exodus. 17. Iosaphat subdued his
enemies and caused them to kill one the other 2. Croni. 20. 2. pa. 20. d. 23
Ezechias delivered his City Jerusalem* and caused also the Sun to go
back certain degrees. 2. pa. 32. c. 21. d. 24.
2. Croni. 32. By which Examples we also ought to con^^iue an assured hope in
the truth of Gods promises, when in ou^ great perils and dangers we call upon
God, and pray to him for his help and deliverance.

The five Kings fled and were hid in a Cave at Makeda. Verse. 16. 17. 18.
etc. These five Kings fled, and thought they had escaped the Plague of God,
because they were not killed either with the sword of the Israelites, or with
the Hayle from Heaven. But God of his Justice reserved them to a greater, and a
more notable Punishmente, because the were the Ringleaders and chief stirrers
of others to withstand the People of God.

In like manner Sennacherib. 2* pa. 32. c. 21.
2. Croni. 32. escaping the Danger of Battle, was murdered in the Temple of
his Gods that he served.

Iosuah, when he understood the Kings were hid in the Cave he provided them
to be kept in Sa^^etie, but he does not omit the opportunity with speed to
follow his enemies, and so to subdue them, that they might not be hable
afterward to recover their power and work him new trouble. In this that
Iosuah causes his Captains to set their feet upon the Necks of ye Kings, it
may seem a barbarous Cruelty, but he knew they were the enemies of God, and
understood also, that his people did often Mistrust the promises, that God had
made unto them, and therefore his meaning was by this sign to assure them that
as God had don^e by these enemies, that might seem the most mighty: so he
would do also by the residue, and therefore willed them not to doubt or to
be * fainte hearted, Deu. 7. c. 18. 1. par. 22. c. 13.
but to be well assured of the assistaunce of their Lord and God, so long as
they faithfullye served him, though their enemies did seem never so mighty.
And the same, in effect, God did Justify immediately. For they did not only
with good success conquer these five kings, that were conspired, but also a
number of other cities and Principalities, that are here reckened up even to
the end of this Chapter, as Makeda, Libna, Lachis, Gazer, Eglon, Hebron, and
Debir. If Iosuah killed in these victories Man, Woman, and Child, we may not
think it cruelty in him, For he had the special commandment of God so to
do: Such were their Sins and offenses in the sight of God. 1. reg. 15. b.
9. 3. re. 20. g. 42
And Saul, and Achab may be an example to all Princes what danger it is to
show Mercy to them, whom God, for Just causes to his secret wisdom known
would have to be punished.

The first Sunday after Trinity at Euenyng prayer.
Joshua. 23.

3 And ye have seen all that the Lord your God has done unto all these
nations before you, how the Lord your God himself has fought for you.

4 Behold, I have divided unto you by Lot these nations that remain to be an
inheritance for your Tribes, from Iordane, with all the nations that I have
destroyed, even unto the great sea Westwarde.

5 And the Lord your God shall expel them before you, and cast them from out
of your sight, and ye shall conquer their land, as the Lord your God has
said unto you.

6 Be ye therefore of a good courage, Deu. 5. b. 9. (...). 28. b. 14.
that ye keep, and do all that is written in the book of the Law of Moses,
that ye bow not aside therefrom to the right hands nor to the

8 But stick fast unto the Lord your God, as ye have done unto this day.

9 So shall the Lord cast out before you great nations and mighty, as no
man has been able to stand before you hitherto.

10 One man of you shall chase a thousand: Leui. 26. b. 8 Deu. 32. d. 30
for the Lord your God he fights for you, as he has promised you.

11 Take good heed therefore unto your selves, that ye love the Lord your God.

12 Else, if ye go back and cleave unto the rest of these Nations that
remain with you, and shall make marriages with them, and go in unto them, and
they to you:

13 Be ye sure that the Lord your God will no more cast out all these Nations
from before you, Nu. 33. g. 55
but they shall be snares and trappes unto you, and scourges in your sides and
thorns in your eyes, until ye peryshe from this good land which the Lord
your God has given you.

14 And behold, this day do I enter into the way of all the world, and ye
know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that nothing has failed of
all the good things which the Lord your God promised you, but all are come to
pass unto you, and nothing has failed thereof.

15 Therefore, as all good things are come upon you which the Lord your God
promised you: so shall the Lord bring upon you all evil, until he have
destroyed you from this good land which the Lord your God has given you.

16 When ye have transgressed the Testamente of the Lord your God which he
commanded you, and have gone and served strange Gods, and bowed your selves
to them: then shall the wrath of the Lord wax whote upon you, and ye shall
perish quickly from the good land which he has given you.

The Exposition upon the.xxiij. Chapter of Iosuah.
And it came to pass, a long season after the Lord had given rest. Verse. 1.
2.
etc. THe Land of Chanaan was now by the Israelites possessed. The portions
were allotted to each Tribe, all things appertaining as well to the state of the
common weal as of Religion, was now established. And Iosuah their Prince and
Captain waxen old and far stricken in years. Therefore he, as a good
Prince, drawing now to the end of his life, shows himself to have had a
care, not only for the good gouernemente of the people of God in his life
time, 3. Reg. 2. a. 3.
but also that the true * worship of God and obedience to Gods holy word
might continue among them to Gods glory after his life time. And therefore in
this place he calls the People, and under Magistrates together, and uses
unto them a very fatherly exhortation to continue in the love, obedience and
true worship of God: declaring unto them the great benefits and blessings of
God, that shall come to them, if they do so, and the assured danger of his
wrath and displeasure to be poured upon them, if they did otherwise. As
touching that is said in the first verse After the Lord had given rest unto
Israel, we are by it instructed to acknowledge God only to be the Author and *
giver of Peace, Leui. 26. a. 6 Nu. 6. d. 26 Josu^. 23 a. 1. 4. re. 20. d. 19 2.
Pa. 14. a. 6. 2. pa. 20. f. 30
Tranquillity, and quietness unto commonweals, and the restrayner and
brideler of all adversary powers, that they work not so much trouble and
danger to the people of God, as otherwise they would do: And therefore, that
both we, and all such whom God blesses with those gifts, ought to show our
selves Thankful, and to accept the same as his gracious mercy to allure us to
Repentance.

And you have seen all that your Lord God has done unto all these. Verse. 3.
4.
etc. Iosuah puts them in mind of the benefits of God showed unto them,
and does assure them, that the same their Lord and God. will also perform
the residue of his promise, and make perfect the work that he has begone,
if they do continue in his faithful obedience. By proof and trial of that
is * past, Deu. 32. a. 7
he exhorts them to the undoubted expectation of those things that were to
come.

By this that Iosuah four times in this place repeateth, The Lord your God,
we may not think, that he is not the God of other Nations also. For God is
the General Lord and governor, not only of all Nations, but also of al
particular Persons and creatures of the world, * and by him do they live, Act.
17. f. 28
and have their being. But the Jews he had chosen as his peculiar People,
and delivered to them his law, and made to them his law, and made to them his
promises especially, and therefore is he here called, The Lord their God. When
he says, that God has fought for them, we are taught that all Victory and
good Success in war comes of God, and * unless he do fight for us, Psa.
126. a. 1.
all labor and strength of men is in vain. And the same God does always assist
his people, and give Victory unto them, unless their unthankfulness in
abusing his Benefits do move his justice, by his and their enemies to punish
them.

Go to therefore, Verse. 6.
and be of good courage, that you take heed and do all that. etc. This is the
end why God either blesses his people with Tranquillity and quietness, or
gives them Victory against enemies: that they may continue in the obedience
of his blessed will declared in his holy word, which consysteth not only in
the Knowledge of his Law, and in the external professyng of the same in
words, or outward behavior, but in deed, and in heart and mind. And
therefore says Iosuah, Take heed and do all that is written in the book of
the Law of Moses, yea, and that in such sort, That they go not aside on
the right hand, or on the left. 1. reg. 15. c. 22
For God * loves obedience more then all the gay devises of man's Brain, and
therefore will be worshipped according to his holy word.

Neither company with these nations, Verse. 7.
that is with them, that. etc. How dangerous the Fellowship and Company of
the wicked is, we see too too many examples daily before our faces. And if we
be loath to come in that Company by which we think our bodies shall be
infected with any contagious disease: much more ought we to fear the Infection
of our Souls, Deuteronomy. 7. a. 2. 1. Co. 10. d. 20
and to dread least * by society of persons corrupted, either in life or
religion, we should be led from the true Service of God. No man * Touches
pitch but he shall be defiled with it. Eccle. 13. a. 1. 2. Cor. 6. c. 14
No man or woman uses the company of them that be evil, but he takes some
hurt by the^, either in Life or Credit. In that he says, Make no mention of
their Gods, he does not forbid them, to name Dagon, Astaroth, or Baalim, but
y^ they should make no Honorable Mention of them, nor use their names with
reverence, but with Detestation, But especially they might * not Swear by
the^. Deuteronomy. 6. c. 13.
For to y^ person or thing by which any man swears, he does attribute divine
Power and Worship: that is, That he sees the hearts and cogitations of men,
That he knows their secret parts, That he can and will reward the good
and punish the wicked. Therefore let men consider with what conscience they
can swear by Saints departed, or by any Person or Thing be it never so Holy,
other than God alone, whose only Power and Property it is to understand the
inward Thoughts of man.

One man of you shall chase a thousand for the Lord your God. Verse. 10. 11.
etc. In the Leuit cap. 26. Leui. 26. a. 3. 7. 8.
If you keep my commandments ( says the Lord) you shall persecute your
enemies, and they shall fall with the svvorde before you, and five of you
shall persecute an hundred, and an hundred of you shall persecureten thousand.

In this place he says, One of you shall persecute a thousand, whereby he
gives to understand, that God will abundantly fulfill his promise unto them.
Example whereof, God showed in sundry places of the Scriptures, Judi. 7. d. 21.
1. Sa^. 14. b. 12 2. pa. 20. d. 22 2. pa. 32. d. 21
as Iudic. 7. by Gedeon. 1. Sam. 14. by Ionathas. 2. Chro. 20* by Iosaphat.
and. 32. by Ezechias.

If you go back and cleave unto the rest of these Nations. Verse. 12. 13.
etc. As before he has exhorted by consideration of the great benefits, that
God had and would do for them, if they continued in his obedience, so now he
moves them by Laying before the^ the threatenings of Gods just plagues and
punishments, if they did otherwise, and revolted from his true worship, saying,
that God would not only not destroy those people that were among them, but he
would suffer them to be unto the Israelites as snares and traps to take and
entangle them in wickedness, As Scourges in their sides to vex and trouble
them, as Thorns in their eyes, to grieve them, and to bleare their eyes, that
they should not discern good from evil, falshoode from truth, light from
darkness etc. And because nothing could be more dangerous unto them, or a
greater snare to lead them from God, than to ioyn in Society, League or
Marriage, with those wicked people: Therefore he often and earnestly willed them
to beware of that. Whereby Christian Princes and people, that profess the truth
of Christ's Gospel, ought also to learn how perilous it is for them, Exo. 23.
g. 32. Deuteronomy. 7. a. 3. Exo. 34. b. 15
to * link in League or Marriage with the enemies or adversaries of the same,
least God make them unto us as Snares, as Whips, and as Thorns in our eyes.
etc.

Behold this day do I enter into the way of all the world, Verse. 14
and ye know. etc. By this fashion of Speaking, that He entered the way of all the world, he means Death, which * way all living Creatures of this world
must tread. 3. Reg. 2. a. 2.
Wise and Learned me^ have devised remedies for all manner of diseases, but never
any could Invent how to put away Death. That is the assured end whereto in this
world we shall come, whether we sleep or wake, or whatsoever we do, we Hasten
to this end: Eccl. 38. c. 23. Job. 7. a. 6.
So * little assurance have we of this miserable life, wherewith we are so
greatly in love. In the end Iosuah puts them in mind, that as God of his
great mercy, has and will assuredly fulfill his promyses, so that one word
thereof shall not be frustrate or vain: In like manner he will of his Severity
and Justice, bring upon them all those evils, that he has Threatened, if they
do fall from him by disobedience, to Idolatry and wickedness. Mat. 24. c. 35
For Heaven and Earth shall perish (as Christ says Mat. 24.) but the words
of God shall not perish.

The second Sunday after Trinity at Morning prayer.
Iudicum. Cap. 4.

2 And the Lord sold them into the hand of Iabin king of Chanaan, that
raygned in Hazor, whose captain of war was called Sisara, which dwelt in
Haroseth of the Gentiles. 3 And the Children of Israel cried unto the Lord,
for he had nine hundred charets of iron: and twenty years he troubled the
children of Israel very sore.

4 And Debora a prophetisse the wife of Lapidoth judged Israel the same time.
5 And the same Debora dwelt under a paulme tree, between Ramath and Bethel in
mount Ephraim: and the children of Israel came up to her for judgment. 6 And
she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of Kedes Nephthali, and said
unto him, Has not the Lord God of Israel commanded, saying, Go, and ^ison,
Sisara the captain of Iabins army, with his charetts and his people, and will
deliver him into thine hands. 8 And Barak said unto her, If thou will go with
me, I will go: but and if thou will not come with me, I will not go. 9 She
said, I will surely go with thee, but this journey that thou take shall not
be for thine honor: for the Lord shall deliver Sisara into the hand of a
woman. And Debora arose, and went with Barak to Kedes.

10 And Barak called Zabulon and Nephthali to Kedes, and led after him ten
thousand men: and Debora went with him. 11 But Haber the Kenite which was of
the children of Hohab, the father in law of Moses, removed from the Kenites,
and pitched his tente unto the plain of Zaanaim, which is by Kedes.

12 And they showed Sisara that Barak the son of Abinoam, was gone up to
Mount Thabor.

13 And Sisara gathered together all his charettes, even nine hundredth
Charettes of iron, and all the people that were with him from Haroseth of the
Gentiles unto the river of Kison. 14 And Debora said unto Barak: Up, for this
is the day in which the lord has delivered Sisara into

16 But Barak followed after the Charets and after the host unto Haroseth of
the Gentiles, Psalm. 83. b
and all the hoaste of Sisara fell upon the edge of the swoorde, and there was
not a man left. 17 Howebeit Sisara fled away on his feet to the t^nte of
Iaell, the wife of Haber the Kenite, (for there was peace between Iabin the
king of Hazor, and the householde of Haber the Kenite.

18 And Iael went out to meet Sisara, and said unto him: Turn in my lord,
turn into me, fear not. And when he had turned in unto her into her tent,
she covered him with a mantell. 19 And he said unto her, Give me I pray thee a
little water to drink, for I am thirsty. And she opened a bottell of milk,
and gave him drink, and covered him.

20 And again he said unto her, Stand in the door of the tent: and when any
man does come and enquire of thee, whether there be any man here, thou shall
say, Nay.

21 Then Iael Habers wife took a nail of the tent, and an hammer in her hand,
and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into the temples of his head,
and fastened it into the ground: (for he slumbred sore, and was weery,) and so
he dyed. 22 And behold as Barak followed after Sisara, Iael came out to meet
him, and said unto him: Come, and I will show thee the man whom thou seek.
And when he came into her tente, behold Sisara lay dead, and the nail was in
his temples.

23 And so God brought Iabin the king of Chanaan into subjection that day
before the children of Israel.

24 And the hand of the Children of Israel prospered, and prevailed against
Iabin the king of Chanaan, until they had destroyed Iabin king of Chanaan.

The Exposition upon the.iiij. Chapter of the Book of Judges.
And the children of Israel began again to do wickedly in the sight of God.
Verse. 1. 2.
etc. IN this place and in the Chapiters before and after, those Promises and
Threatenings be often fulfilled toward the Israelites, that Moses and Joshua
their Gouerners before their departures out of this life moved by the Spirit of
god declared to the^. For here in this book we read oftentimes of Falling from
God to wickedness and error, Jud. 2. b. 14.
and often times of Gods * plagues cast upon them for the same. Judi. 3. b. 8.
Also of often Repentance and tourning to God, Judic. 6. a. 1.
and Gods often merciful deliverance of his people, Jud. 8. c. 27.
when they forsook their wickedness, and called upon him for succor.

Whereby we must learn, that Gods word is infallible true, as well in the
promises of his Mercy and goodness toward them, Esai. 66. a. 2. Psa. 50. c.
17.
that with * contrite hearts come unto him, Esai. 61. a. 1.
as also in the Threatenings of his justice, to the stubburne and obstinate
sinner, that will not Repent.

As touching this place, let us mark, that nothing is more perilous than
carnal Security, and Abusyng the prosperous Benefits of God.

After the Mesopotamians, the Moabites, and Philistines were overcome, as is
before mentioned, it might seem the Israelites should have had no Enemy, that
would once have stirred against them. Jud. 3. d. 30
For they enjoyed great * tranquillity and Peace Fourscore years together.

But Wealth and Prosperity breeds wantonness and forgetfulness of God.
And therefore suddenly while they thought all was hushed and quiet, another
Enemy was raised up, whom they little thought of, that is, Iabin king of the
Chanaanites, whose predecessor before they had slain, and destroyed his royal
City Hazer, Iosue. 11. Josue. 11. b. 13
But now his Nephew or coosen of the same name was grown to so great power
that he had subdued the Jews, and held them in miserable Bondage, which for all his strength, he had not been hable to bring to pass, if God for their
sins Had not sold them into his hands to be punished for their offenses.
The Tirannie of Iabin was the more cruel against the Israelites, because they
had before (as I have said) slain his predecessor, and burnte his royal city
with fire to the ground.

And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord for he had. Verse. 3.
900. etc. Where the Chanaanites had afflicted the people of Israel twenty
years, we may not think that in all that time before, they never cried unto
God, but happily their crying and calling upon God before, was rather in way of
murmuring and muttering against God and the rod of his Chasticement: but now
when with repentant and sorrowful hearts they pray unto God and acknowledge
their wickedness and tra^sgression, with ready mercy he hears and helps
them.

And Debora a prophetisse the wife of Lapidoth judged Israel. Verse. 4. 5.
etc. That God might make the deliverance of his people more glorious unto him,
by the ministry and * weakness of a woman he works it, 1. Cor. 1. c. 27.
and thereby shows that neither might of Princes, nor policy of Captains,
nor strength of armies, nor swiftness of chariots, is hable to hold them in
misery that God will have delivered.

In this that God chooses a Woman to be a Prophetisse, and thereby the
instructor and teacher, the guyd and gouerner, yea, and the Deliverer of his
people, he shows that he does not always reject that Sex or kind from the
ministry of his holy will, neither in matters of Policy, nor of Religion,
Hest. 15. c. 8.
but that oftentimes he will * use them to his glory, Judit. 8. b. 8
as the good Nurses and Patrons of his Church and people.

And she sent and called Barak, Verse. 6. 7.
the son of Abinoam, out of Kedes. etc. Some think that Debora had oftentimes
before, advertised Barak, that he should attempt the deliverance of the people,
and that he through Timorousness had stayed, and therefore now she openly
before the people declares the same unto him, and that in the Name and
Authority of God, after the manner of Prophets, adding the promise of God to
his further confirmation. For, (says she) in the person of God: I will bring
or dravve unto the river Kison, Sisara the Captain. etc.

And Barak said unto her, Verse. 8.
If thou will go with me, I will go: but and etc. Barak in these words may
seem to have somewhat doubted of his calling, and therefore Debora signifies,
that the Glory and chief Praise of this Victory should be given from him
to a Woman.

Other think, that he spoke not this of any mistrust of his Calling, but
because he would be sure to have her with him, as the Prophetisse of God, by
whose Wisdom he might be instructed to all oportunities. And therefore S.
August. reads in ye text these words, Because I know not what day the
Angel of God shall prosper me.

When Debora wills Barak to gather ten thousandemen, we must consider, that
God had been hable without Ma^s help to Subdue their enemies, but by this he
would declare, that he does not reprove just War, nor the help of man's
strength, when it is used with trust and confidence in Him.

When God says, that he will draw Sisara to the River Kyson, we may understand
that God Draws both to good and also to Evil, y^ is in the way of punishment:
but this he does in a diverse manner. When he Draws to Good, he heals our
corrupt minds, and by his Grace prepares us to that, which otherwise we could
not do. When he Draws us to Evil, we need no Motion nor help thereunto,
being altogether by our Corruption bent unto the same, only God directs our
evil doings to his Glory and to our Punishmente.

But Heber the Kenite, Verse 10.
which was of the children of Hobab, father. etc. This is here added, because
of Iael, Hebers wife, who is after reported to kill Sisara with a Nail. etc.
The cause that moved Heber to live separatly from his kinsmen is not here
expressed. It may be some like cause as moved Abraham and Loath to dwell
asunder, Ge. 13. b. 9.
that is, great Plenty of cattle, and Scarsitie of pasture.

And Debora said unto Barac, Verse. 14. etc.
Up, for this is the day in which the Lord. etc. Josephus writes, that Barac
was much abashed of the power of Sisara, and would have stedde into the
Mountains, but that he was stayed by Debora, who signified to him, that this
was the time in which the Providence of God had appointed to Deliver Sisarah
and his army into his hands, as the History declares that in deed it did
fall out.

Howbeit Sisara fled away on his fecte to the tent of Iael, Verse. 17
wife of Heber. etc. Sisara was a wicked and Cruel Tiranne, and a Persecuter
of the people of God: he trusted in his power and strength of his army, he had
no small trust in the Allia^ce and Confederacy of other near unto him: 2. Pa.
32 d. 15 Judith. 1. c. 7.
and upon * confidence hereof, of, was puffed up with Pride, and with extreme
Tirannie sought to oppress the Israelites. But when God * visited his
wickedness, neither his Policy and experience in war, neither the power and
Multitude of his Soldiers, neither the Strength of his iron Chariottes could
help him, but that he Fled, and that on foot, from a Small number of
adversaries, and had reprochefull and villainous Death, where he trusted for
help and comfort. So God uses to deal with the enemies of his people.

And Jael went out to meet Sisara, Verse. 18. etc.
and said unto him: Turn in my lord. etc. It may here be Doubted, how Haber
Iaels husband, being of the people of God, could have League with a Heathen
and godless Prince.

Surely to have such league as tends only to the sa^fe Enjoying of the
Limits and bounds of their Possession, seems not to be against the
Scriptures. Ge. 31. f. 44.
Jacob had league with Laban: And the children of Israel, saving seven nations,
had truce with other countries about them. But to desire aid of them, or to
join power with them in assistance any way, may appear utterly to be
against the word of God, and always has fallen out evil to them that
have used it. As it may appear by the example of Iosaphat, going with the
king of Israel, against Ramoth in Gilead. 2. pa. 19. a. 2.
And God by his prophet reproved him for the same. 2. Paral.

But what shall we here say of Iael, who seems in the killyng of Sisara,
both to have done against the League and covenant of peace between them, and
also to have broken the law of Hospitality, contrary to Nature, and the
preservation of humane Society?

Surely, in other cases to break League and Hospitality, and under pretense
of Frendshippe, to Murder such as commit themselves unto us, may well seem
a foul and horrible act: But that Iaell here does, was a certain devise and
practice of Faith and obedience toward God.

For as it is lawful for any, by what means he can, to kill such a person as
the Prince has proclaimed a Traitor, and put out of his protection: So was it
lawful for Iaell to kill Sisara, whom she now knew to be the enemy of God
and the oppressor of his people, and had declaration thereof by the Prophetisse
Debora, as from the mouth of God himself. The Levites killed the worshippers
of the golden Calfe, having no respect of Aliance or Kindred. Exodus 32 and yet
are they reported To have Consecrated their hands unto the Lord. Exo. 32. f.
28.


That which is appointed by GOD, can not seem to be against his Law. Iaell
was of the people of God, and therefore might she well add her helping hand to
their deliverance, especially against an unrepentant Tiranne, and seeing the
same to be appointed by God.

The.ij. Sunday after Trinity at Evening prayer.
Judges. 5. THen Debora and Barak the son of Abinoam sang

4 Lord when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou departedst out of the feeld
of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens rayned, Deuteronomy. 2. a. 9
the clouds also dropped water.

5 The Mountains melted before the Lord, even as did Sinai before the Lord
God of Israel. Psalm. 97. a. 5 Exo. 19. c. 18.


6 In the days of Samgar the son of Anath, in the days of Iael the hye
ways were unoccupied, and the trauaylers walked thorough bywayes.

7 The inhabitauntes of the towns were gone, they were gone in Israel, until
I Debora came up, which came up a mother in Israel.

8 They chose new Gods, and then had they the enemy in the gates: was there a
shield or spear seen among forty thousand of Israel?

9 My heart loves the governors of Israel, and them that are willing among
the people: O praise ye the Lord.

10 Speak ye that ride on fair asses, ye that dwell by Midden, and that walk
by the ways.

11 For the noise of the archers among the drawers of water ceased, there
shall they speak of the righteousness of the Lord, his righteousness in his
vnfensed towns in Israel: then shall the people of the Lord go down to the
gates.

12 Up Debora up: get thee up, and sing a song: arise Barak, and lead the
captivity captive thou son of Abinoam.

13 Then shall they that remain have dominion of the proudest of the people:
the Lord has given me dominion over the mighty.

14 Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Ameleck, and after thee
Benjamin among thy people, Out of Machir came rulers, and out of Zabulon they
that handle the pen of the writer.

15 And of Isachar there were Princes with Debora, and Isachar, and also Barak
he was sent on foot into the valley: for the divisions of Ruben (were) great
thoughts of heart.

16 Why abodest thou among the sheep foldes, to hear the bleatings of the
flocks? for the divisions of Ruben were great thoughts of heart.

17 Gilead also abode beyond Iordane: and why does Dan remain in ships?
Aser continued on the sea shore, and tarried in his decayed places.

18 (But) the people of Zabulon have ieoparded their lives unto the death, like
as did Nephthali in the hye places of the feelde. 19 The kings came and
fought, then fought the Kings of Chanaan in Thanack by the waters of Megiddo,
and wanne no money.

20 They fought from heaven, even the stars in their courses fought
against Sisara.

21 The river of Kison swept them away, that ancient river the river Kison: O
my soul, thou have marched valiauntly. 22 Then were the horse hoofes smitten a
sunder by the means of the praunsings, that their mighty men made. 23 Curse
ye the City of Meros (said the Angel of the Lord) curse the inhabitants
thereof: because they came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the
mighty.

24 Iael the wife of Haber the Kenite shall be blessed above other women, blessed
shall she be above other women in the tent. 25 He asked water, and she gave him
milk, she brought forth butter in a Lordly dyshe.

26 She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the Smithes hammer:
with the hammer smote she Sisara, and smote his head, wounded him, and
pearsed his temples. 27 He bowed him down at her feet, he fell down, and
lay still at her feet: he bowed himself and fell: and when he had sunk
down, he lay there destroyed.

28 The mother of Sisara looked out at a wyndowe, and cried through the
lattesse, Why is his charet so long a coming? Why tarry the wheels of his
charets?

29 All the wise Ladies answered her, yea and her own words answered her
self.

30 Surely they have found, they divide the spoils, every man has a damsel
or two: Sisara has a pray of diverse colored garments, even a pray of
raiment dyed with sundry colors, and that are made of needle work: raiment
of diverse colors and of needle work on both sides, which is meet for him
that is chief in distributing of the spoils.

31 So perish all thine enemies, O Lord: but they that love him, let them be
as the Sun when he ryseth in his might. And the land had rest forty years.

The Exposition upon the fifth Chapter of Judges.
Then Debora and Barak, Verse. 1. 2. 3.
the son of Abinoam sang the same day. etc. NO kind of worship is to God
more pleasant, nor by the holy Ghost in the Scriptures more earnestly
required, than, when God has showed the great benefits of his mercy toward
his people, Romans 1. a. 8. 2. Cor. 1. b. 11.
that they * for the same declare themselves Thankful, and praise his holy
name therefore. Call upon me, says God, by his Prophet David in the day of
they trouble, Psa. 49. c. 16.
and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, not that God needs our
Glorifying or praising, being of himself most Glorious and worthy praise: but
he * deliteth in Thankfulness, Psa. 68. e. 30.
and also for our causes would have his enemies by that means feared, when
they understand him to be declared by his people to be so terrible, and
mighty a punisher of his sinful and wicked adversaries. And on the other
part, that they, which be weak and fainte, may have their faith Strengthened,
and more readily commit themselves unto his mercy, when they perceive him to be
so willing and gracious a God beyond all Deserte and Expectation of his mere
goodness to deliver them.

Therefore Debora does here the part of a good and faithful Governor, that
is both her self so ready, Psa. 94. a. 12.
and also * wills the residue of her people, in this pleasant and triumphant
Song to the terror of the enemies, and comfort of the faithful, to Set forth
the Mighty and merciful goodness of God toward them. The like examples we
have in Moses at the red Sea, Exo. 15. a. 2. 1. Reg. 2. a. 1. Judit. 16. a. 1
In * Anna for her son Samuel, In * Judith for her victory over Holophernes,
etc.

The People that became so vvilling, were the tribes of Zabulon and Nepthalie,
who did readily follow the Appointment of God declared by Debora and for the
same does she here and afterward Praise them and Reprove the other.

Lord when thou wentest out of Seir, Verse. 4. 5.
when thou departedst out of the. etc. Debora praises God by rehearsing some
of his former acts, done for his people in the Wilderness, and namelye at
their departure from Mount Seir in the land of the Edomites the posterity of
Esau. Deu. 2. c. 12.
Deu. 2. We read that the Israelites had Coasted about Seir the space of.38.
years, and were not greatly terrible to any of their enemies. But when by
Gods appointment they departed from thence toward the land of Chanaan, He
being their Guide and Leader in the Pillar of Fire and the cloud, he did with
such Majesty then deal for them, that the Chananites and other enemies were
stricke^ with Fear, as if the Earth had shaken, or Heaven had poured down
Storms and Tempests against them, or as the Mountains had melted with fire
and Smoke, as Sinay did at the presence of the Lord when he gave his law unto
his people.

In the days of Samgar the son of Anath, Verse. 6. 7.
in the days of Iahel. etc. Before, Debora had praised God as the Ancient
Patron of Israel, now she comes to this noble deliverance that it pleased
him, to his greater Glory and more Terror of his enemies, to work by her a
Simple and Frail woman. Samgar was a Valiant man and Judged Israel, and s^ue
six Hundred Philistines with an Ox goade as it is mentioned in the. Judic. 3.
e. 31.
3. Chapter. But he delivered not Israel so, but that they were deteyned in so
miserable Oppression of the Chanaanites as they could not go out of their
Cities with out Spoiling or killing, neither in the high way as travelers,
neither as husband me^ in the fields: So that both Tillage of la^d, and
traffike of Marchandice was utterly decayed among them, until this Victory
and deliverance wrought by Debora, who Governed and Judged the people of God
rather as a careful Mother, then a stern Prince. Wherefore in this place by
comparison with Samgar, who yet was a good man, She amplifieth this present
Mighty work of God done by Her.

They chose new Gods, Verse. 8.
and then had they the enemy in the gates. etc. So sone as the people *
forsook God, Judic. 3. b. 12.
and fell to Idolatry, he caused their enemies to plague them with War, in
such sort, that of a great number of thousands of the Israelites, not one
durst take speere and shield against their oppressors.

My heart loves the Governors of Israel and them that are willing. Verse. 9.
10. 11
etc. As if Debora had said, It is the exceeding mercy of God that he thus
delivered his people by a few of the Basest and Weakest of them, wherefore my
heart desires nothing more, than that all you of * Israel should praise the
name of the Lord. Psa. 134. c. 19
And first, I admonish you, that are Princes * and Chief men, Psa. 137. a. 5
and ride on fair Asses and sit to Judge the people, or dwell in the City
of Midden, I admonish you also that be wayfairing men, and travail either in
Marchandice or otherwise. For that Liberty, that you were restrained from
before, through oppression, is now * restored to you. Psa. 128. a. 4.
The noise of the Archers that Murdered and Robbed them, which in this dry
Country drove your cattaile to water, is now ceased, and you are out of fear,
and may both keep your Cattle, and go safely to provide water. Yea, in those
places and other unfenced towns, where you lay open to the spoil of enemies,
you may now boldly set forth the Righteousness of the Lord, and you may salfelie
go down to the gates and places of Judgment to have Justice ministered unto
you.

Up Debora, Verse. 12.
up, get the up, and sing a song: Arise Barak. etc. The Prophets and Saints
of God never think themselves earnest enoughe in giuyng Thanks, and Praising
of God, and therefore they often use such stirrings and prouocatio^ of
themselves. She wills Barak also now in triumph to lead them Captive, which
before kept him and other in most Miserable Captivity. Yea, says She,
Judi. 14. b. 12
the * poor remnant of Israel that is not worthy to be called an Army, for
that they were of the poorest, and weakest of the people, shall have Dominion
over those Proud and mighty Chanaanites, that did so sternely use them.

Out of Ephraim was there a root against Amelek, Verse. 14. 15. 16.
and after thee. etc. In these verses Debora recites by what Instruments it
pleased God to give this victory, and what Tribes they were that followed Barak
and which they were that did not accompanye him. First, out of Ephraim Her
self and other as the Root and beginning. Next, a small number out of
Benjamin. Thirdly a company of Strong and warlike men out of the Tribe of
Manasses, a ^hiefe City whereof was Macher.

And out of Zabulon and Nephthalie a number more fit for Learning, and to
handle the Pen, than with Sword and shield to deal against the enemy: For
that She means by these words, To handle the pen of the writer. The tribe
of Isachar also sent worthy and expert men, and therefore are they here
Joined in praise and co^mendatio^ with Barak. The Tribes then that gave aid to
this victory were Ephraim, Benjamin, Manasses, Isachar, Zabulon, and
Nephthalie. Judah, Simeon, Levy, and Gad are not spoken of. Ruben, Dan, and
Asar are mentioned with reprofe. For that it is, that she means by these
words: For the divisions of Ruben were great thoughts of heart. etc. The
Rubenites dwelt in ye fertile Pastures beyond Iordane and seemed to be more
careful for their Sheep and Cattaile, than for the freedom and good state of
their country: and therefore through Pride and disdain would not accompany
Debora and Barak.

Gilead and Dan are for like cause reproved, and A sar, that dwelte toward the
Sea cost, and set their minds upon their ships and the decayed places of
their country. But these pretenses could not in the sight of God * excuse
the^, Jere. 48. b. 10
when they by his Prophetess were called to further the Deliverance of his
people. For it may seem they could have been content to live in thraldom under
the Heathen and godless enemies, So that they might tollerablie enjoy their
worldly riches. The tribe of Zabulon and Nepthali is praised, because although
they were not Valiant and warlike men, but of the meanest sort of the people,
yet they Hasarded their lives for the Liberty of their country.

The kings came and fought, Verse. 19. etc.
then fought the kings of Chanaan in Thanach. etc. Now She shows how
fiercely the Kings, that is, Sisara, and the other Noble captains that were
in his army, did assault the Israelites, and with how great confidence, and
hope of Spoil they set upon them, by the Rivers of Thanach and Megiddo, but to
their own Overthrow and confusion.

For the Lord * fought for his people from Heaven, Exo. 14. c. 14 1. pa. 14. c.
15.
and so abashed their enemies, that they sca^t durst abide the Sight of the^.
Josephus writes that such a Tempest of wind and storm of Hayle came in the
faces of the Chanaanites that they were not hable to stand before the
Israeltes. Yea, a great number of them in ^^eeing were drowned and as it were
Svvept away with the River Kison: by which the field was fought. Yea and the
horse men fled with such violence, that they rent their horses hoofes.

Curse ye the City of Meros, Verse. 23.
(said the Angel of the Lord) Curse the. etc. Meros was a City of the
Israelites near to Thabor, where the victory was gotten, and therefore
inexcusable, because they came not forth to help, and by the Angel of God are
here cursed. Whereby all men are taught* not to withdraw their helping hand,
3. Reg. 2. a. 7. Judic. 12. a. 2.
when God calls to the deliverance of his people from the wicked tirannie of
the oppressor. In the residewe, the Prophetisse pleasantly sets forth the
gesture, Policy and stoutness of Iael in killing Sisara, with the great
reproach of that proud and confident tiranne, that so long under his Prince
had oppressed Gods people. In the end to the comfort of the faithful, in way
of conclusion or rather of a triumphant rejoicing, She adds that God in like
manner will deal* with all his enemies, Psa. 72. d. 27
and they that love him and put their trust and confidence in his mercy, shall
prosper and Florishe as the Sun risen to his might: that is, when he is come
to his midde days course.

The third Sunday after Trinity at Morning prayer.
1. Samuel 2.

2 There is none holy as the Lord: for without thee is nothing, neither is
there any of strength as is our God.

3 Talk no more proudely, let not arrogancy come out of your mouths: for the
Lord is a God of knowledge, Deu. 8. d. 18.
and his purposes come to pass.

4 The bow with the mighty men are broken, and they that were weak have
girded themselves with strength.

5 They that were full have hired out themselves for bread, and they that
were hungrye cease, till the barren have borne seven, Deu. 32. f. 39. Job. 13.
a. 2. Sapi. 16. b. 13.
and she that had many children, is waxed feeble. 6 The Lord kills and
makes alive, brings down to the grave and fetches up again.

7 The Lord makes poor, and makes rich, brings low, and heaueth up on
hye.

8 He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the
dounghill, to set them among princes and to make them inherit the seat of
glory: For the pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he has set the world
upon them.

9 He will keep the feet of his Saints, and the wicked shall keep scilence
in darkness, and in his own might shall no man be strong. 10 The Lords
adversaries shall be destroyed of him, and out of heaven shall be thunder upon
them: the Lord shall judge the ends of the world, and shall give might unto
his king, and exalte the horn of his anointed. 11 And Elkana went to Ramath
to his house, and the lad did Minister unto the Lord before Eli the priest.

12 But the sons of Eli were Children of Belial, and knew not the Lord: 13
And the priests custom toward the people was, that whenever any man offered
any offering, the priests lad came while the flesh was a seething, and a
fleshhooke with three teeth in his hand.

14 And thrust it into the pan, kettle, caldron, or pot: and all that the
fleshhooke brought up, that the priest took for him self: And so they did
unto all the Israelites that came thither to Silo.

15 Yea, and thereto before they burnt the fat, the priests lad came, and said
to the man that offered, Give flesh that I may roste it for the priest: for
he will not have sodden flesh of thee, but raw.

16 And if any man said unto him, Let them burn the fat according to the
custom, and then take as much as thy^e heart desires: Then he would answer
him, Yea thou shall give it me now, and if thou will not, I will take it with
violence. 17 And the sin of the young men was very great before the Lord:
for men abhored the offering of the Lord.

18 But the child Samuel Ministered before the Lord girded with a linen Ephod.

19 Moreover, his mother made him a little coat, and brought it to him from
year to year when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice.

20 And Eli blessed Elkana and his wife, and said, The Lord give thee seed of
this woman, for the petition that she asked of the Lord. And they went unto
their own home.

21 And the Lord visited Hanna, so that she conceived, and bare three sons,
and two daughters: and the child Samuel grew before the Lord.

22 Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all Israel, and
how they lay with the women that waited at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

23 And he said unto them, why do ye such things? for of all these people I
hear evil reports of you.

24 Oh, nay my sons: for it is no good report that I hear, how that ye
make the Lords people to trespass.

25 If one man sin against another, the judge shall judge it: but if a man
sin against the Lord, who will be his dayseman? Notwithstanding they
hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the Lord would slay them.

26 The child Samuel profited and grew, and was in favor both with the Lord
and with men.)

27 And there came a man of God unto Eli and said unto him, Thus says the
lord, Did not I plainly appear unto the house of thy father, when they were
in Egipte in Pharaos house? 28 And I chose him out of all the tribes of Israel
to be my priest, for to offer upon mine altar, and to burn incense, and to
wear an Ephod before me: and I gave unto the house of thy father all the
offeringes made by fire of the Children of Israel.

29 Wherefore tread ye down my sacrifice and mine offering which I commanded
in the Tabernacle, and honor thy children above me, to make your selves fat
of the first fruits of all the offeringes of Israel my people?

30 Wherefore the Lord God of Israel says, I said that thy house and the
house of thy father should walk before me for ever: but now the Lord says,
That be far from me, for them that worship me I will worship, and they
that despise me, shall come to shame.

31 Behold, the days come that I will cut of thine arm, and the arm of thy
fathers house, that there shall not be an old man in thine house. 32 And thou
shall see thine enemy in the habitation ( of the lord) and in all the wealth
which ( God) shall give Israel: and there shall not be an old man in thine
when they be) men.

34 And this shall be a sign unto thee that shall come upon thy two sons
Hophni and Phinehes: in one day they shall dye both. 35 And I will stir up a
faithful priest, that shall do according to my heart and mind, and I will
build him a sure house, and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever. 36
And all that are lest in thine house, shall come, and crouche to him for a
piece of silver and a morsel of bread, and shall say, Put me (I pray thee) in
one office or other among the priests, that I may eat a morsel of bread.

The Exposition upon the.ij. Chapter of.1. Samuel.
And Hanna prayed, Verse. 1.
and said, My heart rejoices in the Lord* etc. THis Hanna the wife of Helcana,
as is mentioned in the 1. Chapter of this book, having been long Baraine, and
without child, to her great reproach and grief of mind: at the last through
earnest prayer, obtained of god her son Samuel, and by her vow dedicated him
to the Service of God. Wherefore in this chapter stirred by the motion of Gods
holy Spirit, she yeldeth most hearty thanks and praises to God for the same.

And albeit this be the chief purpose of Her speech, yet in the vehemency of
her spirit she breaks out to greater matter, and exceeding lie extolleth the
mighty Power of God in other things also. My heart, says she, reioyseth,
which before was wrung with sorrow: my Horn, that is, my strength and glory
is now extolled, which before was overthrown in shame and reproach: my Mouth
is now free, which erst was stopped with heaviness, and I rejoice not in mine
own strength or doing, but in the salvation of the Lord. Verse 2.
The Lord our God is only Holy and of almighty Power, and my gladness in him
is not vain. Verse. 3.
Therefore you wicked ones cease to Breath out the pride and arrogancy of your
hearts, his knowledge is infinite, his power is exceeding great, Psa. 113. a. 3.
and is hable to bring to pass whatsoever he will have done. Verse. 4.
He overthrows the mighty, and breaks their strength and power: Verse. 5.
he sets up the afflicted and troubled persons, and compasses them with his
strength and assistance. Luc. 1. e. 52.
The rich that did feed at full he brings to poverty and need: Such as
were oppressed with hunger he brings to great plenty. Verse. 6. 7. Psa.
112. a. 8.
The baraine he makes mother of many children: and such as had plenty of
children he makes baraine. Yea, the Lord kills and brings even from
Deaths door to Life again. The rich he pulls down out of his Glory, and
lifts up the poor from low estate even to the dignity of Princes. The
Stedinesse of the earth is in his hands, and he caused it, and has placed all
the other elements about it, as it were their foundation whereon they rested.
Verse. 9.
The feet of his Saints, that is, all their Works, Studies, Endeavors, and
Cou^sailes he prospers: but the wicked he causes to perish in the dark
clouds of affliction.

All the enemies of God that set themselves against him and his truth, Verse.
10.
with his mighty power he will from Heaven overthrow, and especially when he
has given his Kingdom to his anointed Messiah and Savior that is to come.

But the sons of Helie were Children of Belial and knew not the Lord. Verse.
12. etc.
etc. Children of Beliall are dissolute and loose young men given over to
wickedness, and not stayed or bridled with the fear God: and such the Sons
of Helie are here described to be, Contemners of God, and of his holy
ordinances, Covetous, Cruel, Proud, Gluttenous. They were not Contented with
those portions that the Lord had assigned them, Exe. 29. e. 26 Nu. 18. c. 21.
Leui. 7. d. 34
Exodus. 29. Number. 18. Leuit. 7. But by violence and extortion took from men
what they lusted. Which dealing, caused the people to loathe the Sacrifices of
God.

So great a mischief is it, if the Ministers of Gods Religion do wickedly
abuse to their gain the Sacraments of God, or not deal in them with comely
Reverence, for the reproach of the Sacraments tend to the dishonor of God.

How grievous this offense of the Sons of Helie was in the sight of God, it
does afterward appear. There might seem to be great blame in the Magistrates,
that seeing this outrageous contempt of God and his Laws, would not seek to
Redress the same.

But the Child Samuel Ministered before the Lord girded with. Verse. (...).
etc. To Minister before the Lord, is to Minister in the service of God. Ephod
was a little linne^ garment from the shoulders down toward the middle, which
the Levites also used in the service of the Temple. But the Ephod which the
Priest wore was of another sort: and was made of Gold, blewe Silk, Purple
Scarlet, and White twined sylke with brodered work. Exo. 28. a. 6.
Exodus 28.

Elie was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto Israel, Verse. 22.
and. etc. Helie for age was not hable to execute the office of the Priest
himself, and therefore committed it unto his sons, who foully abused it to
gods dishonor, and great offense of his people. The women that are mentioned to
have waited at the door of the Tabernacle, either came thither to be purified,
or to help forward the holy ministry, and by these wicked Priests were
either by corruption allured to adultery, or by violence ravished.

And he said unto them, Verse. 23. 24.
Why do ye such things? for of all these people. etc. He should sharply have
rebuked them, yea and with further punishment have put them from the holy
Ministry, as such persons that dishonored the service of God: but as a
negligent man in Gods cause, and a co^kering ^ather toward his children, he
reproves them ^oldly, and said only that he Heard evil report of them, and
therefore they being now acustomed to their wicked doings, were nothing amended
thereby.

When one h^rteth an other man, he offends God, Verse. 25
but, by Media^^on: but when he trespasseth in matter of Religion and
holiness, he offends God Immediately.

As touching these words that be added, They hearkened not to their father,
Because the Lord would slay them: It may seem repugnant to that God speaks
by Ezec. cap. Eze. 18. e. 23.
18. As sure as I live, I will not the death of a sinner. etc. And in Esaias
cap. 28. Esai. 28. e. 21.
God mynding to punish the people says, that he will do A strange work, a
strange act: that is, such an one as usually does not belong unto him. How
then does he say here that He will slay them? For answer hereunto, we must
know, That God is not the direct Authoure of Death either of the soul or of
the body: For Death came in by sin. Romans 5. b. 12.
Romans 5. and Sin was wrought by Satan, father both of sin and Death, and
therefore is he justly called of Saint John A manqueller. Jo. 8. 14.
Therefore, when God punishes or kills, he may well be said to do A strange
work, and such a thing, as in his simple and revealed will, he does not delight
in. S. Augustine notes two kinds of Will in God, y^ one Simplex, that is, his
single and Direct Will, the other Retribuens, that is, his Requiting Will,
whereby he kills, and punishes. For as in his single and direct will he
would not have sin, so would he not have the punishment of sin, but is
Driven unto it by the impenitent sinners, that, of his justice he must needs
give them the reward of that wickedness, which he would not have: And therefore
in his Simple and Revealed will for the love he bears to mankind, he is
grieved to see man cast him self into the danger thereof. When God in Ezechiel
says, I will not the death of a sinner: We must further understand, that there
are two sorts of sinners, The penitente, and the Impenitent sinner: God of his
mercy *will not the death of the Penitente sinner, 1. Jo. 1. d. 9. Eze. 33. c.
12.
although he have justly deserved it. This Will is so Firm, Sure, and Resolute,
that he binds it with an oath, saying, As sure as I live. The Impenitent
sinner, of his justice he must and will punish by Death both of body and soul:
And such were the sons of Helie, of whom here it is spoken.

There came a man unto Hely and said unto him, Verse. 27.
thus says the Lord. etc. Now God sends his messenger to Helie to declare
unto him, as well the grieuousnesse of his sons offenses continued by his
Slacknes, as also the Great punishment that should come unto him for the same.
The Men of God are all they which being lightened with the Spirit of God,
declare his will unto his people: Some of which be ordinary Ministers in the
Church of God, 1. Ti. 6. c. 11.
and so does Paul call Timothy, The man of God: Some ar extraordinary, for
some peculiar purposes of great importance, as this messenger in this place
was, but who it was by name the Scripture expresses not. And here we may
learn, that when the ordinary ministry is corrupted, and regards not the
word of God: The Holy Ghost rayseth up other extraordinary to reprove them.

Examples hereof we have in the Prophets, and in Christ and his Apostles. The
Prophets and messengers of God always use this preface, Thus says the Lord,
whereby as Ambassadors from God they declare their Commission, and that they
mind to utter nothing but that, whereof they have warrant from God himself.

Ambassadors may not go beyond their Commission, nor the Messengers of God
beyond his revealed will.

Helie in mind of the singular benefit that God gave to his ancesters,
appointing the priesthood to remain to that family, thereby the more to
Verse. 32.
That he should see, that is, That his posterity should see, his enemy and
one that he did envy, in the house of the Lord, and that in the time of
Solomon when the people of God had greatest prosperity. That they of his
flock should come to extreme poverty and need. And in assurance, that all
these things in their due time should come to pass, he gives him this
unpleasant token, that his two sons should Die both in one day. This may be
a terrible example to all Parents, Princes, and Magistrates, that by their
slacknesse and remiss gouernemente suffer corruption of Gods true worship, and
wickedness of life to increase in their children or subjects, for lack of
Severity and just Punishment. This punishmente of taking away the priesthood
from the house of Helie God does not presently execute, but differreth it
until the reign of Solomon when Sadoc was placed in Abiathars room. 3. Reg.
2. c. 27
3. Reg 2. In the mean time God of his mercy gave time to his posterity to
repent.

The.14. Sunday after Trinity at Morning prayer.
Jeremy. Cap. 5. Look thorough Jerusalem, behold and see, feeke thorough

2 For though they can say, The Lord lives: yet they swear to deceive. 3
Whereas thou (O Lord) look only upon faith and truth: Thou have scourged
them, but they took no repentance, thou have corrected them for amendment, but
they refused thy correction, they made their faces harder than a stone, and
would not amend.

4 Therefore I thought in my self, Peradventure they are so simple and foolish
that they understand nothing of the Lords way, and judgments of their God.

5 Therefore will I go unto their heads and rulers, and talk with them, if
they know the way of the Lord, and judgments of their God: But these in like
manner have broken the yoke, and burst the bonds in sunder.

6 Wherefore a Lion out of the wood has hurt them, De. 32. d. 20
and a woolfe in the evening shall destroy them, the Leopard does lie lurking
by their cities, to tear in pieces all them that come therout: for their
offenses are multiplied, and their

7 Should I then for all this have mercy upon thee? Sopho. 1. a.
Thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods: and albeit
that I fed them to the full, yet they fall to adultery, and haunt harlots
houses.

8 In the desire of uncleanly lust they are become like the stoned horse, Eze.
22. b. 11
every man neygheth at his neighbors wife 9 Should I not correct this, says
the Lord? Jere. 9. b. 9.
should I not be avenged of every people that is like unto this?

10 Climb up upon their walls, beat them down, and destroy them not
utterly: take away their battlements, because they are not the Lords. 11 For
unfaithfully has the house of Israel and Judah forsaken me, says the Lord.

12 They have denied the Lord and said, 2. Pet. 2. a. 1. Jere. 14. b. 13.
It is not he that looks upon us, tush, there shall no misfortune come upon
us, we shall see neither sword nor hunger.

13 As for the warning of the prophets, it is but wynd, yea there is not the
word of God in them: such things shall happen unto themselves. 14 Wherefore
thus says the lord God of hosts: Because ye speak such words, behold y^
words that are in thy mouth will I turn to fire, and make the people to be
wood, that the fire may consume them. 15 Lo I will Deu. 28. c. 4.
O house of Israel, Baru. 4. c. 9.
says the Lord, a mighty people, an old people, a people whose speech thou
know not, neither understand what they say.

16 Their arrows are sudden death, yea they themselves be very Giants. 17 This
people shall eat up thy fruit and thy meat, yea they shall devour thy sons
and thy daughters thy sheep and thy bullocks, they shall eat up thy grapes and
figgs: As for thy strong and well defensed cities wherein thou did trust,
they shall bring to poverty, and that through the sword.

18 Nevertheless, I will not the^ have done with you, says the Lord. 19 But if
they say: Wherefore does the lord our God all this unto us? Jere. 16. b. 10
Then answer them, Because y^ like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange
gods in your la^d, even so shall ye serve strangers out of your land. 20 Preach
this unto the house of Jacob, and cry it out in Judah, and say thus:

21 Hear this thou foolish and indiscreet people: Ye have eyes Esai. 6 b. 8.
ears have ye, John. 9. d. 39
but ye hear not. Job. 26. d. 10
22 Fear ye not me, says the lord? will ye not tremble at my presence? which
bynd the sea with the sand by a continual decree, so yt it cannot pass his
bounds: for though it rage, yet can it do nothing, and though ye waves thereof
do ^wel, yet may they not go over. 23 But this people has a false and obstinat
heart, they are departed and gone away from me. 24 They think not in their
hearts, O let us fear the lord our God, who gives us rain early and late when
need is, which keeps ever still ye harvest for us yearly. 25 Nevertheless your
misdeeds have turned these from you, and your sins have robbed you of good
thin ges. 26 For among my people are found wicked persons, y^ privily lay
snares and wait for me^, to take them and destroy the^.

27 And like as a net is full of birds, so are their houses full of that
which they have gotten with falsehood and deceit. Hereof comes their great
substance and riches.

28 Hereof are they fat and wealthye, and are more mischeuous than any other:
they minister not the law, they make no end of the fatherless cause, yea and
they prosper: yet they judge not the poor according to equity.

29 Should I not punish these things says the Lord? should not I be avenged
of all such people as these be?

30 Horrible and grievous things are done in the land.

31 The Prophets teach falsely, and the preachers receive gifts, and my people
has pleasure therein: what will come thereof at the last?

The Exposition upon the.v. Chapter of Hieremie.
Look through Jerusalem, behold and see, Verse. 1.
seek through her streets also. etc. THe Prophet Hieremie in the former
Chapter had notably described the coming of Nabuchodonosors army into
Ievvrie, and the great waste and spoil that he should make of that country,
even to the very walls of the city Jerusalem, which therefore should be in
great fear, even as a woman in travail with child.

Therefore in this place, before he notes the destruction of that City, he
makes proof and declaration of the Justice of God in doing of it. For we see
commonly, when God punishes the wicked for their offenses, that they are so
obstinate and stiffenecked, and so far from any sense of true repentance
and turning to God, that they murmr against god, and accuse him for dealing
over Rigorously and Cruelly with them, and that he punishes them more sharply
and grievously than their offenses Deserve.

Wherefore God by his Prophet shows, that they are so far overwhelmed with
their wickedness, as there is not left one Just man among them, in
consideration of whom, he might Spare them, and therefore, that of his Justice
he must of necessity punish them. Look (says he) through Jerusalem,
behold and see, seek thoroughe her streates. etc. In which words God wills
even the whole World to look diligentely into the state of that City, that
was called by the name of The holy City, and to see whether there were any
thing or Person in it, in respect whereof, he should show Mercy toward it.

For though they can say, Verse. 2. 3.
The Lord lives: yet they swear to deceive. etc. Here the Prophet detecteth
their Hypocrisy, and signifies, that albeit they pretend to be the People of
God and to have a reverence to the name of God, and therefore will call him to
witness in their affairs, and Swear by his name, as by that which they
account very Holy: yet it is but wicked Hipocriste in them, and indeed the
Profanation of the name of God. For they swear falsely and untruly to*
deceive their neighbor, Ps. 14. a. 3. 4. Psa. 23. a. 4.
and to work their unjust devises, and so by Perjury make the Name of God a
Cloak and mean to further their own Wickedness: Whereas God Looks only
upon faith and truth, Ps. 77. d. 40
and regards not the fair * Pretense of his Name, when the true Reverence
thereof is not in their hearts.

This place ought to teach us, that the Name of the * Church, Jere. 7. a. 4.
or People of God, the Title of Christians, the External Sacraments of
christian Religion, are not sufficient to move the Favor of God toward us, nor
to make us his people, unless the fear of God and true Holiness be in our
hearts.

In the beginning of the third Verse, which in deed should be a part of
this second, the Prophet alters the Person, and turns the speech unto God
himself.

Thou have scourged them, Verse. 3.
but they took no repentance, thou have corrected etc. This was of exceeding
great Stubbornness in the Jews, and of Indurated hearts, that they could not
be moved to Repentance, no not with the heavy Plagues and punishments that
God did bring upon them to that end: yea they rather hardened their faces, as
it were, against God, and became shameless in their wickedness, casting of al
consideration of Godliness and Honesty.

Therefore I thought in my self, Verse. 4.
peradventure they are so simple and etc. For So Much as it might be thought, the
Simple and. Foolish people did amiss by Ignorance and error only, and that
the wyser and better sort had more Care of ye fear and service of God: he
turns now to the Princes, Priests, Magistrates, and Rulers, and shows that
they also, which of duty should have been not only Instructers, Leaders and
Guyders to other, but also correcters and Punishers of their Lewdness, were
become more stubborn and dissolute than they, and had clean cast from them
the bond and Yoke of Obedience to the Holy Will and Law of God. So that there
might seem no Hope, either in Prince or People, in Rich or poor, in Learned
or Ignorant, but that they All were given over to their own Lusts and Sensual
appetites.

Wherefore a Lion out of the wood has hurt them, and a Wolf in the. etc. By
the Lion, the Wolf, and the Leopard, the Prophet means the Assyrians, the
Egyptians, and sundry other Enemies, that should come upon them, and so
straightly Besiege them in their Cities, that not One should be hable to go
out, but should be Taken and Slain.

When the prophet says, The Lion out of the wood, and a Wolf in the
evening; he notes the Cruelty and fierceness of the enemies. For the Lion
when he comes out of the wood for his pray is very hungry, and the Wolf
that has missed his feeding all the day long, is in the evening more greedy and
fierce. And such he signifies that these Enemies should be. The Lion Has hurt
the^, says Jeremy, that is, Shall hurt them. For the manner of the Prophets
is oftentimes, by y^ time Past to note the time to Come, as well in the
threatenings of punishments, as in the Promises of Gods good blessings. And
thereby do they signify that the truth of either of the^ is so assured, as if
they were Already performed. The cause of all the Afflictions and troubles that
God casts upon his people, is noted to be the increase of their Wickedness and
Contempt of God and his word.

Should I then for all this, Verse. 7. 8. 9
have mercy upon thee? Thy children have. etc. God here shows that of
necessity his very Justice forces him Sharply to punish the^, As if he had
said, Genesis 18. c. 25
Seeing I am the* Judge of the world, how should I let them escape unpunished,
which so obstinately of purpose provoke my wrath against them? Should I not
then make my glory and majesty co^temptible in the world? Should I not make the
wicked to think I were no God? yea, y^ there were no God at al, that would
punish their naughty and sinful life? Wherefore as of my Mercy I am most
ready to pardon the Repentante sinner that leaves his wickedness, and turns
to me: So must I of my Justice sharply plague the obstinate and stiffenecked
offender that runs on headlong in his own naughty ways.

God, turning his speech to the City Jerusalem, says, Her children, that
is, her inhabitants has unthankfully also abused his benefits which he
bestowed upon them, and when he fed them with Plenty and Abundance of al
things, they turned it to the Pa^pering of their bodies, and to the mayntenance
of their wanton lusts, in such sort that they became as Stalions or stone
horses every one neighing at his neighbors wife. By which comparison he
maruelously sets forth their outrageous Incontinencie and Dissolute life,
and gives us also to understand how easily Wealth and * ple^tie does breed
Looseness and wantonness, Ez. 16. f. 49 Jere. 22. e. 27
if we learn not to use with reverence and fear the good blessyngs that GOD
pours upon us, and that God also will be avenged of us for the same. For the
Justice of God must needs punish the same in us, as well as he did in the
Jews, and so he here earnestly affirms, when he says, Should I not be
avenged on every people that is like unto this? etc.

Climb up upon their walls, Verse. 10.
beat them down, and destroy them not utterly. etc. This is spoken by God to
the enemies of the Jews, as it were, to hasten and encourage the^, to Plague
that naughty people. By which manner of speaking, God gives his people to
understand both that the Inuasio^ of their enemies, that should come upon
them, was only at the appointment and calling of God, and that they were therein
the Ministers and * executioners of his justice: Jere. 25. b. 9.
and also that they should be hable by no means to Escape the danger thereof,
either by their Strong and sensed Cities, or otherwise.

In these words, And destroy them not utterly, God limitteth the power of the
enemies, and leaves hope of Pardon to his people, if they will in any time
Repent and turn unto him.

The goodness of God uses all means that may be, to provoke them to leave
their wickedness, before he bring upon them extreme Desolation and confusion.

In the 11. 12. 13. verses God again alleges the just causes of their
Plague, that is, that they had vnfaythefully by Apostasy, forsaken him, Denied
his Providence, contemned the Thretnings of his Prophets, Jere. 43. a. 2.
as * False, Vain, and foolish, and said, that the Punishments of War,
Famine, and Hunger, should not light upon them, but on the Prophets themselves,
that spoke so much of them.

Such is the obstinacy of the wicked against all godly Aduertiseme^ts, that
they will not only not acknowledge them to be Good and true, but impute the
cause of Gods wrath and displeasure to those Messengers that he sends to
call them to Repentance.

Wherefore thus says the Lord of hoastes: Verse. 14. 15. 16. 17.
Because ye speak such words. etc. God shows how grievous and intolerable
the Contempt of his word and ministers is in his sight, and how Severely he will
punish the the same. Because (says he) you have thus Co^temptuously thought
and spoken of my word, vttred by my prophet, Psa. 118. 159.
as though it were * vain, false, and of no credit: behold says God (turning
his speech to Hieremie) That word of which they make so small account, and
which they esteem of so little Force, I will make as Fire in thy mouth, and
that leude People shall be as wood or stubble. And eue^ as certainly as Fire
co^sumeth wood y^ is cast into it, so assuredly shall the Might and Truth of
that my Word uttered by thee, bring upon them the Plague and Desolation that it
has threatened unto them.

In the.3. next Verses, he describes the Might and cruel Barbaritie of those
enemies that he would bring upon them. Verse. 15. 16. 17.
They shall be (says he) A mighty people, whose power they shall not be
hable to resist. An old people, that by long continuance in Empire and
dominion is waxen Proud and stern, and thereby will use the less mercy: A
people whose speech they knew not, and thereby could not deal with them by
entreatie to obtain favor. They are so mighty men and so ready Archers, that
none escapes that they shoot at, and therefore their Arrows may well be
said to be Sudden death: So barbarous and fierce they shall be, as they will
not spare either Sons or Daughters among you, they will Consume your meats,
your fruits, your Grapes, your Figs, they will Destroy your sheep, your Oxen,
your bullockes, and all your Cattle, neither shall you have any Defense,
healpe, or succoure, against them. For the sensed Cities, wherein you trust,
shall in that day nothing healpe you, but that by the force of the sword they
shall bring you to great distress and poverty. Verse. 18. 19.
And although that this threatening be very terrible, yet he says further, that
He will not so have done with them, but will add greter Plagues and
punishments. And therefore, because God saw their wayward obstinacy, that
they would not only not acknowledge their fault and repent, but also would
murmr against him, as dealing cruelly and unjustly with them, and punishing
them without good cause, He wills the Prophet to answer this their
blasphemous murmuring, and tell them plainly, That for so much as they had
forsaken the true worship of the living God, and did Sacrifice to strange
Gods at home in their own Land, which God had given them, He would now
for punishment thereof, cause them to be led Captive into Babylon, and to serve
strange Lords and Masters in a Country that was not theirs.

Preach this unto the house of Jacob, Verse. 20. 21.
and cry it out in Juda. etc. God leaves nothing undone, whereby this
Stubburne people may declare themselves inexcusable, if they do not Repent and
forsake their wickedness, and therefore charge the Prophet, that they lack
not Teaching and Preaching, and the evident declaration of Gods Justice to come
upon them, and that in such manner, as they may not think it to be Words
only and bare Threatninges to fear them, but that they may be well assured
that they shall be as truly performed in deed, as they were uttered in words.

And then, if they did not obey, they should show themselves to be not only a
Blockishe and a folishe people, but in deed as indurate Storkes and Stones, and
altogether like those Idolles that they worshipped which had eyes, Psalm. 113.
b. 6.
and yet saw not, and ears, and yet heard not. etc. but did suffer the Word
of God to pass as if it had been spoken to Insensible creatures.

To the further amplification, Verse. 22.
and condemnation of their Obstinacy, in rejecting al obedience and Fear of
God, he compares them to the Sea. The Sea, says he, then which there is
nothing more forcible and violente, yet at my Decree and appointment does it*
tarry within his bounds, Psa. 103. b. 10
and in his greatest rage and swelling of Waves does not break out beyond
the banks of light Sand and Gravel.

Hereby this People might be taught how great my Power is, and so learn to
Fear me, as their God, and to Obey me as their Lord that made them and all
the world beside: but they are more dull of understanding than the* Insensible
creatures, Esai. 1. a. 3.
and further from obedience than the furious and raging Surges of the Sea.

Although the exceeding might and power of God in bounding the Sea within
certain Limits did not move them to fear his Majesty: Verse. 24.
yet considering that of his fatherly Providence he sent them Rain in due
times, and all manner of Seasonable weathering, to temper the ground, that it
might bring forth Fruits to their use and commodity, it should have somewhat
inclined their hearts to Love his Fatherly goodness, and Reverently to have
served him. But they were as v^thankefull toward the Goodness and mercy of
God, as they were obstinate against his Power and Majesty.

Nevertheless your misdeedes have turned these from you. Verse. 25. etc.
etc. Hereby we are taught that when God takes from us the Fruits of the
Earth, and his other good blessings, the cause thereof is our own Sinfulness
and forsaking of God and his true Service.

In the 26. and 27. verses, the Prophet reckeneth up some of their offenses,
and especially their Falsheade, Deceipte, and Craft in trapping and snaring
the simple, and by unjust and suttell means, drawing them into danger, so
that it may appear there remained among them no Faith, nor Truth, nor
Integrity and vprighte dealing, but altogether covetous craftiness, injury
and oppression.

And as the People were given to extortion and oppression: Verse. 2^.
so were the Magistrates negligent in ministering Justice, in defending the
innocent, and punishing the violence of the oppressor and wrongful doer.
Jere. 2. b. 8. Jere. 8. d. 10. Jere. 6. d. 13.
Yea and the * very Prophets also, Preachers and Priests which should have
instructed and taught both People and Magistrate: were themselves given over to
Covetousness and Briberie, and by false prophesying and teaching noseled the
people in their wickedness, and in the contempt of God and of his true
Prophets. And therefore God denounces that he must needs of his Justice
punish both them and all such other wicked People as they are.

The.14. Sunday after Trinity at Evening prayer.
Jeremy. Cap. 22.

2 And say, Hear the word of the Lord, thou king of Judah that sit in the
kingly seat of David, thou and thy servants, and thy people that goes in and
out at these gates.

3 Thus the Lord commands, Esai. 1. d. 16. Jere. 21. c. 12. Zach. 7. c. 9.
Keep equity and righteousness, deliver the oppressed from the power of the
violent, do not grieve nor oppress the stranger, the fatherless, nor the
wydowe, and shed no innocent blood in this place. 4 And if ye keep these
things Faithfully, then shall there come in at the door of this house, Kings
to sit upon David's seat, they shall be carried in charrets, and ride upon
Horses, both they and their servants, and their people. Esai. 1. e. 20. Heb.
b. 6. 8.
5 But if ye will not be obediente unto these commandments, I swear by mine
own self, says the Lord, this house shall be waste.

6 For thus has the Lord spoken upon the Kings of Judah, Thou Gilea^ art
unto me the head of Libanus: shall I not make thee so waste as the Cities that
no man dwell in? 7 I will prepare a destroyer with his weapons for thee, to
hew down thy especial Cedar trees, and to cast them in the fire.



9 Then shall it be answered, Because they have broken the covenant of the
Lord their God, and have worshipped and served strange Gods.

10 Maurne not over the dead, and be not woe for them: but be sorry for him
that departs away, for he comes not again, and sees his native country
no more. 2. Chr. 3. c.


11 For thus says the Lord as touching Sellum the Son of Josias King of
Judah, which reigned after his father, When he is carried out of this place, he
shall never come hither again.

12 For he shall dye in the place whereunto he is led captive, Esai. 5. c.
Agge. 1. a.
and shall see this land no more.

13 Woe worth him that buyldeth his house with unrighteousness,

14 Who thinks in himself, I will build me a wide house and gorgious
parlours, who causes wyndowes to be hewn therein, and the seelings and
ioystes makes he of Cedar, and painteth them with Sinoper.

15 Think thou to reign now that thou haste enclosed thy self with Cedar?
Did not thy father eat and drink and prosper well, as long as he dealt with
equity and righteousness? 16 Yea, when he helped the oppressed and poor to
their right, then prospered he well: from whence came this, but only because
he knew me, says the Lord?

17 Nevertheless as for thine eyes and thine heart, they look upon
covetousness, to shed Innocent blood, to do wrong and violence.

18 And therefore thus says the Lord against Iehoakim the son of Josias
King of Judah, 4. Reg. 24. a. 2. etc. Jer. 36. e. 30.
They shall not mourn for him ( as they use to do) Alas brother, alas sister:
neither shall they say unto him, Alas for that noble prince.

19 But as an ass shall he be buried, corrupt, and be cast without the
gates of Jerusalem.

20 Climb up the hill of Libanus ( O thou daughter Sion) lift up thy voice
upon Easan, cry from all parts: for all

21 I gave thee warning while thou wast yet in prosperity: but thou saydest, I
will not hear: And this manner haste thou used from thy youth, that thou
would never hear my voice.

22 All thy heardmen shall be driven with the wind, and thy darlinges shall be
carried away into capitiuitie: then shall thou be brought to shame and
confusion, because of all thy wickedness. Esai. 13. d. Esai. 21. a. Jere. 12.
b. Jere. 21. a. 2. Reg. 24. b.
23 Thou that dwell upon Libanus, and make thy nest in the Cedar trees, O
how little shalt thou be regarded when thy sorrow and panges come upon thee,
as upon a woman travailing with child?

24 As truly as I live says the Lord, though Conanias

25 And I will give thee into the hand of them that seek thy life, and into
the power of them that thou fear, even into the power of Nabuchovonozor the
King of Babylon, and into the power of the Chaldees.

26 Moreover I will send thee and thy mother that bare thee into a strange
Land where ye were not borne, and there shall ye dye.

27 But as for the Land that ye will desire to return unto, ye shall never
come at it again.

28 This man Conanias shall be like an Image robbed and torn in pieces, and
like a vessel wherein there is no pleasure: Wherefore both he and his seed
shall be sent away, and cast into a land that they know not.

29 O thou earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord. 30 Thus says
the Lord, Write this man destitute of Children: for no prosperity shall this
man have all his days, neither shall any of his seed be so happy as to
sit upon the seat of David, and to bear rule any more in Judah.

The Exposition upon the.xxij. Chapter of Hieremie.
Thus says the Lord, Verse. 1.
go down into the house of the King of Judah. etc. THat this admonition might
be of the greater force with the people, the Prophet is here willed by God to
go to the Prince and Counsailers themselves, and to declare the Message to
them. For the inferiors and subjects might well think it was no Idle or
trifeling admonishment that was denounsed to the chief and principali rulers,
but that in deed it should be fulfilled. The Kings of Judah and posterity of
David had a singular pre-eminence in the Covenant of God, Psa. 88. d. 28
and a peculiar Promise, that that line and succession should continue for
ever. This promise which should have put them in mind of their duty, they
turned to the maintenance of their obstinacy and stubburnesse: thinking,
because of this Promise, that all the Threatenings of punishment and destruction
declared by the Prophet, were but Vain, and not agreing with the former
Covenant.

Therefore God here wills his Prophet plainly to signify to the King
himself, and to all his Princes, 2. sam. 7. b. 13
that as the promise was conditional, and required as well their Obedience on
the one part, as his Truth on the other: so if they fulfilled not the
Condition, they neither might nor should be Partakers of the Benefit of the
covenant. The Place was holy wherein the Kings of Judah did sit, and they were
Figures of the kingdom of Christ, therefore the Justice of God might the
less bear with their wickedness. By this we may learn, that no Title of
Dignity, Pre-eminence, or holiness, ca^ save us from the just plague of God,
if we Depart from the Truth of his holy will and covenant. Keep equity and
righteousness, says the Prophet, Deliver the oppressed from the power of
the violent, Do not grieve nor oppress the stranger, the fatherless, or the
vvydovve, Shed no innocente blood. Execute Judgment faithfully and truly
in all things, and toward All persons, and then shall ye prosper and
flourishe, and ye shall enjoy the Promises made to David and to his
Posterity: But if ye will not so do, Jere. 21. d. 12.
but continue in * Iniurye, Oppression and Violence, as before time ye have
done, I swear unto ye by mine Own self, and by my truth, that the holy City
of David's throne and kingdom shall not help you, but that I will make this
House to be Waste, and give it as a Pray unto the enemies.

For although Jerusalem, Verse. 6.
which is The head of Libanus, be the place which I have chosen for the
peculiar Seat of my worship: yet seeing it is fallen from me to wickedness and
Idolatry, I esteem it now no otherwise, than I do Gilead, and the kingdom
of the ten Tribes wherein it stands. And as I have dealte by that Kingdom,
and for the Disobedience thereof made it waste and desolate, even so will I do
by Jerusalem and the kingdom of Judah, and will bring the enemy to destroy
that also seeing they will by no means be reclaimed. The kingdom wherein Mount
Gilead stands, is far larger and of greater worthiness in it self tha^
Libanus, and the Kingdom of Judah, whereof Jerusalem is the thief City.
Therefore if I spared not that, they may not think that I will spare
Jerusalem and Judah.

I will prepare a destroyer with his weapons for thee, Verse. 7.
to hew down. etc. Because he had said, that Jerusalem should be destroyed,
he now shows the Means and the manner how it should be done. This Destroyer
is the army of the Chaldees and Babilonians, which was brought by God upon his
people. They came not of their own motion, but were led thereto of God, as his
Scourge to the Punishment of the wicked, and therefore he says, I will
prepare a destroyer. By which words both the Jews, and by them, All other
have to learn, Jere. 9. d. 11.
That it is * God that brings affliction and trouble upon sinners, and
therefore should they also consider, that they have not only to deal with the
outward enemy that persecuteth the^, but with God himself, whose Will no
power or endeavor can Resist. And therefore that the best way is, when in such
case we feel the Heavy hand of God laid upon us, by earnest Repentance
humbly to submit our selves unto him and crave his Mercy. To hevve down
their especial Cedar trees, may either be taken literallie that they should
make Spoil of that goodly Wood of Libanus, and of the notable Timber
thereof, wherein the Jews greatly gloried, or else it may be understood
figuratiuelie of the beams of the Temple, which at the destruction thereof
should be cut out to the fire, or thirdly of their Noble men and all the
glory of their City and kingdom, the chief whereof should be brought to
confusion.

And all the people that go by this City, Verse. 8. 9.
shall speak one to another. etc. Before time God had beautified the City of
Jerusalem with his marvelous benefits, so that it was spoken of as a wonder
or Miracle among strange Nations how mightily God did maintain and defend
them: In so much that very strangers and Heathen persons did understand,
that it was not their own strength or Policy that did preserve them so, but
the mighty and marvelous Power of their Lord and God. Therefore, when they
should now see the same City, that was so Famous and had in so great price,
to be utterly destroyed, in their Common Talking of the same, the one should
answer the other, that the cause of this desolation was, For that they had
broken the Covenant of their Lord. In which point the obstinate Dullness of
the Jews is very much noted, seeing that foreign Nations, Heathen, and
Strangers from God, should so easily conceive the cause of their Destruction,
when as they themselves which had been so accustomed to the works of God,
would not understand it, no not at the telling and declaration of the
Prophets.

Mourn not over the dead, Verse. 10. etc.
and be not woe for them, but be sorry. etc. When People do flee from their
enemies into any place because they are not hable to Resist them, they
commonly do hope for a Better day and for a time of Return into their
country, and an End of the misery, and therefore do they abhor Death more
than banishment or any other trouble. But the Prophet in this place
signifies, that the Misery of the banished Persons led away Captive should
be so great, and so without hope to see their Country again, that any
Death might Justly seem more tolerable: and therefore says he, Mourn not
over the dead, Eze. 24. d. 17
because they seem to be in better case than such as be alive. And this does he
confirm by the example of the kings themselves. Ioakim called also Eliakim
King of Judah, was taken Prisoner by the Babilonians, and Dying by the way, with
great Contempt, was left without Burial, as afterward is declared more
largely: and yet might he seem to be in good case in comparion of Ioakim,
named also Iechonias, and here called Sellum, Who was led Captive and dyed in
banishment, and never returned into his Country. Some do interpret this
place, and this grievous Threatening, of Sedechias, to whom it may very well
in some respect agree. When the text says, that Sellum was The son of
Josias, it is not strange in the Hebrewe tongue, by the Son to understand
the Nephewe or other Successor of the same line. Mar. 12. d. 35. Math. 1. a. 1.
So Christ is called The son of David, as lineallie descending from David.

Woe worth him, Verse. 14.
that builds his house with unrighteousness. etc. From this place unto
the.20. verse the Prophet enueigheth bitterly against King Ioakim, called also
Eliakim, who may seem to have been a Glorious Proud and Pompous Prince, not
contented to dwell in such houses and Palaices as his predecessors had used,
but Enlarged the same, and builded them far more Gorgeously with all manner
of painting and gaye furniture: and that with the grievous Injury and
Oppression of his Subjects, pilling them of their Wages and just reward of
their Labor, which thing here God by his Prophet sharply reproves. To
dwell in fair houses is not, of it self, Abac. 2. c. 12 Genesis 11. a. 4.
evil, but because the building of Sumptuous places commonly is joined with *
Pride and Vaineglorie, and with the Oppression of the poor: Therefore God
declares himself in this place and sundry other, so much to myslike it, and
especially when Princes or other Rich persons do it with such Delight, Abdi.
1. a. 4.
as though they esteemed their greatest Felicity to be therein.

Which may seem to be noted in these words, Think thou to reign now that
thou have enclosed thy self in Cedar. Verse. 15.
etc. As if he had said, Now that thou haste builded to thyselfe goodly and
sumptuous houses with Cedar (...), thou think thy self a Notable and worthy
Prince, and that thy gay Buyldings and pompous doings shall be thy chief
Glory, and thy Stay in thy kingdom: but they shall be no help unto thee at all,
Haba. 2. c. 1^
but rather the hastening of thy overthrow, because the Cry and Lame^tation of
those Poor me^ that thou have oppressed Iniurioulsly to that end, does ring
in mine ears, and calls continually for punishment. Verse. 17.
The means to prosper in thy Kingdom, is not by setting up of Sumptuous
buildings, but in the Fear of my Name to deal with Equity and Righteousness,
and to help the Poor oppressed, 2. pa. 35. d. 25 4. Re. 23. e. 25
as thy * father Josias did before thee, who was a Good and a godly Prince.
But thou clean (...), art given over to Covetousness, Oppression, cruelty,
and shedding of Innocent blood. Therefore thy Captivity by the King of
Babylon, and thy miserable ^nde must of Necessity come upon thee.

And therefore thus says the Lord against Joakim the son of Josias. Verse.
18.
etc. The Prophet signifies by the Word of the Lord, and from his own mouth,
that Ioak^m, who in his Life time provided so Sumptuous Palaces to dwell in, in
reward of his Oppression and Cruelty, at his death should not only want that
Solemnity of Burial and mourning, which commonly Princes and Great personages
have, Verse. 19.
but also should be cast out like an Ass, or other Contemptible beast without
Burial at al, and lie Rotting upon the face of the Earth, to be Meat for the
Birds of the Air.

A notable example may this be to All them, which with Contempt of gods word,
and the Injury of their Subjects and Tena^ts set their chief delight in
gorgious Buildings and po^pous works.

Climb up the hill of Libanus, Verse. 10.
O thou daughter of Sion, lift up thy voice etc. Hieremie perceiving the Jews
to be settled in desperate Obstinacy, in this verse does scornfully deride y^
vain Trust, which in time of their Distress they had in their forain Friends,
to who^ they were all^ed, (...), the Egyptians, and other Borderers. And to
let them Understand, that all that Hope was to no Purpose, in way of Derision,
as I have said, he wills them under the Name of Sion, to ^limbe up to Mount
Libanus, on the one side, and to the hill of Basan, on the other, and to cry
out with Loud voice for Succor, that they might be heard the Further. For all
their Lovers and Friends should Forsake them, and be Destroyed themselves
before they could come to Help them. The Egyptians as Josephus writes, Li.
Ant. 10. cap. 10.
coming to Raise the siege of the Babylonians, at Jerusalem were Discomfited
and overthrown, that they could not help them: and therefore the Army of the
Babylonians returning to Jerusalem, took and spoiled the City, and Led away
the King and all the residue Captive.

I have declared this unto you (says Hieremie to y^ Jews, Verse. 2^.
under the Name of y^ Daughter of Sion) when ye were in Prosperity, but your
perpetual manner has been, never to Hearken to the Voice of the Lord, but way
wardly to Contemn it. Verse. 22.
Therefore your Princes and peers, that be as your Guydes and Leaders, and
your Capitaines and ioylie men that you Delighte and put your Trust in,
shall be Lightly, as it were with a Whirlewynde Driven away in Captivity,
and your selves brought to shame and Confusion, because of your Obstinate
wickedness. Verse. 23.
You think your self in great Honor and Felicity, and Glory much in
that ye dwell in houses Gorgiously Seeled with Ceders of Libanus, but all that
your Gayness shall be little regarded in the time of your Sorrow, when the
Violence of the enemy shall Suddenly come upon you at the time ye least think
of it, even as the throws of a Woman labouryng with child.

As truly as Jliue, Verse. 24. 25. 26. 27.
says the Lord, though Iechonias the son of Ioakim. etc. The manner of the
Prophets is almost continually to utter their sayings in the Person of God,
Esai. 1. c. 10. Esai. 24. a. 3. Esa. 1. e. 20. Esai. 58. d. 14
and oftentimes to * repeat that it is the word of the Lord, and that the
Mouth of the Lord has spoken it, to the intent that the people might be well
Assured, that it was no vain speech that they uttered, but the certain Will
and determinate Purpose of God. And therefore if they would shun the danger
thereof, that they ought to give credit to it, and Believe it.

Of all other, Princes do most hardely Beleuethe declaration of Adversity to
come unto them, because they have commonly the greatest worldly Helps to
deliver them.

Wherefore that Iechonias, otherwise called Ioakim the son of Ioakim, might
not doubt of that he here speaks, he vttreth it in the Person of God, and
confirms it with an oath.

That although he sit ^^on the holy Throne of David, yet he should be a
miserable Captive, yea, God shows himself so to detest that king for the
Contempt of his Word, that though he were as straightly joined to him as a
Signet on his right hand, yet he would pluck him of, and cast him into the
hands of his Enemies, that seek his life. And that both He and his Mother that
bare him, and his Servants with all other that were Chief about him, should be led
Captive into a Strange la^d, and there Die in great misery.

O thou Earth, Verse. 29. 30.
earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord. etc. For So Much as the Jews had
so great confidence in the Promise that was made to David, for the continuance
of his posterity in his seat, So long as the Sun and Moon endured, Psalm.
89. f. 36
as neither Prince nor People could in any case be brought to Believe the
Threatenings of God to the contrary: therefore the Prophet here in earnest manner,
because the People were so Obstinate, turns his Speech to the Earth, and
openly denounces, that he was Willed by God himself to set up this Prophecy
in writing upon the doors of the Temple, to the knowledge of all men, that
Iechonias should not Prosper in his Issue, nor have any child That should be so
happy to sit on the seat of David, and bear rule after him. And yet may not
this seem repugnante to the prophecy of Jacob, Ge. 49. b. 10.
That the scepter should not be taken from Judah, and a Lawgiuer from betvveene
his feet until Silo came. etc. For although the Jews after this Iechonias,
had no king in Succession, either unto the time of the Captivity or after,
which reigned among them with such Liberty and Majesty, as the kings of
Judah before had Done: yet had they a Government, by which they had Ruled both
their Common weal, and the External form of Religion, according to the Law
of Moses, until the very coming of our Savior Christ, under the Romans,
by who^ even that mean Liberty which they had to that Time, was taken away,
and the Prophecy of Jacob fulfilled, as well in the Loss of their
government, as in the coming of Messiah, that should be the Expectation of
the Gentiles.

The.xv. Sunday after Trinity at Morning prayer.
Hieremie. 35. THe words which the Lord spoke unto Hieremie in 2. Re. 10. e.
23
and bring them to the house of the Lord, into some commodious place, and give
them wine to drink.

3 Then took I Iazaniah the son of Hieremie, the son of Habaziniah, and his
brethren, and all his sons, and the whole household of the Rechabites.

4 And brought them into the house of the Lord, into the closet of the children
of Hanan the son of Iegedaliah, the man of God, which was by the closet of
the Princes, that is above the closet of Maasiah the son of Sellum, which is
the treasurer. 5 And before the sons of the kindred of the Rechabites, I set
pottes full of wine, and cups, and said unto them, Drink wine: 6 But they
said, We will drink no wine: for Ionadab the son of Rechab our father
commanded us, saying: Ye and your sons shall never drink wine, Jere. 29. a.
5.
build houses, sow no seed, plant no vines. 7 Yea ye shall have no
vineyards: but for all your Jere. 18. b. 11. Jere. 25. a. 5.
15 Yea I have sent my servants all the Prophets unto you, I rose up early and
sent you word, saying: O turn you now every man from his wicked way, amend
your lives, and go not after strange gods to woorshippe them, that ye may
continue in the land which I have given unto you and your fathers: but ye
would neither hear me, nor follow me.

16 The children of Ionadab Rechabs son, have steadfastly kept their fathers
commandment that he gave them: but this people is not obedient unto me.

Pro. 1. c. 28. Esai. 45. b. Jere. 7. b. 13.
all the trouble that I have devised against them: For I have spoken unto them,
but they would not follow, I have called unto them, nevertheless they would
give me no answer.

18 Jeremy also spoke unto the household of the Rechabites, Thus says the
lord of hoastes the God of Israel: Forasmuch as ye have obeyed the
commandment of Ionadab your father, and kept all his precepts, and done
according to all that he has bidden:

19 Therefore thus says the Lord of hoastes, Jer. 33 c. 17.
the God of Israel, Ionadab the son of Rechab shall not fail, but have one
out of his stock to stand always before me.

The Exposition upon the.xxxv. Chapter of Hieremie.
The words which the Lord spoke unto Hieremie, Verse. 1. 2. etc.
in the reign of. etc. GOD willing to confound the obstinate Disobedience of
his people unto his Law, and to declare how inexcusable they were, In this
Chapter wills the Prophet, to their reproach and shame, to lay before them
the example of the Rechabites Constantly Obeying the commandment and order of
their Ancesters, though they were but Mortal men, without breach, for the
space of.300. years. The Rechabites are thought to have been the Posterity
either of Iethro, or of * Hobab, Judi. 4. b. 11. Exo. 18. b. 9.
who * followed Moses and the Israelites, through the Wilderness into the
Land of Chanaan, and were promised to have had an heritage with the Children
of Israel in that land, but it appears they had not. For they were dispersed
in sundry Tribes, and some of them dwelled even among the Heathen, and yet
were they co^monlie diligent Obseruers of the Law, and men that Feared God.

Of this stock came Ionadab the son of Rechab, who lived in the time of Iehu
and may seem to have been of great credit and authority. For it was he that
Iehu took by the * hand into his Chariot when he was going in great zeal to
destroy Achab his house, 4. re. 10. d. 15.
for the Wickedness that he wrought against the Lord.

This Ionadab for certain considerations, which after shall be noted, gave in
charge to his children, that they and their Posterity for ever should forbear
the Drinking of Wine, the Tilling of the Earth, the keeping of Vines, and
dwelling in any Builded houses, but only to use for their abiding Tents and
Bouthes. This order and commandment, as I have said, the Posterity of the
Rechabites kept very diligently from the time of Ionadab their father or
Auncestour, unto this time of Hieremie, which was.300 years.

The occasion that God took at this time, was, that these Rechabites, which
hitherto had not dwelt in any Towns and Cities, but in Tents and Bouthes in
the fields, through the great Spoil and waste that Nabuchodonosor and the
Chaldees did make in all the Country of Jury, were forced, for their salftie,
to come and dwell in Jerusalem in such places, as they might get. And yet
did they observe all the other parts of Ionadabs commandment, although by
mere necessity they were driven, at this season to dwell in houses.

Wherefore, Jeremy, by the commandment of God, in such sort, as is declared
in this chapter, calls the Rechabites together, Verse. 4. 5.
being many in number, unto a place by the Temple which was notorious, and
where things done could not be kept close, but must needs be spredde by fame
both through the whole City and Country. For it is not to be thought that
Hieremie did it secretly or in close manner. For such a multitude could not be
called to such a place without admiration and great expectacion of some
notable thing to follow. Hieremie therefore in the place here discribed, in
solemn manner sets pottes of Wine before them, and wills them to Drink.
Verse. 6. 7.
But they refuse so to do, alleging for their excuse their Obedience to the
order and commandment of their Auncestor and forefather Ionadab, who had
given them charge to observe those things, which are euidente in the Text.

Here may seem to be some doubts Justly moved. First, whether the
Rechabites did offend or no in refusing to Drink Wine, at the bidding of the
Prophet of God. Therein they might seem to set more by a tradition of their
fathers, than by the appointment of God uttered by the Prophet. But we read
not, that the Prophet Hieremie did say unto them, that it was Gods will and
commandment, that they should Drink Wine: but it seemed to them a bidding
of the Prophet simply, and uttered to them without the Authority of Gods
name.

And yet in their refusing thereof, they undoubtedly did excuse themselves with
great modesty: so that if the Prophet had pressed Gods commandment upon
them, it may be thought they would have yielded, as they did to dwell in houses
in Jerusalem, when they could not salfely have place abroad to use their
Tents.

Secondly if may be doubted whether Ionadab did well in bidding them to
forbear Wine, or not to use Tillage, not to plant Vines, or to dwell in
houses. For therein seems to be some great Superstition to forbid the people
of God to use his Creatures, and those trades of Life that have their Just
comendatio^ in the Scriptures, and were used by good and Godly men. And
therefore this place is alleged of some for the maintenance of Monastical
vows and such like Observations of men's Traditions even with burden of
Conscience and restrainte of Christian Liberty.

Surely, it is not to be thought, that Ionadab did mean to Institute any new
worship of God, or to lay any burden of Holiness or Religion upon their
Consciences in the forbidding of these things, but only the observation of a
Politic means, whereby they might be traded to a more Moderate life, and
easier Contempt of the world. For it is to be thought that Ionadab (who
joined himself to Iehu in the punishment of the wicked house of Achab) had
great fear of God, and a desire to have his Law and true Worship restored
and maintained. And because he saw that Sensuality, Loosnesse of life, and
glory of the world, were the chiefest Causes, that did carry the Israelites
from the Obedience of God, fearing some great Plague and punishment to follow
for the same, Deu. 8. d. 20. Deu. 11. d. 28. Jere. 42. d. 22
according to the * Threatenings of the law, so much as might be, to prevent
the same Inconvenience, in his flock or kindred, He enjoined them to forbear
Wine, whereof ryseth Drunkenness and Wanton lust, and not to use any other
trade of life, tha^ Pasturing or keeping of Cattaile, wherein they were always
brought up, from their first fathers.

Ionadab thought that kind of life to be best, whereunto himself had been
accustomed. He saw what Inco^ueniences Immoderate use of Wine did bring, all
which they shun that Forbear it. And they have their minds Freer that are not
Tied to Tillage and husbanding of Vineyardes.

And if God did bring any Plague upon their Country for the Sins of the
People, their loss should be the less, and they might more easily shift for
themselves. But, howsoever it was in Ionadab, we read not here, that God does
praise that ordinance, but only seems to like the Obedience of the Rechabites,
and takes the same for an Example to reprove the Jews for their Disobedience
and contempt of his holy Laws and ordinances: being not their Earthly father
but the everliving Lord and God.

Then came the word of the Lord to Hieremie saying. Verse. 12. etc.
etc. In these verses follows the applying of this example and comparison of
the Rechabites. In which application, these things are to be noted, First the
comparison between a mortal man and Ionadab, a mortal and frail Creature
prevailed so much with his posterity, whom he did never greatly benefit: how
much more Justly should the Majesty and Eternal Power of God in giving of
his Law, have been esteemed among his own people, upon whom he had bestowed
so many and so great blessings? Secondly, Ionadab gave his Commandment
diligent and careful sending of God himself. And that in so earnest manner as
possibly could be devised, and yet would they never either continue in his
obedience, or easily return unto his true worship, when they were once fallen
from it. 3
Thirdly, those things which God required of the Jews, were not of like
Severity and rigor, as the commandments of Ionadab to his posterity. For
he left unto them the use of Tillage, Inhabitinge of houses, Drinkinge of
Wine, Planting of vines, and all such other like things that might be to their
comfort in the world, and only required that they would not run after the
worshipping of other Gods. And yet would they not therein obey him, nor yet
reclaim themselves, when they were reproved, whereas the Rechabites did not
only keep themselves in more Obedience of the Law of God, than they did, but
also tied themselves to the streicte and rigorous observation of the orders
before mentioned, only in reverence of Ionadab their Ancester and Forefather,
by whom they were given.

And therefore thus says the Lord of hosts, Verse. 17.
the God of Israel, behold. etc. Now that God by the example of the
Rechabites had confounded the disobedience of his People, and showed, that they
have nothing to lay for their excuse, he adds what punishment shall come
upon them for it.

For So Much, says he, as I have often sent my Prophets unto you to call you to
repentance, and to bring you home again into the right way, and yet you will
not in any wise hear them: I will speak no more unto you in way of
exhortation, but I will pronounce terrible Sentence against you, and most
earnestly assure you, that those punishments, that I have devised, without
fail shall come upon you.

Here is to be noted, that when men Obstinately refuse the comfortable word
of God sent unto them in the way of instruction and teaching, they shall after
hear and feel his Dreadful word of Threatening just punishment to come upon
them for their Disobedience and contempt.

Hieremie also spoke unto the household of the Rechabites, Verse. 18. 19.
thus says. etc. After that he has pronounced punishment against the Jews,
for their Contempt of Gods holy will: he declares also, that God of his
goodness according to his Promise anexed to the fifte commandment, would
reward the obedience and Reverence that the Rechabites did show toward their
Father Ionadab, and that he would so prosper their stock, as They should never
fail of one to stand before him, that is, which should be acceptable unto
him. For it cannot be interpreted that they should stand before God in the
Ministration of the Temple, for that was appointed to the Priests and Levites
only. As touching that the Patrons of superstition allege this place for the
Maintenance of obedience to men's traditions in the Church, it is very unfit.
For the Rechabites, as is said before, were not tied to this observation, with
opinion of Holiness, or as a worshipping of God, as men were with the
traditions of the Church of Rome, but observed those things as Politic orders
of life, with Reverence of their Ancesters, by whom they were enjoined.

The.15. Sunday after Trinity at Evening prayer.
Jeremy. Cap. 36. IN the fourth year of Ioakim the son of Josias the king

2 Take a book, Jere. 30. d. 2.
and write therein all the words that I have spoken to thee against Israel,
against Judah, and against all the people, from the time that I began to speak
unto thee in the reign of Josias, unto this day.

3 That when the house of Judah hears of ye plague which I have devised for
them, they may peradventure turn every man from his wicked way, that I may
forgive their offenses and sins.

4 Then did Jeremy call Baruch the son of Neriah, and Baruch wrote in the
book at the mouth of Jeremy all the words of the Lord which he had spoken
unto him. Jere. 45. a. 1.


5 And Jeremy commanded Baruch, saying, I am in prison, so that I may not
come into the house of the Lord.

6 Therefore go thou thither, and read the Book that (namely) the words of
the Lord, and read them in the Lords house, upon the fasting day, that the
people, whole Judah, and all they that come out of the cities may hear.

7 Peradventure they will pray meekely before the face of the Lord, and turn
every one from his wicked way: for great is the wrath and displeasure that the
Lord has taken against this people.

8 So Baruch the son of Neriah did according to all that Hieremie the Prophet
commanded him, reading the words of the Lord out of the book in the Lords
house.

9 And this was done in the fifth year of Iehoakim the son of Josias king of
Judah, Jere. 26. a. 2.
in the nynth month, when it was commanded that all the people of Jerusalem
should fast before the Lord, and they also that were come from the cities of
Judah unto Jerusalem.

10 Then read Baruch the words of Hieremie out of the book within the house
of the Lord, out of the treasury of Gamariah the son of Saphan the scribe,
which is beside the higher loft of the new door of the Lords house, that all the people might hear. 11 Now when Micheas the son of Gamariah the son of
Saphan, hard all the words of the Lord out of the book. 12 He went down to the
kings palace into the scribes chamber, for there all the Princes were set,
Elisama the scribe, Dalaiah the son of Semei, Elnathan the son of Achbor,
Gamariah the son of Saphan, Zedekias the son of Hananias, with all the
princes. 13 And Micheas told them all the words that he heard Baruch read
out of the book before the people.

14 Then all the princes sent Iehudi the son of Nathaniah, 15 And they said
unto him, Sit down and read the book, that we may hear also. So Baruch
read, that they might hear. 16 Now when they had heard all the words, they
were abashed one upon an other, and said unto Baruch: We will certify the
king of all these words.

17 And they examined Baruch, saying: Tell us, how did thou write all these
words out of his mouth?

18 Then Baruch answered them: He spoke al these words unto me with his
mouth, and I wrote them in y^ book.

19 Then said the princes unto Baruch, Go thy way, hyde thee with Hieremie,
so that no man know where ye be

20 And they went in to the king to the Court (but they kept the book in the
chamber of Elizama the scribe, and told the king all the words that he might
hear. 21 So the King

22 Now the king sat in the winter house (for it was in the ninthe month)
and there was a fire before him.

23 And when Iehudi had red three or four leaves thereof, he cut the book in
pieces with a penknife, and cast it into the fire upon the harth, until the
book was all brent in the fire upon the harth. 1. Mac. 3. c.
24 Yet no man was abashed thereof, nor rent his clothes, neither the king
himself, nor his servants, though they heard all these words. 25 Nevertheless
Elnathan, Dalaiah, and Gamariah besought the king that he would not burn the
book: notwithstanding the king would not hear them, 26 But commanded Ierahmel
the son of Amelech, Saraiah the son of Ezriel, and Selemiah the son of
Abdeel, to lay hands upon Baruch the scribe, and upon Jeremy the Prophet: but
the Lord kept them out of sight. 27 Now after that the king had brent the
Book, and the sermons which Baruch wrote at the mouth of Hieremie, the word of
the Lord came unto Hieremie, saying:

that were written in the first book which Iehoakim the king of Judah has
brent. 29 And tell Iehoakim ye king of Judah, thus says the Lord: Thou have
brent the Book, and thoughtest within thy self: Why haste thou written
therein, that the king of Babylon shall come and make this land wast, so that he
shall make both people and cattle to be out of it? 2. Reg. 24. b. Jere. 22. c.
30 Therefore thus the Lord says of Iehoakim the king of Judah: There shall none
of his generation sit upon the throne of David, his dead coarse shall be
cast out, that the heat of the day, and the frost of the night may come upon
him. 31 And I will visit the wickedness of him, of his seed, and of his
servants: Moreover all the evil that I have promised them, though they heard
me not, will I bring upon them, upon the inhabiters of Jerusalem, and upon all
Judah. 32 Then took Hieremie an other book and gave it Baruch the scribe the
son of Neriah, which wrote therein out of the mouth of Hieremie, all the
sermons that were in the first book, which Iehoakim the king of Judah did
burn: and there were added unto them many more Sermons, like unto the former.

The Exposition upon the.xxxvj. Chapter of Hieremie.
In the fourth year of Iehoakim, Verse. 1. 2. 3.
the son of Josias the king of Judah. etc. IN this chapter is described a
notable history, and very profitable to be considered, how God appointed
Hieremie to put in Writing all the Sermons and Prophecies that from the
beginning he had vttred by his mouth against Israel and Judah, and how Hieremie
performed the same by his minister or Secretary Baruch, whom he caused also to
Read the same openly in the Temple, and what thereof followed, before the king
himself and all the Nobles and Counselors.

The Jews oftentimes had heard the word of God at the mouth of Hieremie, and
yet notwithstanding, did obstinately Contemn and reject the same. Wherefore god
now wills him to put the sum of all in Writing, that either they might be
therewith somewhat more moved to embrace the same, and to Turn to the true
worshipping of God: or else that his words might remain in Writing, Jo. 12.
f. 48.
as * witnesses against their obstinate, and Indurate hearts, which by no
calling or teaching could be brought to Relent. By this example we may
learn the great Benefit and commodity of Writing, and that the People of
God may be well taught, not only by a man's own Speech, but also by Reading of
the Good and godly Exhortatio^s of other unto them. Those things that are
uttered by mouth only, may soon slip out of memory, and be forgotten, or not
be well understood at the first, But when they remain in Writing, they may be
read again, and better weighed and considered at leisure, and so will both
stick more Surely in remembrance, and be the more easily understood.

Seeing therefore the Prophet by speaking, had labored in vain, with that
waywarde People the space of Jere. 25. a. 3.
.23. years, as appears cap. 25. of the Prophet, God now wills him to Write
the Prophecies which he had Uttered, to the end they might have no Excuse, nor
want any external means, whereby they might come to the understanding of his
will, Jere. 26. a. 3. Ezec. 2. b. 7.
and thereby turn unto him, that he might take mercy of them: or else that y^
their obstinate Disobedience both of the King, the Counselors, and the whole
People might be made thereby more notorious and open to the world.

Then did Hieremie call Baruch, Verse. 4. 5. etc.
the son of Neriah, and Baruch. etc. The ready Willingness of Baruch is
here to be observed, who was not only Contented to Write the thing at the
Mouth of Hieremie, but also at his Appointment openly to Read it in the face
of all the People, whereof in all likelihood of Reason, it must needs have been, that great Displeasure and danger should have come unto him. But to Further
the will of God, he did not stick to hazard himself to all Perils of the
world. Neither may we think, that Hieremie Cu^ningly shifted the danger hereof
from himself to Baruch. For he could not procure greater Misliking by this
publishing of things in Writing, than he had done by Speaking of the same to
their faces. It may be, that for some causes and respects he was let and
stayed by the Spirit of God, that he might not do it himself, for so I judge
this place to be understood. Now Hieremie should be Let by Imprisonement, I
do not well conceive, seeing verse. 19. of this same chap. Baruch is willed by
the Princes, That he and Hieremie should hide themselves, and not be known
where they were. And also in the.26. verse, the king wills certain to lay
hand on Baruch and Hieremie, but that The Lord kept them out of sight. Which
commandment and manner of Speaking, should not have been used, if Hieremie had been in prison before.

And therefore that which some Translaters interpret Clausus sum, that is, I am
in prison, or shut up, other do expound, Detentus or impeditus sum, that is,
I am stayed or let, meaning, by the Spirit of God: as we read that Paul
was Let and stayed from going to Bithinia. Act. 16. a. 7


In the seventh Verse Hieremie notes the cause why he willed Baruch to Read
his Sermons unto the people, that is, if it were possible, that they might be
moved to Turn from their Wicked ways, and humble themselves in Prayer before
the face of the Lord, thereby to turn away his heavy Wrath and displeasure from
them.

True Prayer is always joined with Faith and hu^blenes. Faith does lift up our
minds to heaven, and makes our Prayer to Ascend unto the Lord, Fear and
reverence which is joined with faith, because of ye sense of our unworthiness,
does move us to Humble and debase our selves in the sight of God, and to ^lee
only to his Mercy, and especially, when he declares Signs of his terrible
Wrath toward us, as he did at this time by the Prophet to his People. If God
did but Lightely threaten us, we should not Contemn it, but be Greatly moved
therewith: and much more when he shows his Displeasure so grievous, as we may
Justly look for Utter confusion.

So Baruch the son of Neriah did according to all that Hieremie. Verse. 8. 9.
10
etc. He describes now the ready Obedience of Baruch, and the manner of his
doing, noting the circumstances, at what Time, in what Place, and before Whom
it was done. It was done the fifth year and ninth month of Ioakims Reign: at
that time that the king according to the customable manner of the Jews in time
of danger, had commanded a solemn and Public fast, and Prayer to be made
unto the Lord, to turn away the Danger that they were in by Nabuchodonosor and
the Chaldeis at their first Invasion that was made in his Reign, and is
mentioned.4. Reg. 24. 4. Re. 24. a. 1
This manner is very good, in time of Danger to proclaim public Prayer and
Fasting withal, that we may by that Testimony declare the true Sorrow of our
hearts, conceived because of the displeasure of God toward us. But we are
taught by this place, that External Prayer and Fasting done for a Form only,
and not with earnest Repentance and true Faith to God, does not at all move
gods mercy toward us, but rather ince^seth his displeasure, and Hasteneth his
heavy judgment, because of our Hypocrisy and dissimulation. How unpleasant
such Fasting is to God, ye may read Esaie 58. Esai. 58. b. 5. Joel. 2. c. 13.
and what the true Fast is, ye may learn there also, and Ioell. 2. Such a
time Hieremie had chosen, very fit for the publishing of the Thretnings of God
against them, that they might be Moved not only to Pray, but also, as he
says, To pray meekely before the face of the Lord.

Baruch did read these Prophecies of Hieremie in a notable place of the Temple
here described, verse. 10. where the Greatest assembly of the People was, and
where he might be best heard. His Audience were not one or two, but the
Whole number of the People, as well of the City, as also of the Country,
gathered together at that time: whereby his doing was the more Notable, and
further Known and Published.

Now when Micheas the Son of Gamariah had heard all. Verse. 11. etc
etc. It is not here expressed of what mind or Purpose this Micheas did make so
great Speed to declare the doing of Baruch unto the Nobles and Counselors.
If he did it as being stricken with Admiration and Terror of those things
that he did hear, as it may be thought he did, (because he was the son of
Gamariah, who showed himself to have the Fear of God, in persuading the King
not to Burn the Book,) then his doing was worthy great commendation. But if
he did it to purchase Blame unto the Prophet, or to get Favor of the
Counsailers, it was that, which always does follow the Prophets and Preachers
of almighty God in doing of his message: Esai. 53. a. 1. Romans 10. c. 16 Jo.
12. f. 38. Jo. 7. b. 12.
that is that * All do not hear them fruitfullie and to good purpose, but
Some are ready to deprave their doings and sayings, and by malicious
Accusations to work the^ trouble and danger. But howsoever it was with
Micheas, it was not done without the assured providence of God, that the
Prince and Nobles might know of it, and not pretend ignorance. Where by ye
way this also is to be Noted, that while the multitude and people were at the
common appointed Prayer in the house of God, the Nobles, very v^seasonablie,
were in the Counsel house consulting by like what might be best to do. The
care of Praying to God should have touched them as well as the people, and
afterward taken opportunity to have met in counsel.

Then all the Princes sent Iehudi the son of Nathaniah. Verse. 14. 15.
etc. It may appear that the Princes did not neglect the report of this
matter, as being stricken with fear of Danger hanging over them, and therefore
with speed they sent a Messenger, as may appear of some Name and credit, to
bring Baruch unto them ^^ho although he migh^e look for nothing but
Imprisonment and Danger of life, yet was he willing and ready to go Before
them, and there in their hearing, Read the same things that he had openly
declared unto the People.

Now when they had heard all the words, Verse. 16. etc.
they were abashed. etc. The Majesty of Gods words and Threatenings in the
Prophecies of Hieremie, struck a Fear and terror into the hearts of the
Princes, so that as men astonished, they looked one upon the other. But yet there
appeared great want of True repentance and right fear of Gods wrath. For if
that had been in them, surely they would have done as Josias* did at the
readyng of the Book of the law of God. 4. Re. 22. b. 11
2. Reg. 22. But the affection of these Noble men seemed, in comparison thereof
to be Fainte and cold. They questioned with Baruch, how he was hable to write
those things, and he answered simply, that Hieremie spoke them and he wrate
them at his mouth. Whereby they might understand that it was not done by the
curious Devise and Industry of man, nor laid up together in writing as matters
Curiously penned: But by the strength of ye Spirit of God, which brought those
things fresh in remembrance to Hieremie, that he in speech had uttered long
before. With which consideration, and the weighte of those things that were
read, they being Somewhat moved, said they would Enfourme ye king of all that
was done, and know his pleasure. But because they suspected his Fury and
cruelty, they willed Baruch and Hieremie to Hide themselves out of the way,
that no man might know where they were.

And they went in to the King to the Court, Verse. 20. etc.
but they kept the book. etc. The Princes might seem to be touched with some
Fear of God, but yet not so greatly, but that they feared the Prince more,
and especially the multitude of them. And therefore did they put the matter so
unto him, that they would not do otherwise than stood with his Pleasure. Some
of them did more Freelye deal with the King, as Elnathan, Dalaiah, and
Gamariah, and in his most vehement rage with some Danger of their own state
and lives persuaded and entreated him not to Burn the book. But nothing could
stay his Fury, but that before he had heard it read through, eue^ in
Contempt of God and of his word and Threatenings, he out it in pieces and cast
it in the fire. When God, in the words of his Prophet, did so terribly
Thunder in ye ears of the king, he should have been Greatly moved therewith, 3.
Re. 21. g. 27 2. pa. 34. d. 19
and have * Rent and tore his garments in token of the inward fear and Sorrow
of his heart, knowing most assured Danger to hang over both him and his
kingdom. But after the manner of Indurate hearts, as a furious beast he Rages
eue^ against God himself, and thinks by Fire, as it were, to Consume his
Threatenings. If he thought it to be the doing of poor Hieremie only, why did
he make so great account of the matter, and show himself so much grieved
therewith, seeing he knew, that so contemptible a person, as he judged him to
be, could not of himself work hurt to him, or to his realm? If his
conscience, trembling at the matter, did tell him, that the Authority of God
was in those words, why did he so furiously storm at the thing, as though
he had been hable by his rage to have Discountenanced the wrath of God toward
him and his people? Jere. 38. a. 4. 1. Re. 22. c. 13. Luc. 13. c. 14. 3. reg
22. b. 8.
But cruel Hipocrites have ever some * pretenses of reason to bolster up their
obstinacy against God and his Prophets, and therefore caused he Hieremie and
Baruch to be sent for, if God had not hyd them, and by his providence kept
them from his fury and wicked purpose. For God uses to preserve his
Messengers from danger and peril, even maugre the heads of all his Enemies
until their full and appointed time be come, that his Name may be glorified,
and his Truth enlarged by their Death.

Now after the King had burnte the book, Verse. 27. etc.
and the sermons which. etc. The wicked persecuters think by cruelty and
violence to Suppress and Extinguishe the word of God and his truth, but by
his providence it rises more Strongly against them to their greater confusion.
Ioakim thought by casting the Book of Hieremies Prophecies into the fire, he
had, as it were, cut of the hand of God, and delivered himself and his
kingdom from those plagues, that wear denounced by those * Seditious and
Factious men, 3. reg. 18. c. 17
as he took them, Hieremie and Baruch. But behold, that he and all his, might
understand that he struggled in vain, and strove against the stream, the
providence of God publishes another book containing not only the same
matter, but also an euidente declaration of Gods just Judgment and sharp
punishment to come upon that wicked King and his stock, that is, that his own
dead Corpse should be cast forth contemptuously without Burial, Jere.
22. e. 19.
as is said in the former Chapter, and that none of his issue and generation
in right descente should sit any time in the throne of David after him. For
Iechonias his Son reigned only three months, and was led away Captive,
so that he might scantly seem to have reigned: and Sedechias was his Uncle and
was set up in despite of him and his Son Iechonias or Ioakim after who^ they
had no King of that direct live but Zorobabel until the coming of the
Messiah Christ Jesus, Esai. 11. a. 1. Act. 13. d. 23.
who was The young branche that sprang a fresh out of the old worn stock of
Iessie as out of a root that had not flourished in many years before. Yea,
and he assures both the King and al his people, though they did never so
contemptuously refuse to hearken to his word, that he would visit their
wickedness, and bring upon them all those evils that he has promised. In like
manner God in all ages deals with the persecuters of his word and holy
Scriptures, and never more than in these latter days. The enemies of the
Gospel have thought to suppress Gods truth by burning the godly writings of
learned men: and by destroying the Preachers and professors of the same with
fire, and with the sword, shedding their blood most cruelly. But the
providence of God raises other even of the ashes of them, that do as
constantly teach and defend his truth even to the faces of them, and maugre
their hearts publishe the Gospel in writing more largely tha^ ever it was
before. And so will it be, until God bring their just deserved plagues upon
their heads, though they in the mean time to the heaping of his greater wrath
upon them, in furious rage kill and s^ea some of his Saints which he has
appointed that way to glorify his name.

The.16. Sunday after Trinity at Morning prayer.
Ezechiel. Cap. 2.

1. And the spirit (...) when he had spoken unto me, and set me upon my feet,
so that I heard him that spoke unto me. 3 And he said unto me, Thou son of
man, I send thee to the Children of Israel, to a rebellious people which have
rebelled against me, both they and their forefathers have wickedly behaved
themselves against me, even unto this very day. 4 For they are children of a
hard face and stiff heart, I do send thee unto them, and thou shalt say
unto them, Thus says the Lord God.

5 And whether they will hear or refuse (for they are a rebellious house) yet
they may know that there has been a Prophet among them. 6 And thou son of
man fear the^ not, neither be afraid of their words, for briers and thorns
are with thee, and thou do dwell among scorpions: fear not their words,
nor be abashed at their looks, for they are a rebellious house. 7 And thou
shall speak my words unto

9 And I looked, and behold a hand was sent unto me, and lo, in it was a roll
of a book. 10 And he opened it before me, and it was written within and
without, and there was written therein lamentations, and mourning and woe.

The Exposition upon the.ij. Chapter of Ezechiel.
And then said he unto me, Verse. 1. 2.
stand up upon thy feet (O thou son of man). etc. IN the first Chapter of
this Prophet in a vision was declared what He was, and of how great
authority that called Ezechiel, that is, the Omnipotente and everliving God,
and the Lord of Hoastes: unto whose dominion all Creatures are subject, and
by him are governed and maintained.

Now the Prophet in this place has, as it were, his Commission delivered
unto him, and is sent as Gods Messenger, unto the Israelites living in
banishmente, and is instructed what manner of people they are, how they will
receive him, and how he shall behave himself toward them. In the end of the
former Chapter, it is mentioned that Ezechiel seeing in a vision an Image of
the glory of God, not being hable to abide the Majesty thereof, fell down
upon his face, Da. 10. b. 8.
in like manner as we read that Daniell did when he saw a terrible vision.
And there was no strength, says he, remaining in me. etc. and yet I heard
the voice of his words, and fell astonished upon my face. Such is the frailty
of man, as he is not hable to abide but a mean shadow of the glorious
Majesty of God.

But the same God, suffers not these good men that he has overthrown with
terror of his glory to remain long prostrate and cast down, but he
comfortablie erecteth them with his spirit, as we see in this place in
Exechiel, whom he not only commands to stand up upon his feet that he
may speak unto him, but also endueth him with his spirit that he may be hable
so to do. For such is our weakness, that when we be once overthrown, we cannot
rise of our selves, but only by the might of Gods Holy grace and Spirit.
Wherefore says S. Paul, We are not able of our selves to do any thing, 2.
Cor. 3. b. 5. 1. Co. 15. b. 10
but al our sufficie^cie is of God: And again, Not of my self, but of the grace
of God in me.

Ezechiel therefore stands not here upon his feet of himself, but by ye
Spirit of God entering into him. Neither was the outward Word of God sufficient
for this Purpose. For the Strength and might of the word of God, is by ye Grace
of his Spirit goeing always with it. The external Word, as his blessed
Instrument, sounds in the ear, and moves the sense, but the Spirit of God
works in the heart.

And he said unto me, Verse. 3. 4.
thou son of man J send thee to the children of. etc. How shall they hear
says Paul without prea ching, To. 10. c. 14.
and how shall they preach, unless they be sent? God therefore commonly
uses in notable manner, to call his Prophets, and they always lightly declare
their own calling and sending, as here Ezechiell does, that they may not be
thought to have Come of themselves, Jer. 23. e. 21.
* as they commonly do that are Seducers and deceivers of the People, but to be
Sent and appointed by God.

Here is also declared to Whom, and to what manner of persons the Prophet is
sent, that is, to the children of Israel living now in Captivity, and with
great Impacience, murmuring against GOD and his Justice. So that neither by
Teaching they could be persuaded, neither by the Scourge and punishemente of
God any thing amended. Therefore are they described to be a Rebellious
people, ever Stryuing and setting them selves against GOD, Psa. 77. f. 63
as their * Fathers had done before them, A people of an Hard and impudente
face, whom Nothing could make ashamed, but rather with Stout countenance,
will Defend their Wickedness, and Glory in it, and therefore by Hieremie
also are they said, To have an Harlottes forheade. Jere. 3. a. 3.
They are noted also to be a People of a Stiff heart, that is, of an
Obstinate and headie mind, whom neither Godly persuasion nor grievous
punishmente could move to return to God, and acknowledge their fault.

When GOD obiecteth to his People, the Imitation of their Forefathers, we also
are Taught to beware, how we Stubburnely Stay our selves against the
Calling of God and his holy word and Gospel, by the Imitation of our
Forefathers.

And yet we see, that men in these days shew^ no greater ground of their
Consciences, than to say, They will Believe and do (...) their Forefathers
have done. If that ^^eason be sound, (as by this place and many other we
are Taught it is not) Surely the Jews might well seem excusable, and not so
much to be blamed for rejecting the doctrine of the Prophets, and of Christ
and his Apostles: For upon that reason they chiefly grounded them selves.
Therefore we ought diligently to Learn by the infallible rule of Gods word
Wherein our Fathers did well, and therein to follow them, and contrarywyse,
gladly to Shun and forsake those things that they do otherwise.

When God commands Ezechiel to go to the Children of Israel, and say unto
them Thus says the Lord, both Preachers have to learn, that they remember
whose Messengers they are, and that they Teach not the people of God their
own Fantasies and devises, but that only, 1. Cor. 11. c. 23 1. Cor. 15 a. 3.
as Paul says, which they have received of GOD, that they may boldly say,
with Ezechiel, Thus says the Lord. And on the other part, the hearers and
people are by the same word instructed, when they hear the Preachers, not to
make account of them as simple men only, nor to accept their words as the
words of men, but as the Doctrine of God, whose ambassadors they are, sent by
him to enfourme them of his holy will and pleasure, and to lead them into his
ways. The Preachers of God must not look to have, their Doctrine by and by to
be thankfully and frutefully received, or that their labors and (...) shall
have favorable and good Success.

The Prince of this World is enemy to God and to his cause, and therefore will
not easily suffer them that forsake God, and fight under his Banner, to yield
to the obedience of God, and to be reformed at his calling.

Therefore says God to Ezechiel, Whether they will hear or refuse, give not
over thy function and office of teaching, but let them know, to their further
Condemnation, and to the taking away of all Pretenses of ignorance, That there
has been a Prophet of God among them, to give them warning, and to call them
from their wickedness. I know, and I tell thee before hand, that they are a
Rebellious and obstinate People, and will not hearken unto thy Preaching nor
accept thy Doctrine, but thou haste my Commandemente, and my Commission to
confirm thee, 1. Cor. 3. b. 6.
therefore perform that, *Plant and water that stony and hard Ground, and
leave the Increase and success to me. If they repent thou may have Comfort
of thy travail, if they continue Stubburne, they must have Justice for their
Disobedience.

And thou son of man fear them not, Verse. 6. 7.
neither be afraid of their words. etc. Such is the Frayltie and
timorousness of Man, that he cannot choose but be Moved with the Clamor and
obloquie of many against him. Therefore God does here strengthen, and as it
were Arm Ezechiell his Prophet against the waywardness of that People, and
wylleth him to take pacientely whatsoever they shall do or say.

Hypocrites rise against Gods truth, and in words pretend Gaye and holy
Titles and Names for the color and maintenance of their Doings, and deal
Fiercely in words and countenance with them that Teach the contrary, as the
Papists and other Adversaries do at this day against the true Ministers of
God. But they must Comfort them selves, and (as he wills his Prophet
Ezechiell in this place) not be afraid nor abashed thereof. It is the
ordinary means of them that be Enemies to GOD and to his Truth. If in the
heat of their Spirit, they call us Schismatikes, Heretics, unlearned, vile,
contemptible, yea dogs and dounghilles of the Earth: yet must we not be so
Overthrown therewith, as for it to leave our office and duty of Teaching
undone, but rather with great Constancy, set our selves against their waywarde
Wickedness, 2. Cor. 6. b. 7
and By the Power of God and armor of Righteousness, pass through honor
and dishonor, good report and evil, and never yield or give place to the
Stubburne Enemies. Though they be as Thorns unto us, and every way Moleste
and grieve us, though they be as Scorpions, and with the venim of their
sclaunderous tongues, poysonously stinge us, yea oftentimes unto very death:
yet must we remember that in this place God speaks to Ezechiel, Fear not
their words, but speak my truth unto them, whether they vvil hear it, or
refuse it.

Therefore thou son of man obey thou all things that I say unto thee. Verse.
8. etc.
etc. There is none meet to be the Messenger of God, and the teacher of his
people, but such a one as has been first Taught of him, and at His hand
learned his holy Will, and the mysteries of his Truth. Therefore the Prophet
is here willed, To open his mouth, and to ear all that the Lord does give
him, that is, That he should Faithfully receive at his Hand, and diligently
Imprinte in his Memory, and in his Heart digeste all the words that the
Lord should speak unto him. For so God says to him in the Eze. 3. b. 10.
. 3. cap. verse. 10. This book is described to be written within and
without, that is, to Conteyne much and Plenteous matter touching the
Children of Israel, and all bitter and unpleasant, showing the Signs and
tokens of Gods wrath against them, so that they could Conceive nothing
thereof but matter of Sorrovv, Mourning, Lamentation and VVoe. For seeing the
Sweetness of his Promises could not allure them, he endeuoreth to break
their Stubborn hearts with the terrible Threatenings of his displeasure. In
the.8. Verse, God armeth his Prophet against an other Temptation, wherewith the
minds of many are carried away, and inclined either not to Receive the word
of God, or when they have received it, to Reuolte from it again: and that is,
the Consent of the Multitude thinking the contrary.

Wherefore he says unto Ezechiell, Obey thou all things that I shall say
unto thee, and be not like this Rebellious house. I know it may seem an
Hard tentation to thee to teach the contrary of that, which they all think
and defend to be true, 3. Re. 18. d. 21
and with a very * few good men to stand against the whole multitude and
Consent of them, which are called and compted my People. But I tell thee, what
soever they Pretend, and howesoeuer fair Titles and tokens they have had of
my Favor, they are a Stiffenecked and rebellious People, which under their
fair Pretenses, set them selves against me, and my Holy will. Therefore
beeware thou be not like them, nor Yield not to their Consent and Multitude,
but cleave fast to my word, and to that I say unto thee. 3. Re. 22. a. 8.
* For one man with my Truth is better and more to be credited, than the whole
World agreeing in the contrary.

The like Instruction god used to Esai. cap. 8. warning him, Esai. 8. c. 12.
That he should not walk in the way of that people, nor speak words of
Conspiracy, that is, of Consent or agreement in one opinion, When this people
shall say Conspiracy, be not afraid of them, but sanctify the Lord of
hoastes, and let him be your fear and dread. S. Peter in his first Epistle
cap. 3. verse. 14. 15. 1. Pet. 3. c. 14. 15.
alludeth to the same place confirming the faithful, against the Conspiracy
and agreement of the Jews in Persecuting the Gospel.

It behooves us also in these latter and perilous days, in so great a
multitude conspiring against the word of God and the profession of his Truth,
to arm our selves with the same weapons of Comfort, wherewith we see God
furnished his Prophets and Apostles against the countenance of the whole
world. This sending forth of Ezechiell is more largely declared by the
Prophet himself in the third Chapter. Ezec. 3. a. 1. etc.


The.xvj. Sunday after Trinity at Evening prayer.
Ezechiell. 14.

4 Therefore speak unto them, and say unto the^, thus says the Lord God, Every
man of the house of Israel that sets up his Idols in his heart, and puts
the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face, and comes to the
Prophet: unto that man will I the Lord my self give answer when he comes,
according to the multitude of his Idols.

5 That the house of Israel may be snared in their own hearts, because they
be clean gone from me all of them through their Idols.

6 Wherefore tell the house of Israel, thus says the Lord God: Return and
cause to return from your Idols, and turn your faces from all your
abominations.

7 For every man, whether he be of the house of Israel, or a stranger that
soiourneth in Israel, which departs from me, and sets up his Idols in his
heart, and puts the for other) yea and a common by word, and will root him
out of my people, that ye may know how that I am the Lord.

9 And if that Prophet be deceived when he tells a thing then I the Lord my
self, 2. Reg. 22. c.
have deceived that Prophet, and will stretche out my hand upon him, to
destroy him out of my people of Israel.

10 And they shall be punished for their wickedness, according to the sin of
him that asks shall the sin of the prophet be: 11 That the house of Israel
may wander no more from me, neither be any more defiled in all their
transgressions: but that they may be my people, and I their God, says the
Lord God. 12 And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. 13 Thou son of
man, Eze. 4. c. 16. Eze. 5. c. 17.
when the land sins against me by committing a trespass, I will stretche
out my hand upon it, and break their staff of bread, and send dearth upon
them, to destroy man and beast forth of it.

Jere. 15. a. 1.
yet shall they in their righteousness deliver but their own souls, says
the Lord God.

15 If I bring noisome beasts into the land, and they spoils it, and it be so
desolate that no man may pass through it for beasts, 16 If these three me^
were also in the midst thereof: as truly as I live says the Lord God, they
shall save neither sons nor daughters, but be only delivered them selves:
and as for the land it shall be waste.

17 Or if I bring a sword upon this land, and say, Sword go through the
land, so that I slay down man and beast in it. 18 And if these three men were
therein: as truly as I live says the Lord God, they shall deliver neither
sons nor daughters, but only be saved themselves.

19 If I send a pestilence into this land, and power out my sore indignation
upon it in blood, so that I root out of it both man and beast: 20 And if Noe,
Daniel, and Job were therein, as truly as I live says the Lord God, they shall
deliver neither some nor daughter, but save their own souls in

22 Behold there shall be a remnant saved therein, which shall bring forth their
sons and daughters, behold they shall come forth unto you, and ye shall see
their way and their enterprise, and ye shall be comforted concerning the evil
that I have brought upon Jerusalem ( even) concerning all that I have brought
upon it. 23 They shall comfort you when ye shall see their way and works: and
ye shall know how that it is not without a cause that I have done al against
Jerusalem, as I did, says the Lord God.

The Exposition upon the.xiiij. Chapter of Ezechiel.
There resorted unto me certain of the Elders of Israel, Verse. 1. 2. 3.
and sat down. etc. THe Israelites which had fallen from God to Idolatry and
false worship, living now in banishmente and Captivity in Babylon, were sore
grieved with these great miseries and tirannicall oppressions which they by the
Chaldees sustained, and yet were nothing at all moved to repent and turn from
their wickedness. Wherefore some of the Elders of the^ retaining still in their
hearts, not only an inclination, but an earnest affection to continue in
their Idolatry, desirous to hear some good tidings of their deliverance at the
hand of Ezechiel the Prophet of God, with Dissimulation and Hypocrisy came
unto him, and sitting by him began to move question how they should behave
themselves in the Captiuitye, and what they might best do, what God had
revealed unto him touching them, and what hope there was of the restoring of
Jerusalem. And for so much as the Prophet might have been deceived by their
Hypocrisy, and have thought that they had truly and sincerely repented: God
opens their Dissimulation unto him, and teaches him home he shall answer
them according to their deserts. These men, says God, that come unto thee are
Hipocrites and dissimulers, and be not inwardly as they pretend out wardlye.
For whereas the Heart of my people should be the Seat of my true worship, and
their Life a declaration of my glory unto the world: These men clean contrary
have set up Idols in their hearts, and long still to continue in the
worshipping of them. And the wicked life which they openly lead, is as a
stumbling block to many other, whereby they are caused to fall from me. Should
I then be sought for by such as they are? or should I answer them at their
request, which by such dealing do in a manner openly delude me, and seem not
to esteem me as a God? For if they did, they must needs know that their
wicked Hypocrisy could not be hid from me. Out of this place we have to
learn, First, how depely the wicked use to dissimule, and to pretend an
obedience to God, and a love to his truth, when in their hearts they mean
nothing less. Mat. 19. a. 3.
In like manner the Scribes and Phariseis often came to Christ: wherefore we
must take heed and beware of them. Secondly, we are taught, that God knows
all things, and that the secrets of our hearts are not hid from him. Heb. 4.
d. 13 Prou. 15. a. 3.
All things, are open to the eyes of God, says Paul. And Solomon, The eyes of
God in every place beholds both the good and the evil. We must so live
therefore, as we be sure that we have God witness of all even our most secret
doings, yea of the very cogitations and devises of our hearts. Thirdly, we are
instructed how to come unto god, or to his Prophets to learn, that is,
sincerely and truly. And we Come unto God, when we come to read or to hear
his holy Word and scriptures: And therefore must we do it with a simple and
a true meaning heart, least it fall out to us, as it did to these old
dissimuling Israelites.

Therefore speak unto them, and say unto them, Verse. 4.
thus says the Lord. etc. For So Much as their impudency was such, that
notwithstanding the love of Idolatry that reigned in their hearts, and the
great wickedness that to the offense of other appeared in their lives, yet
they durst to come to Ezechiel to learn the will of God and his determination
touching them: God wills his Prophet to tell them, that he will answer them
himself, but not as they hoped and desired, nor any thing at all to their
liking, but in such sort, as of his Justice they for their horrible Idolatry
and other wickedness deserved. For that is meant by these words, According to
the multitude of his Idolles. Verse. 5*
In such sort, says God, I will answer them as I will make openly known that
is now secret and hid, and that all men shall understand there is not one
jot of godly motion in them. And I will so snare them in their own
consciences, that they th^selues shall declare to the world they thought not in
their hearts, as they pretended out wardly to have done. The cause of this
unpleasant answer that God makes to them, is, for that through Idolatry they
had forsaken him.

Therefore God, Verse. 6. 7.
as a merciful Lord, desirous rather to have them amend then to perish,
bids his Prophet to will them either unfeignedly to return from their
Sinful life and abominable Idolatrye, and also to cause other to return
whom by their example and instruction they had misledde: or else that they
should be sure to have a very vnpleasante answer at the mouth of God
himself, whether they were Jews naturally borne, Nu. 15. b. 15 29.
or such * strangers as were Circumcised, and professing the Law and Couenante
of God did live among them. When God requires that they should not only
themselves amend and turn unto him, but cause other also to do the like, We
are taught the manner and nature of true repentance, which through the fear
of God hating wickedness himself cannot abide it in other, but by all the
means he can seeks to refourme the same, and especially if his Conscience
tell him, that the same persons in any part, have been misledde by his
example.

I will set my face against that man, Verse. 8.
and will make him to be an example. etc. For So Much as Threatening prophecies
do nothing at all or very little move the minds of them that be obstinate,
because they think the^ to be as it were Thunder without Lightening, and vain
terroure without effect: therefore God declares to them by his Prophet,
that the things be not so earnestly spoken, but that they shall be as effectually
put in execution. And that he will in deed. Set his face, that is, his
countenance and whole power against them, and not only make them a by word
and common Proverb unto al men, but clean root them out of the number of his
people, that they may right well know that he is not only a threatening but
also a Just and a punishing God, which will in deed perform that, that he
has spoken in word. Verse. 9.
And because it might be that notwithstanding the Threatenings of Ezechiell,
they had some comfort in the sayings of their false and flattering Prophets,
which framed themselves to speak unto them things altogether delectable and
pleasant: God wills them to take heed thereof, for that their wickedness, in
his just Judgment, had deserved to be Deceived by such. 3. Re. 22. d. 22
As Achab had been long before against Gods true Prophet Micheas.

The wicked have always their hirelings and flatterers that uphold and
maintain them in their errors, contrary to the Messengers of God and the
Teachers of his holy word.

And that happens unto them by their Just deserte, because they have before
time so stubbournely disobeyed God, when he called them, by his true Ministers.
This is it that Saint Paul says, that God would suffer the wicked in the
latter days to be seduced by false Teachers, 2. these. 2. c. 10.
Because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, and
therefore would send them strong elusions that they should believe lies. Many
at these days do harden themselves by like persuasions against the Preachers
of the Gospel. Oh say they, there be a Number of other learned me^ that Teach
otherwise tha^ they do, and in such a time of contention and diversity of
opinions, How can we know what is the truth? Let them therefore strive among
themselves, we will live and believe as we have done before time. But they
should learn by this place of Ezechiel, that such diversity of opinions and
troubles in Doctrine and Religion, do not happen in the church by Chance or
fortune, but by the Woorking and providence of God for the punishmente of the
Sins of his people, and especially for their waywarde neglecting and
contemning of the word of God Preached unto them. And therefore should they
be the more Careful, studious, and diligente both in reading the Scriptures
and in Prayer to God, that they might understand the truth, and not so easyly
either be Confirmed in Superstition, or carried away to falshoode and Error.

And they shall be punished for their wickedness according to the sin of.
Verse. 10.
etc. As he before had said, that the People for their Stubbornness should
be plagued: so here he declares, that the like should fall also upon the
false Prophets. And so proves it true that Christ says, If the blind lead
the blind, Mat. 15. b. 14
they shall both fall into the ditche.

The False teachers speak many things that they know to be otherwise than
Truth, and the Obstinate people will not abide to hear them, that utter the
truth, and so Truth depraved of the tone, and refused of the the other, pulls
Gods heavy Judgment upon them both.

That the house of Israel be led away no more from me through error. Verse.
11.
etc. As God to the benefit of the faithful does suffer false Prophets and
teachers, and other Schisms and troubles to rise among his people, that their
Faith may be the vetter tried and proved: So does he to their like commodity
oftentimes grievously Punish both the false Teachers, and Such as give
credit to them.

For by that means the Faithefull and elect which through weakness and
frayltie did before stagger and doubt in their consciences, are confirmed and
evidently understand the Judgments of God in them. Therefore, says God, That
the house of Israel may be led no more. etc. By the House of Israel he does
not note the whole people (for among them were the Seducers, and the People
seduced) but the Elect of God, and those that were of the true seed of
Abraham, of which happily many were for the time Misseled by the false
Prophets, and the example of other. And now by the smart of their Punishment
being quickened, and as it were wakened out of their errors, they look more
diligently and carefully unto the truth of God, and return from their
Corruptions into the which they had been carried away before, and being now
Joined to the Couenaunte of God again, become his People, and He their God.

And the word of the Lord came unto me, Verse 12. etc.
saying: Thou son of man etc. The Jews were greatly stayed from Repentance
by an hope and confidence that they had in the Prayers of holy men, which
they thought did live among them: Oh (said they) The Earnest prayers of so many
Godly men and women, as undoubtedly are of the Jews, must needs be heard, and
obtain favor with God, and to cause him to withdraw his Plagues and
punishments. This Vain confidence God by his Prophet in this second part of
the Chapter takes from them. For where as he has Four plagues, which he is
determined to bring upon them, that is Famine, Wild beasts, the Sword, and
the Pestilence, he does assure them, that if Noe, Daniel, and Job, or the
Holiest men that ever lived, were at this time amongst them, they should not
by their Prayers in any one of these Plagues, obtain pardon for any, but for
themselves only, No not for their own sons and daughters, or such as were
nighest to them: much less should they be hable to prevail by their Prayers
now when God in his Just displeasure shall cast upon that wicked People not any
one, but all those Four Plagues together. When men go on forewarde in their
wickedness, it is but a perverse and vain persuasion to think they shall
escape the punishemente and Plagues of God by the Faith and Prayers of other.
They must Repent themselves, if they will look to have God turn his wrath
from them.

God speaks first severally of every one of these Plagues, and still adds,
that Noah, Daniell, and Job, should not be hable to deliver any, but their own
souls. Verse. 13. 15. 17. 19.

In the one and twenty Verse he makes his Collection from the less to the
greater, Verse 21.
That if they could not obtain for One, much less should they be hable to
deliver when he sent al Four upon them to Destroy man and beast out of
their country. A like sentence does God utter by the Prophet Hieremie. If
Moses and Samuel did stand before me, Jere. 15. a. 1.
my heart should not be tovvarde this people. The meaning of both these
places is, That God would never be Reconciled to them, and turn his Plagues
from them, no not though his holiest Saints and servants whom he has
most esteemed, had been alive and entreated for them, because they did so
Stubbornly continue in the Contempt of his word, and would not syncerely
Repent.

The Papists do very fondly and unfitly allege these Places, to prove that
Saints departed, make Intercession for us, and therefore that we must Pray
unto them in our Distress. But the Prophet says not that those Holy men
do make Intercession for the People, but putting a case Impossible, says, if
They were among them, and did entreat for them, 1. Jo. 2. a. 1. 2.
they should not be heard. We have only one mediator and intercessor to God,
Christ Jesus, and he is the propitiation for our sins. And again, 1. Tim. 2.
b. 5.
There is one God and one Mediatoure of God and man Christ Jesus who gave
himself as the price of our Redemption. Coloss. 4. a. 3.
Those that be alive, both may and ought to pray one for an other, 1.
these. 5. d. 25 Heb. 13 d. 18.
and therefore Paul often desires the Churches to pray for him: but when they
be once dead, we have no warrant in Gods word either that they Pray for us, or
that we should Pray to them.

Behold, Verse. 22. 23.
there shall be a remnant saved therein, which shall bring. etc. By A remnante
saved, he means those which should escape the Slaughter in Ievvrie, and
after the Taking of the City. Jerusalem, be brought Captive into Babylon to
the residue, whose wicked ways and corrupt manners, when they did see and
behold, they should Comfort or quiet their minds, and not so much Murmr
against the Just judgment of God, as hitherto they had done. For the
Israelites that were in Banishment, (to whom Ezechiel speaks thus) when they
heard of the Lamentable destruction of Ievvrie: with troubled minds they
Murmured against God, as dealing over rigorously with his own people. But God
by his Prophet tells them, that when they shall see the Remnant of the Jews
come among them, and consider their Abominable works and doings: They shall
comfort and quiet their troubled minds, Acknowledge the Just judgment of
God, and See that it is not without cause that he has in so Severe manner
dealt with Jerusalem.

The.xvij. Sunday after Trinity at Morning prayer.
Ezechiel. 16. Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying: 2 Thou son
of man, show Jerusalem their abominations: 3 And say, Thus says the Lord
God unto Jerusalem: Thy habitation and kindred is of the land of Chanaan, thy
father was an Amorite, thy mother an Hithite. 4 In the day of thy birth when
thou wast borne, the string of thy Navel was not cut of, thou wast not bathed
in water to make thee clean, thou wast not salted with salt, nor swadled in
cloutes. 5 No eye pitied thee to do any of these things for thee, for to have
compassion upon thee: but thou wast utterly cast out upon the field in contempt
of thy person in the day of thy birth. 6 Then came I by thee, and saw thee
defiled in thine own blood, and I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood,
Live ( even) when thou wast in thy blood, I said unto thee, Live.

7 I caused thee to multiply, as the bud of the field, thou art grown up,
and waxen great, thou haste gotten a marvelous pleasant beauty, thy breasts
are fashioned, thy hear is goodly grown, whereas thou wast naked and bare.

8 Now when I went by thee, and looked upon thee, behold thy time was come,
yea ( even) the time to woe thee: then spread I my clothes over thee to cover
thy dishonestie, yea I made an oath unto thee, and contracted my self with
thee (says the Lord God) and so thou becamest mine own.

9 Then washed I thee with water, and purged thy blood from thee, and I
anointed thee with oil.

10 I clothed thee with broydred work, and shod thee with badgers skin,
and I girded thee about with fine linen, and covered thee with silk. 11 I
decked thee with costely apparel, I put bracelets upon thy hands, a chain
about thy neck. 12 And I put a frontlet upon thy face, and earerings upon
thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thine head.

13 Thus wast thou decked with gold and silver, and thy raiment was of fine
linen: and of silk, and of broydred work: thou did eat fine flower, honey
and oil, marvelous beautiful waste thou, and thou did luckily prosper into
a kingdom. 14 And thy name was spread among the Heathen for thy beauty: for
it was perfect through my beauty which I put upon thee, says the Lord God.

15 But thou have put thy confidence in thine own beauty, and played the
harlot because of thy renoune, and haste poured out thy fornications with every
one that went by, thou wast his. 16 Thou did take thy garments, and decked
thy hie places with diverse colors, and played the harlot thereupon, they come
not, and it shall not be. 17 The goodly Jewels which I gave thee of mine own
gold and silver, have thou taken and made thee men's images thereof, and
co^mitmitted whoordome with them. 18 Thy broydred garments have thou taken,
and decked them therewith: mine oil and incense have thou set before them. 19
My meat which I gave thee, as fine flower, oil and honey to feed thee
withal, that have thou set before them for a sweet savor: and thus it was
says the Lord God. 20 Thou have taken thine own sons and daughters whom thou
have begotten unto me, and these have thou offered up unto them to be devoured:
is this but a small whoordome of thine? Leuit. 20. a. 2 Leui. 18. c. 12. 2. Re.
23. b. 6.
21 And thou have slain my children, and delivered them, to cause them to
pass ( thorough the fire) for them. 22 And yet in all thine abominations and
whoordomes, thou have not remembered the days of thy youth, how naked and bare
thou wast at that time, and wast defiled in thine own blood. 23 After all
these thy wickednesses, (woe, woe unto thee, says the Lord God.)

24 Thou haste buylte unto thee an hye place, and haste made thee an hye place
in every street. 25 Thou haste buylt thine hie place at every head of the
way, thou haste made thy beauty to be abhorred, thou have opened thy feet to
every one that came by, and multiplied thy whoordome.

26 Thou have committed fornication with the Egyptians thy neighbors which
were great in flesh, and thus have thou increased thine whoordome to anger me.

27 Behold, I did stretch out my hand over thee, and did minishe thine
ordinary ( food) and delivered thee over into the wills of them that hate
thee, Ezech. 4. d.
( even) to the daughters of the Philistines, Ezech. 5. d.
which are ashamed of thine abominable ways. Ezech. 14. c. Ezech. 25. a.
28 Thou have played the whore also with the Assyrians, because thou waste
insatiable: yea thou have ( I say) with them played the harlot, and yet had
thou not enough.

29 Thus have thou furthermore multiplied thy fornication from the land of
Chanaan unto the Chaldees, and yet thou wast not satisfied herewith. 30 How
weak is thine heart says the Lord God, seeing thou do all these, ( even)
the works of a presumptuous whoorishe woman?

31 Buylding thy hye places at the head of every way, and make thy hye
places in every street: thou haste not ben as an other whore that holds
scorn of a reward:

32 But as a wife that breaks wedlock, and takes other in stead of her
husband. 33 Gifts are given to al other whoores: but thou give rewards unto
al thy lovers, and rewardest them to come unto thee on every side, for thy
fornication. 34 It is come to pass with thee in thy whoordomes contrary to the
use of other women, yea there has no such fornication ben committed after
thee: seeing that thou give gifts unto other, and no reward is given thee,
therefore thou art contrary. 35 Therefore hear the word of the lord, O thou
harlot. 36 Thus says the Lord God, Because thou haste poured out thy brass,
and discovered thy filthiness through thy fornications with thy lovers, and with
all the idols of thine abominations, and in the blood of thy children, whom
thou have given them: 37 Behold therefore, I will gather together all thy
l^uers, with whom thou have taken pleasure, yea and all them whom thou haste
loved, and every one that thou hate: I will ( I say) gather them together
round about against thee, Esai. 47. a.
and will discover thy shame before them, Nah. 3. a.
that they may see all thy fylthinesse. Eze. 23 b. 10


38 Moreover, I will judge thee as a breaker of wedlock and a murderer, and
recompense thee thine own blood in wrath and jealousy. 39 I will give thee
over into their hands, and they shall destroy thy hie place, and break down
thy hie places, they shall strippe thee also out of thy clothes: thy fair
jewels shall they take from thee, and so leave thee naked and bare. Leuit. 20.
d.
40 Yea they shall bring a company upon thee, which shall stone thee with
stones, and thrust thee through with their swords. 41 They shall burn up thy
houses with fire, and punish thee in the sight of many women: thus will I make
thee cease from playing the harlot, 4. Re. 25. b. 9
so that thou shall give out no more rewards. 42 So will I make my wrath
toward thee to rest, and my jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will cease,
and be angry no more. 43 Seeing thou remembredst not the days of thy youth, but
haste fretted me in all these things: behold therefore I will bring thine own
ways upon thy head says the Lord God, so that thou shalt not commit ( any
more) mischief upon all thine abominations.

44 Behold, all they that use common proverbs, shall use this proverb also
against thee, saying, Such a mother, such a a daughter. 45 Thou art even thy
mothers own daughter, that has cast of her husband and her children: yea thou
art the sister of thy sisters, which forsook their husbands and their
children: your mother is an Hithite, and your father an Amorite. 46 Thine
eldest sister is Samaria, thee and her daughters that dwell upon thy left
hand: but thy younger sister that dwells on thy right hand is Sodoma and her
daughters. 47 Yet have thou not walked after their ways, nor done after their
abominations, as a little and a little: but in all thy ways thou have been more
corrupt than they.

48 As truly as I live, says the Lord God, Sodoma thy sister with her
daughters, have not done as thou have done and thy daughters.

49 Behold, the sins of thy sister Sodoma were these: Pride, fullness of
meat, and abundance of welnesse, these things had she and her daughters:
besides that they strengthed not the hand of the poor and needy.

50 But they were hautie, and committed abomination before me, therefore I
took them away as I saw good.

51 Neither has Samaria done half of thy sins, yea thou haste exceeded
them in thine abominations, and haste justified thy sisters in all thine
abominations which thou haste done. 52 Therefore thou which did condemn
thy sister, bear thine own shame, for thine own offenses that thou haste
committed more abhominably than they did, which in deed are more righteous
than thou art, be thou ( I say) ashamed, and bear the shameful rebuke,
seeing that thou have justified thy sisters.

53 Therefore I will bring again their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and
her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, and the
captivity of thy captiuities among them. 54 That thou may take thine own
confusion upon thee, and be ashamed of all that thou haste done, in that thou
haste comforted them.

55 And thy sister Sodom and her daughters shall return to their former state,
Samaria also and her daughters shall return to their former state, when thou
and thy daughters shall return to your former state.

56 For thy sister Sodom was not heard of by thy reports in the day of thy
pride. 57 Before thy wickedness was discovered according to the time of the
reproach of the daughters of Aram, and of all the daughters of the Philistines
round about her, which despise thee on all sides.

58 Thou haste borne thy wickedness and thine abomination, says the Lord.

59 For thus says the Lord God, I might ( by right) deal with thee as thou
have done, which have despised the oath in breaking the covenant.

60 Nevertheless, I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy
youth, and I will establishe unto thee an everlasting couenante.

61 Then shalt thou remember thy ways, and be ashamed when thou shalt
receive thy sisters ( both) thy elder and thy younger: and I will give them
unto thee for daughters, but not by thy covenant.

62 And I will establishe my covenant with thee, that thou may know that I
am the Lord.

63 That thou may think upon it, and be ashamed and never open thy mouth any
more for shame of thy self, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou
have done, says the Lord God.

The Exposition upon the.xvj. Chapter of Ezechiel.
Again the word of the Lord came unto me saying, Verse. 1.
Thou son of. etc. THe sum of this long Chapter is contained in these few
words, Shevve Jerusalem their abominations. For by a long figurative
speech under the similitude of an Adulterous woman, that without all shame and
moderation deals unthankfully and unfaithfully with a loving and kind
husband: the Prophet meruelously painteth forth and notably amplifieth the
filthy abominations, spiritual adultries and other wickedness of that City
and People.

In the first part, he sets forth their poor estate, and the great
goodness of God toward them. Secondly he declares their unthankfulness and
wicked abusing of his benefits.

Thirdly, he describes their just plagues and punishments for the same. And
lastly, the hope of pardon, and restoring to their country if they will repent
and amend. Verse. 3.
First verse.3. he vpbraideth them that they are so Degenerated from the
steps of their first parents Abraham and Sarah, as they are not worthy to be
accounted of their sede and posterity: But rather that they descended of the
Amorites and Cethites, being wicked and Idolatrous people of Chanaan, whose
manners and conditions in all abominable naughtiness they followed. To like
purpose John Baptist calls the Phariseis, Mat. 3. b. 7.
Adders brood. Joh. 8. f. 44.
And Christ himself says They had the Devil to their Father, because they
did Imitate him in malice and mischief.

Afterward the Prophet under the Similitude of a Poor babe newborn, without
help or su^o^^r, sets forth the miserable case that they were in In
Egipte, when God cast first his merciful eyes upon them. When a woman is
delivered of a Child, as midwiues and other women know, first, with great care
they cut the navel string and make it up, otherwise of necessity both mother
and Child would perish.

Secondlye, with warm water they wash away the unclean and blouddie
moysting that the Child is imbrewed withal. Then they cubbe it with salt,
that the dryness thereof may cause the skin to grow to some moderate
hardness. Lastly they wrappe it up in swaddling bands that the limbs may grow
strait. But says God to the City Herusalem and Nation of the Jews, when
thou wast borne there was no person to pity thee, nor to do any of these
things to thee, but thou wast left as a thing desolate and forlorn, and most
assuredly should have perished, if I had not had compassion on thee. This God
means of their miserable condition in Egypt, where they seemed to be borne,
because in that place they first grew unto a people, being before but one
family. Ex. 1. a. 6. 11.
For after Joseph was dead, and they increased to some number, the Egiptians
held them in miserable bondage and most grievous oppression, as well sundry
other ways, as by killing their young infa^ts. So that their life might seem to
be unto them a perpetual death. And yet God casting his merciful countenance
upon them, in the midst of their enemies and in despite of all their
endeavors, did cherishe them, and Even when they were in their birth blood,
that is, in the Filthy state of their bondage, did multiply them and made them
to grow and increase to the full stature, beauty, and strength of a people.
Genesis 46. 6. 26
* For whereas they were but.66. persons when Jacob came into Egypt, in the
space of.250. years they grew to* 600000. beside Children, Nu. 11. c. 23.
notwithstanding standing the Cruel murdering of their men Children.

This is it that he means when he says, Thy breasts are fashioned, thy
hear is goodly grovve^, that is, thou art growe^ to the state and beauty of a
strong people, as a maiden is grown to full age, when those parts are so
fashioned in her.

When they were come to this ripeness, Verse. 8.
God showed more liking to them, and sent Moses and Aaron by his mighty
works to diliuer them, which was as a manner of woeing them to be his people,
and an hiding of their dishonestie and reprochefull state that they were in.
Not long after in Mount Sinay, giving them his law, by his contracte and
Covenant, Exo. 19. b. 6
he as it were, Jere. 13. b. 11.
*dispoused them to himself as a peculiar People: so that they became his
people, and he their God. After the knitting and joining unto God by his
Couenante, which was as a kind of marriage, he did defend and prosper them,
and bestowed his manifold gifts and blessings upon them, as wealth and
abundance of all things, victory against their enemies, and happy success
in their doings, and above all this their beauty of his true knowledge and
worship, Exo. 20. a. 1.
his holy Law and ordinances, his Tabernacle, and the Arc and Testimony of
his presence. So that they became a more honorable and famous people than any
was in the world. Deu. 4. b. 7,
For there was No nation that had God so nighe unto them as they had.

This is mente by the rich clothing and decking which is spoken of verse. 10.
11. 12. 13. 14. Verse. 10. etc.
Hitherto they are put in mind of their own base state that they were in, and
of Gods merciful and undeserved goodness toward them.

But thou haste put thy confidence in thine own beauty and plaide the. Verse.
15 etc.
etc. The chief cause that moves light women to Adultrie and Lewdenesse, is
to much liking of themselves and confidence in their own beauty and
gayness. For thereby* lothing their husbands, and forgetting that by this
benefit they came to the good state that the ^are in, they begin to
fantasy other, and to make themselves familiar with them in whom they have
better liking. And as this kind of women is very evil: so much worse are
they, that wast upon their lovers and adulterers the good and liberal gifts
of money, Jewels, or apparel, that there husbands of good will and honest
meaning have destowed upon them. As it is evil for a woman to yield unto the
motions of wicked adulterers: so to woe them and to hire them with money and
gifts, is an assured tooken of a mind destitute of all fear of God, and
without hope of amendment given over to naughtiness. In this manner dealte
the Nation of the Jews with GOD their Lord and redeemer. For they through
wealth and prosperity in which God had set them, being puffed up with
confidence of them selves, forgatte both what they were once in Egipte, and
how great benefits God had from time to time bestowed upon them. And thinking
they had come to it by their own industry, began to loathe the true worship
of God, that by his law and Couenante they were appointed unto, Japi. 14. b. 12
and *sought forth new worshippinges of their own devises, Exo. 32. a. 1.
yea and *acquainted them selves with strange Gods of other Nations, Nu. 25.
a. 3.
and by that means committed spiritual adultery with them, yea, and like
wicked women raging in the heat of Incontinencie, Eze. 7. f. 20.
they *wasted upon their false Gods such blessings of wealth and riches as God
of his goodness had given them. For such is the nature of them that are given
to superstition that they think nothing enough that is bestowed to beautify
and maintain the same.

The high places that are here spoken of, and, that they so sumptuoustye
dressed, were Chapels and Aulters builded on hills or in upper rooms of
houses, but in such sort, that they were in sight of the People. In those they
did Sacrifice, sometime to the living God but not according, to his word,
sometimes to Idols and false Gods after the manner of the Egyptians,
Assyrians, or other people with who^ they were in league or friendship.

Of al other the most Detestable and horrible was the sacrificings of their
own children to Idols which God severely prohibiteth Leui. 18. Leui. 18. c. 21
and. Leui. 20. a. 4
20. Deu. 12. d. 31.
Deute. Jere. 7. g. 29.
12. In Jeremy cap. 7. We read that not far from Jerusalem, in the tribe
of Benjamin, in the valley of Hinnon, there was a Chapel and Alter in which
they offered their children to the Idol Moloch. This Idol, as some of the
Hebrews write, was of brass and hollow, in which, being glowing hot with
fire, they enclosed their Children to be slain with a Miserable death, and in
the mean time, that the crying of the child might not be heard to move any
pity, they made a noise with Tabrets and drums, whereof that place was
called Tophet. Other opinions there are of the manner of this offering of
Children, which all declare it to be a wicked and a devilish use, and such as
is to be wondered how it should take place among the People of God.

But what Idolatry or error is so gross, Romans 1. c. 23.
whereinto man's corruption destitute of the Grace of God will not easily be
cast by example, Sap. 14. c. 21. 27. 28. etc.
or any other light occasion. It is not to be let pass that God calls the
Children whythe they had begotten, His Children, because they were partakers of
the promises, and signed with the seal of his couenaunte. We therefore that be
Christians, must know that our children are also the children of God, and
partakers of those blessings, that are promised to us in Christ Jesus our
Savior, and therefore that we do Injury to God himself, whose Children they
are, Ephesians. 6. a. 4.
if we do not see them* Carefully brought up in his fear. And much more, if
we, as before time we have done, Bequeath them, and in a manner Consecrate and
Sacrifice them to the Service of men, by thrusting them into Abbeyes and
Monasteries, there to Remain in perpetual bondage of Error and superstition.

Thou have committed fornication with the Aegiptians thy neighbors. Verse. 26.
etc. There are two kinds of Spiritual fornication, the one consists in
Superstition and False woorshipping of God, contrary to his word, or in
Sacrificing to False gods. In which kind God before has noted, Verse. 28. 29.
that his People were insatiable, and Fashioned themselves to the Service, not
only of one or two, but of a number of Idolatrous gods, and builded chapels
for them in every corner, much like to that manner, which in many places of
Christendom is yet to be seen, how they have done for their peculiar Saints.

The other Fornication is unlawful Joining in league with Infidels and
Idolaters, thereby to have their aid and defense, whithe God severely in many
places* forbids. 2. Par. 19. a. 2
For by that means his people are diverse times carried away from his true
Service to Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 7. a. 2.
and the Woorshipping of their Gods, with whom they are in League and
frendeshippe: by Consent in Religion, thynking to have their Favor more
assured.

Thus did the Jews commit Fornication with the Egyptians, and leaving to
put their Trust in the Lord their God, Esai. 30. a. 2. etc.
*desired their Help against their enemies: And in like manner had they Done
at other times with the Assyrians, and other People bordring upon them. For
which they are here sharply Reproved. Our trust and Confidence should be
tied to GOD* alone in all our Trouble and distress: and if we do imparte it
to other, Jere. 17. a. 5.
and seek Help at any other than at God, Psa. 145. a. 4
we commit Fornication with them, and are as Adulterers in his sight.

Therefore hear the word of the Lord, Verse. 33.
O thou Harlot. etc. In this third part of the Chapter, God declares their
Punishemente, and as it were pronounces the sentence of his Justice against
them. And because he is Determined to Judge that City and countreye as an
Adulterer and breaker of Wedlock, and of that Covenant that was between Him
and them: he notes them by the name of An Harlot.

In the Verse. 36.
.36. Verse he briefly knitteth together the causes of their Condemnation and
punishment.

Because (sayeh he) thou haste poured out thy brass. etc. that is, Because
thou have plentifully laid out thy money, riches, and treasure by presents, to
purchase unto thee, and as it were, to wowe new Lovers and friends of strange
Princes, 4. Re. 16. b. 7 2.
in whom thou might put thy trust, Par. 19. a. 2
and have succor at thy need, Exo. 34. b. 12.
*contrary to my commandment: and thereby Discouerest thy filthynesse, and
she west plainly, that thou haste in thy heart forsaken me thy Lord, and
adulterously haste coupled thy self with other, and in them delightest and
put thy confidence.

And because thou haste done this, not only with wicked and Heathen Princes,
but also with a number of Idolatrous gods, and offered the. Innocent blood of
thy Children to them: Therefore I say behold I will Grievously punish thee.
etc. The manner of the Punishemente is, that God will bring against them both
their Friends with whom before time they have joined in league, Esaias. 20. b. 6
as the Assyrians, Chaldeis, and Egyptians, and also their Ancient enemies
the Philistines, Idumeans, and other, and al they gathered together, shall
behold their Nakedness and filthiness, and reward them as Lovers do their
old Strumpets, that they Loath and be weary of.

When Harlots be grown in age, or touched with some foul disease, their
customers begin to detest and shun them, and upon any light occasion will beat
them and taking from them al their gay Jewels and gorgious apparel, will turn
them out of the doors naked, that all other may See what they are. Even so God
signifies that the Chaldees and Assirians shall do by the Jews. Verse. 39.
They shall Waste their country, Destroy their city, Pull down their temple,
and other places of Sacrifice also, carry away into Babylon the gold and
silver and costly vessels belonging unto the same, which things were as the
apparel, ornaments, and jewels, wherewith Jerusalem was decked, and so shall
they turn the Jews out of their Country Naked, that all men may see their
Filthiness, and consider how Unfaithfully they have dealt toward their Lord
and God. Verse. 41.
By this means and by extreme Poverty, God says he will make them to leave
their Idolatry and enterteyning of foreyne Princes, because they should not be
hable through their Misery to bestow any more cost upon them.

Then shall his wrath rest and his iealeousie and anger depart from them. Verse.
42.
etc. So long as a man having an Unfaithful woman is in any hope by meaue
correction or iealeous carfulness to bring her to amendment, his mind cannot
well be Quiet. But when he is past hope, and sees her utterly desperate, and
also has severely punished her for the same, he lays aside all trouble of
mind, and iealeous care that before he had for hit, and lets her go like a
Naughty pack into the wide world. And so GOD says he will deal with the
Nation of the Jews.

Behold, Verse. 44. 45.
all they, that use common Proverbs, shall use this Proverb, etc. When the
Prophets of God did threaten grievous Plagues to come upon the Jews, they in
their hearts thought they had not deserved any such thing, but Gloried and
made auaunt of the Holiness of their Forefathers (as many Christians do at
this day.) Therefore God in diverse manners amplifieth and sets forth their
Wickedness, and in this place he notes, that for all their *Glorying, Io. 8.
e. 39.
they are not the True children of Abraham, the Patriarchs, and the old
Saints of God that followed them, But rather the Bastard babes of the
Idolatrous Chananites, whose manners they do so lively express, that it may,
as in a common proverb, be very well spoken of them, That they are their
mothers own children, that is, the chilof the old Strumpet Chanaan, which did
always filthily rage in the foul lust of spiritual Adultery.

Yea and they had to their Sisters two other, as bad or Worse then the mother
her self, that is, Samaria, and Sodom. So that they are here compared with
three exceeding Wicked Nations or people, which for their grievous and
Detestable offenses had already sustained just Punishment at the hand of
God, and thereby they are assured also to look for the like or worse, because
their sins for diverse respects were greater and more Grievous in his sight.
The like manner of teaching, Mat. 10. 11. 12
Christ himself uses, Math. 10. 11. and 12. willing the people to Beware by
the Example of other. It shall be good therefore for us also to consider the
manner of the enemies of Gods truth, and in time to take heed that we use not
the like, least that fall upon us, that the Prophet here Threatens to the
Jews. The Chananites as appears in the Law and Prophets were Idolaters,
Cruel, Lecherous, Proud, Covetous, False and Deceytfull: Ose. 12. b. 7.
They are like to Chanaan, says Oseas, in whose hands the balances of deceyte
are, and he loves to oppress. Leuit. 18. d. 24
And. Leui. 20. d. 23
Leuit. 18. and 20. In all those things the Nations are defiled, which I cast
out before you, Number. 33. g. 52.
that is, the Chananites. Their Idolatry is noted Number. 33. and in many other
places.

By Samaria the Prophet means the Israelites, and the Kingdom of the ten
Tribes, which he calls the elder Sister, because their Dominion was greater
then the tribe of Judah. And Sodom he calls the younger Sister, because the
Kingdom was less, otherwise Sodom was in time long before either Samaria or
Judah. The children of Samaria are the Towns and Cities belonging to it. How
by means of Jeroboam the Israelites fell from the True law of God to the
worshipping of golden Calves, and how obstinately without repentance they
continued in the same, and added other Heathnish Idolatry to it: we may read
abundantly, in the first and second of the kings, and in the latter book of
the Chronicles, beside many of the Prophets. Verse. 49.
The wickedness of Sodom is described. Gene. 19.
Genesis 19. and afterward here, are more particularly spoken of.

The Prophet very bitterly vpbraydeth them, Verse. 47. 48.
that they have not followed the Corruptions of Sodom and Samaria a little,
but that in all wickedness and Abomination they had done Worse, and far
passed them, so that in comparison of the Jews, the other might seem almost
Just men. For so means he when he says, Verse. 51.
Thou have justified thy Sisters in all thy abominations which thou have done.
Verse. 52.
Therefore God says by the Prophet, that they shall bear the Shame and rebuke
of their naughty doings, and he will Grievously plague them with Desolation
as before to their Example, Verse. 53. etc.
he had done the other. And he will Restore their Captivity, when he restores
the captivity of Sodom and Samaria, that is, Never.

The sins of Sodom mentioned Verse. 49. are these, 1
First Pride and arrogancy, with which whose minds are once possessed, they
can never Submit themselves to the Word of God, nor to the Calling of his
Prophets, but go on still and do all things according as likes themselves
best. The next is Fullness of bread, 2
that is, Gluttony, Riote, and Drunkenness: which does not only ouerwhelme
all good motions of the Spirit of God, but confounds and astonieth the
judgment of common Sense and reason. Therefore Christ gave a good warning when
he said, Luc. 21. g. 34.
Beware that your hearts be not oppressed with surfeting and drunkenness.
etc. signifying that nothing did more Hinder men from all Godliness, or made
them more subject to the tentations of the Devil then that did. God had given
the Sodomites a very Plentiful and wealthy Country, Genesis 13. b. 10.
*called the Paradise of the Earth, which thing they abused to Lust and
wickedness. So Corrupt we are that when GOD gives Wealth and plenty, we can
hardly stay our selves from turning it to ye Maintayning and feeding of Riote
and Excess.

3 The third vice was Security, and Idleness. Long peace and quietness is
the great blessing of God, but we see it come to pass, that they on whom he
does bestow it, do commonly so fall to Idleness and Security, that they
almost forget God, and will hardly by any means be brought to the remembrance
of their Duty until God has touched them with some Grievous plague. 4 The
fourth is Cruelty and unmercifulness toward the poor and needy, which as
it is in all men a great fault, so it is specially in them on whom God had
employed so ample benefits of Plenty, Wealth, Peace, and quietness, as he had
done on them of Sodom. 5 The fifth and last is that which of all other is most
Abominable and sprang out of These vices, as out of most naughty and
contagious roots, that is, Filthy and unnatural Lust, without all Shame and
moderation, as you may see more largely. Genesis 19. a. 1. etc
Genesis 19. read in the Church on the Sunday Sexagesima. In all these detestable
vices, the Prophet says that the Jews did far pass the Sodomites, and
therefore that gods Just plague must needs come upon them.

Thy Sister Sodom was not heard of by thy report in the day of thy pride,
Verse. 56. 57
etc. That is, when thou wast aloft in Honor and prosperity, thou would
never call to thy remembrance the horrible Punishment which they by Gods
Justice sustained, that by their example thou might have learned to fear
his judgments, and terrible plagues: until thine own Wickedness was
discovered, and God had brought upon thee most dreadful punishment, and caused
thee to be an open Reproach to all yt be about thee.

By this place let us learn while God deals Myldely and mercifully with us,
that we dyligently call to our remembrances, and set continually before our
eyes the Examples of such punishments as God has shown upon other for their
Sins, and so amend our lives, and bridle our affections with the fear of
Gods Justice, least, at the length when it shall be to late, we be driven by
extreme Miseries to see and feel the like in our selves. When the Prophet
says, According to the time of the reproach of the daughters of Aram or Syria:
Some do expound it of that Calamity that came upon the Jews by the Syrians,
2. 2. Chr. 28. a. 5 2.
Chron. Reg. 16. a 1
28. 2. Reg. 16. in the reign of the wicked king Achas, at which time not
only the Syrians made a great slaughter of them, but also the Edomites and
Philistines invaded them. Of which time these words may be well interpreted,
but far better if to that also we consider, that the Prophet wrappeth with it
that Plague and Reproach which at this time was at hand to be brought upon
them, and speaks of it as of a thing past. When God does grievously punish
any person for his sins, His wickedness is said To be discovered, which
before might seem to lie hid. For God never plageth but Justly, and
therefore all other may know and understand by the sight of his plagues, that
those persons have been offenders against him.

I might by right deal with thee, Verse. 5^.
as thou have done, which have despised the, etc. The Prophets always use to
their sharp Threatenings to add Sweet promises and comfortes, least such as
have some fear of God and sense of his judgment, should be driven to
desperation, and think that the Promise made unto them in the Messiah and
blessed seed of Abraham should be taken from them. Therefore God here
affirms that he will not deal with the remnant of the Jews according to
their deseruings, but upon their repentance will be Reconciled unto them. The
most part of the people were evil and wicked, and when the Prophets threatened
the wrath of God and their destruction, they would object for their defense the
covenant that God had made with them, as to be Their God and Their Defender,
and therefore esteemed they all the preaching of the Prophets to be vain,
because they thought Destruction could not come upon them by that God, to whom
they were joined as His people. This promise first begone to Adam, Genesis 3. c.
15.
and being after confirmed to Noah and Abraham, Genesis 9. b. 9.
on Mount Sinay by Moses was thoroughly established, Genesis 12. a. 3.
at which time the people also yielded to the same, Exodus 19. b. 8.
All things, say they, that the Lord has spoken, we will do, and will be
obedient to them. This Oath and Covenant the Jews had wholly Broken, and
rejected his law and true Worship therein contained. God therefore tells
them, that it is vain for them to stay upon the Bond of the covenant, seeing
they themselves had first broken it, so that he by good right might deal
otherwise with them. But for so much as the Whole Multitude were not rejected,
but God had some Remnant of Faithful, and such as had fear of his name, and
remembrance of their oath and covenant (as may appear by Jeremy, Ezechiell,
Baruch, Daniel, Tobie and others:) to their great comfort, he says, that he
will Remember his covenant made with them In the days of their youth, that is,
in Egypt, and at Mount Sinay, when they were but a young people. For although
the Greater number were unfaithful, yet their doings should not cause him to
break promise with the residue, but rather that he would establish with them
an Everlasting covenant, that no time should wear out. And this is the
Covenant that he speaks of Hier. Ierem. 31. f. 31.
31. Behold, says he, the days shall come that I will make a new covenant
with the house of Israel and the house of Judah, not after the covenant that I
made with their fathers, etc. which covenant they brake, etc. But this shall
be the couenaut that I will make with them, I will plant my law in the inward
parts of them, and will write it in their hearts, etc. In which words the
Prophet describes the everlasting covenant made in Christ Jesus the true
Messiah, and the confirmation of the same, by the sending of his Holy spirit
into their hearts, to direct them to the observation of his Law and blessed
Will. In all the great Troubles that were toward the people of God, the
Prophets used to erect them with the Promise of the true Savior that was to
come Christ Jesus, and so does Ezechiell in this place. For all other particular
comfortes had their force and strength in him.

Then shall thou remember thy ways, Verse. 61.
and be ashamed when thou shall, etc. God said he would Remember his Covenant
made with them, therefore he would have them also To remember their ways,
Ezech. 36. f. 31
that is, Iere. 31. d. 19.
their Idolatry and Wicked life, Romans 6. d. 21.
and to be * ashamed of them, Ezech. 43. c. 11
and earnestly from their hearts Repent, that they have done so unfaithfully
toward so gracious and loving a God. When God says, He will give their younger
and elder Sisters for daughters to them, He speaks not only of Sodom and
Samaria, which before he mentioned, but of all the Nations of the Gentiles,
which by the preaching of the Gospel should be brought to the knowledge of God
and faith in Christ: and so be made in deed the true children of Abraham, and
brothers and sisters to them that descended of the Promised seed. The Gospel
proceeded out of Jerusalem as Esaias says: A law comes out of Syon, Esa. 2.
a. 3.
and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem, Therefore the Gentiles might
well acknowledge it, in that respect to be their Mother, and they to be her
sons and daughters.

The.17. Sunday after Trinity, at Evening prayer.
Ezech. 18.

2 What mean ye by this common proverb, that ye use in the land of Israel,
saying: The fathers have eaten sour grapes, Iere. 31. e. 29.
and the childrens feeth are set on edge? 3 As truly as I live, says the Lord
God, Ye shall use this byworde no more in Israel.

4 Behold, Psalm. 24. a. 1.
all souls are mine: like as the soul of the father is mine, so is the soul
of the son mine also: the soul that sins, shall die it self.

5 But if a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right. 6 And has
not eaten upon the hills, he has not lift his eyes to the Idols of the house
of Israel, neither has defiled his neighbors wife, neither has come near a
woman removed:

7 Neither has oppressed any man, but has restored to the detter his pledge:
he that has not spoiled any by violence, has given his bread to the hungry,
Esaias. 58. b. 7.
and has clothed the naked. Deuteronomy. 23. c. 19.
8 And has not given forth upon usury, Psalm. 15. a. 6.
neither taken any increase, he has withdrawn his hand from iniquity, and
has executed true judgment between man and man.

9 And has walked in my statutes, and kept my judgments

10 If he now get a son that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and do any
one of these things,

11 Though he do not all these things, but either has eaten upon the hills,
or defiled his neighbors wife:

12 Or has oppressed the poor and needy, Leuit. 18. c. 20
or spoiled by violence, Leuit. 20. c.
or has not restored the pledge, or has lift up his cies unto the Idols, or
has committed abomination.

13 Or has given forth upon usury, Psalm. 15. b. 6.
or has taken increase: Shall this man live? he shall not live: Seeing he has
done all these abominations he shall die the death, his blood shall be upon
him. 14 Now if this man get a son also, that sees all his fathers sins
which he has done, and fears, neither does such like: 15 ( Namely) that has
not eaten upon the hills, neither has lift up his eyes to the Idols of the
house of Israel, nor defiled his neighbors wife:

16 Neither has oppressed any, nor has withholden the pledge, neither has
spoiled by violence: ( but) has given his bread to the hungry, and has
covered the naked with a garment. 17 Neither has withdrawn his hand from the
afflicted, nor received usury nor increase, ( but) has executed my
judgments, and walked in my statutes: this man shall not die in his fathers
sin, Romans 10. a. 5.
but shall live without fail.

18 As for his father, because he has cruelly oppressed and spoiled his
brother by violence, and has not done good among his people, lo he dies in
his own sin.

19 And yet say ye, Wherefore then should not this son bear his fathers
sin? Because the son has done judgment and righteousness, he has kept
all my statutes and done them: therefore shall he live in deed.

20 The same soul that sins shall die, Deuteronomy. 24. c. 16 4. Reg. 14. c. 6. 2.
the son shall not bear the fathers iniquity, Chr. 25. a. 4
neither shall the father bear the sons iniquity: the righteousness of the
righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon
himself also. 21 But if the ungodly will turn away from all his sins that
he has done, and keep all my statutes, and do the thing that is judgment
and right, doubtless he shall live and not die.

22 As for all his sins, that he did before, they shall not be mentioned unto
him: but in his righteousness that he has done he shall live. 2. Pet. 3. b. 9.
23 For have I any pleasure in the death of a sinner says the Lord God?
Ezech. 33. b. 11.
shall he not live if he return from his ways? 24 Again, if the righteous
turn from his righteousness, and do iniquity, and shall do according to
all the abominations that the wicked man does: shall he live? All the
righteousness that he has done shall not be remembered, but in his
tra^sgression that he has committed, in his sin that he has sinned, in them
he shall dye. Eccl. 33. d. 20.
25 And yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not indifferent. Hear therefore
ye house of Israel, is not my way equal? or are not your ways rather unequal?

26 When a righteous man turns away from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, and dies in the same: in his iniquity which he has committed shall
he die.

27 Again, when the wicked turns away from his wickedness that he has
done, and does judgment and right, he shall save his soul alive. 28 Because
he sees and turns away from all his iniquity that he has committed, he
shall surely live, and not die. 29 And yet says the house of Israel, The way
of the Lord is not equal. Are not my ways equal O ye house of Israel? are
not your ways rather unequal? Esaias. 55. b. 6.
30 Therefore I will judge you, Math. 3. a. 2.
every man according to his ways, O ye house of Israel says the Lord God,
return and bring again others from al your wickedness, so iniquity shall
not be your destruction.

31 Cast away from you all your transgressions whereby ye have transgressed,
Ezech. 11. c. 19
and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will he dye O ye house of
Israel?

32 Seeing I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies says the Lord God,
bring again your selves then, and ye shall live.

The Exposition upon the.xviij. Chapter of Ezechiel.
The word of the Lord came unto me saying, Verse. 1.
what mean ye by this, etc. THe Prophets often Preached unto the Jews, that
it could not be but God would grievously punish them because they Continued in
the sins of their forefathers, and that he had long time of his Patience
borne with the offenses of them both, and therefore of Necessity Gods Justice
must now be executed. Upon this occasion the Waywarde people easily believing
their fathers offenses, and hardly brought in persuasion of their Own,
blasphemously murmured against God, and in their hearts condemned him of
injustice, because the punishment of their fathers offenses should light upon
them. And to note this their Meaning, they used this common proverb: The
fathers have eaten sower grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge. By
Sower grapes they understood Idolatry, sin and wickedness, as appears
Esaias. Esaias. 5. b. 7.
5. which their fathers had committed, and by Teeth on edge, the grief and
pain of the punishment. So that, as I have said, their meaning was, that God
Injuriously spared their sinful fathers, and punished the Innocent children.
Iere. 31. e. 29.
In Hieremie also Cap. 31. it may appear they used the same proverb.
Wherefore the Prophet Ezechiel in this place defends the Justice of God
against their blasphemous Obloquie, and shows yt as the wisdom of God might
have other respects in their punishments, then they were hable to conceive: so
they could not Rightly quarrel with God in that point, because beside their
fathers Wickedness, Every man had his Own sins, for which in Justice he
might be Condemned and punished. And the Prophet to this purpose uses five
eauses.

1 The first is, that the Just man continuing in his Justice, and doing in all
things rightly shall prosper and not be punished. This does he in the 5. Verse.
5. etc.
6. 7. 8. and. 9. verses. Wherein also by particular properties he describes a
Just man.

2 The second is, if that Just father beget a Wicked son, Verse. 10. etc.
his fathers Justice shall not help him, but he shall be punished for his Own
naughtines.

3 The third, Verse. 14. etc.
if the Wicked man be getet a Just son, who seeing his fathers evil doings
fears God, and lives Uprightly, he shall not die in his Fathers sins, but
live and be in y^ favor of God.

4 The fourth, if the ungodly man will Turn from his wicked ways, Verse. 21.
etc.
and keep the laws and statutes of God, his sins that he did before shall
not be Mentioned unto him nor he punished for them. 5 If the righteous turn
from his righteousness and fall to Iuiquitie, Verse. 25.
his righteousness shall not be remembered, but he shall be plagued for his
Transgression wherein he continues. For so much as there are sundry places of
the Scriptures that in words seem contrary to the sayings of Ezechiel, there
may justly seem some Doubt to rise thereof. Exodus 20. a. 5.
I will (says God) requite the sins of the fathers upon the sons to the
third and fourth generation. Deuteronomy. 28. b. 15.
And again. If thou will not hear the voice of the Lord, etc. cursed shall
be the fruit of thy womb, and thy sons and thy daughters shall be delivered
to strangers. Exodus 34. b. 7.
The like we have. Iere. 23. b. 10.
Exo. 34. and Hier. 23. and in many other places. For Chams offense toward his
father, the Curse and punishment lights upon Chanaan. Gene. 9. d. 25. 2.
Many thousands perished for David's sin. Reg. 24. c. 15
At Sodom and in all general plagues, Ge. 19. a. 1. etc
the young children that never in Act offended, were partakers of the
punishment. etc. These things may seem repugnant to Gods justice here defended
by Ezechiel. And this was it that the Israelites and Jews did find
themselves Grieved withal, 3. Reg. 21. a. 3.
Jeroboam said they, did set up the golden Calves, 4. Reg. 21. a. 3.
and Manasses mainteyned Idolatry and corrupted the law of God, but the
punishment falls upon us. To this we have to answer that, when God said,
Exodus 20. That he vvoulde punish the sins of the fathers. etc. unto the
third and fourth generation, he added, of them that hate me. If the children
hate God, and Follow their fathers Idolatry and sinfulness, although God of
his mercy Spare their fathers in Wordly punishment: he will plague them, and
so much the more, Because they would not beware by their fathers offenses, and
consider Gods goodness toward them in granting them Time and Space to
repent. But some will ask why God says, he will punish The sins of the
fathers upon their children, seeing the children have their own sins, for
which they are justly punished? It may be answered, Because if their Fathers
had not so grievously offended, their Punishment might have been longer
Deferred. As God is merciful, so he is Just, and for so much as his patience and
mercy has Long borne with their wickedness, and looked in vain for their
repentance, his Justice must needs take place and at Length light upon them,
with due punishment. So that they are the Sooner and more Grievously punished
for their wicked Parents, and yet not without their Own just deserts and
evil doings. Wherefore to conclude with Ezechiel, the Jews in their lewd
Proverb, did blasphemously deprave Gods Justice, seeing their own unjust
doings in Following the foot steps of their sinful Fathers did pull his
just wrath upon them. And yet it cannot be denied but that God Sometimes does
punish some for the cause, Genesis 12. c. 10.
or by the occasion of other. Abraham and Jacob felt the smart of famine and
hunger, even as Sinful men did, Genesis 20. d. 17.
and they of the house of Pharao, and Abimeleck, were plagued for their Princes
cause. But beside that which is said before, that no man is so Righteous in
the sight of God, but that he Justly deserves punishment: we must moreover
consider, that Gods Scourges are not always, nor to all persons of One sort,
Toward the wicked they are Plagues of his Justice, toward the Godly they are
Exercises and Medicines by which he heals their corruptions, Judith. 8. d. 22
practices their faith, and Stirs them up the more earnestly to call upon
him. So that he makes it to them as a School of discipline to retain them in
more Fear of his name, Heb. 12. d. 11.
that they be not carried away with the wicked Allurements of the world, as the
ungodly are. We may not therefore think God to deal unjustly, when sometimes
we see him to wrappe good men in those plagues, wherewith he punishes the
Ungodly.

In those Properties of a Just man which are recyted and sundry times repeated
in this Chapter, the Prophet may seem to omit and leave out many works of
Justice, but in one general clause he comprehends all other. As when he
says: And has walked in my statutes and kept my judgments. Verse. 9. 17.
If there had been any such Just man among the Jews, he might with some
countenance have quarreled with GOD, Job. 15. a. 15. Job. 14. a. 4. Psalm. 13.
a. 4. To. 3. b. 10. 19. Psalm. 142 a. 2. Luc. 17. c. 10. Psalm. 50. b. 6.
punishing him being Innocent, for his fathers offenses: But there was never
yet any that * perfectly fulfilled the Statutes and laws of God. Therefore all
men's mouths are in that case stopped. There has been many good men, whose
imperfect obedience, it has pleased God in respect of the Promised seed and
Savior of the world to accept as Just, and so to account them before him. But
otherwise neither the child this day borne, nor the Angels in heaven are pure
in his sight.

The Prophet undoubtedly recites these Properties and works of Justice
especially, because men in them most commonly and Notoriously in those days
offended: so that he choked them from their blasphemous Obloquie by the
testimony of their own Consciences, which told them, that in these points
they were not innocent, but justly sustained Gods Plague even for their Own
sins, and not for their Fathers only.

And has not eaten upon the hills, Verse. 6.
he has not lift up his eyes to the Idol, etc. He means Sacrifycing and
keeping of their holy Feasts, 3. Reg. 3. a. ^. 3. Reg. 12. g. 31. 2. Par. 21.
b. 11 2. Par. 33. c. 17
in the high Places so often mentioned in the books of Kings and the
Chronicles. For as the Gentiles and Heathens were wont on Hills to have
Chapels and aulters for their False Gods: even so the Jews and Israelites
after their Temple builded, and appointed place chosen, did make Aulters on
high places, and therein worshypped sometime the living God, but disorderly,
sometime Idols and false Gods by the imitation of the Gentiles.

Neither has come near a woman removed, Verse. 6.
etc. He means a woman having her natural and Monthly Disease, because to
seek the company of a woman at that time is loathsome to nature, and a token
of immoderate lust and affection.

But has restored the detter his pledge, Verse. 7.
he that has not spoiled any, etc. The Prophet means the Pledge or gage of a
Poor man, which has borrowed any thing of him. The Law is, Exodus 22. d. 26
Exodus 22. If thou have taken the garment of thy neighbor to pledge, before
the son go down thou shall restore it to him, and he adds, Because he
has nothing else to cover him, etc. Whereby it may appear, he speaks of a
Poor man. Deuteronomy. 24. c. 12
And Deuteronomy. 24. the matter is made more plain: For after a larger declaring of
this law of Charity, he says, If he be a poor man, thou shall not sleep
with his pledge in thy house.

If this man get a son, Verse. 14.
that sees all his fathers sins, etc, and does not, etc. Our fathers are to
be followed, but only in those things that be good, but if they shall either
give us example of that which is Contrary to the will of God, yea either
command us to do it, surely they are not to be obeyed. And yet in these days
we have many, that will Tie themselves very straightly to Follow their
Parents Religion, but if there were any Example in them of virtuous and Honest
life, that they never remember. Such persons embrace in their Fathers that is
evil, and neglect that is good.

If the ungodly will turn away from all his sins that he has done, Verse.
21.
etc. Of this place may be taken a singular Comfort for all them that are
tormented in their consciences, Ierem. 3. a. 1. Ier. 18. a. 8. 2. Par. 6. g.
36. Sap. 11. d. 24 2. Par. 24. c. 19 Luc. 5 f. 32. Luc. 15. b. 7 1. John. 2. a.
2. Math. 11. d. 28 Romans 2. a. 4. Mich. 7. d. 19. Esaias. 49. d. 15. Psalm. 102. c.
12. Eccle. a. b. 11. 2. Pet. 3. b. 9 Romans 11. d. 32.
for the heavy burden of their sins. For God here * proclaimed Mercy and
forgiveness to all that Repent them of their former wickedness, and says it
shall not be Mentioned unto them be it never so great. It is a great craft of
the Devil, first by all Flattering allurements of the world to cause men
grievously to offend, and when they have done, to Lay their sins before
their eyes, that he may drive them to Desperation. But here God says. If the
ungodly will turn from their sins, they shall never be mentioned unto them.

If the righteous turn from his righteousness, Verse. 24.
and do the thing, etc. It is not sufficient for a man to begin well in
godliness and virtue, and after to reuolte from it to wickedness again: But
he must continue in his well doing. Math. 10. c. 22 Luc. 9. g. 62.
Happy is he, says Christ, that contynueth to the end. He that sets his
hand to the Plough and looks back, is not meet for the kingdom of God. It
was not sufficient for Loths wife to depart out of Sodom, Genesis 19. e. 26.
her looking back again did turn her into a salt stone. Apoc. 2. c. 10.
Be faithful unto death says God, and I will give thee the crown of life.

Out of this Chapter we may observe these necessary points.

First, that God is Just and does injury to no man: And as the sons of the
children shall not hurt the father, unless they grew by the fathers occasion,
so shall not the sins of the father hurt the son, if he do not follow the
fathers steps.

Secondly, we see that there were in those days many which carped and cauilled
at the preaching of the Prophets, and made matter of scoffing and jesting at
it. No marvel therefore if we see the like in these days, but their jesting
tauntes will in the end fall upon their own heads.

Thirdly, we may learn the corruption of our own nature. For as these Jews
would seem innocent and in no ways acknowledge their offenses. So do we
either deny our sins, or with fair pretenses extenuate them, and cast the
fault upon other. Many that cannot be persuaded that God governs all things,
yet when they sin, to excuse themself, they impute the blame to the
providence of God. Oh say they, it was my destenie, I think God did work me
this shame to do it. So Adam at the beginning laid the fault to the woman
which God had joined to him, and the Woman turns over the blame to the
Serpent But neither did with humble hearts acknowledge their disobedience. This
Property sticks in the Nature of all the children of Adam.

The 18. Sunday after Trinity, at Morning prayer.
Ezechiel. 20.

2 Then came the word of the Lord unto me, saying, 3 Thou son of man,
speak unto the elders of Israel, and say unto them, thus says the Lord God,
are ye come to enquire of me? As truly as I live I will not be sought of you,
says the Lord God.

4 Wylt thou not judge them son of man, will thou not judge ( them?) cause
them to understand the abominations of their fathers. 5 And tell them, thus
says the Lord God, In the day when I chose Israel, Exodus 3. b. 8. Deuteronomy. 7. b.
6.
and lift up mine hand upon the seed of the house of Jacob, and was known
unto them in the land of Egypt, yea when I lift up my hand over them, and
said, I am the Lord your God.

6 Even in the day that I lift up mine hand unto them, to bring them out of
the land of Egypt into a land that I

7 Then said I unto them, Cast away every man the abominations of his eyes,
and defile not your selves with the Idols of Egypt: for I am the Lord your God.

8 But they rebelled against me, and would not hearken unto me, they did not
cast away every man the abbominations of his eyes, neither did they forsake
the Idols of Egypt: then I said, I would power out mine indignation over
them, and accomplish my wrath upon them, yea even in the midst of the land of
Egypt. 9 And I wrought for my names sake that it should not be polluted before
the heathen among whom they were, to whom I was manifestlye known, in
bringing them forth of the land of Egypt.

10 Now when I had caused them to go out of the land of Egypt, and brought
them into the wilderness.

11 I gave them my statutes, Romans 10. a. 5. Gala. 3. b. 12.
and showed them my judgments: which who so does, shall live in them.

12 I gave them also my Sabbath days to be a token betwixt me and them, Leuit.
18. a. 5.
and thereby to know that I am the Lord which halowe them. Exodus 20. b. 8.
13 And yet the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness, they
would not walk in my statutes, they have cast away my judgments: which who
so does, shall live in them, and my Sabbath days have they greatly polluted:
Number. 14. b. 12
then I said, I would power out mine indignation upon them, and consume them in
the wilderness. 14 And I wrought for my names sake, least it should be defiled
before the heathen, in whose sight I brought them out. 15 Yet nevertheless I
lift up my hand unto them in the wilderness, that I would not bring them into
the land which I gave them, that flows with milk and honey, and is a
pleasure of all lands.

16 And that because they cast away my judgments, and walked not my statutes:
but have defiled my Sabbathes: for their heart was gone after their Idols.

17 Nevertheless mine eye spared them, so that I would not destroy them, not
consume them in the wilderness.

18 Moreover, I said unto their sons in the wilderness. Walk not in the
statutes of your fathers, keep not their judgments, and defyle not your
selves with their Idols.

19 I am the Lord your God, Exodus 16. a. 6.
walk in my statutes, keep my judgments, and do them.

20 Halow my Sabbathes, for they are a token betwixt me and you: that ye may
know how that I am the Lord your Leuit. 18. a. 5. Gala. 3. b. 12. Romans 10. a.
5.
which he that does shall live in them, they profaned my sabbath days, and I
said, I would power out mine indignation ever them, and accomplish my wrath
upon them in the wilderness.

22 Nevertheless I withdrewe my hand, and wrought for my names sake, lest it
should be defiled in the sight of the heathen, before whom I had brought them
forth.

23 I lift up my hand to them also in the wilderness, that I might scatter
them among the heathen, and straw them among the nations. 24 Because they had
not kept my judgments, but cast aside my statutes, and broken my Sabbathes,
and their eyes were after their fathers Idols.

25 Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were not good, and judgments
wherein they should not live.

26 And I defiled them in their own gifts, Exodus 13. a. 2.
in that they caused all that opens the womb to pass, that I might destroy
them, that they might know how that I am the Lord. 27 Therefore speak unto
the house of Israel thou son of man, and thou shall say unto them, thus says
the Lord God, Yet in this also your fathers have blasphemed me, and grievously
transgressed against me.

28 For after I had brought them into the land, for the which I lifted up my
hand to give it unto them, when they saw every high hill, and all thick
trees, they offered there their sacrifices, and there they presented their
offering of anger, there also they made their sweet savors, and powered out
their wine offerings. 29 And I said unto them, What is that high place
whereunto ye resort? and the name of it is called Bamah unto this day.

30 Wherefore speak unto the house of Israel, thus says the Lord God, Are ye
not defiled in the ways of your fathers, and commit ye not whordome after
their abominations? 31 For when ye offer your gifts, Ierem. 19. a. 5. Deuteronomy.
12. d. 31 2. Par. 33. a. 6.
and make your sons to pass through the fire, you are polluted with all your
Idols unto this day: shall I answer you when I am asked, O house of Israel? As
I live says the Lord God, I will not be sought of you.

32 And ( that which) comes into your mind shall not be at all, which you
say, We will be as the Gentiles, as the kinreds of Countries, to serve wood and
stone.

33 As truly as I live says the Lord God, I my self will ru^e you with a
mighty hand, with a stretched out arm, and with indignation powered out over
you.

34 And I will bring you from the people, and gather you out of the countries
wherein ye are scattered, with a mighty hand, with a stretched out arm, and
with indignation poured out. 35 And I will bring you into the wilderness of
the people, and there I will be judged with you face to face.

36 Like as I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderness of Egypt: so will I
plead with you also, says the Lord God.

37 I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the
bond of the covenant.

38 And I will purge out of you the rebels, and them that transgress against
me, and bring them out of the land of their habitation: as for the land of
Israel they shall not come in it, that you may know how that I am the Lord.

39 As for you O house of Israel, Ezech. 14. a. 4
thus says the Lord God, Go you and serve every man his Idols, seeing that
ye obey not me: and pollute no more my holy name with your gifts and your
Idols. 40 For upon my holy hill, even upon the hie hill of Israel says the
Lord God, shall all the house of Israel, and all that is in the land worship
me: and in the same place will I favor them, and there will I require your heave
offeringes, and the firstlings of your oblations, with all your holy things.
41 I will accept your sweet savor, when I bring you from the Nations, and
gather you together out of the lands wherein you have been scattered, that I
may be hallowed in you before the heathen.

42 And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall bring you into the land
of Israel, into the land for the which I lift up my hand to give it unto your
fathers.

43 There shall ye call to remembrance your own ways, and all your works
wherein ye have been defiled, and ye shall be cut of in your own sight for all
your wickedness that ye have done. 44 And ye shall know that I am the Lord,
when I deal with you for my names sake, and not after your wicked ways, nor
according to your corrupt works O ye house of Israel, says the Lord God.

45 Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. 46 Thou son of
man, set thy face toward the way of Themanah, and drop ( thy word) toward
the south, and prophecy toward the forest of the south field.

47 And say to the forest of the south, Here the word of the Lord, thus
says the Lord God, Behold I will kindle a fire in thee, that shall consume
all the green trees, with all the dry: the continual flame shall not be
quenched, and every face from the south to the morth shall be burnt therein.

48 And all flesh shall see that I the Lord have kindled it, and it shall not
be quenched. 49 Then said I, Ah Lord God, they say of me, Does not he speak
parables?

The Exposition upon the.xx. Chapter of Ezechiel.
In the seventh year, Verse. 1.
the tenth day of the fifth Month, certain of the elders, etc. THe Jews as is
said in the former Chapter, quarreled with God and thought it extremity that
their Fathers wickedness should be punished in them. Wherefore in this place
the Prophet declares, that as there fathers were evil and rebellious against
God, so were the children and posterity also, and therefore that they were
justly plagued by him in respect of themselves as well as of their fathers. In
the very entrance of this speech, he shows at what time, and by what
Occasion he preached this unto them. In the seventh year, says he, etc. that
is from the captivity and banishment of Iechonias in Babylon. For from that
time, as it appears in sundry places they began their account, partly to
call to remembrance the Heavy judgments of GOD against them for their sin,
partly to Comfort themselves with the promise of deliverance after.70. weeks,
or years prophesied unto them by Hieremie and Daniell. Dan. 9. f. 24.
The occasion of this speech of Ezechiel is the same that was in Ezech. 14. a. 1
.14. Chapter, that is the coming of the Elders of Israel unto him to have
answer from God of their estate and captivity that they were in. They
pretended to reverence the Prophet as a father and instructor, and that they
were desirous to learn at his hand what they should hope or what they might
do; but meaning nothing less then syncerely to follow his teaching: For if
they had so purposed, they would long before have left those things, with
which God by his Prophets declared that he was greatly Displeased. Ier. 42. a.
1. etc
With like affection came they to Hieremie to consult of their fleeing into
Egypt, but when he had told them Gods will, they would not believe him,
Iere. 37. c. 16. Ier. 38. d. 14.
but followed their own fantasy. * Sedechias also coniured the same Hieremie
to tell him plainly the will and purpose of God, but when he heard it he made
no account of it, but by the motion of his Nobles cast him into prison. Mat.
22. d. 34 Luc. 20. d. 20 John. 18. g. 38.
With like affection oftentimes, the Priests, the Scribes, the Phariseyes, the
Saduces, the Herodians, came unto Christ, but never soundely to learn, but
rather take him in trip, and thereby to work him danger. In like sort many at
this day pretend with fair face a Love of the truth, and a Favor of the
Religion published according to the word of God, and therefore will come to
Sermons and to service, and, when it serves for their purpose, will Speak
against Papistrie, and with words uphold the truth, but, with how sound
mind and conscience, their other dealings do evidently declare. I would to
God there were not many such even in the Boldmes of Godly men. But I trust God
will detect them as he does here to Ezechiel, and to their shame and rebuke
teach his servants to Beware of them. For as they may Dissemble with the
world, and Abuse some true and honest meaning men, so they cannot deceive God,
who sees the be^wels and Secrets of their hearts, and will use them
accordingly.

Will thou not judge them, Verse. 4.
O Son of man, will thou not judge them, etc. This place is diversely
translated and enterpreted: I think the playnest sense to be this. O son of
man enter not into disputation and reasoning with them, and be not careful to
answer all their arguments and pretenses. For they Will not be taught of
thee, And therefore simplye and plainly to their judgment and condemnation
tell them what manner of men their fathers have been, and what yet they remain
still themselves, beginning even at that time when I began first to bring
them out of Egypt, and so contynuing unto this present day, that they may
thereby know themselves.

In the day when I chose Israel, Verse. 5.
and lift up my hand upon the seed, etc. This fashion of speaking To lift up
the hand, does signify sometime, to Swear or take an oath, because the
Ceremony or gesture of lifting up the hand to heaven in taking an oath, did
signify that they called God to witness, that they Concealed no truth, nor
Uttered any falsehood: or if they did, they desired the same God to be Reue^ged
of them. And in this signification of Swearing, it is to be taken in this
place, because God in his concnant, by oath did bind himself to be their God
and to deliver them. Sometime To lift up the hand, signifies to show his
Power or strength, either in Delivering or Punishing, or in Hurting and
Stryking, which signification may also well serve in this Chapter.

A land which flows with milk and honey, Verse. 6.
and is pleasant among, etc. In many places of the Scripture, the land of
Chanaan is mentioned to flow with Milk and Honey, that is, to abound with all
things Necessary, not only for susteynance, but also for Delight and
pleasure. For in those days there was no more delectable feeding then Milk
and Honey.

S. Hierome who lived a long time in that Country, writes that it was a very
Delectable and fruitful place, but yet can we not think that it was then any
thing in comparison of that it was before, so long as they were the people of
God, and remained in his obedience, keeping his laws and ordinances. For when
they had rejected the son of God and promised Messiah, it is likely the land
it self also was stricken for their wickedness, and thereby far decayed from
that it was in times past.

But they rebelled against me, Verse. 8.
and would not harken to me, they did, etc. It is a testimony of the great
goodness and mercy of God, that he calls earnestly to repentance before he
strike and punish his people for their sins. And so did he then to the
Israelites, but they would not harken unto him, nor did cast away The
abominations of their eyes, that is, their wicked Idols on which they did
cast their eyes with great delight: even as they that be in unchaste love be
always desirous to see and behold them that they love. Undoubtedly Idolatry
was unpleasant to Joseph and the other Patriarchs in Egypt, and they did
exhort their children to remain in the True worship of the living God. Yet many
of them, as borne and bredde in Egypt, were corrupted and fell to Idolatry by
the Imitation of that People. Then were Moses and Aaron sent from God unto
them, and yet continued they still in Idolatry. Whereby we may gather what was
the Cause why God did so long suffer his people to continue in so miserable
oppression in Egypt, and did not sooner turn his merciful continaunce toward
them. And that was, because they had almost Forgot him and his true Worship
delivered them by their Fathers, and were given to the worshipping of strange
Gods. And yet GOD would not even Then pour out his wrath upon them, although
they had justly deserved it, but for his Own name sake, and for the Covenant
that he had made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with his mighty hand, he
Delivered them.

I wrought for my names sake, Verse. 9.
that it should not be polluted before, etc. I stayde my self, says God, from
Extremity of my wrath, and from working utter destruction, not for my people
sake, which in deed had justly deserved it, but for my Names sake, that it
might not be distained, and evil spoken of among the Egiptians, Amalechites,
and other Heathen Nations in whose sight my great works were wrought and which
had Heard of my purpose to deliver my people, And therefore would have said
that I had neither been hable nor willing to do that which I had promised,
and thereby to have thought of me no otherwise then they did of their own False
Gods. This cause in this Chapter so often repeated, may bring a singular
Comfort to the godly in time of affliction and trouble. And therefore Moses
and other holy men have always stayed most upon that in their earnest prayers
unto God, when he has threatened or begun any private or common plague,
desiring him, that he would spare his people, and hold his merciful hand
over them, though not for their Own sakes, which in no wise they have
deserved, yet for his promise sake, and for his Own Names sake, that the
enemies might not rejoice in the confusion of his people. And these prayers
have ever taken good effect with God.

Now when I had caused them to go out of the land of Aegipt, Verse. 10.
etc. Hitherto the Prophet has declared how their Fathers behaved themselves
in Egypt Before their deliverance. Now he shows how after his great
benefits they Rebelled and murmured against him in the wilderness. As when
Moses was in the Mountain they made a golden calfe, Exodus 32. a. 1. Exodus 15.
d. 25. Exodus 16. a. 2. Exodus 17. a. 3. Number. 11. a. 1. Number. 14. a. 2. Number. 16.
a. 1. Number. 20. a. 3.
when God tried them with Want of meat and drink, they murmured. They repined
often against their governors, and accusing them of treason, and of a meaning
to destroy the people, were ready to have stoned them. The Histories are Exodus
15. 16. and 17. Number. 11. 14. 16. 20. and 21.

The Sanctifying of the Sabbath mentioned verse.12. was a token that God had
sanctified the Israelites even as he had sanctified the Sabbath, and had chosen
them * as his peculier people and holy Priesthood, 1. Pet. 1. c. 15.
which should preserve and keep his promises until they were fulfilled in
Messiah Christ Jesus, who was the appointed Savior of the world.

And that because they cast away my judgments, Verse. 16. 17.
and walked not in my, etc. By this place and the like often used in this
Chapter, we have to learn what be the Causes that move GOD to mind and
purpose the utter Desolation of any people, Ier. 9. d. 12.
that is, * because they Break the law of God, Cast away his judgments,
and Contemn his word. Yet is God of long patience and slow to wrath, ever
trying all means of amendment before he come to extremity, and even then also
sometime he respects not the deserts of men; but the Glory of his own name.

Moreover, Verse. 18. etc.
I said unto their sons in the Wilderness, Walk not in the, etc. In the
space of forty years well near all the Fathers which came out of Egypt were
dead, partlye by Gods plagues for their disobedience, partly by his just
judgments otherwise: so that but two of them came into the land of promise.
Therefore God by his servant Moses exhorted their sons not to follow their
fathers steps, Deuteronomy. 6. c. 16. Psalm. 77. a. 10. Psalm. 94. b. 10. Zach. 1. a.
4. Heb. 3. b. 9.
but to cleave to the law and ordinances of God, as it appears well near in
the whole book of Deuteronomy. But they were no more obedient tha^ their fathers were.

God forbade the people to follow the statutes and Traditions of their fathers.
Therefore the holy ghost confuteth them which in matters of religion and
holiness will pretend to follow the Example of their fathers, and not measure
their faith by Gods word and his holy scriptures. The authority of fathers
ought certainly to be great with their children in all things that are not
Repugnant to Gods will, which is safely and surely understood by his word
only, and not by example of Ancetours or predecessors. For it has been a
common thing among the people of God, as it appears in this place and a
number mo that Ancetours have Erred in Gods causes, and therefore can they be
no sure ground of conscience.

I gave them also statutes that were not good, Verse. 25.
and judgments wherein they, etc. All the laws and precepts of God were pure,
Deuteronomy. 30.
holy and good, therefore the meaning of these words is, that forsomuche as in
no case they would be brought to keep the Good and wholesome laws of God,
Romans 7. c. 12.
by his just judgment he gave them over to their own Fantasies, and suffered
them to use the wicked and Superstitious ordinances of the heathen to their
own further condemnation. And the same means he by this saying. Romans 1. d.
28.
I defiled them in their own gifts, and gave them up to a reprobate sense,
that they might destroy the first borne of their own children in sacrificing
them to the Idol Moloc. 2. These. 2. c. 11
The like to this Paul also threatens that shall happen unto men in the
latter days, and in the times of Antichrist, that for so much as they will not
love the truth, God will bring upon them an effectual illusion, that they may
believe lies, to the end that all may be judged, which would not give credit
to the truth.

After I had brought them into the land, Verse. 2. ^.
for the which I lifted up. etc. Now follows how Waywardly and
disobediently their Fathers behaved themselves after they came into y^ land of
Chanaan. For the greater benefices that God of his goodness had bestowed upon
them, the more ready were they to Fall from his true worship to the Idolatry
and superstition of the Gentiles. They served the Lord Truly all the days of
Iosuah, and of the Elders that followed him, Iudic. 2. b. 7.
as it is written in the second of the Judges, But in the next generation the
children of Israel dealt wickedly in the sight of the Lord and served all
manner of Idols. The whole Book of the Judges is nothing but as it were a
Register of their inconstancy and light flitting from the True service of God,
notwithstanding that he did sundry times of his great mercy Raise diverse
Governors to deliver them. And afterward did they in like manner in the Reign
of many evil kings both of Israel and Judah.

And I said unto them, Verse. 29.
what is that high place whereunto you resort, etc. The Patriarchs and Saints
of God did always Sacrifice unto God, as appears by Abell, Noah, Abraham, and
other: Which were not therefore acceptable and pleasant unto god because they
were full Satisfaction for sins, but rather partly as Thanksgiving for his
benefits, partly as figures of the true Redemption and Satisfaction that
should be made by the oblation and Sacrifice of Christ Jesus upon the Cross.

Afterward God by Moses distincted those Sacrifices into sundry sorts, and
appointed one Place where he would be served, that is, at his tabernacle,
before the time of Solomon, and in his temple of Jerusalem after it was by him
builded. But the Israelites, making small account of this order and appointment
of God, builded aulters in every high place, and on the same offered Sacrifice,
not only to the living God pretending the imitation of the Patriarchs against
the prescript of Gods word: but also in the like places offered to Idols and
strange Gods, according to the imitation of the Gentiles, as in diverse
Chapiters before I have noted.

Thus says the Lord God, Verse. 30. 31.
are you not defiled in the ways of your fathers, etc. After that God has
laid before them the rebellious wickedness of their Fathers in Egypt, in the
wilderness, and in the land of Chanaan, that they might not * glory in the
holiness of their fathers, Mat. 3. b. 9. Io. 8. e. 33. 39.
as some time they were wont to do, he now comes to themselves, and
declares* that, whatsoever by Hypocrisy they pretended, yet in deed and in
truth they were as evil and wicked as they in all kind of abomination and
spiritual whoredom. And in one example especially he makes proof of the
whole, reciting that which of all other was most Horrible, that is, the
Offering of their children unto Idols. Wherefore he says he will not answer
them to their questions, nor will not be sought vntoby such Hypocrites as they
are.

And that which comes into your minds shall not be at all, Verse. 32.
which you say, etc. These Elders came to the Prophet under fair pretense to
Learn at his hand, how they might behave themselves, and how long the
captivity should endure, but in the mean time they reuolued in their minds
how they might have a reasonable color and pretense clean to reject the law
of God, and to serve Idols of wood and stone, even as the heathen did. Happily
they surmised that the Prophet would have told them, 2. Par. 36. d. 21 Ier.
29. c. 11. Iere. 29. b. 10. Dan. 9. a. 2.
that the *captivity should endue. 70. years, as it was then commonly spread
from the mouth of Hieremie. And then would they have answered, that seeing it
was so, that they should tarry so long in Babylon, it should be best for them to
apply themselves to the Religion and manners of the people of that Country.
Otherwise, if they did stick to stiffly to their former Religion, and so much
differ from the Babilonians, they should be sure to find them the more
grievous Lords and Masters to them. But God detecteth this their unhappy
purpose, and says they shall have due correction for it.

As truly as I live says the Lord, Verse. 33.
I my self will rule you with a mighty, etc. I know (says God) this your
traiterous and rebellious devise of your hearts to revolt wholye from my
service, to the Idols of the Gentiles among whom you are. But surely I will
ouershwart you, and though you do make the Babilonians more favorable to you,
I my self will be your Adversary, and by mighty hand and extremity of
punishment will force you, whether you or no, to acknowledge me your Lord and
God. It shall not come to pass as you think, that you shall *quietly serve
stocks and stones with Idolators, Iudic. 2. c. 14. Iudic. 3. a. 8. Iere. 2. d.
19.
I will not neglect fugitive servants as slack masters are wont to do.
Seeing that I have once taken you into my covenant, I will by sharp
punishment, And by my indignation powered out upon you, make you desirous and
glad to come again under my obedience.

I will bring you from the people, Verse. 34. etc.
and gather you out of the country, etc. God signifies that he will not
break covenant with them, but as he had promised by his Prophets, so would he
do in deed, that is, he would bring them from among those Countries, wherein
they are scattred, but in such sort as the godly only should have comfort
thereby, and the wicked no cause at all to rejoice. He threatens to deal with
them, as he did with their fathers in the wilderness of Egypt. For in Egypt he
declared his justice by sundry kinds of punishment. When they murmured
against God in the wilderness, many of them he consumed with fire: Number. 11.
a. 1.
Number. 11. When Dathan and Abyram rose against Moses. 250. perished with fire,
and the residue the earth swalowed up, yea and the next day again, 14000. and
700. were destroyed Number. 16. Number. 16. c. 35. 49.
When they spoke against Moses at an other time, a great number were slain by
Serpents Number. 21. Number. 21. b. 6.
In this sort of judgment God here Protests that he will deal with the
wicked Israelites, and by such means, as it were, cull out and purge away the
obstinate and rebellious transgressors from the other, so that they shall
never enjoy the land of Israel again with comfort and quietness.

As their fathers which God brought out of Egypt, Number. 14. e. 30 Psalm. 94. d.
11. Heb. 3. d. 18.
because of their often Disobedience * never came into the land of promise:
even so the Prophet says those evil children, that without repentance
continued in their abominations should never have the quiet fruition of their
Country again. Notwithstanding that for his promise sake he would deliver and
bring home the Residue which either by teaching of his Prophets or by
punishment, or any other means, did forsake their wicked ways, and turn
again to the obedience of his law.

As for you, Verse. 39.
O house of Israel, etc. Go you and serve every man his Idols, etc. For So Much
as they would not yield to obey God and to follow his law, with scornful
reproach he bids them go on, and according to their own fantasies wholly to
serve every man his Idols, and not to mixed withal the Title of his name, and
so distaine it. By which words, we may perceive, that God will not be matched
with other, but have worship done wholly to himself. 1. Reg. 18. d. 21
How long, says Elias, halte you on both sides? If the Lord be God follovv
him, 2. Cor. 6. c. 15.
If Baal, go after him. What agreement can there be betvveene Christ and
Belial, says Saint Paul. Math. 6. c. 24.
And our Savior Christ teaches us That we cannot serve two masters, We
must therefore learn also to serve Christ wholly, and not to mixed Idolatrous
Superstition with the truth of his Gospel.

For upon my holy hill, Verse. 40.
even upon the high hill of Israel says the Lord, etc. These words that
follow may be literally understood of such of the Israelites brought out of
Captivity as by manifold plages did repent and learn to worship God
sincerely, not after their own devises, as they did before in their high
places, but according to the prescript of Gods word. And therefore being
restored into their Country, God signifies their devotion should be
acceptable unto him, and all their Sacrifices pleasant. And for so much as the
Prophets do oftentimes break out from things of present state in the world,
unto the blessing to come in the promised seed and Savior: this place may
also very well be interpreted of the spiritual Israel, that is the Church and
people of God under Christ. For by the Holy hill and high mountain of Israel,
or Sion, is understood the Church, because the Apostles were first sent from
thence to preach the Gospel in all the world. Of this hill speaks Esaias.
Esa. 2. a. 2. Mich. 4. a. ^.
2. cap. and Micheas. 4 cap. The hill of the Lords house shall be prepared in
the height of the mountains, and all Nations shall press unto him. The *
Sacrifices of Christians which are acceptable Psalm. 4. b. 6.
unto God, and the * sacrifices which he will require of them, Psalm. 49. c. 15.
Psalm. 50. d. 1. 8 Psalm. 106. b. 22 Psalm. 140. a. 2. Eccl. 35. a. 2. 4 Phil. 4.
d. 18.
are earnest prayer, and thankesgyuing for his benefits, the sacrifice
memorial of the Lords supper, *charitable relief of their poor brethren, and
their own souls and bodies consecrated to his service. In these will he
delight, and these shall be to him as A svvete savor.

There shall you call to remembrance your own ways, Verse. 43. 44.
and all your works, etc. The Repentant Jews after Captivity shall call to
remembrance, says the Prophet, their own naughty ways and works against
the law of God, Dan. 9. b. 7. 1. Esdr. 9. d. 15
and with heavy hearts being sorry and * ashamed of them, shall acknowledge and
* confess that even by their own judgments, they were worthy by Gods justice
to have been clean cut of from him, and that it is of his only mercy and
goodness that he has wrought otherwise. And that for his own names sake, and
for his own glory in performing his covenant, he has restored them into
their Country again. In like manner christian men by the free mercies of God
being delivered from the captivity of Sin, Satan, and Death, and brought
home into holy Mount Sion the Church of God and heavenly Jerusalem, do call
to remembrance their old wickedness and abominations wherein they lived to
the dishonor of God and reproach of the world, 1. Cor. 15. b. 9. Luc. 15. c.
21. Romans 6. d. 21. Luc. 18. c. 13.
and therefore are *ashamed of them, and * confess in their hearts that they
were worthy of ye wrath of God, and by perpetual damnation to be cut from his
presence. And in that it is otherwise done, that it proceeds of the Riches of
his goodness toward mankind laid out abundantly unto them in Christ Jesus
our Savior.

The 18. Sunday after Trinity, at Evening prayer.
Ezech. 24. IN the ninth year, in the tenth Month, the tenth Ezech. 17. a. 2.
and speak unto them, thus says the Lord God, Prepare a pot, set it on, and
power water into it.

4 Gather the pieces thereof into it, every good piece, the thigh and the
shoulder, and fill it with the chief bones.

5 Take one of the best sheep, and burn also bones under it: let it boil
well, and let the bones thereof sees well therein. 6 With that said the Lord
God on this manner, Woe unto the bloody city, to the pot whose scumme is therein,
and whose scumme is not gone out of it: bring it out piece by piece, let no lot
fall upon it. 7 For her blood is in the midst of it, upon a high dry stone
has she powered it: and not upon the ground, that it might be covered with
dust.

8 That it might cause wrath to arise, and take vengeance: I have set her blood
upon a high ( dry) rock, that it should not be covered. 9 Wherefore thus
says the Lord God, O woe be unto the bloudthirstie city, for whom even I my
self will make a great fire. Nahum. 3. a. 1 Abac. 2. a. 8.


10 And heap on much wood, and kindle the fire, and sees the flesh, and
spice the pot, so that the very bones shall be brent. 11 Moreover I will set
the pot empty upon the coals, so that the brass thereof may be hot and
burnt, and the filthiness of it may by molten in it, and the scumme of it
shall be consumed. 12 She has wearied her self with labor, yet her great
scumme is not gone of her, in the fire her scumme ( must be consumed.)

13 In thy filthiness is wickedness: because I would have purged thee, and
thou wast not purged from thy filthynesse, thou shall not be purged any more,
till I have caused mine indignation to reast in thee. 14 Even I the Lord have
spoken it: yea it is come thereto all ready that I will do it, I will not go
back, I will not spare, I will not repent: but according to thy ways and
imaginations shall they judge thee, says the Lord God. 15 And the word of
the Lord came unto me, saying. 16 Thou son of man, behold I will take away
from thee the pleasure of thine eyes with a plague, yet shall thou neither
mourn nor weep, neither shall thy tears run down. 17 Mourn in silence,
make no mourning of the dead, bind the tire of thy head upon thee, and put
on thy shoes upon thy feet, cover not thy lips, and eat no man's bread. 18 So
I spoke unto the people betimes in the morning, and at even my wife died: then
upon the next morrow I did as I was commanded.

19 And the people said unto me, Wylt thou not tell us what this signifies
toward us that thou do so? 20 I answered them, The word of the Lord came
unto me, saying:

21 Tell the house of Israel, thus says the Lord God, Behold I will pollute
my sanctuary, even the glory of your power, ye pleasure of your eyes and your
hearts delight: and your fou^es and daughters whom ye have left, shall fall
through the sword. 22 Like as I have done, so shall ye do also: ye shall not
cover your lips, ye shall eat no man's bread.

23 And your tire ( shall be) upon your heads, and your

25 Also thou son of man, shall it not be in the day when I take from them
their power, the joy of their honor, the pleasure of their eyes, and the
lifting up of their souls, their sons and their daughters? 26 In that day
shall come one that is escaped, unto thee, ( and bring it) to the hearing of (
thine) ears. 27 In that day shall thy mouth be opened to him which is escaped,
that thou may speak and be no more dumb: yea thou shall be their
shewetoken, that they may know how that I am the Lord.

The Exposition upon the.xxiiij. Chapter of Ezechiel.
In the ninth year, in the tenth Month, Verse. 1.
the tenth day of the month, etc. THe Prophet being in Babylon, foretells
the time in which the City Jerusalem was besieged, and by an allegory of a
pot set over the fire, declares how the Jews for their obstinacy should be
punished. Iere. 25. b. 8. Iere. 26. a. 6. Iere. 28. b. 8. Iere. 35. d. 17.
Whereby we also have to learn what shall * happen to Kingdoms, Cities,
Countries, and private men also, which contemning the word of God, and often
calling by his ministers, remain Obstinate and go on still in their former
wickedness: that is, that by Gods justice they shall come to utter confusion.
Though it be a time deferred by Gods patience and long sufferance * alluring to
repentance: Romans 2. a. 4.
yet after sundry warninges at length it falls in deed, and then heap they
upon themselves greater wrath in the day of wrath. Romans 2. a. 5.


First, the time and very day is noted, which was the ninth year of the
captivity of Iechonias, or the reign of Zedechias, the tenth month
answerable to our December, in the tenth day of the month, on which the king
of Babylon came to the siege of Jerusalem, Iere. 39. a. 2. 2. Reg. 25. a. 1.
etc.
as appears, Hier. 39. and.2 Reg. vlti^o. cap. The Prophet wrote this in
Babylon a great number of miles from Iewrie, therefore it may seem a great
thing in the Prophet, that in so large a distance of places, before any
messenger could bring word thereof, he was hable to say in truth, This day
Jerusalem is besieged.

As touching the exposition of the allegory or figurative similitude: The
Pot is the city Jerusalem, The preparing of the pot to the fire, is the
coming to the siege thereof. The Pouring of the water, is the assault thereof
continuing two years. For it was first besieged in the ninth year, and taken
in the eleventh. The calamity, affliction and trouble is The fire that makes
this pot boil and bubble. The Bones that in steed of wood nourishes this
fire, is partly the death and slaughter of many Innocents whose blood was shed
before time in that cruel City, and cried now to God for vengeance, Genesis 4.
b. 10.
as the * blood of Abell: partly the multitude of all their other stubburne
wickedness inflaming the fire of Gods wrath against them. The chief and
principal Pieces of flesh cast into the pot, are the Princes and chief men of
greatest estimation, not only of that City, but also of all the country
about, which fled thither for fear of spoil before the siege. The Chief
bones, are the strength of the principal Soldiers there appointed for the
defense of the City. The Well seething or boiling, is the long continuing in
the trouble of the siege, in which time both strength of Soldiers, and might
of Princes within the City should be consumed. The Foam remaining still in
the pot, is the filthy froth of wickedness and abomination yet in all the
boiling of this trouble remaining among them, even to the sight of all men, and
not Scummed away by Repentance.

When the Prophet says, Bring it out piece by piece, he signifies that they
shall not Al together be taken out of the pot to be devoured and consumed by
death: But some at one time and some at another. Some by plage, some by famine,
some by the sword, and yet that assuredly they should All perish, and no state
and condition be saved. For that he means by these words, Let no lot fall
upon it, that is, let no choice be made for the saving of some and destroying
of other.

For her blood is yet in it, Verse. 7.
upon an high dry stone has she poured it, etc. Dne great cause of desolation
often mentioned of the Prophets, Esaias. 26. d. 21. Joel 3. d. 19. Nahu^. 3. a.
1. 2
is the cruel * murder and killing of Innocents: wherewith God in this place
heavily burdeueth the City Jerusalem. When one pours the bloudde of such
as be slain upon the ground, and does cover it with dust: he seeks so near
as he can to conceal and hide it, but when he pours it upon an high dry
stone, he lays it open to the sight of all men, as being nothing afraid or
ashamed of it. And by that form of speech God here notes the bold and
shameless cruelty that in the sight of the world that Bloody City had used
toward poor Innocents, and therefore cried for the wrath of God upon them.
God therefore, as it were, in the heat of his displeasure breaks out and
cries, Verse. 9.
VVo to that blood thirsty City, affirming that He himself will work in
this reuengement, that He will make and kindle the fire, put under wood, sees
the flesh, and spice the pot, so that the very bones shall be burnt.

In that God threatens that he himself will do it, he takes from them all
manner of hope, either that they shall escape the extremity of this mischief, or
that it shall not at all come to pass. For they had * false Prophets among
them, Iere. 28. d. 15. Ier. 29. e. 21. 31
which did put them in comfort that the City should not be besieged, or, if it
were, that it should not so be taken, but that they should escape. Flesh
dressed with spices is the more pleasant, and eaten more greedily. Therefore
God threatens He will spice the pot, that is, by the continuance and lingering
of the siege, he would set the Soldiers in such a wrath and anger, as, when
they had taken the City, they should with more greedy stomachs put them
unto the sword.

I will set the pot empty over the coals, Verse. 11. etc.
so that the brass thereof may be hot, etc. When the flesh and bones be
consumed, says God, that is, when the Princes, people and Soldiers are
perished and slain, I will cause the pot, that is the City it self, to be set
on coals and burnt with fire, that the filthy some of wickedness which by no
affliction could be taken away, may be consumed with the utter destruction of
those persons which mainteyned it. Iere. 7. f. 24. Ier. 1. d. 16. 17 Baruch. 1.
a. 3. Ezech. ^. a. 3.
God first *sent his Prophets by instruction and teaching of his holy will to
call them from their abominable Idolatry and sinful life, Then he cast upon
them some light and mean punishments to chasten them. But seeing that foul
and rustie pot would not by any means be scoured from the burnt froth, that it
was defiled with, he says here by his Prophet, there is no other remedy but
utter dissolution and consuming by his wrath which in earnest manner he
protests he will not fail to do, saying: Verse. 14.
I will not go back, I will not spare, I will not repent.

Thou son of man, Verse. 16.
behold I will take away from thee the pleasure of thine, etc. God by an other
parable sets forth his judgments to the Jews, which partly were already
in captivity in Babylon, partly as yet remained at Jerusalem. The Parable is
this, that God tells the Prophet before hand of the sudden death of his
wife which he loved most tenderly, and yet commands him in any wise not to
bewail her death. And if the people did ask him, why he did not lament the
death of her yt he esteemed so derely, that he should answer them, it was
done as a sign or token, against them. Because the destruction of the Temple,
and the loss of their wives and children, at the taking of the City should be
such a corosiue to their hearts, as for extremity of sorrow they should not be
hable to weep any more then he did. For extremity of grief sometimes utterly
dries up tears and makes that one cannot weep. God calls his wife The
pleasure of his eyes, because he above all worldely things delighted in her.
Moreover when people mourned at the death of their friends, the manner of the
Country was to lay away the ornament or attire of their heads, to put of
their shoes, and to go barefooted, to cover their face, and specially the
nether part thereof under their eyes, to fast and not to eat meat or drink
wine, or if they did, it should be none other but such as was sent them by
other. Verse. 17.
But God wills Ezechiel at the death of his wife to use none of these
ceremonies, nor to show any outward token of lamentation for his wife. Verse. 18.
In the.18. verse, the Prophet declares, that he did as God had bidden him. In
the morning of that day, in which his wife died at night, he told the people
that his wife should die suddenly, whom all they knew he loved very
earnestly, and the next day he came abroad among them, not using any ceremony
of mourning.

And then the people said unto him, Verse. 18.
will thou not tell us what this signifies, etc. To lament the death of a man's
wife, his children or dear friends, is not only a thing usual with men, but
also such as nature it self does allow, Genesis 23. a. 2.
and Gods law not forbid. Abraham mourned for his wife Sarah. Genesis 50. a. 1. 3.
And Joseph bewailed the death of his father. When a dear friend is taken from
a man, he remembers the benefits and pleasures that he received by him, and
may hardly forbear even the outward show of his sorrow. Wherefore the
people of the Jews, seeing Ezechiel, to behave himself otherwise, thought
there was some Strange matter in it, and desired to know what it meant. The
Prophet answers, that he did it not of himself, for that his nature might
hardly bear it, but by the commandment of God, thereby to signify to them
the great sorrow that should come unto them. The temple was called the *
Sanctuary of God, 3. Reg. 8. b. 10. Deuteronomy. 26. d. 15 Psalm. 72. c. 17.
wherein he especially showed his presence. Therein the Jews did esteem
their greatest glory to consist, that the living God had the Seat of his
presence among them, as a testimony of the covenant between him and them. So
that it does in sundry places appear they did put their greatest confidence
in that outward token, Iere. (...). a. 4
as in Hier. They cried The temple of God is with us, the temple of God is with
us. And as well for this cause, as also, that the temple was so * gorgeously
builded by Solomon, 3. Reg. 6. a. 2. Marc. 13. a. 1.
they delighted in it in their hearts, and desired still to behold it with
their eyes. Wherefore the Prophet here says, that not only this Temple wherein
they had so great pleasure, should be destroyed: but their wives, sons and
daughters cruelly slain with the sword, and thereby so great grief rise unto
the^ as for very extremity of sorrow, they should not be hable to weep, but to
pine away in the iniquity of their hearts. Verse. 24.
And so Ezechiel should be a show or token unto them, that even as he had
done, at the death of his wife whom he loved. So should they do at the
destruction of the City and Temple, Verse. 25.
in which they did esteem all their power, their honor, their joy, the
pleasure of their eyes, and their very hearts delight to consist.

In that day shall come one that is escaped, Verse. 26.
unto thee, and bring it to the, etc. The Prophet signifies, When this shall
be performed, that one which has escaped from Jerusalem, shall come into
Babylon, and in the hearing of Ezechiel, shall tell unto the Jews all that
has happened to the City and to the temple. At which time God wylleth the
Prophets mouth should be opened to tell them again of these things, when that
they were done: that they might understand by the truth of the euente, that it
came not to pass by the might of the enemies, but by the just wrath of God for
their offenses. For before, they were carried away with false Prophets, and
would not believe Ezechiel.

They said that there were many other Prophets which taught the contrary, and
affirmed that they had the spirit of God as well as he, for proof hereof,
Iere. 28. c. 11.
we read Hier. 28. that Ananias a false Prophet said even in the hearing of
Hieremie, and that with great Boldness, that God would break the yoke of
Nabuchodonozer, and deliver the Jews within the space of two years, utterly
contrary to that which Hieremie had spoken before. Wherefore we may learn
the Devil has no readier means to keep the wicked in error, then to raise
up false teachers to impugn and discredit such as be Gods True messengers in
deed.

In the 33. cap. of Ezech. verse. 21. the effect of this Prophecy is fulfilled,
Ezech. 33. e. 21
and declaration made that the 12. year of the Captivity, the tenth Month,
and fifth day of the Month a messenger came, and told the lamentable tidings
of the destruction of the City and temple. What thereupon followed, you may
read in the place.

For So Much as all those things came to pass most truly, of which the
Prophets so oftentimes forewarned the Jews, let us take heed that we do not
contemn such profitable admonitions and exortations as by the Preachers are
taken out of the same Prophets of God, least to our great evil and grief, we
feel the truth of them performed, as the Jews in like case did. The things
were so spoken to them particularly, that notwithstanding general doctrines
are to be taken out of them to be applied to Persons and Times, wherein the
like obstinacye and impenitencie is used that then was.

The.19. Sunday after Trinity, at Morning prayer.
Daniel. 3.

5 That when ye hear the noise of the cornet, trumpet, harp, shawme,
psalteries, dulcimer, and all manner of instruments of music, ye fall down
and worship that golden Image that Nabuchodonozor the king has set up.

6 Who so then falls not down and worshippeth, shall

8 Now were there certain men of the Chaldees, that went even then, and cried
out an accusation of the Jews.

9 They spoke, and said unto the king Nabuchodonozor, O king, live for ever. 10
Thou O king have made a decree, that every man that shall hear the sound of the
cornet, trumpet, harp, shawme, psalteries, dulcimer, and al instruments of
music, shall fall down and worship the golden Image.

11 And who so then fell not down, and worshipped not, that he should be cast
into the mids of an hot fiery furnace.

12 Now are there certain Jews, whom thou have set over the charge of the
province of Babylon: Dan. 2. g. 49.
( namely) Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego: these men O king, regarded not thy
commandment: yea they will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden Image
that thou have set up.

13 Then Nabuchodonozor in his anger and wrath commanded that Sidrach, Misach,
and Abednego should be brought unto him: so these men were brought before the
king

14 Then Nabuchodonozor spoke unto them, and said, Is it true O Sidrach,
Misach, and Abednego, will not you serve my Gods, nor worship the golden Image
that I have set up?

15 Now therefore be ready when ye hear the sound of the cornet, trumpet,
harp, shawme, psalteries, dulcimer, and all instruments of music, to fall
down and worship the Image which I have made: for if ye worship it not, ye
shall be cast immediately into the mids of a hot fiery furnace: for who is
that God that can deliver you out of my hands?

16 Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego answered the king, and said, O
Nabuchodonozor, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. 17 Behold
our God whom we serve, is hable to deliver us from the hot fiery furnace: and
he will deliver us out of thy hand O king.

18 And though he will not, yet shall thou know O king, that we will not serve
thy Gods, nor worship the golden Image which thou have set up. 19 Then was
Nabuchodonozor full of indignation, so that the countenance of his face
changed upon Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego: therefore he charged and
commanded that they should heat the furnace, one seven times more then it was
wont to be heat.

20 And he charged the most valiant men of war that were in his army, to
bind Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, and to cast them into the hot fiery
furnace.

21 So these men were bound in their ceates, hosen, head attire, with their
other garments, and cast into the mids of the hot fiery furnace. 22 Therefore
because the kings commandment was strayte, and the furnace was exceeding
hot, the men that put in Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, the flambe of the fire
destroyed them.

23 And these three men Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, fell down in the mids
of the hot fiery furnace bound.

24 Then Nabuchodonozor the king was astonished, and rose up in all have: he
spoke unto his council, and said, Did not we cast three men bound into the
mids of the fire? They answered and said unto the king, It is true O king.

25 He answered and said, Lo I see four men lose, walking in the mids of the
fire, and they have no hurt: and the fourine of the fourth is like the son of
God.

26 Upon this went Nabuchodonozor unto the mouth of the hot fiery furnace, he
spoke also and said, O Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, ye servants of the hie
God, go forth, and come hither. And so Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, came
forth of the mids of the fire.

27 The Dukes, Lords, and Nobles, and the hings council came together to see
these men, upon whom the fire had no manner of power in their hodyes: insomuch
that the very hear of their head was not burnt, and their clothes unchanged,
yea there was no smell of fire felt upon them.

28 Then spoke Mabuchodonozor and said, Blessed be the God of Sidrach, Psalm.
34. c. 17. Act. 12. b. 11.
Misach, and Abednego, which has sent his Angel, and delivered his servants
that put their trust in him, and have altered the kings commandment, and
ieoparded their bodies, rather then they would serve or worship any God except
their own God only.

29 Therefore I make a decree, that every people, nation, and language, which
speak any blasphemy against the god of Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, shall
be drawn in pieces, and their houses shall be made a sakes: because there is
no God that can deliver after this sort.

30 So the king promoted Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego in the province of
Babylon.

The Exposition upon the third Chapter of Daniel.
Nabuchodonosor the king made an Image of gold, Verse. 1.
which was 60, etc. THe Prophet Daniell in this history sets forth a Iyuely
Image of the contention between the Church of God, and the Sinagoge of Satan,
between the True worship of God, and the wickedness of Idolatry and
superstition. First, we have to observe in what things the false worship of God
consists, that is in Images and other external ceremonies, Leuit. 26 a. 1.
Deuteronomy. 5. a. 8. Psalm. 96. a. 7. Leuit. 19. a. 4.
which God in his Scriptures expressly, oftentimes, and most * earnestly
prohibiteth, as that thing, wherewith his true religion cannot stand. And
therefore it may justly be meruayled, how, of late years, they that have had
the scriptures of God among them, and profess themselves to be pillars of Gods
people, could fall to so Gross error in Religion, as that they durst bring
the worshipping of Images into the Church of God, against his express
commandment to the contrary, Exodus 20. a. 4.
saying. Thou shall not make unto thy self any graven Image, etc.

Next have we to consider, Whence Idolatry and false worshipping of God
especially takes authority and credit, that is, partly, from the Founders
and erectours thereof, great Emperors, Kings, Princes, and persons of Honor:
partly, from the richness of the matter, cunning workmanship, and glorious
pomp in the face of the world, by which means it caryeth with it commonly
the multitude and the countinance of worldly power.

The charges of making this Image of Gold, so high and so thick, may seem
huge, monstrous and almost incredible. But therein is to be learned, both what
exceeding riches that Empire had gathered by the spoil of the world, and also
howewastfully men given to error can * pour out their treasures and substance
toward the maintenance Exodus 32. a. 2. Esa. 46. b. 6. Dan. 14. a. 2.
of Idolatry and superstition. Whereas to find the Ministers of Gods true
Religion, or to relieve their poor christian brethren, they will grudge to
give a small portion, yea, or any thing at all: but rather seek to take that
from them that by order they have already. Are there not, think you in
England, that, when time was, could be contented to give forty shyllings
toward the gylding of a gaie Image, or twenty Nobles to bye a suit of Copes,
that now will not without murmuring, give six pence to bye a Bible, or other
Book of service?

Then Nabuchodonosor sent forth to gather together the Dukes, Verse. 2. etc.
Lords, etc. In these verses following is declared the dedication of this
Idolatrous Image, wherein Daniell very lively painteth forth, both how
Idolatry takes credit of the glory and majesty of the world: and also how
ready and obedient all sorts and states of men show themselves to the
furtherance of the same. Here wanted nothing that could give continuance to
this Idol, or cause the people to have it in admiration. The richness of the
matter, the strange and monstrous biggenesse of the Image, the Kings
authority, the straightness of the charge and great penalty, the consent and
assembly of Dukes, Lords, noble persons, Judges, Officers, and Shiriffes, the
noise of Cornets, Trumpets, Harpes, Shalmes, Psalteries, Dulcimers, and all
manner of musical instruments. To all this comes the exceeding ready
Obedience of all the multitude of subjects. And surely it is much to be
marueyled, that in so great a number of Noble men of so great wisdom and
experience, and such a multitude of people there should not so much as one rise
up and say. Why should men endewed with reason and understanding, Gene. 1. d.
27. Psalm. 113. a. 6. Psalm. 134. d. 16 Sapi. 15. d. 15. Esa. 43. b. 12. 21. Genesis
1. d. 28.
and made to the * Image of God, fall down and worship a dumb and insensible
Idol, that has * eyes and sees not, that has ears and hears not, that
has a mouth and can not utter one word? Why should he that is by Gods
ordynance Lord and master of all earthly creatures, crouche down to an
Idol made of metal dug our of the ground, and framed to a fashion by
man's hand? But such, Men are, when Gods spirit does forsake them, that no
error can be so gross, but they will readily incline unto it. Seeing then so
foul a wickedness was here approved by so general consent of all states: we
must by this Example take heed how in matters of holiness we ground our
consciences upon the authority and consent of men, seem they in the world
never so great of power, never so wise, learned or skillful by experience. But
the word of God only must be the foundation and ground of consciences, in
all things that appertain to the worship of God.

Now wear there certain men of the Chaldeis, Verse. 8. 9. etc.
that went even then, etc. It may very well be thought, that this Erection of
the golden Image, and the charge and worshipping of it, was a cunning devise,
put into the Kings head, and wrought by some of the Nobles, of purpose to
entrap Sidrach, Misaach, and Abednago, because they, being strangers, were in
so great favor of the Prince, Dan. 6. a. 4.
as in the sixth Chapter, we see, they did work against Daniell. Such fetches
and cunning devises have the wicked of the world to bring the innocent
servants of God into danger, when otherwise for disobedience to their Prince
in matters lawful, or for any other dishonestie or ungodly life, they are not
hable to fasten any lykely accusation upon them. When Daniel says, They cried
our accusation of the Jews, he notes their hateful and eger minds against
them, coming to the king, as we say, with open mouth, and leaving nothing
undone or untold that might aggrauate their fault, or pull them into
displeasure. The extolling of the kings ordinance and decree, the strait
charge that he gave to have it observed. That they which disobeyed, were Jews,
that is, Strangers, and in deed of themselves odious, as captives. That they
showed themselves unthankful to the king, who had set them in place of hononr,
and made them great Rulers in his Provinces. That they showed contempt and
disdain toward the laws of the Country, whereunto all the residue of his
Subjects with great reverence did obey.

By this part of the history we are taught, that the servants of God, and
those that will truly worship him, shall not want in this world accusers and
Malicious persons, that with all Spite shall draw them into danger, and seek
their confusion. 2. Tim. 3. c. 12.
They that will live godly in Christ Jesus, says Paul, shall be sure to have
persecution. Satan the Prince of the world will always raise his Ministers to
vex and trouble the members of the Church of God, and that commonly under the
* color of their holiness and religion consisting in outward superstition and
Idolatry. Math. 9. b. 11. Luc. 13. c. 14.
Is there any greater matter at this day, wherefore the enemies of the Gospel
do persecute the Professors of Gods true worship, then because they will not
acknowledge a piece of bread to be God, nor will not worship their Images set
up in the Churches, nor run on Pilgrimage to stocks and stones, wrought with
man's hand, and other like Idolatrous and supersticious wickedness? Therefore
good men have by this example great occasion to comfort and strengthen their
faith, that it be not shaken with the terror and fear of their cruel
dealings. This also is here to be observed, that only Three poor Jews to the
maintenance of Gods true worship do set themselves and hasard their lives,
against the King, his Nobles and Commons, and all the power of ye Babilonicall
Empire, Which manifestly declares how little credit in matters of Religion
should be given to the reasons of Multitude, Number, and General consent. For
commonly the greater part in the world is the worse, and Gods Church is but a
small flock. Elias stood alone against Achab and all Israel. 3. Reg. 18. d. 21
So did Micheas against all the false Prophets. 3. Reg. 22. d. 23
The Prophets only against the whole Church of the Jews. Christ and his
Apostle^s against the Scribes and Pharaseis, and all the learned Philosophers
and mighty Princes of the world.

Then Nabuchodonosor in his anger and wrath commanded that Sydrach, Verse. 13.
etc. Nabuchodonosor is greatly moved to see his ordinance and decree
disobeyed, and therefore makes straight inquisition upon the offenders. In
which he uses all means that may be to persuade them: First, with courteous
words, he signifies, that he could scantly believe any such unthankfulness or
Disobedience to be in them, and therefore wills them, against a time
appointed, (seeing he had set them in place of so great honor) to declare
themselves to be such men as will not to the evil example of other, disobey
his laws. Or, if they would not consent to the worshipping of the Image which
he had made, that they should immediately be cast into an hot fiery Furnace,
and thereby be made a Terror to all such as would with contempt disobey his
authority. In the end he added words of proud blasphemy, That there was no
God that could deliver them out of his hands. Whereby it may appear how
Mutable Princes are, and how soon they are carried by the glory of the world
from the true fear and honor of God. Dan. 2. g. 47.
In the.2. Chapter, when Daniel by the spirit of God interpreted the dream
which astonished all the wise men and Soothsayers of his Country, Daniel was
then greatly esteemed, Sidrach, Misach and Abednago by his counsel, were set
as Judges in the Provinces: and Daniels God was declared to be The God of Gods,
the Lord of Kings, and the reuealer of secreates. But now through the
incensing of wicked enemies, the living God is dishonored, an Idol is set up
to be worshipped, and the servants of God and his own faithful Officers are
brought to the fiery Furnace to be burned. Such doting chaunges oftentimes
happens to them, that set their eyes only upon the power and glory of earthly
kingdoms.

Sidrach, Verse. 16. etc.
Misach and Abednago answered the king and said, etc. The temptation of the
Faithful Increases, and the strength of Gods spirit increases in them.
Wherefore there follows now in this great danger a bold and constant answer
made unto the King, without flattery or dissimulation, without hypocrisy or
worldly policy: only made in simplicity and constancy of faith. As if they
had said: In all things lawful, we ever have and will unfeignedly obey thee as
the Minister that is appointed by God to govern us, but if thou set up thy
self against the living God, who has advanced thee to this great power, and
seek by thy authority to draw us from his true worship to the honoring of
Idols and false Gods, he thou assured O king, Act. 5. e. 29.
that we will not in that obey thee. * For we are taught in matter of faith and
holiness to * obey God and not man. Act. 5. e. 29.
And we know right well that that God whom thou bewitched with the glory of thy
worldly power do blaspheme, can deliver us out of thy hands and from all
thy strength, if he see it to be to the glory of his name. But if his wisdom
think it not meet so to do (for he will not do always that he can do:) we
let thee understand without dissimuling or flattery, that we will not serve
thy Gods, nor worship thy golden Image.

Then was Nabuchodonozor full of indignation, Verse. 19.
so that the countenance, etc. Here let us consider what storms of affliction
the true professors of the sincere worship of God do sustain, 3. Reg. 22. b.
8. 3. Reg. 18. b. 10 3. Reg. 19. d. 2.
at the hands of cruel persecutors.

First they fall into the high indignation of Princes with whom they were before
in great estimation. Secondly, when they come to punishment, they are more
cruelly used then any other offenders.

There were in the kingdom of Babylon, thieves, robbers, adulterers,
murderers, extorcioners, drunkardes, and other like, and yet we read of very
slack punishment that they had. But the servants of God, which never offended
the king in any worldly Justice, but had been his faithful and profitable
officers, only because they will not offend the living god, and worship a
golden Image, have the kings rage so greatly against them, that the furnace is
commanded to be made seven times Hoter then it was wont to be for any other,
that they should be bound hand and foot and cast into it, and that with so
great have and fury, that they might not tarry to put of their garments, but
to be cast in clothes and all, etc.

The flame of the fire destroyed them that put in Sidrach, Verse. 22. etc.
Misach, and, etc. Hitherto God might seem to neglect the defense of his
servants, and to suffer Tyrannes and Tormentours to use all extremity toward
them. But when man's help is past, then God shows his power, and delivers
his faithful with the dread^^ll punishment of the wicked. The same God that
made the fire hurtlesse to his servants in the midst of the furnace, causes
it with such violence to burst out at the mouth of the same, that it destroyed
the greedy tormentours, which to satisfy the Princes furious tyranny, showed
themselves very ready to the execution thereof. Whereby we may learn that God
can, and does use his elements to the defense of his faithful, and to the
punishment of his enemies. Exodus 14. c. 22 Joshua. 10. c. 13. 4. Reg. 20. c. 11
Esaias. 38. b. 8
The running stream shall stay and divide it self, the Sun in the firmament
shall stand in his course and not go forward, Fire shall wax cold and
temperate, Wild beasts shall become tame and gentle, and all natural powers
shall be clean altered, rather then good men shall lack defense, or wicked
persons punishment, when God shall see it to make to his glory. God here
sends down his Angel to comfort his servants, to abash his enemies, and to
make his glorious name and power to be known in the world, and confessed even
by the mouths of them that before with all endeavor sought to oppress the
same. The King is astonished, his Nobles flock together to behold the thing,
All the multitude wonder to see the Merueylous work of God.

Then spoke Nabuchodonozor and said, Verse. 28. 29.
blessed be the Lord God of Sidrach, etc. Now follows the conversion of
Nabuchodonozor and his repentance, making open confession of the glory of GOD,
and as a good convert showing the fruits of repentance. He prayseth God, who
had so merueylously delivered them, that put their trust in him. He extolleth
Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, that did with such constancy withstand his
Authority, and rather hasarde their lives, then they would commit Idolatry.
And because the office of a Prince is not only himself to acknowledge the
true worship of God, but also to set the same forth * to the subjects, 4. Reg.
23. a. 3. Joshua. 24. f. 25 4. Reg. 17. e 27 Nehe. 8. a. 3. 9.
and to the uttermost of his power to suppress the contrariees: He publishes
a decree, That whosoever did worship any other then the lining God, which now
had delivered Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, should be drawn in pieces. This
dreadful and terrible punishment here appointed to drive men to the true
worship of God may be an answer to them, that call it cruelty, when
Supersticious persons are by strait laws Brideled, and say that faith cannot
be forced, but that it may seem sore dealing to constrain a man to that which
is against his conscience. They, says Nabuchodonozor, that speak any
blasphemy against God, shall be drawn in pieces, and their houses shall be
made as a Iakes. If Nabuchodonozor, an Heathen prince by this one miracle was
so moved, as in his whole domination he would not suffer one without
punishment to blaspheme the name of God: What shall we think of them, which
professing themselves to be Christians, have hard the voice of the Gospel,
these many years sounding throughout all Christendom, and have seen great
and strange works of God to the advancement of the same, and yet remain both
themselves obstinate, and cause their subjects for the profession of Gods Truth
cruelly to be Murdered?

The 19. Sunday after Trinity, at Evening prayer.
Daniel. 6. of God) was plenteous in him: so that the king was minded to set
him over the whole realm. 4 Wherefore the rulers and governors sought an
occasion against Daniel concerning the kingdom, but they could find none
occasion nor fault: for he was so faithful, that there was no blame nor fault
found in him. 5 Then said these men, We shall find none occasion against
this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the law of his God.

6 Upon this went the princes and lords together unto the king, and said thus
unto him, king Darius, live for ever.

7 All the rulers of thy kingdom, the officers and governors, the
councillors and dukes, have consulted together to make a decree for the king,
and to establish a statute, That who so desires any petition either of any God
or man within these thirty days, except of thee O king, he shall be cast into
the Lions den. 8 Now O king confirm the decree, and seal the writing, that
it be no changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians which
alters not.

9 Wherefore king Darius sealed the writing and decree.

10 Now when Daniel understood that he had sealed the writing, he went into
his house, and the windows of his chamber toward Jerusalem stood open,
there kneeled he down upon his knees three times a day, he made his petition,
and praised his God, as he did before time.

11 Then these men assembled, and found Daniel making his petition, and praying
unto his God.

12 So they came to the king, and spoke before him concerning his
commandment, saying: O king, have thou not sealed the decree, that within
thirty days who so requires his petition of any God or man, but only of thy
self O king, he shall be cast into the den of Lions? The king answered and
said, yea it is true according to the law of the Medes and Perses that
alters not. 13 Then answered they, and said unto the king, This Daniel which
is of the children of the captivity of Judah, O king, regards neither thee,
nor thy decree that thou have sealed: but makes his petition three times a day
14 When the king heard these words, he was sore displeased with himself, and
set his heart on Daniel to deliver him, and he labored till the Sun went
down to deliver him. 15 Then these men assembled unto the king, and said unto
him, Know this O king that the law of the Medes and Perses ( is) that the
commandment and statute which the king makes may not be altered.

16 Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniell, and they cast him into
the Lions den. Now the king spoke unto Daniell, and said, Thy God whom thou
always seruest, even he will deliver thee. 17 And there was brought a stone, and
laid upon the mouth of the den, this the king sealed with his own ring, and
with the signet of his princes, that the purpose concerning Daniel should not
be changed.

18 So the king went into his palace, and remained fasting, neither was there
any instruments of music brought in before him, and his sleep went from him.

19 But betimes in the morning at the break of the day, the king arose, and
went in all haste unto the den of the Lions. 20 Now as he came nie unto the
den, he cried with a piteous voice unto Daniel, yea the king spoke and said
unto Daniel, O Daniel, thou servant of the living God, is not thy God whom
thou seruest always hable to deliver thee from the Lions? 21 Then Daniel said
unto the king, O king live for ever. 22 My God has sent his angel, Dan. 3. f.
28. Heb. 11. f. 34.
which has shut the Lions mouths, so that they might not hurt me, for mine
vngiltinesse is found out before him: and as for thee O King, I never offended
thee.

23 Then was the king exceeding glad for him, and commanded to take Daniel out
of the den: so Daniel was brought out of the den, and no manner of hurt was
found upon him, for he put his trust in his God.

24 And as for those men which had accused Daniel, Dan. 14. g. 41.
the king commanded to bring them, and to cast them into the Lions den,
them, their children, and their wives: so the Lions had the mastrie of them,
and brake all their bones asunder or ever they came at the ground of the den.

25 After this wrote king Darius unto all people, Dan. 14. f. 42
nations, and tongues that dwelt in all lands. Peace be multiplied unto you.
26 My commandment is in all my dominion and kingdom, that men fear and
stand in awe of Daniels God: for he is the living God which abides ever, his
kingdom shall not fail, and his power is everlasting.

27 It is he that delivers and saves, Dan. 14. f. 45.
he does wonders and meruaylous works in heaven and in earth, he has
preserved Daniel from the power of the Lions.

28 So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of
Cyrus of Persia.

The Exposition upon the.vj. Chapter of Daniel.
It pleased Darius to set over his Kingdom an hundred and twenty, Verse. 1.
2. 3.
etc. WE see it daily to fall out in experience to truly, that the excellent
virtue of good and godly persons, has always, * to their great trouble and
danger, the spite and envy of * ambicious worldlings following it: Hester. 3.
b. 5.
And especially in the state of government, and in the Courts of kings and
Princes. For thither often resorteth such persons as have not the true fear of
God before their eyes, and therefore delight not in sincerity and faithful
dealing, but in the pomp and glory of the world: and to maintain the same
by flattery and dissimulation seek to work their own benefit and
advancement. If they see any either in respect of his virtue, or any other
consideration to creep between them and their ambicious purposes, or by any
mean to hinder the same: him they seek to supplante, and by all cunning
practices to bring him to Discredit, fall and ruin. Example hereof Daniel in
this place declares in his own person, and teaches all good men to consider,
Number. 16. a. 3.
what be the fruits and works of cankred Envy.

This Darius that is here spoken of, was the son of Astiages, and uncle unto
Cyrus, to whom also he gave his daughter in marriage, and in Zenophon is called
Cyaxares, he reigned not passing one year after the conquering of Babylon: and
may seem to have been a Wise and Politic Prince. By the advice of Daniel,
as it may be thought, he had set a very good order of government in his
kingdom. He divided his whole dominion into.3. parts or Provinces, and in
each of them had set forty Judges or Governors, so that the whole number came
to six score. And over them had appointed three Lieuetenants noble and wise
men, which might have a diligent and careful eye into their doings, and take a
just reckening or account of them for all things. One of these three was the
Prophet Daniel, whom he * brought with him out of Babylon at his return into
Medea. Dan. 1. b. 6.
In him he saw so great Wisdom, sincerity, faythfulnesse, and diligence
above all the other, that he minded to set him over the whole Realm. And this
was the cause of that canckred root of envy, that grew in the hearts of the
other Princes and Nobles against him.

Wherefore the Rulers and Governors sought an occasion against Daniel, Verse.
4. 5.
etc. The kingdom of the Medes, Dan. 3. g. 96.
was in great towardness of good government, but Satan the common disturber
of man's life could not abide it: knowing, that by the continuance thereof his
kingdom would be diminished, and Gods glory and truth increased. Therefore,
he pricked forward his Ministers and Instruments to work trouble to Daniel
the chief cause thereof, and by all means that might be, to bring him to
confusion. And here I pray you consider the nature of * envy. Psalm. 9. b. 10.
Prou. 24. b. 15
They look into his doings with all diligence, whether he did any thing
ambitiously toward the atteining of the kingdom, or at the least wise, that
might be so interpreted. They consider whether he dealt untruly in his
accomptes of the kings treasure, or otherwise slackly and negligently in any
thing. But the innocence and faithful diligence of Daniel in all points was
such, as his very enemies said of him, That they should never find matter
against him, unless they did entrappe him by the law and worship of his God,
from which they were well assured he would not swerve. The consideration of
this man's sincerity, being so Curiously scanned even by themselves, should
have moved them to have embraced and loved him. But malice and envy is always
so blind that it does never consider any good gift or well doing in a man, but
only to pervert it to an evil purpose.

Upon this went the Princes and Lords together unto the king and said, Verse.
6. etc.
etc. Now follows the wicked practice of the enemies of Daniel, turning that,
by sinister means, unto his danger, that of all things was worthy greatest
praise in him, that is, his faithful constancy in the true worship of God.
From which neither the love of worldly honor, nor the authority of the
Prince, nor the danger of his life could move him. Hester. 3. c. 8.
Malicious envy espyeth all oportunities to work mischief. The king,
although wise and well enclyned, yet was he of nature glorious, and desirous to
have his honor advanced, as it may appear in Xenophon. This occasion do
they take, and pretend, that now at the beginning of his reign, this their
devise would strike a greater admiration and Reverence of his person, into the
minds of his Subjects, and cause them thereby to be more ready to obey him,
and the more afraid to displease him. They omit not the authority of al their
consents: whereby they might seem even to force the Prince to a thing so
profitable as they pretended this to be. By which allurements, the glorious
Prince was easily won to consent: not knowing the end of their malicious
meaning. And yet were they not content with this, but they would have it so
confirmed, that the King might not after, upon repentance, revoke the law. And
therefore do they burden him with the authority of the Medean laws, which
are never altered, they knew how he liked Daniel, and therefore they would
prevent it.

Now when Daniel understood, Verse. 10. 11.
that he had sealed the writing he went, etc. In Daniel all men that fear God
have an example how to behave themselves in like distress and danger, that
is, first with earnest and often prayer to call upon God for the assistance of
his help and grace. And then constantly, and without all cloking or
dissimuling of worldly Policy, to stand to the confession of Gods true and
holy worship. Some would by friendship or persuasion, have wrought with the
king to alter the law, which he well understood was made as a trappe only to
take him in and bring him to danger. Or if that might not be, they would have
thought thus with themselves, what? I may pray to God in spirit and heart, why
should I need any external bowing of my body or kneeling, why should I
rashly cast my self in danger? and hurt my self and all my Countriemen that
are now in Captivity? One Month space may quickly be passed over, and then I
may freely serve my God again. But Daniel would take none of these devises,
but show himself simply and plainly what he was, not for any fear
dissimuling or altering any of his customable manner in praying to God. Where it
is said, that he prayed looking toward Jerusalem, that manner he and all the
Jews used by the Authority of Solomon in his prayer unto God. 3. Reg. 8. e.
48.
3. Reg. 8 If thy people being led captive into a strange land shall pray
unto thee, looking toward the city that thou have chosen, and toward thy
temple, that I have builded to thy name, thou shall hear them, etc. The
enemies of Daniel were ready watching for their purpose, and taking him in the
deed doing, Presently went unto the king with great complaint, saying, Verse.
12. 13.
O king, have thou not sealed the Decree that within thirty days who so
requires, etc. Mark you the craft of these malicious men, and in them the *
nature and manner of all the enemies of Gods people. Prou. 29. b. 10. Psalm. 36.
d. 34.
First they conspire and consent together, and disagree not in their wicked
purpose, that their consent, being Noble men, might have authority with the
Prince. Then they wreast from the king, before he understood their meaning, a
plain confession, that he had ratified the Degree. And lastly open unto him
the accusation of Daniel, and that with so much spite as possibly could be
devised. That he was one of the Captives of Judah, Dan. 1. a. 6.
that he did not regard the king, that upon stubburnnesse and contempt, to the
perilous example of all his Subjects he disobeyed his Decree, and prayed unto
his God not once or twice, but three times every day, and that in more open
manner, then ever he did before, that he might show to all men that he made no
account either of the King, or of his law.

When the king heard these words, Verse. 14. 15.
he was sore displeased with him self, etc. Now at the length the king
perceyueth that he was ouerreached by the * craft and envy of his Nobles,
Prou. 12. a. 5.
to his great mislyking and displeasure. Whereby, it may appear, there was in
him a good inclination of Justice and equity, but it was joined with time
rousnesse, and the want of the true knowledge of God, and trust in his
providence. He feared, if he should have showed himself more to esteem a
stranger then all the Nobles of his country, and for his cause, contrary to
the manner of the Medes, to revoke a Law that he had made, that they would
have raised some conspiracy and rebellion against him, to his great trouble,
and danger of his kingdom. Wherefore at the length, after the stay of one
whole days space, he yields, and contrary to his own conscience,
commits an innocent and faithful servant into the hands of his wicked
enemies, and to the claws of greedy and hungry Lions.

Now the king spoke unto Daniell and said, Verse. 16. etc.
thy God whom thou have served, etc. If Darius did think, that the GOD of
Daniel would deliver him from the jaws of the Lions, why did he not persuade
himself, that the same God was hable also to save his kingdom to him, against
the endeavors of all enemies or rebels, but that through fear thereof he
would yield against his conscience to give sentence of cruel death against an
innocent. Surely, if he had had Daniels faith, he would rather have hasarded
his kingdom, then so to have tempted God in the unjust punishment of an
innocent and hurtlesse man. But the respect of worldly Glory oftentimes
drowneth the faith of Princes. Yet the providence of God so works by him,
that the miracle that he would show in the deliverance of his servant, might
be evident and without all exception or quarreling. For Darius calls for a
great stone, to be laid at the mouth of the Den, and causes the same to be
sealed with his own ring, and with the signets of his princes, which were the
accusers of Daniel: that there might not be so much as a suspicion of any
sinister working, by feeding the lions with meat or otherwise. When the king
had this done, his conscience could not be quiet, for that he had hasarded the
life of so godly a man, but went home with sorrow and heaviness, forbearing
his meat and sleep, and shunning all occasion of mirth and pleasantness.

But betimes in the morning at the break of the day the king arose, Verse. 19.
20
etc. The speed that Darius made so early in the morning, declares the care
that he had for the life of Daniell, and could not stay his affection, but with
lamentable words calls unto him. And Daniel, although his faithful service
showed to the prince, was very unthankfully rewarded: yet with mildness of
spirit he answers. And neither vpbraydeth the king with his unjust
sentence, nor inueigheth with one word against his accusers and causers of all
his danger, but says, My God has sent his Angel and stopped the Lions
mouths. He says not, I am alive, or I am not dead, but that he may not seem
unthankful to the author of his deliverance, My God, says he, has sent his
Angel, etc. To the confusion of his enemies giving the glory of his delivery to
God alone, that they might thereby know, that they had not stryued against him
alone, but against the eternal and everliving God. The king reioysed, Daniel
was taken out of the den, Psalm. 90. c. 14.
and the * cause of his deliverance is declared: That he did put his trust in
God.

And as for those men which had accused Daniel, Verse. 24.
the king commanded, etc. The king being now by this miracle Increased in the
knowledge of Gods almighty power and divine providence: sharply punishes the
malicious accusers. Leaving herin a notable example to all princes straightly
to punish and correct such, as by crafty means seek the destruction of the
faithful Servants and Saints of God.

After this wrote king Darius unto all people, Verse. 25. 26.
nations and tongues that, etc. The Good king could not satisfy himself, but
that he must also give Strait charge through all his dominions, that no other
should be worshipped but the Living God. As if he had said: let decrees and
proclamations no more ^inde your consciences, whether they come from me or from
any other, if they be contrary to the law of Daniels God. I my self have
learned how far man's laws should take place, and when they are to be
abrogated. * It is far better to obey God then to obey man. Act. 5. e. 29.
Act. 4. d. 19.
I am but mortal, dust, and ashes, but the true God lives for ever. He can
punish, and he can reward: He therefore is to be feared. They that put their
trust in him, Psalm. 33. b. 7. 8 Psalm. 9. b. 9. 10
as Daniel has done, can not lack defense. He lives and is present, when he
seems to be absent, and to neglect the care of his people. Act. 12. b. 11.
He delivers when help and succor is lest looked for, and in extremity of
danger, fails not. Wherefore our commandment is that you neither fear nor
worship any God but him.

The.20. Sunday after Trinity. at Morning prayer.
Joel. 2. Sopho. 1. c. 14. Amos. 5. c. 18.
let all the inhabitants of the earth tremble: for the day of the Lord is
come, for it is nie at hand.

2 A dark and glomie day, a clowdie and black day: as the morning is spread
over the mountains ( so is this) populous and strong people, like it there was
none from the beginning, nor shall be hereafter for evermore.

3 Before him is a devouring fire, and behind him a butning flame: the land
is as a pleasant garden before him, and behind him a wast desert, yea and
nothing shall escape him. 4 The show of him is as the show of horses, and like
horsemen, so shall they run. 5 Like the noise of charets upon the tops of
the mountains they shall skip, like the noise of a flaming fire devouring the
stubble, ( and) as a strong people prepared to battle.

6 Before his face shall the people tremble, the countenance of all folks
shall wax black.

7 They shall run like strong men, and clime the walls

8 No man shall thrust another, but every one shall walk in his path: and if
they shall fall on the sword, they shall not be wounded. 9 They shall run to
and fro in the city, they shall run up and down upon the wall, they shall
clime into the houses, they shall enter in at the windows like a thief. 10
The earth shall quake before him, the heavens shall tremble, Joel. 3. c. 15.
the sun and the moon shall be dark, and the stars shall withdraw their
shining.

11 And the Lord shall give his voice before his host, for his camp is
exceeding great, for he is mighty that executes his commandment: Apoc. 6.
a. 17.
for the day of the Lord is great and very terrible, and who can abide it?

12 But now says the Lord, Turn you unto me with all your hearts, with
fasting, with weeping, and with mourning. 13 And rent your hearts and not your
garments, even) meat offering and drink offering unto the Lord your God. 15
Blow up a trumpet in Sion, proclaim a fast, call an assembly, sanctify ye
congregation.

16 Gather the people, gather the elders, assemble the children and sucking
babes: let the Bridegroom come forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her
closet.

17 Let the Priests the Lords ministers weep betwixt the porch and the
altar, and let them say, Spare thy people O Lord, and give not over thine
heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them: Wherefore should
they say amongst the heathen, Where is their God?

18 And ( then) the Lord will be jealous over his land, and will spare his
people. 19 Yea the Lord will answer and say to his people, Behold I will
send you corn, and wi^e, and oil, and will satisfy you therewith, and will
not give you over any more to be a reproach among the heathen.

army) and I will drive him into a lan^de barren and desolate, with his face
toward the east sea, and his hinder parts toward the uttermost sea: and his
stinch shall arise, and his corruption shall ascend, because he has exalted
himself to do this. 21 Fear not O thou land, be glad and rejoice: for the
Lord will do great things.

22 Be not afraid ye beasts of the field, for the fruitful places of the
desert are green: for the tree bears her fruit, the fig tree and the vine
yield their strength.

23 Be glad then ye children of Sion, and rejoice in the Lord your God: for he
has given you moderate rain, and he will send down for you, the rain (
even) the first rain and the latter rain, and in the first ( month.)

24 And the barnes shall be filled with corn, and the presses shall ouerflowe
with wine and oil.

25 And I will restore to you the years which the grasshopper, the canker worm,
the locuste, and the caterpiller have devoured, my great army which I sent
amongst you.

26 And you shall eat in plenty and be satisfied, and shall praise the name
of the Lord your God, which has dealt wonderously with you, and my people
shall not be ashamed any more. 27 And you shall know that I am in the middle of
Israel, and ( that) I am the Lord your God, and none but I: and my people shall
never be ashamed.

28 And it shall come to pass after this: I will power out my spirit upon all
flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall
dream dreams, your young men shall see visions.

29 Also in those days upon the servants and upon the handmaydens will I
power out my spirit.

30 And I will show wonders in heaven and in earth, blood, and fire, and
pillars of smoke.

31 The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before
that great and terrible day of the Lord come. 32 But whosoever shall call on
the name of the Lord shall be saved: for there shall be deliverance in mount
Sion and in Jerusalem, as the Lord has promised, and ( also) in the remnant
whom the Lord shall call.

The Exposition upon the second Chapter of Joel.
Blow up a trumpet in Sion, Verse. 1.
and showte in my holy hill, let all the inahbitants, etc. THe Prophet Joel
lived in the time of Esaias, and taught in Judah, in the reign of Ezechias, not
long before the invasion of the Assirians, 4. Reg. 18. c. 13
under Sinnacherib. For although that good king to ye uttermost of his power
had restored the true worship of God: yet a great number received it
unthankfully, and both inclined in their hearts again to Superstition, and
continued in most Detestable and sinful living. I^. re. 4. d. 18. 3. Reg. 8.
e. 46. Deuteronomy. 4. d. 26.
* Which was the cause that God did send the Assirians grievously to plague
them. But of his woonted mercies, before that terrible time of punishment
should come, he * sent his Prophets to foretell them of it, Iere. 25. a. 4.
and to call them to repentance. Among these was Joel who now utters these
words, and purposing to call them to repentance, lays before them the
terrible punishment that GOD will bring upon them, if they turned not unto him.
His beginning is tragical, Blow up a trumpet, says he, etc. Because their
Plague should be by invasion of euimies and cruelty of war, he alludeth to
warrefare, and wills the Scowtes and watchmen, that is the Prophets and
teachers to sound the trumpet of Gods holy word, and give men warning to
prepare themselves to battle, that they were not taken with the plague of god
ere they were ware. This he wills them to do in Sion, and in His holy hill,
His chosen City of Jerusalem, that they might not think any holiness of
place should help them. Yea and he speaks to all the inhabitans of the land
of Judah, and bids them to Tremble and fear, for that the Lord did not mind
to dally with them, or any longer to put of the time. For says he, The day of
the Lord is come, and is nigh at hand, and you must repent with * speed,
Eccle. 5. b. 8.
if you will escape it. By The day of the Lord, he means the time appointed
to Plague them for their unthankfulness and contempt of Gods word, and the
calling of his Prophets.

A dark and glomie day, Verse. 2.
a clowdie and black day: as the morning is spread, etc. By Glomie, Clowdie,
and Black, he signifies the heavy and sorrowful time that should be so
lamentably ouercast with grievous afflictions and calamities, that men should
not be hable to tell what to do, or how to rid themselves from them.
Darkness commonly in scripture notes trouble and heaviness, Light,
prosperity and felicity. As the spring of the day and morning light sodainlye
spreads it self over the mountains and cannot by any means be stayed: So
shall this mighty and strong people of the Assirians suddenly spread
themselves, Iere. 4. d. 13.
and ouerwhelme even the tops of those mountains, that you think hard to
be passed, and that in such sort as they cannot be resisted. For since the
beginning was there never Empire either of so great force, or of so long
continuance of their dominion as this has been and is. Verse. 3.
Therefore they shall be to you and to your Country as a raging and consuming
fire. The Land that was before their coming as a pleasant Garden or paradise,
after they be gone it shall be left lamentably spoiled, Verse. 4.
wasted, and desolate. Yea they shall come with such fierceness, that with
great speed they shall run over the mountains and high places as it were
Horsemen, or chariots in a plain field. Your men of war, Capiteynes and
Soldiers, Verse. 5.
in whom you may seem to put some trust, at the report of their coming shall
tremble and wax pale and wanne for exceeding great fear. They shall run
against you as mighty Giants, and assaulting the walls of your strong and
fenced Cities: they shall do it not only with such strength, but also with
actiuitie, nimblenesse, and good order, that one shall not be a let or
impediment to the other, but every one shall keep his place and array. And when
they run with desperate courage even among your swords and weapons, they
will do it in such manner, that you shall not be hable to hurt them. Verse. 9.
And furthermore, though your Cities be strongly walled, and fenced with so
great munition as they may seem vnpregnable, they will with such facility
both enter and go to and fro, as if the matter were to be done in ye plain
field, where no resistance is. Verse. 10.
Finally, their rage and fierceness shall be so dreadful, that the earth shall
quake, the heavens shall tremble, the Sun and Moon shall be dark, the
Stars shall withdraw their light, and all the creatures of God shall be
abashed to see yt God will so grievously plage his people. And therefore, they,
as it were, having sense of the same before hand, shall give strange signs and
sightes unto men, to put them in mind to repent and turn unto God, that he
may withdraw this his heavy hand from them. Verse. 11.
For God it is that works it, and by his voice calls the Assirians, and
they do nothing but execute his commandment, in punishing your waywarde and
stubburne unthankfulness and contempt of his word.

In all this we see the Prophet has done nothing, but signify unto the Jews,
that no worldly thing should be hable to stay from them, the grievous
punishments of God by the Assirians. Neither the plentifulnesse of the earth,
nor the great distance of the places, nor the difficulty of the passages over
hills and mountains, neither the number of their Soldiers, nor the strength
of their Cities, to the end, that they seeing all worldly help to fail them,
may the more readily repent and fly unto God for his mercy.

But now says the Lord, Verse. 12.
turn you unto me with all your hearts with fasting, etc. Although the day of
Gods wrath be nighe at hand, yet the Prophet signifies, that there is time
to repent, Ezec. 33. c. 12.
because * no true repentance from the heart is ever to late. And therefore
under the person of God exhorts them thereunto, and tells them what they
shall do, Turn says he: We must in repentance first Turn from wickedness
of mind and dissolute life, from Idolatry, Superstition and corruption of
Gods true worship. And we must Turn unto God, and submit our selves to his
merry, and to be directed by his holy word. We are not willed to Turn to
Saints, Esaias. 45. d. 22
to Patriarchs, to Prophets, to Fathers, to Apostles, or to any creature, be
he never so holy. No nor yet to our owue inventions and devises of holiness,
thereby thinking to ransom our sins. But we must Turn to the everliving
God, who is both willing as a father, and hable as a mighty Lord to help us.
And this must we do unfeignedly, With all our hearts, Renting our minds with
sorrow, and not our garments with hypocrissie and outward show of grief and
repentance, when we have no true sense of Gods wrath inwardly in our hearts.
If renting of Garments, and such other signs be used as tokens and witnesses
to the world, that we are in deed and unfeignedly touched with exceeding sorrow
of heart (as Josias did when he heard the threatenings of God read in the book
of his law: 4. Reg. 22. b. 11 2. Par. 34. d. 19
) Then are they acceptable unto God, and he does not prohibit them. For to
that end he wills them here, To fast, To lament, To weep, thereby to show
the inward and repentant sorrow of their hearts. That they may in this manner
repent, he declares by the nature and properties of GOD, that there is assured
hope of mercy in God. Esaias. 30. d. 18.
For, says he, God is Gracious, and of nature more prone to pleasure then to
punish. He is Merciful, Psalm. 102. c. 13.
as a father moved with compassion even upon the deserved miseries of his
children. 2. Esd. 9. d. 17
He is of Long suffering, and loath to be drawn to wrath and punishment. He is
of exceeding Bounty and goodness, Romans 10. c. 12. 1. Cor. 1. a. 5.
and as a plentiful springing fountain desires still to pour out upon us
the riches of his benefits and gracious gifts. Iere. 26. d. 13.
Lastly, He will repent him of the evil, that is, he will alter his decree,
and revoke his sentence of displeasure. For all the sentences of punishment
that god pronounces upon his people are ever joined with condition of
repentance, which if they show, he may and does without note of Mutabilitie or
inconstancy change his purpose. And therefore it is said here: He will
return, and leave behind him a blessing of meat offering, etc. Whereby he
means, that where they were before oppressed with such scarcity, that they
had not beasts wherewith to do sacrifice to God, now he would bless them
with Plenty, etc.

Blow up a trumpet in Sion, Verse. 15. etc.
proclaim a fast, call an assembly, sanctify, etc. As before the Prophet
exhorted them to private repentance and sorrow of heart: so now he wills them
to declare the same by public and open decree, Jonas. 3 c. 7.
that in a common danger all generally might declare their repentant hearts
and call unto God. In this he shows what the duty of Rulers and Governors
is, Judith. 6. c. 20 Hester. 4. d. 16
when there are great tokens of the wrath of God to hang over their Countries
and commonweals. The manner of this public repentance is here at large set
forth, and a prayer devised to the same purpose. Unto this must all sorts of
men be assembled, old men, children, babes, yea, the new married man and his
bryde out of the chamber of his pleasure. But especially Priests and the
ministers of the Lord must show themselves ready in this and by earnest
prayer and weeping be as Mediators between God and his people.

And the Lord will be ielous over his land, Verse. 18.
and will spare his people, etc. The Prophet now comfort the people, and
does assure them, what benefit they shall have by their Repentance, if they
turn unto God. As the husband cannot abide to see his wife cruelly used of
any other, so will the Lord be ielous over the land of the Jews his chosen
people. Verse. 19.
Where they were pinched with Famine and hunger through spoil of the land and
barrenness, he will now send them, Corn, Wine, Oil, and plenty of all
things necessary for their sustenance. Verse. 20. etc.
He will remove from them the power and army of the Assyrians, that came
Northward against them, and will so scatter them and put them to flight by his*
Angel from heaven, 4. Reg. 19. g. 33 Esaias. 37, g. 36.
that they shall run Eastward and Westwarde, not knowing which way best to
save themselves, Tob. 1. d. 21. 2. Par. 32, d. 17
yea the proud and * blasphemous speech of the Captain Sinnacherib wherein
he extolled his power against the living God of heaven, shall ascend as a stench
or loathsome savor to provoke his displeasure against them. Therefore Be glad
says the Prophet, Rejoice, Fear not, the Lord will work great things for
you. The beasts of the field shall prosper, the ground shall be fruitful,
the barnes shall be filled, the Vine presses shall run over. The Lord will
send you seasonable weathering, the first rain in the spring to make the
Corn grow, and the latter rain toward the harvest to fill the ear: yea, he
shall do all things for you so favorably, that you shall perceive him to be as
it were present and dwelling in the middle of you.

And it shall come to pass after this, Verse. 28.
I will pour out my spirit upon all. etc. Upon the occasion of the declaring
of this comfortable and bountiful promise of the favor of God toward his
people after their repentance: Joel breaks out to speak of the spiritual
kingdom of Christ, Iere. 24. c. 7 Ezec. 11. d. 19. 20.
and of the *benefits that men should have, and the state of life that should
be under him. This is the ordinary manner of all the Prophets to mix the
mention of Christ with their other doctrine of things pertaining to their
present state. Hereby signifying, that all the benefits and blessings, either
worldly or spiritual, that God gives to his people, are promised and
performed only in respect of the Savior of the world, and that promised
seed Christ Jesus that was to come.

The Prophet therefore in this place putting the people of God in mind of the
spiritual blessings of Messiah, first begins with the sending of the holy
ghost, which of all other was the greatest, and in deed the sum of all the
residue. Colos. 2. a. 2. 3 Io. 3 a. 5. Io. 6. g. 63. Io. 16. b. 13. Romans 8. e.
26. 2. Pet. 1. d. 21. 1. Cor. 12. a. 10
For albeit the whole riches, and * treasures of Gods graces and goodness are
given out by Christ Jesus: yet can we not enjoy the same * but by the Holy
ghost. The work and effect of whom is * to open unto men the will of God,
either by * prophecy and foretelling of things to come, by word, by visions,
by dreams, or by interpretation and opening of the* mysteries of religion out
of the holy scriptures, Io. 14. d. 26. Act 16. c. 14. Ezec. 36. f. 27 Gal. 5.
d. 22.
and by * inclyning the hearts and wills of the faithful to the observation of
the law and commandments of God. This is it that God speaks of in
Jeremy. Iere. 31. f. 33.
cap. 31. I will plant my law in the inward parts of them, and write it in
their hearts, and from thenceforth shall no man teach his neighbor or his
brother, saying, know you the Lord, but they shall all know me from the
lowest to the highest, etc.

And I will show wonders in heaven and in earth, Verse. 30. 31.
blood and fire and pillars, etc. Least, that after the coming of Christ into
the world, the faithful should persuade themselves, that all trouble were
paste, and that they should live in rest and quietness (as the Phariseys and
other Jews did:) the Prophet Joel here declares what a troublous and
dangerous State there should be toward the end of the world, and what
wonderful * signs and strange sights God would work in all the elements
before the last coming of Christ to judgment. Act. 2. c. 19.
It may seem that Christ himself had respect to this place when he
prophesied of the same matter Math. Math. 24. c. 29 Luc. 21. e. 25.
24. and Luc. 21. This the Prophet does not only to forewarne the fiathfull
people of God, and to shake from them security: but also to strike a fear in
the hearts of the enemies of Gods people, and of his Gospel, that they do
not contemn him, who will send so terrible signs before his coming. These
things we have seen in these latter days meruelously fulfilled in all the
elements. In the Sun and Moon often Eclipses. In the upper part of the air
blasing Stars, Swoordes, Pillars of fire, fire Drakes flying in the Air, and
other like impressions. In the Earth, Earthquakes, and other strange
alterations. In the Water, many and exceeding great floudes, risings and
swellings to the great grief and annoyance of Mankind. And as there has been
in all times some of those signs: so in no age so many as has been within
these few years. Whereby we must needs gather that we are fallen into those
latter, troublesome, and perilous days, thathere the Prophet speaks of.

But whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved: Verse. 32.
for. etc. The whole sum of our* salvation consists in *calling upon the
name of the Lord, Romans 10. e. 13. Eccl. 2. b. 12. Act. 2. c. 21. Psalm. 33. d.
22. Iere. 17. a. 7. Judas. 1. d. 21.
and in putting our* confidence and trust in his mercy and deliverance wrought
for us by the Savior of the world Christ Jesus. Who suffered and dyed for us
and by his resurrection made perfect the mystery of our Redemption At Mount
Sion, and in Jerusalem, according to the infallible Promises of Almighty God.

The. 20. Sunday after Trinity, at Evening prayer.
Micheas. 6.

4 I have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and delivered thee out of the
house of bondage, and I made Moises, Aaron, Exodus 14. Number. 22.
and Miriam to lead thee. 5 Remember O my people, what Balach the king of Moab
had devised against thee, and what answer that Balaam the son of Beor gave
him, from Sethin unto Galgal, that ye may know the righteousness namely) to
do justly, to love mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with thy God. 9 The
Lords voice cries unto the city, and the man that shall be saved considers
thy name: hearken what is your rod, and hear him that warns you.

10 Are not yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and
the scant measure which is abominable?

11 Should I justify the false balances, and the bag of deceytfull
weightes? 12 For the rich men thereof are full of cruelty, and the inhabitants
thereof have spoken lies, and have deceytfull tongues in their mouths.

13 Therefore I will take in hand to punish thee, and to

14 Thou shall eat and not have enough: yea thou shall bring thy self down
in the mids of thee, thou shall flee, but not escape, and those that thou
would save will I deliver to the sword. 15 Thou shall sow, but not reap,
thou shall press out Olives, but Oil shall thou not have to annoint thy self
with Oil: thou shall tread out must, but thou shall drink no wine. 16 Ye
keep the ordinances of Amri, and all the customs of the house of Ahab, ye
walk in their counsels: therefore will I make thee waste, and cause thy
inhabiters to be hissed at, and ye shall bear the reproach of my people.

The Exposition upon the sixth Chapter of Micheas.
Hearken you now what the Lord says. Verse. 1. 2.
Arise thou and contend with, etc. THe Prophet Micheas blames the Jews for
their wickedness, and declares to them their punishment for y^ same. 1 First
he notes their unthankfulness for the great benefits that they have
received at his hand. 2 Then he takes from them all the confidence that they
might have had to please God with their Sacrifices and external Hypocrisy, and
shows what they should do to please God rightly. 3 Thirdly he sharply
rebukes their obstinacy in contem^ing the word of God, and refusing to hear
him. 4 Lastly, he opens some of their particular faults, and denounces
their punishment that God will bring upon them. And all this does he in manner
of a pleading of Gods cause before Judges, Esa. 41. a. 1.
which *manner the Prophets diverse times do use, thereby to set out the
Justice of God and more evidently to declare that his people, even by the
Judgment of men or other common creatures are inexcusable, and by their own
wickedness to pull upon themselves just and grievous punishments. In this
place the Prophet by appointment of God takes Mountains and Hills, Irre. 6.
e. 18. 19 Esaias. 1. a. 2.
and the very Foundations of the earth to hear the cause and complaint of
Almighty God against his people of Israel. And that is it that the Prophet
utters in ye person of God, saying, Arise thou and contend with the
mountains; etc. And then he Obeying the appointment of God says: Hear O you
mountains the Lords quarrel, etc. As if he had said: For So Much as the
hearts of this people are so far from God, that not so much as one of them
will consider and vnbe ^stande his cause, I appeal to you hills and
mountains, and make the insensible Creatures Judges against them. In this the
Prophet both notes the hard hearts and the obstinate contempt of the Jews
particularly, and also generally teaches all then which in like manner contemn
the word of god; that they shall by no means be hable to escape just judgment
and condemnation. Genesis 1. a. etc. Genesis 2. a. etc.
For, because the *whole world was made by God for us, and in all points
serving to our use perfourmeth that end to the which it was made, though all
other Judges and witnesses would fail: the very parts of the world and the
common creatures will pronounce sentence against us, if we in our calling do
show our selves unthankful, disobedient, and rebellious against God.

O my people what have I done unto thee? Verse. 3. etc.
or wherein have I grieved thee? etc. There is no one thing that in the
Prophets causes more difficulty, then the often and the sudden changing of
the Person, wherefore that is here also to be observed. The second verse was
uttered in the person of the Prophet, these three verses God himself speaks.
Although God were grievously displeased with them, yet he calls them His
people, Deuteronomy. 5. d. 29. Esaias 65. a. 2. Romans 10. d. 21. Esaias. 30. d. 18.
thereby *showing that he would be ready to receive them to Mercy if they
would turn unto him and repent.

Then he lamentably vpbraideth them with the unthankful receiving of his
great benefits that he had done for them. Whereby he, as it were in judgment
clears him self, that he never hurted them, never wrought trouble and grief
unto them whereby they might pretend cause to revolt from him, but always has
showed him self their gracicious, merciful, and bountiful Lord, ever ready
to assiste and help them, and miraculously with mighty hand to deliver them.
As for example out of Aegipt from the stern Tirannie of Pharao and his people.
Exo. 10. 11. 14
In the wilderness from many dangers by the means of Moses, Aaron and
Marie, their sister endued with the spirit of prophecy. From the wicked
devises of Balach, Nu. 22. 23. 24
at which time he turned the Cursing, that was sought against them into a
notable blessing. By this we also have to take heed that we do not contemn
the word of God and reject the memory of his exceeding benefits, that he has
of late years done for us, least it be grievously laid against us as the like
is here unto the Jews.

Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, Verse. 6. 7. 8.
and bow my self to the hye God, etc. As the Prophet before made, as it were,
God him self to accuse the Jews: even so here does he bring in the people of
ye Jews co^sulting and asking by what means, by what sacrifices, by what
satisfactions they may please God and appease his wrath and displeasure. Here
is to be noted, that as the faithful when they perceive God to be displeased,
resort to his holy word, and out of that learn what to do to please God: so
other that are unfaithful, when he has beaten into their minds some sense of
his wrath, as he had here done to the Jews, they cannot ascend to any higher
consideration then the wisdom of the flesh and of the world. Esaias. 1. a.
etc. Esaias. 58. a. etc.
And therefore give themselves to work reconsiliation by external things, as
sacrifices, outward kneelings, fastings, and tormentings of the body, judging
that God also makes great account of those outward things, which they
themselves greatly esteem, and wherein they judge principal holiness to
consist. John. 4. d. 24.
But God being a spirit, shows himself to delight in that holiness only
that is in spirit and in truth. And therefore in the 8. verse the Prophet
aunswering their question says, God has showed thee, O man what is good, and
what the Lord requires of thee. etc. Whereby he takes from them their
pretense of ignorance, or rather reproves their obstinate impude^cie, whereby
they move such questions. As though God had not by his servant Moises, Deuteronomy. 4.
etc. Esaias. 1. etc. Esaias. 58. etc.
and by his Prophets declared oftentimes unto them what true worship he
looks for at their hands, and wherewith his anger will be appeased, that is
with repentance and the true fruits thereof. Such as are the doing of justice,
when not only the Magistrate deals uprightly in judgment, but also every
private man according to his office and calling: The love of mercy and pity,
consisting in all the works of Charity: The humbleness of our hearts
submitting our selves to the will and pleasure of God declared in his word.
For To walk with God, is to walk before him according to the appointment of
his holy will and word.

The Lords voice cries unto the City and the man that shall be saved, Verse. 16.
etc. In this part of the chapter the Prophet charge them with their sins
wherewith they had displeased God. The Lords voice, is the preaching and
teaching of his word. You have heard says the Prophet, Esaias. 5. a. 4.
what *duties God requires of you, neither can you in this pretend
ignorance. For the Lord does his part diligently when he sends his Prophets
to you that be of this City, and to all other likewise that be in your case,
and by them cries to you that you should repent, and do those fruits of
repentance. And therefore the faithful and good man that has care of his
salvation does consider it, and fear the name of thee, O Lord. But you, O
stiff necked Jews, show your selves to contemn his voice, and to neglect
his calling. Therefore, seeing you will not hear that voice calling you to
salvation, hearken to this voice that assures you of your punishment, rod,
and destruction. Then lays he before them their grievous faults and
offenses, that is, Riches, unjustly gotten, False measures, False waightes and
balances, Cruelty, Lying, Falsehoode and deceyte, as well in their occupying
and bargayning, as in all other dealing, and for these things, says he, the
Lord will take in hand to punish them.

Therefore I will take in hand to punish thee, Verse. 13. etc.
and to make thee desolate, etc. This is uttered in the person of God, I will
therefore punish thee, says the Lord, and take all those my good gifts from
thee which has made thee so proud and obstinate, and not ouely so, but
because thou will not repent and turn from thy sins, (O thou wicked City,) I
will utterly destroy thee and make thee desolate, 1
The first plague is famine, and that in a strange manner, that they should have
to eat, and yet there meat not prosper with them,

The second plague, 2
that by inward mischief among themselves, that is, by discord, discention,
or other like means by giving credit to the false Prophets that were among
them, they should work their own overthrow. 3
The third is, that all means of help, succor, and refuge should be taken
from them, and that those whom they would seek to save, the Lord would
deliver to the sword. 4
The fourth is, that their goods, and the fruits of the ground should be
spoiled and taken from them, and that they should enjoy no part of their
labors therein. 5
The last is, that they should be utterly wasted, carried away captive, and be a
scorn and reproach to all people.

The. 21. Sunday after Trinity. at Morning prayer.
Habacuc. 2. I Will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the though it tarry,
wait: for it shall surely come, and shall not stay. Romans 1. b. 17. Heb. 10. g.
38. Galat. 3. b. 11.
4 Behold, he that lifts up himself, his mind is not upright in him: but
the just shall live by his faith.

5 Yea in deed the proud man ( is as) he that transgresses by wine,
therefore shall he not endure, because he has enlarged his desire as the hell,
and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathers unto him all nations,
and heapeth unto him all people. 6 Shall not all these take up a parable against
him? and a taunting proverb against him, and say, Woe to him that increases
that which is not his? how long? and he that ladeth himself with thick clay?

7 Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee? and awake that shall
stir thee, and thou shall be their pray?

8 Because thou have spoiled many nations, all the remnant of the people shall
spoil thee, because of men's blood, and for the wrong ( done) in the land, in
the City, and unto all that dwell therein. 9 Woe to him that coueteth an evil
covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on hie, to escape from the
power of evil. 10 Thou have consulted shame to thine own house, by destroying
many people, and have sinned against thine own soul.

11 For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
shall answer it.

12 Woe unto him that buyldeth a town with blood, Nah. 3. a. 1. Ezech. 24. b. 9
and erecteth a city by iniquity. 13 Behold is it not of the Lord of hosts
that the people shall labor in the very fire? the people shall even weary
themselves for very vanity.

14 For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the
Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

15 Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink, thou ioynest thy rage, and
make ( him) drunken also, that thou may see their priuities. 16 Thou art
filled with shame for glory, drink thou also and be made naked: the cup of
the Lords right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spuing shall be
for thy glory. 17 For the cruelty of Libanus shall cover thee: so shall the
spoil of the beasts which he made afraid, because of men's blood, and for the
wrong done in the land, in the city, and unto all that dwell therein.

18 What profits the Image? for the maker thereof has made it an Image and a
teacher of lies, though he that made it trust therein when he makes dumb
Idols.

19 Woe unto him that says to the wood, Awake: and to the dumb stone, Rise up,
it shall teach ( thee:) behold it is laid over with gold and silver, and
there is no breath in it.

20 But the Lord is in his holy temple: Psalm. 10. a. 4
let all the earth keep silence before him.

The Exposition upon the. 2. Chapter of Habacuc.
I will stand upon my watch, Verse. 1.
and set me upon the tower and will look and. etc. THe Prophet Habacuc in the
first Chapter had comforted the Jews, Haba. 1. a. etc.
living both in great oppression under the wicked king Manasses: and also being
sore afflicted by the power of the Chaldees. But some of the people of God
considering the great and *long prosperity of the wicked enemies of God
began to *stagger in their faith, Psalm. 72. a. 2. Iere. 12. a. 1. Job. 21. a.
7.
and half to mistrust the providence of God, as though he did neglect his
people. And for that cause quarelled with the Prophet, and desired some
resolution of their doubtful minds herein. Therefore in the beginning of this
Chapter he says He will stand upon his watch tower, and see what God will
say unto him, and what answer he may make to them, that did in such manner
rebuke him and quarrel with him. By The watchtower he understands a more
deep and earnest consideration and meditation of the mysteries of Gods
providence, wherein his mind was lifted up above the capacity of man's common
reason, and was stayed up by the declaration of Gods holy will revealed in his
word. The Prophet being in this VVatchtower, says, The Lord answered him,
that is, that God by his holy spirit revealed to him, that he should Write a
vision, and that so plainly, and in so great letters, that a man running by in
haste might read it. In that the Prophet so easily obtains answer of God,
we also are taught that when with earnest Meditation and Prayer, we seek to
understand the will of God, and what is best for us to do: He will not fail
by his grace to lighten our minds to the understanding thereof. If thou seek
understanding (says Solomon) as silver, Prou. 2. a. 4.
and search it out as great treasure, thou shall understand the fear of the
Lord, and find out the knowledge of God. The sum of this vision is, that
those proud Chaldies, which did so afflict his people, and glory in their
own strength, notwithstanding that they did seem for the time to prosper and
to be a scourge to other, yet, in short space by Gods just judgment for their
wickedness should be brought to confusion, and made a laughing stock to the
world. This answer God wills the Prophet to Set up in writing, that all
his people might see it and read it to their assured comfort. When the
Prophet adds The vision is yet for an appointed time, Verse. 3.
but at the last it shall speak and not lie, and though it tarried yet it
should assuredly come and not stay. etc. He means that the contents of the
vision should not forthwith be fulfilled, but after a certain space, and
therefore wills them patiently to abide the time, for that undoubtedly in
the end it should come to pass. And so in deed was it fulfilled about. 70.
years after the destruction of Jerusalem, and leading of the people captive
into Babylon. At which time Cyrus took and spoiled Babylon, and transferred
the Empire to the Persians.

Behold he that lifts up himself, Verse. 4.
his mind is not upright in him, But, etc. He, says the Prophet, that lifts
up his mind upon confidence and trust of his own devises, help, and
strength, and thereby thinks that he shall be safe against all mutabilitie of
fortune or other danger that may come: shall never have sure quietness and
tranquillity of mind, but ever be tossed to and fro with new devises. Iere.
42. b. 15. Psalm. 32. b. 10. Psalm. 55. b. 11.
For God will *frustrate the counsayles of such persons. But the good just man
which with an assured faith* stays himself upon the word and promises of
God, in all dangers both worldely and spiritual: shall not fail of
tranquillity and quietness of mind. For he has the infallible truth and the
almighty power of God whereon he rests. Wherefore by this verse the Prophet
wills the people, Psalm. 59. b. 12. Esa. 20. b. 5. 6
to * lay aside all confidence of worldely help, and to rest only in Gods
truth and his promises. This sentence is not only to be applied to worldly
afflictions and cares, but also, and especially to the torments of conscience
against sin, and Satan, and all our spiritual enemies, Galat. 3. b. 11.
and so does Saint Paul use, Galat. 3.

Yea in deed the proud man is as he that transgresses by wine, Verse. 5.
therefore shall, etc. Here the Prophet begins to declare what shall come to
the Empire of Babylon and of the Chaldees, together with the causes wherewith
God was moved thereto. The proud man, says he, that is, the proud and
ambitious Babilonian, is like to a drunken man, that has passed all measure in
drinking of wine. As in the Drunkarde the vapors of the wine ascendinge to the
head so trouble the brain, and takes away the right use of sense and reason,
that without shame or measure he runs headlong to all filthiness, and the
more he has powered in, the more still he desires to drink: Even so the proud
and * ambicious spirit of the Babilonian does so trouble his mind with vain
imaginations, Judith. 1. c. 7
and carries him away with furious lust and desire of larger dominion, That
without all shame or measure he attempteth any thing that may serve his
pleasure. And the more he has gotten under his dominion by violence and
cruelty, the more still he lusts. Therefore says God, by the Prophet, He
shall not endure, he shall come to a foul end. For even as hell mouth, the
grave or the sepulcher, and Death itself are insatiable, and draw unto them
young, and old, and of all sorts and states: even so the outrageous lust of
the Babilonian, not contented with the great Empire of Assiria, seeks by
might, violence, and oppression, by heaps as it were, to pull under his
subjection all Nations and Countries of the earth. By this that is here spoken
of the Babilonians, 4. Re. 14. c. 10 Sopho. 3. c. 11. Eccle. 10. b. 7.
we must learn what * mischief comes of pride, and ambition, and how
displeasant it is to God.

Shall not all these take up a parable against him, Verse. 6. 7. 8.
and a taunting proverb, etc. The first plague that God threatens to the
Empire of Babylon (for under the person of one Man he means the whole
kingdom) and says, that al those nations that it before had afflicted and
grieved, when they saw the overthrow thereof, should triumph at it, and take
up taunting sayings and Proverbs against it. And in reproach of it say, Woe be
to this greedy kingdom, yt with insatiable rauine have before time increased
thy Dominion, with that which by no right belonged to thee, and loaded thy
self with riches, being none other thing in themself then Dirt and Clay of
the Earth. Verse. 7.
How long shall such wicked violence continue? Shall not Cyrus with the
Persians, and Medians, suddenly come upon them, when they least think of it,
and bite them with like sorrow as they have grieved other, Verse. 8.
and in the end utterly spoil them? Yea, because they with exceeding cruelty
and bloodshed have wasted other Nations and Countries, and done great injury
unto Land, City, and inhabitants: the remnant of the same Countries shall
now in like manner spoil them with their Country, City and People. Thus God
uses to reward the cruelty of Tyrannes with like cruelty, as they have used
toward other.

Woe, to him that coueteth an evil covetousness to his house, Verse. 9. 10.
that he may, etc. Now the prophet speaks against the covetousness and
extortion of the Babilonians, Woe be to thee O Babylon, says he, and to all
them which in like wicked and covetous manner study to enrich their children,
and set up their houses and families aloft, thinking by their great treasure,
power, and wealth, Verse. 10.
to set them out of all danger of evil: Yea such persons as by extortion
rob other poor and honest people, to enrich their family, to make them
noble persons and gentlemen, to build gay houses, to purchase lands, to
procure sumptuous pleasures, do pull shame and perpetual reproach upon their
houses and sin grievously against their souls. Verse. 11.
These men think that they are so high, and of so great authority, that no
man dare blame them, But God will so work it, that if no man will, the very
stones of the houses that they have builded by Extortion, shall cry against
them, and say, VVo unto him that builds a town with blood and cruelty,
Verse. 12.
And the Beams out of the timber shall answer, And to them also that erect a
city in iniquity. This God will cause even the insensible creatures to cry
out curse and woe against them. And so all their labors that they have taken,
god will make vain, as if they were consumed with fire. And the work of God
shall so evidently appear to the comfort of his people in the punishment and
destruction of the Babilonians, Verse. 14.
that his glory shall be spread over all the earth, as the waters ouerwhelme the
room of the Sea.

Woe be to him that gives his neighbor drink, Verse. 15.
thou ioynest thy heat, and, etc. The next vice that the Prophet does
reprove, is Drunkenness and quaffing, whereunto the Babilonians were much
given, and specially under their king Balthazar, as appears. Dan. Dan. 5. a.
2.
5. When the Prophet says, VVoe to him that gives his Neighbor drink, he
does not blame them, that offer drink in honest manner to their ghestes, or to
relieve the poor.

But as he expounds himself, such persons as in the Heat of their
drunkenness provoke other to quaffing and immoderate drinking, until they
have made them more like beasts then men, discovering themselves filthily, and
therein take they great delight and pleasure. Wherefore God threatens them
punishment for that wickedness, and says that they Shall be filled with shame
instead of Glory, For when the Prophet says Thou art, etc. by the present
time (as the Prophets often do) he signifies what shall so assuredlye come
unto them as if it were now already fulfilled. Then the Prophet with bitter
scorn adds, Drink thou also, and be made naked etc. As if he hadsayde,
seeing it is such a pleasure and delight to thee, to behold the filthy
nakedness of other, whom thou haste made drunk, thou also, will thou nill
thou, shalt drink, and have thy filthiness, thy shame and reproach
discovered and laid open to all men. For the lord by his right hand and
mighty power has prepared a Woeful Cup of affliction for thee, Verse. 17.
which when it shall be poured upon thy head Shameful spuing, that is, the
bewraying of thine own ignominy, reproach, and shame, shall ouerwhelme and
distayne all thy glory wherein thou have reioiced. Thus bitterly God reproved
in them that foul vice of drunkenness. And he adds moreover the principal
cause of their utter destruction to be the exceeding cruelty, murder, and
spoil, that they had used toward the country of Jury and his people dwelling
therein. For that is it that he means by the Cruelty of Lybanus. By Lybanus,
which is a part of the land of Chanaan, he understands the whole country.

What profits the Image, Verse. 18. etc.
for the maker thereof has made it an Image. etc. God, that his people being in
captivity among the Heathen, and seeing their prosperity might not attribute
the same to their false Gods, in this place by his Prophet reproves the
Idolatry of the Babilonians, and shows that they are not * hable to help
them, 3. Reg. 18. e. 26 28. 29.
or in any respect to do them good. For they are but stocks and stones * and
have their shape and figure of the workman, Psalm. 114. a. 4.
that makes them: Who as an unreasonable Creature and as it were bewitched of
his senses * worshippeth it as God, Esa. 46. a. 6. 7
and puts his trust in the work of his own hands. They are set as
Teachers of lies, For they breed opinion that they are the Image of God, which
can be expressed by no Image, being a spiritual substance. They move many
vain false and wicked cogitations of God, in the minds of men, and lead them
into error. They corrupt and overthrow the true worship of God, and cause
it to be transferred to creatures. And what greater Lie can there be then this,
to induce men to * attribute divine power to that, Esaias. 44. c. 17
which has not so much as any thing like to a mortal man, more then the dead
figure and proportion.

This place let them consider which before time have taught the people of God
that Images are lay men's books. In deed books and teachers they may well be
called, but as the Prophet here says, to teach them Lies, and errors touching
God and his worship. Therefore the People that have been so lamentably
missledde, may well say, woe, woe, unto them that have brought us to so
palpaand gross error as to forget the eternal, true, and living God, Esaias.
44. d. 24
* who made us, who preserved, and by his son redeemed us, and kneel down
to dumb stocks, and stones, and in our greatest need and distress to call
to them for help, and to put our chief trust, and confidence in them.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Denham for Rafe Newbery dwelling in Fletestreete
a little above the Conduite.

Anno. 1573.


