THE Prospectiue Glass of WAR.

Shevving you a glimps of VVarres Mystery, in her admirable Stratagems,
Policies, Ways; in Victualling of an ARMY, providing Money to pay Soldiers,
finding out the Enemies Purposes, Traps, and Stratagems: Ordering of Marches,
Framing of Battails, sundry Fights, Retreats, and the like, to avoid Battle
or Fight.

Furnished with Argument to encourage, and Skill to Instruct. By C. E.

War is a School of necessary Knowledge.



LONDON: Printed for Michael Spark, dwelling at the sign of the blue Bible in
Greone-Arbor. 1628.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir JOHN COOK Knight, Principal Secretary of State to his
Majesty.
SIR,
AS shape beautifies an Image, so good actions commend a man. That which did
commend Lucullus most, was this, Plutarch in the life of Lucullus.
He would rather deliver a Roman Citizen from the hands of his enemy, then win
all that his enemies had in their power. Lucullus in this did conquer himself;
as Alexander did in containing from Darius his most fair wife and daughters;
and Caesar, in sparing to punish his greatest enemies. To whom Cicero said,
that in other Victories, Fortune, Policy, and Soldiers, might claim a part,
but in this, he alone should have all the glory.

Glory, Thirst of prey, and love of Country, were the three things that set
all the Romans upon admirable action. The first is counted but a August. de
Ciuit. dei. li. 5. cap. 3.
Vice; the second, no better then Theft; the third, is the Virtue Heroical. In
this Virtue Cicero excelled the other three, and therefore was honored with
this Epitaph, Pater Patriae.

He was called Father of his Country, because he kept it from decay.

All those that in their Consultations do seek the benefit of their Country,
do deserve the like like reward and praise. You then Sir, are to be praised
and honored of all men, whose Consultations tend to the benefit of the whole
Kingdom: having obtained a Conquest of your self (being a Christian) far
above that of Lucullus and Caesar's. Therefore you shall attain a most sure
triumph, the guide of whose Chariot shall be Grace given from above, and Glory,
that shall never fail you.

It is reported of Roscius (the Tragedian) that men durst not adventure to Act
in a Tragedy in his sight, because of his excellency in that faculty. And
shall I dare to discourse of War (or any other subject) before so great a
Statesman, so learned, exquesite a Mathematician as your self? Behold I were
blanckt, and should stand as Queen Hester did (dead in all men's opinion:) did
not your Septer of benignity give me life, and tell me that you are a Fauoror
of Arts and Arms.

Therefore I take courage, and prostrate this my poor labor to Kiss your
Honorable hands, not as any addition to your uncontrollable and approved
knowledge, but as a weak Fabric, which only wants the support of your much
admired goodness. Pleases it you therefore to accept my Book, to peruse and
allow of the same, that it may the more safely come abroad, and thereby deserve
the better favor and acceptance of all the Readers thereof: as allowed of him,
whose Noble acts as well within the Realm, as without, have always from time
to time, so well appeared. So I shall be the more boldned, and encouraged to
take the like pains hereafter, if good and meet occasion, may serve there unto.

Ever vowed to you (Honorable Sir) in all dutiful service, Edward Cook.

The Preface to the Reader.
Judicious Reader:
IT is not the least, but the greatest kind of folly, when a man having but a
little science, presumes to teach not only those which have only science,
but such as have most certain experience. For mine own part (among many) I am
most free from this guilt: though for the good of many I have published this
Treatise which will make me thereby seem guilty. Yet I confess the Book or
Treatise is a collection of such notes as have bin by me selected out of the
best Tacticke writers both Ancient and Modern. All which I have illustrated
with examples, and precepts, the better to instruct all young Commanders; who by
reading them may get much knowledge. But it may be these brave spirits are
minded to get knowledge by experience, and not to join experience unto
knowledge: therefore they affect the bloody fields of Afric better then the
beautiful Schools in Greece. Well, let them do so; but in my opinion it
seems a far better and shorter way (for them) to attain to the name of
worthy perfect Captains, to join experience unto knowledge, then to get
knowledge by Experience. For Man's life is short and subject to many casualties,
oftentimes it is cut off before it can come to any such perfection as is
required in an excellent man of War; whereas small experience with diligent
reading, and perfect learning of feats of War may frame and make many
politic Captains in a small time.

I do not mean that knowledge without experience can do any great thing at
all; but being joined both together, doubtless they may be as able to bring to
pass as great and as merueilous things in valiant men in these our days, as
they have done to others before our time: To which not only experience alone
brought them, but diligent learning and study of the Art of War, written and
set forth by Historical Writers and Poets. Innumerable are the Books which
this age does afford of the like subject for their direction: the number of
which I have augmented by two; namely, The Character of War, and The
Prospectiue Glass of War. The Character of War, does instruct them in the
use of the Postures, in the use of Facing, Wheeling, Countermarching, Doubling,
Distances, and the like. And how to Command a Company.

The prospectiue Glass of War does instruct them how to Victual an Army,
how to provide money to pay Soldiers, how to find out the enemies purposes,
Traps, and Stratagems; how to direct an Army to march either by day or by
night; how to Embattell; how to behave themselves in battle, when to fight,
when to avoid fight, with many other excellent things worthy of their
knowledge. Then let them read, and reading they will learn to judge aright of
the Author; who puts a difference between the state of Philosophers, and the
state of Captains; between the skill to read in Schools, and the knowledge
to rule an Army; between the science that wise men have in Books, and the
experience that others have in war; between the skill to write with the pen,
and others to write with the sword; between one that for his pastime is set
round with deskes of Books, and another in peril of life, encompassed with
troops of enemies. Therefore presumes not to teach any such grave experienced
Soldiers; only records what they have done, or can do; which he recounts to
others to imitate, who it may be have neither seen nor read them. Spare not
then to judge and censure him who will ever remain thine.

C. E.

Hiss.

Hiss.

A Battle both with Seconds, and Ayds for all attempts; containing 12000.
Foot, and 4000. Horse, with Ordnance on the Hills, Rear and Flanks.



THE PROSPECTIVE Glass of WAR.
CHAP. I.
After what manner a Commander or General should best provide Victuals and
Mouie to content his Soldiers, and how to find out the purposes, Trapps, and
Stratagems of his Enemy.
VIctuals is the Soul of an Army: Money, but the Sinews: without the first
your Army cannot at all subsist; without the second, but indifferently: but
with both, admirable well. That your Army may have both Soul and Sinews,
thereby to subsist long and well, provide for it good store of victuals and
money: Likewise prye into the wiles and stratagems of the Enemy in time, that
it may go well with your Army. Which that you may well do, these precepts
following will direct you aright. But first of Victuals.

Victuals consist first in convenient provision of them, then in safe keeping
and preserving of them, then in good distributing, or spending, or bestowing of
them always.

Precepts for provision of victuals.
All which you must carefully execute if you would not willingly taste of want.

1. Provide for victuals before you undertake the war, for then is the time
of best provision.

2. In your war begun, store your self with victuals, either near hand or
far off. And conduct it with good and strong conuoyes, lest the Enemy
surprise it.

3. In your Towns of war, either without or within, have great store of
Milles to grind corn to sustain you the better in a seidge: And be sure to
look well unto them, and sufficiently to defend them, especially those that
are without the Town.

4. If you beseidge Towns or Cities, you ought to hurl down all Milles
within and without, and to cut of the water from them, if you cannot keep them
for your own use.

5. Provide that such neighbors as dwell near unto you, may safely bring
victuals into your Camp without danger of the Enemy.

6. In case of necessity send your Soldiers into their Province to abide and
be relieved with victuals for a time. Example,

Galli being in some distress of victuals, choose the City Attella, a City
full of victuals, to stay there until by their friends they might be
relieved, both with victuals and Soldiers. In which City their Soldiers for
a while were largely relieved and freely, with or at the charges of the
Citizens.

7. Seek by all means to intercept your Enemies victuals; and lay seidge to
those places from whence their chief relief of victuals does come. Example,

The Captains of Charles the sift, in the wars against the Germans, lacked
victuals somewhat, where on the other side, the Germans lying in a plain
fertile Country, had plenty of victuals, upon the occasion of the aoundance of
the Country, being large; and partly because certain friendly Cities and
Countries lay behind them on the otherside of the River. For the same purpose
Charles the Emperor went about for to gain the Cities standing about the
River from them, and so the advantage of the same River with victuals: which
was a brave act.

Like this was that of Francis Sforsa, who understanding that the Frenchmen, or
Army at Nouaro, had great comfort of victuals from Biagrassa, he beseidged that
Town suddenly, and took it: by which occasion he took from them their
chief victuals: And shortly after the French Army was feign to remove.

8. If you are for to journey toward the wars, journey in a plentiful
Country, and which has in long time been in peace. Thus did the French King
Charles the eight when he came to the City of Ast.

9. Also you are to journey in your Confederates Country, and who upon very
great occasion is to desire your society, for such will aid you liberally.
This was likewise practiced by Charles the eight when he invaded Naples: For
other ways of getting of victuals, and preserving them so got, peruse these
presedents.

10. Some Kings, Captains, and Generals, which have either taken, or saved
some City which was likely to be lost, have caused their Soldiers to be
releiued of victuals in the same; in the houses of them which were their
Enemies.

11. Some have used for to send certain Captains of Soldiers into other
Cities, for to ease the present spending in the place where they were.

12. Some have used to send all the poor and impotent people out of their
City so beseidged, that their victuals might last the longer.

13. Some would suffer none either to return or to have relief of victuals:
Which unreasonable hard usage needed not, if Governors would before hand, and
before need, prepare both for abundance of victuals, or else withal take order
for the moderate spending of their victuals: For negligence of provision of
victuals in time, and mispending, or else lack of good keeping or ordering
them which you have, should be well seen unto. I pretermit this. And I fall
upon the provision of money for the payment of your Soldiers wages.

Precepts for the payment of Soldiers wages.
Having money sufficient, it is best to pay your Soldiers beforehand, or
monthly.

1. If you be bare of money, pay some wages, and procure that the Soldiers may
have victuals good cheap all the while you lack money, or employ them where
continual spoil may be had.

2. If you have little money, pay a part of that openly in the hands of such
soldiers as are most likely to make a Mutiny.

3. Some Generals when as their soldiers have been ready to reuoult or mutiny
for lack of pay, have straight way brought them to the battle, for this
purpose; if victory happened on their side, they would pay their soldiers of
the spoil of their Enemies, or else if their Army were overthrown, then they
should be clearly and well discharged of the grievous and dangerous complaint.

4. Some have caused the Citizens of Cities to receive soldiers into their
houses for to give unto them meat, drink, and lodging, and to give wages unto
the same soldiers. Thus did Anthony de Leua at Millan.

This was he that forbad all his Citizens for to eat any bread but only such
as should be bought of him: For which purpose he appointed in every street
certain houses where bread should be sold, at what price he lusted, and none
durst do the contrary. By which kind of means he got into his hands all such
kind of money as any Citizen of Millan had in his Chests, or else could make
or reserve by any means or ways; with which he paid his soldiers. This was
his way, but some have found other ways besides these.

Ways to get money to pay Soldiers.
5. Some Generals have gaged all their plate and Jewels unto rich monyed men,
to pay their soldiers.

Charles the 8. of France.
6. Some Kings have borrowed all the Jewels and ornaments of certain great
Ladies or Estates, which were their friends and kinsmen, and have pawned the
same to Usurers for to pay their soldiers.

7. Borrow largely of your Confederates money, who seeks your society in his
wars: for his special purpose: The French King Charles the 8. could do this
passing well.

8. Seek of such a Confederate any other aid or furniture for your wars,
which furniture can stay your laying out of much expense.

9. Seem (to such a Confederate) to defer your wars that you may the
better wring forth of him greater sums. It may be he may prove like
Lodowicke Sforza Duke of Millan.

This Duke, seeing Charles the eight make no haste to invade Naples according
unto promise, because Lodowicke was to work a feate by Charles his coming,
which otherwise he was very hardly to do; he sent his son in Law with a
brave Captain into France unto the King, offering him money, ships,
horsemen, and many other things of great importance, which the King accepted,
and for that cause before did stay the war. Thus much of this, which shall
suffice for the ways of getting of money to pay soldiers, and likewise for
victualling your Army. I will now show the ways by which you may find out
your Enemies purposes, Trapps, and Stratagems. To do which, well observe these
precepts.

Ways to find out the Enemies purposes Traps, and Stratagems.
1. First, you are to suspect vehemently, or else to fear, how your Enemy has
an invention by some subtlety or politic stratagem, or invention, or else
some crafty deceit or wile to entrap, beguile, or overthrow your Army.

2. Next for such intents or purposes, you should entertain very good and
sundry espialls, who by all means are to be very attentive, inquisitiue,
curious, liberal, suspicious, and bold.

3. Which especially should remain or abide near the Court of your Enemy, or
else near unto the Army of your Enemies, or in some friends Country of your
Enemies, or near some neighbor of your Enemies, or in the way of your
Enemies, or else a Common Trauellor, or else a Studient in the Land of the
Enemies, or a subject of reputation in the Land of your Enemies, or else a
Merchant or common seller of wares, or a Barber, or a Victualler in your
Enemies Country.

5 Which kind of espialls, you are never to trust thoroughly, but ever to be
jealous of them, and to weigh and confer their reports with the reports of
other espialls, and with likely-hoods, oppertunities, and reasons.

Have espialls continually, if it be possible, in your Enemies Army.

The Langraue, with other Captains of the Germans, (against the Emperor
Charles the first by name) had in Charles his Army ^00. good Espials, whereby
he almost every hour had certain knowledge what was done or said in Charles
his Camp or Tents.

Charles the first Emperor lacked good Espials, for which cause he left many
things undone, which had been for his singular profit, if he had known of
such occasions.

Therefore provide you good Espialls; which Espials are so necessary in the
wars as any thing else: for by them you shall understand how your Enemy will
fight, what he will do against your Army, Marching, Fighting, or Flying.
Which motions, (or rather principal heads of the Art of war) shall be
handled in the four next Chapters following.

CHAP. II.
How a Commander or General should order his March, both by day and night for
the saftie of his Army: How pass Woods, Hills, and Rivers, beset or not beset
with Enemies. With many other necessary circumstances appertaining to Marches.
I Am now to enter by degrees upon these four principal heads of the Art of
war: namely, Marching, Embattelling, Fighting, and Flying from an Enemy. All
which I will deliver with as good method, plainness, and brevity as I can. I
am to begin with Marching: wherein I pray observe my method and order; which
shall be, fiirst by precept to prescribe it: Then by Example to approve it;
Example being the life of precept. I begin.

Precepts for Marching.
1. In Marching you must be very mistrustfull of your Enemy, lest he entrap
you with Ambushes.

2. You must therefore appoint some to march before to discover suspected
places; as Woods, Mountains, Forests, Rocks, Banckes of Rivers, Caves,
Hills, hollow and deep ways. The most of which are rough and intricate, and
scarce passable for the heavy Armed and horse.

3. The fittest for this service are your Musketteers; I, and your Dragons to
join with them, for they may alight from their Horses and serve on foot.

4. You must march sometimes in one form, sometimes in another, according to
the place and occasion offered. Example.

Alexander at the River Granicus marched with his horse foremost to pass the
River, and to assail the Persians, who had opposed their Horse against him on
the banks.

5. Marching through the streights to fight the battle of Issos, he marched
with his Horse behind his Foot, because he was uncertain how near the Enemy
lay, and was loath to put them to hazard before they had liberty of ground to
order themselves, and might have assistance of the Foot. At the River of Ister
he did the like; for having past the River, he marched through a Corn field,
and therefore so marshalled them for fear of an Ambush. Otherwise it was his
custom in marching (as it is the manner also at this day) to dispose his Horse
half behind, and half before: the Carriage in the midst, or Otherwise.

But how to March properly both by day and by night, with your Carriage truly
placed, and every thing rightly ordered, is a point worthy to be taken notice
of: Briefly thus.

Being to March in the day, observe the manner of March now in use.

7. Let some Dragons and Musketteers march before to repress the Enemies
incursions, and to search Woods and Forests for Ambushes, and to surprise
straight Ways, Bridges and Foords. Send after them your Pyoneers to mend the
ways, to cut the woods that are in the way, least by bad way the Army be tired.

8. Let the Foot of the Vantguard (or right wing) follow, enery battalion there
of in order, having half the horse of the Army before them, and all their
baggage and Carriage behind them.

9. After let the battalions of the battle follow with all their baggage and
carriage in the Rear, as the former. Let the battalions of the Reareward (or
left wing) follow, with all their baggage or carriage behind them. Let every
one of the battalions have their shoot before and behind. And let the
remainder of your Horse bring up the Rear. As for your Ordnance, distribute
that (as your Carriage) both behind the Vantgard, the battle, and the
Rereward; the better to serve against all attempts.

10. At night, quarter the Battalions of the Vantgard all in one place; those
of the Battle all in another; and those of the Reareward all by themselves,
but not too far a sunder for fear of danger.

11. In the morning being to dislodge: First shoot off one piece of Ordnance, a
little after that another, and so a third in his time. Shooting the first, the
Army takes notice you will dislodge; therefore they trusse up their baggage and
load it. Shooting the second, they take up their Arms and fall into rank:
shooting the third, they set forward to march. Thus Grave Maurice did dislodge
his Soldiers. Vespatian did it by the sound of a Trumpet (as Josephus does
report) in the third Book of his Antiquities, Chap. 3.

12. Being to march in the night observe the Grecian order.

Send your baggage and carriage before with a sufficient guard. Then follow,
first with your Pikemen, then with your light Armed (being Musketteers;) next
with all your Horse in the rear; the better* by break of day to come all
together into one place, as ought to be. This way your Army in the night is
easily kept together, and is soonest espied if it break.

13. Being to invade an Enemies Country, march with your Carriage in the
Rear. When you do dismarch from an Enemies Country, let your Carriage be in
the Front, unless great store of Enemies be suspected to intercept it; then
you must place it in the midst.

14. Now in fight you may dispose of it five manner of ways; either before the
Army, or behind, or on the one flank, or on the other, or in the midst.
Before the Army, when you fear to be charged behind: behind the Army, when
you lead toward the Enemy: when you fear to be charged in Flank, on the
contrary side: in the midst, when a hollow battle is needful and fit. This
last was practiced by Sr Horatio Vere in the Pallatinate, and by the Graecians
(as Zenophon does record in his third book of the Ascent of Cyrus.

15. Being to march through a wood observe Zenophons counsel. Let your Foot
and Horse in order single themselves as the way falls out, and you shall make
your passage the more secure and easy: Zenophon did thus, as you may read in
his sixth book of the Ascent of Cyrus.

16. It were not amiss to have some Musketteers to march on the sides of the
Wood, to secure the rest within.

How to troule an enemy out of a wood.
17. If your Enemy be in a Wood, Fenne, Hill, Fort, Town, or other place of
strength, that admits no access, send your Musketteers to show themselves,
and with a brauado to toule him out of his advantage, and bring him into the
field, where he may the more easily be dealt withal: with these Musketteers
send some Horse to set upon him, if he dare to venture forth. Example.

Alexander leading his Army against the Tribals that had hid themselves in a
wood, commanded his Archers and slingers to run out and shoot, and sling among
the Barbarians, to see if he could toule them into the plain. The Archers and
slingers spared not to let fly, and the Tribals being wounded with arrows,
threw themselves out of the wood with all speed, to fall upon the unarmed
Archers. Then Alexander with his Horse presently charged them, and being
ouerborne by the Horse they fled through the Wood to the River.

18. Alexander whenever he was to use expedition, marched away with the Horse
and light armed, leaving the Armed to come after. The Armed are for a firm and
steadfast fight, not for Concursions.

19. Being then forsome far, yet sudden attempt, leave your Pikemen behind,
and march away with your Horse and Musketeers: for when celeritie is requisite,
who so fit to be employed, as they who have nothing to hinder their speed.

20. Being to march against an Enemy in his own Country, give the word to
come to such a Province, but Invade another: by this you shall deceive your
Enemy.

Plutarch in the life of Agesilaus. Example.
Agesilaus to deceive Tisaphernes, made countenance as though he would first
invade Caria; whereupon Tisaphernes gathered all his power together; but
Agesilaus on a sudden returned back again, and entered into Phrygia, took
there many Cities, and won great spoil.

21. Many Generals besides Agesilaus have done the like, then be not you
careless of it; for by such a plot the Enemy some other time may perchance be
drawn to deceive himself. Example.

Agesilaus upon another time gave out that he would enter Lydia, not meaning to
deceive Tisaphernes again, but Tisaphernes deceived himself, and thought he
would have invaded Caria, a woodie Country very ill for horsemen, in which he
was the weaker: but Agesilaus took the champion Country of Lydia contrary to
his expectation, so that Tisaphernes was enforced to come with all the speed
that might be to the rescue thereof: therefore leaving all his Foot behind
him, he came stealing upon them with his Horse: Agesilaus understanding by his
men that Tisaphernes was come (and had made some slaughter of such as were
found straggling abroad out of order) imagined with himself that the footmen of
his Enemies could not yet be arrived, therefore with all speed he thrust in
among the horsemen (which he had) his light armed footmen, and commanded them
straight to charge the Enemy, whilst he caused the heavy armed men to follow at
their heels, as they did: but Tisaphernes men fled upon it immediately, and
Agesilaus men lustily followed the chase, took his Camp, and made a great
slaughter of them that fled.

22. Being in an Enemies Country, march in battle array, and let your Pyoners
work the harder, for a long march here is dangerous. Send Horse and Musketeers
a good way before, to search the hills, and to surprise them from the Enemy.

23. In marching between Mountains and Hills, see that your Vantgard succor
your Rereward, your Rereward the Vantgard, if your Enemies go about to
intercept or molest you marching.

Zenophon and Cherisophus did thus against the Carduchans: Observe the manner.

The Carduchans by fighting took the streights which lay in their way, and
indeauoured to hinder and shut up their march: but when they opposed against
the Vant, Zenophon from the Reate ascending the Mountains, and gaining the
upper ground, removed all the impediments the Enemy could cast upon the way:
when against the Rear, Cherisophus ascending up took the upper ground
likewise, and freed the way from them that came behind. So they always
succored, and had mutual care one of another.

How to pass Rivers.
24. Lighting in your March upon deep and impassible Rivers, and having no
Boats (to make Bridges) to waffe you over; marching further to the heads of the
Rivers, you may go over without wetting your knees: Zenophon in the third
Book of the Ascent of Cyrus.

25. Being come to some passable River, where the current runs exceeding
strong; cause your Horse to break the waters, and then let your Foot march
over, but sheltered on each side with the Horse.

26. If the current be over big, so that you cannot waide over; cut the same
River in diverse places, and turn it into the landward with other currants, and
you may pass over with ease.

27. Being to pass a great River where the Enemy on the banks stands to
intercept your passage; to withdraw him from thence (and to deceive him) seem
to leave the attempt, and march away; then having left some behind you to make
a Bridge (unknown to the Enemy) return when you see your time, and pass your
men over with ease. Example.

Caesar having his Army on a bank of a River in France and his passage being
let of Vergintorige a Frenchman, the which on the other side of the River, had
his men, marched many days along the River, and the like did the Enemy:
wherefore Caesar encamping in a woodie place, apt to hide men, he took out of
every Legion 3. Cohorts, and made them to tarry in the same place, commanding
them that so soon as he was departed, they should cast over a bridge, and
fortify it, and he and his other men followed on the way: Wherefore
Vergintorige seeing the number of the Legions, thinking that there was not left
any part of them behind, followed also his way. But Caesar when he supposed
the bridge was made, turned backward, and finding all things in order, passed
the River without difficulty.


In marching, to avoid contention about place; let every Nation have his honor
of place: That which had the Vantgard this day, must have the Reareward the
next day; and so of all the rest by turns. Thus much for Marching.

CHAP. III.
How a Commander or General, should order his Battles, and how behave
himself in the time of Fight, and after the Battle lost.
THe substance of the Art Military does subsist in this: How to order your
Battle, and how to behave your self in the time of Fight, and after the
Battle lost: To do which, observe these particular precepts, and you will be
enabled to do accordingly. I begin with the ordering of your battles.

Precepts for the ordering of your Battles.
1. You are to choose your place both for Rainging of your battles before fight,
and in the fight of the battle, that the same place be able to contain your
whole Army without disturbance.

2. Next in ordering your battles* you must consider what dangers are likely,
or else may happen by causualtie or fortune, and to provide for remedies by
your order beforehand.

3. Likewise you are to consider, that you ought not to order your battles in
all cases and respects alike, but very diversely as your case shall require. For
you are to order your battles according, partly unto the nature of the ground,
partly unto the quantity, quality, or regard of your Enemies Army, and partly
unto such respect as is fittest against such orders or battles of your Enemies
best known to your self for your best advantage.

4. You are to order your Army into convenient parts, and to appoint every one
his place, number, and action.

5. You are to order your battles, that no part of your Army be any disturbance
to any part of your battles.

6. Your are to choose your place, and to order your Army so, that your Enemies
cannot compass you either with their horsemen, or with their shoot, great or
small, or otherwise to your hurt.

7. You are with discretion to learn and know the equality and inequality of
the number of your Enemies Army with your own Army. For you can never most
aptly order your Army in just battles, for to be ordered according to
discipline of war, before you know and consider thoroughly, the nature, force,
and weakness of either of your Armies.

8. Also you are to consider, how you may take any advantage upon any orders,
provisions, oractions; of your Enemies present order, weakness, or strength.

9. Consider also what kinds of advantages the times of the year or the day
affords, which can be had by your Enemies or your self, or else of the
Air, or else of Tempests past or present.

10. Further consider which things first are possible or may be; then which are
likely; next which are apparent before your eyes easy to be known or to be
provided for.

11. Which well known and considered, you are then to order your battles, to
take your ground, for to plant your ordnance, to avoid your dangers, to take
your advantages, for to work your stratagems also for your most comfort, and
so to fight accordingly. But how to order your battles, and so to fight
accordingly, is to be discussed of more largely; for therein is the chief
substance of the Art Military, in which some Generals have been more expert
then others.

Excellent Generals (of old) commonly did use to ordain of footmen apt for to
fight, three great battles; a Vantgard, a Battle, and a Rearward; and two
wings of their horsemen: And when they came to fight, they did set them for the
most part in an even front: The Battle in the midst; on the right hand the
Vantgard, which was called the right winge; on the left the Reareward, which
was called the left winge. Their order we do in a manner follow: For we have
Vantgard, Battle, and Reareward, which we place in Front as they did; only
we differ in the kind of Embattailing. By kind of Embattailing, I mean not
bills, and bows; but gross Bodies: For they parted their Army into three
parts, and Embattailed them into three gross Bodies. We divide our Army into
three parts, but not into such gross Bodies; as for example, Say we have
12000. Foot, and 4000. Horse; if we bring them into one front without seconds,
we do thus.

In our Vantgard, or right winge, we put 3000. men, dividing them into three
battalions, sometimes into more, as we see occasion. In our Battle we put
6000. men dividing them into three battalions, every one containing 2000. a
piece, for the battalions in the Battle, must exceed those in the wings.

In our Reareward or left winge, we put 3000. men, dividing them into as many
battalions, with as many men in either of them, as was to be in the Vantgard
above mentioned. Our horse we place half in the righwinge, and half in the
left winge, the ordinary place for horse. For proof of this, look into the
ordinary practice of the Netherlands, and you shall see them sometimes to put
two Regiments into one battalion, sometimes but one, and sometimes they will
make two battalions of one Regiment. We as they are not tied to any certain
number, but may vary as we see occasions.

Occasions are produced by the Enemy, by the ground, by our selves to our best
advantage, and therefore we do accordingly. If our number be more, we have
the more battalions; if less, the fewer, unless some policy be used.

Some Generals have Martialed their Army only into one Battle, some into two,
some into three, some into four, some into five, some into six, and some into
nine.

The Venetians at the battle of Taro, did martial their Army into nine
battalions; whereof three was to fight with the Enemy, other three to be aid
to the other three fighting, and the other three was appointed for sundry other
purposes and effects.

King Ferdenand, besides his ordinary battalions, had another standing aloof
behind his other battles, for to take advantage, or else to help in
necessity as occasion served; which were light horsemen.

The Earl of Surry, at the battle of Sloddon, had likewise besides his
ordinary Battles, one battle of light horsemen, with which he discomfitted
James (the fourth) King of Scots.

James King of Scots, at the same battle of Sloddon, did martial his Army
into six battles, without horse relief, or seconds, which lost him the
field. For the English with their horse (when the King had the better) would
presently give upon his Flanks, so snatched the victory out of his hands, having
neither Horse nor seconds to recover it.

The Argonians, have divided their Army into five Battles; which battles in
form of straight or direct horns, were extended from the great battle or
midleward. But these were partly Horse and Foot.

The Heluetians, have martialed their Army into three battles, without Horse or
seconds; sometimes into one battle only of footmen, which was their usual
form by custom. But not to be imitated.

The Spaniard, have martialed their Army into two battles; one of footmen in
one winge, and another of horsemen in another winge, all in an even Front. Now
they do otherwise.

The Ancient Romans, have martialed their Armed foot into three Battles. The
first subsisting of the Hastatij, the second of the Principes, the third of the
Triarij: with Velites to either of them, and Horse in the wings. How their
Velites (light Armed men) were placed, being too weak to deal with Horsemen,
or armed Foot (without advantage) I will show you hereafter.

Some have ordered a weak battle of Foot or horsemen, against a strong
battle of their Enemies Foot or Horsemen, thereby to bring their Enemies
strength into some stratagem, which was wisely done by the great Captain
Gonsaluo, against the Frenchmen. This Gonsaluo sent a noble Spaniard called
Mondotius, against the General of the Frenchmen to fight with his Reareward;
which Mondotius, had a company of light horsemen for to invade the Rear of the
Frenchmen, and with him likewise went two Cohorts of Calliuer-shot, which kept
company in the front almost with them, being extended as in two spread wings.
Mondotius horse left these shot, and invaded freshly the hindermost of the
French. The French barbed horsemen, with fury set upon Mondotius light
horsemen: Mondotius light horsemen retired as though they were not able to
encounter the barbed Horsemen: thus flying, caused the barbed horsemen to
pursue out of order: Then the Calliuer-shot keeping aloof off (about a
furlong) and in form of a half Moon, shot of upon the French barbed horsemen,
before and on the Flanks. Gonsaluo thereupon sent a company of his barbed
horsemen to the aid of his light horsemen flying, and his Calliuers fighting:
Thereupon his light horsemen returned, and joined with their own barbed
horsemen that came for aid, and both of them in order, did set upon the
Frenchmen out of order; the shot continuing on both sides, and backs as
before. Which kind of order (you see) and flying, and aid of the Spaniards,
was for to bring first such French force to disorder, and so thereby to
discomfort them the easlier, which was done to their minds.

Some have rainged certain files of shot before every battalion, to skirmish
with the Enemy a far off, and near at hand, thereby to weaken him by
degrees, before they did join battle. This was pactised by Henry the fourth
the French King, against Albertus Arch Duke of Austria, Governor of Brabant, in
the name of the King of Spain, when he came to raise the seidge at Amens. The
form of whose battle I will now describe both by word and figure: But first
let me declare his number. For his number, it was 12000. foot, and 4000.
Horse. Now he ordered them in this manner: His foot was Martialed into nine
Battalions; three of which were for the right winge, three for the battle, and
three for the left winge; The three battalions on the right winge, were two
Regiments of English, and one French Regiment; each flankt with Musketeers,
and containing very neigh 1000. Foot a piece; before every one of which were
placed nine files of Musketeers; three in the right angle, three on the left,
and three in the midst before them: (peruse the first figure following,) every
file contained ten men. The three battalions for the Battle, were three
Regiments of Swize, flankt with Musketeers, with nine files of Musketeers a
piece placed before them as the other, only these Regiments contained more men
then the rest, being together about five thonsand. The three battailions for
the left winge, were three French Regiments, embattailed as the rest, with
Musketeers before them in the same form as the other; every battalion
containing above 1000. The King had 12 field Pieces, which to his commendations
The form of the French Kings battle, containing 12000.

Foot, and 4000. Horse.

The Horse should have been higher placed, and more inclining to the three
uppermost field Pieces.
he planted Soldier like; Three foreright, three flankwise, six on either
winge to annoy the Enemy, both in front and flancke. His Horse was raunged
without these, not forthright, but obliquewise, to encompasse the Enemy; being
in number 4000. in each winge 2000. two hundred in Front, and 10. in depth;
that the one half of the winge might give the charge, the other be their
seconds. Behind the King were his Trenches, guarded with 3000. Foot to defend
him from the sallies of the Town, therefore the King needed no seconds at all.
But if you would see 12000. Foot, and 4000. Horse, embattailed both with
seconds and aids for all attempts, peruse the second Figure going before,
(joined to that of the Kings.)

Where you shall see 15. battalions of Foot, martialed in a manner after the
French Kings form, viz. In the Vantgard or right wing, are three battalions of
500. a piece, Flanckt with Musketeers; before every one of which are raunged
ten files of Musketeers; three in the right angle, three in the left, and
four in the midst just before them; every file containing ten men, which shot
are to make their way through the interuals of the battalions in the Rear of
all, there to give upon the Enemies Flanks. In the Battle are three
battalions, containing 3000. men, (a thousand a piece) flankt with Musketeers,
and with Musketeers before them in the same fashion as the rest. In the
Reareward (or left winge) of the battle, are likewise three battalions of 500.
a piece, Embattailed as the rest, with Musketeers before them, in the same
form as the other: Behind these battalions (for seconds) are four battalions
of 500. a piece, standing against the Interuals of their opposite battalions;
which Interuals are 200. foot broad, that the four battalions may the better
pass through them. These four battalions have shot before them as the former,
which with the rest may march forth to skirmish with the Enemy; or stand still
to second them upon their retreat, before the Battles join: after being in
the Rear to give upon your Enemies flanks as the other. The rest of the
battalions are in Front but twelve foot distance one from another, and at
three foot order.

The divisions of Musketeers are allowed six foot, that they may the better
fall through, having given fire.

In the Rear of all are two battalions, of a thousand a piece, standing just
behind the three battalions of the Battle, about a furlong of. On the Flanks
of these are 800, Horse, 400. in each flank, oblique wise, the better to start
forth and inuiron the Enemy. In like manner are the Horse martialed in the
outward flanks of the rest, but in greater numbers. peruse the Figure.

By the wings of these two battalions are two field Pieces ready turned and
bent to the Rear, to discharge upon the Enemy, if he should with Horse or
Foot give upon that part; if not, then these field Pieces may be with ease
brought from thence to some other place to annoy him other ways.

As for the rest of the Ordance, I have planted them upon two Hills opposite
against the Enemies flanks, thereby to distress him. And for the better
performance of this, I have planted 700. Musketeers to guard them; and will
aid them with more if need be.

Now against this Battle having Ordnance in the Rear, and on the Hills, to
distress the Enemies Flanks, I oppose this Battle following.

A Battle of 12000. foot and 4000. horse, with Ordnance in the midst, and on
the wings. Described in the next page. The pricks enclosed with lines are 800.
shot to surprise the enemies Ordnance on the hills.



Here (or in the Figure going before) you see are sixteen Battalions. The
Ordnance planted both in the Wings and in the Front of the maine Battle. The
Ordnance in the maine Battle, has before them 400. Musketeers, ranged in the
same form as the Enemies, the better to hide the deceit: for so soon as the
Musketeers are clear of the Battle, the Ordnance are to discharge upon the
Enemy to break his maine Battle; and then the other Battles are to march on
to charge the Enemy in disorder: the Horse are martialled outward on the wings,
and stand oblique wise to inuiron the Enemy.

Now before the Horse give the charge, eight hundred Musketties do sallie
forth to surprise the Enemies Ordnance, being planting on the hills.

The Figure does demonstrate it as plain as can be, with the number of every
battalion; only take notice that the shot before every battalion are to make
their passage through the interuals, and sides of the battles, in the Rear
of all; from thence to give upon the Enemies Flanks, if occasion be, otherwise
to aid their own men in the Fight. All the shot before the battalions are in
number 1200.

This appointing of shot for to march before, and to surprise the enemies
Ordnance (in such a place of advantage) was heretofore practiced by ancient
Generals, and lately by our great Commander Sir Horatio Vere in the Palatinate,
though the Battle were unfought.

The planting of Ordnance in the Front of the maine Battle, between the
interuals, to break the Enemies Battalia, was, and is at this day practiced by
the Turks, and other Nations.

Likewise the placing of Ordnance in the Rear with seconds for all attempts,
was, and is at this day practiced both by Italians, French, Germans, and other
Generals besides.

You see then that all this is no crotchet of mine (as the pacing of the shot
before every battalion was no crotchet of the French Kings) but the usual
custom of all Generals before and in his time.

The ancient Romans did continually observe it in placing their Velites before
every Maniple. Their Velites were their light Armed, such as used throwing
weapons (in Latin Massilia) as Bows, Slings and Darts. To a popular Legion
they allotted 1200. Velites. 1200. Hastalij, 1200 Principes, and 600. Triarij.
These made up a Legion. This Legion of 4200. foot was divided into 30.
Maniples; ten of the Hastatij, ten of the Principes, and ten of the Triarij.
The ten of the Hastatij made the first Battle, the ten of the Principes the
second Battle, the ten of the Triarij the third Battle: if but one Legion
were Embattailed. To each of these Battles were allotted 400. Velites, forty
to a Maniple: the Battles containing 3000. of well armed men, besides the
Velites which were but lightly armed. How these Maniples were placed: how far
distant each Battle stood one from another: the order of the Velites: the
number of their Horse, and how ranged by Troops, must not be passed over.
Briefly thus.

Thee ten Maniples of the Hastatij they set in an even Front, leaving so much
distance or void ground betwixt every Maniple, as a Maniple it self took up
in standing. At a reasonable space behind, were the Principes placed in as
many Maniples; but so, that their Maniples stood directly behind the void
places of the Hastatij. And against the bodies of the Hastatij, they left
likewise spaces in the Principes, to the end the Hastatij The Embattaling of a
Roman Legion; showing you how the Velites were first placed, being in number
1200. They are marked with Pricks, being five in rank, eight in depth, 40.
before every Maniple. The Maniples of the Hastatij are marked with H. those of
the Principes with P. those of the Triarii with T. Five Troupts of horse in the
right Wing, five in the left, and 32. in a Troop.

being over laid might retire into these spaces; or else themselves might
advance against the Enemy through the Internals of the Hastatij.

Lastly, at a larger distance behind these were the Triarij set, and divided
with spaces betwixt every Maniple, which spaces were great enough to receive
the Principes in case they retired also: but how big the cross interuals
were I cannot truly and soundly set down; rather I believe they varied,
according to the Forces and will of the General. Polibus notes that Haniball
in his Affrican Battle removed the third Battle (for so he had divided them
according to the Roman fashion) more then a furlong from the second. And
although I dare not affirm that the Romans did the like, yet may I probably
guess it differed not much, because they had need to have such space to
retire, and to avoid the mingling and confusion of Troops. Now the direct
ways were indifferent, sometimes of one distance, sometimes of another, as use
required: if the Velites were there placed as often as they were, they had
need be broad, so large as to receive them with the Maniples; yet not so large
as the cross interuals, of which I have spoke.

In the Cross Internals the Velites were first of all placed, 40. before every
Maniple, and so stood before the Battle did begin As you may see in the former
page
: afterward they marched forth all together to begin the Fight before the
Army did join: As you may see in the next Figure.
they fought a good way before the Front, as our Forlornes do, scattering and
disbandied. After which, having spent their Darts and Arrows upon the Enemies,
they retired in good order through the direct ways, and stood in the Rear of
every Maniple, as formerly they had done in the Front; from whence with The
manner of the Velites fight dismarching from their Maniples, marked with S.
with their retreat in the Rear of all behind the Triarii, marked with V. and
pricks.

their missiue weapons they annoyed the Enemy from thence over their own men's
heads: And sometimes were removed from this station, to assail the Enemy in
Rear and Flanks. This remove was through the direct ways of the Maniples of
the Triarij into the Rear of all; for by the cross ways they could not
pass, by reason the Horse were ranged in the sides thereof.

The Horse of this Legion were in number 320. divided into ten troops, 32. in
a troop: five troops placed on the right wing, five on the left wing, oblique
wise, withal closing in the Front, and opening in the Rear, like this letter
A put downwards.

The manner of the Velites fight with their Retreat into the Rear of all
behind the Triary is in the former page figured to the life. With the station
of the Horse on the Flanks, to save the Battle from inuironing, and to charge
the Enemy in the Flank, if the Enemy gave the charge with his Horse in the
Front.

I with Iustus Lipsus do admire the Roman Embattailing, and will affirm as
much as he, that if this ancient discipline were joined with these our new
found Arms, the old and new world would be subject to one man: for surely if
our light Soldiers (so I call shot) were mixed between the Maniples and before
the Maniples of the armed, with Interuals and distances for retreat, and that
against the Horse and Armed Foot, what Battalia durst assail, nay, what
Battalia could resist us? For in regard hereof our men should be always fit to
charge, fit to retire for a second charge. All which notwithstanding is to be
done with long use and exercise, least they trouble us in the doing. If any
object against the Romans discipline, because such Maniples are not able to
cope with great Battaliaes? Let them know, that the Romans did make their
Maniples Cohorts; and their Cohorts were sometimes 500. sometimes 600. nay, a
thousand if we believe Vegetius: and is not this our number when we
Embattaile? and will not you imitate them? well, if you will not, yet follow
the discipline now in use; a discipline approved for instruction, instructing
you to do thus.

1. When your Battalia of Footmen come to join Battaila with your Enemies
Footmen, have a great company of Musketeers before you to hurt and weaken your
adversary before you join battle or fight; which shot when they have wrought
their effect must have room ready open for them to retreat into the Rear;
from whence they may be fecht to serve against the Enemies Flanks. Your
Enemies Battalia in such case, coming without shot before, has his next
remedy in all haste to join to handy strokes. Your care must ever be to avoid
confusion of fight.

Confusion of fight isto begin before your time, which causes such
inconvenience, as is cause oftentimes of loss: therefore in the beginning of
your Fight take great heed that you invade nor fight confusedly. Whereas every
part of the Army has his ordinary time to fight: neither suffer any part of
your Army to fight with your Euemy in any other fashion then you appointed him.
And for such casualties and accidents as may happen to you in Battle or Fight,
keep these conclusions following in memory and heart, and they will much
avail you in time of need.

2. If your Horsemen be oppressed with your Enemies Horsemen, send for succor
a supply of Musketties, who may scattering and out of order, as occasion shall
serve, shoot at the oppressors, and upon occasion retire and return very often.

3. To these you may send a guard of Pikes for rescue, the better to bring them
off safe: but if you invade your Enemy with Musketeers, with your guard of Pike
send some Horse, that both may defend them from invasion of the Enemies
Horsemen.

4. Likewise to give the Enemy his hands full, follow him with a battalion
resolutely, to put all or one of his battalions to rout; and having discomfited
any one of his Battles, send only a small or convenient company to pursue the
chase, and with the rest invade quickly some part of his Army fighting with
any one of your Battles: This must of necessity be done; for sundry victories
have been lost upon this occasion: that when one Battle has overthrown his
first encountered Enemies Battle, it has immediately followed the chase, and
not helped his own fellows in danger.

Likewise in your first joining of Battle, if your foreward gain the victory,
join your other Battles immediately whilst comfort is on your side, on your
Enemies discomfort. This got Bucoy the victory at Prague.

6. If your Footmen be vehemently oppressed with your Enemies footmen; send
your horsemen to invade the sides of your Enemies, and with them some shot to
hold them play: but if you can plant a piece of Ordnance against their flank,
it will much abate their courage.

7. If your Enemies come upon you unprovided and unlooked for, send your
Horsemen or shot, to skirmish with them, whilst you intend to make you ready
for Battle. Also your Horse may extend themselves into a deep Heirse battle,
for to invade your Enemies with their more trouble and stay.

8. Or to deceive your Enemies, march toward them with a company of Horse, and
make semblance of fight, as if the whole Army followed. The Enemy at this will
stand; your battles in the mean time be set: you by this may outface the
Enemy, and return again without fight.

9. Then being in good order, if your occasion be such, that you would not have
your Enemies understand of your orders and policies, cause you Horsemen to run
up and down: the dust, to let their fight. Do the like if you have planted and
ordered your Army all in stratagems.

10. If your Enemies maine battle do urge very valiantly your foreward, and
his other battle be not ready to help, or rescue, cause both your other
battles one on the one side, and the other on the other side, freshly to invade
your Enemies maine battle; and herein you shall do wisely, imitating your
predecessors, the brave English, at the battle of Poytiers.

11. If you having a small and weak number, and you understand that your
Enemies go for to distress a certain aid coming to help you: where you be
sent after the Enemy to invade the backs of them when they be fighting with
your aid; coming, set not you on rashly upon your Enemies, before your time
appointed; for if you fight with your enemies so, being stronger, before your
aid have set upon their Front, you foolishly cast away your selves, and also
leave your aid in danger: and by your untimely, rash, and unwarlike onset
bereave your selves of your aid and help. And withal you much comfort your
Enemies, who might have been discomforted; for if you had observed your
discipline and purpose, you should have followed your Enemy closely, with as
little noise as might be, until your Enemies had set upon your aid; then in
the heat of their fight, you should have set upon their backs, before your
Enemies were knowing of your coming: which kind of dealing had been most
hurtful to your Enemies, commodious to your Aid, and profitable to your
selves; for warlike discipline is, that a weaker company never fight with a
greater strength, without a special advantage of time, occasion, and place for
to help you. Also, never to break your advised determinate purpose, without
you be either enforced, either drawn to fight by occasion of some notable
accident offered by chance. Accident will happen; for in wars no most
certain rule can be appointed, which is not broken by some means at some
several times: therefore wait time, and so I proceed to other Council.

12. If you abound in number, covet to compass your Enemies, and to distress
them being weak.

13. If your Enemies abound in number, provide by order, or stratagem, or
place, that your Enemies cannot compass you.

14. Plant your Camp or Army to fight in a very strong ground by nature, and
help it by Art.

15. Some have used to choose their ground fortified by nature, as Prosper
Colonno.

16. Some have no regard of the strength of the place by nature, but choose
rather to fortify all wholly by Art and industry, as the ancient Romans.

17. Some seek places somewhat by nature strong, and by Art and industry make
them more stronger. They fortify themselves as well in Fight as in Camp,
which the good Captains of our time do usually.

18. Therefore if you be unwilling to fight, and your Enemies must needs fight
with you, by your industry make a ditch three foot deep, and five or six foot
broad, and cast the earth toward you; which ditch, if you think good, let it
be especially in the Front, also in the sides, and on your backs also, as
Prosper Colonno would often dot.

19. Which Ditch, if it have sundry places open and free for your Enemies to
enter, of no great space, it shall encourage them there to enter; where if you
provide some stratagem against them, you do well. The fittest stratagem for
this occasion, is to place certain Companies before the gaps, and certain
Ordnance behind them to be discharged when they open in the midst.

20. Whereupon, if your Enemies desist, urge them hardly, only make a fair
show, but proceed no further. For you are not to put your confidence in such
weak fortification: nor in the arrogance of your men to fight; by arrogance
many Armies are overthrown, where by wisdom many are saved. I present you
the Figure of such an Entrenched Battle to peruse; (in the next page
following) but you may do as you please.

21. If your Company be small, and your Enemy have great store of Horsemen
against you, so that you be likely to loose the Battle, if your Enemies again
set upon you; if any great Wood be near, seek to save your Army by the
thickness of the same Wood, and suffer your Enemies to gain your Ordnance,
and Baggage, and Victuals, that they spoiling the same, you may the better
escape.

22. Likewise when you have a Battle more then the Enemies, divide it into two
parts; and where you see any danger among your Enemies, send first one

A Foure-Fronted Battle for Stratagem, being environed with a Ditch.
THe Ditch is 6. foot broad, and 3. foot deep. It has four gaps (for
sallyes) twenty paces broad, to allure the Enemy there to enter. It has at
every gap five battalions of 300. a piece: it has a field Piece behind every
middle battle; every middle battle must open in the midst, before the Piece
do discharge; then the Horse must issue forth upon the Enemy: for this cause
the Horse have their place in the midst, remote from the Foot, divided into
four squadrons, (in the form of a cross) ready faced to the gaps: being in
all 1600. the foot 6000. If you will have no Horse in the midst, then divide
them into 8 troops; place them for wings, in an even front, or on the angles:
so the Battle will be hollow, and the foot battles for the gaps but 3 a piece.



part, and then another: or else, if occasion serve, aid your Battles, as
reason shall move you to help.

23. And in the heat of your Fight, if news come that your Baggage is in
danger, in no case the Captains must not suffer the Soldiers, or Horsemen
confusedly for to run for to recover the same, in case of loss; but by
advice to send a company of convenient men for to do it, only by their
Commandments, and no otherwise; for by seeking to recover the same pelf or
baggage, sundry Armies have been ouerthrown, which otherwise might have been
saved.

24. If your Enemies come ouerstrongly upon any part of your Army, shoot off
your great Ordnance amongst the thickest of them, and when your great Ordnance
has dispersed them, then cause your Horsemen to invade them so disordered most
furiously.

25. As for your Ordnance, you may plant them either before you, or on your
wings, or else upon some convenient Hills behind you, to shoot over your heads;
or on some high grounds on the sides, or before.

26. Some have planted their Ordnance on a level ground behind their Battle,
and causing the Battle to open in the midst, have delivered the volly upon the
Front of the Enemy. In which case you are to mark, that if your Enemy so open,
then his great Ordnance is so planted; and then you have no better remedy, but
to open your selves as you see them do before you: In which case also your
Footmen may suddenly fall down flat upon the ground, and that safely, and rise
again immediately after the Enemies have shot; for in such a case they will
never invade you in your Front, before their shot have been discharged: and
being down, your Ordnance behind you may flanke-wise immediately play on them,
if you were so provided.

27. In marching against an Enemy, if you fear his great Ordnance shooting
directly against you, fetch a long compass to pass by them, and so to avoid
them, if no greater impediment let you.

28. Likewise fearing your Enemies great Ordnance, let your journey be behind
the covert of Corn high standing, creeping close, and your Pikes trayling, so
covet to invade the sides, or backs of your Enemies.

29. Some have, being in danger of the great Ordnance, caused their servants in
Armor for to stand behind great trees, standing directly in the face or sight
of the Gunners, thereby to cause them to shoot off the more vehemently, as
though the whole Battle came that way, and meant for to come upon the Ordnance:
In the mean space, under that color, their Soldiers have come conveniently
some other way; or else behind their servants, creeping lo, toward their
Enemies; which to imitate, you must beforehand learn perfectly the nature of
the ground, which you are to pass, that you may take all advantages which the
nature of the soil can render unto you.

30. If your Enemy March with all his Ordnance in the Vantgard, and his other
Battles lagge half a days journey behind, follow him with all your power
with as great celeritie and secrecy as you can, and so fight with him, being
deprived of his chief strength.

31. If your Enemy March away in good order with his Ordnance before, and in
the Rear of his Army so traveling (not determined to fight) and you seek by
following your Enemy to fight with him, you must have a great regard unto the
place where your Enemy and you both iourny, and there a company of Dragons with
Curassiers, or Pistoliers, with two or three field Pieces, are to be sent
before to stay your Enemies, and to disturb them; that when you see them
thereby stayed, you may have the more leisure to order your Battles, and to
make choice of your ground to fight. Then if you fight (if it be possible) by
all means bring your great Ordnance round about your Enemies Army; plant them
upon some high ground, that you may without impediment shoot free upon your
Enemies backs, or sides: and withal guard your Ordnance with a convenient
number of shot, that they may not be surprised by the Enemy, and turned upon
your selves.

32. If it chance that your Battle be ouerpressed by your Enemies, and begin
to scatter, or for to disorder; then all your Captains must with all diligence
bestir themselves, first in exhortation, and comforting their Soldiers; then
by bringing them again into order, and turn them again, which have turned
from their Enemies: If fair words will not serve, then let them use foul, and
from words fall unto blows, it may be that will force them to return. If they
persist and will fly, then let some few valiant Captains as know such
streights through which they must pass, run before to possess the
streights; there after blows and slaughter, force them to fall into order
again.

33. Bridges, deep Rivers, straight ways environed are to be set.

34. By which ways oftentimes recoueries have bin gotten, although very
dearly.

35. It is very necessary for a General to have beforehand perfect knowledge
of these ways; that he may somewhat the better behave himself after the
loss of his Battle.

How a General should behave himself after the loss of his Battle.
His behavior after his Battle lost, consists best in his good provision of
all kinds of duties made before his Fight or Battle.

For if he have provided beforehand by wisdom some place of safe refuge,
near hand unto the place of the Battle, he has very well taken order for
all mishaps.

If he by wisdom before have taken order that the enemy can in no safety,
but with his danger pursue him, he has well helped his danger.

If knowing no other help to be likely, he began the Battle over night; in
which case having lost the Battle, his Enemies could not pursue him very
far: he has done very well.

If he have beforehand, when he saw himself likely to loose the Battle, in
some convenient place laid some Ambush, which in order will set upon his
Enemies, persuing out of order; he has performed the part of a good General.

A good General will forecast what may happen, and therefore will consider
always of every ground, as he passes by it, what occasion it can work, and
how he can take advantage, or help himself thereby; either by the impediments
of his Enemy there, or else by some Ambush, or some other stratagem to be
wrought upon the occasion of the same ground, good or bad. And if his Enemy
very wisely, and with good reasons and discretion seek Battle or Fight, he
with like wisdom and discretion will avoid Battle or fight, and seek to get
away by flying: which is the next point to be handled.

CHAP. IIII.
In what case it is best for a Commander or General to fly, and how.
AS great Judgment was required of you in the ordering of your Battles, and
behavior of your self in Fight, and after the Battle lost; so there is as
much required of you in taking time to Fly: for if you fly not like a good
Soldier, but like one void of judgment without Discipline, you will bring
destruction to your Army, shame to your Friends, and dishonor to your self:
but if you fly with judgment as a Souldidier, you bring safety to your Army,
glory to your Friends, and hope of victory to your self. That you may be
enabled to fly thus with honor, observe these precepts following.

Precepts for Flying.
1. When your Enemies being mighty, or else very strong, urges you being
weak in strength, helpelesse; then know, that upon such an occasion (so
necessitated) that a wise, orderly, and politic flight is better then an
indiscreet stay without reason.

2. If you be by necessity compelled to fly, fly in order, and in Battle
array, fully provided of rescues and helps, that your Enemies eagerly urge you
not.

3. Fly with sufficient space of time and place, that your Enemies cannot
easily overtake you before you come into safety (I mean places of advantages
for you.)

4. Fly in many parts and sundry ways, which conceal, that your Enemies may
have no intelligence of your meaning, and diversity of flying.

5. If you fly or avoid the fight; do it either compelled by necessity, or
subtlety, or cautiously to bring your Enemy into your danger, or else to seek
places or occasions for your best, or better advantage.

6. If you fly, your Enemy hardly urging you in the Rear and Flanks; your
Hosemen or else your Musketeers, or both, should eagerly skirmish with them
which pursue so earnestly; so that your Army may in the interim win a good
space of ground.

7. Before your Horse and Musketeers should issue out (as above said) you
should have a Piece of Ordnance remaining in the Rear of your Army for to
shoot off upon the vrgers, as opportunity should serve.

8. In like fashion two or three pieces of Ordnance in the Rear of every
battalia, traveling, iournying, or flying.

9. Commonly your Musketeers (in such cases last rehearsed) are used to be
placed both in the Rear and Flanks, for the said special purpose; namely, to
skirmish with such as do disturb your March; and yet to keep on their
journey with the rest.

10. Some such as fly use to leave some great Stales or Ambushes, in places
very convenient (as Woods, Mountains, Forests, Rocks, banks of Rivers, Caves,
Hills, hollow and deep ways, Corne-fields, and the like) for such a purpose,
to entrap the vrgers, if occasion can serve.

21. Sometimes (as Count Mansfield) they fire houses to stay their Enemies
following: and on that side the smoke falls (by reason of the wind) they lay
an Ambush to entrap the Enemy. The like do you, that the rest of your Army may
pass with safety.

12. When you fly only the Battle, and seek order and time convenient for
the same, send all your baggage and carriage before, and after them all your
Footmen, and with a strong company of Horse fortify your Rear, and leave many
fires in the Camp; And for time, choose a cloudy dark morning.

13. In your flying, or before, learn exquisitely of them as be skillful of
the ways and places, where, how far off, or how lie such places, as you hope
may somewhat defend you from any danger of your Enemies, and make the greatest
haste toward them.

14. If you can learn of any narrow passage between two great Hills, or
between some great River or Wood, and some dangerous Hill, or some other
dangerous place wherein you may safely rest from your Enemies, make haste
thither.

15. In which case learn very diligently whether there be not some secret
place in the same place of your quietness, whereunto your Enemies getting, may
disturb your quietness; and if there be cause, such kinds of dangerous
places, to be either well warded, or else stopped by a trane-ditch, or by
another good way.

16. Also learn very diligently, whether your Enemy seek not by their
Horsemen to fetch a great compass about any side of your said place of your
security, either to enclose you there, or else for to go before you to some
place of their advantage against you.

17. In which case, if your Enemies with their whole Army seek to compass the
place, and for to be before you, take good advice, if you may not turn that
their practice unto your commodity, by some new invention.

Zenaphon of the Graecians retreat from Babylon, lib. 3.
As first, for to return back again unto some place of refuge; for you are
else (as the Graecians) to seek another way not suspected of your Enemies.

Or else to return a little back to give a color to your Enemy of flying
away, so to draw him into the same straight to follow you the easier in his
opinion, and to return to encounter him the more easily.

18. A chief, or else a notable place of refuge for Flyers, is to fly to be
under the wings, or safety of some City, or else strong Fort, well furnished
with great Ordnance upon the walls; it is able to shoot over your flying Army
into the Army of your prosecuting Enemy, and so hurt him, to his great danger,
and your great security, and comfort many ways.

19. If you fly, or journey in three Battles, or more, every Battle must
always be in sight of the next before or behind, in such order, that the one
be always able to succor the other (in case it be invaded by Enemies) so
Flying, or Iournying. Otherwise, for lack of such order and aid, one may be
discomfited for want of others help. To conclude.

20. If Flying, your Enemy with a great company of Horse and shot, invade your
hindermost Battle, discharge two Pieces of Ordnance upon them, or more, which
will cool their courage, and will likewise by their roaring and thundering
noise, warn your other Battles to make Alt or stand, whereby you may work
your will. Example.

The Landgraue with his German great Army, when Charles the fifth Emperor
sent a great company of shot for to invade their hindmost Battle, and to stay
them, he caused two Culuerins to be discharged upon them; and all the Army
staid. Thus much for Flying.

CHAP. V.
How a Commander or General must avoid Battle, and when accept of Fight.
THe wisdom of a General does best appear in the avoiding of Fight, and in
the taking of opportunity to fight; both of which are so necessary in the
Wars, that the one cannot be without the other: but which of these for a time
are first to be used, and for a time laid aside, rests in the wisdoms of a
wise General to determine.

Wisdom wills you to begin with wars, when you see your self very strongly
prepared, and your Enemies contrariwise altogether weak and unprovided.

And wisdom wills you, as you begin well, so to continue your wars wisely
for your most commodity.

In wars, if you either for lack of knowledge, or by negligence, or else by
pride let slip most apt occasions, you seldom after can get them again.

To let slip a good opportunity, brings both repentance, shame and loss
also.

Many have felt this to their sorrow. Therefore let their losses admonish you
to let nothing slip, that may either dispatch your war quick, or prolong it
to your Enemies loss, and your own advantage.

That you may be enabled to do this, take these Rules for your direction.

When to Fight.
1. If your Enemies be few in number, and raw Soldiers, ill furnished, ill
willing for to fight, and not fortified by place: if you abound in number which
are better Soldiers, you are to seek the Battle. Vegetius, lib. 3.

2. When your Enemies abounds in all things, and therefore auoideth to fight,
and where you want of provision, and your Soldiers lusty, and desirous of
Battle; there you may seek Battle. Antony at Philippi against Cassius and
Brutus.

3. Where you be determined to seek the Battle, make good choice of your
ground where you be to fight, and see your self in perfect order and
direction, and yet seek all advantages you can by any means find out.
Prosper Colonno against the Frenchmen at Bicocca, and Bassan.

4. Though you abound in number, seek not to fight rashly, neither be very
desirous of Battle, without very good appearance of likelihood of victory:
neither fight before you have intelligence of your Enemies strength, policies,
and orders, except extreme necessity compel you.

5. Avoid not to fight with one great Army, when you know, that if you stay,
you shall shortly be compelled to fight with two great Armies.

This was well foreseen by Claudius Nero, and as well executed to his glory.
Claudius Nero the Roman Consul, intercepting Asdrubals Letters (directed to
his brother Hanibal, to meet him at Vmbra, to join both their powers together,
for the subversion of the Romans) presently upon the reading, left his fellow
Consul in the night (unknown to Haniball) and with six thousand foot, and one
thousand horse, came to Liuius another Roman Consul, who was to intercept
Asdruball coming from the Mountains into Italy, and there joining force with
his, gave Battle to Asdruball, overcame him, and slew him before ever Haniball
knew of his being in Italy. Haniball upon this was much grieved, both for the
death of his Brother, and the deprivation of his power, and removed into the
fields the Brutians. And for that he had no power left him of men, to defend
his Portresses that he held, being so far off; he gathered together all the
Metapontancs, and the Lucanes, such as were his friends; and brought them all
into the Country of the Brutians, where he remained for a season, Counselling
what were best for him to do. Thus was Haniball brought to distress by the
wisdom of one man, taking his time and opportunity to fight.

Having shown you when to Fight; now let me show you when to avoid it. Avoid
Fight upon these occasions:

When to avoid fight,
Where you by deferring the Battle are to find all things in better case; and
contrary, your Enemies are to lack, and loose by the same victuals, wages,
good will or friendship, you are to avoid Battle. Vegetius, lib. 3.

Where you abound in number and victuals, and other provision, and your Enemy
wants of your abundance, and therefore seeks to fight, avoid you the
Battle. Cassius and Brutus at Philippi, against Antony and Caesar.

Where the Enemy must needs dissolve his Army shortly, if he fight not with
you; there you are to avoid the Battle. Pompey at Durazzo against Caesar.

Where you are in danger to loose a Realm, or two, if you loose the Battle,
your Enemies are in danger only to loose their present Army: Being no stronger
then your Enemies, seek not to fight. Hispani. Bell. Verona.

Where your Soldiers and Captains be marueilously unwilling to fight, seek
not to fight. Vegetius lib. 3. cap. 9.

Aluians.
If your Enemies be poor and needy, beware of their necessity; for always
necessity makes men desperate, and causes them to think there is no remedy
but victory in fight.

If you be in any strong place, so planted that your Enemy cannot fight with
you, but with his great loss, seek not to fight with him. Prosper Colonno at
Bicocca.

If your Enemy be so placed in a strong Camp, seek not there to fight with
your Enemy. Carolus Caesar in Germany.

Frenchmen are by long dalliance and time to be deluded, because they be hot,
and desirous to fight when they be fresh, and eager to be put on in the
beginning of the wars; afterward, when by long time they are wearied, they
are tractable enongh: so will others be besides Frenchmen.

If you have wars made against you by a number of confederate Princes or
Magistrates (take Caesar's counsel) defer the Battle for a time, and weary
them out by polliticke usage. Keep them from victuals; kill all such as go
for Forage, or any other purpose; make many Alarams nightly upon them in their
Camp, and toil them with watches and sudden labors: By this means you
shall make the wars seem loathsome unto them, and protract it the longer;
whereby, they may fall into dissension one with another: for such a number of
Confederates cannot long agree, but that some quarrels will fall out between
them, or else some grudges; so that some may be divided from the other by some
kind of persuasion or other, whereupon you may, if you think good, give
Battle to the relinquished: or chase them (as the Imperials did the French out
of Millan) with light skirmishes.

For the better performance of these skirmishes, let all your Soldiers have
the perfect use of their Arms. They may have the perfect use of their Arms
quickly, if the Seriants do but at vacant times plye and exercise them.

FINIS.
At the sign of the Angel in Lumberstreet, you may have an excellent
Plotforme for the postures of Pike and Musket.


