A GODLY Sermon, Preached on New years day last, before Sir William
Fitzwilliam Knight, late Lord deputy of Irelande, Sir James Harrington Knight,
their Ladies and Children, with many others, at Burghley in Rutlande. By the
minister of God Anthony Anderson. Hereto is added a very profitable form of
prayer, good for all such as pass the seas: by the same author framed, and
used in his adventured journey.

Psalm. 37. Mark the upright man, and behold the just, for the end of that man
is peace. Imprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote for Lucas Harison, dwelling in
Paul's Church yard. Anno Dom. 1576.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Sir William Fitzwilliam Knight, late Lord deputy of
Ireland, Sir James Harrington Knight Master Ihon Harrington his son and godly
heir, their virtuous Ladies, Wives and faithful children: Anthony Anderson
Preacher of Christ's Gospel, wishes all health in Christ our Lord.
THough I use not (more the^ brief notes) to write my sermons (yet right
worshipful) for that of some of your godly religious children, I was more then
earnestly entreated to set down this Sermon, my simple newyeares gift
(bestowed in common amongst you) I after longer suit then there was great cause,
granted, and have penned down the same, so near as I can call to my memory
the manner of my speech. The order and disposition I have exactly observed, and
not omitted any note or authority of scripture by me then alleged. And as it
is impossible for him that penneth not his Sermons, to set them down, even so,
and with the self same words in all places as he spoke them: So to all my
possibility have I performed as near as may be my order and speech. And some
thing have I added in some place, which want of time trained me from at that
present. And if any less ye now like then when you herd the same, consider
then the difference betwixt reading and preaching the self same truth, and
matter. Gods grace did the^ assist the preachers spirit, voice, gesture and
disposition, and likewise your hearts by his spirit were made to hunger this
holy bread. And now you have the living words, (but severed from the lively
voice) which never can bring like profit to the godly hearts, unless great
thirste of the matter, cause the resemblaunce of the manner how, to stand as
fresh before your eyes. The Lord grant it to profit as much as my good will
is, and then shall my small labor be fully recompensed. I have joined here to
the form of prayer which I gave to your worship (good Sir William) at Holme
Patricke in Irelande, very good for all such as pass the seas, as our selves
have tasted by good proof, the comforts received in our late ariual the lord
be praised therefore. Take the small gift with the geuer, all yours (as he may)
in the Lord: to whom (with daily thanks for your great courtesy to me in
Irelande), I in my prayers commend you and the rest unfeignedly.

Ian. 3. 1575. Your worships in the Lord Anthony Anderson.

The Lord is my sheperd therefore shall I want nothing.

He makes me to rest in green pasture, etc.


RIght worshipful and dearly beloved brethren, it has from ancient days
been received, that in the first of the new year, each friend does salute
his other with some token of friendship, and therewith wishes to such his
friend all health and good prosperity in God. Which cyuill custom in
Newyeares gyfts, I do allow in civil sort, and having so many friends here
assembled, have purposed, to benefit you all at once, and with such a
special gift as of every of you (the same being worthily received) I shall be
deemed to have satisfied my office belonging my bounden amity to you all. The
gift I exhibit is a portion of Gods heavenly treasure, fully sufficient from
this first day of the year to enriche you above measure in Christ, so that you
use the same with the spiritual instrument of faithful and obedient practice,
continually in your hearts. And this treasure forth of the Psalmists treasury I
have received, and by the same spirit deliver it to you in the Lord, whose
grace the Lord vouchsafe to be ours in this holy actio^ for his Christ's
sake. The treasure it self is the.23. Psalm of the Prophet David, the which
Psalm was made by that holy king, after the receipt of his kingdom and
Crown, whereto he confesses God to be his only help, and promises to him
self by the former received benefits, an absolute warrant of Gods heavenly
providence in his succeding Regiment. The words are thus.

The Lord is my sheperd, therefore shall I want nothing.

He makes me to rest in green pasture, and leads me by the still waters.
And so forth to the end of the Psalm.

I purpose (having thus by prayer called upon god) to give you the Psalm. by
verses, and of every of them such comfortable lessons, as the Lord in mercy
shall give me to utter unto your Christian hearts, and with as much brevity as
may be, because of the extreme cold, that so we may more speedely approach the
Lords holy Table to receive his heavenly mysteries.

The Lord is my sheperd. etc. The prophet calls his God a shepherd, because
of his provident care over him one of his chosen lambs, which word (sheperd)
imports an office of continual feeding, of daily care, of fervent love to the
flock under his charge, of watching, guiding and defending, to the best safety
of his sheep. All which the noble David, by the spirit of Gods instructiu^
knows to be in the Lord, his and our god, and therefore he gives his
majesty, this most apt title: The Lord is my sheperd. David the prophet uses
the phrase which God by his holy spirit gives to him and his other Prophets
in calling the Lord a sheperd, Psa. 77.21 Psalm. 80.1.
as thus. Thou did lead thy people like sheep by the hand of Moses and
Aaron. Again, O thou sheperd of Israel harken which leadest Joseph like a
sheep. And when God will by his Prophet foretell in what sort he will visit
his people, Esai. 40.11
he promises his visiting Christ by this name, saying: He shall feed his
flock like a sheperde, he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them
in his bosom, and shall guide them with young. Likewise in the Prophet Iere.
23.4. and Ezec. 34.10.12. Psa. 110.1 Ma. 23. Act. 2.34.
This sheperd Christ is David's sheperd and Lord. The Lord said unto my Lord,
sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footestole. In which
place David calls Christ his lord, which is to hsm and to all ye chosen
children of god the appointed sheperd of their souls, as Christ him self does
witness, saying: Io. 10.11.
J am the good sheperd, the good sheperde gives his life for his sheep. And
Peter in his first epistle thus: 1. Pe. 2.25.
Ye were as sheep going astray but ye are returned now unto the sheperd and
bishop of your souls. In a good sheperd are to be required these things, all
which are most aptly found in Christ our good sheperde. He must be of sound
skill, to know his sheep from other men's cattle, and this is said of Christ, I
know my sheep by name, and am known of mine. He must have skill in pasturing
his sheep, least he bring them to rotten soil, and wasting grass. In Christ
is the only pasture of man's soul, in whom all safety of food is, for his
glorious gospel is our heavenly food, his spirit and life is our celestial
diet, and by the mouth of our faith, this our bread of life is of every of us
that believe, firmly eaten, and the same is so sound and sweet pasture, that
no rot and death can come unto the worthy fields, Io. 5.24.
or any less able is yt then his divine power to bring us to life eternal.
Thirdly a good sheperde must have will to feed according to his skill, that so
his sheep may not be pyned for want of his loving pains: So Christ is most
loving of all others to feed his lambs, who has not spared to lay down his
life for the food of his sheep. willing to feed, for he calls all men to
him for pasture. most careful of their diet, Io. 10.15. Mat. 11.28
and therefore he has left their Pabulum his holy word to the end of the
world, whereby his beloved sheep should become fat and well lyking in him,
and has to this end commanded Peter to feed, Io. 21.15.16.17.
and also has from thence till now, and will to the end of this world
select his pastors from among men, to feed men with the bread of life, Christ
in his word and Sacraments. Further a good Sheperd takes great ear over his
sheep, and vigilantly does search if so any of them skabbe, or be infected,
and finding them faulty, he addresseth him self to their amendment: so
Christ our Lord does dearly care over his flock, Act. 20.28. Luke. 15.4 5.
they be to him as the apple of his eye for them he has paid the price of
their sin, and deadly disease, namely his own heart blood, he seeks the
lost and caryeth the^ on his own shoulders, Mat. 18 12 Lu. 10.34.
he annoynteth their sores with the sovereign salve of his mercy and justice:
Esai. 53. 1. Pe. 2.24.
with ye one he pacifieth, and that because he fully satisfies his just
Father: with the other he covers our sins and heals our infirmities. He
most lovingly looks into our weakness, and bears up our infancy, he breaks
not the bruised read, Ma. 12.20.
nor quenches the smoking flax. He suffers not our lives to be lascivious,
but scourges and purges us, that we may bring forth more fruit. Io. 15.2.
Lastly a good sheperd has himself, his staff and sheperdes dog, to help and
aid his wandering flock. Even so has Christ given him self for our
defense, Io. 15.2.3.
his preaching prophets have of him especial charge to feed his flock, and
them protect continually: Eze. 3.18. Act. 20.28.
and great plagues has he appointed to such idle sheperds as no way feed his
lowly la^bes: and though all men fail, Zach. 11.17
yet David byddeth us all be glad, for the Lord is our sheperd therefore shall
we not want. And now dearly beloved, time and place requires to speak
something of ye sheep property, which belong to that sheperde Christ, the
which thing known, every man and woman with their young ones, may with
examination of them selves, best say to God, I am thy sheep, for thou O Lord
art my sheperd. For of no other is Christ the Sheperd, but of those which know
their wandering wickedness, and feel their stay to stand in him their God, and
spedely submit the^ selves under his tuitio^. And to this is David our guide,
who notwithstanding he was rich and a mighty king, yet he freely confesses his
health to be in this, that he is the Lords sheep, and has Christ to his
everlasting sheperd. In a sheep are sundry things agreeing, with the
corruption of our nature, and therefore stands in great need of an expert
sheperde. She is foolish and unawares of harms, she runs into daily
dangers in her self remediles: So we by nature are unwise, and blind to all
heavenly things. Romans 8
Or can the natural man savor the things which be of God, or yet keep him
from the wandering paths of death. 1. Pet. 2.
The wandering ways of all the best may set down this: to the other sort,
for all to true, that man can not but sin and daily run from God the Lord.
Our David he, may stand as able among the rest, to this for proof, neither can
any in the flesh by the qualities fleshy please God. Romans 8.
A sheep for weakness and want of courage is unable to stand against so many
her devouring foes, the Fox, the Wolf, and the ravenous Lion: nor is the
stoutest man in ye earth by nature, of power to give check unto sin, who
like a subtle Fox lies lurking and fawning for his pray of Christian soul:
or from the gaping gulf, of woluishe chappes that hipocritically seek his
spoil: 1. Pe. 5.
or yet from the raging Satan, who goes roaring abroad seeking every where
who^ he may devour. The good sheperde Christ therefore is most requisite, in
whom against all these we may go in and out safely, Io. 10.
and find pasture.

But else the natural sheep has qualities right good, which are frequented in
the children of God, they know their Pastors whystle, and thereat they yield
unto his will. So the sheep of Chrste refusing all strange voice, they harken
unto ye word of our savior Christ, and therein they take such comfort as having
therein full contentatio^ they eschew all others charm, be they never so
subtle, and sly. The sheep is ever feding with his flece those, which no way
have pleasured him, for he has his life of his sheperdes pasture. So the
children of God, living in their Christ, are beneficial to all for his names
sake. Esa. 53.7.
The sheep is laid by the sherer to the loss of him self, upon the thrall,
and yet he opens not his mouth: So also the true christian abides for his
Christ all ignominy, Heb. 12.2.3 4. etc.
and reprochful death not resisting at al, but willingly abides the cross
expecting the event in the Lord, which is to them that suffer for his names
sake ever prosperous. Now my brethren of the pastors condition clasped in
Christ and of the sheep nature fixed by his spirit, learn your selves to
know to whom ye belong, and if you feel your selves the Foldimates of David,
then may you be bold to say, The Lord is my sheperd therefore can I not want.
The wants whereof the prophet here speaks are of two sorts. The one is
called insaciable lust, the other necessary need. With the first as the godly
are not combred (for that belongs only the reprobate) so the other in them is
ever remedied by the feeding sheperde Christ, first in supplying their need
with present necessaries: then in forming their hearts to be content with their
estate, established by his divine providence, to his glory and their best
good. Psalm. 37.25
I have been young and now am I old (says David) yet never saw I the
righteous forsaken, or his seed begging their bread. Helias following his
vocation, 1. Kin. 17.4 5.6.
was forsaken of all men, but daily fed of God by the ravenous Crows, and the
poor wydowes meal, when the rich gluttons of Israel were pined for want of
necessary food. 1. Kin. 17.14.15.16. Dan. 14. story of Bell.
Daniell seeking chiefly the glory of our God is cast into the hungry Lions den
in deed, but preserved to live, and to him is sent the prophet Abacucke with
his dinner many a mile by the guide of an Angel. The Jews which follow Christ
into the wilderness are of him miraculously fed. Io. 6.11.12 13. Mat. 6.33. Psa.
37.19
And to all is this promise given. Seek first the kindome of God and the
righteousness thereof, and all other things shall be mynistred unto you. Now as
concerning that the Lord frames his peoples hearts to be contented with their
estate. Paul for the body of the whole church, says thus: Phi. 4.11.
I have learned in what state soever I am therewith to be content, and I can be
abased and I can abou^de, every where in all things I am instructed, both to be
full and to be hungry, and to a bound, Psa. 37.2.3 Psa. 17.14
and to have want. The wicked many times do florishe as the green bay tree,
and have the world at will, great store of wealth for them selves and children,
so that their son sons do feed of the elder gotten bread, but withal
they have their portion in this life, and after that can see no further
co^forts. And though the godly contrary do feel many wants, and seem in man's
conceit utterly to decay, yet far other is their state then external show
does tell, For the Lord is their sheperde, and when they seem to dye, they
live: they are chastened, but not killed: they seem in sorrow to be swallowed
up, but they always rejoice: 2. Cor. 5.8.9.10.11.16.17.18. 2. Cor. 6.9.10.
they seem poor, but yet they make many rich: and deprived so of worldly
comforts seeming to have nothing, they notwithstanding possess all things.
Likewise their end is far otherwise then the worldly rich. For the Lord
deals with them as the noble man with his fatted Ox, when he is well fed,
is by the slaughter man committed to the axe of death, his noble son abides
many sharp yirkes and correcting blows, and after that enjoys his fathers
possessions: Even so the wicked in wealth are wrapped with Dives in hell, and
the beloved (though payned Lazarus) is carried by service of Angels into our
heavenly Fathers kingdom, Luke. 16
our Christ's inheritance belonging to the just. This is the mark that David
shoots at when he says, I shall not want. It follows,

He shall make me to rest in green pasture, verse.2
he leads me by the still waters. All things necessary shall the Lord give
me says David, and that in no base sort, or shall any trouble molest my
feeding? for I shall quietly be guyded, and my prosperity shall be continuing,
always flourishing green, and at no time dry or withered, neither shall his
blessings be taken from me with the rage of wicked men: but as the sheep, of
her self weak, needs resting place, and quiet rivers: so shall all things
come to the best, and to my hearts desire in him. But beloved in Christ, our
shepherd is spiritual, therefore our pasture must be answerable, and it is set
down to us by our master and Pastor, thus: Io. 5.24
He that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has eternal
life, and he shall not come into judgment, but has passed from death unto
life. Here is the pasture of life the gospel of God: The rest for man's soul,
faith in God through Christ: Ioh. 7.39.
The still waters, the holy spirit which does pacify the troubled
conscience, and quietly establishes us in Christ, who freeth us from the
Fathers iuslice, the sentence of eternal death, and gives us his glorious
Crown, and heavenly kingdom our inheritance in him. Come to this pasture,
John. 4.14.
feed on this bread, rest in this power, drink of this water, So shall you no
more thirst after the filthy puddles of Popish poisoned Cups. For in your
selves (by this spirit of Christ) shall abundant rivers of spiritual goodness
flow out of you, that all men seeing your good works, Math. 6.
may be provoked to praise the Lord. This God grant you for his son our
savior Christ his sake. Amen.

verse. 3.
He shall convert my soul, and lead me in the paths of righteousness, for his
names sake. Three especial things in this verse the Prophet teaches most
notably. First, that we are by nature stubborn, and estraunged from the
nature belonging the sheep of God. Secondly, that after regeneration by the
spirit, there remains yet in us such matter of massy sin, Romans 7.18.19.20.
that unable we be to walk the paths belonging to the children of god, and
therefore it behooves us to have a leader into righteousness. Thirdly, as many
be the falls by sin which Satan and the flesh procures to us: So sundry
be the fruits of the godly. In which virtues, as in sin, Satan seeks our
overthrow, if so he can make us to rest in them, as either satisfactorie to
God, or meritorious for their valor. But the Lord by his Prophet here
preaches, that our conversion to god, and our walking daily in godlynes, is
from and by the Lord, and that also not for any preventing, foreknowne, or
succeeding graces in us: but only soly for his names sake. He shall convert my
soul, says David. The root of the Tree being sound and good, feeds her
branches to her fruitful life: So the soul of man's principal substance
being made whole and sound, can not but give life to the whole body. In this
branch also we are to note, that unless the inward man be turned unto God,
thexternall parts can be but hipocriticall, and serving time. So the Nobles in
Ioash Court, during the days of the good Bishop Jehoiada, seemed most
religious, 2 Chro. 24 17.18.19.20.
but death had no sooner deprived the godly of this Priests life, then they
diswaded the Prince, and to their erst ydolatrie persuaded they him. Many be
the mouths that now confess them selves changed from Popish life, but God
continue our noble Elizabethes reign, and the Gospel safe progress, else
doubt I that stormy days would sterue ye small store of living grace, in many
English hearts of sundry callings. But who so is turned in heart and mind
unfeignedly, he ioyeth the days of dangerous death, and soroweth to see the
worldly solace, the cause no doubt of all infinite woes. Romans 8.
He hates that he loved first, he lotheth at his former life, he is ashamed of
sin, he casts off from him the works of darkness, and confessing Christ
with his lips, because he believes on him in heart, he daily walks in the
paths of righteousness after his leader Christ our lord. And here with me note,
good Auditorie, who it is that does convert man's soul, him self, or some
other: the Lord our Shepherd, David says it is, He shall convert my soul. In
that we are converted, it is not our action, or in our power is it to become
the sheep of Christ, but it is the work of God in him. The order also in our
conversion to the Lord is excellent. The Father gives to his Christ those
which shall be called. Io. 17.2.6
The holy Ghost he gives into their hearts, whom he has predestinate to life,
which spirit graffeth them into Christ, who by his blood does wash their
souls from sin, and by the same his spirit does form them in his faith,
whose Gospel he writes in their hearts, and sheedeth his love into their
consciences, so that they walk in newnes of life, because they are taken up,
and the old man in them cast down, and as new creatures they follow their
leader Christ, into the steps besitting their condition. These are they
which are theodidaktoi, all taught of God. This elegant order is described at
large by the Prophet Ezechiell, in this sort: A new heart will I give you, and
a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out
of your body, and will give you an heart of flesh, and I will put my spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and you shall keep my
judgments, and do the^. And a little after, I will be your God, and you shall
be my people: And again thus, Then shall ye remember your own wicked vvayes,
and your deeds which were not good, and shall judge your selves worthy to
have been destroyed for your iniquities and abominations. Be it known to you
that J do not this for your sakes, says the Lord God, therefore be ashamed
and confounded for your own vvayes. Romans 8.29
And Paul to the Romans has it thus, Those which he knew before, he also
predestinate to be made like to the image of his son, that he might be the
first borne among many brethren. Moreover, Whom he predestinate, them also he
called, and whom he called, them also he justified, and whom he justified,
them also he glorified. This is the golden gift of god, thus is our new
creation lincked in this precious chain. Ephesians. 1.2.3.4.
The celestial god has inwardly beyond time predestinate and created his
people to the likeness of his son, and has by his holy spirit sealed them
to him self, and by thexternal Organ his holy word, through the ministry of
preaching, in their several times has he called his sheep to the knowledge
of their shepherd Christ, Romans 8.
and state in him, and by his bloody death has justified them before, and with
his supernatural power has made them glorious with the Angels. So our
conversion, Colos. 3.
as it is by the Lord, so is it by his spirit and gospel wrought in us. How
necessary then the office of preaching is, you see, it is the isntrumental
cause of our conversion. How miserable that place is which wants preaching,
may you perceive by the glory that comes through daily teaching Christ by the
truth in his word. For this cause Christ so often, Math. 3. 2. Co. 5.20
John Baptist so diligently, the Prophets severely, the Apostles most
playnelye, the Pastors and spiritual shepeheards in Gods Church now most
comfortablye, do offer and exhibit unto you the truth of God to turn your
hearts. By the preaching of the word, the world from time to time has been
won to Christ the son of God: and by the same the Gentiles are converted
into him: hereby this nation is changed into truth, and Popery overthrown: by
this shall the hearts of the children he turned to the faith of their fathers
in God, Luke. 1.17
and the Reprobate shall heerewith be condemned. And this property David
gives to the word: The Law of the Lord, Psalm. 19
says he, conuerteth the soul, the testimony of the Lord is faithful, and
gives light unto the eyes. The necessity of teaching Paul preaches to be
great: 1. Co. 9.16
woe unto me if I preach not (says he). Pro. 29.18
where preaching fails, the people perish, says Solomon. Faith comes by
hearing of the word of God, says Paul to the Romans: To. 10.17
without faith can not a man please God: by faith we shall be more then
conquerours: Romans 8.37
he that believes shall be saved, Mark. 16 16
but he that believes not shall be damned, says our doctor Christ. Faith is
brought by hearing, hearing wayteth of the Preacher, the Preacher is dombe
unless he be sent: pray therefore the Lord of truth, to send more store of
true and paynfull Preachers into this Church of England, and this shire, and
convert in mercy, or confound by Justice, Esa. 56.10 11.12
these dombe Dogs which can not bark: these watchemen which can not see:
these ydol shepherds which either can not, or will nor feed the hungry Lambs
of Gods holy Church, and shepefold of this nation. O Lord grant this for thy
Christ our chief shepherds sake. Now dear friends examine your selves here
present: Is this holy change wrought in you? may I say unto you with Paul,
Ye were sometime Gentiles, Ephe. 1
ye were dead in sin, ye were without God in this life? But you has he
quickened: you has he called: you that were no people, has he now made the
people of God: you are no more strangers and forreners, but Citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God, buylt (not upon the Romish rock, but)
upon the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.19
Jesus Christ him self being the head corner stone: in whom (my brethren) if
you be by his spirit grafted and buylt, you shall grow to an holy temple in
the lord. I trust to you I may say thus: Ye were Gentiles, but you are
Christians, of the cheifest I know it, of the rest I have great cause to
think it, and therefore with great comfort in God, I proceed to the second
point. He leads us in the paths of righteousness for his names sake.

In God is our conversion, in him also is the continuance of our upright
walking before him. First, of us is here to be noted a double righteousness,
whereunto we are brought by Christ. The first is the righteousness of Christ for
us to the Father. The second is the righteousness of man by Christ, and is the
worthy walking in holiness of life without ceassing. The righteousness of
Christ for us, Ephesians. 2.12.
consists in the person of him self, who for us has so answered the fathers
full justice, in his just sacrifice, and has so incorporate us into him
self, by faith through his spirit, that the same his righteousness is
accounted for ours, so that though we by nature are wicked, yet in respect of
his grace we are sanctified, and just in the sight of God, whose it is to save
and to condemn. Of this justification or righteousness Paul speaks thus.
Romans 8.3.4.
God sending his own son down in the similitude of sinful flesh, for sin
condemned sin in the flesh that the righteousness of the law, might be
fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. The
second righteousness is the daily walking in newnes of life, which is of
every man required that thus by the Lord is justified. The grace of God (says
Paul) that brings salvation unto all men appeared, Tit. 2.11.11.
and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that
we should live soberly and righteously, and godly in this world, loking for
the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and of our
Savior Jesus Christ, who gave him self for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto him self, zealous of
good works. Into both of these Christ leads us, for of our selves we are
unapt, enable and most unworthy, had we power to enter into the first, to
win the latter. Daily we be looking back from the plough, where unto we are
brought by Christ, Lu. 9.62.
therefore unapt of our selves to his kingdom. we have not so much power as
to think a good thought, but that sufficiency which seems to be in any of
us, 2. Cor. 3.5
the same is of God, who does both begin the work of God, Phil. 1.6
and perform the same in us. The better learned we be in God, the more fully
we see our unworthiness, to be accounted members of his righteousness. As the
Prophet Ezechiell says, Ezech. 35.30.31
I will deliver you from all your filthiness, etc. Then shall ye remember your
own wickedness, and your deeds that were not good, and shall judge your selves
worthy to have been destroyed. Zacheus was the best disposed man in that
people, and the more graces he had with the Centurion, the more unworthy he
thought him self of Christ's presence at his house: but being comforted by
Christ, he took most joy therein. Finally, let us note the valor of this
word, He leads us. That we are righteous before God, it is that Christ our
shepherd leads us by his spirit, and faith, unto the throne of grace, where
he presents us as dear children to God his father, and teaches us to cry
unto him, Ephe. 2.18 Romans 8.15
Abba dear father. Into which state by his spirit brought, we firmly see our
salvation to rest in him, and that we are sealed to the Lords salvation. Apoc.
7. and 14 Ephesians. 4.30 1. Io. 5.10
Yea and the witness even Gods holy spirit from that Throne, is set strongly in
our hearts, and within us does bear witness against Satan, sin, and the
world, that following our God by the faith of Christ, we are become his
children, so righteous that no man can condemn us, because our god has in his
Christ set us free. Romans 8.33 2.
To the second he leads us in him self first: as Peter says, Christ
suffered for us, 1. Pet. 2.21
leaving us an example that we should follow his steps, who did no sin,
neither was there any guyle found in his mouth, who when he was reviled,
reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed it to him
that judges righteously. Secondly, by his holy spirit he conducteth us into
all goodness. Romans 8.14
For either are we lead by Satan and flesh unto evil, or by his spirit and
grace into all godlynes. Romans 7.19
In our selves there is no power of passing to good, or will to stay from
evil. 2. Pet. 2.19
Of whom soever a man is overcome, his servant he is says the Apostle,
whether of sin unto death, or of grace unto life. And those which be the
sons of God, are lead by the spirit of God, and strengthened in the inner
man, Ephesians. 3.16.
Christ dwells in their hearts by faith, they are rooted and grounded in the
love of God, they are by Christ coupled one to another in him, through him they
receive the increase of the spiritual body, and edify one another: and
therefore they walk not as other Gentiles, or them selves erst did, in the
vanity of their mind, with darkened cogitations in blind hypocrisy, but
they cast of the old man and passed conversation, and being thus renewed, they
put on the new, which is created in righteousness and true holiness after the
will of God. Ephesians. 4.19 20.
Thus they follow by the spirit the commandment of Paul in Christ, saying:
Be ye followers of God as dear children. Ephesians. 5.4.
And him self going before has given us a rule to measure the saints
imitatio^, saying: Follow you me, as J follow Christ. 1. Cor. 11.1
The Lord grant us his grace and spiritual strength by prosperity and
adversity, sycknes and health, life and death, thus to follow our leader, and
pastor Christ Jesus, in true holiness and righteousness before him all the
days of this our present life. Luke 2.
I dwell in speech to teach the sheep of God only, and therefore I leave to
set you forth the paths of the wicked goats, which know not God, nor can be
accepted of him. Sap. 5.
They run through the pleasures of this life, and live at lust, till death
do su^mon their souls to the tribunal throne whence they are cast to
everlasting torments and woe. But or we pass this verse, we ought depely to
consider the conclusion of David's words which are: This he does for his names
sake. From the beginning the godly have felt his defending and guiding hand,
and by his spirit they have been fed and led the ways to live in him, but
never was there any one, or could the worthiness of all, being laid up into one
lump, demerite the lest his benefits, or ever challenge cause beyond his own
names sake to move his so great mercy to his chosen church and children. For
his names sake he has converted and led us, that is for his own glories
sake, and not our worthynesse has he thus blessed us. Then thus the Prophet
says: That the Lord is our shepherd, that he has chosen us from the wicked
woorlde to be of the number of his elect children and sheep of his pasture,
that he temporally feeds us: that he by his spirit, and the ministry of
his gospel conuerteth us: that he makes us righteous before his Father in
him, and leads us by the hand into all godly actions and christian life:
that he conducteth us into safety from the fury of our crooked foes, and
every way blesses us: it is not for the excellency of our beauty, for that
is but grass: Esa. 40 Esa. 30.22. Esa. 64 verse. 6
not for our righteousness, for that is to his eyes as a filthy me^strous cloth.
But it is for ye same cause wherewith he has ever bin provoked, and that is,
for his own glories sake. So have the Fathers from time to time confessed,
condemning them selves for sin, and accepting his benefits for his mercy
sake, and his holy names sake. This is that the Prophet would have us to rest
in, when he says, that the name of god is a strong Tower of defense. For his
names sake he will lead us, and nourish us: for his great names sake he will
not forsake his people: Psalm. 31.4 1. Sa. 12.22 Esa. 48.9 Eze. 20.9
and for his names sake he will far hence remove his anger from us. The same
shall cause him to preserve his truth among the gentiles. And that he
continues his gospel, our gracious Queen and this quiet government over us,
it is not for our worthynesse, who be all for our daily sins most unworthy of
his mercyes, as the Lord for ever speaks to all flesh thus: Eze. 36.32.
Be it known unto you that I do not this for your sakes: No Lord, but for
thine own names sake, to the which, only be all glory for ever. It follows.

verse. 4.
And though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, J will
fear no evil, for thou art ever with me. Thy rod and thy staff they
comfort me. The lessons again be three in especial which David has taught
me in this verse to deliver you. The first is, though yt the godly safely are
set under ye Lords protection, as the sheep under the most faithful
shepherd, yet are they assaulted with sundry attempts, Psa. 34.19
and eminent dangers. Many be the troubles of the just says the Psalmist, but
the Lord delivers him quite out of all. And his mercy has so determined the
matter, that the godly perceauing his holy hand, might more firmly rest in
his fatherly providence. Secondly the godly are not freede under the shepherd
Christ from all kind of fear, but are set amid the mighty helhounds of the
earth, Ephesians. 5.7
that they should warely walk and shun thoccasion of danger, but if they be
so exalted by the Lord, to have the cross, then are they freed from shaking
terror, 2. Cor. 4.13
and desperate fear, and strengthened by his spirit: they follow Christ whither
soever he goes. Exo. 14.22
So the Israelites followed Moses in the Red sea, so the children ye Angel in ye
burning Oven, Dan. 3.25.
So Thapostles their master Christ to death and cruel torments. So David
without fear is ready to continue his calling though he pass through the
valley of the shadow of death, that is, though he enter into most extreme
peril. The third is ye boldning force which David atte^pteth by his shepherds
croke, Thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. Two things says David drive al
fear from me. Thy presence, for thou art with me: and thy careful government,
which is always exercised to my good. Note good people, ye god is alwais
present, and beholds al our actions, and perceth into our thoughts: he saw
Sara in Abimelecks chamber, Genesis 20.3
and Bethsaba in David's bed. 2. Sa. 12.1.
He prevented Herodes purpose, and brought confusion to Saules persecution.
Psa. 22.24
He beholds the oppression of the poor afflicted, and is present to hear
their cry when they call upon him. All things are naked and open to his eyes,
Gene. 17.
and therefore reverently walk before him, and be thou upright. Iona. 1.17.
He fetched Jonas from his fleeing ship, and cast him into ye whales belly.
Act. 12.8.9
He brought his preaching Peter forth of the prison fast locked in with iron
gates. He is present ever to help innocent Susanna out of distress, and ready
to cast the corrupted Judges unto their deserved death. This was David's
comfort, Thou Lord art with me, therefore will I not fear. Let the same
teach us now to say, our God and Christ is present by his spiritual aid and
comforts in all troubles to assist us: of whom then shall we be afraid, for
though fast closed in iron gates, through the strength of our god we shall leap
over the wall. And though persecuted for his cause, yet is he ready to comfort
us in all tribulation. 2. Cor. 2.3.
So that we are able to comfort others which be in affliction, by the same
co^fortes which we have received our selves of God. Secondly, thy careful
government says David does administer no small solace unto me, for thy rod
and thy staff they comfort me. David elegantly, dwelling in the received
Metaphor, sets forth Gods good government by the Shepherds rod and
staff, which rodd or Shepherds crook is used of a cunning heard, to
constrayne the declining sheep, to his former foldy-mates, to urge the
wanderer to his wonted fellows, and to force the slothful Plodders better to
pase it: Even so the Lord by his holy rod and staff of health, does scourge
our wandering steps, and with his correcting hand, in love, does join us to
his Church, and if slouthfully we lie aloof, he uses sharper blows to
compel our speed to join with others in the service of our god: all which is
to the best comfort of his chosen child. But here is named a Rod, and a
Staff, the one to correct us, the other to defend us. And both of these are
doubled in the holy scriptures. God is said to have a twofolde Rod, the Rod of
his love, and the Rod of his anger. Zach. 11.
Also a twofold staff: as in Zachary the staff of beauty, and the staff of
Bands. Of these two rods, and these two staves, the scripture speaks thus,
First Thapostle says, that in love he scourges his people, and corrects
their sins, least they should be damned with the wicked world. 1. Cor. 11.32
When we are thus judged (says Paul, speaking of gods correction for thabuse
of the Eucharist) we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world. Behold his loving Rod. Our daily transgressions
demerite death, but his daily mercy who wills not the death of a sinner,
Ezech. 18.
cha^geth his sharpened sword into a smarting rod, Psalm. 103.8
thereby to work in us true repentance, Heb. 12.10. and 2.17
and humble patience. For as his hand is striking, Esa. 5 4.7
his bowels are boiling in pity toward us, and with his spirit does change
our hearts, and supporteth our falling state, by his defending staff.
Wherefore despise not (says Paul) the chastening of the Lord, Hebr. 12.5.6.7.
neither faint when thou art rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves, he
chasteneth, and he scourges every son that he receives. If ye endure
chastning God offers him self unto you as unto sons, for what son is he
whom the father chastneth not? If therefore ye be without correction,
whereof all be partakers, then are ye Bastardes and not Sons. See dearly
beloved, the nature of our loving Father in this his rod of love. And now it
should seem this doctrine to be most lively, when as we see his heavy hand
whipping our brethren with the smarting scourge of pestilence, Irelande is
therewith every where infected. England is infected, and this our Country,
and Towns very near us. Stamford and Vppingham, grievously visited. Hereby we
ought to be moved to repentance, knowing that for sin our God our shephearde
chasteneth us with rebukes (that I may use our Prophets words in the Psalms)
and with his rod makes our gallant beauty to fade away, Psalm. 39.11
as it were a mothe fretting a garment. Every man therefore is but vanity: But
there be some of you (me thinks) that whispereth in my ears, thus: Sir you
know that many of us together with your self, God has most lovingly
delivered from this pestilent rod, in Ireland, yea and so, that wonderful was
our safety. The whole land is visited, no town known free, in the house
where we lay some dead, in the ship wherein we passed the seas, one or more
gone to God: and since our departure, the Knight, with whom we were twenty
days (waiting Gods blessing for westerly winds) has in his own person
therewith been scourged. The which deliverance seems to clear us, in
deserving so heuie a scourge, though called a loving rod. So of the rest (I
deem) some say, and we also are not touched with the plague, but they which
have deserved it, have it: this doctrine therefore might best serve those
which are now exercised with his loving Rod. But to one and other of you I
say (dear brethren) as Christ our loving Shephearde said to the reporters of
Pylates cruel fact, who mingled the blood of the Galileans with the sacrifice
of the Jews, thus: Luke. 13.2
Suppose ye (says Christ) that these Galileans were greater sinners then
all the other Galileans, because they have suffered such things? I tell you
nay. But except ye amend your lives, ye shall all likewise perish. Or think
you that those eyghtien upon whom the Tower in Syloam fell and slew them, that
they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you nay. But
except ye amend your lives, ye shall all likewise perish. So let Christ say
to you here present: That you are by my sparing hand brought from the plague
in Irelande, that you are yet severed from the sick here in Rutlande: it is
not for that any of you, (from the Preacher to the basest Hearer) have less
offended, but that I would use them for your Preachers to amendment, and them
selves to a bettered life, as hereafter (if by their example ye amend not) I
will make you the like example to others, when they shall see my hand shaking
over you. Pray for our brethren therefore, help too succor their present
need, and repent in time, least that his scourge of love being removed, we
feel the heavy fall of his angry Rod. Whereof our Prophet speaks in the
second Psalm, Psalm. 2.9.
prophesying the utter ruin of all those that insult against Christ and his
chosen children. For as he is most lovely unto his lovely sheep, So to the
stubborn hearted he is the God of strength, who can and will correct, or
compel them to stoop to his good pleasure. And he is said to have an iron
Rod in respect of his divine power, and princely dominion over the mighty
Kings of the earth, who with his word does arm the weak things of the
world, against the most gigaunt under heaven. Lise and Frogs shall be to
strong for stout Pharao the mighty gigante king of Egypt, Ps. 78.45.
and weak David shall overthrow the huge armies of the Philisteans, the
Syrians, ye Ammonites, 2. Sa. 10.12
and the Moabites. The Idumeans, 1. Para. 18.19.
and the Syria^s shall often by weakness be brought from their great strength.
Esa. 37.36.38
Sennacherib with his Rabsekah shall leave his siege against Jerusalem, and shall
be broken into pieces: his own sons shall strike him to the heart with their
swords (the Lords iron rod) to his utter confusion. And to this their utter
shame, the Lord from heaven shall use but his only word, and with the breath of
his mouth shall he make al creatures ready to be his rod, to the confusion of
the wicked. His own prophet Elisah shall cause blindness to come into the eyes
of the mighty host, which from the king of Syria are sent to take him, and
shall bring the^ into Samaria ye city of their enemies. Bennadad the king of
Aram shall be compelled 2. King. 6.14.18
to remove his siege from Samaria in one night, 2. Kin. 7.6.
because the Lord has made the concept of hearing of charrets and horsemen, to
be his iron rod to drive them before their enemies, which by them before were
brought to most extreme pennurie, so that an asses head, was sold for four
schore siluerlinges, and a load of doves doung (to roast the same) for five
syluerlinges. The former churches of the cast which did degenerate from their
first faith, 2. Ki. 6.25.
has he with this his angry rod, cast under the power of the Turk, that they
may believe lies to their destruction, which would not receive the truth, when
it was offered them. Christ in his own person is this rod of anger, to all
that stubbornly resist him. 2. Tes. 2.
He that stumbleth at this Christ shall be bruised, but upon who^soeuer this
stone Christ shall fall he shall grind the^ all to poudre, Mat. 21.44.
take heed of this angry (so daily provoked) iron rod. For as to the faithful
he is life and consolation, so to ye unbelieving and obstinate, he is the iron
rod here spoken of. His ghospel, Apostles, preachers and ministers, has he
made to be the same, according to the nature of their auditory, as The Apostle
Paul witnesses, saying: The weapons of our warefare are not carnal, 2. Cor.
10.4.
but mighty through God, to cast down holds, casting down the imaginations
and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. And having
ready the vengeance against all disobedience, when your obedience is
fulfilled. O my brethren consider your calling: ye are the sheep of Christ,
what belongs your calling: Truly to hear with reverent obedience his voice.
What is his workmanshippe then of you regenerate? To purge you with his rod
of love that ye should be more fruitful, and to the greater comfort of you
his chosen: he plaigeth to destruction with his angrye iron rod, the wicked
which can not but much moleste you, were they unbridled. Take heed in time,
repent and believe his gospel, Ioh. 14.1.
least the former being ended, his second rod begin to skoure you out of
place, for a better people. Mat. 21.43
Thus much for the Lords rods, and now to the shepheardes crook, that
doubled staff, of which David thus says: Thy rod and thy staff they
comfort me.

As it is far more safety for us, to be under our shepherds rod, then
committed or left to the woluishe jaws of Satanicall broad: So is it our best
comfort and assured prosperity to dwell under the reach of his most loving
government, which here is set forth unto us by the shepherd staff. Very
significa^tly does ye Prophet Zachary set down the love and anger of God, by
the two stanes which Christ our shepherd first took into his hand, and after
brust in sundre. And these be his words: I took unto me two staves (the prophet
speaks in the person of Christ) the one J called beauty, Zach. 11.7.
and the other I called ba^ds, and J fed the sheep. And a little after he
says: Their soul abhorred me, and J said, J will not feed you, that which
dies let it dye, and that which perishes let it perish: and let the remnant
eat one another: every one the flesh of his neighbor. And J took my staff
beauty and brake it, that J might disanull my covenant which J had made with
all people: And somewhat after, thus, Then brake J mine other staff, even
bands, that J might dissolve the brotherhoode between Judah and Jsraell. By
the first staff beauty, the Prophet understands that most elegant frame of
the Iewishe commonwealth and government, which for the great excellency
thereof, is here called beauty. Of this staff Moses triumphing speaks thus:
Keep these laws and do them, Deu. 4.6.
for that is your wisdom, and your understanding in the sight of the people,
which shall hear all these ordinances, and shall say, only this people is
wise and of understanding, and a great nation. For what nation is so great
unto whom the Gods come so near unto them, as the Lord our God is near unto
us, in all that we call unto him for. And what nation is so great, that has
ordinances and laws so righteous, as all this law which I set before you this
day: But if from the constituted law most holy, righteous, brief and
comodious, thou cast thine eyes to the commonwealth of Israel, even from the
king Solomon to his people, thou shall see it most beautiful. The constitution
of the church in Jury as it far passed all popish pomp (and that was
marvelous) so was it not without a preaching office to the posterity of
Christ's glorified church. The doctrine plainly did set forth the way to life
in Christ: and because all this fair form tended to this end to keep the
poople of Israel in the limittes of their calling, Gualterus in zachari.
it is aptly compared to a shepheardes staff, and for the excelling order is
most worthily called beauty. By the second staff he understands the lynked
love and fraternity in blood, which far excelled all other kingdoms, which
know not their original, or are kept immixed with forre^ blood. The Jews
proceed all from one father Jacob, and are as touching blood al in one
brotherhood. The Lord to keep them in them selves, as well in external rites
as continual Genelogies of their Tribes, did tie them together in one, that
they should not he ignorant of their pedigrie, nor should mixed them selves
with forreiners. Neither was it else then the Lords singular blessing, that
notwithstanding so many battles and often troubles, such division of the
kingdom and long exile, in so many forepassed years, they (till the day
wherein the Lord brake these his staves of beauty and bands) know one another
race and offspring for the which things sake you may see how elegantly this
staff is called bands, as by the which the Jewish amity was preserved. But
both these staves Christ brake when Symony first purchased ye priesthood in
Jerusalem, and lastly when ye Jews were oppressed of all me^ and made the out
castes of the world, which sometime were Lords in ye earth above the rest.
And this covenant did God unfold when after Christ's assention, he sent the
Romans to pollute: and finally to subvert both their ecclesiastical and
pollitique government. Yet some comfort was left them till the reign of
Aelius Adrianus, by whom their rebellion to Christ and his word, was utterly
reue^ged. For he slew many of them, he put the rest to exile, and forbdd them
the entrance into their former Cities and towns, he did compel them to cast
their lokes from ye land of promise. He rammed up the gates in Jerusalem with
swynes doung to the ignomious reproach of the obstinate Jews with whom God in
justice had caused his Christ to break the staves of their former defense
beauty and bands. And from this time is it that the temple and commonwealth
in Jury is so overthrown, that none of them can now truly tell of what
linnaige or kindred he is of.

O Lord who can look into this people and not quake in fear, so greatly
blessed, so dearly loved, as to them and for them God spared not to give his
son in first and chief. Besides for this he kept the whole earth to stand in
awe of them. But now no people so odious either to God or man, as they, quite
given over of god, and persecuted of all good men. By this we are taught (that
since all our christian fraternity depends upon Christ whom this people
despised, of whom we are named, and by whom also we have God to our father)
spedely to kiss the son least he be angry, Psa. 2.12.
and so we perish from the right way, for unless we be at one with him, there
is no account of us, but as to the wicked Jews, to whom there is no peace. The
beautiful government of this our land so long continued under one monarchy,
may assure us of Christ our shephearde to hold our stay, his beautiful
staff, in hand. But I fear me our demerites be such, as were it not for his
own names sake, this staff by him yet holden, would spedely be sore shiuered.
God preserve our noble Queen, in who^ alone by his great mercy, the stay of
our happy government is continued, for beyond her we can see nothing but
confusion. Our beauty is then like to be turned into more than beggary. Far
be it from men in earth, to take this Gods office from heaven in hand. If any
government he not perfect, it is the Lords to amend it, if any to be reformed,
the same is with such foresight to be regarded, that in seeking to remove the
forreing matter, from the shepherds staff (which by longer time (as a snayle)
slowly has crept upon it: and by latter days is conglutinate so thereto,
that hardly may it be severed without some detriment) that the staff may
still be preserved, without which we perish. To the shepheardes which have
this staff in hold, belongs the pollishing of the same, Prou. 20.
and not to private persons which are rather to be directed thereby. Our parts
is to pray the head shepherd Christ, by whom kings do reign, so to frame the
hearts of christian kings which are al in his hand, that they may feed the
flock committed to their charge, faithfully and in the integrity of their
soul, Ps. 78.70.71.72.
with the staff of Christ's government: Namely by the Cannon of his word,
which by his divine providence is appointed the staff of our assured defense.
The preachers office is into the hearts of Kings to beat the knowledge of this
truth, that they by doctrine, may know, the substanciall duty of best
government. The higher called to the first, must hoalpe thereto, that God our
high shephearde by him self, in the person of his princes in earth, may daily
rule over us his children. So far I like of the learned at this day seeking
for redress: but in no wise dare I allow, that others should be shut up in
hate, which cannot join in all respects to that them selves do not perceive.
And I conclude that petition, patience, and parliament, is the ascending
staire, to this high blessing. Beyond this there seems not else to be but a
chrusshing of the shepeheardes croke, which is the work of god alone: Zac.
11.16.
and to us then no other, but the door of desolation, and confusion, to our
former christian unity, which God preserve for his names sake, and purge his
church, of snayly knurres glewed to this staff, and keep the same whole and
sound over us to our farthest posterity, if it stand with his good will and
pleasure. So shall our kingdom be beautiful, and our christian brotherhoode
guarded with the band of Gods spirit, to our eternal peace in him. For the
which peace only we ought to strive, for all other peace is meare wars with
God. Thus much of the shepheardes rods and staves, and now we proceed to
the.5. verse, which says.

Thou do prepare a table before me in the sight of mine adversaries. Thou
do anoint my head with oil and my cup runs over.

Doubtless kindness and mercy shall follovv me, all the days of my life, and J
shall remain a long season in the house of the Lord.

Though mine enemies (says David) seek to destroy me, yet thou Lord do
not only deliver me, but also in despite of their fury dealest most liberally
with me, as men do with their chiefest friends in this our land of Jury.
Bydden to their sumptuous feasts, they anoint their heads with pleasant Oil,
and give them Cups of large importe, and them most amply filled. So haste
thou, and much more abundantly dealt with me, and wilt after, for thy mercy is
such, as kindness shall follow me during life. And for this thy mercy in my
prolonged days, I shall always in them seek to serve thee: in thy holy house.
Because I have long troubled you, I will omit to speak here of the providence
of God in them which be his, and persecuted of the multitude, Ps. 61.2.5.
but such it is, that their devises the Lord does laugh to skorne, and
erecteth his beloved up to honor, maugre their berdes. Or more to say of the
difference betwixt the papist and the faithful protestant: the one with the
Jew is ever gaping after good: but after the godly, Gods blessing runs, them
to comfort, even as the River from Moses Rock flowed after Israel to be their
drink and spiritual sacrament. 1. Co. 10.4.
Or once to touch that longing lust which ought to be in David's live (in all
christian heroical, honorable, worshipful, godly, rich, and meaner persons)
that is a daily desire to serve God, yea even in ye house of prayer with the
floke of Christ's fold. Psa. 122.1.
I was glad (says David) of those which said unto me, Come we will go into
the house of the Lord together. Your old chaples, your private houses (O ye
states of the earth) are for the most part an occasion of great loss to your
selves. Ye so separate your selves from the common exercise of Christ's sheep.
Ye lack the doctrine which other there receive to their great comfort. Ye
keep your families from grace, and be evil examples to the vulgar sort. Ye
express the small love to those that be like David, which if you mende not,
can not but bring you from his god and our sheheard Christ, whose desire is to
have his sheep come together. 1. Cor. 10.
Where two or three be gathered together in my name (says Christ) there am I
in the midst of them. Gather the people says God, sanctify the
congregation, gather the Elders, assemble the children and those that suck the
breast, let the bridegroom go out of his chamber, and the Bride out of her
closet, Let the Priests the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch,
and the Alter, and let them say, Spare thy people O Lord. etc. Joel. 2.16 17.
This was the order in the Apostles church, as Paul affirms in his first
epistle to the Corrin. saying. I praise you not, 1. Cor. 10.17.
that you come together not with profit, but with hurt. For first of all
when you come together in the church J hear that there is dissension among
you: Again, if therefore when the whole church is come together in one. 1.
Cor. 14.23.
etc. In this church were of great birth, like wealth and stately condition,
yet they came together in one they assembled them selves in the church, they
kept not, some their privy chaples, other their dining chambers, but most of
all their sleeping heads. Look to this (you states) be not so stately that
you set your selves stiff necked to the Lord, frequent his house, adsociate
his people, conioyne with his church, to hear the Lord by his ministers
speak unto you, that your common cry with the rest may jointly pearce the
ears of Gods most loving majesty, in the throne of his mercy seat. In hope of
your content hereto, I say nothing hereof, but as you see run from the same
in haste to end. But because of the holy communion, to the which we purpose in
the Lord, one word thereof and so an end. 1. Cor. 10.1 2.3.4.
Paul the Apostle takes occasion by the temporal blessing of God upon the
Israelites in Manna and the stony rock, to deliver to the Corrinthians sound
doctrine in sacraments. And if the same (with the rest of holy scripture) be
written for our learning, Romans 15.
why should I forget so good and apt a lesson, as both his example, our present
ministration, and this our profitable text does offer unto me. etc. David
speaks of his Crown and Diadem, with the Appendices: Neither does he forget
the spiritual comfortes that from the Lord he daily receives by the seals
of the lords righteousness his sacred sacraments. Romans 4.
The sacraments of Gods church are only two, The lauer of baptism, and the
Table of the Lord: In the Supper at this table prepared (without our provision
and desert) of God in his Christ, the faithful do receive two things, and that
of two several persons: sacred bread and wine, In the Sacrament two things are
conceived.
at and of ye external preaching ministry (ye only fyt ministre for ye same)
and by ye inward secret, and omnipotent invisible work of the holy ghost, (in
soul by faith truly fixed in christ) they verily eat and receive ye very true
and substantial body of Jesus Christ, still sitting at ye right hand of his
heavenly father in majesty on hie. By faith he is received, by gods spirit he is
delivered in soul he is eaten, for the diet is spiritual, and can not be
pressed with man's carnal teeth. That of ye minister we receive only bread and
wine, the holy Apostle Paul five times tells us in the delivery thereof to
the Corinthians. 1 Epist. chap. 11. And the ancient Fathers say the same:
amongst whom S. Ciprian does stand approved, and he says thus of the
Eucharist: Cipriani de vnct. Chrism.
Dedit itaque dominus noster, in mensa, etc. Therefore our Lord Christ in his
last supper which he made with his Apostles, gave to them at that table, Bread
and wine with his own hands: but upon the Cross by the hands of the cruel
tormenters, he gave his body wounded for us. Sunt quae erant (says Ambrose,
Ambro. de sacra. li. 4. cap. 4.
speaking of the Elementall bread and wine) The same they were they are, and
are changed into another use. If the sacramental bread be the very body of
Christ after consecration, then the wicked as well eat Christ's body, as the
godly. But this the ancient fathers do deny. Origin says, Est verus Cibus.
Origin. in Matthew.
Christ is the true meat, which no evil and wicked man can eat. For if the
wicked man could (in the Sacrament) eat the body of the Lord, then should it
not be written, Qui edit hunc panem, He that eats this bread shall live for
ever. Augustine says: August. in Io. tra. 20.
Qui non manet in Christo, etc. He that dwells not in Christ, and in whom
Christ dwells not, undoubtedly he eats not spiritually the flesh and
blood of Christ, Albeit he carnally and visibly tear with his teeth the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. And if any man say unto me, why
then does Christ say, This is my body? I answer, it is a figurative speech of
our Savior, and is of him spoken to a people that well were acquaynted with
the Scriptures phrase in Sacraments. So is Circumcision called the Covenant
of the Lord, when it is but the sign of the Lords Covenant. The Covenant
it self was, I will be thy God, Genesis 17.10
and thou shall be my people. And therefore Circumcision is called in the same
chapter that which in it self it remains to be, namely the Sign, and not
the Covenant. And it shall be (says God) a sign of the Covenant betwixt
thee and me. Likewise the Pascall Lamb is called Transitus domini, the passing
by of the Lord, until the coming of Christ, yet the Lord by his angel
passed but once in all through the land of Egypt, Exodus 12.
and therefore verily and indede, that sacrament could not be the passsing of
the Lord. This is the use of scripture, says Augu. August. in Leuit. 17. Genesis
41.26
that the signs which signify, are called by the names which they do
represent, as thus: ye seven ears of corn septem anni sunt, are seven years.
The Rock was Christ. etc. And in another place he says, The Lord doubted not
to say, This is my body, when he gave signu^ corporis the sign of his body. So
good christian Audience, the words of Christ, as of him they were spoken, are
sacramentally to be understood. So that when Christ says, This is my body, we
are to take it thus: this is the representing, and to the faithful the
exhibiting sign of my body. That these words of Christ are figuratively
spoken, Augu. Augu. de doct. chri. lib. 3.
also witnesses in his book De doctrina christiana. But that the faithful do
eat by the work of the spirit and Christ's divine power his very body and
blood in the true use of the Lords supper, ye faithfulness in god approves, who
ever was ye same to his people, that his faithful pledges the Sacraments
promised. Circumcision promised his continual aid, and that he would be their
god, and they should be his people. Search the Scriptures, and see, Deuteronomy. 4.
if ever any people were so guerdoned, or had the presence of God so near
them, or were any people so prospered so long as they continued with
circumcised hearts in his holy covenant? Did not the Lord by his angel perform
that in deed, which he promised by his paesah, his sacramental passover? Exo.
12.12.13.28.29.
Did he not pass by the Israelites house tied to this Covenant, and plagued
all the first borne in Egypt. So no doubt he truly feeds the faithful with
not only ye power, but ye precious body in himself, not stouping one inch yet
from his fathers Throne, or giving his body to be rent into pieces with our
mortal teeth, but in such a divine sort as our tongs can not utter, because our
or thy capacities ca^ not conceive the manner how, further the^ by the sight of
his noble creature ye shining sun. The sun in his globe and person does keep
and continue his sphere and circle in the Zodiake, and yet does he by the
decree and provident power of God, light us, warm us, comfort us, and renew
our blood and bodies, and as we may say by borrowed speech, gives us life, by
his heavenly beams, the ordinary conducts from him felfe, with his very
living substance. Since thus we have so elegant a shadow, of our Savior
Christ's body verily feding us yt are his in earth: let us not distrust, or
further descant how the Lord can (since we know not how ye son does his
office, but feel it so to be) but let us believe that the Lord by his holy
spirit does feed us, and in deed with his very body and blood, from heaven,
as verily as his minister at ye table in earth does give us the sacred symboles
of his holy body, which in their former nature remain not other then bread
and wine. And with that mind that our father Abraham did receive the sacrament
of circumcision, let us follow and approach the Lords table. That is, so taccept
with faithful heart in hand, To. 4.11.12
the holy Mysteries, as the seals of righteousness, that God will give us the
same that he affyrmeth them to be, and in such sort as the same is to be
distributed unto us effectually in spirit and truth. Let us examine and try
our selves whether we be in the faith, 2. Corinthians.
let us well consider of our steps whether we be standing or falling before
our God, let us cast from us our former ills, and put upon us Jesus Christ, and
his obedience. Let us confess our daily sins, and approach with loving fear
and reverence unto this table of atonement. Finally repent and believe the
Gospel. Let the Papist depart from all his ignorant superstition, and receive
the doctrine of the holy written scriptures unfeignedly. Let the carnal
gospeller, the Atheist, be ashamed at his filthy life and skoffing girds, cast
at the truth. Let the Ancient harlot hate his whordome, and bath his beastly
body in the blood of Christ by repentant faith. Let the covetous stretche out
his hand unto the poor, and shut up his eyes from worldly thirst. Let the
courtly Dames (and you here present) cut short the fantasies of vain desires,
and rather covet to come behind the lashing pride of these ill days, Romans 12.2.
then seek to follow the untamed fashion of this wicked world. Psalm. 119.32.
And pray with David, that your eyes may be fast shut from beholding our to to
much, and abominable vanities. Let the contentious cease their brawling
striffe, and with us in one by the Lords spirit of truth, ascend to the
Lords sacrament of unity and love. That this grace may come to every of us,
and to the whole Church of god this Church of England and Ireland, and therein
to the Queen's majesty Elizabeth, her honorable Councelours and Potentates,
Gods spiritual Preachers and Ministers, to all Magistrates and governors, as
well here present as absent, and to this congregation a member of the said
Church, let us the loving sheep of our chief Shepherd Christ, by the comfort
and direction of his holy spirit, humbly at the hands of our most merciful
Father, for the love he bears to Christ his only begotten son, and in his
name crave it, saying, O our father which art in heaven, etc. Grant, O
Lord, that into the words which this day, and at other times, through thy
great mercy we have graciously heard, we may be effectually transformed,
through Christ our head Shepherd and Lord. To whom together with thee, O
Father, and the holy Ghost, three distinct persons, and one eternal God, be
all honor and glory, power and dominion, now and for ever. Amen.

Laus Deo per Christum. 1. Ian. 1575
To the right worshipful Sir William Fitzwilliam Knight, late Lord deputy
of Irelande: A. Anderson the minister of Christ's holy Gospel, wishes Christ
our Lord, with his whole merits.
CAll upon me (says God) in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee.
Greater troubles with less comfortes than in the raging Seas, can not be
found, as those with David must confess which occupy their business in great
waters. This dangerous Journey, as among many others ye are in the Lords name
to adventure, so vouchsafe this preparatiue to your godly heart, and by and with
the same in assured hope of Gods assistaunce for his Christ, approach his mercy
seat. The have we have, and gaping hope for Westerly winds, will not permit
long leisure, to proyue this sudden frame. Take it (Right Worshipful) as it
is, and accept the good will of the Geuer, use it at your need to the Lords
praise, and your present comfort, which is my hearty desire. And I shall daily
pray the Lord for you, and us, that we may speedely imbarke, and safely arrive
in England through Christ's aid, the master of our ship.

At Holme Patricke in Irelande. 17. October. 1575. Your Worships in Dom. A.
Anderson.

A form of prayer for seamen and passengers to use in the sailing Ship.
A confession of our sins to God.
O Almighty God and most righteous, we thy dear children, here encompassed
with these thy mighty creatures, ye winds, the huge seas and sailing ship, do
acknowledge and confess our selves, and every of us, to be miserable sinners,
and from our first cradles depely to have offended thy divine majesty. Our
several thoughts be corrupted, our sundry hearts and acts are polluted, our
sins cannot be hid from thee. We heartily confess them O Lord, else should our
consciences condemn us, because our transgressions bear witness against us.
But thou art the God of our salvation and to us thy children the best father,
full of mercyes, rich in compassion, slow to wrath, and most ready to forgive
the penitent sinner calling upon thee. And sith it is the work of thy most
holy spirit to mollify the stony hearted, and to change the fleshly heart into
a spiritual soul: Eze. 36.
We most humbly beseech thee for thy Christ's sake, to grant us thy holy
spirit, taken from us our stony and give us hearts of flesh, and into them
power thy graces, and turn us unto thee. Thy holy law imprint in our souls,
and give us to walk in thy statutes, during these our natural lives. Bow
down thine ear and hear us, and with thy favorable countenance look upon
us, behold our place, and cause of cry. Our ship is subject to subversion, if
thy holy hand direct us not in merciful providence. Give, O lord the sweet
and pleasant gale, in thy name of us to be desired in vehement storms (by thee
called to punish and prove us) assist us with thy strength and spirit of
comfort. Look upon our mediator Christ, and through him pity us, and in the
bowels of thy mercy, conduct us to the haven of us desired if it be thy will.
Then shall we sing and praise thy name, and show thy wonders in the deep, and
our souls shall confess that though the seas be mighty, Psa. 93.5.
yet thou, O God, art of most might over them. Let us not be tempted further
gracious God, then that our strength in thee shall counteruaile, and grant the
event prosperous, Glad our hearts with safety on shore, and make us mindful of
thy mercies. Give us we beseech thee, true faith, firm hope, and fervent love
in thee, keep us always thine, and grant thy Christ for ever ours, in whose
name for our selves and all other in our condition, with the rest of thy
church we call unto thee, thus: O our father which art in heaven, hallowed be
thy name, etc.

A psalm.
Psa. 93.5.
The waves of the sea are mighy and rage horribly, but yet the Lord that
dwells on high is mightier. Psalm. 107.


23.
They that go down to the sea in ships, and occupy their business in great
waters.

24.
These men see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.

25.
For at his word the stormy wind arises which lifts up the waves thereof.

26.
They are carried up to heaven and down again to the deep, their soul melts
in them because of their trouble.

27.
They reele to and fro, and stagger like a dronken man, and are at their wits
end.

28.
So when they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, he delivers them out of
their distress.

29.
For he makes the stormy winds to cease, so that the waves thereof are still.

30.
Then are they glad because they are at rest, and so he brings them to the
haven where they would be.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders which he does for the children of men.

Glory be to the Father. etc. The lesson Mat. 8.13.
ANd when Jesus was entered with his disciples into ye ship, there arose a great
tempest in the sea, so that the ship was covered with waves, but he was a
sleep. Then his Disciples awoke him, saying, Master save us, we perish. And
he said unto them, why are ye fearful O ye of little faith? Then he arose
and rebuked the winds and the sea, and so there was a great calm. And the
men marueled, saying, what man is this that both winds and sea obey him. If the
Sea be rough.
Out of the deep O Lord we call upon thee, hear us, O God, and have mercy.

Psalm. 5.
We have sore provoked thine anger (O Lord) thy wrath is waxed hot, and thy heavy
displeasure is sore kindled against us.

But rebuke us not in thine indignation, neither chaste^ us in thy displeasure.
Psalm. 6.


Iudit 8.
In deed we acknowledge that all our punishments are less the^ our deseruings.

Job. 11.
But yet of thy mercy (O Lord) correct us to amendment, and plague us not to
our destruction.

Sap. 11. Psa. 25.
Turn thee unto us and have mercy, for we are desolate and in great misery.

Psa. 79.
So we that be thy people and the sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks
for ever, and will be always showing forth thy praise, to all generations.
Glory be to the father. etc.

The prayer.
O Lord God the Father of comforts and God of all solace, which art ever
myndfull of thy mercy, and careful to keep promise, who also co^maundest us
to call upon thee in our troubles, with hope of full release at the brinke of
our deep dangers, we thy poor children crave thy hand now to help us,
which are destitute of further aid in earth, then this our little ship. We are
environed with these huge roaring seas, horribly raging, and breaking in upon
us. The winds are vehement, and grow to increase in storms, our sins be
heavy, and Satan seeks to sink us. In our selves we distrust, but in thy
mercy we repose our earnest confidence, and in the humbled state of these our
souls, we beseech thee to hear us. Grant us thy Christ his presence in our
ship. Awake, O blessed savior, and help us lest we perish. Thou see our case
and cause of cry, thou know our weakness, O Lord increase our faith.
Command the winds to cease their violence, co^ptroll the seas, and set them
quite under us. Keep whole our mastes, provide safety to our sail, hold
steady our helm, and be thy self the master of our ship. Give us grace to have
like care to serve thee in seming and supposed security, as we have desire to
receive thy help in this our present adversity. Keep us ever to be thine,
and vouchsafe to stand for us to thy Fathers justice. Conduct us to land, and
safely set us to our several dwellinges for thy names sake. Bless our souls
with thy spirit, and be merciful to our Church and Queen, her honorable
Deputies, Councillors, Preside^ts, and Magistrates. Give them and us faithful
hearts to hear thy word, and increase thy good gifts in the teachers of the
same. Finally, our selves, our souls and bodies, we commit into thy merciful
hands, deliver us at thy good pleasure for thy holy names sake, we beseech
thee, to whom with the Father and the holy ghost, be all honor and glory now
and for ever. Amen.

But if the Seas be quiet, and passage pleasant, then say thus, and pray.
O Lord our good God, how excellent is thy name, wonderful are thy works,
but thy mercy far above measure. If we descend into our consciences to
ponder the poyse of our sin, what may we look for but vengeance, beholding
thee for just? These sensles Creatures, the wind and seas, do daily serve
thee in silent obedience: and all other inferior created things do ever yield
thee obsequie. But we for whom all these are made, and daily are benefited by
them, do never stand upright before thee. And at this present Lord we feel the
truth of thy loving promise give to all them that trust in thee. For thou have
called away the elder storms (the correction of sin and trial of faith) and
sent unto us this pleasant gale, having the wind seruiseable to our humble
desires, and these mighty waters to work our willing effects. Vouchsafe us
pardon by Christ, for our iniquities, and the continuance of this pleasant
passing, until we be arrived the port (in thee) of us desired. Keep us we pray
thee O heavenly father, from all perils in the sea, and save us by thy mighty
hand in earth. Guide us with thy spirit in the ship of thy holy church,
through the raging seas of this wicked world, and bring us through true faith
safely to the celestial haven of our inheritance, that there with the
company of al heavenly passengers, we may praise thee everlastingly. Grant
us, and thy whole church, these our requests, for Christ our Lord thy
sons sake. In whose name we make to thy mercy our petition thus: O our father
which art in heaven. etc.

Laus Deo.
Having safely arrived let the godly company together say or sing the 103
Psalm, and then this thanksgeuing, thus.
AL honor and praise we yield to thee O God our loving father, who in thy
great mercy, notwithstanding our former lives, and present sins, some
distrusting thy loving help, some not caring to call upon thee (and some most
desperately blaspheming thy holy name) have thus most mercifully delivered us,
and to this safety on land in thy great mercy brought us. Now Lord again we
beseech thee to defend us, that having safely passed ye surging seas, we be
not, through our weakness, and Satan's temtation, drowned in the voluptuous
Rivers of fleshly lusts, or choked with the foggie mists of popish or carnal
practices, but that we may attend upon the son of righteousness, Christ our
Lord, and may be conducted to the haue^ of our celestial Jerusalem, by the
most pleasant purifying wind, the spirit of truth. Which spirit as he
blows where he lusts, so vouchsafe him ever to take us with him during our
natural lives, in the faithful and true serving of thee, and never leave us
destitute of his holy aid, until thou have (for thy christ's sake) crowned us
in glory. To whom with thee and the same holy ghost, three persons, and our one
and only God, be all honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Laus Deo per Christum.

