The Cry and Revenge of Blood.

Expressing the Nature and haynousnesse of wilful Murder.

Exemplified In a most lamentable History thereof, committed at Halsworth in
High Suffolk, and Lately Convicted at Bury Assize, 1620.



LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, for John Wright, dwelling in Pie-corner 1620.

^O THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir Henry Mountague, Lord Chief Justice of England,
and his thrice honored Lady, all increase of honor and true happiness.
SEeing it has pleased your good Honor to give life to this poor Infant, by
that gracious breath of yours, whereby you prepared the guitlie deservedly to
their death: Pardon (I beseech you) my boldness in committing it to be fostered
under your Honorable Patronage, who already have a vowed the better part
thereof. Long have I been desirous to approve my self unto your honor, in
what poor measure I have been able: not only in respect of many favors
undeservedly received from your honorable Lady in my former afflictions: but
especially in regard of your Lordships gracious clemency, in releasing a poor
distressed neighbor, at my request: whose folly by how much the more it
provoked your honors just displeasure, by so much the greater was your
benignity in remitting his offense. And therefore, observing your meekenes
extended to so undeserving, I have been the rather emboldned to put my self,
and these poor labors under the covert thereof, that so the Church of God may
more warrantablie entertain, and make better use of this discovery, being
commended unto them under such justifiable protection: and the Country may
more earnestly pray for yours honors happy return amongst them, for the
full discovery and censure of what yet lies hidden, concerning this most
hellish and execrable murder. Among whom my self also unfeignedly wait Gods
holy providence herein: and shall not cease to commend your honor in my best
devotions unto the God of Justice, to continue your Lordship in all health and
happiness, not only to the finishing of this work, so worthily proceeded in
hitherto, but also to the perfiting of your salvation, in his fear, in a full
discharge of this great and honorable calling he has placed you in. And so I
commend your honor with your gracious Lady to the grace of God.

From my house in White-crosse street this 24. of August. 1620. Resting in the
Lord at your Honors, and the Churches service. THO. COOPER.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, SIR HENRY NORTH, HIGH Sheriff of the County of
Suffolk, together withthe rest of his Majesty's Justice of peace in that County.
RIght Worshipful: It fell out by Gods good providence, that at the last
Assize at Berrie, I was an eare-witnesse of the Discovery of the most strange
and cruel Murder that ever I read of: The Detection whereof, together with
the most fair and honorable carriage of the business, did so affect me: that
I could not think my time better spent, then in taking notes of such special
Passages as fell out therein. Which howsoever I then only intended for my
private use, yet considering, that such wonderful works of God, are to be
declared to posterity: and being solicited by some Worthies of the Shire to
that end: I thought it good to condescend to their requests with the soonest,
the rather to prevent such flying and suspicious pamphlets, wherewith the world
in such cases, is too much abused: and so inform the world in the right use of
such strange occurrents. Wherein if your Worships shall find ought that may
revive in your memory, ^o wonderful a discovery, and shall stir up your
affections to magnify the providence of God herein: As I shall have herein
what I principally desire, so shall I not fail to take any other good
occasion, to testify my thankfulness unto your Worships, as God shall offer
the same: to whose gracious protection I do most heartily commend you all,

Resting in him, Your Worships poor remembrancer at the Throne of Grace. THO.
COOPER.

The Contents.
CHAPTER 1. The Introduction to the History: where of the Providence of God in
permitting and ordering such horrible wickedness. 1. For the confusion of the
Atheist: And secondly, awaking of the secure and profane Christians. CHAP. 2.
Wherein first an entrance is made by way of Application unto the Particular
sin of Murder, being the proper subject of this Treatise: where 2. The
Progeny and heynousnesse of this sin is discovered and enlarged. 3. The
causes and occasions thereof in general are explained. 4. The Dangerous
Effects, and consequences thereof are detected. And so 5. Such several uses
are propounded as both tend to the preventing of this sin, as also for the
wise suppressing and weeding out thereof. CHAPTER. 3. Of the particular Murder
at Halsworth. And first of the occasions and causes thereof. 2 Of the Actors
and Accessaries therein. 3 Of the Parties that were Murdered. 4 Of the Manner
and Circumstances how they were made away. 5 Of the Means to conceal the
Murder being committed. 6 And diverse observations considerable on either
side. CHAP. 4. Where first of the Reason why, howsoever other sins come after
Judgment, yet this sin of Murder is seldom left undiscovered. 2. Of the
Many ways whereby the Lord has discovered Murder from time to time, with
diverse instances thereof. 3. That it was the Finger of God, that detected this
blood. 4. Of the Manner and Instruments employed herein. 5. And the several
Uses to be made thereof. CHAP. 5. Declares the Conviction of the Murderers:
1. Where the Evidences against them are published and opened by the Judge. 2
Their Inditements found hereupon by the Jury. 3 Their Obstinacy upon their
finding declared and discussed, with the Use of all. CHAP. 6. Of the
Condemnation and Judgment given upon the Malefactors, where after entrance
made hereto: 1 The religious and learned Speech of the thrice reverend Judge,
is published, tending to justify the righteous hand of God herein, as also to
prepare the delinquents to an holy use thereof. 2 The Sentence it self
follows, with the great clemency and moderation thereof. 3 With diverse
passages and profitable uses of the same. CHAP. 7. 1 Containing the execution
of the Murderers. 2 And such accidents as fell out therein. 3 Together with
such Uses as may be made thereof. CHAP. 8. Containing the conclusion of the
whole. With promise of further light.
The Cry and Revenge of Blood.
CHAPTER. 1.
The Introduction to the History: whereof the Providence of God in permitting
and ordering such horrible wickedness. 1. For the confusion of the Atheist:
And secondly, awakening of the secure and profane Christians.

IT may seem very strange, and almost incredible to carnal apprehension, that
such glorious light of the Gospel, especially so long continued among us, and
that not without some gracious effect, should yet notwithstanding, abound with
so many strange and monstrous sins, as do daily break out and are
strengthened with so high an hand of obstinacy and deeperate Impenitency. For
whereas the powerful preaching of the word has this gracious promise annexed
with it, that (as at the coming of the Savior of the world, all the Heathen
Oracles and devilish Delusions ceased and vanished) so all unclean spirits
should be banished, and Satan fall down like lightning, by the Heb. 2. 13.
power thereof, and his works be dissolved, and thoroughly abolished: may not the
ouer-flowing of high handed sins, so reigning in these evil days, either
seem so challenge the Truth of the Gospel, as if it yet appeared not in it
lively Beauty, or else at least, question the Efficacy thereof, as not
preuayling to the subduing of Iniquity: surely if we consider on the one side,
what has opened the mouth of Papists to challenge the Truth of our Religion,
and still dote upon their own dreams? Is it any other then what has been
occasioned from such desperate sins as have broken out, and continued there
with? Do they not hereby impeach the truth and power thereof, because Iniquity
notwithstanding abounds in the midst of so glorious light? Does not this
harden their hearts in their gross and palpable darkness, even that, I say,
which hardened the Jews in their Idolatry and obstinacy against the truth; that
because when they worshipped the Queen of Heaven and all the host thereof,
then all things went better with Ierem. 44. 16.
them, more charity then abounded, less sin and misery brake out: but since
the discovery of the Light, sin has appeared more out of measure sinful,
the wrath of God Romans 7. 8. 9.
has been more discovered against the same, therefore their Conclusion is,
that we are in the wrong, and they maintain the right?

And has not his on the other side, hardened the Atheist, not only in his
blasphemy, that there is no God, that Religion is but Policy, but also in his
obstinate impiety, and obdurate impenitency, even this, I say, is the maine
Stumbling block hereunto, that the Gospel, being not powerful to weed out
such gross wickedness, but that it swarms and rangeth, securely under the
scepter thereof: Either it is because there is no Truth therein, or else,
wanting power, it is no more to be regarded then a scarre-crow or bugbeare, to
fright fools and children: Either he thinks that God is like unto him,
because he prospers in his sin, or that he likes well thereof, because
sentence does not speedily pass to Psalm. 50.
his discovery and confusion. Does not the close conuayance of sin, and long
concealing thereof provoke him to Eccle. 8.
challenge the Omnipresence of God, as if he were hid in the clouds, and could
not see it? Does not his long forbearance Job 22.
of sin, and great patience in suffering the vessels of wrath, give further
occasion to the Atheist to challenge the divine providence, as if the Lord would
neither do good nor evil, Nahum. 1. 12.

And is not the mouth of the Profane Christian hereby opened against heaven?
Does not his talk go through the earth that Sin is but a trick of youth,
that the more senseless we are thereof, the less care we take for the same:
the more our consciences are secure therein, the more secure we are of the
mercy of God, the more we may sin that Romans 6. 1.
grace may abound: because hereby the conscience becomes more obdurate, and so
secure of Gods favor.

Behold here the righteous Justice of God, in causing his Word to be a savor
of death unto death: observe, I pray you, and admire Gods wonderful wisdom,
in taking the wise in their craftiness, that seeing they will not obey the
glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus, in receiving the Love of the truth:
therefore the Lord has given them up justly to strong Delusions, even to
pervert this glorious 1. These. 2, 12.
light, to the hardening of their hearts, because they will not be persuaded,
and subdued thereunto, imputing those things as the effects of the Gospel,
which are, indeeds, the Fruits of their obstinate despising, and perverting of
the same.

For to speak the truth in Jesus Christ, and to justify the truth of God, to
the conuincing of these liars, and peruerters of his glorious Grace: Consider,
I pray you, in the fear of God, these Three things:

First, the Intent of God, in sending his Gospel unto a Nation.

Secondly, The Manner of Gods wisdom, in the Dispensation thereof.

Thirdly, The grounds and causes of Stumbling at, and perverting the same.

Concerning the Purpose of God in bestowing his Gospel upon a Nation: that we
may the better discern the same, we must look up into the Revealed counsel
of God, concerning the salvation of the Elect, and reiection of the Reprobate:
For the Execution of which his Eternal decree. As the Lord in his eternal
wisdom has ordained his Mighty Word, so seeing the number of his Chosen is a
little Flock in comparison of the Cast-awayes, therefore does he also in his
singular wisdom, send and dispose thereof, that howsoever it shall accomplish
what he sends it for, namely, to convince all sorts, of either side, both Elect
and Reprobate, yet it shall be effectual only in those few, to their sound
conversion, as for the rest, they shall only be hardened, and be made
inexcusable thereby. And to these contrary ends has the wise and glorious God
fitted and composed his blessed Word, both in respect of the Nature thereof, as
also in the diverse manner of the conuayance of the same.

As touching ye Nature of the Word: Is it not a great Mystery supposing
somewhat in show, to ye stubling of ye flesh, even while it seems most easily
to conceive the same, and including that in substance which while it is only
conceiueable by the Spirit, does thereby also abase the Flesh, that so it may
renounce it self in the apprehension thereof, and seek unto the Spirit for
the opening of this Mystery. By which it comes to pass, that the natural man
being only able to conceive, though but peruersly, the letter and outside of
the Word, does thereby also stumble at it own conceit, either measuring the
power of the Word, by the letter of it, and so abasing it in it own conceit,
as being so obuious to it carnal reach, and thereby seeming becomes offended
at the outward simplicity and foolishness thereof: or else resting in it own
outward apprehension, as suiting with, and serving it carnal and present ends,
does therefore stumble at the power thereof, as thinking it needelesse or
dangerous, either because it is beyond his compass, or crosses his carnal
ends, and so instead of submitting himself thereunto, does in the height of it
wisdom, despise and reject the same.

Behold here how the Lord takes the wise in their craftiness. The Foolish
Worldling being the wiser in his own eyes, by how much the less he
diserneth his folly, does therefore think himself able enough, to diserne the
Mystery of his happiness, in the glass of his own false and counterfeit
wisdom, and so being neither willing, nor able to go out of himself,
howsoever he may pore at the outside of this Mystery, so far as he may
conceive his present fading happiness, that so he may flatter himself
therein, and thereby attain some such motion of the Deity, as may puff him up
therewith, yet is hereby made more inexcusable, and farther off, from the
inward search of the Power thereof. And yet the ways of the Lord herein most
equal and righteous. As both tendering the means indifferently unto all, so
that the wicked cannot say, but he has had his choice thereof, and liberty
therein with the best; yea, the patience of the Lord, in leading him to
Repentance, accompanied with such an answering to his desires, concerning
present ends, as it must much more justify the Lord. What could he have done
unto him which he has not done? so it shall also make him much more
inexcusable. And if so now the Lord deny unto him his grace, for the
effectuating of the means. As he not bound thereunto, because he will have
mercy upon whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he heardneth: so seeing
the wicked do neither dream of any such assistance of his grace, as being
blinded by self-love, they cannot see the want thereof: nay, being puffed up
with carnal wisdom, they do utterly despise and reject the same. Is it any
marvel if they want the supply of that grace, which they so abase and
contemn. Is it not just with God that the scorner shall seek wisdom and yet
not find it? Because he despises the substance, white he hunts after the
shadow. And if now it please the righteous Lord, to give him his desire, and
send leanenesse into his soul, that not only that which he seemed to have,
shall be taken away from him, the light he has shall be quenched, and by
degrees extinguished; yea, the spirit of God instead of restrayning him
formerly from some outward evils, and so happily affrighting his conscience
with sense of inward rottenness, shall now give him up to his own lusts, even
to commit sin with greediness: Is not this the happiness that he specially
dreams of, to be past feeling of sin, that so he may make up his measure
without controulement. Are not the ways of God most equal herein? Shall not
the mouth of iniquity be utterly stopped? Have not the wicked herein more at
the hands of God then they can desire? Does not he give them herein much more
then he owes them of all outward blessings? Does he not afford them more
plenty of spiritual means then they do desire? Does he not respite them in
his great patience, many a time beyond their own fond and counterfeit vows,
in the day of their distress, sparing them further then themselves do wish,
and repealing that sentence, which in their sudden flashes they have
pronounced against themselves, if they should hereafter turn to their vomit
again: yea, still drawing them to him with the cords of Love, when they have
cast off his cords, and fall desperately from him? Is not the Justice of God
most righteous, even his enemies being Judges. And surely as is the Lord, so is
his Word herein, most holy and righteous. If it cross the wicked in their
desires to discover that inward corruption, whereof they are ignorant, and
wherein they favor themselves: Is it any less then stands with the Power of
the Word, even as fire to search the hidden parts, yea, as the light, to lay
open the darkest corners.

And if now the wicked upon their first entertainment of the word desirous
happily to gain credit, and applause thereby, be justly confounded by the
power thereof, enraging their consciences by it inward search, is not the
wisdom of God admirable, thus taking them in their craftiness. Is not his
goodness justifiable, thus preparing them hereby to repentance? If now the
love of sin, will give no way to sound repentance: Is not yet the wisdom of
God herein more admirable, that whereas the wicked desire some slight evidence
to conceit a false conception, their slavish humiliation shall further
hereunto, and hereby flatter them in a new birth. And if thus conceiting a
false conversion for a true, because they cannot endure the travel of a true
birth, they shall now encroach upon the priueledges of the new man,
mis-applying and challenging those joys and comforts unto their festered and
ranckling soars, which belong only to those that are healed, and so instead
of being further searched and launched by the law of God, shall unseasonably
apply unto themselves the sweet promises of the Gospel, and will endure
nothing but leuitures and cordials?

Is the word of God unequal, because they unfitly apply it, nay is it not most
equal, in offering that indifferently unto them, which if they could wisely
apply, would prove sovereign unto them: Yea, though they apply it amiss, yet
herein is justifiable, in that themselves are their own caruers in the
misapplying thereof? If now upon the misapplying of the Plaster before the
soar be soundly healed, it does hereby more fester, and putrify inwardly, and
so break out to a cancerous ulcer. As the word was not first to be blamed, in
discovering the soar, that so it might be prepared to it cure, because, if
there had been no pray the Lion would not have roared: So now much less, may
it be justly challenged, to be the cause of it further ranckling, seeing the
misapplying thereof has effected the same.

And therefore as it were extreme folly to charge the heat of the Sun, to be
the cause of stench and putrifieation in these inferior bodies, which being
well disposed are purified thereby, and are only subject to tainture by their
own indisposition, and aptness thereunto: so let it be the shame of Popish
glory, to hate the light, because their works are evil. Yea let this be the
confusion of their carnal wisdom to challenge the glorious light of the
preaching of the Word, as the cause of sins abundance, that hereby they
might color their despising and persecuting thereof, not only in that by
opposing the light they make up the measure of their own sins, by denying to
themselves, and others, the means of life and happiness. But hereby also
provoking the righteous Lord to avenge upon them the contempt of his word in
giving them up to such outrage and monstrous wickedness of combustions and
murders, which the true wisdom of flesh, for it own safety, can no way
endure, that so her own lovers, even out of love to themselves, must needs
hate the whore, and make her desolate: and so the Justice of the Lord may shine
more gloriously, in rewarding her as she has done to others, and sheathing her
own sword, in her own bowels. And is not the Word glorious in judging the
Whore even by her own mouth, and taking her in the snare, that she has laid
for others, and so ouertaking her in he month and ripeness of iniquity. Who
so is wise he shall understand these things, and to whom the arm of the Lord
shall Hos. 14. 13. 14.
reveal them; for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk
therein, but the transgressor shall fall in them.

Let it therefore be the shame of Popery thus to traduce the light, and let it
be the glory of the Gospel, thus to discover their shame, for, if it were not
powerful, why do they spurn against it? if they being galled thereby, do
spurn against the same, let them thank their own rottenness, and justify
the powerful Word. But if being covered thus with shame, they will not seek
the face of God in Jesus Christ, the Lord will further glorify his Word in
hastening their confusion, and gathering in the first borne to his glorious
appearance.

And shall the blasphemous Atheist escape any better? Surely, as it is extreme
folly in him, to bark against the Moon, because it gives him light, to his
desperate wickedness (for what wisdom is there to condemn that, which is so
favorable unto us) so does this folly threaten his confusion, as both
discovering his accursed spirit, imputing that obstinacy in sin, to the Word,
which arises from his ignorance of the power thereof, and Rebellion against
the same, and thereby hardening his neck against all hope of reclaiming, as
rejecting the Word, which is only auayleable hereunto. For what though as the
heat of the Sun does harden the clay, so the power of the word indirectly
occasions the increase of sin in the froward heart: Is the word in vain
while it does that unto which it is appointed? Is not the wisdom of God
herein more glorious, who as he would never have permitted evil, but that he
can bring good out of it: so he turns the rage of man to his glorious praise.
Not only making way hereby to the just confusion of the wicked, for the
advancement of the glory of his righteous justice: but also discovering herein
the riches of his Free Grace, in softning the hearts of his Elect by the same
means, whereby the wicked are hardened, and so by these contrary effects
advancing the Power of his mighty Word, which with the same breath, is thus
able to kill and to quicken.

And therefore as the Atheist has no just cause to stumble at the power of the
Word, because Iniquity is discovered and enraged thereby, so much less may he
justly challeng the providence of God, in accompanying his word with such great
patience and common favors, seeing as the Lord hereby gives him his desire, to
enjoy the pleasures of sin, that so he may have nothing justly to except
against his goodness: so by this his long suffering, he does also inuit him
to repentance, and so makes him more inexcusable if he abuse the same. But
howsoever, the filthy will be filthy still, yet let the servants of God
magnify his wonderful mercy, and free kindness toward them, in softning
them by the same means whereby he hardens the wicked: yea, turning about the
hardening of the reprobate to be the means of their more close walking with
their God, and dependence on his free grace, in the sense of their failing,
when they do their best; yea, let them evermore bless the name of the Lord,
that seeing the righteous shall hardly be saved, they may yet have some hope of
Life, in so great conscience of their corruptions, that they can yet follow
after righteousness; notwithstanding, the stream runs contrary, and their
labor is so thanklesse, and dangerous in regard of present success, seeing
iniquity does so swarm and prevail: yea, let this be their evidence, that
Christ reigns over them, even in the midst of their enemies: that even where
Satan has his throne, there God shall have his glory: Antipas his faithful
servant shall seal it up with his blood: or if this be not yet the trial,
yet Jeremy shall be smitten with the tongue, and holy Job shall esteem the
book that his Adversaries writ against him, to be the most glorious Crown
that may adorn his head: Yea; the more that the word of God is blasphemed by
the wicked, the more watchful shall his children be, that they give no just
offense, that so, either they which speak of them as evil doers, shall
glorify God on their behalf, and so by their holy conversation be won to the
obedience of the Gospel, or be made more inexcusable, when their mouths
shall be justly stopped, if yet they shall not cease to speak evil of the
righteous ways of God.

And this may also stop the profane mouth of the filthy Libertine, that though
he turn the grace of God into wantonness, imagining his security and
senselessness in sin, to be the assurance of his happiness, yet the Word is
holy, yielding no apperance, much less allowance hereunto, yea righteous
herein is the mighty Word, in giving him up to such a reprobate sense, through
his perverting of the chief errand thereof, (the mercy of God in Christ Jesus
to repentant sinners) which if he could rightly apply, might make him capable
thereof: yea, marvelous is the wisdom of God herein, that by the contrary
apprehension of the promise, and preparation thereunto by his servants, he
confounds the perverseness and profaneness of the Libertine: If yet the
filthy will be filthy still, let him know this for his further confusion, that
as the Lord will not fail eft-soones, to awaken his senseless conscience with
some inward quawmes, or outward crosses to confound him in his security, that
so he may be forced to acknowledge and seek to the power of the Word, which
he has so abased: so if for all this he will not be reclaimed, but by
mistaking and mis-applying the mercy of God, shall thereby be cast into a
deeper sleep, the Lord shall glorify his Word in giving him up to a spirit of
giddiness, even to heap up teachers unto himself according unto his lusts,
that may answer him according to the stumbling block of iniquity, which he
has set up in his heart, that so he which could not commit sin so securely,
but that his heart did sometimes smite him for the same, might new continue in
it more freely and desperately, as being warranted hereunto by such accursed
deceivers.

Behold here the wisdom of the wicked in sin; and observe withal the
wisdom of God in taking them in their craftines, that they may securely
revel in wickedness, their first policy is to make their conscience senseless,
and that they may bring it to this pass, their desperate wisdom is to
multiply sin with greedines, that so by this custom and outrage, they may grow
to an habit; and so by often putting the iron in the fire, may in the end
harden and stupifie their hearts: that as it falls out with those which often
drink strong payson, that in the end they can digest the same without any
sense or danger, so the wicked by often drinking in of iniquity with
greedines, become senseless at length, both of the evil and of the danger
thereof: whereby as they take occasion to commit any notorious outrage
whatsoever, so they become hereby obuious to the scandal and danger of the
world, which cannot but take notice of what themselves are senseless of, and
by it clamorus and just scandal, either awaken them to repentance, or convince
them to punishment. Behold how the Lord takes the wise in their craftines: They
desire to be senseless of sin, that they may commit it more greedily, and the
more greedily they commit the same, the more they provoke the world through
their scandal, and it one danger, to awaken them thereout: what remedy is now
left in carnal wisdom to make up the breach, and lull them a sleep again.
Behold again the hight of this wisdom in sin, and observe how the Lord takes
the wicked in their craftines. If Elia will Prophesy no good, but evil unto us
while we sleep in sin, yet welfare Zidkiah, that will warrant good success
therein, flattering us that we may go up and prosper, because hitherto it has
gone well with us, and though he lie falsely; yet he will walk in the spirit,
that he may deceive more effectually, yea he wants not his rough garment of
tything mint and comin, yea he will not spare herein to humble flesh by
voluntary devotions of Pilgrimage penances, and such like trash to the
satisfying of the flesh, even in a great show of wisdom to abase the same.
And what now shall be spared for the sin of the soul, though it be to the
parting with our substance, yea our first borne, and all yea which is the hight
of this delusion shall not a greater sin be made a price for the less? shall
not the murder of Princes become an expiation for all our personal sins.
Behold here the depth of the Mystery of iniquity, and admire with me the
Justice of God in taking the whore and her accursed brood in their own
craftines, that while they esteem their own blood vile, that they may murder
the Lords anointed, they have justly brought the Kings of the earth upon their
heads to secure themselves in subuerting Antichrist, whom otherwise they could
have been contented still to have made their band for the satisfying of their
lusts. Oh! the unsearchable riches of the wisdom, and mercy of our God, who
turns about the carnal wisdom of man, tending only to it present bodily
good, to be means of removing that great stumbling block, whereby their
souls were ensnared, that so they might ascribe unto him alone the glory of
their true happiness, so far above, and contrary to their corrupt intent.

Well, thus we see how the Lord takes the wise in their craftines. That the
world may securely revel in sin, the false Prophet must be a snare upon Mispah
to cry aim thereto, that so the blind leading the blind, both may fall into
the ditch.

And is not this providence of God very remarkable, in these dangerous days
of the contempt and perverting of the word of God? that though the Lord feeds
the hungry with good and wholesome food, yet the dainty and full stomach, is
either choked with chafe, or puffed up with wind, that so seeming that which
he is not, he may not see what truly he is, and thereby be both prevented of
sound curing, and withal hardened to destruction. Behold here then some
further light to justify the Providence of God in the ouer-flowing of sin,
amidst so glorious light of the Gospel, Not that the word is any true cause
thereof, but only a means to discover and convince the same: whereby as
through our natural rebellion the more sin is convinced, the more it is
enraged and so increased thereby: so through carnal wisdom, the light being
perverted, becomes a broker unto sin, and thereby proves a further means to
increase and ripen the same. And yet all this in great Justice, and exceeding
Equity. The Lord herein giving the wicked their desires, for the accomplishment
of his righteous decree in their condemnation, in that themselves are their
own caruers in the means there unto. And all this executed by his mighty
word, becoming thus unto the wicked, a savor of death unto death: whereby as
he takes the wise Papist and Atheist in their Craftines, so does he, also
justly confound the Profane Libertine, who while he fathers that upon the Word
which proceeds from his own corrupt sense and application thereof, does
therefore Justify the word in his hardening thereby, and so is Judged by the
Word, while he peruerteth the same, to such ends, as are contrary thereunto.

And thus hitherto for the Justifying of Gods providence in disposing of such
greuious sins, as do accompany and prevail even in the most glorious light
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. 2.
Wherein first an entrance is made by way of Application unto the Particular
sin of Murder, being the proper subject of this Treatise: where 2. The
Progeny and heynousnesse of this sin is discovered and enlarged. 3. The
causes and occasions thereof in general are explained. 4. The Dangerous
Effects, and consequences thereof are detected. And so 5. Such several uses
are propounded as both tend to the preventing of this sin, as also for the
wise suppressing and weeding out thereof.

FRom that which hitherto has been discoursed concerning the Providence of God
in disposing of such multiplicity and increase of sin, in this glorious light
of the Gospel, we may gather these Conclusions.

First, that the Gospel is not properly the cause of these evils, but only 1
the ignorance thereof, 2 perverting the light, to the justifying of sin, or
else our want of love, and so obedience thereunto.

2 That as Ignorance breeding Error, and so Disobedience to the truth, is the
Mother of all that gross wickedness that is discovered thereby: So in that
Popery is the chief and only Patron of ignorance, so it becomes also the very
Chaos of all errors and delusions, and so proves the maine Broker to all gross
and desperate wickedness.

3 That whereas the weapons of Popish warfare are only carnal and devilish
using these as her last refuge, when her Paper bolts, and enchantments will not
prevail, to root out and destroy all her opposits: as being that
Scarletcoloured Whore, whom nothing will secure and satisfy but the blood of
Saints, and all such as shall oppose her Tyranny: Therefore, howsoever all
other sins are harbored in her bosom, as being ashamed to have them known
to the world: Yet this sin of Murder is her chief darling and glorious
sin, whereof she is so far from being ashamed, as that she reigns only
thereby, and triumphs therewith; not only upon her pretended power of the
secular sword, whereby she arrogates supreme authority over life and death: But
especially upon pretense of the Power of her Keys, whereby presuming over the
souls as well as the bodies of men, she thereby confirms and iustifies this
her insatiable thirst of blood, as either serving for the good of their souls,
whose bodies she butchered, or else by cutting off such supposed Leapers,
thereby securing the estates of others. Thus does her Progeny declare the same,
who is of her Father the Ioh. 8. 44.
Devil, that was a murderer from the beginning. So her condition does import
no less, who being an harlot, hunts for the precious life of man: so her very
Name does portend, and glory therein, as being that Apollyon, that Child of
Perdition, ordained of God in his Justice for the plaguing of unbelievers, and
thereby to ripen her own destruction: yea her very Habit proclaims the same,
as being Died bloud-red with the slaughter of the Saints, and her End also
shall manifest the same, when she shall be made drunken with her own blood,
and drowned therein, because she has shed the blood of the Saints.

Behold here these the generation of this bloody sin. Satan, the Arch enemy
of Mankind, envying his happiness, and that especially under the Time of the
Gospel, that he might utterly destroy him both root and branches, head and
tail, soul and body, to this end, abusing the security and Pride of the
Times, begdt thereupon the Whore of Babylon, that great Enchantresse and
deceiuer of the world. And that he might by this Bastard execute his malice
more fully against the Saints, when she came to age and began to revel in
Pride and Sovereignty, then he begat on her this Monstrous and bloody sin:
whereby as the Viper eats out the bowels of her Mother, so the first
adventures of this Cruel brat were achieved against it Damme, one Pope cruelly
making away each other: And being thus thoroughly fleshed and imbrued in her
own blood. Is it any marvel if she spares not other? Is it not just with
God, that while she spares not her own blood, to take away the lines of the
anointed of the Lord, that the Princes of the Earth should secure themselves
in letting out her life blood, and consuming her utterly with fire, that so her
Memorial may perish from the earth. Behold the righteous doom of Iehoua
against the Whore: And observe we wisely herein, the Progeny of this bloody
sin and issue thereof.

Shall we now further way this sin in the Balance of The heynnusnesse and
greatness of this sin. By the Object.
the Sanctuary, that thereby we may discern the greatness thereof, and so be
brought into greater detestation of ye same.

First, then let us measure it, by the object against which is committed: and
here consider we these particulars. First the Murderer, does what lies in
him to take a way the life of God himself, in that he destroys his Lively
Image in Man: not so much, that outward frame and substance of the Body, as if
God were like unto man in his outward feature, as some carnal Capernaites have
dreamed: as those Acts of the Divine soul, which it exercised in the body,
these the boudy hands, do wholly abolish, whereby man in regard of his better
part was made after the Image of God, yea hereby the life of God, his
providence and other acts of his government is in a manner extinguished in that
creature who is thus by cruel hand cut off from that holy regiment.

2. The bloody minded man as he thirsts greedily after blood, so does he lie in
wait privily for his pray, partly fearing to attempt upon equal terms, as
being through his Psalm. 10.
inward guilt a very dastard, and coward; and partly hoping hereby to make
surer work, when all means of prevention shall be forestalled and frustrated.
And does he not hereby prove oftimes a murderer of his brothers soul, taking
him thus on the sudden, and so preventing Repentance. May we not consider
herein the malice of Diasius the Lawyer, who in a deadly hatred to his brothers
soul, first enforced him to deny his faith in Christ, and then instantly took
away his life.

3 The Murder in destroying his Brother, destroys himself, not only in that
his brother wasis own flesh, but in that he necessarily exposes himself
either to be his own Butcher, though the horror of his conscience, as many
have done, or else justly lies open to the sword of the Magistrate, who above
all other sins will not suffer this unrevenged.

Yea, does not the Murderer in sinning willingly, and plotting his cruelty
with deliberation, and desperatenes, does he not herein commonly murder his
own soul, as excluding himself through this wilfulnes, the mercy of God.

What should I speak of those fearful events that have followed the same?
has not the Father murdered the son coming home as a stranger, for lucre
of his money, and when he came to the notice thereof, did he not first murder
his wife, that procured him thereto, and afterward laid violent hands upon
himself? And did not this accident bring his only daughter to an untimely
end, and so the whole root and branches were wholly cut off utterly. And if
here we shall consider, that hereby many a wife has been deprived of her
husband, many children made Orphans, and so exposed to all extremity, does
not the murderer make fair work for the Devil.

And is not the common Parents hereby deprived of many a good member, does not
the common Mother hereby lament the loss of many a Nursing Father, and so is
exposed to combustions and desolations.

Behold here the haynousnesse of this sin by the consideration of the
Object, against which it was committed.

And may we not hereby also guess at it greatness, in regard of the subject
that commits the same?

1 Is not the Murderer a Traitor in the highest degree, both committing
treason against God, whose Image he thus defaceth, and being guilty of
treason, against his Prince and Country, whom he depriueth of their guard and
glory: Is not he a Traitor to his Brother, in surprising him so cruelly? Is he
not a Traitor against himself, in betraying his own life and soul hereby to
the grave and destruction.

Surely, if of all other the hypocrite shall be beaten with many stripes, then
must the Murderer look for his full payment, because he crowcheth and boweth
to onsnare his poor Brother, he kisseth and betrayeth, fawneth and stabbeth,
saluteth and smites, speaks peaceably with his tongue, when his hand is ready
to shed blood: and all this with a breath, to take away breath, and triumph
more securely in his masked wickedness.

What should I say, the Murderer is an Atheist? If he thought the eye of God
were upon him, he durst not thus wilfully deface the Image of God.

The Murderer is an Idolater, in defacing the Image of God, and setting up the
Idol of revenge in his heart, which he adores above all that is called God,
either Gods presence, the Magistrates sword, Gods Image in his brother, his
life in himself.

In a word, as there is not any sin wherein the Murderer has not a share,
so herein is his case most fearful, and desperate, that not sinning of
infirmity but of malice, and digested hatred, as herein horesembles his father
the Devil, so hereby he casts himself desperately upon his malice, to endure
unquenchable torments, for the recompense of his insatiable malice.

Thus by the subject of this grievous sin, we may seek some farther
scantling of the haynousnesse thereof. Causes of murder.


Shall we now proceed to examine this sin by the causes thereof, that so we
may take a further view of the odiousness of the same?

Surely, if we look up to the first Murderer that ever 1 Envy.
was, may we not observe, that Envy provoked him thereunto, because his
brothers was accepted, and his sacrifice was teiected, therefore did Cain
(says the Apostle) stay his brother Abell, that was more righteous then he:
And was not the pride of his heart the occasion of this envy, because 2 Pride.
Caine was not respected according to the conceit of his own worth; therefore
he envied his own brother, that was better respected of God then himself, and
so through envy shed his innocent blood. Was not Joseph sold through envy by
his brethren: Consider we the next Murderer, recorded in the book of God: Was
not Lamech an 3 Adultery.
Adulterer, and thereupon a murderer: either inflamed thereto by jealousy,
which is the rage of a man, and therefore 4 Jealousy.
he will not spare in the day of vengeance, or enraged thereto by lust, which
will admit no partner therein. Did not David's adultery end in murder? 2. Sam.
11. Is not lust 5 Lust.
the firebrand to contentions and murders, Iam. 4. 1. 2. was not lust the
cause of that treacherous murder of the Shechemites? Did not lust bring a
whole Tribe in Israel to this end? And what caused Absolon to seek his fathers
6 Ambition.
life, was it not ambition and desire of sovereignty?

What moved Ahab to take away Naboths life? was it not a covetous desire to
enjoy his Vineyard, was not Judas blinded by covetousness, to betray his
Master to the 7 Covetousness.
death?

And may we not see all these causes concurring together in those cruel Jews,
that murdered the Lord of Life? To conclude.

Is not rage and fury usually the spur hereunto?

Have not bitter words sometimes ended in bloody 7 Rage: 9 Bitter speaking:
broils, and barbarous murders?

And is not drunkenness an ordinary harnenger to this sin, not only
murdering hereby it master suddenly, but also provoking in his cups, to
spill the blood of others; so just is the Lord to meet with sinners in their
kind, that they which make no conscience to abuse and spill the good creatures
of God, serving for the increase of blood, and maintenance of life, but have
been brethren in such horrible sins, shall be given up to shed the blood
of each other, and so deprive themselves of that blessing which they have
abused.

These are some causes and occasions of this grievous sin, unto which, if we
shall add what may be collected from the consideration of the subject
formerly deciphered, we may conclude, that as the want of Gods fear, is a
special cause of falling into this sin, so obstinacy and hardness of heart,
proceeding therefrom, does much inflame and harden therein: yea, an enraged
and guilty soul, does oft-times provoke hereunto, out of hellish despair.

As touching the Effects of this grievous sin, let that suffice which has
been spoken concerning the haynousnesse thereof, only give me leave to add
some cautions herein.

That though it be a grievous sin to shed blood: yet this neither does
debar the Magistrate and his Instruments, Two Cautions.
from executing of Justice against Malefactors, because they are Deputies unto
the Lord herein, and have authority hereunto from his Word; neither does it
privilege any Private man upon any instinct whatsoever, to presume hereunto,
though some inferior calling in the Family has been wickedly thought by some
to warrant the same, because the power of life and death, is in the hands of
the Supreme Magistrate, and such as are immediately deputed from him thereunto.

Though above all other murders, that of our selves is most unnatural and
monstrous: therefore, as we may not justify any such particular sins, by
any example of Sampson, or particular instinct. So we must be marvelous
chary and tender in condemning absolutely their estates, that through violence
of Tentation, or such like distempers, have made away themselves, because
either they were not themselves in that distemper, and so it shall not be
imputed unto them, or it was done, not without some reluctation, and so the
Lord may have mercy upon them: only let us be careful not to imitate them
herein, and so leave them to the Lord, to whom they fall or stand.

Thus of the Effects and Judgment of this sin.

Proceed we now in the last place to consider such Antidotes Antidotes to
prevent murder.
as may prevent the same.

The principal whereof is to maintain peace with our God: because, if our
ways do please him, he will not only To mainetain peace with God.
make our enemies to be at peace with us, that we may not fear to be provoked,
either by bridling their corruptions, as he did sometimes Labans and Esaus, or
turning their hearts toward us, as he has done the hearts of many
persecutors. But will also incline our hearts to be at peace with our enemies,
either by giving us wisdom to overcome their evil with good, or affording us
Patience to bear with our enemies; or sustaining us with meekness, neither to
provoke, nor be provoked by them.

Now we shall wisely Maintain peace with God. How,

1 If we walk closely with him according to his will, with all power and
diligence, not leaning to our own Wisdom, but relying on his revealed word,
and not presuming of ought either beyond, or short thereof.

2 If, though we fail and slip daily (as who can clear himself therein) yet
we shall daily judge our selves, and by repentance renew our covenant with the
Lord, warring daily with our corruptions, and maintaining the spiritual
combat, hereby we may preserve our Peace with God.

3 If, seeing our best works are mixed with such corruption, that if the Lord
should be severe to mark what is done amiss, even when we do our best, we
shall never be able to abide it, we shall therefore daily deny our best
righteousness, and labor to be found in Christ, renewing our right in him:
hereby we shall renew and Maintain our Peace with God.

4 And yet seeing the grace of God shall be sufficient for us, in what soever
wants or extreamities may befall, if now we can in patience possess our
souls, not repining at the dispensation of our God, but being contented
therewith in all occasions, we shall so hunger after what we want, as that we
can be thankful for that which we have, and so husband the same with all
vprightnes and diligence to the glory of our God, and the general good: this
is an excellent means to maintain Peace with God, Lastly, that we may
maintain Peace with God, let us still nourish enmity against the world:
because the Amity of the World is Enmity against God: so using the good
therein, that we hate the evil thereof, and so using the good that we trust
not therein, so enjoying the things thereof, as that we are still ready to part
with them at the Pleasure of the giver: accounting all things as doing, that we
may win Christ, and yet by our wise husbandry, laying up a good foundation by
them, against the day of Christ.

Thus may we maintain peace with God.

A second preservative against this bloody sin is to maintain peace with
Men, I say so far, as possible we may to have peace with all men.

This we shall do,

If we be careful to give unto each his due, according to their callings and
occasions, as comfort to whom comfort belongs, tribute to whom tribute. etc.

2 If we can in all wrongs, look up to God, and so leave vengeance unto him,
as considering we have deserved in his Justice a thousand fold more.

4 If we be quick in provoking to goodness, and recompensing the same, and
slow to wrath or any such occasions as may breed discord, and such
consequences, as follow thereupon.

5 Being wise, not to further them in sin, or smother the same, unless it be
of infirmity, where there is some sign of repentance, as knowing that brethren
in evil will prove whippes to each other. They have not loved so dearly, till
their turns be served, as when they have their will, they will hate most
deadly. Witness Ammon his dealing with Thamar his sister.

6 Lastly, that we may keep peace with men, be we very wise in ruling our
tongues, avoiding rash censuring, vpbraiding, taunting, etc, whereby anger is
kindled, and revenge provoked.

Thus may we maintain peace with men.

A third Preservative against this Monstrous sin, is wisdom to avoid the
occasions thereof.

Which are those before touched.

As Pride, Envy, Lust, Jealousy, Ambition, Covetousness, Rage, Bitter speaking,
Drunkenness, and the like.

Unto which we may add these that follow.

1. Evil company as being a special firebrand as to all other sins, so this:
how many murders have been hatched and atchiued by the Opportunity and Benefit
hereof.

2 Discontent whereby the mind being inwardly at war with it self, cannot be
at peace with any other, but has this only desperate remedy to ease it own
fever, even to fall upon any that stands in it way, friend nor foe, nothing
comes amiss.

3 Superstition as bewitching the heart with such insatiable love, that it
thinks no cost to dear, no loss to great for the satisfying of it will
worship, no though it were to cause their children to pass through the Fire,
though it were to launch themselves with knives, and offer up their bodies for
the sin of their souls. Math. 6. 5. 6.

4 Unlawful recreation or abuse and excess in lawful.

Thus may we prevent this bloody sin.

Lastly, also take we some good directions how to weed it out. and here there
are.

Some instructions for the Magistrate, that seeing the sword is put in his
hands, therefore he beware how he suffer the Murderer to escape, least he
hear that sentence, because thou have suffered a man to escape that was
appointed to death, therefore thy life shall go for his life, thy people for
his people.

2 Whereas there has been of ancient time (when trialls of titles depended
rather upon valor then truth) an ordinary manner of disciding great
differences, by single combat between two parties, this as it is utterly
unlawful, and so no better then murder, because they are not equal means to
discide controversies. And 2. It falls out that he is Conqueror before men,
who is guilty before God: therefore the Magistrate must in no wise give way to
these, lest he be guilty of the blood that is spilt hereby.

3 Much less may he tolerate those single combats, that rise upon quarrels,
and vain pleas of reputation, Valor, disgraceful speeches, etc. because they
have neither any sound warrant from the Word; no, not in any reason, or equity
may be endured.

4 As for Sanctuaries and Popish Receptacles, for Murderers, neither may the
Magistrate allow of these, because the Lord has expressly commanded, That such
an one shall be taked from his Alter and die, Exodus 21. 14. according as Ioab
was served in the like case, 1. Kings 2. 24.

5 Seeing populous assemblies, under pretense of Recreations, are usually
occasions of Quarrels, and so of murders: therefore the Magistrate must be
marvelous wise, in giving an Inch, lest the People take an Ell, rather
studying to restrains the unbridled corruption of the people, with such as may
humble the flesh, then to yield them any occasion, to turn their liberty into
wantonness, remembering that the pretense of such liberty, has been the
color to draw unlawful assemblies together, and so provoke to Rebellion, and
great blood shed. Consider the blood that was spilt in jest, when Ioab and
Abner met together with their companies, and tell me whether that jest were not
in earnest, that merriment, madness.

Thus for the Magistrate.

For Private men, let them wisely observe those rules, delivered formerly for
prevention of this sin, and the same will also enable them to weed it out.

And thus hitherto of this bloody sin, together with the Nature,
Haynousnesse, Causes and Means to prevent the same.

It follows now that we make some particular application hereof unto the
instance in hand, that so we may discern the truth of this Description,
confirmed in this example: And therein wonder at the wisdom and providence of
God, in permitting so horrible a wickedness, and after so long concealing
thereof, in due season discovering the same.

CHAPTER. 3.
Of the particular Murder at Halsworth. And first of the occasions and causes
thereof. 2 Of the Actors and Accessaries therein. 3 Of the Parties that were
Murdered. 4 Of the Manner and Circumstances how they were made away. 5 Of the
Means to conceal the Murder being committed. 6 And diverse observations
considerable on either side.

Having thus discoursed of the Nature of Murder in general, It now remains
that we examine the Particular instance that has occasioned this Discourse.
Namely, the Murder that was lately discovered and convicted at the Last Assize
at Berry.

Wherein first offers it self to our consideration such circumstances as
occasioned and drew out this sin. The Maine Root, and ground whereof, was
this.

One M. Norton dwelling in the Town of Halsworth in high Suffolk, being a man
(though of fair possessions) yet of a very foul and evil favor: Both in
regard of his Profession, as being no better then a Church-Papist, the most
dangerous subject the Land has: As also in regard of his practice being
suitable to his profession, and therefore of necessity debosht and desolate,
having his neighbors vineyard lying by him, cast his eye upon it; and having
got some hold in the Land of his Neighbor, Widow Leeson, either being
morgaged unto him, or forfeited upon the morgage, that he might clear the land
wholly to himself from the widow and her Issue. First attempted by cunning
sleights, and secret oppressions: yea, by feined kindnesses, as feeding them
with money, and to draw the widow, and her children to his Lure: or else to
inwrap them so in his snares, that upon any occasion he might either curb
them, or make pray of them. To this end when otherwise he could not bring them
to his bent, upon a pretended Action, he cast the eldest of them into Prison,
that so his misery might terrify the rest: where either by some secret
stratagem, or else (as the most credible report is) being debarred of necessary
sustenance, his friends not being suffered to minister unto him, and his
(Iaylor happily being feed to restrain him thereof) he pined even through
want, and so perished in the Goal.

This was the first Scoene of this bloody Tragedy.

Whereon, before we go further, let us pause a little, and observe somewhat
thereout for our better instruction, both to justify the former discourse of
Murder, as also to prevent the like ends in our selves, laying to our hearts
such things, as may be gathered hence.

First observe we the Root, and foundation of this misery, and that the
rather, because it is not our own conceit, but the sensure of the right
Honorable and thrice Reverend Judge, who upon Nortons appearing at the Bar,
did so divinely challenge him, that he was the root, of this practice, the
other, that were his instruments therein, were but the branches springing up
therefrom, he was the sword that cut those innocents lives asunder, his agents
were but the hands to execute therewith. This root thus branded and laid open
in his colors. Observe we further therein these Particulars, 1 his inward
condition, as being a Papist in heart, and so, as making no bones of any sin,
so especially less sticking at the sin of blood, as being the glory of his
Idol, and prop to maintain the same: and therefore honored with no less then
the imputation of merit. And yet withal being a Protestant in show, that so
he might the better color and shuffell up his sin, and with the harlot wipe
his mouth, as if he had done no iniquity, whereby 1 we may take the true
scantling of a branded Papist, that though he be humble like the lamb, his
pretense be salvation, yet he Revel. 13. 11.
speaks like the dragon, nothing but blood and fire, when he cannot deceive
otherwise, he pretends like the harlot, offerings of peace and payment of
vows, yet her ways go Pro. 7.
down to hell, and her paths to destruction. And so we may be advised to
look for no better at their hands, who eat of our bread and go up into the
house of God with us, the^ as David complained of such treacherous friends,
even to Psalm. 55.
lift up the heel against us, and if they can do it finely, even to Poison us
with the host which they have consecrated for our welfare. And therefore of all
other to be most jealous of such hollow friends.

2 From the inward condition of this bitter Root, also proceed we further to
his outward estate. And that first in regard of his means, being of fair
reuenew, sufficient if he could have been content to his bountefull
mantenance, yet if we consider withal his abuse of this large portion, by
royoting and prodigality, we may easily discern even great fear of want in
much abundance, and thereby imagine what such fear of want may provoke unto,
even an unlawful desire of what is not our own, as a just punishment for the
abuse of our own, and so as opportunity and power is on our hand, such an
effecting our desires, as by the close conuayance thereof, may be free from
blame or shame. Behold here then the causes and prouocations to this bloody
sin, Luxury threatens want, and fear of want breeds covetousness,
covetousness leads us blindfold to make pray where we fasten first, and
opposition begets murder to conceal, or Justify the same. Thus Ahabs
prodigality in maintayning Baals Priests, prouokes him through divine justice
to covet his Neighbors vineyard, yt so his violation of Gods honor might be
justly avenged by the cry of ye innocent blood, which he so cruelly spilled,
and that he might cloak and justify his devouring thereof, the blood of
Naboth must write the deed, and pretense of religion, and iustce must peale and
confirm the same. And thus our Ahabs prodigality in maintayning happily such
croaking frogs as run up and down the world to make combustions and
massacres, prouokes him to covet his Neighbor Leesons vinyard, that lay pat
for his tooth, and that he might more securely make pray thereof, the blood of
her children must confirm the same, when otherwise by cunning and fairer
means they will not be brought thereto, and pretense of law, and equity must
color the fact, that so it may pass current with men, what is abominable in
the sight of God. Whereby we may learn, as to walk frugally in that
competency which God has allowed us, least otherwise a great deal, may prove
too little, and that in smallest measure we may be content, remember we that
our lives consists not in abundance, but in the blessing of God, who makes a
small thing sufficient, where he affords no more, laboring Math. 6. Psalm. 37.
with all diligence to husband that little we have, that so in the hand of the
diligent may be plenty, whereas the revenues of the sluggard do soon fade and
molter away. A thing of very fearful experience, for the most part in our
Gentry, that as no revenue will usually serve their luxury and excess, so
they are so fine fingred that they cannot labor, and so high minded they are,
that they are ashamed to beg, and therefore their last refuge is either to
turn Cheators in gaming, or huntsmen on the high way, or Pandors to baudy
houses, or which is the fairest, Laysie Abby-lubbers, I should say Almes-men,
to be fatted up in the sty, and hardened to destruction.

Before I pass this first Scoene, observe we yet one thing more in this
bitter root, namely, his manner of proceeding in this Bloody Tragedy. At the
first very Fair, and charitable to the outward show, feeding them with money,
and feasting them with good cheer, sorting them with boon companions, to
pass the time away mercily, but indeed, to cheat them of their money, and
make them secure: At the next bout, more roughly yet conuayed with great
cunning, and secrecy, under pretense of Law, casting into prison, and if this
will not do the feat, then at the last, murder and confusion: just so dealt
Pharaoh with the Israelits, and so this bloody Pharaoh dealt with these
Widows children, and surely such are all the ways of sin, such and no Use.
better, is the success of all sinners, though the wine be pleasant in the
cup, and sweet in the going down, yet in the end it bites like a serpent,
and kills like a Coskatrice, Pro. 23.
though Iael inuit Sisera into her Tent, and lull him asleep, yet in the end
she fastens him with a nail to the ground. Look we therefore to the end of
sin, and so the sweet beginning shall not deceive us, and distrust we then
the wicked most, when they most fawn upon us, because though their lips drop
honey, yet swords are in their hearts, and they may be sheathed in our bowels,
before we are aware of them.

Thus of the first Scoene of this Bloody Tragedy.

The second follows, more bloody and desperate. The next son, John Leeson,
laying claim to his Inheritance, has his mouth stopped with a good round
sum of money, and withal, a guard is set upon him, of bloody and desperate
villains, yet masked under pretense of good fellows and acquaintance, both to
fleece him of his money, and make him sure enough from making Hugh-and-cry
after them. By these he is encountered, and trained to an Alehouse up at the
Mill-hill, a place remote from much company, and so fit to do mischief, here
his head is filled with drink, and his mind secured by sports and gaming, from
fear of danger, here he is detained by these means till the night, and then
he is knocked on the head, and stripped of his money, and his body is dragd to a
great pond, not far off, and is fastened in the deepest part thereof with a
stake and block thereupon, that so it might not rise up to discover the
wickedness.

Behold here first the progress and increase of sin, Use.
if secret oppression will not prevail, if cunning will not carry it, then
open violence shall: if there be no remedy, then blood must quench the thirst.
Thus David when he had abused Vriah, by taking away his wife, howsoever he
would feign have spared his servants life, by making him an instrument to
conceal his Adultery, calling him from the Camp to that end, giving him wine
to make him forward to his liberty: yet when he saw these means would not
prevail, then his last refuge was to take away Vriahs life, that so in his
end, his sin also might seem to dye, which indeed, was the only means to
make it cry loud for vengeance. And let this advise sinners to prevent the
beginnings of sin, lest when they would, they cannot stay the rage thereof.
If yet through carnal wisdom, they will still go forward, hoping by one
sin to hide another, let them know, that their wisdom will prove their
confusion, seeing while they thus ripen their sins, they in the end cry loud
in the ears of the Lord for vengeance, who will in due time recompense
innocent blood upon the shedders thereof: so David's Children re-payd the price
of the Blood of his servants, and Nortons blood is like to answer for the blood
of his neighbors children, as Lands has done already. Lastly, observe we
here, the Justice of God in making partakers in sin Instruments to punish
each other. For to speak a little of those, that were convicted of this
murder, what were Land and Worlish any other, then Profane and loose persons,
having sold them to do wickedness, even to any that would hire them
thereunto: As for Land, why, he was Nortons Instrument from time to time, to
serve his Writs, and bring any into his snares and cruel clutches: nay, he was
the Devils Factor, to draw fools from drunkenness to shame and spoil, as
himself confessed even upon the Gallows. To speak more sparingly of Worlish,
because the Lord has yet respited him to repentance, in hope that he will
further discharge his conscience and satisfy the world, in the more full
discovery of what yet lies in darkness: Yet as there is sufficient to
condemn him at least, as an accessory, even out of his own mouth, as shall
hereafter appear: so were he not guilty of this sin: yet, as he confessed
on the Gallows, his loose and prohane life were sufficient to bring him to
that shameful end. Such were these parties that are hitherto convicted of the
murder, whereof the one is already executed, the other only respited for his
own, and the public good. And what were they that fell into their bloody
hands? surely fit companions for such Copesmates, brethren in evil, companions
in profaneness, drunkards, and what not; and therefore justly dying in their
own sins, howsoever unjustly, in regard of the instruments and manner
thereof, yet justly, I say, by the righteous doom of the Lord, who makes
brethren in evil, instruments of each other punishment, that as Land and
Worlish were the means to bring them to their ends, so their deaths has, and
will be the overthrow of their murderers.

Thus of the second Scoene of this cruel Tragedy.

The third follows yet more fearful and bloody.

About two years after a third son renues the suite Thomas Leeson.
for the Land, and having procured a suppena to bring the Oppresser into the
Chancery, carries his sister a long with him to serve the same, where being
discovered hanging the same at Nortons door, because he either could not, or
durst not meet his person, as being through former guilt become more jealous
and outrageous, they were both seized on, (I hope you may imagine by the former
bloody hands) and so (as the pond has now discovered) being cruely made away,
were cast thereunto and staked down therein, as their brother was, that so the
fact might be buried with them for ever: so insatiable is the thirst of blood,
when once the sweet thereof is tasted, that still the wicked must be drinking
deeper thereof: so desperate is the estate of sinners, that they must plunge
themselves still more deeply in wickedness, so foolish is sin to mend it
self by the increase thereof, yea herein most foolish, when it seems to be
most wise, that while it seeks to prevent most securely it discovery, that so
it may ease the conscience of the guilt thereof, the more it increases the
guilt, by the secret conuayance of sin, even as the fire the more it is
suppressed the more it strives to break out, yea the more man in wisdom
labors the hiding of sin, and flatters himself in the security thereof, the
more he prouokes the Lord to discover his skirts, the more he hastens himself
to righteous vengeance, that so the Lord may have the only glory of his
discovery and confusion, who out of his secret conuayance spares not to
challenge ye providence of God, as if he saw them not or could not disappoint
them. Thus while the wicked say peace and safety we have made all sure, then
shall a sudden destruction come upon them as the travail upon a woman 1.
These. 5. 5.
with child, and they shall not be able to escape. Thus when Babylon says,
she sits as a Queen and shall see no evil, then her plagues shall come upon
her in one day, so righteous is the Lord that judges the whore. Well thus
these poor souls are now buried in the pond, yea a block is laid upon them yt
they shall not rise again. The murderers they sing care away, and revel with
their spoil, the world is at rest, no notice taken of them, no missing them by
their Friends, who were informed that Ireland had received them, no seeking
them by their enemies, who knew well enough where they were. If guilt of sin
troubled, yet fear of discovery bit it in, and policy sought to drown the
conscience by surfeiting in sin: that so Peace might be at home, as all was
quiet abroad. And so four years are passed over in great iollity and
security. And by this time even the memory of these murdered souls was buried
with them. What now remained? Surely, where man usually ends, there God
begins: and while the wicked slept securely, the vengeance of God was
bestirring it self. Behold, says the Prophet, when the Lord makes inquisition
for blood, he remembers Psalm. 9. 13. 14.
it, and forgets not the complaint of the poor: The blood of these murdered
souls cried loud in the ears of the Lord. from the bottom of the Pond for
vengeance, even while the bloud-suckers sang a requiem to their souls. And the
Lord awakened at length out of the sleep of his patience, discovering the
murdered by his own Immediate Arm, and by their discovery, discovered also
the murderers, and so brought them in due season to their just trial and
confusion, as shall appear most wonderfully in the next Chapter. Which before
we enter into for conclusion of this present, and preparation to the discovery.
A special Case of Conscience comes here to be discussed, and resolved.

Namely, that seeing murder is so crying a sin, that it calls for speedy and
continual vengeance in the ears of the Lord, how notwithstanding it comes to
pass, that the Lord differs the discovery and recompen^e thereof, many years;
yea, ages after. That the Lord does thus defer this discovery and execution,
is not only apparent by the cry of those souls under the Alter, slain for
the Word of God, How long Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge Revel. 6. 9
and avenge our blood on them that dwell upon the earth. But also by the
revenge upon Saul's Posterity, for his slaughter of the Gibeonites, which was
not executed many years after, and the histories of our age do witness no
less, that many murders have lain hid, some 20. some ten years, some more,
some shorter time: If we desire to be satisfied in the true reasons of this
Divine providence, 1 some may be given in respect of the murderers: 2 others
in regard of the murdered: 3 some concern the Information of the World: and 4
some immediately concern God himself.

Concerning the murderers, the providence of God is wonderful in deferring
the discovery of their sin, even to a long time after, for these Reasons:

Some tending to their good.

Others tending to their further condemnation.

Those that tend to their good, are

First, that by the patience of God, in deferring their discovery and
vengeance, they might be prepared mean while to repentance, and so be better
fitted to what end the Lord has appointed, Romans 4. 2.

Secondly, By the patience of the Lord toward them, if they will not make use
of it for themselves, yet hereby they may be further serviceable for the
common good, in those places and callings wherein God has set them: as for
education of their Posterity, for the maintaining of peace and order abroad,
yea happily for the saving of others, howsoever themselves are reproved. So
was Judas a long time concealed from others, though long before known to his
Master, for the execution of his calling, and serving his Lord therein.

Reasons tending to the condemnation of these bloodsuckers, are,

1 That the Lord forbeares the discovery of them, not only to make them
Instruments of his further Justice, in perverting and hardening others, but
also,

2 This forbearance is a means to harden them in their sin, and drown them
in se^urity, that so their surprizall being more sudden, may prove more
deadly and fatal to them.

3 Hereby they are also nourished in their Atheism and contempt of Gods
providence, and so provoke the Lord in due time to avenge himself in their
confusion.

As for the Murdered, there may be some Reasons of Gods silence and Patience,
even in regard of them. 1 That the crying of blood from the earth so long
deferred to vengeance, may be a Simbole unto them, of an answer from God at
length, because no cry shall be in vain, which he has warranted in this
word. 2 That the cry of Blood, though a long time deferred, yet at length
answered, may Type unto them, their resurrection from the dead. The case herein
being much alike. That as the blood though consumed, yet has a loud cry for
vengeance, and shall in due time be recompensed; so the bodies, though rotten
in the grave, yet because they rest in hope, do therefore in their Manner cry
for their raising up again, and so in due time shall obtain their desire.
Even as the creature made subject unto vanity, not willingly, but by reason of
him that has subjected the same in hope, does therefore earnestly wait Romans
8. 19 20.
for the Revelation of the sons of God, that it also may be delivered from
her bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Children of God.

Touching the World. This Patience of God respects it also. And that, to try
it affection to Gods Justice, and such as are taken away, whither they find any
want of them, whither they think the World is not well rid of them, and that
they may be heard of no more, and such like.

But the maine ground of this Providence is in regard of God himself: and that
in these respects.

As first to Justify his great Patience, to such horrible sinners: whom he is
so far from taking in their sins, that he respites them many times to
commit greater evils, that so he may make them more inexcuseable in the day of
vengeance.

2 His wisdom is herein magnified, that by respiting the wicked in such
horrible sins, the guilt of the conscience is hereby so increased, and at
length enraged, that though all other means fail, yet their own tongues
shall be forced to bewray them, to ease the inward pangs, and so to Justify
the Lord even out of their own mouths.

3 Lastly, hereby the Lord reserues unto himself alone the glory of his
Justice: that when all sides are hushed, ye murderers secure, the murdered
forgotten, the world careless, all hope past: Then does the righteous Lord
make himself known by executing of vengeance, to the stopping of the mouth of
Atheism, that says, There is no God, because the wicked escape scot-free, and
to the opening of the mouths of his children in that gracious acknowledgment,
Verily there is a reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a God that Psa.
58. 12.
judges the earth.

4 And does not the Lord discover herein his absolute power? that seeing the
times and seasons are only in his hands: and therefore when he sees a
convenient time he will execute vengeance: that it may appear, his thoughts,
are Psalm. 75. 2.
not our thoughts, therefore howsoever we may think every moment too much,
wherein vengeance is deferred: Yet the Lord, will defer the time, that it may
appear to be at his dispose, and yet will do it in the most convenient time,
which may make most for his glory, and affecting of a secure and faithless
generation.

And this may serve for the resolving of this case of Conscience.

And thus far of this third Scaene of this bloody Tragedy.

Concerning (as the two former) the Parties that were Murdered, together with
the manner thereof, and means to conceal the same.

Wherein howsoever all was done, that carnal wisdom could devise: and the
patience of God for six whole years together, seemed to applaud, and subscribe
thereunto. So that now it might seem, the Tragedy was finished, and all
further expectation prevented: Yet as this was the Lords time to put to his
own hand for the discovery of this horrible crime: So when he began once, each
creature in his place ministered graciously unto him, for the full manifestation
and conviction thereof. Attend therefore in the fear of God, Three other
Scaenes of this Tragedy. Wherein now the Murderers are to play their parts
upon the Stage of Justice. And if ever thou desire to be (...)tisfied in the
wonderful Providence of God, both in the discovery of Murder, and challenging
of the murderers, by a strange and secret hand: if ever thou would observe a
full and Honorable trial of so foul a crime: attend I say in the Name of God,
to that which follows, and if thou be not fully satisfied in all these, I
must needs conclude, that either thou want understanding to discern the
Power and Wisdom of the Lord, or thou want an heart, to adore, and
magnify the same. Only my desire is, that thou woldst not stumble at my weak
handling thereof, thereby, to challenge so excellent matter, but rather hereby
to prize the worth thereof, as if it could not be sufficiently handled. And if
thou discernest any spark of true light amidst so great darkness and
corruption, any power of God in so great infirmity, my earnest desire is, that
hereby thou would ascribe unto God the glory of his mercy, that so thou may
begin, where I have ended, and still inform and inflame thy heart with such
wonderful works of God.

CHAP. 4.
Where first of the Reason why, howsoever other sins come after Judgment,
yet this sin of Murder is seldom left undiscovered. 2. Of the Many ways
whereby the Lord has discovered Murder from time to time, with diverse
instances thereof. 3. That it was the Finger of God, that detected this blood.
4. Of the Manner and Instruments employed herein. 5. And the several Uses to
be made thereof.

HJtherto of the first part of this Tragedy, concerning the parties that were
murdered, and that exibited in three several Scoenes, according to the
several degrees whereby this murder was committed.

The second part of this Tragedy now follows, concerning the discovery and
judgment of the murderers. And this also is enlarged in four several
Scoenes. The first whereof contains the discovery of the murder, and
murderers.

The second expresses their Judgment and Conviction.

The third, their Judgment and Condemnation.

The fourth, represents their righteous Execution.

As in the little world, the soul of Man, the understanding leads the
Conscience; and the Conscience leads the Affection. So is it in the soul of
the greater world, I mean Justice, Plato in Timeo.
and the due execution thereof: There must be first a discovery of the Crime,
before it be convicted, and it must be convicted, before it be censured. For as
Conscience without Knowledge is blind, and erroneous, so the will and
affections without conscience, are perverse and exorbitant: Even so conviction
of sin, before it be discovered, produces erroneous Judgment, and
sentencing of sin before it be convicted, is no better then to pervert
Justice, and condemn the innocent: And yet as it cannot be denied, but as the
thunder breaks out before the lightning, so where Case of the Guise justified,
and Marquess D'ancre.
the party delinquent is of that exorbitant power, that it cannot stand with
the safety of a diseased state, to question him Iudicially, because his
greatness may either outbraue or suppress Justice: If in this extremity
sentence and execution, anticipate legal trial, as this is to be ascribed to
the necessity of the state, so it may well stand with the prerogative of the
Prince, who in such exigents, may perform Martial Law: And this also
answerable to the divine Justice, who in such like cases, upon it Prerogative
royal has executed upon exorbitant sinners, before their legal As in the
case of Nadab and Abiu, Cosbi and Zimri.
conviction, and justified his Ministers in the like executions. But as these
extraordinary cases, may not prescribe to such persons, and offenses as are
ordinary, so we may observe, that the wise Lord in all ordinary trials, has
kept this ordinary course: As first to discover, though not so much for his
own information, (unto whom all things past are present, nothing so hid as is
not known before it is done, much moreafter) as for our satisfaction: so also
in the second plate, to convince sin being discovered, and then to execute
upon the same. And even the same course has our wise and glorious God taken,
in meeting with bloody and crying sins. Long has the blood of these
slaughtered souls cried for vengeance from the bottom of the pond: Long had
the Lord deserted the answering of their cry: but when he saw a convenient
time, he rowsed up himself, He put on righteousness as a breast plate, and an
Helmet of Salvation upon his head, and he put on a garment of vengeance for a
clothing, and was clad with Zeal as a cloak: and so according to their deeds
he repayed fury to the murderers, recompenee to his enemies. If we doubt that
it was the Lords doing, that his only hand, discovered the Murder, and
detected the murderers, harken I pray you to the discourse that follows: and
if we shall not herein acknowledge the immediate finger of God, it is because
there is no true knowledge of God in us. You have hitherto heard the raze of
the Murdered, how they were brought to their end, how disposed in their end,
the bottom of the pond was their Grave, and oblivion was their Motto, and there
I hope was an end of their part of the Tragedy. Now harken, I beseech you, to
the second part of the Tragedy concerning the Murderers.

And here first are presented unto you, as in a dumb show, the carcases of the
Murdered raised out of the Pond by a Divine Instinct, and in a strange and
wonderful manner, discovering and fastening upon the Murderers, and these be
the Actors in this first Scoene. Will you hear the truth thereof confirmed by
the story, then hearken I say again unto that which follows, and conclude
with the worthy Judge, that it was Digitus Dei, the immediate Finger of God.

The Pond wherein these bodies lay (you must imagine had a Master) that
occupied the Farm and ground wherein it was, unto whose custody the Lord
having committed in trust these slaughtered souls, does now require of him the
discovery and restoring of them, for the satisfying of his Justice. But would
you know the manner how the Lord required them of Him? mark I beseech you, and
wonder at the wisdom and Power of God herein. Because the blood of the slain
could not cease crying for vengeance, till they were recompensed: Therefore the
Farmer can have no Peace in his mind, till he cleanse the Pond, that so their
blood may be discovered. Will you see the Hand of God more clearly in rejecting
the wisdom of the flesh, and subduing all oppositions, to serve his will?
Consider then I pray you the sequel hereof. The Farmer cannot rest till the
Pond be cleased. Why? His own profit was against it, because it would be great
charge and no benefit to him, that had but a short time to enjoy it. And
therefore his Wife and Friends are also against it, as consulting no Further
then with flesh and blood. But God was for it, and therefore he must be for
God, or else he shall not be for himself, nothing will go gown well with him,
till this be done. And therefore he is resolute, it shall be done. Well at
length, with much ado, he sets workmen about it, but God will not be served by
deputies in so glorious a work: he that had the sour, while it was not done,
shall have the sweet and comfort in doing it himself. And therefore when
workmen give over, as dispairing of the success, or being happily discouraged
by friends, Himself, with his Brother, sets upon the clensing of the Pond.
Surely we must imagine, not for any profit he expected thereby, for he could
not finish it without great cost and loss too: but the maine ground was, his
mind must be satisfied, nay to look up higher, Gods justice must be satisfied,
that so the glory thereof may be reserved entirely to himself alone: and
therefore when that is satisfied, his mind is at quiet, and his labor is at an
end: and so the fear of his charge, and loss graciously prevented. Shall we
observe how the Lord brought all this about, and that with great speed, and
wisdom for his glory. Oh consider and wonder at the Wisdom of God herein.
The work is begun in the likeliest place for labor and carriage, but the Lord
will spare the poor man's labor, he means not to put him to that cost, as to
lade and cleanse the whole Pond; but only to discover the Murdered therein.
And yet he means to abase Him, in this discovery, even by the bruit beasts
that has no understanding. Will you see the proof hereof in the sequel of
the Story, Oh mark again, and wonder at the wisdom of God herein. Our
workmen by this time had made work for the Teame: The Horses they are brought
to the place of their loading. But this is not the Load the Lord will have
carried out: and therefore the Horses will not stay here, howsoever they smart,
but away they must, where God will have them: Man now must be lead by them,
because they are lead by God, that so the glory of the discovery may be taken
from man, and ascribed wholly unto the Lord. And so after much trial and
leading them about the Pond, they stay at length against the Place where the
Bodies lay, and so gave aim to the workmen to renew their labor. And did they
find it lost labor, to attend the Lord? No surely, they had not labored many
houers, until they light upon the Bodies that made amends for all. The
Carcases are found, Time and corruption having lest nothing else, and so the
Murder being discovered, the mind is at quiet, and the labor is at an end,
farther cost is spared, and God has the glory, in the use of foolish and
brutish means. Thus of the first part of this first Scoene, namely, the
discovery of the Murder.

Proceed we now unto the second part hereof, namely, the discovery of the
murcherers. And herein also observe with me a wonderful and immediate hand of
God.

Had these Parties been newly slain, their blood is usually a means to peach
their murder; or had their flesh not been wasted, and countenance remained,
this might have given some light to discern their quality and condition; and
so to have made some way for the finding out of the murderers, but that
carkases only of bare bones, and those happily disordered, should have any
remaindures left, whereby they might be known what they were from others, and
so be means to make known the murderers, seeing this is contrary to all
sense, and reason, it must needs be ascribed to to the finger of God, even in
such impossibility yielding some light to the discovery both of the murdered,
who they were, and also of the murderers. Will you see the proof hereof in
the sequel of the story, oh then stir up your hearts to wonder at the
providence of God. The carcases being thus found, and so murder being
discovered, yet the great matter still remained, that Gods justice must be
satisfied in finding out the offenders; and that these may be discovered, it is
very fit to know who the murdered were, that so from them and theirs, matter
may be gathered to sent out the murderers. The next thing therefore now to be
done, is to find out who the murdered were. And because this neither
concerns, nor indeed is ^astly to be compassed of a private brain: therefore
the Magistrate next adjoining, is acquainted therewith, whose pains and
wisdom in this bustnes may with honor be remembered.

He taking notice of this discovery, causes the carcases to be taken charily
out the mud, and using the help of a Chyrurgeon herein, caused each carcass to
be laid out severally by it self, in it proportion, to far as the bones
would afford it, and so making special fearch into each carcass, concerning
fractures, or any such defect, that might give any light for the particular
knowledge of them, somewhat here appeared that by the help of further
intelligence, gave some inkling hereunto. To this end the inhabitants
thereabout were called unto this spectacle, and so inquiry made amongst them
concerning such parties, as were missing within compass of remembrance:
amongst these the mother of these children calls to mind hers, that have been
missing, and with all remembers, what has been formerly related to her
concerning the same, both how they were gone for Ireland, which was the
general voice, but especially she remembers what Worlich, one of the
Accessaries (if not a Principal) had told her many months before, that he had
seen her son in the Low countries, and was the last man that had him by the
hand alive and dead. Hereupon suspicion, and so much the rather, because upon
the discovery of these in the pond, Worlich played least in sight, and flying to
London, was there apprehended upon this evidence: but yet the day was but
dawning, more light shortly appeared, by the wisdom of the Justice, the
carcases were searched, and measured: And hereupon question made to the Mother
what marks she could discover to own them. See the wisdom of God herein: all
outward tokens might seem to fail, yet one remained; her son John was high
of stature, six foot long, this she calls to mind, and ownes him thereby,
and so the measure of the carcass gives him her. And so one spark begets
another. Now the remembers again, that her son John had two teeth broken out
of his upper iaw by a former accident, and the scull being searched approues
the same: and so both marks concurring upon the same carcass, the length and
iaw mark: hereby undoubted conclusion was made, that, that carcass was her
son John's, and thus by the one discovered, the other were gessed also to be
hers, the brother and sister that 2 years after were cast into the pond,
because they lay in one grave together, and therefore were like to lie in one
belly: and so collected, that they that murdered the former, made also these
latter away, as using one common grave to bury them in. Now all the mystery
was, who should be the murderer of the first: suspicion there might be in
regard of Norton, and his dealings with them formerly, as also of such
instruments employed by him to molest and oppress them. Among whom the
special was Land the weauer, a man observed not only to be employed in
business to molest them, but also to insuiuate himself often in to their
companies, and to draw them to much excess of riot in gaming and drunkenes.
These things were now called to mind by many, to nourish suspicion: but yet
this was not sufficient directly to chalendge the party. Behold then the
wisdom and power of God, in making the Party to challenge himself: and that
by that means, whereby he sought to hide his sin, and elude justice. For
hearing that such a scull wanted such teeth, and so was thereby owned by the
mother, his guilty conscience draws him to the pond, and yet in a show of
wisdom, to bewray him the more: he hopes if that mark be defaced, the
evidence will be confounded: and therefore he takes away the scull with him, and
fool as he was, that might have knocked them out himself, yet first goes to a
barbar to pluck out more teeth, that he might be a witness against him: and
that out of the mouth of two or three witnesses the truth might be confirmed,
lo the barbars tool shall not do the feat: and therefore vengeance sends this
murder to the smith, and he at length serves his turn, to witness against
him. And yet the sort must heap more coals one his head, and that in a show
of wisdom to bewray himself further: he comes to a woman thereby (that knew
him well enough and had observed his coming and going from the Pond and doings
there) yet I say he comes like a stranger, as hearing of such strange news,
and desirous to satisfy his curious eye therewith, enquires of her, where
these carcases lay, she replies unto him, that he need make no such enquiry,
he was better acquainted therewith, and charges him with what had formerly
passed: his denial hereof confirms the suspicion, and conuinceth him of the
fact. And so hereupon being laid hold one by justice; diverse speeches and
accidents formerly passed long before, are now revived, tending to his further
challenge and conviction. Now it is euidenced that 2 days after the murder,
Land meting with one of his consorts, asked him when he saw John Leeson: mark
says the worthy judge, the murderer asks the other, the other does not first
enquire of him: a manifest token of his guilty conscience, and apparent
evidence accusing himself. Now it is proved that he and Worlich were in the
company of John Leeson at the Mill-hill, after which John was never seen
again. Now many other speeches are remembered, that had formerly passed
between Land and others in their cups, tending to the particular fact, of
casting them into the Pond, and condemning them by their own mouths. One
special among the rest I may not omit that in a dry summer they talking of
casting of Ponds, and ditches, bolted out such words, that if such a Pond were
cast (mentioning that where ye murdered lay) it would go hard with three or
four of them: to pass over others, material hereunto. Their examinations are
manifest, that no less then 28 witnesses gave in evidence concerning the fact,
chalendging Land by circumstance to be the Murderer. But in so clear a
light, what need their many? nay indeed any witnesses, when Lands one actions
and words are sufficient to convince him: so just is the Lord, to cause the
tongues of the wicked to fall upon them, so wise hereby to satisfy the world,
and gain himself the glory of this discovery by taking the wicked in their
own craftines.

Well, thus we have found out one of the Murderers, or rather he has offered
himself unto us unsought for, or rather indeed, the Lord has brought him to
the Bar, even by his own wisdom. And so we may also conclued of Worlich,
feign would he have been gone, but the Lord arrested him at Yarmouth, with a
fearful sickness, and brought him back again, and his own mouth must
bewray him, to be privy, at least, to the murder, when he told the Mother,
that he was the last man that had John by the hand alive and dead, in the
Low Countries: It being proved that he was never there, and expounded wisely,
by the Reverend Lord Chief Justice, that he meant by the Low Countries, the
bottom of the Pond. So now we have two of the Actors, or at least,
Accessaries, time will shortly (God willing) discover others that are in hold.

Mean while, bless we the Lord, for this discovery hitherto, And justify we
his providence in meeting with sinners in their kind, even by their own
mouths. And above all, take we heed of wisdom in sin, because it will
prove greatest foolishness in the end. Bless we the Lord for good
Magistrates, that will sift and bolt out hidden wickedness: and pray we
heartily for their lives and welfare, by whose means we enjoy our lives and
liuelihoods: yea, that which is most precious above all, the hope of life to
come, in the liberty of the Gospel, being wise in our several places, to
shame and discover sin, that so we may be kept from participation and
danger, therefrom, and yet charitable in covering the infirmities of our
Brethren, least otherwise casting them off by our rigor and indiscretion, we
force them to break out through despair, into desperate wickedness.

Thus of the first Scoene of the second part of this Tragedy, concerning the
discovery of the murder and Murderers.

CHAP. 5.
Declares the Conviction of the Murderers: 1. Where the Evidences against
them are published and opened by the Judge. 2 Their Inditements found hereupon
by the Jury. 3 Their Obstinacy upon their finding declared and discussed, with
the Use of all.

By that which formerly has been related, concerning the discovery of the
murderers, and such evidences alleged thereunto, howsoever it may seem the
matter to be so clear, as that it need no further trial, yet this being but
a preparatiue to ripen the business, that so it might have it public and
judicial trial at the Bar: It shall be very necessary to add somewhat
concerning ye Equity and solemnity, of that honorable trial, to the stopping of
all gainsaying lips, and to the advancement of Gods glory, in such righteous
proceeding. And here to say nothing of the manner of these Trials by witnesses
to prove the fact, and Iurers to find the same, (a course so warrantable, both
by the practice of God himself, and all Nations, even by the instinct of
Nature, that it shall be in vain to light a candle when the Sun shines so
clearly:) Give me leave, I pray you, to point at some things especially
remarkable in this Trial, for the more clear justifying, and benefit
thereof. As,

First, that whereas out of the mouth of two or three witnesses every truth
shall stand: we have not only here apparent circumstances, even from the
mouth and actions of the Delinquents, to convince them sufficiently of the
Fact, but also no less then 28. Evidences were taken by the worthy Justice,
all of great moment, by way of circumstance and consequence to prove the same:
whereof, though no more then 18. were produced at the Bar, because time
(which there is precious) would have been otherwise taken up, and those that
were produced in the judgment of the Honorable Judge, were sufficient, yea,
more then enough: yet who could desire more then so many Evidences, especially,
seeing the rest all aimed at the same end? so clear was this Trial, so fully
justified.

Secondly, Whereas exception against Witnesses, as it is usually admitted in
honorable Trials so being denied, may seem to challenge the equity of them,
this is also obseruable for the justifying of this Trial, that howsoever the
accused were obstinate in denying, or faint in acknowledging the fact: yet, as
there was no just reason, why they should except against the witnesses, so
either they did not except against them at all, or only made such cauils, as
either were not consonant to reason, or did confound themselves by their
contradiction, or were but triflings to differ or elude Justice.

Thirdly, Whereas in such infamous and strange cases, for the further
conviction of them. The voice of the people is as the voice of God, that what
generally is current and avouched, by the generallity, carries with it some
warrant of truth: it may be observed also for the further justifying of this
Trial, there has not been hard of a more general consent of the people in
any Trialls, desiring the discovery of the truth, and approving, yea,
applauding the detection thereof, then was manifest at this trial.

Lastly, If contraries may be gathered by their contraries, seeing it is the
policy and malice of Satan, then to resist the light most, when it shiues most
clearly, may not the obstinacy of Land, in opposing such clear and manifest
Evidence, that was brought against him, as proving hereby more effectual to
harden his heart, by making him desperate, the more clearly he was convinced
thereby, may not this obstinacy, I say, of that accursed wretch, serve much
more to justify the truth of this honorable Trial.

I touch this last point of special purpose, both to satisfy the wise in this
particular, whereat the ignorant usually stumble, and also to stop the mouth of
all gaine-saying herein. For why should it seem strange to any, that offenders
should so differ in the issue of their conviction, that the one should be
penitent, and confess the fact, as Worlich in part has done, by referring
himself to the mercy of the Judge, the other should still remain obstinate,
even to the death, in the justifying of himself. Have we not examples of the
like in the Book of God, one thief being penitent on the Cross, and the
other continuing obstinate to the death. And may not the eternal decree of
God, of two in a bed, electing the one, and rejecting the other, justify the
execution thereof, in the very last breath, the one justifying his sin on the
Gallows, and so condemning himself, the other acknowledging his fault, and so
interessing himself in the mercy of God. And is there not apparent reason of
this desperate obstinacy? may not common course prevail in this case, which is
to plead not guilty to the Fact?

May not hope of life induce thereunto, thereby to prevail, if it may be, with
a corrupt, or pitiful and Ignorant Jury, and when once we have denied the
Fact, may not credit or obstinacy continue in that note? Is it not too
apparent, that many preferring their credit and good of their Posterity, before
their conscience and benefit of their souls, do therefore stand obstinate in
the denial of that, which their own conscience co^uinceth them of: What else
meant ye answer of Gardener to Bishop Day, when he exorted him on his
deathbed, to trust only in the mercy of Christ, and renounce all Popish trash
and selfe-deseruing. Did not the conscience of that Bloud-sucker convince him
of the truth? And yet did the glory and credit of his profession carry him
contrary in that reply, that if that gap were opened all would be gone.

Nay, may not such consequences follow hereupon, that if they confess the
truth, others shall be drawn in danger, and so either by bribery or flattery,
compassion, or such like, many are contented to sell away their own souls to
Satan, for the preserving of others.

Do not these things usually fall out, and might not Land be hardened in his
sin, by some or all these means? Howsoever let him die in his sin, and let
us live to glorify God, in making a holy use of these things: though not
absolutely judging of any by their ends: yet wisely judging of the end, by the
former life: that they which live desperately, do usually die obstinately: And
so let us by the ends of such men, labor to reform our lives, taking heed of
custom in sin, and hardening our hearts therein, lest when we would, we
cannot leave it, and when we cannot leave it, we grow to justify it, and so
not only die therein, but dye eternally thereby. Concerning further Guidences,
and Acts of the Jury, because they are only matters of Form, or needless in
so great light, I willingly pass them over, resting myself on such
collections, as I have gathered for the justifying of the Proceedings.

And thus far of the second Scoene of the second part of the Tragedy,
concerning the Conviction and casting of the Murderers.

CHAP. 6.
Of the Condemnation and Judgment given upon the Malefactors, where after
entrance made hereto: 1 The religious and learned Speech of the thrice reuerand
Judge, is published, tending to justify the righteous hand of God heroin, as
also to prepare the delinquents to an holy use thereof. 2 The Sentence it self
follows, with the great clemency and moderation thereof. 3. With diverse
passages and profitable uses of the same.

We are now come unto the Dismal day, wherein the Murderers received their
sentence of condemnation and Judgment thereupon. A day most comfortable to the
godly, as wherein they observe, the law of God executed, that the murderer
without any admittance of privilege, or Psalm of mercy, must die the death,
that so blood might be recompensed with blood, and the land may be cleansed from
the guilt thereof. And so according thereunto, Justice administered without
respect of persons, and yet with great wisdom, according to the different
degrees and circumstances in the committing of the Crime. Here is no
admittance of Sanctuary, nor any such like protection to frustrate the course
of Justice, and nuzling of the wicked in their sin; so happy are we that God
has taken from our necks that cruel and bloody yoke of Antichrist, who not
only maintained his own tyranny by blood, but also protected others therein:
And yet much more in this respect miserable, if we shall not be more
thankful for the light of the Gospel, and improoue the time of our
visitation, with more profit and advantage. But blessed be the Lord for the
fruit of his Word, that Justice has his due course, Iniquity braues it not
uncontrolled, and righteousness may have countenance enough, if it be
accompanied with sobriety and meekness of wisdom. If Sincerity be made a
cloak for contentions and private lucre: is it not wisdom to pluck off this
vizard, that so the Hypocrite may be ashamed, and the sober Christian
justified. But whither am I going? I must retire my self to my present
station. We are now expecting the Judgment given upon these Malefactors: And
blessed be God, our expectation was more then satisfied. Oh how true is it,
that Judges are in the place of God, that he honors them as his Deputies,
and furnishes them extraordinarily with divine gifts: What Majesty does shine
in their honorable persons, what wisdom and Equity flows from their lips,
what Righteousness mixed with Clemency, appears in their sentences? Harken, I
pray you, unto that which follows, and witness with me the truth of all
these. The Bench being set, the prisoners are called to the Bar: doubtful
matters are referred to a further clearing, smaller offenses are censured
accordingly: The greater and Capital crimes of Blood, and such like, come now
to be sentenced: And that the sentence may be better laid to heart, and take
deeper impression to work repentance, and so thereby prepare the offenders to
their deaths: Harken, I Sir Henry Mountague, Lord chief Iustiee.
pray you, unto the divine and grave speech, the reverend Judge, makes unto
them in such words as these.

The speech at the giving of Judgment.
YOu Prisoners at the bar, whose lives now stand waiting upon death, as you
look up to us with fear, so we look down upon you with sorrow. Your fear
is to receive punishment for your mis-doing, and our sorrow is that we must
pronounce it. Yet not without hope to bring you to Repentance, which may gain
you pardon for your sin. But as we have the commandment of God, to warrant,
and comfort us herein, that the malefactor must die: so we heartily desire of
God, that your condemnation may not be of death unto death, but rather a
means to a better life.

Now in these cases three things best befit a Judge, which are Discretion,
Correction, and Comfort.

1 Discretion, to make an offender know his fault. 2 Correction, to Pronounce,
and inflict the punishment. 3. Comfort, that notwithstanding the denouncing,
and inflicting of the punishment yet so to prepare the delinquent unto death,
that he may find life in death, and so see heaven upon earth, before the world
leaves him, and he the world.
Concerning the knowledge of your fault, that will best appear by your
acknowledgment thereof. For without this acknowledgment, there can be no sound
Repentance. Thus did God himself deal with his servant David in those his
unclean and bloody facts, first to bring him to the sight of those sins, he
put the case by another, and so brought David to pronounce sentence upon
himself, so my desire is, that each of you would make David's case your own.
And as in the like facts you would be ready, in another man's case to pronounce
sentence as he did, against the man that had dealt so cruelly; so now to make
his example your pattern, to make it your own case. That as he being
convinced by the Prophet to be the man, whom he had condemned in the like case
of another, was thereby brought to an acknowledgement of his own sin, and so
receive a gracious acquittance: so you also being now convicted of your heavy
and bloody facts, by such apparent evidence: may by David's example, be brought
to an acknowledgement thereof, and so with David obtain an answer of the
pardon of your sin: howsoever for the satisfying of the world, and humbling of
the flesh, you are like with David to answer blood for blood.

The second thing I noted was Correction.

But the better to prepare you for it, tell me you poor souls that have had
a great portion of sorrow by your imprisonment, if these three things do not
now trouble you more then ever before, that is, Sorrow, Shame and Fear.

1 Sorrow for your life past so wickedly missed. 2 Shame for your present
facts. 3 Fear not so much of your present punishment, which ends in the
punishment: as of the judgment to come, bringing with it eternal torments,
and yet beginning but where the other ends.
To begin with this last: (because if it had been well remembered by you, it
might have prevented the former, and yet being well applied may release you
from the latter:) that you may take a deeper impression of that great and
general Assizes. Be you advised, not so much to look upon Us, who have only
power to kill the body, as to look up unto the Lord, who has power to destroy
both body and soul: and remember his last and dreadful coming in the clouds,
where each of you must appear personally, without Deputy, delay, or Advocate,
to receive according to your works which you have done in your bodies, be they
good or evil.

And that you may prevent the extremity of that Iugdement; my advice unto you
is, that you would erectin a judgment seat your own souls, judging your
selves by the evidence of your own consciences, that so you may not be judged
of the Lord. So did David obtain the pardon of his sin, he had no sooner
judged himself for his sins: and confessed them unto the Lord, but the Lord
forgave him the iniquity of them all: and no sooner shall you acknowledge your
selves worthy to die, but the Lord will answer you, you shall not die, but
live. For if you be now dead in sin, by hardening your hearts in the denial
thereof: though you be living to the world, yet you are dead unto God, and so
shall never die out of the punishment of sin, how soever you be ever dying in
the horror thereof. But if you shall now dievnto sin by unfeigned Repentance:
though you may die for your sin, by the hand of man, yet you shall live for
ever without sin, by the power of God. And therefore howsoever you must die
temporally to satisfy the Law, yet remember, this is but of the body, and that
for a time: and consider with all that there is another death co come, both of
body and soul, wherein you shall die eternally from-God, and yet live eternal
to intolerable torments. Consider then I pray you the Terror of that great
day: where the fire howsoever spiritual, yet shall thereby be the more
intolerable; and yet the conscience shall be more stinging, then the fire
tormenting: and the everlasting exclusion from the presence of God, shall make
up the measure of those insufferable torments. If they were but for a hundred,
or a thousand, nay a million of years: yet there were some hope at length of
release: but remember, that the worm never dies, the fire never goet out,
because the wrath of God like a river of Brimstone, does continually maintain
the same.

Thus you may meditate upon those endless torments.

And this by Gods mercy, may work in you that hearty and seasonable sorrow for
your present sins, whereby you may prepare to your present ends, and so
prevent those endless torments. But be not too sudden in applying mercy, when
your sins have been so many. For it is not every one, that says Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. Consider, also that there can be no
comfort in God, till there be true sorrow for sin: the best sacrifices were
sodden in the sowrest herbs: and the sacrifice best pleasing unto God, is
that, of a broken and contrite heart. Only be you wise to try your sorrow.
There is a sorrow unto death which is carnal and hypocritical, rather greiuing
for the punishment, then the offense: if therefore you will be sorry in hope
of (...)y, you must in(...) God in your punishment, (...) (...)ere far
greater, and greiua for your sins, that have deserved more. For your
punishment is not great or then your faint, but your (...)t greater then your
punishment.

If you would farther trik the sincerity of your sorrow: examine it then by
the fruit thereof. Godly sorrow breeds Repentance, and true Repentance
expresses it self in the hearty confession of sin: and true confession, is
not forced, but voluntary: not only of what apparent evidence wrings from us,
but what is secret, and only known to our selves, and unto God. And thi^^e it
not enough to satisfy the world, of what you are now convicted of, unless you
also discharge your conscience (so far as possibly you may remember) of all
that hidden burden of sin, which at the day of judgment will be certainly
laid open, and charged upon you, even to your utter pressing down, and
ouerwhelming for ever: And withal lay it to your hearts, that if you shall
fail to acknowledge, what you are now convicted of: as you shall least of all
satisfy God, who knows your hearts, to shall you not satisfy the world in
this your obstinacy, which must needs be convicted, with such apparent
evidences, as have been delivered: and so justly condemn you, in that wherein
you seek to Justify your selves Let me hear speak unto you even from my very
soul, and set you in a way for your souls eternal good. Do not think that
every Psalm of Miserere is sufficient to expiate your fault, or to give you an
interest in the pardon of your sin: no, I tell you, you must confess your
faults to the world; bebefore you leave the world. You have offended God, and
man; as far as confession may yield satisfaction, do it care you die. Oh
fear and remember that saying. As the tree falls, so it lies. If you be dead
while you live, you cannot hope to live when you are dead. If we forget our
sins, God will remember them, and if we confess them, God will forget them.
Remember the good success of the Prodigal child: he no sooner came home to
his Father, and confessed his sin, but his Father ran to meet him, and kissed
him, killed the fatted calfe for him, and clothed him with the be(...)
(...)yment. Even so our heavenly Eather, has offered his only son, as the
fatted calfe, for the redemption of all penitent sinners, he is ready to meet
us, if we be coming to him by Repentance, nay to kiss and embrace us, if we
cast of our sins, and instead of those theenish rags, you wear to cloth
you with that glorious Robe of his perfect righteousness. This I hope and wish
that you may be so happy as to find.

And therefore I desire you to embrace the Mercy of God that is now offered
unto you. Labor to break your hard hearts with the consideration of his tender
compassions, and ease your distressed souls by the the acknowledgement of your
sins. Remember, that God will not endure a stubborn sinner but they which
are heavy laden with the burden of their sins, shall be welcome unto him. And
to this end, above all things, take heed of desparing. Consider that the mercy
of God is above all your mysery whatsoever, and that you shall more offend in
disparing of Gods mercy, then in shedding of the blood of so many innocents:
eue^ as Judas more offended in despayring of the pardon of his sin, then in
betraying of that just one, who was the ransom for his sin: and let this
last part be the best, which is to comfort you. Now I commend you with my best
affections, to the mercy and goodness of God, wishing you to glorify God in
the confession of your greinous faults remembering that no time can privilege,
no place conceal, nor Persons bear down, and smother the shedding of blood:
but God in his due time will discover the same, and make the places of
concealment, the stages of discovery. Yea, he will make the Actors themselves
to discover their own sins. The blood of Abel shall cry for vengeance from
the earth; and the blood of these murdered souls has cried for vengeance
from the bottom of the Pond. And therefore Justify God in this wonderful
discovery. And so the Lord give you wisdom in time, to make your Peace with
him.

This was the effect of the reverend Judges Exhortation, as himself pleased to
anow the same. Which being ended, their judgment was pronounced, and so
respited till Manday, for their execution, that so, in the mean time, they
might be prepared by repentance to the comfortable issue thereof.

And this of the third Scoene of this second part of this Tragedy.

CHAP. 7.
1 Containing the execution of the Murderers, 2 And such accidents as fell out
therein. 3 Together with such Uses as may be made thereof.

We are now come to the last Scoene of this Tragedy, concerning the Execution
of the murderers.



And herein we may first behold the singular wisdom of God in disposing
thereof, according to the diverse condition of the Murderers. For, whereas there
was two convicted and condemned, for this heinous murder; namely, Land and
Worlich: Though these both were brought to the Gallows, and knew no more but
they should both dye, yet such was the providence of God, guiding the heart of
the Reverend Judge, that the one being more tractable to confess the truth,
and giving sou(...) hope of his repentance, both for his own and the Countries
good (who expect yet a further discovery of four principal offenders, not yet
known or convicted:) He was therefore only brought upon the Ladder, and so
prepared to execution, that so he might convince the other of the crime, being
still obstinate therein, and satisfy the world concerning his own guiltiness
of the Fact: Wherein, as he did not obscurely bewray himself, at least an
accessory, though not so clearly and particularly as was expected for his
comfort, yet he spared not to challenge his fellow, standing obstinate on the
dentall, and by many circumstances convicted him to(...)es the chief
Murderer: Whereby, as it may seem, he was not an Actor in the Murder
himself, but only privy thereto by relation or consequence, so was he
therefore repriued, for the further clearing of the truth, and freeing of his
own conscience from any secret burden yet lay thereupon. As for the other,
who the more he was convicted, remained still more obstinate: whether in
policy, that he might be also repriued, in hope of mollifying his heart, and
bringing him to repentance, or upon desperateness, and so seeing no way but
one, must now prepare himself to the vengeance of God, and confound the worlds
expectation, or harden the world in such like sins: therefore was he justly
cut off, that he might do no more mischief, though to his own greater
confusion, thus dying in his sin. And yet behold the power of Gods justice
preuayling on his conscience, though he would not confess his sin in
particular, yet he acknowledged to his shame, what the world took too much
notice of, and himself did formerly much glory in, that he was much delighted
in Drunkennnsse himself; yea, which was the hight of his sin, he was strong to
be are his drink, and so gloried to draw others into the same excess, that so
he might pride himself in his great power, that could out drink others, and
thereby also more easily make prey of them. Which, as it was the means whereby
he caught John Leeson in his snare, so if consequents may be gathered by their
Antecede^ts, it must needs follow hereupon that he made prey of him:
especially, seeing he could not deny, but he accompanied him that day at the
Mill-hill, when he was made away, and his pretenses that John was gone for
Ireland, as were disprooued and confounded by contradictions in his own, and
wives speeches. But howsoever such apparent conuictions, both at the Bar and
Gallows, even from his own mouth, though he still denied the: fact, as (...)
has bin given heretofore the t(...), so we hope time will more (...)eetely
discover his madness herein. And so we leave him to the fruit of his si(...).
But before we end this Sc(...), one scruple is to be cleared, that whereas
Justice so (...)ends the (...)ying thereof in the punishment of the body, as
that it specially aims at the good of the soul: it might seem therefore to
have been fitter, that Worlich being more penitent, would have dyed presently,
and Land being so obstinate, should have been respited for his better
preparing to his end. For satisfaction where of, we must know, that as the
judgment against sin is directed by a special in(...)ct scour God, and so
therein does usually (...)ble his (...)teous (...), which is, th(...) to h(...)
that has shall be given, but to him th(...) nothing, shall be taken away (...)
that which he s(...) th(...) have: therefore to Worlich that has some spacke
of grace, and (...)rse, opportunity was further yielded to increase and perfect
the work, And from Land that has nothing, in truth if we may c(...)e by the
effect, therefore that was taken away which it seemed belonged unto him, even
longer time and space of Repentance, A notable Image of Gods righteous decras,
in the hardening of ye one and softning of the other, and a wise item to
obstinate sinners, that what they have been in their lives, they likely prove
in their deaths. And withal, a sweet word of comfort, to al broken and
bleeding hearts, that the Lord will wait upon them that he may have mercy upon
them.

And this we wish heartily, may be portion of that poor soul that now is
respited in the hope thereof. And thus ends the history of this bloody
Tragedy. Justifying the Righteous Do(...)e of the Lord, That he that sheddeth
man's blood by man shall his blood be shed again.

CHAP. 8.
Containing the conclusion of the whole. With promise of further light.

THus have thou, Christian Reader, a brief of the most lamentable History
which ever I heard or read of concerning the cruel murder of this widows
children. Together with the admirable discovery thereof by the Finger of God,
as also the proceedings against so many of the Malefactors as are yet
discovered. What now remains but that thou glorify God with me for the
execution of his righteous judgments. Assuring thee that as I was an eye
witness of these particulars, so I have delivered thee therein the truth,
according to the evidences confirmed by the consent of the best warrants to
establish the same: only I have forborne to specify the particular
information of many witnesses, because as many of them were spared at the
Bar, seeing the rest were sufficient; so of those that were given in, I have
also spared some, as specifying the same in effect with those that are wouen
into the history: because I did not so much respect the order of their
allegations at the Bar, as the fitness of their application, to the use and
life of the Story. If herein I have given any light or spirit by this manner of
handling, remember I wrote it not, for a nine days wonder to vanish like a
dream; but that it might leave such impression in thy heart, as might provoke
thee to know the Lord by his executing of Justice: and so hereby learn to make
use of his Providence in all his works: promising thee, that if thou shall
profitably use this discovery to this end, thou shall be fitted not only with
further light herein, as occasion shall be offered, but as thou may make
profitable use of many other labors published by me formerly for the common
good: so thou shall shortly be furnished with my long expected Pains,
concerning the Delusions of the Time, and cure of a wounded Spirit, which I am
reuising and polishing at my best leisure,s for thy good herein. And so
desiring thy hearty prayers unto God for his furtherance hereunto, I commend
thee to the grace of our Glorious Lord.

In whom I rest, thine and the Churches servant THO. COOPER.

FINIS.

