THE CATHOLIC MODERATOR: OR A MODERATE EXAMINATION OF THE DOCTRINE of the
PROTESTANTS. Proving against the too rigid CATHOLICS of these times, and
against the Arguments especially, of that Book called, The Answer to the
Catholic Apology, That we, who are members of the CATHOLIC, APOSTOLIC, and
ROMAN CHVRCH, ought not to condeme the PROTESTANTS for HERETICS, until
further proof be made. First written in French by a Catholic Gentleman, and
now faithfully translated.

See the occasion of the name of HVGVENOTS, after the Translaters Epistle.

LONDON, Printed for NATHANIEL BVTTER. 1623.

THE TRANSLATER TO the Christian Readers.
AND TO ALL THOSE ESPECIALly, whose hard hap it is, or may be, to be seduced
unto Popery: That by the help of this Book, and their own Prayers, they may
be delivered from the the Evil, when the Priests and Jesuits would Lead them
into temptation.
THere is a bold Nation of men (the Tempters above mentioned I mean) slily of
late crept in amongst you (well-meaning and abused people) whose enticements
(as you know too well) still begin with the Church; saying you Protestants are
direct Heretics, you have no Church: Are you therefore reconciled to the
Church? Meaning all this time the Roman Church. Had they fairly meant the
Catholic Church, I know no Caluinist that has put this Article out of his
Creed, I believe in the holy Catholic Church. And to say, I believe: What else
implies it, but to believe himself to be of it; else, why his Creed? That
therefore you may make one Romanist to answer all the rest; do but turn him,
that would seduce you, unto these two first Chapters; and he shall there find,
that for those few points of Reformation, both in matter of Doctrine and
Ceremony, wherein the Protestants have justly dissented from the Papists; we
can be no Heretics. And that their own new Doctors, who boast so much of
Antiquity, can no where show our Doctrine to be sufficiently condemned, before
the time of that fifth Gospel of the Romanists, the Council of Trent I mean,
which ended no more than some 60 years ago; the third Chapter will evidently
show them. And how incompetent a Judge an Adversary is, and how unlawful a
Council that of Trent was, the Instances of the fourth and fifth Chapters will
euince it. Lastly, that we Protestants, having ever continued true members of
the true, holy, and catholic Church, do not now need any Reconciliation to
theirs of Rome, the last Chapter will abundantly demonstrate it. Which six
Chapters being written by a Gentleman, who every where professes himself one
of theirs, if they would offer to shift off (as they have euasions enough) by
saying that what is written in this Book, is but the opinion of one Doctor:
Lo then, we have not only the Authors opinions, but the strength of his
reasons to urge them withal. All which are so mannerly, so directly, and so
succinctly touched upon, and come off so handsomely, as no man (in my opinion)
has yet said better, that purposed to say so little.

To give you therefore the mind of the Author in a word: Nothing was here
written, with any intention to urge us Protestants, any whit to depart from our
Right in yielding to a Reconciliation with them; but to persuade them rather,
to esteem better of us: and to demonstrate withal, that if they will judge
right, they must needs think well. And this is the purpose of the Translator
also. To show you therefore to understand all this Book: If the Reader shall
sometimes feel, that this Author now and then gives the Protestants a light
fillip by the way; he shall observe in the conclusion, that it was to reach his
own Romanists, a smarter blow; which is satisfaction enough. And that he
gives us any at all, let us but consider, that the Author though he were a
moderate man, yet that he was withal a Papist, and it will take away much of
the scandal. Lastly, which will give us as much advantage as we can desire
from one man, which is to answer them by one of their own; this Gentleman the
Author H. C. was too well known here in England to have continued a most
zealous Roman Catholic until his dying day, and yet nevertheless are all
his Reasons for Moderation, directed to the Papists, as if they should first
begin it; and all his conclusions directly for the Protestants, as though we
should still hold them. Nay and which is somewhat more; whereas all this is
with us of England, common to our Brethren the Protestants of France, yet does
this Book make more for us at home, than it does for them, for whose sakes it
was first written. For though we have with them entertained the points of
Reformation; yet have we not so far receded from the more Primitive Roman
Church (which he stands for) but that we still retain more of the necessary
Ceremonies, Solemnities, and Church Discipline, than they of France have done;
witness his second Chapter of Ceremonies; which is still for our advantage.

As therefore this little Book has been twice already printed in France,
which is an Argument of the Protestants good liking of it there; so has it
four or five several times, both by Divines and Gentlemen of our own
Religion, been translated both into Latin and English, which is a
demonstratiue Reason to me, how much it has been liked and desired. To save
therefore the labor of writing it out, which I still observed, as many
desirous to do as could get Copies of it, I have thought fit to let mine be
published: desiring all those that light upon it, to be as impartial and
charitable, as the Author himself wishes them; which if they be, I hope well
that the strictest need not be offended, and the wellminded may reap much
benefit by it. Which being my only desire, I shall ever pray for.

THE FIRST OCCASION how the name of HVGVENOTS, which our Author every where
uses, came first to be given to the French PROTESTANTS.
THere is ever some Salt as well as Gall in malice, and this temper makes it
sometimes bitterly witty; as may appear by this name of Huguenots, by which
and no other, do the French Papists generally vouchsafe to call the
Protestants. It was taken up about the year 1559. which was some four or five
years before Mr. Calvin's death. Till which time they were called Tourengeaux,
of the City of Tours, where the Protestants mostly used: But about that time,
there having been a foolish opinion, of a Night-Spirits walking up and down
the streets, which they called King Hugon: This fancy made one of the City
Gates to be called King Hugons Gate; and the Protestants being once observed in
the night to go through that Gate unto their Assemblies and holy Exercises;
were hereupon called Huguenots. He that will see more of this Name, and the
occasion of it, may find a handsome Discourse of it in Monsieur Pasquiers
Recherches, lib. 7. cap. 52. whither I refer you.

TO ALL THE KINGS FAITHFVL SVBIECTS, and principally to those Catholics, that
are desirous of the quiet of the Church and State.
THERE are now thirty years and more (at several times) since we have had
perpetual wars with the Huguenots, as with Rebels and Heretics; though we
have perceived of late, that our former opinion was wrongfully conceived
against them: and we may be also mistaken in the latter; and that time, which
has made it appear, that they are not Rebels, may discover likewise unto us
that they are not Heretics. But howsoever, it were much to be wished in the
mean time, that we would entertain a charitable conceit of them, till there
be more evidence given in against them.

The bitter dissension in Religion, has been the springhead of all our
miseries. That was it, which brought them forth at first, and which yet nurseth
them: whence it is now come to pass, that those men who are at this present,
disturbers of the State, have at the very selfsame time begun to raise
tumults in the Realm, and to reviue and exasperate the differences which we
have in Religion: In such fashion, as that the practices of the principal
Leaguers, and the turbulent Sermons of diverse Preachers (for I blame not all)
have been (as it were) Hippocrates twins, who went always together, laughed
always together; and it may chance, that these also may weep together: and we
have seen the experience of it, that the tongues of the one have done more
mischief than the swords of the other.

See the cause then, why in the beginning of these late troubles, the Catholic
Apology has labored to qualify this heat, and to confute the slanders given
out against the Reformed Religion, and those of it. Which Apology has been
in part refuted, but so coldly, that no proofs which the Confuter produces,
could make me see any reason, why we should so peremptorily condemn the
Huguenots for Heretics, although differing from us, about the explication of
some points of Religion. Upon which I was induced a year since and more, to
answer the Reasons aforesaid. But finding the Arguments to be of great weight,
I judged it fitter to write a just Treatise thereof by it self, than to answer
the objections hudled up together by another man: which has caused me also
both to suppress that which I had written already, and to defer that which I
purposed to write. And longer I suppose I had deferred it, if these late
Tragedies acted in the murders of our two last Kings, Henry 3.
had not put me in the conceit of it, Henry 4.
how that these horrid Acts sprung from the selfsame fountain, and that only
upon this ground too, namely, That the Errors of the Huguenots are so
exceedingly enormous; they found their Maxims, by which they persuade
themselves; That a man may take any course lawful or unlawful, to destroy
them and their favorers.

Another motive I also had, which induced me to proceed in my purpose of
writing. Which was the consideration of the fortunate proceedings of our late
King HENRY (whom his enemies made to be called, Great) all the time that he
continued Protestant: Then whose troubles we need seek no further example, to
show how God both dislikes man's bloody courses, and disposes also of his own
proceedings, his own way. For God never produces any extraordinary event,
without some extraordinary Design. But how extraordinarily God in the
beginning favored his Majesty, whiles he continued Protestant, none knows so
well as his enemies, forasmuch as God made use of their courses, for his
advancement. They conceited it, that by embroyling France in Civil wars, to
have ruined him; and these wars have increased his honor and power. They,
impatient of delays, thought presently by unjustifiable practices, to have
urged the late King Henry 3.
to have prosecuted him with more violence, than he had done heretofore; and
these plots of theirs, have been both the causes of the utter ruin of his
enemies, and of his reconcilement to the King. Briefly, his enemies thrust
Arms into his hands for their own destructions: and those devices by which
they had thought to have chased him out of Guyen, have brought him into the
heart of France; and by the selfsame means whereby they thought to take away
his life, they have given him the Kingdom. May we imagine that God had no
design, in the bringing about of these purposes? Or what else may we gather
out of all this; but that God is angry, when we will not permit him to dispose
of his own Church, his own way, but devise to prevent him by our own
wisdoms? For which respect, I protest before God, that had I been the sorest
enemy that the King had had, yet should I think that for no other reason God
had so many ways favored him, than to punish us, who by unjustifiable
practices out of an impatient zeal, would have rooted out the Reformed
Religion, though erroneous.

Happily then it may fall out, that if we alter our courses, God will also
change his. And as those designs of ours, by which we verily thought to have
advanced our Religion have hindered it: So God also may turn the same means
which we feared would hinder our Religion, to the advancement of it. In the
mean time let us know thus much; That God never blesses those men's courses,
which think to anticipate him through impatience. Let us then have patience a
while; and when we shall perceive the times of peace to be fittest for our
purposes, let us (a Gods name) offer the same conditions unto the Huguenots,
which they propounded unto us before; which was, to assemble the best learned
men in both Religions, to discuss friendly the points in controversy; to the
end, that the quiet of the Commonwealth, may go along with that of the
Church: which if the Huguenots shall accept of, (as I make no doubt but they
will) I persuade my self, that there may be such a course taken in the
Conference, that discovery may be made of many things, which have been
concealed hitherto from both of us. Not that I imagine any novelty can be
found out in Religion, (God forbid that I should ever think so) but that the
meaner questions in controversy, being reconciled, the impertinent ones
omitted, the greater may be insisted upon, to be cleared by more evident
demonstrations.

Nor can either party (considering the points be already sufficiently
discussed) imagine that such a conference would be unprofitable; for although
there can hardly be found more solid Arguments, than those wherewith we have
served our selves heretofore; yet is it one thing to prove, and another thing
to satisfy: now we must not so much maintain a side, to vanquish; as to
win those that are in the wrong. And thus much I dare say, and I will be able
to make good against any contradiction; that neither party, have in any
conference as yet taken that course, which they ought and might have followed,
for the satisfaction of the adverse party, and the clearing of doubts.

For mine own part, though I be the meanest of a Million, who have embroyled
themselves in the disputes of the time, yet dare I undertake to reduce the
points in controversy to so short an issue, and to set down such a course for
the handling thereof; that more of the truth shall be discovered in this one
conference, than in all the other disputes, which have been since Martin
Luther first opposed himself against the Pope. For both the issue shall be so
drawn, and the means so disposed of; that the persons of neither Religion
(keeping themselves to their own proper Maxims) shall be able to reject them.
I should be too impudent to give it out, if I were not well assured of my
ability for the performance. But I am acquainted well enough with the euasions
of either side, I know their fallacies, and I have also the Art to prevent them.

But the time seems not to be yet so fit, for we must have our spirits quiet,
as well as our State; and above all, free from that same preiudication. For if
we Catholics come to a Disputation, being confident before hand, that the
Huguenots are already condemned for Heretics: And they on the other side, that
they understand the Scriptures better than S. Austin, and that all is clear on
their side; to what purpose serves such a Conference? The Priests and Ministers
may seem as confident as they please, for they are our Teachers; but we should
not be so resolute, for we are but Learners. The end which they propose, is the
Victory; but the end which we seek for, is the Truth. Which if we have
found, why look we further? But if we believe without searching, we may very
well be deceived.

The chief reason then, which induced me to reassume my design of writing in
this point of Moderation, was; that our spirits being something pacified, we
might be the better prepared to a Conference, and in that Conference make
discovery of the Truth; and by discovery of the Truth, establish a Peace in the
Church of God. But I suspecting mine own insufficiency, and fearing withal
to bestow my labor in vain: and on the other side, being wondrously desirous
to see an union in Religion, I chose rather to hazard that pains which I had
already taken, in publishing that answer which I had made before, than to lose
a new.

The reason then why I that am a Catholic, do rather blame the rigor of ours
against the Huguenots, than theirs against us (both parties being faulty much
alike) is; because he that would reform another, must begin at himself.

The importunity and arrogancy of mine Adversary, vrges me sometimes to
write not so like a Catholic, which I do not purposely to confute the
Catholic Religion: but to show only; That the errors of the Huguenots are not
so gross, as our side persuades themselves they are. And knowing also that no
one thing has more suppressed the Truth, than the mean esteem that the one
party has of the others Arguments. Which (God knows) is merely out of
ignorance; for so much as the deeper learned any man is, the more difficulty he
finds in confuting his Adversary. For it is most certain, that Ignorance
engenders Vehemency, and Vehemency blinds us from discovering the Truth. For
their ignorance that are in the rights, makes those likewise the more vehement
that are in the error; and the ignorance of those that are in error, blinds
them the more.

See then the true intent of this my Discourse: wherein though I may perchance
have used some Reasons, which in too rigorous a Judgment, may be esteemed with
the most, in favor of these new opinions; yet is not my intent, with them to
seduce any man, or to turn them from the Faith of their forefathers, but only
to purge their spirits from preiudication until further proof be made. And if
such proof be made (without which I conceive no hope of union in the Church) I
adjure thee (beloved Reader, of whether Religion soever thou be) to come
with a spirit void of this preiudication: Such a spirit I wish to thee, as I
protest I my self have; and I pray God to confirm in all of us. Amen.

The Argument of the Book.
THe Catholic Apology has endeavored to acquit the Huguenots of heresy by
two Reasons. The first is, for that the Religion pretended to be Reformed, is
not heretical of it self, for that the substance of the Catholic Faith is
received by the Huguenots, and that the Ceremonies which they have rejected,
were unknown to the ancient Church, of which two points, viz. Doctrine and
Ceremonies, all Religion is composed. The second is, that their Religion has
not been as yet condemned by any lawful Judgment: because that before the
Council of Trent, it was not condemned in any General Council, and that the
Council of Trent is neither lawful of itself, nor as yet approved of in
France. Upon which consideration, albeit that the Huguenots had wandered from
the true faith, yet ought we not to proceed against them, as against
Heretics, until they have received an arrest of condemnation from a general
Council: no more th^n we can in justice put a Malefactor to death, although he
be notoriously capable, until he be cast by the Jury, and has had his trial.

The Author now of the Answer to this Apology, in the second part of his
book, from the fifth Chapter to the fifteenth, travails hard to refute the
foresaid Reasons: in the fifth Chapter, he only propounds his Method; in the
sixth, he would show, that the Religion of the Huguenots is quite another from
that of the Catholics; in the seventh, that the Ceremonies of the modern
Church of Rome were observed in the Primitive Church; in the eight, that the
Doctrine pretended to be Reformed, stands condemned by ancient Councels: in the
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14. he defends the Council of Trent; whereof the 11,
12, and 13. are to prove, that that Council is absolutely lawful, and the 9,
10, and 14. that it is received in France: after which method I will also
divide my defense into these six Chapters.

1. In my first, I will prove against the reasons of his sixth Chapter, that the
Catholics and Huguenots thus far agree in Doctrine, that they are both of
one and the same Faith and Religion.

2. In my second, against his seventh Chapter, that neither the Catholics,
nor the Huguenots, do accord with the Primitive Church in the matter of
Ceremonies: and that for this reason the Huguenots are not to be condemned.

3. In my third, against his eighth, that before the times of the Council of
Trent, they stood not publicly and lawfully condemned.

4. In my fourth, against his 11, 12, and 13. Chapters, that the Council of
Trent is not lawful.

5. In my fifth, against his 9, 10, and 14. Chapter, that it is not received in
France.

6. In my sixth and last I will conclude, that the Huguenots may be good right
be still reputed for members of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church.

CHAP. 1.
That the Catholics and Huguenots thus far forth agree in Doctrine, that
they are both of the same Faith and Religion.

IT is most clear, that men of the same Church and Religion, may differ
nevertheless about some opinions in Divinity. Austen accords not to Hierome,
nor Epiphanius to Chrysostom, nor Cyprian to Cornelius, nor Irenaeus to
Victor, and questionless one of them was in the error; yet were they all
Doctors, approved by the Church, and Saints every one of them. Every error
does not separate a man from the Church, nor should we regard so much the
number, as the quality of them. Arrius accorded with the Catholics in all
points but one; insomuch as the change of a word, yea of one bare letter, would
have compounded the controversy; (...).
and yet was he the greatest Heretic, that ever the Church was troubled with.
Origin, on the other side, dissented in infinite Tenants, from the other old
Doctors, and was yet nevertheless esteemed a member of the Church.

To see then, whether the Huguenots be of another Religion than we, neither
their errors, nor their numbers is the thing which is so much to be regarded,
but the nature of them only is it: That is to say; what Errors are to be
reputed for Heresies, and whether theirs be of that nature.

There be two things which (according to the opinion of the Catholics) make
Errors to prove Heresies. The one, when the Error is of it self so enormous,
that he is at all times an Heretic that holds it. So that even before the
Nicene Council had decided it, Ebion, Paulus Samosetanus, and Arrius stood
then as Heretics, for that they denied the eternal Divinity of the Son of
God.

The second thing which (according to our opinion) makes an Error to become an
Heresy, is; when any man maintains an opinion in point of Doctrine, contrary
to the Decrees of a General Council. So then, the Heresy lies not so much in
the mischieuousnesse of the opinion, as in the resistance made against the
ordinance of the Church. For example: The opinion of S. Cyprian touching
Rebaptization, was not Heresy in him, because there was not as then any Decree
of Council made against it: But since that (say we) this opinion is condemned
legally, it were flat Heresy in any other that should hold it. Of this second
Species of Heresy, I will entreat in my third Chapter: In this, only of the
former: which is; Whether the errors of the Huguenots be in themselves so
enormous, that they destroy the very foundation of Faith, and by consequence
keep them off, from being of the same Religion with us.

Let us see then, The first Reason. Page 20.
how our Antagonist takes upon him to prove the contrary. In the first place
(says he) both parties, as well the Catholics as their Adversaries, repute
one another for Heretics. I answer, that I find no impossibility, why they
may not be both deceived. For two brothers being in choler, may well renounce
one another; and yet they leave not for all that to continue true brothers
always. Cyrill and Theodoret accused one another for Heretics, and yet
neither of them was so. So that this reason is only drawn from the passion of
men, when Reason has abandoned them.

But how does he prove, Page 21.
that the Catholics repute the Huguenots for Heretics. The Catholic Church
(says he) has by the Council of Trent, condemned diverse of the Lutheran
opinions. I answer (according to my first distinction) that it is one thing to
return an opinion for an heresy by condemnation; and another thing to repute
it so, of its own nature. Now whether or no the Huguenots be heretics by
condemnation, we will argue it hereafter in our third, fourth, and fifth
Chapters. But here we dispute only of the nature of their error; wherein his
proofs are nothing to his purpose. But (says he) At Rome every holy Thursday
the Pope pronounces them excommunicate, Page 21.
and prohibits all Chatholikes to read their Books. In like manner, the same
day also he excommunicats all sinners; of whom he dares not deny but that
many are of the Church; else should he himself be condemned for an heretic
by the Council of Constance, which gave sentence against John Huz: That the
Church consists as well of the bad, as of the good. And whereas the Huguenots
Books be prohibited, so are also the Books of Machiauel, Aretine, and diverse
other Catholics.

Let us next see the opinion which the Huguenots have of the Catholic
Doctrine. Page 21.
Calvin (says he) writes that the principal points of Doctrine in the Church
of Rome, are almost utterly abolished, and the right use of the Sacraments in
many fashions corrupted. He needs but little explication; the words themselves
answer him. Calvin says not, that the Sacraments are utterly taken away, but
the right use of them, many ways corrupted: Nor, that the principal points of
Religion are utterly destroyed, but almost abolished. A man may be almost killed,
and yet live.

Secondly, to prove how their Religion differs from ours, The second Reason.
he produces the controversies of Original sin, Free Will, Justification,
Merits, and diverse others which he judges of most consequence. It is the
greatest pity in the world to hear how the most of the Preachers in both
Religions commonly fight with their own shadows, not understanding what it is
that their adversary holds; which comes only of the subtleties of words
invented by the Devil to disturb the Peace of the Church. One party
understanding the word Justification in one sense, and another in another; one,
Faith one way, and another in another; one, Grace in one fashion, another after
another, and so of the rest: that which we say being true, in our acception of
the word, and that which they say being likewise true, as they take it. So,
that if the desire of contention were once taken away, we should soon find,
that the most of these disputes wherewith peoples ears are filled, are only
the subtelties of the School, upon the Etimologies and Definitions of words
only. Whence it came to pass, that in the conference at Regenspurg, the
Catholics and the Protestants fell to some agreement in the question of
Original sin, of Predestination, Free Will, and diverse other points,
Lindanus in prefat. in Lib. de querela pacis.
which is also confessed by Bishop Lindanus one of the tartest enemies that the
Huguenots ever had. Neue^thelesse the Author of this answer is so ill advised,
as to choose out these questions principally, to show the differences between
them and us.

For mine own part, I will not take upon me to reconcile the said questions,
neither know I well (to confess mine own ignorance freely) whether it be
possible to be done or no: only thus much I assure my self, that the
difference is not so great, as it is judged to be. Nor will I too exactly
search out the point in controversy, because I well hope some other man may
more happily perform it hereafter. Only I will discourse upon the said
questions as they are commonly understood by the best Doctors in each Religion.
In which sense I affirm (for ought that I have yet seen) that the errors of
the Huguenots are not so gross, as that they impeach their being members of
the Catholic Church. To clear which point, I will reduce these questions to
these four heads. 1. The Scripture. 2. Justification. 3. Prayer. 4. The
Sacraments.

Scripture. Page 23.
he charge the Huguenots only with one error, which is, that they reject the
Books of Tebit, Judith, the Machabees, and the rest which they call
Apocryphal, notwithstanding that they were approved for Canonical by the
Council of Trent.

To which I answer: That the Huguenots do not altogether reject them, but
esteem of them as of holy writings, and full of piety, of greater authority
than any other book; only they do not state them in the same rank with the
other books, which are found written in the holy tongue. And this it seems to
me, Tom. 1. Contr. 1. l. cap. 4.
that Bellarmine after a sort accords unto: for that in his division of the
Books of the Old Testament, he makes two Classes. In the first he ranks the
books received by the Huguenots: And those which be called Apocryphal, in the
second. But what though the opinion of the Huguenots be in this point
condemned by the Council of Trent, yet is the Council of Laodicea clear on
their sides: And so are also Hierome, Origin, and Nicholaus Lyra himself,
Cardinal Caietane, and many other pillars of the Roman Church. So that I would
feign know, if that this error of the Huguenots be so enormous, as that for
this cause they must necessarily be Heretics; wherefore then did it not as
well hinder Hierome from being a Saint, and Cardinal Caietane from being a
Catholic.

Now under the title of Justification, Justification.
I comprehend all the differences Trent, touching 1. The Cause; 2. The Matter;
3. The Instrument; 4. And the Effects of our Justification. By the Source or
principal Cause, I mean, That disposition by which our Nature (as we
Catholics use to say) being both prevented and accompanied by the grace of
God, prepares it self to Justification; that is to say, To the operation of
the Free Will, which remained in man after his Fall. Free Will. Page 24.
For the compounding of this difference; man's Free Will must be considered in
these three estates; Before the Fall of Adam, after the Fall, and in the time
of his regeneration, after he was again restored. Wherein there is contained
whatsoever is necessary for a Christian to believe; namely, That man before the
Fall of Adam had Free Will both to good and evil; And that by his Fall he lost
the liberty to do good: And that by Grace in his Regeneration he again
recovered it. Thus far the Catholics and the Huguenots are agreed: The
imaginary controversy then lies only in the manner how this will is
enfranchised or made free. The Huguenots auerring, That it is the Grace of God,
which sets it at liberty by giving it new powers, whereof it was altogether
destitute before. The Catholics likewise auerring, that the grace of God has
set it at liberty, by loosing the chains wherewith it was before so
captiuated, that it could not set a work the powers that it had. See here then
the true difference between them in this point, wherein though the Huguenots
may be deceived, yet is their error nothing so dangerous, as to overthrow the
foundation of Faith. In the discussing of which point, we are principally to
regard two things: The Justice of God in punishing Adams sin by this
captivity; and his Mercy again in freeing us. Now if the Huguenots be in the
wrong, their error is only in augmenting the Justice and Mercy of God, by
affirming, That the freedom of our wills, is not only bound, but slain (as
it were.) Death now is a more grievous punishment, than imprisonment, and it is
a greater mercy to give life to the will, than liberty. But what need the
common people break their brains, about these Metaphors of binding and
killing, which they can never comprehend? It Is sufficient for them to know, that
nothing can be done without Gods good grace, and to say all with Saint Austen,
To do freely, comes from the Nature of man; to do well, from Grace; but to
do evil, from our corrupt Nature. Which saying, as it contains the whole
doctrine of Free Will, so is it consented unto, as well by the Catholics as
the Huguenots.

The second thing which I observed in Justification, is the Matter, that is to
say; Whether that righteousness, which is infused into us by Grace, or that of
Christ imputed unto us by Faith, be it, by virtue whereof we be justified
before God. And this question, though it be all one with that of Justification,
yet our adversary, thereby to multiply the number of his controversies, makes
two of them, so desirous he is of contention. Concerning which point, the
Huguenots are in no error in the ground and substance of the question; so that
though they may be thought to differ never so much from us in the
circumstances, yet may they for all that be very good Catholics. For example; A
tree which has the Root, Stock and many Arms of it sound, may be a good tree
though some one bough be crazed: But the Catholics and the Huguenots are
agreed upon the Root of the question, that is to say, That there are two things
necessary: That we be first quit of our Sins, and that we be next endued
with Righteousness; to put off our old garments, and re-invest our selves with
new.

1. Upon the first, the Catholics and the Huguenots are agreed; namely, That
we are pardoned of our sins, and redeemed from hell, merely by the blood of
Jesus Christ.

2. Touching the second, both sides hold alike; That to be admitted entrance
into heaven, we have need of Righteousness, and that this Righteousness comes
from Christ.

Now the Righteousness which is of Christ, is either Inherent in him, and
reputed ours, or Inherent in us, and proceeding from him; being by his grace
infused into our hearts; which Act the Huguenots call Sanctification: Finally,
the Huguenots confess as well as the Catholics, that there be indeed both
these kinds of Righteousnesses, only they differ upon this, whether the
Righteousness Inherent in Christ and imputed to us, or that Inherent in us,
and proceeding from him, be it; by virtue whereof we become justified in the
sight of God. And what is it to us, whether another man paies our debts for us,
or gives us money to pay it our selves? So that (in a manner) they both
acknowledge the self same Root, the same Stock, and the same Arms of this
question, only they cannot agree upon the smaller Branches which grow out of
these Arms. Nay more; they both acknowledge the same Branches too, but they
cannot agree, upon which of them they should roost. For the Huguenots confess,
that whosoever are saved, are also first sanctified; that is to say, That they
have that kind of Righteousness, which the Catholics call Inherent or
Secondarie Righteousness. But they say, that they dare not build upon it, but
only upon that Righteousness, which being inherent in Christ, is by Faith
imputed to them. Seeing then, that this Righteousness of Christ is by general
consent acknowledged to be most perfect; though there may perhaps be thought
to be some error in the Huguenots doctrine, yet no danger can come of it. Like
as when a man lays hold on a strong bough, he may very well be deceived in
fearing another may be too weak; yet without doubt he cannot fall, so long as
he embraces that which cannot break.

Next follows the Instrument by which we embrace this Righteousness, The
Conjunction of Faith and Grace. p. 23.
and that is Faith; about the nature whereof the Huguenots seem to him, to
hold another error; For that, They deny (says he) that Grace may be lost,
without the loss of Faith. Which is but a mere cavil of his, upon the double
signification of the word Faith. For, if we affirm, That Faith is nothing
else, but to believe that God is so and so, and that he has done such and such
things, and to be brief, that all the Christian doctrine is most true; the
Huguenots will say (with Saint James) That the devils also believe as much,
and that the devils have Faith, though without Grace. So that the Huguenots
mistake, is nothing but in the word, for that they teach, That the Faith of
that man, which is deuoid of Grace and Charity, merits not the honorable
title of a Justifying Faith; and that such a Faith as this, is but the
Instrument only by which we are justified, which is ever accompanied with
Grace, and followed by good Works. We affirm likewise; That a Faith without
Charity, is a Faith without Form; wherefore, since the Form is it, which
gives the Being to the thing, it must needs follow; That a perfect Faith can
have no Being, without Charity: which Tenet is consented unto, both by the
Huguenots and the Catholics themselves: only we differ in terms: the
Huguenots calling Faith without Charity, an Historical or dead Faith; and we,
a Faith without Form. O my God, what a pity it is, to behold the simplicity
of our Christian Faith, thus puzzled about these quiddities.

There remains now the Effects of our Justification, Good Works: Merit of
Works.
By which even we Catholics say, That a man is not made Just, but that being
justified before, he increases in Righteousness: That is; of a Just man, he
becomes more Just; and being regenerate and in the state of Grace, He may (as
our Adversary says) fulfill the Law in such a sort, that he may by it truly
and properly merit eternal life. But as for the fulfilling of the Law, seeing
the Huguenots do their best to perform it, although they may be thought to
err, in confessing they cannot do it, yet has our Savior himself promised
free pardon for it, in the Parable of the Son, who refused to do his Fathers
will, and yet did it.

To return then to Merits by Works, the more accurate sort of Catholics
peremptorily deny, that they are at all meritorious, unless they be dyed in
the blood of Christ. And I assure my self, that not one amongst ten thousand
Catholics, understands sufficiently the meaning of this phrase; Works dyed in
the blood of Christ: but simply and without other addition they will say, That
they are in good hope to merit heaven by their Works. So that (we see) there
be three several opinions touching this question.

The first is of the vulgar Catholics, who are more in number

The second is of the Huguenots; who absolutely deny,

The third is the opinion of the Jesuits and the learned Catholics, who deny,
that any kind of Works do of themselves merit, but such only (as I said) as
are dyed in the blood of Christ. Which opinion accords much better with the
Huguenots doctrine, then that of the vulgar Catholics: for a thing dyed, is
not altered in substance, as Copper though gilded, yet continues Copper still:
the tincture and the gilding making the thing only fairer to the eye. And so
is it with our Works, which being by nature corrupt, remain corrupt still,
though dyed in the blood of Christ; howbeit that the tincture and gilding,
makes them more pleasing unto God, and for the love which he bears to Christ's
blood, to be rewarded. And if peradventure they make conscience of using the
word Merit, let us hearken to S. Bernard: A man cannot (says he) merit
eternal life, Sermon. 1. de anuntiatione Beatae Virginis.
by any good works whatsoever. And yet I trow, that S. Bernard was in this no
Huguenot. For I well know, that a Jesuit with some neat distinction, can make
him speak like a Catholic, whatsoever his meaning was. Let us then but do
the Huguenots the like courtesy, and make the same distinction in the
interpretation of their Tenent, as we would do in the explication of S.
Bernards, and in this point they will prove as good Catholics as S. Bernard,
or our selves.

Prayer. Page 26.
to wit, whether we ought to inuoke the Saints or not. The difference betwixt
us lies in two points: First, whether we ought to direct our prayers unto them;
the second, whether they pray for us.

For the first this I say; That the Catholics themselves make two extremities:
to wit, in the not inuoking them, as the Huguenots do; and in honoring them
too much; which is to say, in attributing to them that honor, which is due
only unto God, which the Schoolmen call Latria; which whosoever does, they
themselves hold him for an Idolater. Now the poor people which understand not
the Greek, nor what Latria means, nor comprehends any other mediocritie, than
to adore right down, or not to adore at all; goes to it bonafide, and with as
much devotion, adore our Lady and the other Saints, as they do God himself;
in such fashion, as that very hardly (even in the judgment of Catholics) can
the Catholics themselves herein avoid Idolatry.

As for the other extremity, those Catholics that maintain Invocation of
Saints, teach only thus much: That it is lawful to inuoke them, and not
unlawful, not to inuoke them. So that there can come no great danger of it, in
following the Catholics doctrine if true, nor in following the Huguenots
though erroneous. The Huguenots say furthermore, that we ought to honor them;
which we may very well do without inuoking them. As a Subject may well honor
his Sovereign being absent, though he never presented any petition to him in
all his life.

As for the second point; to wit, whether they pray for us or not: I affirm
that there be Huguenots, that will confess that they do; neither does Calvin
himself deny it: only he says, that he troubles not himself greatly, to know
whether they do or no. But should any of them deny it; where is the danger?
Bellarmine that great Master of Controversies affirms, Tom. 1. Contr. 6. lib.
3. cap. 15.
That the souls in Heaven, do pray for the souls in Purgatory, and they in
Purgatory, for those on earth. And yet notwithstanding confesses, that
Dominicus a Soto denies the first, and S. Thomas Aquinas the second. Wherefore
seeing that Purgatory is more beneficial to the Pope than Paradise, I can
perceive no reason wherefore the Huguentos should rather be Heretics for
disagreeing with the Catholics about the Intercession of the Saints in Heaven,
than the Catholics are for differing amongst themselves about the Intercession
both of the souls, and for the souls in Purgatory.

The last point wherein the Huguenots are departed from The Sacraments and
their number. Page 25.
nature, and particular Sacraments are to be considered of. And they first
miscount themselves in the number, reckoning but two, whereas the Council of
Trent has concluded it, that there are seven. Which objection of his is but
frivolous; insomuch as the difference lies more in the words, than in the
thing. For taking the word Sacrament properly, S. Austin says, that there be
but two, that is to say, Baptism, and the Eucharist. Further, it is an
ordinary phrase amongst us Catholics to say, That all the Sacraments issued
out of our Saviors side: whereas there issued nothing from thence save water
and blood, which according as Chrysostom, Cyril, and other Ancients interpret
it, represent the two Sacraments: that is, Baptism by the water, and the Cup
of the Lords Supper, by the blood. To which our Catholic Doctors give no other
answer than this: That the two Sacraments have some kind of dignity above the
rest; which comes to no more than to say, that there be two principal
Sacraments, and five more, inferior to those two. Which is all one with the
Huguenots opinion, though in diverse terms. They say that there be but two
properly; we say that there be but two principally: We again, that there be
five more of an inferior order; they confess that there may be more, if we
mean of Sacraments in the general signification.

For Calvin yields, that Order is a Sacrament, but not common to all men, nor
will our Catholic Doctors say otherwise. Again, they will confess with S.
Paul, that Marriage is also a Sacrament, taking it in that general
signification wherein the Ancients have translated the Greek word. Briefly,
they will yield that there be seven, but not barely seven. And in truth there
was none of the Ancient Fathers, that ever light upon this number of seven. So
that though the Huguenots cannot so euenly iumpe upon the number, seeing the
Primitive Church could not do it; we may perchance condemn them of ignorance
in Arithmeticke, but their error in Theology cannot be so great.

But he may argue, that they are mistaken in the very nature of the Sacraments;
The difference betwixt our Sacraments, and those of the old Law. Page 26.
because they deny them to be distinguished in force and virtue, from the
Sacraments of the old Law, or that they confer grace. I answer: That this is a
mere slander; for the Huguenots do distinguish them from the Sacraments of
the old Testament; and do affirm, that they do also confer grace. What would
you desire more of them? But not (says he) ex opere operato. The difference
then is not in the matter, whether our Sacraments confer more grace, or are of
more efficacy, than those of the old Law, but in the manner only, by what
means this grace is conferred. As for the manner, we should not me thinks too
narrowly pry into it, as Bellarmine very sagely advises us. Tom. 2. contr. 1.
lib. 2. cap. 1.
Like as in Christ's miracles (says he) the parties that were healed, needed
not to inquire in what manner the garment of Christ did cure them, it being
sufficient to them to believe only, that the touch of it wrought the cure: just
so is it not necessary (says he) that the Ministers or the Receivers of the
Sacraments should be curious to know, in what manner they become the causes of
our Justification.

We come next to the particular Sacraments, whereof he makes mention but of
three only: That is to say, Baptism, The efficacy of Baptism. Page 23.
the Sacrament of the Altar, and Penance. Touching Baptism, they affirm,
says he, That Original sin sticks so close to man, that neither by Baptism,
nor any other remedy, can it be gotten off. I answer: That even the Huguenots
confess as freely as the Catholics, that a man is washed from Original sin
by Baptism, which is enough for a Christian to believe in this point: so that
the difference lies merely in the nicity of the word, whether it should
rightliest be called Sin, or no Sin: The Catholics holding, that the Sin
is so far remitted, that the concupiscence which remains, ought not to be
called Sin: The Huguenots affirming, that the remaining Concupiscence may
very well be called Sin, although they herein consent to the Catholics, That
a man is so clearly absolved and discharged of it, that it is not reputed as a
Sin. For which cause in no other sense do they deny the grace received in
Baptism, though they still esteem themselves sinners altogether, than the
Debtor does his Creditors mercy; who confessing that he has received the
favor of him, to have his debts forgiven, does nevertheless acknowledge
himself his debtor. Which way soever it be taken, the sinner is pardoned, and
the debtor discharged, and what need have we to desire more?

He may say perchance again: Of Infants dying without Baptism.
That the Huguenots err not so much in acknowledging the benefits received in
Baptism, because they are not so well aware of the danger that follows the
want of it: For they affirm (says he) that the children of Christians may be
esteemed righteous, and have admittance into the kingdom of heaven without
Baptism, notwithstanding that Jesus Christ has said, That whosoever is not
borne again of water and of the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom
of heaven: I answer: that the Huguenots affirm not, that every child borne of
Christian Parents dying without Baptism is saved, but those only whom God in
his eternal counsel has elected. So that the question is not so much about
Baptism, as about Gods election: wherein there can be no danger, to confess
our ignorance, referring still Gods own decrees to his own good pleasure, as
the Huguenots do. For they instance not in what children are elected, but
forbear to press into Gods cabinet, and out of that to pronounce, that such
and such children shall be saved.

And if he replies again, That the Election of God is never destitute of these
secondarie means, and that Baptism is the means, by which he saues those that
are elected; and that it is a most manifest sign, that those who are deprived
of this Baptism, are also deprived of that election: I answer; That there be
Catholics, who teach, that a man may be saved without these secondarie means.
S. Damascene, S. Brigid, and some other Catholics do hold, that the Emperor
Trajanes soul was delivered out of Hell by the prayers of S. Gregory,
notwithstanding that he died a Painim, and without Baptism. If they then be
not Heretics, that teach the mercy of God to be so great, that he saved one
who had sinned actually, notwithstanding that he died without Faith, and
without Baptism; why should it be accounted Heresy, to say, that he sometimes
saues little Innocents, who never had more than Original Sin? For it is a more
extraordinary thing, to draw one out of Hell, than to keep one from going
thither. And what favor God had shown to one, he may likewise show to many.

As for that text of S. John, Regenerate of water and of the Holy Ghost, it is
to show; that the ordinary means unto salvation, is to conioyne the outward
sign, to the inward grace, according to S. Paul's saying, That with the heart
man belieues unto righteousness, and with the tongue he confesses to salvation;
which shows thus much; that ordinarily the outward confession goes with the
inward affection: nor can it be inferred out of the former text, That faith can
never be without the confession of the mouth, no more than it can by the other,
that Grace cannot be without the washing of the body. Finding now no great
matter in the Huguenots Doctrine blameworthy about the Baptism of Christ; The
Baptism of John.
he descends to the Baptism of John: which in the Huguenots opinion differs
not at all from that of Christ. To which I answer; That all the Huguenots hold
not this opinion: Secondly, that this difference is of no such great
importance, because that they that hold it, do it not to derogat from the
Baptism of Christ; for that they esteem it not John's Baptism, but Christ's,
administered by John, before Christ's declaring of himself, as it was by the
Apostles afterward. Finally, all this dispute is not about Christ's Baptism
which the people receive, but about John's, which they receive not; and
consequently it matters not much, to understand the force and efficacy of it.

In the next place follows the Sacrament of the Altar, Transubstantiation.
Page 26.
which comprehends two differences propounded in the answer. Which be, Christ's
presence in it; and the Sacrifice of the Mass. Upon the first the Huguenots
are accorded with the Catholics in the thing it self; that is, That our
Savior is truly present in the holy Sacrament, and that we do eat his body,
and drink his blood. The difference only lies in the manner, how he is
present, and how we eat and drink him. Which error cannot touch the
foundation of Faith, for as much as, according to our Catholic Doctors
opinion, it was left free for every man, by the space of 1000 years after
Christ's death, to believe this presence of his, in what manner they thought
best, provided that they believe it at all. Whence it is manifest, that it is
but the Huguenots ill luck to live in such a rigorous age of the Church,
otherwise they should not for this have been heretics. For diverse of the
ancient Fathers were infected with this error. Theod. Dialog. Gelasius lib. de
duabus naturis.
Theodoret, yea and Gelasius too, who was also Pope, have written in express
words, That even after the Consecration of these holy Mysteries, the very
nature and substance of the bread remained still. True it is that the Huguenots
may well be shent for reviving of this error, when they see that the Church of
Rome, and which is more, the Pope himself has condemned it; nevertheless
seeing that Gelasius, who was likewise a Pope, held the very same error; we
Catholics should do well to qualify it all we can, for the reputation of the
Sea Apostolic.

Now for the Sacrifice of the Mass, The Sacrifice of the Mass. Page 26.
they both confess with St. Paul, that there is but one Sacrifice for sin,
namely, that one of Jesus Christ upon the Cross; in such sort, that the
Catholics affirm not, that they make any new Oblation, but only represent
that former one, so oftentimes over, as they celebrate the Eucharist, in which
Christ is continually offered up. But for as much as St. Paul teaches, Heb. 7.
10.
That there is not only but one Sacrifice, but also that Jesus Christ is but
once offered: this Doctrine of ours had need be very subtly interpreted,
which no man in my judgment could finelier do then St. Thomas Aquinas, who
says, Thomas part. quest. 83. Artic. 1.
That this Sacrament is named an Immolation of Christ, in two regards, the
first, for that (as St. Austin says) Signs are called by the names of the
things whereof they be Signs: the second, for that by virtue of this
Sacrament, we are made partakers of the death of Jesus Christ. Well, let us see
then how far the Huguenots accord with St. Thomas in these two manners of the
offering up of Christ Jesus. For the first, seeing that it is collected out of
St. Austen, let us hear him in his own words. Aug. ad Bonifacium, epist. 23.
He falsifies not (says he) who says that Jesus Christ is offered up every
day, for if the Sacraments had not a kind of resemblance of the things whereof
they be Sacraments, they could not be Sacraments at all; and by reason of this
resemblance, they ordinarily take the names of the things themselves. According
to which interpretation the Huguenots will also say, that Christ is offered up
in the Sacrament, for as much as the Sacraments have the name of the things
which they signify. And seeing that the Eucharist signifies the death of
Christ, a man may well give the same term to the Eucharist, which he does to
his death. And for as much as he was offered up by his death, the Huguenots
will confess likewise, that he is also offered up in the Eucharist, by reason
(as St. Austen says) of this resemblance between them.

Concerning the second respect, for which S. Thomas says, that the Eucharist
is called the Immolation of Jesus Christ, that is, for that in the Sacrament we
are made partakers of the death of Jesus Christ; the Huguenots will also agree
thereunto. For it is their common phrase of speech to say, that in this Supper
they are made partakers of the death and passion of Jesus Christ. Now if there
be any third way of offering, questionless it is no matter of any great
importance; for that S. Thomas was so good a Catholic, and so subtle a
Logician, and above all, so experienced in the distinctions and other
stratagems of the School, would never have made mention barely of two manners
of offerings, had there been any third of any consequence.

The last Sacrament which he instances in, is Penance, Penance. Page 26.
wherein the Author of the answer observes no difference, but only names it in
that fashion, that I cannot see what fault he finds in the Huguenots
doctrine. But to pick out his meaning, I trow, that the difference lies
principally in two points: That is to say, Whether this Penance be well called
a Sacrament, or not; and secondly, What be the parts of it. For the first
point, of the title of Sacrament; It is but a wrangling about the word, as I
have showed before, when I discourst of the number of the Sacraments. As for
the parts; Namely, Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction, if that he blames
the Huguenots for not holding them properly parts thereof; I answer him, That
neither do all Catholics hold them so: For Durandus makes but two parts,
Confession and Absolution, and Scotus says, that there is but one, which is
Absolution.

But if the question be whether these three things be requisite or not, the
Huguenots will also say that they are; to wit, that it is necessary for a
Penitent to have Contrition and sorrow of heart, to confess and acknowledge
our sins unto God, nay, and that it is profitable also to confess them to the
Pastors of the Church, but not so absolutely necessary: because (according to
the judgment of the learned Catholics) this Auricular Confession was never
instituted by God, In Annotat. ad lib. Tertull. de poenitent. a.
nor yet of a long time practiced in the Church; as Beatus Rhenanus, who was
himself a Catholic, has very well observed.

Finally, as for Satisfaction, it is to be considered either in this life, or
in the life to come in Purgatory. That in this life, the Huguenots approve of,
and teach it to be most necessary to Salvation, to give satisfaction to men
whom we have any way offended, and in regard of our sins against God, to walk
in newness of life. Moreover, they confess that God punishes men in this
life by temporal afflictions, yea, even those whose sins are pardoned.

It Is true indeed, Purgatory, Page 26.
that they deny any satisfaction or punishment to be in Purgatory after death
for sin: but herein their error cannot be great; Lib. 21. de Civ. Dei, cap.
26.
first because S. Austen puts it down no otherwise than as a thing probable and
not necessary, saying no more, but, It may be that it is true. And secondly,
because that neither can the Catholics agree upon it amongst themselves; some
of them placing Pargatory here upon earth, others under it; some neither above,
nor below, but in the Air. Some affirm, that all the Elect shall go thither,
yea the Apostles and Martyrs themselves: others thrust in those only, who have
not in this life given full satisfaction for their sins. And for the fire, some
would have it a Material fire; some, fire and water; others, neither of both.
Lastly, some there be that teach, that the souls are there tormented by
Devils; others, by Angels, others by neither of both. How then I pray is this
question likely to be so necessary, about which there is so much uncertainty,
that we neither know (as I have showed) who they be that go thither, nor where
it is, nor by whom they are to be tormented, nor what they are to suffer. The
difference then betwixt the Catholics and the Huguenots, is but this; That the
Huguenots believe it not at all, and the Catholics know not what they believe.

See here in brief the Huguenots opinions upon the points before mentioned, by
which we may perceive their errors not to be in the substance of Faith, and
do not therefore hinder them from being of the Church and Catholic Religion.
For every error in Theology does not separate a man from the Church. S.
Cyprian was an Anabaptist in the point of Rebaptization, and yet was he a
Martyr. S. Hierome (as I said before) held those books of Scripture for
Apocryphal, which the Council of Trent has since concluded to be Canonical,
and yet remains he still Canonized for a Saint. Tertullian one of the ancient
Fathers fell to be a Montanist: And Origin alone held as many errors, as all
the Huguenots together; yet was he one of the most famous Doctors of the whole
Church. And to come nearer to our times; In how many questions of Divinity did
Scotus and Thomas Aquinas differ, the two prime pillars of Schoole-Diuinitie?
Melchior Canus and Bellarmine accuse Caietane of diverse errors, who for all
that remains one of the venerable College of Cardinals. The Dominicans and
Franciscans could never yet agree about our Ladies conception, yet be both of
them held for very good Catholics. So that, as I said, the Huguenots may very
safely be accounted good Catholics, so long as they hold the foundation of
Divinity, although they put some few tyles out of order on the roof of the
house, and build with hay and straw: upon condition still, that (as S. Paul
says) it be upon the same foundation. Otherwise we must conclude, the Martyrs,
the Saints, the ancient Fathers, the Doctors of the Church, the prime
Schoolmen, the Cardinals, yea and the Catholics themselves, to be no
Catholics.

CAP. 2.
(...) Catholics as well as the Huguenots do not agree with the ancient
Church in matter of Ceremonies: and that therefore the Huguenots are not to be
condemned.

AS in men we consider their bodies, and their apparel; so in the Church
likewise we consider the Doctrine, and the Ceremonies. As for the doctrine or
body of Religion, I have shown in the former Chapter that the Huguenots have
the brain, the heart, and the liver, and all other the vital parts, whole and
sound: that is, that they yet hold all the principal points of faith, and that
the maine thing that can seem to be blamed in them, is, that they have some
certain warts or spots in their skin; certain errors I mean, in the
circumstances and application of that faith. Now for the apparel and ceremony
of Religion, I confess that the Church of the Huguenots is not so gorgeously
or richly set out as the Church of Rome, and is for the same cause not so well
entertained, and more despised in the Courts of great Princes and Monarchs of
the world: which I judge to be the reason why the Catholic Apology endeavored
to excuse the simple and naked Ceremonies of the Reformed Church, without any
intent thereby to disparage the gorgeous and gay attire of the Catholic
Church; but to show only, That we should not so meanly esteem this outward
simplicity, as to condemn it without hearing. Even as that officer would be
held too rigide and severe, that would hinder a poor man from presenting his
Petition to the Prince, because he is not clad like a Courtier.

The reason for which the Apology does excuse them, is, for that the ancient
Church did sometimes heretofore content her self with the like simplicity. Now
upon this occasion the Author of the answer persuades himself that he has
gotten a great advantage upon the Catholic Apology: Because (says he) he can
prove, that diverse of these ceremonies which the Huguenots do reject are very
ancient: To which I answer, That I willingly accept as much as he grants, that
is, that he cannot prove that all the ceremonies of the Church of Rome be most
ancient, but only (as he says) diverse of them. As for those diverse which he
instanceth in, that you may see how impertinent they are, I will make it
appear in these two things: First, that he does not prove against the
Huguenots that the Church of Rome does agree with the ancient Church in the
self same ceremonies. Secondly, that admitting that the ancient Church had
them in use, yet are not the Huguenots to be condemned for having disused them.

For the first point: That the Church of Rome agrees not with the Primitive
Church in matter of ceremonies.
my purpose is not to condemn the ceremonies of our Mother the holy Church,
but since that our side are so strait laced, as to hinder our reconciliation
for a thing so indifferent as these ceremonies are; I have taken the boldness
to oppose them: and to show, That the Huguenots may easily answer the argument
which he alleages: which I write not to justify them, but with a purpose that
we should not so confidently assure our selves, that all is so clear on our
sides. Let us hear then how the Huguenots may answer the 15 examples which he
brings.

sign of the Cross: Sign of the Cross. Page 27.
concerning which, the Huguenots will confess that it has been anciently
used; but that the use of this was brought into the Church, upon a particular
occasion, and proper only to that age. For the Pagans amongst whom the
Christians in those days conuersed, were wont when they met with a Christian
to make the sign of the cross in derision of their Christianity, for that the
God whom they worshipped was hanged upon a cross; so that the Christians, to
show that they were not ashamed of such a death, in all their actions would still
make the sign of the cross. But now this occasion being taken away, the
Huguenots may likewise say, that it is not necessary to continue the practice
no more then it is to apply a plaster to a wou^d already healed.

As for praying to the East: I never yet knew any Huguenot that held it
unlawful to pray toward the East, nor any Catholic Praying toward the East.
Page 28.
What more then is there to be said between them, but only that it is an
indifferent custom, which has not been always so strictly observed in all
Churches. For Socrates says that in the Church of Antioch, Lib. 5. cap. 21.
the high Altar was placed clean contrary, and toward the West.

As for the invocation of the Eucharist, our adversary affirms, Basile,
Invocation of the Eucharist.
That this invocation was then and from the Apostles time practiced, when they
showed the Eucharist. I answer; that these words make nothing against the
Huguenots, for a man may very well use invocation in the time of the
celebration of the Sacrament, and all the while direct his invocation to God,
and not to the Sacrament. True it is, that there was a special Prayer
appointed for that purpose, which Saint Basile thought to have been a
tradition of the Apostles: But now the Catholics themselves do not any longer
observe that form of prayer: and it cannot be found in any antiquity, what
form of prayer that was, which Saint Basile speaks of. So that if this prayer
were an Apostolical tradition, our Church has had small care in preserving
it; which made me believe that we have some things put upon us under the title
of Apostolical tradition, which are not so. For it is still as easy to invent
some new tradition, which we have not yet received, as to forget those which
we have already entertained. For God ordinarily where he takes away the memory,
supplies that defect with invention and sufficiency of judgment. It being very
wisely done, when we have lost one tradition, to put another in the place,
thereby to keep the number full still, and entire.

The fourth example is of Hallowing the water in Baptism. Basile, Blessing of
the water in Baptism. Page 28.
that the water of Baptism ought to be blessed: But this they deny; that this
hallowing was such heretofore, as that now in use with us. For as much as they
say, That water and all other creatures are sanctified by God already: and
particularly that the water of Baptism needs no benediction to make it more
holy; Homil. 25. in Johan.
because (as says Saint Chrysostom) Christ by his Baptism has blessed all
waters. But if my Antagonist will proceed further to infer, that the water in
Baptism ought of necessity to be hallowed in the same sort that it is now; I
say that Eusebius writes that Constantine the Great would have men to baptize
in Jordan; and yet I never heard that all the water of Jordan was made holy
water.

consecration of the Oil: the word consecration at the first, Consecration and
use of Oil in Baptism. Page 28. Tertull lib. de corona militis.
signifying no more then the institution of a sign to an holy use. And as for
the use of oil, like as the ancient Church made use of it in Baptism, so did
they also of milk and honey; neither of which are any more in use, no not in
the Roman Church. Why then should the Huguenots be blamed more for the want of
one ceremony, then the Catholics would be for want of another? And this also
serves to disprove that other example which follows, to wit, that the Roman
Church agrees with the ancient in all the ceremonies of Baptism.

Lent, Lent.
which Saint Hierome esteems for an Apostolical tradition. To which the
Huguenots will answer, that Epiphanius says, Epiphan. haerest. 75.
that it is an Apostolical tradition also to fast upon Wednesdayes and
Frydayes, except upon those betwixt Easter and Whitsontide: in which time the
said S. Hierome in the very book quoted by the Answerer, Hieronim. contra Lucif.
says that it is unlawful to fast: and yet do the Catholics fast
notwithstanding upon Fridaies in that very time. Why then are the Huguenots
more to be blamed for disusing the custom of the ancient Church in the
observation of the forty days before Easter, then the Catholics, for
dissenting from the same Church, in the observation of the 50. days after?

sacrifice for the dead, it appears by that Liturgy of the Greeks, Sacrifice
for the dead.
which is read in the fifth Tome of Saint Chrysostomes works, that they made
mention amongst the dead (for whom they made their oblations) of the Apostles
and Marytrs; who according to the judgment of all parties, do go directly
into heaven, and have no need of any such oblation as men offer at this day,
for the easing of the souls departed. So as the Huguenots will say, that it
must needs follow that the souls of the Saints which are in Paradise are
helped by such oblations, (which none of the wiser Catholics will maintain)
or else that the said sacrifice for the dead was no other thing then a
Commemoration made in the time of the Celebration of the Eucharist; and thus
much the wiser sort of Huguenots will not find fault withal.

The next example is of the Baptism of Infants: Baptism of infants.
which the

As for the mixing of water with the wine in the Chalice, Mixture of water with
the wine in the Chalice.


Another example is of perpetual single life, Perpetual single life.
which the Huguenots The Church (says one Cano^) after the constitution of the
Apostles, added some counsel of perfection, as this of the single life of
Priests: where we may observe 2. things against the answer; one is, that single
life was ordained by way of counsel, not of commandment: the other, that it
was ordained since the Apostles times, and could therefore be no tradition of
the Apostles.

The next example is of the solitary or contemplative life; Solitary life.
Sozomen. Histor. lib. 1. cap. 12.
as the Ecclesiastical stories do testify in the lives of S. Paul and S.
Anthony, the two first Hermits.

Now for the order of Monks: Orders of Monks.
the Huguenots will name the very year when each of them was invented. And
what though the name of Monks was usual in the primitive Church yet were they
then other manner of Monks, then ours at this day. For first, they earned
their livings by the sweat of their brows. Secondly, diverse of them were
married, as Athanasius writes. Athanasius ad Dracontium.
Finally, the Huguenots will say, that there was never Monk in the Primitive
Church that killed a King; nor any Catholic in those times, that would have
approved it.

election of meats; which the Huguenots approve, Election of Meats.
so that it be done with discretion, and not merely for conscience, according
to the custom of the ancient Church. For the better clearing of this point, we
may (me thinks) distinguish between the difference of meats, and the choice
of meats. For the Huguenots will say, that there is no difference of meats in
respect of Religion; for that it is lawful to eat indifferently of all sorts
of meats, without making scruple of Conscience; but that men for the taming of
their flesh may abstain from such meats, as they find to provoke them to
concupiscence: which kind of abstinence because it is left free, to the choice
of him that fasteth, may properly be called Election of meats. For the Apostles
(says the Ecclesiastical Story) have left it to every man's liberty,
Tripartite 9. 38.
to use as well in their fasts, as on other days, such kinds of meats as they
best like of. Whereas the Fasts enjoined by the Church of Rome, may rather
(will the Huguenots say) be called A Prescription of meats, then a free
Election: Because Election is still voluntary, and their abstinence is
constrained.

Holy Days, which they call an Apostolical tradition, Holy Days.
I say, that the Ecclesiastical Stories show the clean contrary; Lib. 5. cap.
21.
For Socrates says in express words, That the Apostles ordained nothing
concerning Holy Days. Again, they which supposed them to have been ordained
by the Apostles, are enforced at length, to place the observation of them in
the Class of things indifferent. For of all the Festival days, there was not
one of them which has been observed with more devotion then Easterday; which
notwithstanding, the Western Church used to celebrate upon Sunday, and the
Eastern, upon other days: the one confirming their custom by the tradition
of S. Peter and Paul, and the other by the tradition of Philip and John. Soz.
7. 19.
Which controversy, was thus taken up betwixt Polycarpus, and Victor Bishop of
Rome; namely, that the observation of it should be left free and indifferent.
Now the Huguenots do not simply condemn the observation of Holy Days, but
only the forcing to the observation of them. For in England, Germany,
Switzerland, and other Countries, where the pretended Reformed Religion is
established, they to this day observe diverse Saints days, without reprehension
of the Huguenots in France.

But put the case, That the Huguenots are not to be blamed for leaving off the
Ceremonies of the ancient Church.
that the use of all the foresaid Ceremonies were such in the ancient Church,
as they now are (...) the Roman; yet say I, that all these examples make
nothing to the purpose; Forasmuch as Ceremonies (as I have said) are but the
apparel, which alters the fashion every foot, and are fitted to time and
place: which our Adversary himself confesses. For, knowing that the most part
of our Ceremonies were unknown to the Ancients, he has no other Answer then
this, which will also serve to answer him again, viz: That it matters not
much, whether the Ecclesiastical Ceremonies were in use in the Primitive
Church, or were newly taken up in these latter times. Now the Scriptures (will
the Huguenots say) denounces the same curse against those which add, as
against those which take away: so that if it be lawful for the Roman Church
to add any thing to the ancient Ceremonies, it is as lawful for them also to
take away, especially those which have been added.

Secondly, the Church is called Primitive, either in regard of it self,
because it is truly ancient; or in respect of the modern Church of Rome, as it
is more ancient in its self. If we speak now of the Church, as it is ancient
in it self; the Huguenots will say, that there is no resemblance betwixt the
Ceremonies of the ancient Church and those of the modern. But if we speak of
that which is more ancient then ours, (from which only our Adversaries
Arguments are drawn) they will say, that (besides all this, that the most part
of our Ceremonies are different) yet at that time also were there too too many
in the Church; Epist. 119. 19.
in so much as Saint Augustine in his time complained exceedingly of the
multitude of them.

Finally, as the ancient Church had some Ceremonies which the Huguenots have
not; so had it likewise others, which the Church of Rome has not; as Milk and
Honey in Baptism, and the fashion of plunging the Infant thrice to the
bottom: which have been abrogated (as Saint Thomas says) to avoid the
calumnies of the Sabellians, who for this custom reproched the Christians,
that they worshipped three Gods. From whence we may collect, how indifferent
things these Ceremonies are, so long as they are not abused: and on the other
sid^ how lawful it is, yea, and how necessary, to take away the use of them,
for preventing of an inconvenience. So that we may say thus much in the
Huguenots behalf; that they do, not in this point, swerve so much from the
practice of the ancient Church, seeing they do not condemn those diverse
Ceremonies which were practiced anciently; notwithstanding, that they do now
forbear them, especially when they have observed them to change into so much
superstition, as that our better learned Catholics, do even laugh at the
poor people, whom they themselves have abused.

CAP. 3.
That the doctrine of the Huguenots has not been condemned by any lawful
Judgment, before the Council of Trent.

HItherto have I spoken of the Huguenots Religion as it is in it self, As well
in Doctrine, as in Ceremonies, viz: That Ceremonies be things indifferent; And
as for their errors in doctrine, that they be not in the foundation of faith.
So that they, not being Heretics in respect of the wickedness of their
opinions; let us now trauerse the Indictment, to find whether they be so by
condemnation. Now our Adversary to convict them, produces the Decrees of
diverse Councels: to which, before I make answer, I will propose these 4
Considerations.

The first is this: 1 Consid. Aug. Epist. 112,
Whether a general and lawful Council, may err or not in the substance of
faith; seeing that it is made up of men, in whose testimony (as says S.
Augustine) there is so little certainty, his words be these: A man may believe
the Scriptu^es, without doubting; but for any other testimonies, it is lawful
either to believe them or not to believe them. So as this privilege, to be of
an irrefageable certainty, is only given to the Scriptures: which if it be
true, then all the passages which are drawn from the authority of Councels,
are thus far forth only, of weight, as they can be made good by the
Scriptures. Nevertheless, this being the common answer of the Huguenots: I
will make no further use of it; but like a true Catholic, confess this to be
an infallible Maxim; That a lawful and general Council, cannot err in the
substance of faith.

The second is: 2 Consid.
Whether if such a general Council may err, though not in the substance of
faith; yet at least in other points of Divinity of less consequence; And if
they may err in these, then, seeing (as I have shown) that the Huguenots
errors be not in the substance of faith, that it follows hereupon, That the
Councels may err in their definitive decisions of those Controversies which
are betwixt the Huguenots and us, being only points of lesser consequence.
Whereupon it follows, That this second sort of heresy becomes supernumerary,
and their errors not being heresies in their own nature, cannot be made
heresies by bare condemnation. For the reason why he is counted an Heretic,
who resists the Decrees of a Council, is; for that in doing so, he resists the
Judgment of the Holy Ghost, which does still, and infallibly, accompany the
Council. But now, if the Holy Ghost be no further forth promised to assist the
Council, then when it treats of things necessary to salvation; Then they,
who hold some tenets contrary to the Council in other things, do not herein
resist the judgment of the Holy Ghost, Stapleton Princip. Doctrine. cont. 4.
lib. 6. cap. 15.
and by consequence are no Heretics. Stapleton, professor of the Controversies
at Doway, and one of the most learned Catholics of our times, who has written
most accurately of this Argument) holds, That the holy Ghost is only promised
to assist the Counsels in necessary things, and that in other things they may
err. Andradius defen^fid^ ^^dent. Lib. 4.
And Andradius himself, who defends the Council of Trent, in the very same
Book wherein he does defend it as general, lawful, and sound in the matter
of Faith, Council. Trid. Sess. 3.
condemns the vulgar translation of the Bible, as corrupted, although the said
Council had authorized it for authentical; so little did he trust to the
judgment of Counsels in things which were beside the essence of faith.

But admitting thus much; 3. Cons.
That a lawful Council cannot err at all, yet is there still a third
difficulty; viz. Whether these Counsels which he produces against the
Huguenots be lawful: which even a Catholic may safely deny; for as much as
there be diverse nillities to be found in them, and namely in their manner of
proceeding, which are no where found in the ancient Counsels, as I will show
in the next Chapter, when I treat of the Council of Trent. Now, the Huguenots
will be very well content to be tried by the Ancient Counsels, held in the
first 600 years of Christ; namely, until such time as the Pope (as they say)
having gotten so absolute a Monarchy in the Church, took away the liberty of
Counsels, and subjected the suffrages of the other Bishops to give with him:
now all the Councels alleged by our Adversary are since that time.

There remains a fourth difficulty, ^ Cons.
namely, Whether the Huguenots have been justly condemned by the latter
Counsels. Now upon these four considerations, a man may perceive how
frivolous his brags are of the Councels; for as much as he is able to conclude
nothing, unless he has leave granted him before hand to add what authority
to the Councels he pleases; to make what Counsels lawful he lists, and to
force the Counsels to speak what he would have them: The most innocent man
in the world might be convicted by such proofs, if a man would believe
without further examination, whatsoever every witness shall bring against him:
and when his Adversary also shall have leave, both to pack the witnesses at
his own pleasure, and also to judge of their testimonies.

But to return to our purpose. Let us see next, whether the Huguenots stand
lawfully condemned by those Counsels which he produces, or not. The
Catholic Apology denies it; whereby (in my conceit) he shows a great deal
of zeal to the Roman Religion. For, considering what a world of people are
infected with the Huguenots doctrine, by reason that it is not yet condemned by
any lawful form of proceeding; he endeavors to persuade with the Catholics,
to cause a lawful Council to be called to confute them, to the end, that the
Huguenots might be satisfied by being showed their errors, and be left
without excuse for rejecting the doctrine of the Church of Rome. But observing
that there be many seditious Catholics (who rather thirst to kill their
bodies, then to save their souls) do hinder so holy a design, under color,
that they be already condemned by other Counsels: The Catholic Apology does
very well herein, to advise them not to desist for all this, but to pursue so
good an enterprise; for as much as the former Decrees, by which the Huguenots
stand condemned: are not of such authority, but that they may appeal from them
to an higher power. So that we must sue out another Process against them, to
get such a Judgment as they themselves shall never be able to except against.
Now our Adversary answers, that there is no need to take this course,
affirming that they be indeed cast already by such a Judgment; which he
proves by two reasons. One is, that the doctrine of the Roman Church has
been publicly confirmed by general Counsels, before that of Trent. The
second is, that the Huguenots religion is the same with that of ancient
Heretics, which has been heretofore condemned.

For the first, Transubstantiation:
The chief Controversy is (says he) about the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper; which is not only determined by the Council of Trent, but also by
ten most ancient councels of the Church. To make good which assertion, he
cites the Council of Vercelles, Tours, Vienna, Constance, Florence: and of
five others, celebrated at Rome; the chief of which was that of Lateran, under
Innocent the third. And these be the ten Councels which our Adversary styles
the most ancient Counsels of the Church. Certainly, then was the Church a
long time without Councels, for the ancientest of these was 1000 years after
the Apostles times. But peradventure he means it only of the Church of Rome,
as it is different in doctrine from the ancient Church; which is as much to
say, As th^se Counsels are the most ancient of this (Roman) Church, which not
long before the celebrating of these Counsels, became a new Church, and quite
contrary to the former. And in this sense, he does not account these Counsels
as simply ancient, but the most ancient only of that Church* which is not
ancient. I can but wonder how he comes so ill advised, as to give this
advantage to the Huguenots, as to conclude upon him out of his own premises;
That our holy mother Church of Rome, is a new Church: and so give a hint to the
vulgar to discover by his own confession, that it is so indeed. Which
inconvenience, the Author of the Catholic Apology was better aware off to
prevent it, for knowing very well, that we are not able to make good the
doctrine of the Roman Church by the ancient Counsels, he advises rather that
we should labor the calling of a new one; lest that by urging the other,
which indeed be not ancient, the common people might come by this means to
suspect that our doctrine is new.

But to return to the said Counsels: besides this, that they are all new,
there be also seven of the ten which were never received for general, by the
most learned defenders of the Roman religion; and by the opinion therefore of
those very Catholics, they may err, and by consequence it will be lawful to
appeal from them to a general Council. Just as the opinion of S. Cyprian
about Rebaptization, being cond^mned at Rome in a particular Council, by Pope
Cornelius, and the sentence ratified by Pope Stephan; yet did S. Cyprian
nevertheless continue in his former opinion, accusing both the Popes and the
Councels of error; which certainly he would not have done, had he esteemed
the authority of a particular Council, without appeal: whereby it appears,
that of those ten Counsels which he urges, the^e be but three, namely,
that of Lateran, of Vienna, and of Florence, which be esteemed general, even
by the Catholics themselves: and so by consequence only three, which have
power definitiuely to determine, and not to be subject to an appeal to be
made from them.

As for the Decree of that Council of Lateran, Council of Lateran.
we ought not to think it strange, that the Huguenots except against it,
seeing that the said Council, in the judgment even of the Catholics
themselves might err, in the sentence given against them; for Scotus says of
Transubstantiation, That it is but an opinion probable; now, an opinion
probable is not necessary; and in determining upon a doctrine which is not
necessary, Stapleton says: That a general Council may err: whereby it
appears, that in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, the Decree of the
Council aforesaid was not certain. Can we imagine then that the Huguenots
will stand to such a Decree, which the Catholics themselves confess to be
subject to error.

As for the Council of Vienna, Council of Vienna.
this error (says he) is condemned in it, which is: That we ought not to
do any honor or reverence to the holy Eucharist; which, as every man knows
is the error of Calvin, and of all the Sacramentaries. I answer: That our
Adversary, and such as he, do much injury the church of Rome, in giving the
Huguenots occasion to reproach the Catholics, as to twit them, that they be
liars and slanderers. For they of the Religion do not affirm (as he would
make them) that we ought not to give any honor or reverence to the Eucharist:
but that we should not adore it as the Catholics do.

The last Council is that of Florence; Council of Florence.
the authority whereof, the Huguenots may well except against, for that (...)
dissents from other Counsels. For the Counsels of B^sil and Constance, both
which our Adversary ranks here amongst the general Councels, have adjudged
it, That the authority of a Council is above the Pope; whereas the Council
of Florence, makes the Pope above the Council. Which sentence is not only (as
I think) contrary to the Council of Basil and Constance, but contradictory
also to the judgment of all the Divines in Paris at that time. So that if the
Huguenots do ill in dissenting from the Council of Florence, they do it by
the example of Catholic Divines and of other Councels, yea of those which are
general, by the judgment even of our Adversary himself,

The second doctrine which he instances in, Freewill.
is that of Freewill; for denying of which, the Manichees and other Heretics
stand condemned by S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Leo, etc. Now I answer: That
the Huguenots deny it not in the same manner that those Heretics did, as is to
be well seen in the doctrine of the Manichees: who made two necessary
Principles; the one of Good, and the other of Evil; and as absolutely denied
Freewill, as well of doing ill, as of doing good. But when he can show, that
the Huguenots hold any such opinion, his examples will serve to some purpose.

Further, he confirms the said opinion by four other Councels, viz: by a
particular one held in France, and by those of Auranches, Sens, and Constance.
I answer; that it were but an easy matter so to interpret the said Councels,
as that the Huguenots need not refuse them in this point of Freewill. But for
breuities sake, I will not stand to examine them, because that three of them be
particular, and for that respect may err (as I have shown before) and may be
appealed from: and for the fourth, which is that of Constance, though it be
called general by our Adversary, yet Bellarmine nevertheless receives but
18. Councels for general and lawful, of which rank this of Constance is none.

The third heresy that he speaks of is, Children dying without Baptism.
That the Huguenots hold, that little Children dying without Baptism, do not
perish; which that they do, is plain enough (says he.) And how? namely, by
so many testimonies of Scripture, by so many Decrees of ancient Councels, by so
many resolutions of holy Fathers; And yet does he allege but two passages only
out of S. Austen, who indeed as he was of this opinion, That Children could not
be saved without Baptism; so held he likewise, That they could not be saved
without the Eucharist Which opinion of his, even our Catholics themselves do
condemn. Why then should the Huguenots be Heretics rather for dissenting from
S. Augustine in one Sacrament, then the Catholics are for disallowing his
judgment in the other?

The fourth point is the Worshipping of Images: Worshipping of Images.
which was confirmed by the second Council of Nice, unto which I may well
oppose the Council of Franckford, celebrated since that of Nice, which both
contemned and condemned the authority of that Council, and the Decrees of it.
Neither does it make anything for our Adversary, to say that these testimonies
are of weight enough amongst Catholics, for there were none in the Council of
Franckford but Catholics, and the Popes Legates themselves, which assisted at
it. Observe then all the Councels which our Adversary has rakt together
against the Huguenots; All of which, excepting those three of Lateran, Vienna,
Florence, and this last of Nice, are particular, and so by consequence, their
Decrees may be anulled and reuersed. Further of these four, which by some are
accounted general; the first, (that of Lateran I mean) was by the sentence of
Scotus and Stapleton (two grand Catholics) subject unto error. The words he
urges out of the second, ( viz: that of Vienna) are nothing to the purpose.
The Judgment of the third (which is that of Florence) is contrary to the
Decrees of the Councels of Basile and Constance. The last of Nice, was
condemned by that of Franckford: wherefore then, should the Huguenots give way
to the authority of such Councels, from whom the Catholics themselves, yea
Councels also of Catholics themselves, do disagree, how can we hope then to
convert them by such proofs? let us call a new one then; let us give
indifferent audience to their Ministers, let us refute their Arguments to their
very faces, else shall we never recall the Huguenots, that are gone astray,
into the right way.

That the Doctrine o^ the Huguenots is not the same with that of the ancient
Heretics already condemned.
Because they agree in doctrine with the ancient Heretics, viz: the Arrians,
who (as S. Augustine testifies) rejected, 1. Prayers for the dead: 2. The set
times of Fasting: 3. The difference betwixt the Bishop and the ordinary Priest:
And 4. with Iouinian and Vigilantius, in the point of Continency and
Virginity. 5. Merit and rewards of Saints: 6. The Adoration of Relics: 7.
The Invocation of Saints: 8. The Election of Meats. I answer. First, Retractat.
lib. 2. cap. 17.
That even as a good Catholic may err, so may an Heretic also speak truth.
S. Cyprian and Ticonius the Donatist, having diversely interpreted a place of
the holy Scriptures, S. Augustine reiects S. Cyprians exposition, and allows
that of Ticonius. So that it is not enough barely to show that an Heretic has
maintained such and such an opinion, unless he prove withal, that the said
opinion is heretical. Secondly, I have showed in the former Chapter, that the
use of things indifferent, might be lawful in the ancient Church, and yet
unlawful in this of ours: so that the Huguenots may justly blame the
selfsame things which the said Heretics did unjustly except against, until
we can prove, not only the things to be the same; but also make it appear,
that there is not now a greater abuse, in the same things, then there was then.
As for the opinions following, the Huguenots will affirm, that neither did the
Fathers hold them in the same manner that the Catholics now do, nor that the
Heretics took the same exceptions to them, that the Huguenots now do, as we
may perceive by the examples following.

First, Prayer for the dead.
as for Prayer for the Dead, the Huguenots will affirm, That the Church in the
beginning, celebrated only a Commemoration of the dead, wherein (as I showed in
the former Chapter) they made mention likewise of the Apostles, and of those
that be already gone to heaven. Now this Commemoration (will the Huguenots say)
brought forth Prayer for the dead, this Prayer brought forth Purgatory;
Purgatory, Pardons; and Pardons have brought in pence into the Popes coffers.
Now (will they say further) that so long as these abuses were not in the
Church, if any man had found fault with this custom, of Commemoration, he
should but have showed himself to be of a quarrelsome spirit, yea, they will
further say; that petty abuses, especially such as bare a show of Charity,
might somewhat be winked at, as Prayer for the Dead, had: which custom served
then also to stir up in the Pagans, a better esteem of the Christian faith:
but this occasion being now ceased, and the abuses remaining so great, as they
affirm them to be; it is now no time to wink at them any longer, nor is there
any other means left us, to reform them, then to take away the first occasion
whence they proceeded, though in themselves they be of no great consequence. So
that if we will show wherein the Huguenots resemble the other ancient
Heretics, in taking exceptions unto Prayer for the dead, we must show withal;
how that the ancient Church used the same chaffering for Pardons and
Indulgences, for the delivering of souls out of Purgatory, that the Church of
Rome at this day does. Otherwise, the abuse being not the same, the things
deserve not equal blame, and they that find fault with them, are not alike
faulty.

Touching set Fasting days, I am heartily sorry, that he, in Set Fasting days.
that the Huguenots do herein imitate the ancient Heretics, gives them
advantage to revenge themselves upon us, and to prove the clean contrary;
namely, that it is we that follow the ancient Heretics: Eusebius. 5. 16.
for Eusebius says, That it was Montanus the Heretic, who first set down the
Rules for Fasting, seeing that before that, these set Fasting days were not
ordained with any intention to bind the Consciences, but for orders sake only.
Surely then he was not in the right, whosoever found fault with them, seeing
there was at first no superstition in them. But since that (say the Huguenots)
the superstition is come to that height, that the very day, only because it is
such, or such a Saints Eve, is esteemed much holyer th^n other days. So then,
this order having occasioned superstition, to avoid this superstition, we may
dispose otherwise of that order.

Distinction of Bishops and Priests.
the Huguenots will say, that at first they were both equal: but that since
then, some amongst them have been promoted to dignity above the rest, and at
last One is become Monarch over them all. Now (will the Huguenots confess)
that before this universal Monarchy of the Pope, there was not the like reason
to blame the distinction of degrees in Pastors, which in it self was
tolerable, and not altogether unprofitable: But they will say withal, that it
is most manifest, how that the Fathers never held this distinction to have
been instituted by God, but only to be a positive ordinance of men, Comment
in cap. 1. Epist. ^d Titum.
to preserve (as Saint Jerome says) the unity of the Church. A Priest (says
he) is the same with a Bishop, but it was afterward ordained throughout the
world that one should be made choice of above the rest, for the avoiding of
Schism. Howbeit he confesses that Bishops are superior to Priests, by Custom
rather, then by divine Ordination.

Marriage and Virginity.
is concerning Marriage and Virginity, which is but a mere calumny: for the
Huguenots affirm not with Iouinian, That marriage is simply equal to
virginity; but only in such a sense as Saint Augustine speaks it, who says,
that he dares not prefer the virginity of S. John, before the marriage of
Abraham. Nor with Vigilantius, that it is unlawful to make a Priest, unless
he were first married: but with that holy man Paphnutius, that it is lawful for
a Priest to be married.

Merits and rewards of the Saints, I cannot tell what he would say: Merits of
Saints.
for if he means by it, That the Saints receive a recompense of their good
works the Huguenots will agree to it: but if he means it of works of
supererrogation, laid up (as they say) in the treasury of the Church, and
applied by the Popes Indulgences, unto the souls of other men; the Catholics
will say, that the Church lived in the same ignorance for the first thousand
years, that the Huguenots now do: for it is not long since that for the
benefit and advancement of the Pope, God first revealed this treasure, which
had lain hid so long, and the most gainful commodity of Indulgences also.

Now as for Relics, I say that even the same Saint Hierome Vigilantius for
taking exception to the Relics of Saints; Worshipping of Saints and their
Relics*
does yet in the same book against Vigilantius, allow of the Eues of Saints:
howbeit for certain abuses committed in the night of the said Eues, which they
called the Vigils, the Catholics themselves have forbidden them: And now fast
only upon the Eues, although the days do still retain the names of Eues. So
then, we must either grant that the catholics are condemned by Saint Hierome,
as well as the Huguenots; or else that the abuse of things, causes them to be
thought blame worthy at one time, and not at another. So that we must not
consider whether the Huguenots agree with Vigilantius, in the taking exception
to Relics; but whether there be not now more abuse in the worshipping of
them, then in Saint Hieromes time. For the Huguenots do not now simply except
against Relics, insomuch that I have heard diverse Huguenots say, That if they
could be certain that they had any ancient monument of our Savior, or of his
Apostles, they would make very precious esteem of them: and far more, then
of any antique medall or other antiquity of the old Romans. By greater reason
then do they honor their persons, although they do not inuoke them being
dead, for that (say they) themselves forbade it whilst they lived. So that if
we will prove the Huguenots to be enemies to the honor of the Apostles, we
must prove out of their writings, That such was their will to be inuocated.
Else will the Huguenots tell us, That they have the Saints in more honor then
the Catholics; in that they have such a care to observe their precepts now
after their deaths: It being evident, That that child who is most careful to
perform his last will and testament, loves hid deceased father best, then if
he should only keep his picture by him.

The eight and last opinion of the ancient Heretics, Election of meats.
is, the Election of meats. Whereunto the Huguenots will give the same answer
as to the former objections: viz. that it was unlawful in those times to find
fault with the election of meats, and yet lawful to condemn it now. The
reason is, for that it was then an order only, without enforcing of the
conscience to observe it.

And if any man reply, That they now in the Church do but the same, and that
it is only the meaner sort of people that account one meat holier then
another: and that the better learned Catholics hold, that the sin of eating
flesh upon days whereon it is forbidden, is only in regard of the ordinance,
and not in regard of the nature of the meats: Whence comes it then that
Durandus that great defender of the ceremonies of our Church, Durand. l. 6 de
aliis ieiuniis.
makes use of this reason, to confirm abstinence from eating of flesh; namely,
That fish is a more holy meat: for that in the time of Noah's flood, God cursed
the earth, and the creatures that it brought forth, but not the waters.

See here now the ancient heresies revived (as he says) by the Huguenots: but
he is in the wrong: for that they ought not to be ranked amongst the Heretics,
until such time as we have made proof, how that the Church of Rome does not
only agree with the Primitive in the same things, but also in the very
circumstances of the things: for those things which are of themselves
ceremonies, are also of themselves indifferent; and it is the right use or
abuse of them, which makes them lawful or unlawful. So that by consequence it
may be at this time lawful, and at another time unlawful, to take exceptions
to them; Even as it was not lawful to break the brazen Serpent, (...)
whilst it was a Sacrament, but necessary to break it, when it became an
Idol.

CAP. 4.
That the Council of Trent is not lawful.

WE are come at last, thanks be to God, to the holy Council of Trent; a
Council whereof our Adversary had need to make good account, for that the
proofs drawn from the former Counsels, concerned only two or three
questions; and those also, rather probable conjectures, then proofs. But as
for the Council of Trent, that openly confutes all the heresies now maintained
by the Huguenots; by reason whereof, our Adversary toils himself more in the
defense of that, then in any other question whatsoever: albeit he uses not any
proofs to confirm it, but answers only to the objections of the Catholic
Apology, which I find to be three in number.

The first is; That the Pope did therein take upon him

The second is; That those who sought the reformation,

The third: that for as much as the Huguenots are able to John has commanded
us to try the Spirits.

To the first Objection: That the Pope was both Judge and Party, he answers:
That the Pope ought not to lose his right of calling Counsels, and of being
President in them, for that he had obtained this right 1500 years before. The
Huguenots can easily cut him off 500 years of his time. In all which space, the
Pope neither once called any general Council, nor sat President in it. The
first of Nice was called by Constantine the great. That of Constantinople by
Theodosius Senior: That of Ephesus, by Theodosius Junior: That of Chalcedon, by
Marcianus, the Emperor. The same also may be affirmed of those that sat
President in them. In the Council of Nice was Hosius Bishop of Corduba in
Spain, President. In the Council of Ephesus, Cyril, Patriarch of Alexandria.
And thus much may suffice for so evident a truth.

Secondly, he answers; That it is nothing repugnant to the equity of a great
Prince, to be both Judge and Party. In so much as a Sovereign Prince is
perpetually Judge, until he be lawfully declared to have forfeited his
principality, although the suite be commenced against himself. But I say,
that there is still a third, which arbitrates betwixt the Prince and his
Subjects, when there is a suit between them: And although the Judge be the
Princes Officer, yet may he pronounce sentence against him, En denier resort.
which himself cannot repeal; and there is no Prince, but a Tyrant, that would
reuerse that judgment, as the Pope has done in disanulling the decrees of the
Councels of Basil and Constance, made against himself. But admit I should
confess, that a Prince might be Judge in his own cause; yet ought that to be
understood in a suit of mean consequence: but when the controversy be, whether
he be a lawful King or not, we may well assure our selves that he would never
be deposed, if he might be his own arbitrator: and of this nature is the
first Article of the process against the Pope. The Huguenots deny him to be
head of the church; How then I pray shall this Controversy be decided, if
there be no other Judge besides himself?

Thirdly, he shows by examples, that Pope Marcelline, Sixtus the third,
Symachus, Leo, Alexander Patriarch of Alexandria, Cyril, and Leo the first,
were Judges in their own causes. As for S. Marcelline (says he) when as he
had offered Incense unto Idols, he went and accused himself in the Council
of Sinuessa, and yet durst no man denounce Sentence against him, but all the
Bishops cried out with one consent: Father, judge thy self with thine own
mouth. To which I answer: That it is easy to discover this to be but a forged
Council, which brings in the Emperor Dioclesian, talking with S. Marcelline at
Rome, and enticing him to Idolatry; Sigonius de oceidentis Imp. l. ^.
whereas Dioclesian was at the same time at Nicomedia, a City of Bithinia.
Secondly, there is a great deal of difference between a plain case, and a
right in question. For S. Marcelline was accused of an act, of which he was
most apparently guilty: So that the Bishops perceiving that the Pope denied not
the fact, and that he was penitent for it, offered to refer themselves to
that sentence which he would give against himself lust as if a man should say
to a Thief that were taken in the manner; Thou see thy self openly guilty,
thou know likewise the punishment ordained by the law for such offenses,
What think thou that thou have deserved? Speak a Gods name and be thine
own Judge: surely this would be very acceptable to all malefactors, to
conclude thereupon, that they should have no other Judges go upon them but
themselves. His second example is of Sixtus the third, who being (says he)
accused of adultery, would have a Synod called by The Emperors authority. But
they would not, nor indeed, durst they (says he) meddle with his Cause before
all the Bishops were met, and that they understood the Popes pleasure, whether
he were willing to have them so decide his business, or not. I answer; that
this was but a singular favor shown him by the Emperor Valentinian, by
reason of his innocence: For the Pope himself was willing that other men
should have been Judges in his business: But it follows not hereupon, that
every Pope in every cause ought to claim the same privilege; but the contrary
rather: viz. That Pope Sixtus the fifth, who would not suffer himself to be
indged by any other man, ought to have been so, because Sixtus the third, who
would have been so was not. What necessity is there in censuring him, whose
innocence is clear; and as it was a token of innocence in the one to submit
himself unto censure, so to refuse all men's verdicts, but his own, is an
evidence* that he finds himself guilty. But I demand now, whether that
singular privilege granted unto Sixtus, must thenceforth be taken for a
leading cause or not? If he answers no, then is this instance nothing to his
purpose: if yea, The Catholics will oppose it; for Bellarmine confesses, Tom.
1. Cont. 4.
that in case of heinous crimes, a Council may be called to sit upon the Pope:
Lib. 4. Cap. 9.
But the thinks not peradventure that Sixtus was accused of any heinous crime:
which (as I think) is the reason that he names not his fault, because he
barely intimates, that he was accused of Adultery; whereas indeed, he was
accused for defiling of a Nun; which we, good Catholics, style not
Adultery, but Incest; by reason of the spiritual consanguinity which is
betwixt a Priest and a Nun.

His third example is of Symachus, whose consent (says he) was required even
for the calling of that Council, wherein himself was accused. The Huguenots
will desire no more at the Popes hands, then to do as Symachus did; for,
albeit his consent went to the calling of the Council; yet when it was called,
he took not upon him the part of a Judge in it, but with all humbleness
purged himself before the Council of those crimes which he was charged
withal.

The fourth example is of Leo the third, of which passage the troath is this:
The Romans bearing a spleen to Leo, for that Charlemaigne the Emperor had
enforced them to swear allegiance to him; out of mere malice laid many
slanders upon him; But Charlemaigne appearing at Rome, they, for fear of him,
durst not stand to it to prosecute their proofs against him, but at the very
first canuasse they all cried out; That the Apostolic Sea could not be judged
by any man. Which clamor testifies nothing else, then, That is the nature of
the vulgar, to fall from one extreme to another. And therefore they having
slandered the Pope before out of malice, they afterward thought to curry
favor again, by flattering him for fear. But let us hear what follows: Did
not Arrius (says he) heretofore dispute the case in a matter of faith with
Alexander? Notwithstanding was this Alexander judge in the Council of Nice.
Was not Cyril President in the Council of Ephesus, notwithstanding he was one
of the parties? And who but Leo sat President at the Counsel of Chalcedon,
notwithstanding that all the difference then was betwixt him and Dioscorus? I
answer: That the controversies which then were betwixt Alexander, Cyril, Leo,
and the foresaid Heretics, concerned them no more, then it did the rest of
the Bishops of the Church: whereas that of the Pope is a private quarrel,
wherein the dignity of his person is questioned. Again, Cyril was not
President of the Council, so as that he could allow or anull the Decrees as
he thought good; but sat only first in order, having otherwise but his single
voice; whereas the Pope now a days has his negative voice to disanull a whole
Council though general: yea, and to make his Decretalls upon what he lists,
without a Council. As for Alexander, he sat neither as Judge nor President,
but only as a private Bishop amongst the rest. To conclude, Leo came not at all
to the Council of Chalcedon, and Anatolius, Patriarch of Constantinople sat
President in it.

His concluding reason why the Pope may be Judge, is; because (as he says)
he is not Judge alone, but has diverse Assistants. I answer: That in the
latter Counsels he has been sole Judge; and that the rest of the Bishops
have not been so much his Assistants, as his Vassalls. For, whatsoever the
Council decrees, is void, without the confirmation of the Pope be to it,
(witness his abrogation of the Counsels of Frankford, Basil, and Constance.)
Contrariwise, whenever the Pope makes a Decree without a Council, it is of
as much virtue as the definitions of the most holy Council, that ever was or
can be. For the Popes Advocates maintain, that he cannot err in a matter of
faith, though he should give judgment without a Council: and that a Council
may err, if not confirmed by him. To what purpose then, serve the other
Bishops joined with him as companions, when as he may do all without them, and
they nothing without him?

The second Objection of the Catholic Apology, Object. 2.
viz. That the Huguenots had not fair audience: is first (says he) confuted
by that very book which the Protestants set forth, entitled, Causacur
Electores: For they confess in that book that they were summoned to the
Council. And we may read moreover of many ample safe Conducts, whereby full
liberty was given to the Protestants, to come to the Council. And this briefly
is his answer; to which I reply:

First, that the book which he mentions, delivers no reason why they came not
to the Council, but why they judged, that the form of proceeding in that
Council was like to be such, as that their coming thither would have been
to no purpose. But to what end answers he, that they were summoned? The
Apology affirms not, that they were not called, but that they were not heard.
For it is not enough for a Judge to call both the parties before him, if he
suffers but one of them to speak: and just thus fell it out at that Council
of Trent; for Brentius, and other Divines of Sweuia were sent thither by the
Duke of Wittenberge, but might not be suffered to dispute when they came there*
Melancthon also, and other Ministers of Saxony, were upon the way, but turned
back again, having received intelligence from Mauritius, the Electors
Ambassador there, that they could not be heard.

Secondly, I reply; that admit that they had been suffered to dispute, and had
been heard, yet were the Conditions altogether unequal, for they requiring to
have a deciding voice, with the rest of the Council, according to the form of
the safe Conduct granted to the Bohemians by the Council of Basil. But the
Tridentine Fathers would none of that; refusing to admit of any to have
decisiue voices, but only the Catholic Divines.

Thirdly, the Huguenots had good cause to suspect the safe conduct; for John
Hus had also a safe conduct from the Emperor Sigismund, to come to the
Council of Constance; and yet coming thither, was there burnt.

To the third Objection, Object. 3.
viz: That the Apostle commands us to try the Spirits whether they be of God,
or no; he answers: That the Apostle there speaks not of such things as be
already certain, and defined in the Church: but of matters rather vp-start and
ambiguous, as are those of our treacherous Adversaries. Soft and fair, not too
fast; there is no man affirms, that we must try a thing that is certain; but
that we are not to settle our belief upon it, without proofs that it is
certain. For a thing may be certain in it self; nevertheless, if it does not
appear to be certain unto us, we may well make trial of it, for that without
trying, we cannot understand the certainty. But it is (says he) lawful to
try the Huguenots opinions, because they be new and ambiguous. If then it be
lawful to try the new, it is also lawful (say I) to try the old; for two
opposite Opinions are Relatiues; so that we cannot make demonstration that the
new are false, but we must prove withal, that the old are true. And as for the
ambiguitie of the Hugnenots doctrine; if it be ambiguous, then is it not
certainly false; and if their doctrine be not certainly false, then is not the
Catholics certainly true: and consequently, even by the judgment of our
Adversary himself, it is lawful to try it. But let us now examine his
reasons upon which he concludes, that it is not lawful to try the Spirits of
the Council.

First (says he) if we ought to try them all, then were it lawful to try the
Spirits of the Council of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon:
Whereupon it must follow, that we ought to discuss again the wicked heresies
of Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, and Eutiches, and examine again the sacred
Scriptures themselves, the Oracles of the Prophets, the History of Moses, and
finally the holy Gospel. At length he concludes, That if things which be
determined by the holy Councels, ought to be held for certain, there is no
reason to suffer the Decrees of the Council of Trent, to be called again into
question. I answer: That we ought to hold the Decrees of the former Councels
for most certain; and yet is it lawful nevertheless, to make question of the
determinations of the Council of Trent: to which purpose diverse reasons might
be alleged; how be it, this one may suffice for the present: For that in every
Council, we ought to deliberate and measure things, before we judge; and after
this, the judgment of a Council which has duly examined and judged,
(according to the right measure) ought not to be called again in question. But
to know now, whether a man has truly measured, we must take consideration of
the size and manner of measuring by it. Now will the Huguenots say, that the
Rule which the Conncell of Nice did measure by, was only the Scripture, or the
written Word, as the words of Constantine do testify: Theod. l. 10. c. 70.
which be these. All seditious contention set aside, let us discuss the things
in controversy by the testimony of the Scriptures divinely inspired. The
manner of measuring then was, to apply the Doctrine to the said Rule or
Scripture, and accordingly to receive or reject it, as it was conformable or
varying, to or from the said Rule. But now has the Council of Trent (will the
Huguenots say) much failed in all these circumstances.

For first, it decided before it measured, for as much as even before their
coming to the Council, they were every man of them, resolved to condemn the
Huguenots. Secondly, in examining and measuring of the questions, it measured
not by the written Word only, but by Traditions also, as it was agreed upon at
the fourth Session of the said Council. So that it measured sometimes, either
without a Rule, or at least by a Rule, very contrary to that of the Council of
Nice. Thirdly, admit that it had measured by a true Rule; yet did it not so
much apply the doctrine to the Rule, as bend the Rule, to make it fit to the
doctrine, viz: perverted the Scripture by an interpretation forced to their
own opinion: For in the fourth Session, it was decreed, That no man should
give any other interpretation, then that which was consonant to the doctrine of
the Church of Rome. So that in stead of measuring their doctrine by the Rule,
they measured the Rule by their doctrine.

But he follows it further against the trial of the Spirits; 2. Reason.
that if we should try all, then should we call again into question, the very
Books of the holy Scripture it self. I answer no; and that it follows not,
that we should call in question again the books approved by ancient Councels,
because they reject some, which are approved by the Council of Trent; seeing
that in this particular, the judgment of that Council, is suspected even by
Catholics themselves. For Sixtus Senensis a great Catholic, yea, even since
the Council of Trent, has rejected for Apocryphal, the seven last Chapters
of the book of Hester, which were approved by the Council of Trent; which
doubtless he would never have done, had he held it unlawful to try the Spirit
of the said Council.

Thirdly he argues; 3. Reason.
that if matters already determined and defined, may be brought in question
again, what end then would there be of Controversies? I answer, that this
reason is not sufficient to stay the trial of Councels, because that this is
the way to set an end to Controversies: for that it is not enough to dispatch
Controversies, unless we be sure that this dispatching, is a well ending of
them. And so the Arrians might even as well have persuaded us, to rely upon
their packt Council of Ariminum, to give an end to Controversies. To which our
Adversary can shape no other answer, but that their Council was not lawful,
and that the Council of Trent was. Well then (say I) that though we may not
examine the Decrees of a Council, yet may we try whether the Council were
lawful or not: and for this once, we desire no more advantage then this; and
thus much must be granted us in despite of the world. For if we ought simply to
rely upon the Authority of Councels, which commonly pass for lawful amongst
our Doctors, without any further inquiry; there is no reason wherefore the
Graecians should rather assent to the second Council of Nice, which allowed of
Images; then to that of Constantinople, made up of 300. of their own Bishops,
which condemned them.

The fourth Reason, 4. Reason.
for which he takes away the liberty of trying their doctrine, from the
people, is quoted out of the 17. Chapter of Deuteronomie, where it is
commanded, That men should enquire of the Priests and Leuie^s, and the Judge
appointed for the time in cases of difficulty. And Moses (says our
Adversary) adds not, Try the Spirits of the Priests and Judges; But if any
grow proud, and will not obey the command of the Priests, that man shall die,
by the sentence of the Judges. Nor is this much different from that which our
Lord says in the Gospel of Saint Matthew, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in
Moses chair, whatsoever therefore they say unto you, that observe and do. As
for Moses Commandment, it was given unto the Jews; Rab. Sal. ^archi in Deute
onom.
whereupon Rabbi Solomon Iarchi concludes, That we are to believe whatsoever
the Jewish Priests say. Since then that their Priests interpreted the
Prophecies, even of Christ himself, otherwise then we Christians do. A Jew
will say that Christ is not yet come, because their Priests deny it; and if
according to our Adversaries saying, we ought not to try the Spirits of their
Priests; I demand then, how he will answer the Jews, and I will answer him, as
he does them; namely, that in the text this clause is inserted, According to
Law, that is to say, we are to obey their Commandments, so far forth, ay
they are agreeable to the Law; which how can we know, unless we examine it. So
that let our Adversary take his choice; either to confess, that we are not in
this place forbidden to try the Spirits of the Priests, or else to acknowledge
himself to be a Jew.

To the place of Saint Matthew, 5. Reason.
because he says, how that it is not much unlike: our answer shall likewise be
the same. For our Savior has not commanded us to obey the Pharisees in all
things, simply; but not to take such scandal at their lives, as that we should
refuse to obey them, when they speak well. For, should we simply give credit
to what they bid us, without trial of it, Mat. 17.
why should we believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, when as the high
Priest said that he blasphemed in calling himself so.

His last reason is drawn from the Council of the Apostles mentioned Acts 15.
It seemed good unto the holy Ghost and to us: Whence he concludes, That Gods
Spirit is so infallibly tied unto a lawful Council, that we ought not to call
the definitions of it into question: nor would Saint Paul himself (says our
Adversary) examine the instructions of the Council of the Apostles: as Saint
Luke says, Acts 16. He gave them that to observe, which was ordained by the
Apostles and the Elders which were at Jerusalem. I would feign ask one of our
Catholic Doctors, to what purpose are there so many disputations and
consultations at our Councels, if so be that the holy Ghost does so infallibly
direct them? His answer will be, That Gods ordinary providence is such, as that
he still assists them with his Spirit, when they for their parts, apply that
diligence, which they ought, and not otherwise; Just as he makes not the
ground fruitful, but when the husbandman tills and sowes his corn in it, and
applies such labor as the soil requires. And thus much is clear by this
passage: namely, That the Apostles did apply all industry and the aptest
means, for the resolving of the doubts proposed: for it is said, That after a
long disputation Peter stood up: whence a man may conclude; That the holy Ghost
is no otherwise promised to a Council, then conditionally; viz. when the
Council does apply all the means and industry on their parts, for the finding
out of the truth: and that otherwise it may be destitute of Gods Spirit,
namely; when it does not apply the means. So that albeit we are not to
examine the Decrees of that Council, which has used these means; yet may we
enquire whether it has applied these means or no; for that we cannot be
otherwise assured that Gods Spirit did assist it. The Huguenots I know well,
will require another manner of trial; not only of the course in the
proceedings, but of the Articles also concluded upon. But that the Hugenots may
not have a twofold advantage against us, we should do well to show them:
first, That the Council of Trent has observed these lawful courses; and then
shall we have but one thing to do; which is, To make good the Articles; which
are so difficult to be proved, that it would be wisely done of us, to put it
off as long as we can, and first to decide all other differences.

CAP. 5.
That the Council of Trent has not as yet been received in France.

EVen as the Kings of France ought to have no one thing in greater
recommendation, then to be the inheritors of the virtues of their predecessors;
so should they not likewise be more careful of any thing, then to eschew such
occasions as might soil the reputation of this virtue, and bewray them to have
cooled in the zeal and piety of their Ancestors: who (as all know) have ever
been accounted the eldest sons of the Church, and the maine vpholders of the
Sea Apostolic: and for that one reason of this their zeal, have received
more privileges and honors, then any other Prince of Christendom whatsoever.
Now then, seeing that the Council of Trent has established so many decrees,
so directly opposing the former privileges and honors; what has it done more
by so doing, then to proclaim to the world, That the Kings at this day have
less zeal then their Ancestors had, and are therefore unworthy to enjoy those
honors bestowed upon them. So that the reason why our later Kings have rejected
the said Council, may be, for that they could not well approve of that,
without reproving of themselves; nor publish it, without publishing also unto
the world, a shameful confession of their own demerits. But to come to the
point; I purpose only to buckle to the objections of the Catholic Apology,
which our Adversary offers to confute; and those be three.

1 That the Kings of France have ever refused that Council.

2 That it has called in question the precedence and priority of place, which
was due unto our Kings, in all assemblies.

3 That there be diverse things decreed in the said Council, flatly against the
liberties of the French Church, and the Majesty of the King.

As for the first point; 1 Objection.
namely, that it has never been received by our Kings: he answers to it in
general; That this objection touches not so much the Council, as it
reproacheth the Kings of France. For what else can this mean (says he) then
to persuade all men, that our Kings have been Schismatikes, and disobedient to
the Universal Church. I answer, That it is no news to have the Kings of
France oppose themselves against the Councels of the Church of Rome: seeing
that not the Council of Trent alone, has been refused by King Henry the
second, and all his Sons who reigned after him; but even the general
Council of Vienna also, was never wholly received in France. And even as King
Henry the second, forbade his Bishops to be present at the Council of Trent,
so would not King Charles the seventh suffer his to be present at that of
Basil: and yet was not he any whit the more a Schismatike (as our Adversary
concludes) nor disobedient to the Church universal. But let us see now, how
he demonstrates the Council of Trent to have been received by our Kings:
There be certain Letters (says he) of Charles the ninth yet to be seen, 1
Reason.
in which he honors and reuerenceth that Council: and in the very same
page, to answer that objection of K. Henry the seconds forbidding his Bishops
to repair unto that Council, he having nothing else to say; then That it is
not so necessary to look so narrowly into what King Henry did at the
beginning; for, that the admitting or receiving of a Council, ought not to be
taken from the beginning but from the ending of it. According to which rule I
also answer, That the Letters sent by Charles the ninth, before the Council
broke up, do not prove his approbation of the Council, because he refused to
receive it, when it was fully ended. For if the rejecting of it by King Henry
the second before the end of it, does not prove that he did finally reject it;
no more does that honor which Charles the ninth did it, before it broke up,
prove that he did receive it.

Secondly, 2 Reason.
The King (says he) showed the reason why the Bishops of France came no sooner
to the Council; which is one of the most pleasant Arguments that yet I ever
heard. For if this be a sufficient reason to prove that the King did receive
the Council, because he gave a reason for the absence of his Bishops; then
have the Protestant Princes of Germany also received it, because they published
a whole book of the reasons that moved them to absent themselves from thence.

Thirdly, 3 Reason.
The King (says he) sent his Orator and Ambassador the Sieur de Lansack,
Knight of his own Order, thither; who in his Majesty's name was at the
Council; with whom he joined in commission Reginald Ferrier President of the
Parliament, and Guy de Faur, Judge Mayor of Toulouse. A goodly proof, The King
approved of the Council, because he sent his Ambassador thither. As though
the Electors of Germany of the confession of Ausburgh, sent not their
Ambassadors thither also? Where then lies the force of his Argument, is it in
this, that Monseur de Lansacke was a Knight of the Order, or in this, That he
was accompanied by Monseur du Ferrier and de Pibrac: For no other sense can I
collect out of his words, nor any other proof for the receiving of the
Council; nor is there indeed any other. For the King sent not his Ambassadors
to the Council, to confirm it; but to admonish it, to reform the abuses of
the Church; giving express charge unto his Ambassadors, that they should
solicit the Fathers, not to decree any thing against the Huguenots; until
they themselves had first of all reformed the abuses in the Ecclesiastical
Polity: And in case that this were not done, then that they should protest
against the said Council: all which appears in the Letters which the King
himself sent unto Monseur du Ferrier. See here then the brief of the Kings
Commission, and of Monseur du Ferrier and de Pibrac their Orations in the
Council: They both, and Monseur du Ferrier especially, often in the Kings name
requiring the reformation of the abuses of the Church. Which admonitions for
that the Council did reject, they according to their Kings command, rejected
the Council, and refused to subscribe to it; nor did the King afterward
receive it, or the court of Parliament ever publish it; no not after that Saint
Bartholmewes day, The massacre Anno Dom. 1572
when the time seemed most importune to favor any thing, that might be
prejudicial to the Huguenots.

But at least, the Bishops have approved it. For when the decrees of it were
openly read in the last Session, the Bishops were present and gave their voices
and suffrages.

I answer: 4 Reason.
first; that so far was the consent of the Bishops from confirming of the
Council, that quite contrary it discouers the unjust proceedings of it. For
those Bishops that gave their voices to it, in the last Session; gave their
sentence deliberatiue upon the points which had been treated upon, in the
former Sessions under Paulus the third, and Julius the third, before that the
said Bishops came to the Council; a thing contrary to all Civil Law, to
equity it self, and to the customs of all the Parliaments, high courts of
Justice, and other Iudiciaries, which out of the persons of many Judges, are
made one body; In all which, those that have not been there all the time, are
not suffered to deliver their opinions.

Secondly, it does not hereupon follow, that the Bishops have approved of this
Council, because they gave their consents to the Articles of it: For there is
a great deal of difference betwixt those that agree in opinion with the
Decrees of a Council, and those that uphold an opinion, only because the
Council has decreed it. For our Adversary agrees in opinion with the Devil,
in that it is written how God gave his Angels charge over our Lord Jesus
Christ: yet he does not I think believe it never the more for that the devil
said it. Furthermore, at what time as they gave their consent to the Articles
aforesaid, the Council was not confirmed by the Pope: now it is our
Adversaries own Tenet, That a Council is void, if not confirmed by the Pope;
and this one reason he makes to serve his own turn against the Council of
Basil. It is (says he) a Rule most generally known, that Councels are not to
be received, without the Authority of the Pope. Whereupon it follows, That
those who gave their consents to the said Articles, did at the very same time
when they gave their consents, hold the said Council, to be as yet, no
Council. So that a man cannot hereby prove, that they did receive the
Council, because they gave their voices to the Articles.

To the second Objection, 2. Objection.
which touches upon the precedencie of the most Christian King, he answers thus
in brief: That the Council was so far from offering to diminish the Kings
Authority; that to the contrary, the Kings Ambassadors by the unanimous
consent of all, were seated immediately next after the Emperors; but the
Spanish Ambassador, out of his rank in another place: to the end, that if it
so fell out, that any man were set out of his place, yet should it not be
prejudicial unto him. He should not have answered, That the Council seated
the Kings Ambassador next unto the Emperors, but only, that the Council did
not put him out of his right place. For in the 22. Session, Monsieur du
Ferrier, and de Pibrac, being suspicious of the affection of the Council, went
in betimes to take up their places, insomuch that the Count de Luna Ambassador
for the King of Spain, made public protestation before the Fathers, how that
his place was taken up: Whereupon Monsieur de Pibrac required, that the said
Protestation of his, might not be prejudicial to his Kings Prerogative, whose
Ambassadors had ever had the first place, next to the Emperors, as they had at
the Councels of Constance and Lateran: But for all this, the Council would not
vmpire the business. And though they took not the place away from the Kings
Ambassadors, yet our Adversary confesses, that they would not pronounce that
this place did belong unto them. For first he says, That the Spanish
Ambassador was set out of his place. Secondly, That if any man were by chance
set out of his rank, yet would not the Council have it to be prejudicial unto
him. Which is nothing else then to declare, That that place, which they
permitted the Kings Ambassadors to keep for the time for avoiding of
contention (and for that they had betimes already taken it up much against the
wills of the Fathers) should not be prejudicial unto that right, which they
thought to be due unto the King of Spain.

Secondly, put case the Council to have been so euenly affected (as he would
make it) yet did they wrong (say I) nevertheless, in forbearing to be vmpires
openly in the Kings cause; For there is no man, that can deny a thing most
apparent, at the first dash, but he must gain upon it, by little and little.
So that the first degree to it, is to call a thing into question: nor does any
man wilfully call a thing into question, unless he purposes absolutely to
deny it afterward. So that it is easily discerned, that the Council at this
time bringing the Kings precedence into question, and making the King of Spain
equal with him, had a plot in it, at the next Council to give him the place
above the King of France.

Lastly, admit the Council to have had no such plot upon him, but only to
carry an even regard to both, yet the wrong remains nevertheless, it being no
less injurious to make an inferior equal to his superior, then to make an
equal, superior to his equal.

Thereremaines now (says our Adversary) the last Objection only, viz: That
the Council of Trent has decreed diverse things against the Realm of France;
which is the reason that it is not received there. But this Objection (says
he) serves little to the purpose: For the question is not only about
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but about Faith and Religion. Wherefore although
that the Decrees of the Council for reformation be not received in France,
yet the Decrees which treat above Faith, are.

Our Adversary cannot deny, but that the Council of Trent has decreed some
things against the French liberty; only he answers, that all this hinders not
the receiving of the other Articles which merely concern Faith. His own
words are, This Objection serves to little purpose, for that the question is
not only about Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but about Faith, and Religion. And
I say again, that this answer of his, serves as little to the purpose; for
that we treat not of things that concern either Reformation, or Faith, but of
the Authority only by which those Decrees were enacted. That is to say,
whether the Judgment of the Council of Trent, be in France received for a
sentence not liable to be appealed from? and whether they here believe those
Articles wherein they agree with the Council implicitly, for that the Council
has decreed them.

For how shall it be proved, that a man who believes a thing which another has
reported, did believe it upon the reporters credit, unless he be confident
withal, that he who reported this, would not report an untruth, and that he
durst trust him in any thing. But France now does not believe the Council of
Trent in all things: for our Adversary himself confesses, that it refused the
Decrees of the Council which touched upon Reformation. Whereupon it follows,
that though France does agree in opinion with the Council in what it decreed
concerning matters of Faith, yet does it not hold this opinion for any regard
to the Councels authority, but for some other respect; else might he conclude
as well, That the Huguenots do receive the said Council, for that they believe
diverse Articles of it, which are against the Anabaptists, and other Heretics
of our time. For even as they refuse the authority of the said Council, in
that very same part whereof they receive the Articles; so may we as well refuse
the whole Council, and yet receive all the Articles; there being the same
respect from the Articles of one part, to the authority of the same part, as
from the authority of the whole, to the authority of the whole. But let us now
mark how he concludes, that this Council is received in France. Our
Adversaries own self confesses (says he) That this Council is received by
the Bishops: but what man can persuade himself, that the Bishops have another
faith and religion from that professed by the King, and all the Catholic
people? For, how may the King be styled, The most Christian, if he were of a
Faith singular from the Bishops? And how should the people be called, The
Lords Flock, unless they acknowledged some Pastors?

See then, this in brief is his Argument: The Bishops have received the
Council; The King and the people have believed the Bishops. Ergo, The Council
has been received by the King, the Bishops, the Clergy, and likewise of all
the people of France. I have shown already how he has not made it good as
yet, that the Bishops which then were, have received it: and for the Bishops
and Clergy at this day, though diverse of them for the advancement of the Holy
League, have endeavored to cause the said Council to be received; yet might
the King and the people refuse it notwithstanding, and yet not cease for all
that, to be of the same faith with them; in so much as the approbation of that
Council is not an Article of faith: for the Council of Ephesus has expressly
prohibited us the addition of any other Article of faith unto those which were
then received; in which number, the receiving of the Tridentine Council is
not. But, supposing that they were not of the same faith, what danger could
come of it? The King (says he) should not then be most Christian, nor the
people Christ his flock. First, as for the King, for as much as this reason is
drawn from his Title; I say, that if the King were the greatest Heretic in
the world, yet should he not be deprived of his Title. Henry the eight, King
of England, received the Title of Defender of the faith from Pope Leo the
tenth, for writing against Luther. King Edward the sixth, and the last Queen of
famous memory, and the now reigning KING, who have changed the Religion, for
defending of which, King Henry received this Title, do still keep the same
Style: And by very good right too; for Titles, though personal, and proper
only to the first of the Race that receive them, (as Catholic to Ferdinando
King of Arragon; Defender of the faith, to Henry the eight King of England) yet
do they descend unto their successors, as ornaments only annexed to their
State. So that it is not Philip of Austria, who is Catholic in that sense, but
the King of Spain. For, if we consider of Kings only in point of Religion,
the King of France may be as good a Catholic as the King of Spain; and the
King of Spain as good a Christian as the King of France; and yet the Title of
Christian belongs only unto the one, and the Title of Catholic to the other.

But above all, is this reason ill applied against the King of France, for that
Christian is not a title to distinguish one Christian from another, but to
distinguish them all from Pagans; and in this sense is it given to the King of
France, as to the first King of Europe, that abolished Paganism, and who still
had the most wars of all with the Sarazens, enemies of the name of Christ.
True it is, that this title might incline him the more to embrace that doctrine
which is best, but for that it has not been hitherto agreed upon which of the
two is the best, we must not prove one doubt by another. For the Huguenots may
as well convert this reason to persuade the King to reform the Church, as the
Catholics use it, to incline him to maintain the Romish Religion: howbeit
there is not any thing that the King can do, more worthy of this Title of his,
then to do both; that is to say, to maintain the Roman Church, and to
reform it. Neither is there any contradiction in these two, seeing there is no
better means to make the Iron endure long, then to scowre away the rust; nor
to maintain the Church of Rome, then to reform the abuses of it.
Nevertheless, to establish such a course, that any of the Iron be not scraped
away, in stead of the rust; and yet see that it be bright scowred; there is no
safer means then to do quite contrary to that which our Aduersay advises;
viz. To let their Council of Trent sleep, and to call another, wherein both
parts may have indifferent hearing: by which means, if so be that there be
any corruption in the Church of Rome, it may be seen into and purged. And if
there be any error in the doctrine of the Huguenots; they may be evicted and
instructed in a better faith. And this were the way to reunite us all in one
faith; and this would be an act indeed well worthy a most Christian King.

3 But descend we now to the people: How should they (says he) be the sheep
of Christ's flock, if so be they acknowledge not any Pastors? I answer; That
they may well enough acknowledge their Pastors, though they believe not just as
the Pastors of their Country do. For that no man is obliged to build his
faith, but upon an infallible foundation: and it is confessed by the Catholics
themselves, that all the Bishops in a whole country may err in point of
faith. So that the people are not always obliged, to ground their faith upon
that of their Bishops, and consequently may be of another faith, and yet be
of the flock of Jesus Christ: As in very troath, our Savior does not call
them his Sheep which heard the Bishops, but those that hear his voice; which
is, the word of God.

Let us now look upon his conclusion: And so (says he) is the Council
honored of the King, the Bishops, the Clergy, and likewise of all the people
of France. Admit it were so; yet for all this does it not follow, that it is
received in France, unless he can show withal, that all the Estates do
receive it: that is, The Church, the Nobility, and the People: But he makes no
mention of the Nobility, but only of the Church, and the third Estate, so that
at the most it is received but of two of the three Estates: which may be the
cause that our Adversary, to keep up the number diuides the Church into two
parts, viz. Bishops, and Clergy: The Council (says he) is received of the
Bishops, the Clergy, and likewise of all the people of France. Which is a new
division of the Estates, never, as I persuade my self, heard of before. Judge
then what just occasion the Nobility of France now have to reject this
Council, when as those who would have the Council received, do reject the
Nobility.

CAP. 6.
That the Huguenots may very rightly be accounted members of the Catholic,
Apostolic, and Roman Church.

THis Chapter at the first blush, seems to treat of the same Argument that the
first does; for having there proved it, That the Huguenots are of the same
religion with us Catholics, it may follow also, that they be of the same
Church too: And yet to my thinking, these two Chapters may very well be
parted; not so much in regard of the difference of the nature of the subject,
as of the humors of the persons. For commonly, when a Huguenot would draw a
Catholic to his opinion, he begins evermore with the particular Controversies;
and so, upon the purity of his doctrine, he inferres the verity of his Church.

A Catholic, on the other side, when he would win a Huguenot, begins
still with the Church, and so by the verity of the Church, concludes the purity
of his doctrine: and commonly, when either of them gets the other out of this
tracke, they are to seek; which is one of the reasons that they cannot
satisfy the adverse party. For he that would persuade another, must not begin
with that principle which to him seems best, (though indeed it be so) but with
that which seems best in his opinion whom he desires to persuade; otherwise,
he shall but lose his labor.

For, when a Huguenot shall have urged a thousand passages of holy Scripture,
to prove the truth of his own particular assertion, he shall not be a whit
the nearer; and why? For that a Catholic will say instantly with himself;
What though I cannot answer him, yet another may: and if I am to believe
nothing which I am not able to maintain by disputation, then should I not
believe the proceeding of the holy Ghost, the union of both Natures in Jesus
Christ, the mysteries of the holy Trinity: all which I have believed, without
being able to maintain them, or so much as understand them. And even so, the
authority of the same Church which makes me believe these mysteries, without
being able to maintain them, makes me also to believe the holy sacrament of
the Altar, Purgatory, etc. without being able to maintain them. So that if a
Hugu: proceeds no further, and does not show a reason how a man may be assured
of these mysteries without the Churches authority; or else (which I hold more
reasonable) why we ought wholly to rely upon the authority of the Church in
one point, and not in another; he shall never say ought to the purpose. Nor
can the Catholics have any happier success in their perswasiues; for when they
talk to the Huguenots of the Church; how the Church says this, and the Church
says that, and the Church cannot err: They who are not brought up to such
kind of phrases; and who found their faith upon this persuasion, That the
Scripture is clear on their sides; What care we (will they say) what the
Church says, so long as we agree in opinion with the word of God. So that a
Catholic shall never be able to persuade them to any thing, if he begins
not at their foundation, and prove, that the Scripture makes not so clearly
for them, as they imagine it does: and then when they once perceive, that they
cannot confute the Catholics by Scripture, they will be compelld to confess;
That a man can have no assurance of his faith, without submitting his own
judgment to the judgment of the Church: which (as we say) according to Christ's
own promise, is infallibly accompanied with the holy Spirit. For mine own
part, although it be not my intention to entice any man, either to one
Religion or the other, but to qualify only the passions of men: yet for fear
that I should commit the same error in this Treatise of Pacification, which
they often do in the course of their perswasiues, I thought good to subioine
this Chapter also; to the end that my reasons might be drawn from the
principles of both Religions. And thus having proved in the first Chapter, by
examination of the particular questions, according to the Huguenots method,
That they be no Heretics; I was also desirous to add this Chapter, that
according to the Catholics manner of proceeding (that is as much to say, as
according to the Nature of the Church) I might also prove them (the Huguenots)
to be no Heretics. For, it were but labor lost, to tell many of our
Catholics, that the Huguenots hold many of the fundamental points of faith as
well as we, seeing they take not the skantling of an heretic by his opinions,
but only by this mark, That he is out of the Church, understanding thereby no
other Church, then that which we call Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman:
excluding all those out of the Church, to whom these three titles may not be
given, what opinion soever they be of. For which reason I resolved to prove,
that these three titles do belong unto the Huguenots.

And first touching the title of Catholic; Catholic.
the Church is in regard of it self. 2. In regard of the Jews. 3. In regard
of Heretics.

Now the Church is called Catholic in regard of it self, How the Church is
called Catholic in respect of it self.
it comprehends all times, and all places, viz: the whole number of the Elect,
as well those who have been since the beginning of the world, and are now
departed and triumphant in heaven, enjoying everlasting bliss; as those that
are ordained to the like blessedness whether now alive, or to be borne
hereafter. Which definition is founded upon the Scriptures; for S. Paul's words
are; The Church of the firstborn, Heb. 12. 23.
which are written in Heaven: and who are written in heaven, but the Elect?
from whom the reprobates are in this specialty distinguished, Revel. 13. 18.
That their names are not written in the Book of the Lamb. The Church then
consists of the Elect, who are not restrained to any place or time, For Jesus
Christ has redeemed with his blood (says Saint John) Out of every kindred,
Revel. 5. 9.
and tongue, and people, and nation. With which definition the Fathers jointly
consent; August. de Catechizandis Rudibus, cap. 12.
All they (says Saint Augustine) which are holy and sanctified, which are,
have been, and shall be, are Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem: Greg. Mor. in
Job. lib. 28. cap. 9.
And S. Gregory the Pope (that my proof may be the more authentical) says,
That all the Elect are embraced in the bosom of the Church, and all the
Reprobates are without. And yet was poor John Husse burnt for an Heretic, for
affirming the very same.

O wicked Catholics, that have made a man to be burnt for an Heretic, for
affirming no more, then what a Saint had done, and (which is more) then a Pope
had said before him. So then in this signification, neither the Church of Rome,
nor that which themselves call the Reformed Church, can properly be called the
Catholic Church, but only parts of it. Nay, we cannot truly affirm, that they
be parts of the Catholic Church; but that God has both in the Roman Church,
and in the Reformed, some that be members of the Catholic Church. Which is as
much to say, as that diverse shall be saved in both Churches. Like as there were
many amongst the Jews at the coming of Jesus Christ, and at this day be in
the Greek Church, and in Prester John's Country, which do embrace the
Christian faith, without acknowledging the Pope. So that if we appropriate the
title of Catholic to the Roman Church only taking it in this signification;
it must needs so low, that either all the Catholics are elected (though the
Catholics themselves write that diverse Popes have been damned) or else, that
no Jew was ever saved before Christ's coming, and that God has not had his
Church at all times: or that no Greek nor Affrican can be saved in our time;
and then God should not have his Church in all places. Again, if we attribute
not this title of Catholic only to the Church of Rome, I can see no reason why
the reformed Church should be more excluded then the rest. To be brief, when
we pass our censure upon any man, whether he be of the Catholic Church, or
not; we must speak either according to Faith, or according to Charity. If
according to Faith, we cannot say, that such or such a man is a Catholic,
because it is God that knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
says S. Paul: But if we pass our judgment according to charity, this will
have us esteem all those to be of the true Catholic Church, which be of the
visible; of which I will next speak, and show how it may be termed Catholic.

2 The Church, as I have proved already, comprehends How the Church is called
Catholic, in respect of the Jews.
as those that are yet on earth, and remain mingled among the wicked; which
last, though generally more in number, yet the Elect bear the name of the
better part. So that both good and bad, which make an outward profession of the
true faith, are reputed members of the true Church. According to the Parable of
the net, Mat. 13.
which held the bad fishes as well as the good. This Church was separated from
the rest of the Gentiles, with a partition wall (as it were) and before the
coming of Christ pend up in one country, and restrained to the Family of
Israel: But since Christ's coming, Ephesians. 2. 14.
This partition wall is (as S. Paul says) broken down; so that neither Jew
nor Greek are excluded. And by reason of this difference, that the Jews in
those days had only this privilege, and that now no one particular country
has it more then another, the Church is called Catholic: that is to say,
Spread all the world over. And for that she is so universal, she is divided
into particular Churches: As in Saint Paul's time, into the Church of Ephesus,
of Rome, of Galatia, of Corinth, etc. and no one of these Churches having any
privilege more then another, they were all together called The Church
Catholic: not that it is always euery-where, but for that no country is
excluded, and no place privileged. So then, no place being excluded, there may
be other Churches besides that of Rome; and no place being privileged, even
Rome it self may be cut off from the Church.

3 Thirdly, the Church is called Catholic, in respect of How the Church is
called Catholic, in regard of Heretics.
who denied the Church to be dispersed all over the world; but held it to be
coopt up in Africa: whereupon it came to pass, that those Churches which held
the contrary, were called the Catholic Churches. Even as at this day, these
Churches that hold, the Church to have need of reformation, are called The
Reformed Churches: Which is the reason why the more ancient Fathers never used
this term Catholic, to distinguish the pure Churches from the heretical; but
called them Orthodoxall. But in process of time, by reason that the Orthodoxe
Churches held, that the Church was Catholic or Universal; these two words
Catholic and Orthodoxall, were taken in one and the same signification: so
that at last, this title of Catholic, was not only given to the Church, to
distinguish the Orthodox from the Donatists, but also from all other Heretics.
For a Catholic in proper speech is not opposite to all sorts of Heretics, but
to the Jews only and the Donatists. But for as much as custom is the matter
of words (as we see in this word Tyrant, anciently taken in good part for a
King, and now only for a bad King) this word Catholic is taken contrary to
his nature, in the signification of a pure Church; in such a sense as that a
particular Church may be called a Catholic Church, and more or less
Catholic, proportionably as it is more or less pure. So that the question
between the Catholics and the Huguenots, lies not in this point, viz. Which
of the Churches is the Church Catholic; but whether of them is most Catholic,
and which most corrupted: for in some degree both of them may be Catholic, so
long as they hold the substance of faith, (as I showed in the first Chapter)
and both of them in some sort may be corrupt: it being a thing most certain,
That every visible Church may have errors, more or less. Bernard* in Cantica,
Sermon. 38
The Church (says Saint Bernard) as long as she is in the tabernacle of this
body, has not attained unto the perfection of beauty, and is not therefore
absolutely fair: For it is the privilege of the Church Triumphant only to be
fair, and as S. Paul says, without spot or wrinckle. Ephesians. 5.
True it is indeed that the Church is sometime called fair, but this is ever
comparatively: Cant. 1.
wherefore the Bridegroom in the Canticles says of his Spouse (which is the
Church) that she is the fairest of women: that is, not simply fair (says S.
Bernard) but the fairest among women. And for that self same reason, is she in
one and the same verse, styled both black and fair. I am black (says the
Spouse) but I am comely.

I am not ignorant how that the Ancients also did use this word Catholic, for
a distinction from an Heretic, in another signification; which in truth was
according to the proper interpretation of the word, taking Catholic or
Universal, for a mark of the true Church. For which reason in the ancient
Church, when as the whole visible Church yet retained the faith received from
the Apostles, and that some part of it became corrupted; for the exact
discerning unto whether side we ought to lean, Vincentius Lyrinensis Vincent.
Lyr. l. aduers. haereses.
gave this Rule: What else should we do (says he) but prefer the safety of
the body, before a rotten member. And therefore, for that the body of the
Church was at that time sound, all the Church was called Catholic, for so much
this word Body, as well as that word Catholic, implies an universality; so
that the distinction of Catholic and Heretic, serves but to distinguish the
sound body, from a corrupted member. But so soon as the body it self became
corrupted, then this rule and distinction failed. For which reason Vincentius
makes a difference between a Catholic in place, and a Catholic in time. And
ever when a Catholic in place is not a sure mark, he has recourse unto a
Catholic in time. But (says he) if any new infection goes on, Eodem lib. adu.
haeres.
not only to corrupt a part, but the whole Church, then must we cleave to
antiquity. So that the difference between the Catholics and the Huguenots,
lying in this point, Whether the body of the Church be corrupted or no? we
must not speak of the Church which is Catholic according to place, but
according to time. And that Church is Catholic (says Vincentius) which holds
that religion which has been ever hitherto embraced. And to discern which
Religion has been always embraced, when as the body of the Church, or the
visible Church (as says the same Vincentius) is corrupted; we must still have
recourse unto Antiquity, and say with Tertullian, Illudverum, quod primum:
Tertul. lib, de praescript* adu, haeres.
That is truest which is ancientest. So as that is the Catholic Church, which
agrees in faith with the more Primitive Church. So that if we would discuss
it, whether the Catholics or the Huguenots be most properly the right
Catholics; we must consider first, whether of them best holds of the faith of
the Apostles: and next, of that of the ancient Doctors and Councels of the
Church.

As for the Title Apostolic; The Church may be called Apostolic, as well in
regard of the Writings, as of the Preaching of the Apostles. As for their
Writings, those Churches which embrace the doctrine delivered in them, are
entitled Apostolic; yea, and more or less Apostolic, as they do more or
less agree, or disagree, to or from the said doctrine. So that the word
Apostolic is all one with the word Orthodox, or with Catholic, taken in the
last signification. And if the Church of the Huguenots may be entitled
Catholic, or Orthodox, they may also by the same reason be called Apostolic:
nay, and more properly Apostolic then Catholic. For the visible Church, being
(as I have showed) not absolutely, but comparatively, more or less Catholic
or Apostolic: the Huguenots, though they may offend in default, and so be
less Catholic rather; yet in this, they offend rather in the excess, and are
too Apostolic: as being so strict, that they will readily believe nothing, but
what the Apostles have written.

Apostolic.
and where the Apostles have had their seats, as Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus,
Alexandria, etc. where the Apostles Peter, James, John, and Mark the
Evangelist, sat; and are therefore from all Antiquity styled Apostolical
Seaes, as well as Rome: howbeit that this signification is rather an ornament
then a mark, of a pure Church. For Antioch, Alexandria, and other Churches of
Greece, where the Apostles preached; have either altogether forsaken the name
of Christ, or are at the least (according to the Catholics Tenet) quite cut
off for Schism and Heresy, from the communion of the true Church: and France,
Spain, Poland, Germany, England, and Denmark, where the Apostles never had
any Bishoprics, have sithence been the true Churches. So that in this
signification a Church may be pure, and yet not be Apostolic; and a Church
which is Apostolic, may be impure.

The last title, though first in estimation with the Catholics, How the
Huguenots may be said to be of the Roman Church.
is Roman; which I have observed to have been taken in three several sorts.
First, the Roman Church is only taken for the Diocese of Rome, and was in the
beginning, for the City of Rome alone. As in S. Paul's time, who inscribed an
Epistle severally to Rome alone, as he did likewise to those Churches of
Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia, etc. For had the Church of Rome been every where at
that time spread abroad, he had not needed to have written to other Churches
severally, because that in writing to that of Rome, he had then written to them
all: And yet would our people needs make use of this Epistle, to prove by it,
The Roman church to be the catholic Church, because that in it, Romans 1. 8.
S. Paul says, Your faith is spread abroad in all the world: as if S. Paul had
not said the same to the Church of Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
Your faith which you have to Godward is spread abroad. But had the Church of
Rome been (as they would have it) esteemed by S. Paul as all one with the
Catholic; without all doubt his Epistle to the Romans had been entitled
Catholic, as well as those of S. John, S. Peter, S. James, and S. Jude, which
are therefore styled Catholic, for that they were written to the Catholic
Church. Now taking the Roman Church in this signification, I confess that not
the Huguenots Churches alone are separated from the Roman Church, but all other
catholic Churches besides: so that to this day they in France make a
distinction of sundry customs of the Roman Church, and of the Church Gallicane.

Secondly, the Church of Rome is taken for the Western Church, Roman, Latin,
and Occidental Church, does signify one and the same thing, to distinguish it
from the Greek and Eastern Church; just as the Empire of the East, and the
Empire of the West, were called the Empires of Rome and of Constantinople,
because that these two Cities were the chief seats of the Empire: and so by
reason of the dignity of the City of Rome, which was the seat of the
Emperors that reigned in the West, all this Western part, was called the
Roman Empire, and all the Western Church the Roman Church: that is to say; The
Church contained under the Roman Empire. So then, if we call it the Roman
Church, for distinguishing it from the Greek and Eastern Churches; then also
may the Huguenots Churches be members likewise of the Roman Church, for that
they be Western, and not Greek, nor Eastern Churches. If in respect of the
Roman Empire, (taking the Roman Empire largely, as it was) they also be under
the Empire, and by consequence, under the Church. But taking the Empire as it
now is, then may the Churches of Germany, some of which have shook off the
Popes authority, be more properly styled members of the Roman Church, than
Rome it self; insomuch as Germany and not Rome, is at this day called the
Roman Empire.

Lastly, the Roman Church is understood, for all those, that do in Faith
communicate with the Church of Rome: that is to say, those that be of the
Romish Religion. I demand then their meaning, whether they understand by the
Romish Religion, those points in which the Huguenots do agree with us, or
those wherein they disagree from us, or both the one and the other.

If those points wherein they agree with us; then they are directly of the
Roman faith. If for the points only wherein they dissent, then are the belief
in the Trinity, and all the Articles of the three Creeds, of the Apostles, of
Nice, and of Athanasius, wherein they do agree, no Articles of the Romish
Religion.

But if they take the Roman Religion, for all the points of it together, both
for those wherein they do agree, and all the other too; I demand once again,
whether so exact an agreement in all points, be required or not? And if not;
then seeing that the points whereupon the Huguenots be agreed with the
Catholics, be for number more, and for importance greater, than those
questions are, upon which they disagree; they may yet nevertheless be reputed
to be of the Roman Church and Faith: forasmuch as things for the most part take
their Denomination from the better part. Even as we use to say; those people
are of a sanguine complexion, in whom blood is predominant, although their
temper be of other humors too. But if we affirm, that no man can be of this
Church, unless he believes all, and the selfsame, that the Church of Rome
does; then say I, that whilst we go about to prove, that the Huguenots be not
of our Church, we shall show withal, that we have not any one man, who is
absolutely of the Church: insomuch as that there is no one man, learned or
unlearned; that believes all, just as the Church does.

For it is the credit of our Doctors, to maintain singular opinions by
themselves; which may be the reason why Bellarmine, the greatest Adversary to
the Huguenots, accuses all the Catholics that ever were before him, of Error,
and those especially, which have written against the Huguenots; as Genebrard,
Pighius, Eckius, Hosius, Canus, Caietane, Scotus, Durand, S. Bonauenture, S.
Thomas, S. Damascene: (for he spares not the Saints neither) the like courtesy
also shows he to the Ancient Fathers, S. Augustine, S. Bernard, S.
Chrysostom, and much ado he has to let S. Paul alone So that amongst so many
dissentions, either has the Church believed nothing at all, or else has the
Church believed them altogether, that is to say, contradictions; or else that
the Church has believed but only some of them: and perchance, they have all
believed contrary to what the Church believes.

Come we now to the common people, and they understand not the one half part
of that, which we teach them: and when we tell them of such points of
Divinity, wherein they were never brought up; their fancies framing Idea's
unto themselves, upon what they hear, make them conceive Chimaera's in their
brains, and to believe the quite contrary to what the Church does, before they
are well aware of it.

But our Catholics now have found out a remedy for that; which is, That an
implicit Faith is enough for the common people, which is as much to say, as to
think only, and to believe only as the Church does, though they do not so
indeed. So then, seeing that an implicit Faith is, To believe the contrary,
and yet think they believe the same; if we could but once persuade the
Huguenots, that they do verily believe as our Church of Rome does in every
thing, although indeed they do not, they shall be of our Church. See then, if
I have not taken a better method to convert them, than any other Catholics
have yet light upon. They labor to convert them to our Explicit faith, which
were to make them believe all the particulars of our Faith. And I, perceiving
them altogether incapable of this Explicit Faith, have endeavored my self to
make them embrace the Implicit Faith, which is much the easier of the two, and
to persuade them to believe, that they do already believe, as our Church
believes: and consequently, that their Faith is the same, and their Church the
same. That so by this persuasion they may prove, if not so good Catholics as
the Priests, yet at least, as good Catholics as the people.

But to return again to my purpose; it appears by what has been said; that
if we stand for so strict an union in every point, then will not the
Catholics themselves, neither learned nor unlearned, be of the Roman Church.
Forasmuch as the learned will not believe as the rest do, and the unlearned
cannot. And would we content our selves with an essential union, the Huguenots
may then well be of it. Whereupon it follows, that we must needs yield to one
of these; That either the Huguenots are of the Roman Church, or else that the
Catholics are not.

FINIS.
Errata in some Copies.
Page 54. l. 5. for Authority (in the first place) read Articles.

End

