Greenes Tu quoque, OR, The City Gallant. As it has been diverse times acted
by the Queens Majesty's Servants, Written by IO. COOK Gent.



Printed at London for John Trundle. 1614.

To the Reader.
TO gratulate the love and memory of my worthy friend the Author, and my
entirely beloved Fellow, the Actor, I could not choose being in the way ^ust
^hen this Play was to be published in Pr^ut, but to prefixe some token of my
affection to either in the frontispire of the Book. For the Gentleman that
wrote it, h^s Poem it self can better speak his praise, then any Oratory from
me. Nor can I tell whether this work was diuulged with his consent or no: but
howsoever, since it has past the Test of the stage with so general an
applause, pity it were but it should likewise have the honor of the Press.
As for Master Green, all that I will speak of him (and that without
flattery) is this (if I were worthy to censure) there was not an Actor of his
nature in his time of better ability in performance of what he undertook; more
applaudent by the Audience, of greater grace at the Court, or of more general
love in the City, and so with this brief character of his memory, I commit
him to his rest.

Thomas Heywood.

Upon the death of Thomas Gree^^.
How fast bleake Autumn changes Floraes dye,
What yesterday was ( Green) now is sear and dry.
W. R.

Greenes Tu Quoque.
A Mercers Shop discovered, Gartred working in it, Spendall walking by the
Shop: M Balance walking over the Stage: after him Longfield and Geraldine.
Francis. WHat lack you sir? fair stuffes, or veluets?


Ball. Good morrow Frank.


Fran. Good morrow master Balance.


Gerald. Save you master Long-field.


Long. And you sir, what business draws you toward this end o'th town?


Gerald. Faith no great serious affairs, only a stirring humor to walk, and
partly to see the beauties of the City; but it may be you can instruct me:
pray whose shop's this?


Long. Why it is Will Rashes fathers, a man that you are well acquainted with.
Enter a wench with a basket of linen


Ger. As with your self; and is that his sister?


Long. Marry is it sir.


Ger. Pray let us walk, I would behold her better.


Wench. Buy some quaifes, handkerchers, or very good bonelace Mistress.


Gart. None.


Wench. Will you buy any handkerchers, sir?


Spend. Yes, have you any fine ones?


Wench I Will show you choice, please you look sir?


Spend. How now! what news?


Wench. Mistress Tickleman has sent you a Letter, and expects your company at
night, and entreats you to send her an angel, whether you can come, or whether
you can not. He reads.


Spend. Sweet rascal! if your love be as earnest as your protestation, you
will meet me this night at Supper, you know the randeuows, there will be good
company, a noise of choice Fiddlers, a fine boy with an excellent voice, very
good songs and bawdy; and which is more, I do purpose my self to be exceeding
merry: but if you come not, I shall powt my self sick, and not eat one bit
tonight.

Your continual close friend, Nan Tickle-man.




I pray send me an angel by this bearer, whether ye can come, or whether ye
cannot. What Is the price of these two?


Wench. Half a crown in truth, sir.


Spend. Hold thee, there is an angel, and commend me to my delight, tell her I
will not fail her, though I loose my freedom by it. Exit wench.


Wench. I thank you sir; buy any fine handkerchers?


Long. You are taken sir extremely, what is the object?


Gerald. She Is wondrous fair.


Long. Nay, and your thoughts be on wenching I Will leave you.


Gerald. You shall not be so unfriendly, pray assist me; We Will to the shop and
cheapen stuffes or sattins.


Spend. What lack you Gentlemen? fine stuffes, veluets, or sattins? pray come
near.


Ger. Let me see a good satin.


Spend. You shall sir, what color?


Ger. Faith I am indifferent, what color most affects you Lady?


Gart. Sir!


Ger. Without offense (fair creature) I demand it.


Gart. Sir, I believe it, but I never did
Tie my affection unto any color.

Ger. But my affection (fairest) is fast tied
Unto the crimson color of your cheek.

Gart. You relish too much Courtier, sir.


Long. What Is the price of this?


Spend. Fifteen indeed sir.


Long. You set a high rate on it, it had need be good.


Spend. Good! if you find a better in the town, I Will give you mine for nothing:
if you were my own brother, I Would put it into your hands, look upon it, it is
close wrought, and has an excellent glass.


Long. I, I see it.


Spend. Pray sir come into the next room; I Will show you that of a lower price
shall (perhaps) better please you.


Long. This fellow has an excellent tongue, sure he was brought up in the
Exchange.


Spend. Will you come in sir?


Long. No, it is no matter, for I mean to buy none.


Gerald. Pre thee walk in, what you bargain for, I Will discharge.


Long. Say so; fall to your work, I Will be your chapman.


Ger. Why do you say I flatter? Exeunt Spend. Long.


Gart. Why? you do;
And so do all men when they women woo.

Ger. Who looks on heaven, and not admires the work?
Who viewes a well cut Diamond, does not praise
The beauty of the Stone? if these deserve
The name of Excellent, I lack a word
For thee which meritst more,
More then the tongue of man can attribute.

Gart. This is pretty Poetry, good fiction this: Sir, I must leave you.


Ger. Leave with me first some comfort.


Gart. What would you crave?


Gerald. That which I fear you will not let me have.


Gart. You do not know my bounty; Say what it is.


Ger. No more (fair creature) then a modest kiss.


Gart. If I should give you one, would you refrain, on that condition, never to
beg again.


Ger. I dare not grant to that.


Gart. Then't seems you have,
Though you get nothing, a delight to crave,
One will not hurt my lip, which you may take,
Not for your love, but for your absence sake. So farewell sir.

Ger. O fare thee well (fair regent of my soul)
Never let ill sit near thee, unless it come
To purge it self; be as thou ever seemst,
An Angel of thy Sex, borne to make happy
The man that shall possess thee for his Bride.

Enter Spendall and Longfield. Spen. Will you have it for thirteen shillings
and six pence? I Will fall to as low a price as I can, because I Will buy your
custom.


Long. How now man! what! intranced?


Ger. Good sir, ha you done?


Long. Yes faith, I think as much as you, and it is just nothing: where is the
wench?


Gerald. She Is here sir, here.


Long. Vds pity! vnbutton man, thou wilt stifle her else.


Ger. Nay good sir, will you go?


Long. With all my heart, I stay but for you.


Spen. Do you hear sir?


Long. What say?


Spend. Will you take it for thirteen?


Long. Not a penny more then I bid. Ex. Ger. and Long.


Spend. Why then say you might have had a good bargain; Where Is this boy to
make up the wares? here is some ten pieces opened, and all to no purpose.
Enter Boy.


Boy. O Frank* shut up shop, shut up shop.


Spend. Shut up shop, boy, why?


Boy. My Master is come from the Court knighted, and bid us, for he says he
will have the first year of the reign of his Knighthood kept holiday; here he
comes. Enter sir Lionell.


Spend. God give your worship joy, sir.


Sir Lion. O Francke* I have the worship now in the right kind, the sword of
Knighthood sticks still upon my shoulders, and I feel the blow in my purse, it
has cut two leather bags asunder; but all is one, honor must be purchac'd: I
will give over my City coat, and betake my self to the Court iacket; as for
trade, I will deal in it no longer, I will seat thee in my shop, and it shall
be thy care to ask men what they lack, my stock shall be summed up, and I
will call thee to an account for it.


Spend. My service sir, never deserved so much,
Nor could I ever hope so large a bounty
Could spring out of your love.

Sir Lion. That Is all one,
I do love to do things beyond men's hopes,
To morrow I remove into the Strand,
There for this quarter dwell, the next at Fulham:
He that has choice, may shift, the whilst shall thou
Be master of this house, and rent it free.

Spend. I thank you sir.


Sir Lion. To day I Will go dine with my Lord Mayor: to morrow with the Sherifes,
and next day with the Aldermen, I will spread the Ensign of my knighthood over
the face of the City, which shall strike as great a terror to my enemies, as
ever Tamberlaine to the Turks.

Come Frank, come in with me, and see the meat,
Upon the which my knighthood first shall eat. Ex: omnes.

Enter Stains. Stains. There is a devil has haunted me these three years,
in likeness of an Usurer, a fellow that in all his life never ^at three groat
loaves out of his own purse, nor never warmed him but at other men's fires,
never saw a joint of mutton in his own house these four and twenty years,
but always cosoned the poor prisoners, for he always bought his victuals
out of the almes-basket, and yet this rogue now feeds upon capons which my
tenants sent him out of the Country; he is Landlord forsooth over all my
possessions: well, I am spent, and this rogue has consumed me; I dare not walk
abroad to see my friends, for fear the Serieants should take acquaintance of
me: my refuge is Ireland, or Virginia; necessity cries out, and I will
presently to Westchester. Enter Bubble. How now! Bubble have thou packed up all
thy things? our parting time is come: nay pre thee do not weep.


Bub. Affection sir will burst out.


Stains. Thou have been a faithful servant to me, go to thy uncle, he will
give thee entertainment, tell him upon the stony rock of his merciless heart
my fortunes suffer shipwreck.


Bub. I will tell him he is an usuring rascal, and one that would do the
Commonwealth good, if he were hanged.


Stains. Which thou have cause to wish for, thou art his heir, my
affectionate Bubble.


Bub. But Master, wherefore should we be parted?


Stains. Because my fortunes are desperate, thine are hopeful.


Bub. Why but whither do you mean to go Master?


Stains. Why to Sea.


Bub. To sea! Lord bless us, me thinks I hear of a tempest already, but what
will you do at Sea?


Stains. Why as other Gallants do that are spent, turn pyrate.


Bub. O Master! have the grace of Wapping before your eyes, remember a high
tide, give not your friends cause to wet their handkerchers: nay Master, I Will
tell you a better course then so, you and I will go and rob mine uncle; if
we escape, we will dominiere together, if we be taken, we will be hanged together
at Tyburne, that is the warmer gallows of the two.


Enter a Messenger. Mes. By your leave sir, whereabouts dwells one M. Bubble?


Bub. Do you hear, my friend, do you know M. Bubble if you do see him?


Mes. No in truth do I not.


Bub. What is your business with Master Bubble?


Mes. Marry sir, I come with welcome news to him.


Bub. Tell it, my friend, I am the man.


Mes. May I be assured sir, that your name is master Bubble?


Bub. I tell thee, honest friend, my name is master Bubble, Master Bartholomew
Bubble.


Mes. Why then sir, you are heir to a million, for your uncle the rich usurer
is dead.


Bub. Pray thee honest friend, go to the next Haberdashers, and bid him send
me a new melancholy hat, and take thou that for thy labor.


Mes. I will sir. Exit.


Enter another Messenger hastily, and knockes. Bub. Vmh, vmh, vmh.


Sta. I would the news were true; see how my little Bubble is blown up with it!


Bub. Do you hear, my friend, for what do you knock there?


2. Mes. Marry sir, I would speak with the worshipful Master Bubble.


Bub. The worshipful! and what would you do with the worshipful Master
Bubble? I am the man.


2. Mes. I cry your worship mercy then, Master Thong the Belt-maker sent me to
your worship, to give you notice, that your uncle is dead, and that you are his
only heir. Exit.


Bub. Thy news is good, and I have looked for it long,
Thanks unto thee, my friend, and goodman Thong.

Enter Master Blancke. Stains. Certainly, this news is true: for see
another, by this light his Scriuener! now M. Blancke, whither away so fast?


Bla. Master Stains, God save you, where is your man?


Stains. Why look you sir, do you not see him?


Bla. God save the right worshipful master Bubble; I bring you heavy news
with a light heart.


Bub. What are you?


Bla. I am your worships poor Scriuener.


Bub. He is an honest man it seems, for he has both his ears.


Bla. I am one that your worships uncle committed some trust in for the putting
out of his money, and I hope I shall have the putting out of yours.


Bub. The putting out of mine! would you have the putting out of money?


Bla. Yea sir.


Bub. No sir, I am old enough to put out my own money.


Bla. I have writings of your worships.


Sta. As thou love thy profit, hold thy tongue, thou and I will confer.


Bub. Do you hear, my friend, can you tell me when, and how my uncle died?


Bla. Yes sir, he died this morning, and he was killed by a Butcher?


Bub. How! by a Butcher?


Bla. Yes indeed sir, for going this morning into the Market, to cheapen meat,
he fell down stark dead, because a Butcher asked him four shillings for a
shoulder of Mutton.


Bu. How stark dead! and could not aqua vitae fetch him again?


Bla. No sir, nor Rosa solis neither, and yet there was trial made of both.


Bu. I shall love aqua vitae and rosa solis the better while I live.


Sta. Will it please your worship to accept of my poor service, you know my
case is desperate, I beseech you that I may feed upon your bread, tho it be of
the brownest, and drink of your drink tho it be of the smallest, for I am
humble in body, and dejected in mind, and will do your worship as good service
for forty shillings a year, as another shall for 3. pounds.


Bub. I will not stand with you for such a matter, because you have been my
master, but otherwise, I will entertain no man without some Knights or Ladies
Letter for their behavior, Geruase I take it is your christen name.


Sta. Yes if it please your worship.


Bub. Well Geruase, be a good servant, and you shall find me a dutiful
master: and because you have been a Gentleman, I will entertain you for my
Tutor in behavior; Conduct me to my palace. Exeunt omnes.


Enter Geraldine as in his study reading. Ger. As little children love to play
with fire*
And will not leave till they themselves do burn,
So did I fondly dally with Desire:
Until Loves flames grew hot, I could not turn,
Nor well avoid; but sigh and sob, and mourn
As children do, when as they feel the pain,
Till tender mother kiss them whole again.
Fie, what unsavory stuff is this? but she,
Whose mature judgment can distinguish things,
Will thus conceit; tales that are harshest told,
Have smoothest meanings, and to speak are bold:
It is the firstborn Sonet of my brain,
We sucked a white leaf from my blacke-lipp'd pen
So sad employment, Enter Will Rash and Long field.
Yet the dry paper drinks it up as deep,
As if it flowed from Petrarkes cunning Quill.

Rash. How now! what have we here, a Sonet and a Satire coupled together like
my Ladies Dog and her Munkie; As little children etc.


Ger. Pre thee away, by the deepest oath that can be sworn, thou shall not
read it, by our friendship I conjure thee, pre thee let go.


Rash. Now in the name of Cupid, what want thou, a pigeon, a dove, a mate, a
turtle, do love foul, ha?

O no, she is fairer thrice then is the Queen,

Whom beauteous Venus called is by name, pre thee let me know what she is thou
love, that I may shunae her, if I should chance to meet her.


Long. Why I Will tell you sir what she is, if you do not know.


Rash. No not I, I protest.


Long. Why it is your sister.


Rash. How! my sister?


Long. Yes, your eldest sister.


Rash. Now God bless the man, he had better choose a wench that has been borne
and bred in an alley, her tongue is a perpetual motion, Thought is not so
swift as it is; and for pride, the woman that had her Ruff poak'd by the
devil, is but a Puritan to her, thou could never have fastened thy affection
on a worse subject, she will flowt faster then a court-waiting woman in
progress, any man that comes in the way of honesty does she set her mark
upon, that is, a villainous leaft; for she is a kind of Poetesse, and will
make Ballads upon the calves of your legs: I pre thee let her alone, she will
never make a good wife for any man unless it be a Leather dresser; for perhaps
he, in time, may turn her.


Ger. Thou have a Privilege to utter this,
But by my life my own blood could not escape
A chasticement for thus profaning her,
Whose virtues sits above men's calumnies,
Had mine own brother spoke thus liberally,
My fury should have taught him better manners.

Long. No more words as you fear a challenge.


Rash. I may tell thee in thine ear, I am glad to hear what I do; I pray God
send her no worse husband, nor he no worse wife: do you hear love, will you
take your Cloak and Rapier, and walk abroad into some wholesome air? I do
much fear thy infection, good council I see will do no good on thee, but
pursue the end, and to thy thoughts, I Will prove a faithful friend.


Enter Spendall, Nan Tickleman, Sweat man, Pursenet, and a Drawer. Exit. Spend.
Here Is a spacious room to walk in, sir set down the candle, and fetch us
up a quart of Ipocras, and so we will part.


Sweat. Nay faith Son, we will have a pottle, let us never be covetous in our
young days.


Spend. A pottle sir, do you hear?


Dra. Yes sir, you shall.


Spend. How now Wench! how do?


Tickle. Faith I am somewhat sick, yet I should be well enough if I had a new
gown.


Spend. Why here is my hand, within these three days thou shall have one.


Sweat. And will you (son) remember me for a new forepart, by my troth, my
old one is worn so bare, I am ashamed any body should see it.


Spend. Why, did I ever fail of my promise?


Sweat. No in sincerity did thou not. Enter Drawer.


Dra. Here Is a cup of rich Ipocras.


Spend. Here sister, mother, and master Pursnet; nay good sir, be not so
dejected, for by this wine, to morrow I will send you stuff for a new suite,
and as much as shall line you a cloak clean through.


Purs. I thank you, and shall study to deserve.


Spend. Here boy, fill, and hang that eurmogin that is good for no body but
himself.


Purs. Heroickly spoken by this Candle, it is pity thou were not made a Lord.


Spend. A Lord! by this Light I do not think but to be Lord Mayor of London
before I die, and have three Pageants carried before me, besides a Ship and
an Unicorn; prentices may pray for that time, for whenever it happens, I
will make another Shrouetuesday for them. Enter Drawer.


Dra. Young master Rash has sent you a quart of Maligoe.


Spend. M: Rash! zownds how does he know I am here?


Dra. Nay, I know not sir.


Spend. Know not! it comes through you and your rascally glib-tongu'd
companions, it is my Masters son, a fine gentleman he is, and a boon
companion, I must go so him. Exit Spend.


Sweat. Boy, fill us a cup of your maligo, we will drink to M. Sp^ndall in his
absence, there is not a finer spirit of a Citizen within the walls, here
master Pursnet you shall pledge him.


Purs. I Will not refuse it were it puddle: by Stix hs is a bountiful Gentleman,
and I shall report him so: here M Tickleman, shall I charge you?


Tickl^. Do your worst Sergeant, I Will pledge my young Sp^ndall a whole sea, as
they say, fa la la la la, would the Music were here again, I do begin to
be wanton, Ipocras sir, and a dry biscuit; here bawd, a carowse.


Sweat. Bawd! I faith you begin to grow light ith head, I pray, no more such
words, for if you do, I shall grow into distempers.


Tickle. Distempers! hang your distempers, be angry with me and thou d^r'st, I
pray, who feeds you, but I? who keeps the feather-beddes from the Brokers,
but I? it is not your sawsege face, thick clowted cream rampallion at home,
that snuffles in the nose like a decayed Bagge-pipe.


Purs. Nay, sweet Mistress Tickle-man, be concordant, reverence Antiquity.


Enter Rash, Longfield, and Spendal. Rash. Save you, sweet creatures of
beauty, save you: How now old Beelzebub, how do thou?


Sweat. Beelzebub! Beelzebub in thy face.


Spend. Nay, good words Mistress Swearman, he is a young Gallant, you must not
weigh what he says.


Rash. I would my lamentable complaining Lover had been here, here had been
a Supersede as for his melancholy, and in faith Francke I am glad my father has
turned over his shop to thee, I hope I, or any friend of mine, shall have so
much credit with thee, as to stand in thy books for a suite of Satin.


Spend. For a whole piece, if you please, any friend of yours shall command me
to the last remnant.


Rash. Why God a mercy Francke, what, shall's to dice?


Spend. Dice or drink, here is forty crowns, as long as that will last, any
thing.


Rash. Why there spoke a gingling Boy.


Spend. A pox of money, it is but rubbish, and he that hoord's it up, it but a
Scauenger: if there be cards ith house, let us go to Primero.


Rash. Primero! why I thought thou had not been so much gamster as to play at
it.


Spend. Gamster (to say truth) I am none, but what is it I will not be in good
company? I will ^it my self to all humors, I will game with a Gamster, drink
with a drunkard, be civil with a citizen, fight with a swaggerer, and drabbe
with a whoore-master.


Enter a Swaggerer puffing. Rash. An excellent humor in faith.


Long. Zownds what have we here?


Spend. A land Porpoise, I think.


Rash. This is no angry, nor no roaring boy, but a blustering boy; now Eolus
defend us, what puffes are these?


Swag. I do smell a whore.


Dra. O Gentlemen, give him good words, he is one of the roaring boys.


Swag. Rogue.


Dra. Here sir.


Swag. Take my cloak, I must unbuckle, my pickled oysters work; puff, puff.


Spend. Puff, puff.


Swag. Do thou retort, in opposition stand.


Spend. Out you swaggering Rogue, Zownds I Will kick him out of the room. Beats
him away.


Tickle. Out alas! their naked tools are out,


Spend. Fear not (sweet heart;) come along with me.


Enter Gartred sola. Exeunt omnes. Gart. Thrice happy days they were, and too
soon gone,
When as the heart was coupled with the tongue,
And no deceitful flattery or guile:
Hung on the Lovers teare-commixed smile:
Could women learn but that imperiousness,
By which men use to stint our happiness,
When they have purchased us for to be theirs,
By customarie sighs and forced tears,
To give us bittes of kindness lest we faint,
But no abundance, that we ever want,
And still are begging; which too well they know
Endeeres affection, and does make it grow:
Had we these sleights, how happy were we then,
That we might glory over loue-sicke men?
But Arts we know not; nor have any skill,
To feign a sour look to a pleasing will, Enter Joys.
Nor cowch a secret love in show of hate:
But if we like, must be compassionate;
Yet I will strive to bridle and conceal,
The hid affection which my heart does feel.

Joyce Now the boy with the Bird-bolt be praisde: nay faith sister forward,
it was an excellent passion, come let us hear, what is he? if he be a proper
man, and have a black eye, a smooth chinne, and a curld pare, take him wench,
if my father will not consent, run away with him, I Will help to convey you.


Gart. You talk strangely sister.


Joyce Sister, sister, dissemble not with me, though you do mean to dissemble
with your lover, though you have protested to conceal your affection; by this
tongue you shall not, for I Will discover all as soon as I know the Gentleman.


Gart. Discover, what will you discover?


Joyce Mary, enough I Will warrant thee, first and foremost, I Will tell him thou
readst loue-passions in print, and speak every morning without book to thy
looking-glass; next, that thou never sleep'st, till an hour after the Bell
man; that as soon as thou art asleep, thou art in a dream, and in a dream
thou art the kindest and comfortablest bedfellow for kissings and embracings;
by this hand, I can not rest for thee, but our father. --


Enter sir Lyonell. Lyonell. How now! what are you two consulting on, on
husbands? you think you loose time I am sure, but hold your own a little
Girls, it shall not be long ere I Will provide for you: and for you Gartred, I
have bethought my self already,

Whirle-pit the usurer is late deceast,
A man of unknown wealth, which he has left
Unto a provident kinsman as I hear,
That was once servant to that unthrift Stains.
A prudent Gentleman they say he is,
And (as I take it) called master Bubble.

Joyce Bubble!

Lyonell Yes nimble-chappes, what say you to that?

Joyce Nothing, but that I wish his Christen name were Wa^er.

Gart. Sir, I Am at your disposing, but my mind
Stands not as yet toward marriage,
Were you so pleased I would a little longer
Enjoy the quiet of a single bed.

Lyonell Here Is the right trick of them all, let a man
Be motion'd to vm, they could be content
To lead a single life forsooth, when the harlotries
Do pine and run into diseases,
Eat chalk and oate-meale, cry and creep in corners,
Which are manifest tokens of their longings,
And yet they will dissemble. But Gartred,
As you do owe me reverence, and will pay it,
Prepare your self to like this Gentleman,
Who can maintain thee in thy choice of Gowns,
Of tyres, of servants, and of costly Jewels;
Nay for a need, out of his easy nature,
Mai'st draw him to the keeping of a Coach
For Country; and Carroach for London,
Indeed what might thou not.

Enter a Servant. Servant. Sir, here is one come from Master Bubble, to inuit
you to the funeral of his uncle.


Lyonell Thank the Messenger, and make him drink,
Tell him I will not fail to wait the coarse,
Yet stay, I will go talk with him my self:
Gartred, think upon what I have told you,
And let me er't be long receive your answer.

Exeunt Lyonell and Ser. Joyce Sister, sister.


Gart. What say you sister?


Joyce Shall I provide a Cord?


Gart. A Cord! what to do?


Joyce Why to let thee out at the window; do not I know that thou will run
away with the Gentleman, for whom you made the passion, rather then endure this
same Bubble, that my father talks of, it were good you would let me be of
your council, lest I break the neck of your plot.


Gart. Sister, know I love thee,
And I Will not think a thought thou shall not know;
I love a Gentleman that answers me,
In all the rites of love as faithfully,
Has wooed me often with Sonets, and with tears,
Yet I seem still to slight him. Experience tells,
The Jewel that is enjoyed is not esteemed,
Things hardly got, are always highest deemed.

Joyce You say well sister, but it is not good to linger out too long,
continuance of time will take away any man's stomach in the world; I hope the
next time that he comes to you, I shall see him.


Gart. You shall.


Joyce Why go to then, you shall have my opinion of him, if he deserve thee,
thou shall delay him no longer; for if you can not find in your heart to tell
him you love him, I Will sigh it out for you; come, we little creatures must
help one another.


Exeunt. Enter Geraldine. Ger. How cheerfully things look in this place,
It Is always Springtime here, such is the grace
And potencie of her who has the bliss,
To make it still Elizeum where she is:
Nor does the King of flames in's golden fires,
After a tempest answer men's desires,
When as he casts his comfortable beams,
Over the flowrie fields and silver streams,
As her illustrate Beauty strikes in me,
And wrappes my soul up to felicity.

Enter Gartred and Joyce aloft. Joyce Do you hear sir?


Gart. Why sister, what will you do?


Joyce By my mayden-head, an oath which I never took in vain, either go down
and comfort him, or I Will call him up, and disclose all: What, will you have no
mercy? but let a proper man, that might spend the spirit of his youth upon
your self, fall into a consumption, for shame sister.


Gart. You Are the strangest creature, what would you have me do?


Joy. Marry, I would have you go to him, take him by the hand, and grype him,
say you are welcome, I love you with all my heart, you are the man must do the
feat, and take him about the neck, and kiss upon the bargain.


Gart. Fie how you talk, it is mere immodestie,
The common'st strumpet would not do so much.

Joy. Mary the better, for such as are honest,
Should still do what the common strumpet will no^:
Speak, will you do it?

Gart. I Will loose his company for ever first.


Joyce. Do you hear sir? here is a Gentlewoman would speak with you.


Gart. Why sister, pray sister.


Joyce. One that loves you with all her heart, yet is ashamed to confess it.


Gart. Good sister hold your tongue, I will go down to him.


Joyce. Do not jest with me, for by this hand I Will either get him up, or go
down my self, and read the whole History of your love to him.


Gart. If you will forbear to call, I will go down.


Joyce. Let me see your back then, and hear you? do not use him scuruily you
were best; unset all your tyrannical looks, and bid him lovingly welcome, or as
I live, I Will stretch out my voice again; vds foot, I must take some pains I
see, or we shall never have this gear cotton: but to say truth, the fault is
in my melancholy Monsieur, for if he had but half so much spirit, as he has
flesh, he might ha boorded her by this. But see, yonder she marches; now a
passion of his side of half an hour long, his hatte is off already, as if he
were begging one poor pennyworth of kindness. Enter Gart.


Ger. Shall I presume (fair Mistress) on your hand to lay my unworthy lip?


Joyce. Fie upon him, I am ashamed to hear him, you shall have a Country
fellow at a Maie-pole, go better to his work: he had need to be constant, for
he is able to spoil as many Maids as he shall fall in love withal.


Gart. Sir, you profess love unto me, let me entreat you it may appear but
in some small request.


Ger. Let me know it (Lady) and I shall soon effect it.


Gart. But for this present to forbear this place,
Because my father is expected here.

Ger. I am gone Lady.


Joyce. Do you hear sir?


Ger. Did you call?


Joyce. Look up to the window.


Ger. What say you Gentlewoman?


Gart. Nay pray sir go, it is my sister call's to hasten you.


Joyce. I call to speak with you, pray stay a little.


Ger. The Gentlewoman has something to say to me.


Gart. She has nothing, I do conjure you, as you love me, stay not. Exit Joyce.


Ger. The power of Magic can not fasten me, I am gone.


Gart. Good sir, look back no more, what voice ere call you,
Imagine, going from me, you were coming,
And use the same speed, as you love my safety. Exit Ger.
Wild witted sister, I have prevented you,
I will not have my love yet opened to him,
By how much longer'tis ere it be known, Enter Joyce.
By so much dearer 'twill be when'tis purchased:
But I must use my strength to stop her journey,
For she will after him: and see, she comes;
Nay sister, you are at furdest.

Joyce. Let me go you were best, for if you wrestle with me I shall throw you,
passion, come back, fool, lover, turn again, and kiss your belly full;

For here she is will stand you, do your worst:
Will you let me go?

Gart. Yes, if you will stay.


Joyce. If I stir a foot, hang me, you shall come together of your selves,
and be naught, do what you will, for if 'ere I trouble my self again, let me
want help In such a case when I need.


Gart. Nay but pre thee sister be not angry.


Joyce. I will be angry, vdsfoot, I cannot indu^e such foolerie, I, two
bashful fools that would couple together, and yet ha not the faces.


Gart. Nay pre thee sweet sister.


Joyce. Come, come, let me go, birds that want the use of reason and speech,
can couple together in one day, and yet you that have both, cannot conclude in
twenty.


Gart. Why what good would it do you to tell him?


Joyce. Do not talk to me, for I am deaf to any thing you say, go weep and
cry.


Gart. Nay but sister. Exeunt ambo.


Enter Stains, and a Drawer with wine. Sta. Drawer, bid them make haste at
home,
Tell them they are coming from church.

Dra. I will sir. Exit Drawer.


Sta. That I should live to be a seruing-man, a fellow which scalds his mouth
with another man's porredge, brings up meat for other men's bellies, and carries
away the bones for his own, changes his clean trenchor for a foul one, and is
glad of it, and yet did I never live so merry a life, when I was my masters
master, as now I do, being man to my man, and I will stand to it for all my
former speeches, a seruing-man lives a better life then his Master, and thus I
prove it; the saying is, The nearer the bone the sweeter the flesh: then must
the seruing-man needs eat the sweeter flesh, for he always pickes the
bones. And again the Proverb says, The deeper the sweeter: There has the
seruing-man the vantage again, for he drinks still in the bottom of the pot,
he filles his belly, and never asks what is to pay? wears broad-cloth, and
yet dares walk Wa^^ing-stre^te, without any fear of his Drap^r: and for his
c^lour^, they are according to the season, in the Summer he is apparrelled
(for the most part) like the heavens, in blew, in the winter, like the earth,
in freeze.

Enter Bubble, sir Lionell, and Long-field and Sprinckle. But see, I am
preu^nted in my Encomium,
I could have maintained this theme these two hours.

Lion. Well, God rest his soul, he is gone, and we must all follow him


Bub. I, I, he is gone sir Lionell, he is gone.


Lyonell. Why tho he be gone, what then? it is not you that can fetch him
again, with all your cunning, it must be your comfort, that he died well.


Bub. Truly and so it is, I would to God I had eene another uncle that would
die no worse; surely I shall weep again, if I should find my handkercher.


Long. How now! what, are these onions?


Bub. I, I, sir Lyonell, they are my onions, I thought to have had them roasted
this morning for my cold: Geruase you have not wept to day, pray take your
onions Gentlemen, the remembrance of death is sharp, therefore there is a
banquet within to sweeten your conceits: I pray walk in Gentlemen, walk you
in, you know I must needs be melancholy, and keep my Chamber, Geruase, usher
them into the banquet.


Sta. I shall sir, please you sir Lyonell.


Gentlemen and Geruase go out. Lyonell Well Master Bubble, we will go in and
taste of your bounty.
In the mean time, you must be of good cheer.

Bub. If grief take not away my stomach,
I will have good cheer I warrant you Sprinckle.

Sprin. Sir.


Bub. Had the women puddings to their dole?


Sprin. Yes sir.


Bub. And how did they take them?


Sprin. Why wi^h their hands, how should they take vm?


Bub. O thou Hercules of ignorance! I mean, how were they sati^fied?


Sprin. By my throth sir, but so so, and yet some of them had two.


Bub. O insatiable women! whom two puddings would not sati^fie, but vanish
Sp^inckl^; bid your fellow Geruase come hither: Exit Sprinckle.

And off my mourning roabes, grief to the grave,
For I have gold, and therefore will be brave:
In silks I Will rattle it of every color,
And when I go by water, scorn a Sculler,
In black carnation velvet I will cloak me, Enter Stai^es.
And when men bid God save me, Cry Tu quoque:
It is needful a Gentleman should speak Latin sometimes, is it not Geruase?

Sta. O very graceful sir, your most accomplished Gentlemen are known by it.


Bub. Why then will I make use of that little I have,
Upon times and occasions, here Geruase, take this bag,
And run presently to the Mercers, buy me seven ell, of horse flesh colored
taffata, nine yards of yellow satin, and eight yards of orange tawney velvet;
then run to the Tailers, the Haberdashers, the Sempsters, the Cutlers, the
Persumers, and to all trades whatsoever that belong to the m^king up of a
Gentleman; and amongst the rest, let not the Barber be forgotten: and look
that he be an excellent fellow, and one that can snacke his fingers with
dexterity.


Sta. I shall fit you sir.


Bub. Do so good Geruase, it is time my beard were corrected, for it is grown
so sawsie, as it begins to play with my nose.


Stains. Your nose sir must endure it: for it is in part the fashion.


Bub. Is it in fashion? why then my nose shall endure it, let it tickle his
worst.


Sta. Why now you are ith right sir, if you will be a true Gallant, you must
bear things resolute, as this sir, if you be at an Ordinary, and chance to
loose your money at play, you must not fret and fume, tear cards, and fling
away dice, as your ignorant gamster, or country-Gentleman does, but you must
put on a calm temperate action, with a kind of careless smile, in contempt of
Fortune, as not being able with all her engines to batter down one piece of your
estate, that your means may be thought invincible, never tell your money, nor
what you have won, nor what you have lost: if a question be made: your answer
must be, what I have lost, I have lost, what I have won, I have won, a
close heart and free hand, makes a man admired, a testerne or a shilling to a
servant that brings you a glass of beer, binds his hands to his lips, you
shall have more service of him, then his Master, he will be more humble to
you, then a Cheater before a Magistrate.


Bub. Geruase, give me thy hand, I think thou have more wit then I that am
thy Master, and for this Speech only, I do here create thee my steward: I do
long me thinks to be at an Ordinary, to smile at Fortune, and to be
bountiful: Geruase about your business good Geruase, while^t I go and
meditate upon a Gentleman-like behavior, I have an excellent gate already
Geruase, have I not?


Sta. Hercules himself sir, had never a better gate.


Bub. But dispatch Geruase, the satin and the velvet must be thought upon, and
the Tu quoque must not be forgotten: for whenever I give Arms, that shall
be my Motto. Exit Bub.


Sta. What a fortune had I thrown upon me, when I preferred my self into this
fellows service! indeed I serve my self, and not him, for this Gold here
is mine own truly purchased: he has credit, and shall run ith books
for it, I Will carry things so cunningly, that he shall not be able to look into
my actions, my morgage I have already got into my hands: the rent he shall
enjoy a while, till his riot constrain him to sell it, which I will purchase
with his own money, I must cheat a little, I have been cheated upon,
therefore I hope the world will a little the better excuse me, what his uncle
craftily got from me, I will knauishly recover of him, to come by it, I must
vary shapes, and my first shift shall be in satin:

Proteus propitious be to my disguise,
And I shall prosper in my enterprise. Exit.

Enter Spendall, Purseuet, and a boy with Rackets. Spend. A Rubber sir.


Boy. You shall sir.


Spend. And bid those two men you said would speak with me, come in.


Boy. I will sir. Exit Boy.


Spend. Did I not play this Set will?


Enter Blancke and another. Purs. Excellent well by Phaeton, by Erebus, it went
as if it had cut the Line.


Bla. God bless you sir.


Spend. Master Blanke! welcome.


Bla. Here Is the Gentleman's man sir has brought the money.


Ser. Wilt please you tell sir?


Spend. Have you the Bond ready master Blanke?


Bla. Yes sir.


Spend. It Is well, Pursenet, help to tell -- 10.11.22. What time have you given?


Bla. The thirteenth of the next Month.


Spend. It Is well, here is light gold.


Ser. It Will be the less troublesome to carry.


Spend. You say well sir, how much have thou told?


Purs. In gold and silver here is twenty pounds.


Bla. It Is right M. Spendall, I Will warrant you.


Spend. I Will take your warrant sir, and tell no further, come let me see the
Condition of this Obligation.


Purs. A man may win from him that cares not for it,
This royal Casar does regard no Cash,
Has thrown away as much in Duckes and Drakes,
As would have bought some 50000 Capons.

Spend. It Is very well; so, lend me your pen.

Purs. This is the Captain of brave Citizens,
The Agamemnon of all merry Greeks,
A Stukely or a Sherley for his spirit,
Bounty and Royalty to men at arms.

Bla. You give this as your deed.

Spend. Ma^y do I sir.

Bla. Pleases this Gentleman to be a witness.

Spend. Yes Mary shall he, Pursenet, your hand.

Purs. My hand is at thy service, Noble Brutus.

Spend. There Is for your kindness master Blanke.

Bla. I thank you sir.

Spend. For your pains.

Ser. I Will take my leave of you.

Spend. What, must you be gone too, master Blancke?

Bla. Yes indeed sir, I must to the Exchange.

Spend. Farewell to both, Pursenet,
Take that twenty pounds, and give it mistress Sweatma^^*
Bid her pay her Landlord and Apothecarie,
And let her Butcher and her Baker stay,
They Are honest men, and I Will take order with them.

Purs. The Butcher and the Baker then shall stay.


Spend. They must till I am somewhat stronger purst.


Purs. If this be all, I have my errand perfect. Exit Purs.


Spend. Here sir, here is for balls, there is for your self.


Boy I thank your worship.


Spend. Commend me to your mistress. Exit Spend.


Boy I will sir; in good faith it is the liberall'st Gentleman that comes into
our Court, why he cares no more for a shilling then I do for a box o'th ear,
God bless him. Exit.


Enter Stains Gallant, Long-^ield and a Servant. Sta. Sir, what a clock
is it?


Ser. Past ten sir.


Sta. Here will not be a Gallant seen this hour.


Ser. Within this quarter sir, and less, they meet here as soon as at any
Ordinary in the town.


Sta. Have any Tobacco?


Ser. Yes sir.


Sta. Fill.


Long. Why thou report'st miracles, things not to be believed: I protest to
thee, had thou not vnrip't thy self to me, I should never have known thee.


Sta. I tell you true sir, I was so far gone, that desperation knocked at
mine elbow, and whispered news to me out of Barbary.


Lon. Well, I Am glad so good an occasion staid thee at home,
And mai'st thou prosper in thy project, and go on,
With best success of thy invention.

Sta. False dice say Amen, for that is my induction,
I do mean to cheat to day without respect of persons:
When saw thou Will Rash?

Long. This morning at his Chamber, hell be here.


Sta. Why then do thou give him my name and character, for my aim is wholly at
my worshipful Master.


Lon. Nay thou shall take another into him, one that laughs out his life in
this Ordinary, thanks any man that winnes his money; all the while his money
is loosing, he swears by the cross of this silver, and when it is gone, he
changes it to the hilts of his sword.


Enter Scatter-good and Ninnie-hammer. Sta. He Will be an excellent coach-horse
for my captain.


Scat. Save you Gallants, save you.


Lon. How think ye now? have I not carved him out to you?


Sta. Thou Have lighted me into his heart, I see him thoroughly.


Scat. Ninni-hammer.


Nin. Sir.


Scat. Take my cloak and rapier also: I think it be early Gentlemen, what
time do you take it to be?


Sta. Inclining to eleven sir.


Scat. Inclining! a good word; I would it were inclining to twelve, for by my
stomach it should be high Noone: but what shall we do Gallants? shall we to
cards, till our Company come?


Long. Please you sir.


Scat. Harry. fetch sir Cards, me thinks it is an unseemly fight to see
Gentlemen stand idle, please you to impart your smoke.


Long. Very willingly sir.


S^at. In good faith a pipe of excellent vapor.


Long. The best the house yeeldes.


Scat. Had you it in the house? I had thought it had been your own: it is not
so good now as I took it to be: Come Gentlemen, what is your game?


Sta. Why Gleeke, that is your only game.


Scat. Gleeke let it be, for I am persuaded I shall gleeke some of you; cut sir.


Long. What play we, twelve pence gleeke.


Scat* Twelve pence, a crown; vds foot I will not spoil my memory for twelve
pence.


Long. With all my heart.


Sta. Honor.


Scat. What is it, Hearts?


Sta. The King, what say you?


Long. You must speak sir.


Scat. Why I bid thirteen.


Sta. Fourteen.


Scat. Fifteen.


Sta. Sixteen.


Long. Sixteen, seventeen.


Sta. You shall have it for me.


Scat. Eighteen.


Long. Take it to you sir.


Scat. V^slid I Will not be out-brau'd.


Sta. I vie it.


Long. I Will none of it.


Scat. Nor I.


Sta. Give me a mournauall of aces, and a gleek of queens.


Long. And me a gleeke of knaves.


Scat. V^slid, I am gleek't this time. Enter Will Rash.


Stay. Play.


Rash. Equal fortunes befall you Gallants.


Scat. Will Rash, well, I pray see what a vile game I have


Rash. What Is your game, Gleeke?


Scat. Yes faith, Gleek, and I have not one Court card, but the knave of
Clubbes.


Rash. Thou have a wild hand indeed: thy small cards show like a troop of
rebels, and the knave of Clubbes their chief Leader.


Scat. And so they do as God save me, by the cross of this silver he says
true. Enter Spendall.


Sta. Pray, play sir:


Long. Honor.


Rash. How go the stocks Gentlemen, what is won or lost?


Sta. This is the first game.


Scat. Yes this is the first game, but by the cross of this silver here is all
of five pounds.


Spend, Good day to you Gentlemen.


Rash. Francke, welcome by this hand, how do lad?


Spend. And how does thy wench in faith.


Rash. Why fat and plump
Like thy geldings: thou give them both good prouender
It seems, go to, thou art one of the madd'st wagges,
Of a Citizen 'ith town^, the whole company talks of thee already.

Spend. Talk, why let vm talk, vdsfoot I pay scot and lot, and all manner of
duties else, as well as the best of vm: it may be they understand I keep a
whore, a horse, and a kennell of hownds, what is that to them? no man's purse
opens for it but mine own; and so long, my hownds shall eat flesh, my horse
bread, and my who ore wear velvet.


Rash. Why there spoke a courageous Boy.


Spend. Vdsfoote, shall I be confined all the days of my life to walk under a
pent-house? no, I Will take my pleasure whiles my youth affoords it.


Scat. By the cross of these hilts, I Will never play at Gleeke again, whilst I
have a nose on my face,
I smell the knavery of the game.

Spend. Why what is the matter? who has lost?


Scat. Mary that have I, by the hiltes of my sword, I have lost forty crowns,
in as small time almost, as while a man might tell it.


Spend. Change your Game for dice,
We are a full number for Nouum.

Scatt. With all my heart, where is M. Ambush the Broaker Ninni-hammer?


Nin. Sir.


Scat. Go to M. Ambush, and bid him send me twenty marks upon this Diamond.
Enter Bubble.


Nin. I will sir.


Long. Look you (to make us the merrier) who comes here.


Rash. A fresh Gamster, M. Bubble, God save you.


Bub. Tu quoque sir.


Spend. God save you Master Bubble.


Bub. Tu quoque.


Sta. Save you sir.


Bub. Et tu quoque.


Long. Good master Bubleb


Bub. Et tu quoque.


Scatt. Is your name Master Bubble?


Bub. Master Bubble is my name, sir.


Scat. God save you sir.


Bub. Et tu quoque.


Scat. I would be better acquainted with you.


Bub. And I with you.


Scat. Pray let us salute again.


Bub. With all my heart sir.


Lon. Behold yonder the oak and the Iuy how they embrace.


Rash. Excellent acquaintance, they shall be the Gemini.


Bub. Shall I desire your name sir?


Scat. Master Scattergood.


Bub. Of the Scattergoods of London?


Scat. No indeed sir, of the Scattergoods of Hampshire.


Bub. Good Master Scattergood.


Sta. Come Gentlemen, here is dice.


Scat. Please you advance to the Table?


Bub. No indeed sir.


Scatt. Pray will you go?


Bub. I will go sir over the whole world for your sake, But in cur^esie I will
not budge a foot. Enter Ni^^ihammer.


Nin. Here is the Cash you sent me for, and master Rash,
Here is a Letter from one of your sisters*

Spend. I have the dice, set Gentlemen.


Long. From which sister?


Rash. From the mad-cap, I know by the hand.


Spend. For me, six.


Omnes. And six that.


Sta. Nine; 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8: eighteen shillings.


Spend. What Is yours sir?


S^a^. Mine Is a Bakers dozen: master Bubble tell your money.


Bub. In good faith I am but a simple Gamster, and do not know what to do.


Scat. Why you must tell your money, and he will pay you.


Bub. My money! I do know how much my money is, but he shall not pay me, I have a
better conscience then so: what for throwing the dice twice, in faith he should
have but a hard bargain of it.


Rash. Witty rascal, I must needs away.


Long. Why what is the matter?


Rash. Why the lovers can not agree, thou shall along with me, and know all.


Long. But first let me instruct thee in the condition of this Gentleman, whom
do thou take him to be?


Rash. Nay, he is a stranger, I know him not.


Long. By this light but you do, if his beard were off, it is St^ined^.


Rash. The devil it is as soon: and what is his purpose in this disguise?


Long. Why cheating, do you not see how he plays upon his worshipful
Master, and the rest.


Rash. By my faith he draws apace.


Spend. A pox upon these dice, giue's a fresh bale.


Bubb. Ha ha, the dice are not to be blamed, a man may perceive this is no
Gentlemanly gamster, by his chasing: do you hear, my friend, fill me a glass
of beer, and there is a shilling for your pains.


Dra. Your worship shall sir.


Rash. Why how now Frank, what have lost?


Spend. Fifteen pounds and upwards: is there never an honest fellow.


Amb. What do you lack money sir?


Sp^nd. Yes, can furnish me?


Amb. Upon a sufficient pawn sir.


Spend. You know my shop, bid my man deliver you a piece of three pile velvet,
and let me have as much money as you dare adventure upon it.


Amb. You shall sir.


Spend. A pox of this luck, it will not last ever:
Play sir, I Will set you.

Rash. Frank, better fortune befa'l thee: and Gentlemen, I must take my leave,
for I must leave you.


Scat. Must you needs be gone?


Rash. Indeed I must.


Bub. Et tu quoque?


Long. Yes truly.


Scat. At your discretions Gentlemen.


Rash. Farewell. Exeunt Rash and Long.


Sta. Cry you mercy sir, I am chanced with you all Gentlemen: here I have 7,
here 7, and here 10.


Spend. It Is right sir, and ten that.


Bub. And nine that.


Sta. Two fiues at all. Draws all.


Bub. One and five that.


Spend. V^nh, and can a suite of Satin cheat so grossly? By this light
there is naught on one die but fiues and sixes, I must not be thus gulled.


Bub. Come Master Spendall, set.


Spend. No sir, I have done.


Scatt. Why then let us all leave, for I think dinner's ne^^e ready.


Dra. Your meat's upon the Table.


Scat. On the Table! come Gentlemen, we do our stomachs wrong: M. Bubble, what
have you lost?


Bub. That Is no matter, what I have lost, I have lost; nor can I choose but
smile at the foolishnes of the dice.


Sta. I am but your steward Gentlemen, for after dinner I may restore it again.


Bub. M. Scatter-good, will you walk in?


Scat. I Will wait upon you sir, come Gentlemen, will you follow? Exit: manent
Spendall and St^^nes.


Sta. Yes sir, I Will follow you.


Spe^. Hear you sir, a word.


Sta. Ten if you please.


Spend. I have lost fifteen pounds.


Sta And I have found it.


Spend. You say right, found it you have indeed,
But never won it: do you know this die?

Sta. Not I sir.

Spend. You seem a Gentleman, and you may perceive.
I have some respect unto your credit,
To take you thus aside, will you restore
What you ha drawn from me unlawfully?

Sta. Sir, by your outside you seem a citizen,
Whose Cockes-comb, I were apt enough to break,
But for the Law; go y' are a prating Jack,
Nor 'ist your hopes, of crying out for clubbes,
Can save you from my chasticement, if once
You shall but dare to utter this again.

Spend. You lie, you dare pot.


Sta. Lie! nay villain, now thou tempest me to thy death.


Spend. So 't, you must buy it dearer,
The b^st blood flows within you is the price.

Sta. Dare thou resist, thou art no Citizen.


Spend. I am a Citizen.


Sta. Say thou art a Gentleman, and I am satisfied,
For then I know thou wilt answer me in field.

Spend. I Will say directly what I am, a Citizen,
And I will meet thee in the field as fairly
As the best Gentleman that wears a sword.

Sta. I accept it, the meeting place.


Spend. Beyond the Maze in Tuttle.


Sta. What weapon?


Spend. Single rapier.


Sta. The time.


Spend. To morrow.


Sta. The hour.


Spend. Twixt nine and ten.


Sta. It Is good, I shall expect you, farewell. Ex. omnes.


Spend. Farewell sir.


Enter Will Rash, Long-field, and Joyce. Rash. Why I commend thee Gerle, thou
speak as thou think, thy tongue and thy heart are Relatiues, and thou were
not my sister, I should at this time fall in love with thee.


Joyce. You should not need, for and you were not my brother, I should fall in
love with you, for I love a proper man with my heart, and so does all the Sex
of us, let my sister dissemble never so much, I am out of charity with these
nice and squemish tricks, we were borne for men, and men for us, and we must
together.


Rash. This same plain dealing is a Jewel in thee.


Joyce. And let me enjoy that Jewel, for I love plain dealing with my heart.


Rash. Tha'rt a good wench in faith, I should never be ashamed to call thee
sister, though thou should marry a Broomeman: but your lover me thinks is
over tedious.


Enter Geraldine. Joyce. No, look ye sir, could you wish a man to come better
upon his q, let us withdraw.


Rash. Close, close, for the prosecution of the plot, wench,
See he prepares.

Joyce. Silence.

Gerald. The Sun is yet wrapped in Aurora^s arms,
And lulled with her delight, forgets his creatures:
Awake thou god of heat,
I call thee up, and task thee for thy slownesse;
Point all thy beams through yonder flaring glass,
And raise a beauty brighter then thy s^^fe; Music.
Musitions, give to each Instrument a tongue,
To breathe sweet music in the ears of her
To whom I send it as a messenger. Enter Gartred aloft.

Gart. Sir, your music is so good, that I must say I like it; but the Bringer
so ill welcome, that I could be content to loose it: if you played for money,
there it is; if for love, here is none; if for goodwill, I thank you, and when
you will you may be gone,


Ger. Leave me not intranc'd: sing not my death,
Thy voice is able to make Satires tame,
And call rough winds to her obedience.

Gart. Sir, sir, our ears itch not for flattery, here you besiege my window,
that I dare not put forth my self to take the geatle Air, but you are in the
fields, and volley out your woes, your plaints, your loves, your injuries.


Ger. Since you have heard, and know them, give redress, True beauty never yet
was merciless.


Gart. Sir, rest thus satisfied, my mind was never woman, never altered, nor
shall it now begin: So fare you well. Exis Gart.


Rash. Sfoot, she plays the terrible tyrannizing Tamberlaine over him, this it
is to turn Turk, from a most absolute complete Gentleman, to a most absurd
ridiculous and fond lover.


Long. Oh, when a woman knows the power and authority of her eye.


Joyce. Fie upon her, she is good for nothing then, no more then a jade that
knows his own strength: The window is clasped, now brother, pursue your
project, and deliver your friend from the tyranny of my domineering sister.


Rash. Do you hear, you drunkard in love, come in to ^s and be ruled, you
would little think^, that the wench that talked so souruily out of the window
there, is more inamored on thee then thou on her: nay, look you now, see if
he turn not away slighting our good council: I am no Christian if she do
not sigh, whine, and grow sick for thee: look you sir, I will bring you in
good witness against her.


Joyce. Sir, you are my brothers friend, and I Will be plain with you, you do not
take the course to win my sister, but indirectly go about the bush: you come
and siddle here, and keep a coile in verse: hold off your hatte, and beg to
kiss her hand, which makes her proud. But to be short, in two lines thus it
is:

Who most does love, must seem most to neglect it,
For those that show most love, are least respected.

Long. A good observation by my faith.


Rash. Well this instruction comes too late now,
Stand you close, and let me prosecute my invention,
Sister, O sister, wake, arise sister.

Enter Gartred above. Gart. How now brother, why call you with such terror?


Rash. How can you sleep so sound, and hear such groans,
So horride and so tedious to the ear,
That I was frighted hither by the sound?
O sister, here lies a Gentleman that loved you too dearly,
And himself too ill, as by his death appears,
I can report no further without tears;
Assist me now.

Long. When he came first, death startled in his eyes,
His hand had not forsook the dagger hilt,
But still he gave it strength, as if he feared
He had not sent it home unto his heart.

Gart. Enough, enough,
If you will have me live, give him no name,
Suspicion tells me it is my Geraldine:
But be it whom it will, I Will come to him,
To suffer death as resolute as he. Exit Gart.

Rash. Did not I tell you 'twould take, down sir down.


Ger. I guess what y'ould have me do.


Long. O for a little blood to besprinckle him.


Rash. No matter for blood, I Will not suffer her to come near him, till the
plot have taken his full height.


Ger. A scarffe ore my face, left I betray my self.


Enter Gartred below. Rash. Here, here, lie still, she comes,
Now Mereurie, be propitious.

Gart. Where lies this spectacle of blood?
This tragic Scene.

Rash. Yonder lies Geraldine.

Gart. O let me see him with his face of death!
Why do you stay me from my Geraldine?

Rash. Because, unworthy as thou art, thou shall not see
The man now dead, whom living thou did scorn,
The worst part that he had, deserved thy best,
But yet contemned, deluded, mocked, despisde by you,
Unfit for aught but for the general mark
Which you were made for, man's creation.

Gart. Burst not my heart before I see my Love,
Brother, upon my knees I beg your leave,
That I may see the wound of Geraldine,
I will embalme his body with my tears,
And carry him unto his sepulcher,
From whence I Will never rise, but be interred
In the same dust he shall be buried in.

Long. I do protest she draws sad tears from me,
I pre thee let her see her Geraldine.

Gart. Brother, if e're you loved me as a sister,
Deprive me not the sight of Geraldine.

Rash. Well, I am contented you shall touch his lips,
But neither see his face nor yet his wound,

Gart. Not see his face?

Rash. Nay, I have sworn it to the contrary:
Nay, hark you further yet.

Gart. What now?

Rash. But one kiss, no more.

Gart. Why then no more.

Rash. Marry this liberty I Will give you,
If you intend to make my speech of repentance
Over him, I am content, so it be short.

Gart. What you command is Law, and I obey.

Joyce. Peace, give ear to the passion.

Gart. Before I touch thy body, I implore
Thy discontented ghost to be appeasde:
Send not unto me till I come my self:
Then shall thou know how much I honored thee.
O see the color of his coral lip!
Which in despite of death lives full and fresh,
As when he was the beauty of his Sex:
It Were sin worthy the worst of plagues to leave thee:
Not all the strength and policy of man
Shall snatch me from thy bosom.

Long. Look, look, I think she will ravish him.

Rash. Why how now sister?

Gart. Shall we have both one grave? here I am chained,
Thunder nor Earthquakes shall shake me off.

Rash. No? I Will try that, come dead man, awake, up with your bag and baggage,
and let us have no more fooling.


Gart. And liue's my Geraldine?


Rash. Live? faith I,
Why should he not? he was never dead,
That I know on.

Ger. It is no wonder Geraldine should live,
Tho he had emptied all his vital spirits,
The Lute of Orpheus spoke not half so sweet,
When he descended to th'mfernall vaults,
To fetch again his fair Euridice,
As did thy sweet voice to Geraldine.

Gart. I Will exercise that voice, since it does please
My better self, my constant Geraldine.

Joyce. Why so la, here is an end of an old Song,
Why could not this have been done before
I pray?

Gart. O you are a goodly sister, this is your plot:
Well, I shall live one day to requite you.

Joyce. Spare me not, for wheresoever I set my affection, although it be upon a
Colliar, if I fall back, unless it be in the right kind, bind me to a
stake, and let me be burned to death with char-coale.


Rash. Well, thou art a mad wench, and there is no more to be done at this time,
but as we brought you together, so to part you, you must not lie at rack and
manger: there be those within, that will forbid the banes, Time must shake good
Fortune by the hand, before you two must be great, specially you sister; come
leave swearing.


Gart. Must we then part?


Rash. Must you part? why how think you? vdsfoote, I do think we shall have
as much to do to get her from him, as we had to bring her to him: this love of
women is of a strange quality, and has more tricks then a Iuggler.


Gart. But this, and then farewell.


Ger. Thy company is heaven, thy absence hell.


Rash. Lord who'ld think it?


Joyce. Come wench. Exeunt omnes.


Enter Spendall, and Stains. Spend. This ground is firm and even, I Will go no
further.

Sta. This be the place then, and prepare you sir,
You shall have fair play for your life of me,
For look sir, I Will be open breasted to you.

Spend. Shame light on him that thinks his safety lies in a
French doublet.
Nay I would strippe my self, would comeliness
Give sufferance to the deed, and fight with thee,
As naked as a Mauritanian Moore.

Sta. Give me thy hand, by my heart I love thee,
Thou art the highest spirited Citizen,
That ever Guild Hall took notice of.

Spend. Talk not what I am, until you have tried me.

Sta. Come on sir. They fight.

Spend. Now sir, your life is mine.

Sta. Why then take it, for I Will not beg it of thee.

Spend. Nobly resolved, I love thee for those words,
Here take thy arms again, and if thy malice
Have spent it self like mine, then let us part
More friendly then we met at first encounter.

Sta. Sir, I accept this gift of you, but not your friendship,
Until I shall recouer't with my honor.

Spend. Will you fight again then?

Sta. Yes.

Spend. Faith thou do well then, justly to whip my folly.
But come sir.

Sta. Hold, you are hurt I take it.

Spend. Hurt! where? zownds I feel it not.

Sta. You bleed I am sure.

Spend. Sblood, I think you wear a cattes claw upon your
Rapiers point,
I am scratcht indeed, but small as it is,
I must have blood for blood.

Sta. You Are bent to kill I see.

Spend. No by my hopes, if I can seape that sin,
And keep my good name, I Will never offer't.

Sta. Well sir, your worst.

Spend. We both bleed now I take it,
And if the motion may be equal thought,
To part with clasped hands: I shall first subscribe.

Sta. It were vnmanlinesse in me to refuse
The safety of us both, my hand shall never fall
From such a charitable motion.

Spend. Then join we both, and here our malice ends,
Tho foes we came to'^h field, we will depart friends. Exeunt.

Enter sir Lyonell and a Servant. Lion. Come, come, follow me knave, follow me,
I have the best nose 'ith house, I think, either we shall have rainie
weather, or the vaults vnstop'd: sir, go see, I would not have my guess
smell out any such inconvenience: Do you hear sir Simon?


Ser. Sir.


Lion. Bid the Kitchin-maide skowre the sincke, and make clean her backe-side,
for the wind lies just upon it.


Ser. I will sir.


Lion. And bid Anthony put on his white fustian doublet, for he must wait to
day: It does me so much good to stir and talk, to place this, and displace
that, that I shall need no Apothecaries prescriptions, I have sent my daughter
this morning as far as Pimliko to fetch a draught of Darby ale, that it may
fetch a color in her cheeks, the puling harlotrie looks so pale, and it is
all for want of a man, for so their mother would say, God rest her soul,
before she died. Exit Servant.


Enter Bubble, Scattergood and Stains. Ser. Sir, the Gentlemen are come
already.


Lion. How knave, the Gentlemen!


Ser. Yes sir, yonder they are.


Lyonell. Gods precious, we are too tardie, let one be sent presently to meet
the gerles, and hasten their coming home quickly: how do thou stand
dreaming? Gentlemen, I see you love me, you are careful of your hour; you may
be deceived in your cheer, but not in your welcome.


Bub. Thanks, and Tu quoque is a word for all.


Scatterg. A pretty concise room: sir Lyonell, where are your danghters?


Lion. They are at your service sir, and forth coming.


Bub. Gods will Geruase! how shall I behave my self to the Gentlewomen?


Sta. Why advance your self toward them, with a comely step, and in your
salute, be careful you strike not too high, nor too low, and afterward for
your discourse, your Tu quoque will bear you out.


Bub. Nay, and that be all, I care not, for I Will set a good face on it, that is
flat: and for my nether parts, let them speak for themselves: here is a leg,
and ever a Baker in England show me a better, I Will give him mine for nothing.


Sta. O that is a special thing that I must caution you of.


Bub. What sweet Geruase?


Sta. Why for commending your self; never whilst you line commend your self:
and then you shall have the Ladies themselves commend you.


Bub. I would they would else.


Sta. Why they will I Will assure you sir, and the more vilely you speak of your
self, the more will they strive to collaud you.


Enter Gartred and Joyce. Bub. Let me alone to dispraise my self,
I Will make my self the arrantest Cockes-combe within a whole
Country.

Lyonell. Here come the Gypsies, the Sunne-burn'd gerles,
Whose beauties will not utter them alone,
They must have bags although my credit crack for it.

Bub. Is this the eldest sir?

Lyonell. Yes marry is she sir.

Bub. I Will kiss the youngest first, because she likes me best.

Scat. Marry sir, and whilst you are there, I Will be here:
O delicious touch! I think in conscience
Her lips are lined quite through with Orange Tawny velvet.

Bub. They kiss exceeding well, I do not think but they have been brought
up to it, I will begin to her like a Gentleman in a set speech: Fair Lady,
shall I speak a word with you?


Joyce. With me sir?


Bub. With you Lady, -- this way, -- a little more, --
So now it is well, vmh --
Even as a Drummer, -- or a Pewterer.

Joy. Which of the two no matter,
For one beats on a Drum, the other a Platter.

Bub. In good faith sweet Lady you say true*
But pray mark me further, I will begin again.

Joy. I pray Sir do.

Bub. Even as a Drummer, as I said before, --
Or as a Pewterer.

Joy. Very good Sir.


Bub. Do -- do -- do.


Joy. What do they do?


Bub. By my troth Lady, I do not know: for to say truth, I am a kind of an
Ass.


Joy. How Sir, an Ass?


Bub. Yes indeed Lady.


Joy. Nay that you are not.


Bub. So God ha me, I am Lady: you never saw an arranter Ass in your life.


Joy. Why here is a Gentleman your friend, will not say so.


Bub. Y faith but he shall: How say you sir,
Am not I an Ass?

Scatt. Yes by my troth Lady is he: Why I Will say any thing my brother Bubble
says.


Gart. Is this the man my Father choose for me, to make a Husband of? O God,
how blind are parents in our loves: so they have weath, they care not to what
things they marry us.


Bub. Pray look upon me Lady.


Joy. So I do sir.


Bub. I but look upon me well, and tell me if you ever saw any man look so
scuruily, as I do?


Joy. The fellow sure is frantique.


Bub. You do not mark me?


Joy. Yes indeed sir.


Bub. I, but look upon me well:
Did you ever see a worse timberd Leg?

Joy. By my faith it is a pretty four square Leg.

Bub. I but your four square Legs are none of the best.
Oh! Iaruis, Iaruis.

Sta. Excellent well sir.


Bub. What say you now to me Lady, can you find ere a good inch about me?


Joy. Yes that I can sir.


Bub. Find it, and take it sweet Lady:
There I think I bobd her, Iaruis?

Joy. Well sir, disparadge not your self so: for if you were
The man you would make your self; yet out of your
Behavior and discourse, I could find cause enough
To love you.

Bub. Augh! now she comes to me: My behavior? alas, alas, it is clownicall;
and my discourse is very bald, bald: You shall not hear me break a good
Jest in a twelve month.


Joy. No sir? why now you break a good Jest.


Bub. No, I want the Boon Ioure, and the Tu quoques,
Which yonder Gentleman has: There Is a bob for him too:
There Is a Gentleman, and you talk of a Gentleman?

Joy. Who he? he is a Coxcombe indeed.


Bub. We are sworn Brothers in good faith Lady.


Enter Servant. Scatt. Yes in truth we are sworn Brothers, and do mean to
go both alike, and to have Horses alike.


Joy. And they shall be sworn Brothers too?


Scatt. If it please them, Lady.


Ser. M. Balance, the Gold smith desires to speak with you.


Lyo. Bid him come, knave.


Scatt. I wonder (Sir Lyonell) your son Will Rash is not here?


Lyo. Is he of your acquaintance, sir?


Scatt. O very familiar; he struck me a box on the ear once, and from
thence grew my love to him.


Enter Balance. Lyo. It was a sign of virtue in you sir; but heel be here
at dinner. Master Balance, what makes you so strange?

Come, you're welcome: what is the News?


Balla. Why sir, the old News: your man Francis royots still,
And little hope of thrift there is in him*
Therefore I come to advise your Worship,
To take some order whilst there is something left,
The better part of his best Ware's consumd.

Lyo. Speak softly Master Balance.
But is there no hope of his recovery?

Ball. None at all sir; for he is already laid to be arested by some that I know.


Lyo. Well, I do suffer for him, and am loath
Indeed to do, what I am constraind to do:
Well sir, I mean to ceaze on what is left.
And hark you one wo^d more.

Joy. What heinous sin has yonder man committed,
To have so great a punishment, as wait
upon the humors of an idle Fool:
A very proper Fellow, good Leg, good Face,
A Body well proportiond: but his mind
Bewrayes he never came of Generous kind.

Enter Will Rash and Geraldine. Lyo. Go to, no more of this at this time.
What sir, are you come?

Rash. Yes sir, and have made bold to bring a Guist along.


Lyo. Master Geraldines son of Essex?


Ger. The same sir.


Lyo You Are welcome sir, when will your Father be in town?


Ger. It Will not be long, sir.


Lyo. I shall be glad to see him when he coms.


Ger. I thank you sir.


Lyo. In the mean time you're welcome; pray be not strange,
I Will leave my Son amongst you Gentlemen,
I have some business: hark you M. Balance,
Dinner will soon be ready; one word more. Exit Lyo. and Bal.

Rash. And how does my little Asinus and his Tu quoque here? Oh you pretty
sweet-fac'd rogues, that for your countenances might be Alexander and Lodwicke:
What says the old man to you? will it be a match? shall we call Brothers?


Scatt. I faith with all my heart; if Mistress Gartred will, we will be married
to morrow.


Bub. S'fott, if Mistress Joyce will, we will be married to night.


Rash. Why you courageous Boys, and worthy Wenches, made out of Wax. But what
shall's do when we have dinde, shall's go see a Play?


Scatt. Yes faith Brother: if it please you, let us go see a Play at the Gloabe.


Bub. I care not; any whither, so the Clown have a part: For Ifayth I am no
body without a Fool.


Ger. Why then we will go to the Red Bull; they say Green's a good Clown.


Bub. Green? Greene's an Ass.


Scatt. Where^ore do you say so?


Bub. Indeed I ha no reason: for they say, he is as like me as ever he can
look.


Scatt. Well then, to the Bull.


Rash. A good resolution, continue it: nay on?


Bub. Not before the Gentlewomen; not I never.


Rash. O while you live, men before women:
Custom has placed it so.

Bub. Why then Custom is not so mannerly, as I would be.


Rash. Farewell M. Scatter-good: Come Lover, you're too busy here, I must
tutor ye: Cast not your eye at the table on each other, my Father will spy
you without Spectacles,

He is a shrewd obseruer: do you hear me?

Ger. Very well sir.


Rash. Come then go we together, let the Wenches alone.
Do you see yonder fellow?

Ger. Yes: prithee what is he?


Rash. I Will give you him within, he must not now be thought on: but you shall
know him. Exit Rash. and Gerald.


Gart. I have observed my sister, and her eye
Is much inquisitiue after yond fellow;
She has examined him from head to foot:
I Will stay and see the issue.

Joy. To wrestle against the stream of our Affection,
Is to strike Air, or buffet with the Wind,
That plays upon us: I have strived to cast
This fellow from my thoughts, but still he grows
More comely in my sight; yet a slave
Unto one worse conditioned then a Slave:
They are all gone, here is none but he, and I,
Now I will speak to him: and yet I will not.
Oh! I wrong my self, I will suppress
That insurrection Love has traind in me,
And leave him as he is: once m^ bold spirits
Had vowed to utter all my thoughts to him
On whom I settled my affection:
And why r^tyres it now?

Sta. Fight Love on both sides; for on me thou strik'st
Strokes that has beat my heart into a flame:
She has sent amorous glaunses from her eye:
Which I have back returned as faithfully.
I would make to her, but these servile Roabes,
Curbes that suggestion, till some fitter time
Shall bring me more perswadingly unto her.

Joy. I wonder why he stays; I fear he notes me,
For I have publicly betrayde my self,
By too much gazing on him: I will leave him.

Gart. But you shall not; I Will make you speak to him
Before you go. Do you hear sir?

Joy. What mean you sister?

Gart. To fit you in your kind, sister: do you remember
How you once tyranizd over me?

Joy. Nay prithee leave this jesting,
I am out of the vain.

Gart. I, but I am in: go speak to your Lover.


Joy. I Will first be buried quick.


Gart. How, ashamd? S'^ott Itro, if I had set my affection on a Collier, I Would
nere fall back, unless it were in the right kind: if I did, let me be tied
to a Stake, and burnt to death with Charcoale.


Joy. Nay then we shall hate.


Gart. Yes marry shall you. Sister, will you speak to him:


Joy. No.


Gart. Do you hear sir? here is a Gentlewoman would speak with you.


Joy. Why Sister, I pray Sister.


Gart One that loves you with all her heart,
Yet is ashamd to confess it.

Sta. Did you call, Ladies?


Joy. No sir, here is no one called.


Gart. Yes sir it was I, I called to speak with you.


Joy. My Sister's somewhat frantique; there is no regard to be had unto her
clamors: Will you yet leave?

In faith you will anger me.

Gart. Passion: Come back fool lover, turn again and kiss your belly full,
here is one will stand ye.


Sta. What does this mean tro^*


Joy. Yes, is your humor spent?


Gart. Come let me go, Birds that want the use of
Reason and of Speech, ca^ couple together in one day;
And yet you that have both, cannot conclude in twenty:
now Sister I am even with you, my venom is spit,
As much happiness may you enjoy with your lover as I with mine:
And droope not wench, not never be ashamd of him,
The man will serve the turn, though he be wrapped
In a blew Coat, lle warrant him, come.

Joy. You're merely disposed, Sister.
Exit Wenches.
Sta. I needs must prosper, Fortune and Love work for me.
Be moderate my Joys; for as you grow to your full height,
So Bubbles waxes low. Exit.

Enter Spendall, Sweatman, and Tickleman. Tick. Will my sweet Spendall be gone
then?


Spend. I must upon promise; but I Will be here at supper:
Therefore Mistress Sweatman, provide us some good cheer.

Sweat. The best the Market will yield.


Spend. Here Is twenty shillings; I protest I have left my self but a Crown,
for my spending money: for indeed I intend to be frugall, and turn good husband.


Tick. I marry will you, you will to play again, and loose your Money and fall
to fighting; my very heart trembles to think on it: how if you had been killed
in the quarrel, of my faith I had been but a dead woman.


Spen. Come, come, no more of this; thou do but dissemble.


Tick. Dissemble* do not you say so; for if you do,
Gods my judge lle give my self a gash.

Spend. Away, away, prithee no more: farewell.

Tick. Nay busse first: Well,
There Is no adversity in the world shall part us.

Enter Sergiants. Spend. Thou art a loving Rascal; farewell.


Sweat. You will not fail supper?


Spend. You have my word; farewell.


1. Ser. Sir, we arrest you.


Spend. Arrest me, at whose suite?


2. Ser. Marry there is suites enough against you,
I Will warrant you.

1. Ser. Come, away with him.


Spend. Stay, hear me a word.


2. Ser. What do you say?


Enter Purssuet. Tick. How now Purssuet, why come in such haste?

Purss. Shut up your doors, and bar young Spendall out,
And let him be cashieard your company,
He is turned Banquerout, his wares are ceazd on,
And his shop shut up.

Tick. How, his wares ceazd on? thou do but jest, I hope.

Purss. What this tongue does report, these eyes have seen,
It is no Aesops fable that I tell,
But it is true, as I am faithful Pander.

Sweat. Nay I did ever think the prodigal would prove
A Banquerout; but hang him, let him rott
In prison, he comes no more within these doors
I warrant him.

Tick. Come hither, I would he would but offer it,
We Will fire him out with a pox to him.

Spend. Will you do it;
To carry me to prison, but undoes me?

1. Sar. What say you fellow Gripe, shall we take his 40. shillings.

2. Sar. Yes faith, we shall have him again within this week.

1. Sar. Well Sir, your 40 shillings? and we will have some compassion on you.

Spend. Will you but walk with me unto that house,
And there you shall receive it.

Sar. What, where the women are?

Spend* Yes sir.

Sweat* Look yonder, if the ungracious rascal be not coming hither,
Betwixt two Sargiantes: he thinks belike,
That we will relieve him; let us go in,
And clap the doors against him.

Purss. It is the best course Mistres Tickleman?

Tick But I say no, you shall not stir a foot,
For I will talk with him,

Spend. Nan, I am come
Even in the Minute that thou did profess
Kindness unto me, to make trial of it,
Adversity thou Sees lays hands upon me,
But Fortie-shillings will deliver me,

Tick. Why you Impudent Rogue, do you come to me for Money?
Or do I know you? what acquaintance pray,
Has ever past betwixt your self and me?

Sar. Zounds do you mock us, to bring us to these women that do not know you?

Sweat. Yes in good Sooth, (Officers I take it you're)
He Is a mere stranger here: only in charity,
Sometimes we have reliued him with a meal.

Spend. This is not earnest in you? Come, I know
My guistes and bounty cannot be soon buried:
Go prithee fetch Forty shillings?

Tick. Talk not to me (you slave) of Forty shillings;
For by this light that shines, ask it again,
I Will send my Knife of an earrand in your Guts:
A shameless Roge to come to me for Money?

Sweat. Is he your Prisoner, Gentlemen?

Sar. Yes marry is he.

Sweat. Pray carry him then to Prison, let him smart for it,
Perhaps twill tame the wildness of his youth,
And teach him how to lead a better life:
He had good counsel here, I can assure you,
And if a would a took it.

Purss. I told him still my self, what would insew.

Spend. Furies break loose in me: Sargeants, let me go, I Will give you all I
have, to purchase freedom but for a lightning while, to tear yond Whore.
Baud, Pander; and in them, the Devil: for there is his Hell, his habitation;
nor has he any other local place. Takes Spendals Cloak.


Sar. No sir, we will take no Bribes.


Spend. Honest Sargeants, give me leave to unlade
A heart ore-chargd with grief; as I have a soul,
I Will not break from you.
Thou Strumpet, that were borne to ruin men,
My fame, and fortune: be subject to my Curse,
And hear me speak it: May thou in thy youth,
Feel the sharp Whippe; and in thy Beldame age,
The Cart: when thou art grown to be
An old Vpholster unto Venerie,
(A Bawd I mean, to live by Fether-beds,)
Mayst-thou be driven to sell all thou have
Unto thy Aqua vite Bottle; that is the last
A Bawd will part withal; and line so poor,
That being turned forth thy house, may die at door.

Ser. Come sir, ha you done?

Spend. A little further give me leave, I pray,
I have a charitable Prayer to end with.
May the French Canniball eat into thy flesh,
And pick thy bones so clean, that the report
Of thy Calamity, may draw resort
Of all the common Sinners in the town,
To see thy mangled Carcass: and that then,
They may upon it, turn honest; Bawd, say Amen. Exit.

Sweat. Out upon him wicked villain, how he blspheames;

Purss. He will be damned for turning Heretic.

Tick. Hang him Banquerout rascal, let him talk in Prison,
The whilst we will spend his Goods: for I did never
Hear, that men took example by each other.

Sweat. Well, if men did rightly consider't, they should find,
That Whores and Bawdes are profitable members
In a Commonwealth: for indeed, tho we somewhat
Impair their Bodies, yet we do good to their Souls;
For I am sure, we still bring them to Repentance.

Purss. By Dis, and so we do.

Sweat. Come, come, will you Dis before: thou art one of them, that I warrant
thee wilt be hanged, before thou will repent. Exit.


Enter Rash Stayns and Geraldine. Rash. Well, this Love is a troublesome thing,
Jupiter bless me out of his fingers: there is no estate can rest for him: He
runs through all Countries, will travel through the I Will of Man in a minut;
but never is quiet till he come into Middle-sex, and there keeps his
Christmas:

It Is his habitation, his mantion, from whence,
Heel never out, till he be fierd.

Ger. Well, do not tyranize too much, least one day he make you know his
Deity, by sending a shaft out of a sparkling eye, shall strike so deep into
your heart, that it shall make you fetch your breath short again.


Rash. And make me cry, O eyes no eyes, but two celestial Stars! A pox ont,
I Would as leiue hear a fellow sing throngh the nose. How now Wench^


Enter Gartred. Gart. Keep your station; you stand as well for the encounter
as may be: she is coming on; but as melancholy, as a Base-vyollin Consort.


Rash. Which makes thee as Sprightly as the Trebble.

Now do thou play thy prize: here is the honorable Sciense one against
another: Do you hear Lover, the thing is done you wot off; you shall have
your Wench alone without any disturbance: now if you can do any good, why so,
the Silver Game be yours, we will stand by and give aim, and hallow if you hit
the Clout.


Sta. It Is all the assistance I request of you,
Bring me but opportunatly to her presence,
And I desire no more: and If I cannot win her,
Let me loose her.

Gart. Well sir, let me tell you, perhaps you undertake
A harder task then yet you do imagine.

Sta. A task, what to win a Woman, and have opportunity? I would that were a
task ifayth, for any man that wears his wits about him: give me but half
an hours

Conference with the coldest creature of them all,
And if I bring her not into a fools Paradise,
I Will pull out my tongue, and hang it at her door for a draw-latch.
Vds^oot, I Would nere stand thrumming of Caps for the matter,
I Will quickly make trial of her if she love:
To have her Beauty praised, I Will praise it: if her Wit,
I Will commend it: if her good parts, I Will exalt them.
No course shall escape me; for to what soever I saw her inclind too, to that
would I fit her.

Rash. But you must not do thus to her, for she is a subtle flouting rogue,
that will laugh you out of countenance, if you solicit her ceriously: No, talk
me to her wantonly, flightly and carelessly, and perhaps so you may prevail as
much with her, as wind does with a Sail, carry her whither thou will, Bully.


Enter Joyce. Sta. Well sir, I Will follow your instruction.

Rash. Do so. And see she appears; fall you two off from us,
Let us two walk together.

Joy. Why did my enquiring eye take in this fellow,
And let him down so easy to my heart;
Where like a Conqueror he ceases on it,
And beats all other men out of my Bossome*

Rash. Sister, you're well met,
Here Is a Gentleman desires to be acquainted with you.

Joy. See, the Seruingman is turned a Gentleman,
That villainous Wench my Sister, has no mercy,
She and my Brother has conspired together to play upon me;
But I Will prevent their sport: for rather then my tongue shall have scope to
speak matter to give them mirth, my heart shall break.


Rash. You have your desire sir, I Will leave you;
Grapple with her as you can.

Sat. Lady, God save you. She turns back upon the motion,
There Is no good to be done by braying for her, I see that;
I must plunge into a passion: now for a piece of Hero and Leander: it were
excellent; and praise be to my memory,
It has reached half a dozen lines for the purpose:
Well, she shall have them.
One is no Number; Maids are nothing then
Without the sweet society of Men.
Will thou live single still? one shall thou be,
Though never singling Hymen couple thee.
Wild Savages that drink of running Springs,
Thinks Water far excells all other thing.
They that daily taste neat Wine, despise it.
Virginity albeit some highly prize it,
Compard with Marriage; had you tryde them both,
Differs as much, as Wine and Water does. No?
Why then have at you in another kind.
By the faith of a Soldier (Lady) I do reverence the ground that you walk
upon: I will fight with him that darts, say you are not fair: Stabbe him that
will not pledge your health; and with a Dagger pierce a Vain, to drink a full
health to you; but it shall be on this condition, that you shall speak first.

Vds-foot, if I could but get her to talk once, half my labor were over: but
I Will try her in an other vain.
What an excellent creature is a Woman without a tongue?
But what a more excellent creature is a Woman that has a tongue, and can hold
her peace? But how much more excellent and fortunate a creature is that man,
that has that Woman to his wife? This cannot choose but mad her;

And if any thing make a Woman talk, it is this. It will not do
tho yet I pray God they have not guld me:
But I Will try once again.
When will that tongue take liberty to talk?
Speak but one word, and I am satisfied:
Or do but say but Mum, and I am answered?
No sound? no accent? Is there no noise in Woman?
Nay then without direction I ha don.
I must go call for help.

Rash. How, not speak?


Sta. Not a s^llable, night nor sleep, is not more silent:
She Is as dumb as Westminster Hall, in the long vacation.

Rash. Well, and what would you have me do?

Sta. Why, make her speak.

Rash. And what then?

Sta. Why, let me alone with her.

Rash. I, so you said before, Give you but opportunity,
And let you alone, you would desire no more: but come,
I Will try my cunning for you: See what I can do.
How do you Sister, I am sorry to hear you are not well,
This Gent. tells me you have lost your tongue, I pray lels see?
If you can but make signs whereabout you lost it,
We Will go and look fort': in good faith Sister, you look very pale,
In my conscience it is for grief: will you have
Any comfortable Drinks sent for, this is not the way;
Come walk, seem earnest in discourse, cast not an eye
Toward her, and you shall see weakness work it self.

Joy. My heart is swollen so big, that it must vent,
Or it will burst: Are you a Brother?

Rash. Look to your self Sir,
The Brazen head has spoke, and I must leave you.

Joy. Has shame that power in him, to make him fly:
And dare you be so impudent to stand
Just in the face of my incensed anger?
What are you? why do you stay? who sent for you?
You were in Garments yesterday, befitting
A fellow of your fashion; has a Crown
Purchased that shyning Satin of the Brokers?
Or is it a cast Suite of your goodly Masters.

Sta. A Cast suite, Lady?

Joy. You think it does become you: faith it does not,
A Blew Coat with a Badge, does better with you.
Go untruss your Masters Points, and do not dare
To stop your Nose when as his Worship stinkes:
T^a's been your breeding.

Sta. Vds'life, this is excellent: now she talks.

Joy. Nay, were you a Gentleman: and which is more;
Well Landed, I should hardly love you:
For, for your Face, I never saw a worse,
It looks as if it were drawn with yellow Oacker
Upon black Buckram: and that Hair
That's on your Chin, looks not like Beard,
But as ift had been smeard with Shoomakers Wax.

Sta. Vdsfoot, she will make me out of love with my self.

Joy. How dares your Baseness once aspyre unto
So high a fortune, as to reach at me:
Because you have heard, that some have run away
With Butlers, Horskeepers, and their fathers Clearks;
You forsooth, cockerd with your own suggestion,
Take heart upon it, and think me, (that am meat,
And set up for your Master) fit for you.

Sta. I would I could get her now to hold her tongue.

Joy. Or cause, some times as I have past along,
And have returned a Curtcie for your Hatt;
You (as the common tricks is) straight suppose,
It Is Love, (sirreuerence, which makes the word more beastly.)

Sta. Why, it is worse then scilence.

Joy. But we are fools, and in our reputations
We find the smart on it:
Kindness, is termed Lightness, in our sex:
And when we give a Favor, or a Kiss,
We give our Good names too.

Sta. Will you be dumb again.

Joy. Men you are called, but you're a viperous brood,
Whom we in charity take into our bosoms,
And cherish with our heart: for which, you sting us.

Sta. Vds'foot, I Will fetch him that waked your tongue,
To lay it down again.

Rash. Why how now man?

Sta. O reliue me, or I shall loose my hearing,
You have raysde a Fury up into her tongue
A Parliament of women could not make
Such a Confused noise as that she vtters.

Rash. Well, what would you have me do?

Sat. Why make her hold her tongue.

Rash. And what then?

Sta. Why then let me alone again.

Rash. This is very good I faith, first give thee but oppertunitie, and let
thee alone: then make her but Speak, and let
Thee alone: now make her hold her tongue, and then
Let her alone: By my torth I think I were best to let
Thee alone indeed: but come, follow me,
The Wild-cat shall not carry it so away,
Walk, walk, as we did.

Joy. What, have you fetched your Champion? what can he do?
Not have you, nor himself from out the storm
Of my incensed rage; I will thunder into your ears,
The wrongs that you have done an innocent Maid:
Oh you're a cupple of sweet: What shall I call you?
Men you are not; for if you were,
You would not offer this unto a Maid.
Wherein have I deserved it at your hands? Have I not been, always a kind
Sister to you; and in signs and tokens showed it? Did I not send Money to you
at Cambridge when you were but a Freshman, wrought you Purses and Bands; and
since you came toth'Inn's a Court, a fair pair of Hangers? Have you not taken
Rings from me, which I have been feign to say I have lost, when you had paund
them: and yet was never beholding to you for a pair of Gloves?


Rash. A Woman's tongue I see, is like a Bell,
That once being set a going, goes it self.

Joy. And yet you to join with my sister against me,
Send one here to play upon me, whilst you laugh and leere,
And make a pastime on me: is this Brotherly done?
No it is Barberous, and a Turk would blush to offer it to a Christian: but I
will think on it, and have it written in my heart, when it has slipped your
memories.


Rash. When will your tongue be weary?

Joy. Never.

Rash. How never? Come talk, and I Will talk with you,
I Will try the ninble footmanship of your tongue;
And if you can out-talke me, yours be the victory.

Here they two talk and rail what they lift; then Rash speaks to Stayns.
All speak. Vds'foot, do thou stand by, and do nothing?
Come talk, and drown her clamors.

Here they all three talk, and Joyce gives over weeping, and Exit. Gerald.
Alas, she is spent yfayth: now the storms over.


Rash. Vds'foot, I Will follow her as long as I have any breath.


Gart. Nay no more now Brother, you have no compassion,
You see she cries.

Sta. If I do not wonder she could talk so long, I am a villain,
She eats no Nuts I warrant her: sfoot, I am almost out of breath
With that little I talked: well Gent. Brothers I might say;
For she and I must clap hands upon it: a match for all this.
Pray go in; and Sister, salve the matter, collogue with her
Again, and all shall be well: I have a little business
That must be thought upon, and it is partly for your mirth;
Therefore let me not (tho absent) be forgotten:
Fare well.

Rash. We will be mindful of you sir, fare you well.


Ger. How now man, what tyerd, tyerd?


Rash. Zounds, and you had talked as much as I did, you would be tyrd I warrant:
What, is she gone in? I Will to her again whilst my tongue is warm: and if I
thought I should be used to this exercise I woulst eat every morning an ounce
of Lickorish. Exit.


Enter Lodge the master of the Prison, and Lock-fast his man. Lodge. Have you
sumd up those Reckonings?


Hold. Yes Sir.


Lodge. And what is owing me?


Hold. Thirtie-seuen pound odd money,


Lodge. How much owes the Frenchman?


Hold. A fourtnights Commons.


Lodge. Has Spendall any money?


Hold. Not any sir: and he has sold all his Clothes.


Enter Spendall. Lodge. That fellow would wast Millions, if he had them;
Whilst he has Money, no man spends a penny:
Ask him money, and if he say he has none,
Be plain with him, and turn him out o'th Ward. Exit Lodge.

Hold. I will sir. Master Spendall,
My Master has sent to you for money.

Spend. Money, why does he send to me? does he think
I have the Philosophers Stones, or I can clip or coin?
How does he think I can come by money?

Hold. Faith sir, his occasions are so great, that he must have money, or else
he can buy no Victuals.


Spend. Then we must starve, belike: Vdsfoot thou see
I have nothing left, that will yield me two shillings.

Hold. If you have no money,
You're best remove into some cheaper Ward.

Spend. What Ward should I remove in?


Hold. Why to the Two-pennie Ward, is likliest to hold out with your means: or
if you will, you may go into the Holl, and there you may feed for nothing.


Spend. I, out of the Almes-basket, where Charity appears
In likeness of a piece of stinking Fish:
Such as they beat Bawdes with when they are Carted.

Hold. Why sir, do not scorn it, as good men as your self,
Have been glad to eat Scraps out of the Almsbasket.

Spend. And yet slave, thou in pride wilt stop thy nose,
Scrue and make faces, talk contemptibly of it, and of the feeders; surely
groom.

Enter Fox. Hold. Well sir, your mallapertnes will get you nothing.
Fox.

Fox. H^ere.


Hold. A prisoner to the Holl, ^ake charge of him, and use him as scuruily as
thou canste you shall be taught your duty sir, I warrant you.


Spend. Hence slavish tyrants, instruments of torture,
There is more kindness yet in Whores, then you,
For when a man has spent all, he may go
And seek his way, they will kick him out of doors;
Not keep him in as you do, and enforce him
To be the subject of their cruelty.
You have no mercy; but be this your comfort*
The punishment and torturs which you do
Iuflict on men, the Devils shall on you.

Hold. Well sir, you may talk, but you shall see the end,
And who shall have the worst of it. Exit Lock.

Spend. Why villain, I shall have the worst, I know it,
And am prepared to suffer like a Stoicke,
Or else (to speak more properly) like a Stock;
For I have no sense left: do thou think I have?

Fox. Zounds, I think he is mad?

Spend. Why, thou art in the right; for I am mad indeed,
And have been mad this two year. Do thou think
I could have spent so much as I have done
In wares and credit, had I not been mad?
Why thou must know, I had a fair estate,
Which through my riot, I have torn in pieces,
And scattered amongst Bawdes, Buffoons, and Whores,
That fawnd on me, and by their flatteries,
Rockt all my understanding faculties
Into a pleasant slumber; where I dreampt
Of naught but joy and pleasure: never felt
How I was luld in sensuality,
Until at last, Affliction waked me:
And lighting up the Taper of my soul,
Led me unto my self; where I might see
A mind and body rent with Misery.
A Prisoner within.
Pris. Harry Fox, Harry Eox.

Fox. Who calls?

Enter Prisoners. Pris. Here Is the Bread and Meate-man come.


Fox. Well, the Bread and Meate-man may stay a little.


Pris. Yes indeed Harry, the Bread and Meat-man, may stay:
But you know our stomachs cannot stay.

Enter Gatherscrap with the Basket. Fox. Indeed your Stomach is always first
up.


Bris. And therefore by right, should be fire served: I have a stomach like
Aqua fortis, it will eat any thing:

O Father Gatherscrap, here are excellent bits in the Basket.

Fox. Will you hold your Chops further; by and by you will driuell into the Basket?


Pris. Perhaps it may do some good; for there may be a piece of powderd Beef
that wants watering.


Fox. Here sir, here is your share.


Pris. Here Is a bit indeed: what is this to a Gargantua stomach?


Fox. Thou art ever grumbling.


Pris. Zounds, it would make a Dog grumble, to want his Victuals: I pray give
Spendall none, he came into'th Holl but yester-night.


Fox. What, do you refuse it?


Spend. I cannot eat, I thank you.


Pris. No, no, give it me; he is not yet seasond for our company.


Fox. Divide it then amongst you. Exit Fox and Prisoners.


Spend. To such a one as these are, must I come,
Hunger will draw me into their fellowship,
To fight and scramble for unsavory Scraps,
That come from unknown hands, perhaps unwashed:
And would that were the worst; for I have noted,
That naught goes to the Prisoners, but such food
As either by the weather has been tainted,
Or Children, nay sometimes full paunched Dogs,
Have overlickt, as if men had determind
That the worst Sustenance, which is Gods Creatures,
How ever they are abusde, are good enough
For such vild Creatures as abuse themselves.
O what a Slave was I unto my Pleasures?
How drowned in Sin, and ouerwhelmd in Lust?
That I could write my repentance to the world,
And force the impression of it in the hearts
Of you, and my acquaintance, I might teach them
By my example, to look home to Thrift,
And not to range abroad to seek out Ruin:
Experience shows, his Purse shall soon grow light,
Whom Dice wastes in the day, Drabs in the night:
Let all avoid false Strumpets, Dice, and Drink;
For he that leaps in Mudde, shall quickly sink.

Enter Fox and Longfield. Fox. Yonder Is the man.

Long. I thank you.
How is it with you, sir? What on the ground*
Look up, there is comfort toward you.

Spend. Belike some charitable Friend has sent a Shilling,
What is your Business?

Long. Liberty.

Spend. There Is virtue in that word; I Will rise up to you.
Pray let me hear that cheerful word again.

Long. The able, and wel-minded Widow Ra^sby,
Whose hand is still upon the poor man's Box,
Has in her Charity remembered you:
And being by your Master seconded,
Has taken order with your Creditors
For day, and payment; and freely from her Purse,
By me her Deputy, she has dischargd
All Duties in the House: Besides, to your necessities,
This is bequeathd, to furnish you with Clothes.

Spend. Speak you this seriously?

Long. It Is not my practice to mock Misery.

Spend. Be ever praised that Deuinitie,
That has to my oppressed state raysd Friends:
still be his blessings powered upon their heads:
Your hand, I pray,
That have so faithfully performd their wills:
If ere my industry, joined with their loves,
Shall raise me to a competent estate,
Your name shall ever be to me a friend.

Long. In your good wishes, you requite me amply.

Spend. All Fees, you say, are paid? there is for your love.

Fox. I thank you sir, and glad you are releast. Exit.

Enter Bubble gallanted. Bub. How Apparel makes a man respected; the very
children in the street do adore me: for if a Boy that is throwing at his
lacke-alent chance to hit me on the shinnes: Why I say nothing but, Tu
quoque, smile, and forgive the Child with a beck of my hand, or some such like
token: so by that means, I do seldom go without broken shinnes.


Enter Stains like an Italian. Sta. The blessings of your Mistres fall upon you,
And may the heat and spirit of Hee-lip,
Endue her with matter above her understanding,
That she may only live to admire you, or as the Italian says;
Que que dell fogo Ginni Coxcombie.

Bub. I do wonder what language he speaks.
Do you hear my friend, are not you a Coniurer?

Sta. I am sir, a perfect Traveler, that have trampled over
The face of this vneuerss. and can speak Greek and
Latin as promptly, as my own natural Language:
I have composd a Book, wherein I have set down
All the Wonders of the world that I have seen,
And the whole scope of my Iornies, together with the
Miseries and lousy fortunes I have endured therein.

Bub. O Lord Sir, are you the man; give me your hand:
How do ye: in good faith I think I have heard of you.

Sta. No sir, you never heard of me, I set this day footing
Upon the Wharffe, I came in with the last peale of Ordinance,
And dind this day in the Exchange amongst the Merchants.
But this is friuelous and from the matter: you do seem
To be one of our Genteell spirrits that do affect Genorositie:
Pleases you to be instituted in the nature, Garb. and habit,
Of the most exactest Nation in the world, the Italian:
Whose Language is sweetest, Clothes nearest, and hauiour
Most accomplished: I am one that have spent much money,
And time; which to me is more dear then money, in the
Observation of these things: and now I am come,
I will sit me down and rest, and make no doubt,
But by quality, to purchase and build, by professing this Art,
Or humane Science (as I may term it,) to such Honorable
And Worshipful personages as mean to be peculiar.

Bub. This fellow has his tongue at his fingers ends:
But hark you sir, is your Italian the finest Gentleman?

Sta. In the world Signeor, your Spaniard is a mere Bumbard to him: he will
bounce indeed; but he will burst: But your Italian is smooth and lofty, and
his language is, Cozen germane to the Latin.


Bub. Why then he has his Tu quoque in his salute?


Sta. Yes sir, for it is an Italian word as well as a Latin,
And infoldes a double sense: for one way spoken,
It includes a fine Gentleman like your self;
And another way, it imports an Ass, like whom you will.

Bub. I would my man Iaruis were here, for he understands these things
better then I. You will not serve?


Sta. Serve, no sir, I have talked with the great Sophy.


Bub. I pary sir, what is the lowest price of being Italianated?


Sta. Sir, if it please you, I will stand to your bounty:
And mark me, I will set your face like a Grand signeors,
And you shall march a whole day, until you come opounctly to your Mistirs,
And not disrancke one hair of your phisnomie.

Bub. I would you would do it Sir, if you will stand to my
Bounty, I will pay you, as I am an Italian tu quoque.

Sta. Then sir, I will first disburthen you of your Cloak,
You will be the nimbler to practice: Now sir, observe me,
Go you directly to the Lady to whom you deuote your self.

Bub. Yes sir.

Sta. You shall set a good stayed face upon the matter then.
Your Band is not to your Shirt, is it?

Bub. No sir, it is loose.


Sta. It is the fitter for my purpose.

I will first remove your Hatte, it has been the fashion (as I have heard) in
England, to wear your Hatte thus in your eyes; But it is gross, naught,
inconvenient, and proclaymes with a loud voice; that he that brought it up
first, stood in fear of Sargiants. Your Italian is contrary, he does advance
his Hatte, and sets it thus.


Bub. Excellent well: I would you would set on my head so.


Sta. Soft, I will first remove your Band, and set it out of the reach of your
eye; it must lie altogether backward: So, your Band is well.


Bub. Is it as you would have it!


Sta. It is as I would wish; only sir, this I must condition you off; in your
affront or salute, never to move your Hatte: But here, here is your courtesy.


Bub. Nay I warrant you, let me alone; if I perceive a thing once, I Will carry
it away: Now pray sir, reach my Cloak.


Sta. Never whilst you live, sir.


Bub. No, what do your Italians wear no Cloakes?


Sta. Your Signeors never: you see I am unfurnished my self.


Enter Sir Lyo Will Rash, Geraldine, Widow, Gartred, and Joyce. Bub. Sa'y
so'prethee keep it then. See, yonder is the company that I look for;
therefore if you will set my face of any fashion, pray do it quickly?


Sta. You carry your face as well as ear an Italian in the world, only enrich
it with a Smyle, and it is incomparable: and thus much more, at your first
apparace, you shall perhaps strike your acquaintance into an ecstasy, or
perhaps a laughter: but it is ignorance in them, which will soon be overcome, if
you persevere.


Bub. I will persevere, I warrant thee; only do thou stand aloof and be not
seen, because I would have them think I fetched it out of my own practice.


Sta. Do not you fear, I Will not be seen, I warrant you. Exit.


Lyo. Now Widow, you are welcome to my house,
And to your own house too; so you may call it:
For what is mine, is yours: you may command here,
As at home, and be as soon obayde.

Wid. May I deserve this kindness of you, sir?

Bub. Save you Gent. I salute you after the Italian fashion.

Rash. How, the Italian fashion? Zounds, he has dressed him rarely

Lyo. My son Bubble, I take it?

Rash. The nether part of him I think is he,
But what the upper part is, I know not.

Bub. By my troth he is a rare fellow, he said true:
They are all in an ecstasy.

Gart. I think he is mad?


Joy Nay that can not be* for they ^ay, they that are mad, loose their wits:
and I am sure he had none to loose.


Enter Scattergood. Lyo. How now son Bubble, how come you thus attyrder
What, do you mean to make your self a laughing stock, ha?

Bub. Vm; Ignorance, ignorance.

Ger. For the love of laughter, look yo^der,
Another Hearing in the same pickle.

Rash. The the other Hobbyhorse I perceive is not forgotten.

Bub. Ha, ha, ha, ha.

Scat. Ha, ha, ha, ha.

Bub. Who has made him such a Coxcombe troe?
An Italian tu quoque.

Scat. I salute you according to the Italian fashion.

Bub. Puh, the Italian fashion? the tatterd-de-malian fashion he means.

Scat. Save you sweet bloods, save you.

Lyo. Why but what ligge is this?

Scat. Nay if I know father, would I were hanged,
I am e'ne as Innocent as the Child newborn.

Lyo. I but son Bubble, where did you two buy your Felts?


Scat. Felts? By this light, mine is a good Beauer:
It cost me three pound this morning upon trust.

Lyo. Nay, I think you had it upon trust: for no man that has any shame in
him, would take money for it: behold Sir.


Scat. Ha, ha, ha.


Lyo. Nay never do you laugh, for you're in the same block.


Bub. Is this the Italian fashion?


Scat. No, it is the Fools fashion:
And we two are the first that follow it.

Bub. Et tu qu^que, are we both cozend:
Then lets show our selves brothers in adversity, and embrace.

Lyo. What was he that cheated you?

Bub. Marry sir, he was a Knave that cheated me.

Scat. And I think he was no honest man, that cheated me,

Lyo. Do you know him again, if you see him?
Enter Stayne.
Bub. Yes I know him again, if I see him:
But I do not know how I should come to see him.
O Iaruis, Iaruis, do you see us two, Iaruis?

Sta. Yes sir, very well.

Bub. No, you do not see us very well;
For we have been horribly abused:
Never were Englishmen so guld in Italian, as we have been.

Sta. Why sir, you have not lost your Cloak and Hatte.

Bub. Iaruis you lie, I have lost my Cloak and Hatte:
And therefore you must use your credit for another.

Scat. I think my old Cloak and Hatte, must be glad to serve me till next
quarter day.

Lyo. Come, take no ca^^ for Cloakes, I Will furnish you;
To night you lodge with me, to morrow morn
Before the Sun be up, prepare for Church,
The Widow and I have so concluded on it:
The Wenches understand not yet so much,
Nor shall not, until bedtime: then will they,
Not sleep a wincke all night, for very joy.

Scat. And I Will promise the next night,
They shall not sleep for joy neither.

Lyo. O Master Geraldine, I saw you not before:
Your Father now is come to town, I hear?

Ger. Yes Sir.

Lyo. Were not my business earnest, I would see him*
But pray entreat him break an hours sleep
To morrow morn, t'accompanie me to Church;
And come your self I pray along with him.

Enter Spendall. Ger. Sir, I thank you.

Lyo. But look, here comes one,
That has but lately shook off his Shackles.
How now firra, wherefore come you?

Spend. I come to crave a pardon sir, of you,
And with hearty and zealous thanks
Unto this worthy Lady, that has given me
More then I ere could hope for: Liberty.

Wid. Be thankful unto Heaven, and your Master:
Nor let your heart grow bigger then your Purse,
But live within a limit, least you burst out
To Riot, and to Misery again:
For then it would loose the benefit I mean it.

Lyo. O you do graciously, it is good advice:
Let it take root firra, let it take root.
But come Widow come, and see your Chamber;
Nay your company too, for I must speak with you. Exit.

Spend. It Is bound unto you Sir.

Bub. And I have to talk with you too, Mistress Joyce:
Pray a word.

Joy. What would you, Sir?


Bub. Pray let me see your hand: the line of your Maydenhead is out. Now for
your Finger; upon which Finger will you wear your wedding Ring?


Joy. Upon no Finger.


Bub. Then I perceive you mean to wear it on your thumb.
Well, the time is come sweet Joyce, the time is come.

Joy. What to do, sir?

Bub. For me to tickle thy Tuquoque; to do the act of our forefathers:
therefore prepare, provide,
To morrow morn to meet me as my Brde. Exit.

Joy. I Will meet thee like a Ghost first.

Gart. How now, what matter have you fisht out of that fool?

Joy. Matter as poysning as Corruption,
That will without some Antidote strike home
Like blew Infection to the very heart.

Rash. As how, for Gods sake?

Joy. To morrow is the appointed Wedding day.

Gart. The day of doom it is?

Ger. It Would be a dismal day indeed to some of us.

Joy. Sir, I do know you love me; and the time
Will not be dallyed with: be what you seem,
Or not the same: I am your Wife, your Mistress,
Or your Servant; indeed what you will make me:
Let us no longer wrangle with our Wits,
Or dally with our Fortunes; lead me hence,
And carry me into a Wilderness:
I Will fast with you, rather then feast with him.

Sta. What can be welcommer unto these arms?
Not my estate recouerd, is more sweet,
Nor strikes more joy in me, then does your love.

Rash. Will you both kiss then upon the bargain,
Here Is two couple on you; God give you joy,
I wish well to you, and I see it is all the good that I can do you:
And so to your shifts I leave you.

Joy. Nay Brother, you will not leave us thus, I hope.


Rash. Why what would you have me do, you mean to run away together, would
you ha me run with you, and so loose my Inheritance: no, trudge, trudge with
your backs to me, and your bellies to them: away.


Ger. Nay I prithee be not thus unseasonable:
Without thee we are nothing.

Rash. By my troth, and I think so too: you love one another in the way of
Matrimony, do you not?


Ger. What else man?


Rash. What else man? why it is a question to be asked;
For I can assure you, there is an other kind of love:
But come follow me, I must be your good Angel still:
It Is in this brain how to prevent my Father, and his brace
Of Beagles: you shall none of you be bid to night:
Follow but my direction, if I bring you not,
To have and to hold, for better for worse, let me be held an
Eunuch in wit, and one that was never Father to a good Feast.

Gart. We Will be instructed by you.

Rash. Well, if you be, it will be your own^ another day.
Come follow me.

Spendall meets them, and they look str^gely upon him, and Exit. Spend. How
ruthlesse men are to adversity,
My acquaintance scarce will know me, when we meet
They cannot stay to talk, they must be gone;
And shake me by the hand as if I burnt them:
A man must trust unto himself, I see;
For if he once but halt in his estate,
Friendship will prove but broken Crutches to him:
Well, I will lean to none of them, but stand
Free of my self: and if I had a spirit
Daring to act what I am prompted too,
I must thrust out into the world again,
Full blossomd with a sweet and golden Spring:
It was an argument of love in her
To fetch me out of Prison, and this night,
She claspt my hand in hers, as who should say,
Thou art my Purchase, and I hold thee thus:
The worst is but repulse, if I attempt it:
I am resolud, my Geneus whispers to me
Go on and win her, thou art young and active;
Which she is apt to catch at, for there is naught
That Is more vnsteadfast, then a woman's thought.

Enter Sir Lyo, Will Rash, Scatter-good, Bubble, Widow, Gartred, Joyce,
Phillis, and Servant. Lyo. Here Is ill lodging Widow: but you must know,
If we had better, we could afford it you.

Wid. The lodging Sir, might serve better Guestes.

Lyo. Not better, Widow, nor yet welcommer:
But we will leave you to it; and the rest.
Phillis, pray let your Mistress want not any thing,
Once more Good night, I Will leave a kiss with you,
As earnest of a better Gift to morrow.
Sirrah, a Light.

Wid. Good rest to all.

Bub. Et tu quoque, forsooth.

Scat. God give you goodnight, forsooth,
And send you an early resurrection.

Wid. God-might to both.

Lyo. Come, come away, each Bird unto his nest,
To morrow night's a time of little rest. Exit.

Manet Widow and Phillis. Wid. Here untie: soft, let it alone,
I have no diposition to sleep yet:
G^ue me a Book, and leave me for a while,
Some half hour hence, look into me.

Phil. I shall forsooth. Exit Phillis.

Enter Spendall. Wid. How now, what makes this bold intrusion?

Spend. Pardon m^e Lady, I have business to you.

Wid. Business, from whom, is it of such importance
That it craves present hearing?

Spend. It does.

Wid. Then speak it, and be brief.

Spend. Nay gentle Widow, be more plyant to me.
My suite is soft and courtious: full of love.

Wid. Of love?

Spend. Of love.

Wid. Why sure the man is mad? bethink thy self,
Thou have forgot thy errand?

Spend. I have indeed, fair Lady; for my errand
Should first have been delivered on your lips.

Wid. Why thou impudent fellow, unthrift of shame,
As well as of thy purse; What has mooud thee
To prosecute thy ruin? has my bounty,
For which thy Master was an orator,
Importune thee to pay me with abuse?
Sir retire, or I will to your shame,
With clamors raise the house, and make your Master
For this attempt, return you to the Dungion,
From whence you came.

Spend. Nay then I must be desperate:
Widow, hold your Clapdish, fasten your Tongue
Unto your Roof, and do not dare to call,
But give me audience, with fear and silence:
Come kiss me: No?
This Dagger has a point, do you see it?
And be unto my suite obedient,
Or you shall feel it too:
For I will rather totter, hang in clean Linen,
Then live to scrub it out in lousy Lynings.
Go too, kiss: You will? why so: Again: the third time?
Good, it is a sufficient Charm: Now hear me,
You are rich in Money, Lands, and Lordships,
Manors, and fair Possessions, and I have not so much
As one poor Coppy-hold to thrust my head in.
Why should you not then have compassion
upon a reasonable handsome fellow,
That has both youth and liuelihood upon him;
And can at midnight quicken and refresh
Pleasures decayed in you? You want Children,
And I am strong, lusty, and have a back
Like Hercules, able to get them
Without the help of Muscadine and Eggs:
And will you then, that have enough,
Take to your Bed a bundle of diseases,
Wrapped up in threescore years, to lie a hawking,
Spitting, and coffing backwards and forwards
That you shall not sleep; but thrusting forth
Your face out of the Bed, be glad to draw
The Curtains, such a steame shall reeke
Out of this dunghill. Now what say you^
Shall we without further wrangling clap it up,
And go to Bed together?

Wid. Will you hear me? Knock within.

Spend. Yes with all my heart,
So the first word may be, Untruss your Points.
Zounds one knocks: do not stir I charge you,
Nor speak, but what I bid you:
For by these Lips, which now in love I kiss,
If you but struggle, or but raise your voice,
My arm shall rise with it, and strike you dead.
Go too, come on with me, and ask who is there?

Wid. It is my Maid.

Spend. No matter, do as I bid you: say, Who Is there?

Wid. Who Is there?
Within Phillis. It Is I, forsooth.

Spend. If it be you, forsooth, then pray stay.
Till I shall call upon you.

Wid. If it be you forsooth, then pray you stay,
Till shall call upon you.

Spend. Very well, why now I see
Thou Wilt prove an obedient wise, come, let us undress.

Wid. Will you put up your naked weapon sir?

Spend. You shall pardon me (Widow) I must have you grant first.

Wid. You will not put it up.

Spend. Not till I have some token of your love.

Wid. If this may be a testimony take it. Kiss him.
By all my hopes I love thee, thou are worthy
Of the best widow living, thou t^k'st the course;
And those that will win widows must do thus.

Spen. Nay, I knew what I did, when I came with my naked weapon in my hand; but
come, unlace.

Wid. Nay my dear love, know that I will not yield
My body unto lust, until the Priest
Shall ioynevs in Hymen's sacred nuptial rites.

Spend. Then set your hand to this, nay it is a contract
Strong and sufficient, and will hold in Law,
Here, here is pen and ^^cke, you see I come provided.

Wid. Give me the pen.

Spend. Why here is some comfort,
Yet write your name fair I pray,
And at large; why now it is very well,
Now widow you may admit your Maid,
For in the next room I Will go fetch a nappe.

Wid. Thou shall not leave me so, come pre thee sit,
We Will talk a while, for thou have made my heart
Dance in my bosom I receive such joy.

Spend. Thou art a good wench in faith, come kiss upon it.

Wid. But will you be a loving husband to me,
Avoid all naughty company, and be true
To me, and to my bed?

Spend. As true to thee, as Steel to Adamant.

Bind him to the poa^. Wid. I Will bind you to your word, see that you be,
Or I Will conceal my bags, I have kins folks,
To whom I Will mak't over, you shall not ba^e^ penny.

Spend. Push, pre thee do not doubt me,
How now, what means this?

Wid. It means my vengeance; nay sir, you are fast,
Nor do not dare to struggle, I have liberty,
Both of my tongue and feet, I Will call my maid:
Phillis come in, and help to triumph, Enter Phillis.
Over this bold Intruder, wonder not wench,
But go unto him, and rans^cke all his pockets,
And take from thence a Contract which he forced
From my unwilling fingers:

Spend. Is this according to your oath.

Phillis Come sir, I must search you.

Spend. I pre thee do.
And when thou take that from me, take my life too.

Wid. Have thou it gerle?

Phill. I have a paper here.

Wid. It is the same, give it me, look you sir,
Thus your new fancied hopes I tear asunder:
Poor wretched man, t'hast had a golden dream,
Which gilded over thy calamity:
But being awake thou findst it ill laid on,
For with one finger I have wiped it off:
Go fetch me hither the Casket that contains
My choicest Jewels, and spread them here before him;
Look you sit:
Here Is gold, pearl, rubies, saphires, diamonds;
These would be goodly things for you to pawn,
Or revel with amongst your Curtizans,
Whilst I and mine did starue^ why do not curse,
And utter all the mischiefs of thy heart,
Which I know swells within thee, power it our,
And let me hear thy fury.

Spend. Never, never:
When ere my tongue shall speak but well of thee,
It proves no faithful servant to my heart.

Wid. False traitor to thy master, and to me,
Thou lie, there is no such thing within thee.

Spend. May I be burned to ugliness, to that
Which you and all men hate, but I speak truth.

Wid. May I be turned a monster, and the shame
Of all my Sex, -- and if I not believe thee,
Take me unto thee, these, and all that is mine,
Were it thrice trebled, thou were worthy all:
And do not blame this trial, cause it shows
I give my self unto thee, am not forced,
And with it alone, that never shall be diuorc'd.

Spend. I am glad it is come to this yet, by this light
Thou putt'st me into a horrible fear:
But this is my excuse: know that my thoughts
Were not so desperate as my actions seemed,
For fore my dagger should ha drawn one drop
Of thy chaste blood, it should have sluc'd out mine:
And the cold point struck deep into my heart:
Nor better be my fate, if I shall move
To any other pleasure but thy love.

Wid. It shall be in my Creed: but lett's away,
For night with her black Steeds draws up the day. Exeunt.

Enter Rash, Stains, Geraldine, Gartred, Joyce, and a Boy with a Lantern.
Rash. Softly Boy, softly, you think you are upon firm ground, but it is
dangerous; you will never make a good thief, you rogue, till you learn to creep
upon all four: if I do not swear with going this pace: every thing I see, me
thinks, should be my father in his white beard.


Sta. It is the property of that passion, for fear
Still shapes all things we see to that we fear.

Rash. Well said Logic, sister, I pray lay hold of him, For the man I see is
able to give the Watch an answer, if they Enter Spendall, Widow, and Phillis.
should come upon him with Interrogatories: zownds we are discovered, boy, come
up close, and use the property of your Lantern: what dumb show should this
be?


Geral. They take their way directly, intend nothing against us.

Sta. Can you not discern who they are?

Joyce. One is Spendall.

Gart. The other is the Widow as I take it.

Sta. It Is true, and that is her maid before her.

Rash. What a night of conspiracy is here, more villainy* there is another
goodly mutton going, my father i^ fleeced of all, grief will give him a box
in faith, but it is no great matter, I shall inherit the sooner, nay soft sir, you
shall not pas^e so current with the matter, I Will shake you alittle: who goes
there?


Spend. Out with the Candle, who is that asks the question?


Rash. One that has some reason for it.


Spend. It should be, by the voice, young Rash.
Why we are honest folks.

Rash. Pray where do you dwell? not in town I hope.

Spend. Why we dwell, zownds where do we dwell?
I know not where.

Rash. And you will be married you know not when, zownds it were a Christian deed
to stop thee in thy iourny: have thou no more spirit in thee, but to let thy
tongue betray thee. Suppose I had been a Constable, you had been in a fine
taking, had you not!


Spend. But my still worthy friend,
Is there no worse face of ill bent toward me,
Then that thou merrily putt'st on.

Rash. Yes, here is four or five faces more, but never an ill one, though never
an excellent good one, Boy, up wish your lantern of light, and show him his
associats, all running away with the flesh as thou art, go yoke together, you
may be oxen one day, and draw all together in a plough, go march together, the
Parson stays for you, pay him royally, come, give me the Lantern, for you
have light sufficient, for night has put off his black Cappe, and salut^s the
morn, now farewell my little children of Cupid, that walk by two and two as
if you went a feasting: let me hear no more words, but be gone.


Spend. and Sta. Farewell.


Gart. and Joyce Farewell brother. Ma^et Rash.


Rash. I, you may cry farewell, but if my father should know of my villainy,
how should I fare then? but all is one, I ha done my sisters good, my friends
good, and my self good, and a general good is always to be respected before
a particular, there is eight score pounds a year saved, by the conueyance of
this widow, I hear footesteps, now darkness take me into thy arms, and
deliver me from discovery. Exit.


Enter sir Lyonell. Lyonell Lord, lord, what a careless world is this, neither
Bride nor Bridegroom ready, time to go to Church, and not a man vnroosted,
this age has not seen a young Gallant rise with a candle, we live drowned in
feather-beds, and dream of no other felicity: this was not the life when I
was a young man, what makes us so weak as we are now? a feather-bed: what so
unapt for exercise? a feather-bed: what breede^ such pains and aches in our
bones? why a feather-bed or a wench, or at least a wench in a feather-bed: is
it not a shame, that an old man as I am should be up first, and in a wedding
day, I think in my conscience there is more metal in laddes of three score,
then in boys of one and twenty. Enter Basket hilt. Why Basket hilt.


Bask. Here sir.


Lion. Shall I not be trussed to day?


Bask. Yes sir, but I went for water.


Lion. Is Will Rash up yet?


Basket. I think not sir, for I heard no body stirring in the house.


Lion. Knock sir at his chamber, Knock within.
The house might be plucked down and builded again
Before he would wa^e with the noise. Rash aloft.

Rash. Who Is that keeps such a knocking, are you mad?

Lion. Rather thou art drunk, thou lazy slowch,
That make thy bed thy grave, and in it buriest
All thy youth and vigor; up for shame.

Rash. Why it is not two a clock yet.

Lyo. Out sluggish knave it is nearer unto five,

The whole house has out-slept themselves, as if they had drunk wild poppy:
Sir, go you and raise the maids, and let them call upon their mistresses.


Bask. Well sir, I shall. Exit.


Enter Scatergood and Bubble. Scatt. Did I eat any Lettice to supper last
night, that I am so sleepie, I think it be day light, brother Bubble.


Bub. What sai'st thou brother? heigh ho!


Lion. Fie, fie, not ready yet? what sluggishnesse
Has seized upon you? why thine eyes are close still.

Bub. As fast as a Kentish oyster, surely I was begotten in a Plumb-tree,
I ha such a deal of gum about mine eyes. Enter Servant.

Lion. Lord how you stand! I am ashamed to se^
The Sun should be a witness of your sloth,
Now sir, your haste.

Bask. Marry sir, there are gu^sts coming to accompany you to church.


Ly. Why this is excellent, men whom it not concerns
Are more respective then we that are maine Actors.

Bub. Father Rash, be not so outrageous, we will go in and buckle our selves,
all in good time, how now! what is this about my shinnes? Enter old Geraldine,
and Long-field.


Scatt. Me thought our shankes were not fellows, we have metamorphosed our
stockings for want of splendour. Exit.


Bub. Pray what is that Splendour?


Scatt. Why it is the Latin word for a Christmasse candle


Lion. O Gentlemen, you love, you honor me, welcome, welcome good Master
Geraldine, you have taken pains
To accompany an undeserving friend. Enter Philli^.

Old Ger. You put us to a needelesse labor sir,
To run and wind about for circumstance,
When the plain word, I thank you, would have served.

Lion. How now wench, are the females ready yet?
The time comes on upon us, and we run backward:
We are so untoward in our business,
We think not what we have to do, nor what we do.

Phill. I know not sir whether they know what to do, but I am sure they have
been at Church well-nie an hour, they were afraid you had got the start of
them, which made them make such has^e.


Lion. Is It possible, what think you Gentlemen?
Are not these wenches forward? is there not virtue in a man can make young
Virgins leave their beds so soon.
But is the widow gone along with them?

Phill. Yes sir; why she was the ringleader.

Lyo. I thought as much, for she knows what belong's to it,
Come Gentlemen, me thinks it is sport to see
Young wenches run to church before their husbands: En. Rash.
Faith we shall make them blush for this ^re night:
A sir, are you come? why that is well said;
I marl'd indeed that all things were so quiet,
Which made me think they had not vnwrapt their sheet^:
Enter Servant with a cloak. And then were they at Church I hold my life:
Maids think it long until each be made a wi^e.
Enter Spend Sta. Geraldine, Widow, Gartred, and Joyce. Have thou my cloak
knave? well said, put it on,
We Will after them; let me go hasten both,
Both the Bridegroomes forward, we will walk a little
Softly on before: but see, see, if they be not come
To fetch us now, we come. we come,
Bid them return, and save themselves this labor.

Rash. Now have I a quartane ague upon me.


Lyonell. Why how now! why come you from Church to kneel thus publicly,
what is the matter?


Ger. We kneel sir for your blessing.


Lion. How, my blessing! Master Geraldine, is not that your son?


Old Ger. Yes sir, and that I take it is your daughter.


Lion. I suspect knavery, what are you?
Why do you kneel hand in hand with her?

Sta. For a fatherly blessing too sir.


Lion. Hoy day! it is palpable, I am gulled, and my son
Scatter-good and Bubble fooled, you are married?

Spend. Yes sir, we are married.


Lion. More villainy! every thing goes the wrong way.


Spend. We shall go the right way anon, I hope.


Lion. Yes marry shall you, you shall eene to the Counter again, and that is
the right way for you.


Wid. O you are wrong,
The prison that shall hold him are these arms.

Lion. I do fear that I shall turn stinckard, I do smell such a matter: you
are married then?


Enter Scatter-good and Bubble. Spend. Ecee signum, here is the wedding Ring
t'affirme it.


Lion. I believe the knave has druncke Ipocras,
He is so pleasant.

Scat. God morrow Gentlemen.


Bub. Tu quoque to all: what, shall we go to Church?
Come, I long to be about this gear.

Lion. Do you hear me, will you two go sleep again? take out the the other
nap, for you are both made Cockescombes, and so am I.


Scatt. How, Cockes-combes!


Lion. Yea Cockes-combes.


Scatt. Father, that word Cockes-comb goes against my stomach.


Bub. And against mine, a man might ha digested a Woodcocke better.


Lion. You two come now to go to church to be married,
And they two come from Church, and are married.

Bub. How, married! I would see that man durst ma^ry her.


Ger. Why sir, what would you do?


Bub. Why ^ir I would forbid the banes.


Scatt. And so would I.


Lion. Do you know that youth in Satin, he is the penner that belongs to that
Inck-horne.


Bub. How, let me see, are not you my man Ger^ase?


Scat. Yes sir. Enter a Sergea^t.


Bub. And have you married her?


Scat. Yes sir.


Bub. And do you think you have used me well?


Scat. Yes sir.


Bub. O intolerable rascal! I will presently be made a Justice of Peace, and
have thee whipped, go fetch a Constable.


Scat. Come, you are a flourishing Ass; Sergeant take him to thee, he has had a
long time of his pageantry.


Lion. Sir let him go, I Will be his bail, for all debts which come against
him.


Scat. Reverend sir, to whom I owe the duty of a son,
Which I shall ever pay in my obedience:
Know that which made him gracious in your eyes,
And gilded over his imperfecti^ns,
Is wasted and consumed eue^ like ice,
Which by the vehemence of heat dissolues,
And glides to many rivers, so his wealth,
That felt a prodigal hand, hot in expense,
Melted within his gripe, and from his coffers,
Ran like a violent stream to other men's,
What was my own, I caught at.

Lion. Have you your morgage in?


Scat. Yes sir.


Lion. Stand up, the matter is well amended,
Master Geraldine, you give sufferance to this match.

Old Ger. Yes marry do I sir, for since they love,
I Will not have the crime lie on my head,
To ^iuide man and wife.

Lion. Why you say well, my blessing fall upon you,


W^d. An^ upon us that love sir Lyonell.


Lion. By my ^roth since thou have ^ane the young kna^e,
God give the^ ^oy of him, and may ^e prove*
A wiser man then his Master.

Sta Sergeant, why do not carry him to prison?

Serg. Sir Lyonell Rash will bail him.

Lion. I bail him knave! wherefore should I bail him?
No, carry him away, I Will relieve no prodigalls.

Bub. Good sir Lyonell, I beseech you sir, Gentlemen, I pray make a purse for
me.


Serg. Come sir, come, are you begging?


Bub. Why that does you no harm Ger^^se, master I should say; some compassion.


Sta. Sergeants, come back with him, look sir, here is your livery,
If you can put off all your former pride,
And put on this with that humility
That you first wore it, I will pay your debts,
Free you of all incomb^ances,
And take you again into my service.

Bub. Tenter-hooke let ^^e go, I will take his worships offer without wages,
rather then come into your clu^ches again; a man in a blew coat may have some
color for his knavery, ^n the Counter he can have none.


Lion. But now M. Scatter-good, what say you to this?


Scat. Marry I say it is scarce honest dealing for any man to Conny-catch
another man's wife, I protest we will not put it up.


Sta. No, which we?


Scatt. Why Gartred and I.


Sta. Gartred, why she will put it up.


Scatt. Will she?


Ger. I that she will, and so must you.


Scatt. Must I?


Ger. Yes that you must.


Sc^tt. Well, if I must, I must* but I protest I would not:
But that I must: So vale, vale: Et tu quoque. Exit.

Lion. Why that is well said,
Then I perceive we shall wind up all wrong:
Come Gentlemen, and all our other guests:
Let our well-tempered bloods taste B^cchus feasts,
But let us know first how these sports delight,
And to these Gentlemen each bid good night.

Rash. Gentles, I hope, that well my labor ends,
All that I did was but to please my friends.

Ger. A kind enamouret I did strive so prove,
But now I leave that, and pursue your love.

Gart. My part I have performed with the rest,
And though I have not, yet I would do best.

Sta. That I have cheated through the Play, it is true,
But yet I hope, I have not cheated you.

Joyce. If with my clamors I have done you wrong,
Ever hereafter I will hold my tongue.

Spend. If through my riot I have offensive been,
Henceforth I Will play the civil Citizen.

Wid. Faith all that I say, is, how ere it hap,
Widows like M^ids sometimes may catch a clappe.

Bub. To mirth and laughter henceforth I Will provoke ye,
If you but please to like of Greenes Tu quoque.

FINIS.

