THE MYSTERY OF THE HOLY GOVERNMENT of our Affections. CONTAINING THEIR
Nature, Original, Causes, and Differences. Together with the right Ordering,
Trial, and Benefit thereof: As also resolving diverse Cases of Conscience,
incident hereunto. Very necessary for the Trial of Sincerity, and increasing
in the Power of Godliness.

The first Book.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, and are to be sold at his House, at S. Annes
Church, near Aldersgate.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Worshipful, and my very bountiful Benefactors, the
Hon: Sir Thomas Smith, most Worthy Governor of the East Indian Company,
Together with the grave Committees, and the rest of that famous Society: All
Health and Happiness.
RIght Honorable, Worshipful, and dearly beloved in our Lord Jesus: It has
been an ancient and laudable Custom of the Church of God, as to ordain
generally certain ordinary Loue-Feasts and Christian Meetings, for the more
comfortable exercise and maintenance of Brotherly Love, which is the Bond of
Perfection: so more especially, when the Lord has enlarged himself in any
extraordinary Favor unto his Church, by delivering the same out of some
desperate and inexplicable danger. We have not only the express command of
God, to be enlarged in thankfulness accordingly, but to express our
thankfulness: as principally by exercising our selves in Psalms and Hymns,
and spiritual reioycings; so also (to testify our renewed interest in the
Creatures, which such Extremities might have utterly deprived us of) in this
respect also, to solace our selves in a more liberal use thereof by solemn
Feastings, and all such outward Means, as together with inward refreshing of
the Mind, might also tend abundantly to the comfort of the body; as being
much weakened and disinabled with the fear and expectation of former Dangers.
And thus we may find, that the Church of God has upon such Occasion
accordingly practiced. See Hest. 9. Nehem. 8.

And thus do we at this day solemnize the Memorial of our Wonderful and
glorious Deliverance from the Kingdom of Darkness, by the True Light of the
World, Jesus Christ: Who as at this Time shined as it were in the darkness
and obscurity of his Humane Nature, that so he might bring Light out of
Darkness, and by his abasing of himself unto the shape of a Servant, might
restore us to the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Wherein howsoever
happily we are not free from some unjust imputation of superstition, by such,
who being not able to discern between the right use, and abuse of things, do
therefore condemn our Liberty for the common abuse thereof in these licentious
Times, by turning the same as an occasion to the flesh: yet neither ought their
aspersions any whit to discourage any religious heart from an holy improuing of
his Liberty to the glory of God, seeing they proceed rather of superstitious
singularity then any sound ground of Truth: Neither may we doubt, but that our
reverend and spiritual Behavior herein, as it shall justly clear us from any
imputation of superstition, so it may also free us from the danger of any such
abuse, which the looseness of the times is guilty of. For howsoever it may
not be denied, but that such Observations as were merely of Humane Invention;
or though they were of Gods appointment, yet tending to the obscuring and
abrogating of the Truth of Christ, were merely superstitious, and so to be
renounced of us, as they were abolished by Christ: such as were the Ceremonies
of Moses, and whatsoever else of the like nature: Yet whatsoever Ordinances
have their Equity from the Law of God, and Practice of the Saints, according
thereunto, and withal are so far from opposing the Virtue of Christ, or
Christian Liberty, as that both in their Intent and Use they may further to
the more comfortable enjoying of both: as these have their sufficient warrant,
because they further that blessed Communion between God and Man, and serve
also for the maintenance of holy Society between Man and Man; so may we
lawfully use our Liberty herein, so all things be done to the Glory of God,
and mutual Edification: Especially, seeing the lawful Custom of our Church
and State ought to bind us wisely herein, if we will not be contentious,
whereof we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God. And therefore,
howsoever to him that doubts, this liberty may be sin; and that much more,
if he shall proceed to condemn others, wherein himself is not resolved; and
that most of all, if he shall deprive himself of the liberty in good things,
upon pretense of some evil that does hang upon the same (as the manner of some
is:) yet should this rather provoke us to improve our liberty to the best in
all spiritual manner, that so either the Mouth of Iniquity may be utterly
stopped, or opened graciously to glorify our God with us, even on our behalf.
The Means and Trial hereof, seeing it consists in the holy ordering and
government of the Affections, as euidencing the inward purity of the heart;
which being purified by Faith, all things become pure thereunto: therefore
shall this Direction at this Time prove most seasonable, wherein by our
liberty in the flesh, we may be so easily provoked to exceed to the satisfying
of the flesh. Neither only shall it serve for the restrayning of Intemperancie
at this time: But seeing the whole course of our Christian Life is graciously
led, and so accordingly follows the wise Temper of our Affections, and so
is also approved and perfected thereby: Therefore also shall this Light prove
a profitable Guide, to conduct us throughout all the Difficulties and
Infirmities thereof: As serving for an Armor both to enable us in the Conquest
of such Enemies, which will be sure at all times to oppose us in our Heavenly
Journey; as also the better to comfort us, in regard of such Infirmities, and
outward faylings, which do oftentimes mainely challenge the truth of our
proceeding. For as, if there be a willing mind, the Lord accepts it above what
we do, or can do, that so we may discern a truth of Grace in the
imperfection thereof: so seeing the Lord will perfect the work he has begun
in us. And yet in that manner, that still his power must be seen in our
weakness, that he may have the only glory; therefore as this is for the
present our evidence of sincerity, that we love and affect what we cannot do,
greeuing withal for our failing herein; so by these contrary affections
about the same Object, we do not only Justify the Spiritual combat, but
do daily interesse our selves hereby in the virtue of our Christ, by whom we
are not only sustained in the combat, above any ability in our selves, but
also by his virtue, we are daily strengthened against all oppositions, that so
in time we may be more then Conquerors. But of these things more particularly
in the Treatise ensuing. Which as I have now according to my promise, published
for the Common good; so because we live in a profane and surfeting Age,
wherein all is counted too little for the satisfying of the Flesh: and every
little too-much, that serves by the restraining thereof to the satisfaction of
the Mind: therefore are my Meditations sorted accordingly; As in some brevity
and much weakness, to stumble the profane, who stands upon color more then
cloth, doting rather upon what may affect and puff up the giddy brain, then
what may reform and humble the honest heart: so thereby also to exercise, and
stir up the dullness of the best; that what seems not so apparent at the
first view, may by more serious Meditation and fervent prayer be better
conceived, and more profitably digested. And therefore also have I been the
briefer in this General discovery of the government of the Affections; because
my purpose is (God-willing) to add shortly hereunto a Particular Discovery of
each several Affection, according to their Order, Nature, and Differences;
wherein by the Grace of God there may be some profitable supply in special,
for what soever is wanting in the General direction. Mean while, that I might
not be wanting to the season, whereby the time may in some measure be redeemed,
and the hearts of Gods children raised up to further hope. I have thought good
first to frame these Walls and Gates for the City, that so the Inward buildings
may be more safely erected and perfected. Of all which, as I have bin bold to
make choice of your Honors and Worcester. as Patrons; and Gardians, as to whom being
already bound by so many former favors; I could not choose but renew my Bonds,
by paying this poor Interest, though far I hope from any base Usurie: yet
binding hereby to a continual debt of love, which is then best paid, when still
it is owed. And so I humbly request you to accept thereof, not as a discharge of
my debt, but only a pledge of the renewing of the bonds of my best affections
toward your Worships, which seeing they ought not to be measured by any
outward expressing thereof, therefore my hope is, that you will accept of my
endeauours herein, not according unto that which I have, but answerable to my
affection therein. Comforting my self herein: that seeing God has given you
wisdom to discern of things that differ, and our hearts are in the hands of
God, that if we prevail with him, we shall prevail with men: therefore, as my
desire herein, is to approve my self unto God and the consciences of his
people; so other things shall be so far supplied, as that still the power of
God may be seen in our weakness, and the Lord may have the glory of all his
mercies. What others aim at in these endeauours, I matter not; neither do I
envy at what they reap: much less does it stumble me, what this way of
making our selves known to the World, daily hears of, either vaineglory or
filthy lucre, or such like: It suffices me, that my reward is with God, and
that I have daily experience of the difference between his payment and man's,
that so I might trust him better, and man the less; and yet still not to fail
any good occasion, whereby I may provoke men, that they may be like unto God in
a wiser disposal of their Affections. This is that I aim at in this Treatise.
This I shall heartily labor for in my best devotions and supplications unto
our God for you, that he would increase in you al wisdom and spiritual
understanding, that you may approve the most excellent, and like wise
Merchants, still be buying that Precious Pearl; and having once obtained it,
labor still to husband it with most advantage to Gods glory and the good of his
Church, being never weary of weldoing, that so you may reap in due time if you
faint not, that so you may fight the good fight of faith and finish your course
with joy, and so lay hold of Eternal life. And so I heartily commend you all
to the grace of God in Christ Jesus. Resting in him.

Your Hon: and Worsh: with all that I am or may be. Th. Cooper.

The Contents of this Book.
OF the N^tion of this term Affection, and the diverse acceptions thereof.
Chap. 1. Of the General Distribution of affections into their several classes
and kinds. chapter 2. Of the causes of Affections and Perturbations. chapter 3. Rules
for the right judging of Affections and their sincerity. chapter 4. 1. Concerning
their ground. 2. Their Object. 3. Their End.
General rules for the right ordering and trial of them: especially in regard
of such ^entations as do accompany ^he same. chapter 5. How we may discern the
^entation from the Affection. chapter 6. How to order our affections. 1. In regard
of our selves. 2. Toward others. 3. Toward God.
Of the Benefits of this holy Ordering and trial of our Affections. Cases of
Conscience incident hereunto: whereof, 1. Whither Faith be an affection. 2.
Concerning the Object of our Affections, whether it be an argument of
unsanctified affections to be more conversant about earthly, then heavenly
things. 3. How we may place our Affections on things which are done.

The Right ordering of our Affections, consists in two things. First, In the
right Judgment of them. Secondly, In the holy disposing and employing of them
on their several Objects.


Concerning the right judgment of Affections: here first consider we.

THE GOVERNMENT of the Affections.
CHAP. I.
Of the Notion of this term Affection, and the diverse senses thereof.

THis Name Affection, Affection, what it signifies.
in our common Occasions, usually imports these three things.

First, either those Desires and Motions to such several Objects as are
offered in the world, whether they be good, or bad, and so it is a term
conuertible with Appetite. Genes. 3. 16.

Secondly, or else it is used in a more restrained sense, to express our
desires to good things.

Or, thirdly it extends it self, to express those manifold passions of the
mind which are the fuel to our desires, and bellows there unto, which by the
Stoikes were called perturbations, as conceiving them not to stand with the
tranquillity of the mind, to interrupt and disgrace the same. By others, are
called the Passions thereof: as discovering a more violent working of the same,
or some great violence offered thereunto. And are usually called Affections, as
expressing the several affects and desires of the mind, in the outward man. In
which sense the holy Ghost calls them Members (Mortify therefore your earthly
members: Col. 3. 4.) as by a figura^iue speech signifying, that these
affections exercise Meta^^mia subiecti.
^hemselues in our earthly ^embers, as using them (...) the expressing thereof;
(...) Joy and Sorrow by the Countenance; Fear and Hope, by the Hands and ^eet;
Anger by the whole Body, etc. And in this ^ense we take them in this Treatise,
and so do prosecute them, first generally in this first Book, and the^
particularly, according to their several Distinctions hereafter.

CHAP. II.
Of the general Distributio^ of the Affections into their several Classes.

AFfections are distinguished, The division of Affections, 1. in respect of the
Object.
in regard o^ the Object, or Extent.

Touching the Object all Affections and Perturbations may be reduced to two
Heads: either Simple, such as have no mixture of any other perturbations; or
Compound, such as are derived of other.

The simple Affections are of two sorts.

First, Primitive, which are the ground of all the rest.

Secondly, Deriuatiue, such as are derived from those Primitiues.

The Primitive Affections are two: namely,

Love, whereby we vehemently 1. Love.
affect a thing; and

Hate, being a vehement 2. Hate.
affection of disliking.

The simple deriuatiue Affections arise from the Primitive: as,

From Love, and liking of Good,

If it be present, proceeds Joy. 3. Joy.


If it be to come, Hope. 4. Hope.


From Dislike, and hate of Evil,

If it be present, arises Grief, and heaviness of 5. Grief.
heart.

If it be a future Evil, then Fear rises from 6. Fear.
the mislike of Hate. And these I take to be all the simple Perturbations.

The Compound are such as have part of the simple, by mixture, and that either
of the Primitive simple, or the Deriuatiue, and of the Primitiues, with simples
only, or mixed with Deriuatiues.

Such as are mixed of Primitiues only, are either unequally mixed, of Love,
and Liking, or of Mislike, and Hate: or mixed equally of them.

Of the first sort, taking more part of liking, is the 7. Laughter.
Affection of Laughter: Wherewith, we with some discontentme^t, take pleasure
at that, which is done or said ridiculously: of which sort, are Deeds and Words
unseemly, or unmeet, and yet move no compassion: as when one scaldeth his
mouth with an hot Pie, etc. We are discontented with the hurt, yet joy at the
Event unexpected by the party, and that we have escaped it: from whence comes
Laughter. Which, because it exceeds the mislike of the Thing that hurts,
bursteth out into vehemency on that side, and procures that merry Gesture.

If on the other side, the thing be such, as the mislike exceeds the Joy we
have of our freedom from that evil, then arises Pity, and Compassion. And
these Perturbations take their beginnings 8. Pity.
of the Primitiues, unequally mixed: whereby one of them does after a sort
obscure the other.

The other, are such as have equal Mixture, and those are Envy and Jealousy.

If the thing we love, be such, as we have not part of, then springs an Hate
or mislike of the party, who inioyeth that we want, and like of, and so
breeds Envy, a grief 8. Envy whar.
for the prosperity of another, or good success whatsoever, wherein we have
no part.

If it be such a benefit as we enjoy, and are grieved it should be communicated
to others, and whereun we refuse a partner, this is called Jealousy, incident
9. Jealousy.
to Amorettoes, and aspiring Natures: and these are compounded of the
Primitiues alone, like, or mislike, love, or hate.

Those which are mixed of Primitiues and Deriuatiues, are of two sorts,
according as the Primitiues, that is to say, mixed of love, or hate.

Now love mixed with 10. Trust. 11. Distrust
Hope, breeds Trust: With Love and Fear, Distrust.

Hate, or Mislike, compounded with Hope, breeds Anger: whereby we 12. Anger.
are displeased with that which misliketh us, and in hope of being satisfied of
that which offered the mislike: are driven to Anger, the Affection of Revenge.

If it be any thing, wherein we have displeased our selves, it is called
Shame. 13. Shame.


If it be compounded with Fear, it is called 14. Bashfulnesse.
Bashfulnesse.

If the dislike be taken from another, the composition is of Hate and Anger,
and thereof springs Malice. 15. Malice.


These are Perturbations, compounded of Primitive passions, with their
deriuatiues.

Of Deriuatiues betwixt themselves, arise Despair, 16. Despair
and confident Assurance.

Despair is compounded of Heaviness, Grief, and Fear.

Confidence, of Joy and 17. Confidence.
Hope.

Out of Hope, and Faith, Patience. 18. Patience.


Thus in general of the distribution of Affections, in regard of their
several grounds, nature, and comparison between themselves.

Secondly, Affections may be divided, in regard of 2: In respect of the Extent.
their Extent: as some concern only this life.

As first, all such as concern Evil, as Hate, Fear, Grief, Jealousy,
Pity, Laughter, Envy, Anger, Shame, Bashfulnesse, Malice, Despair, etc.

Secondly, some such as concern Good: which because it cannot be perfectly
attained in this life, therefore some Affections there are, which tend to the
obtaining thereof, and perfitting of the same: as Faith, Hope, Patience, and
Compassion.

Others concern both his life and the life to come, as Joy and Love.

CHAP. III.
Of the Causes of Affections and Perturbations.

COncerning the Causes 1. Of Philosophers, which derive from the Humors
of Perturbations, there are two contrary Opinions: One of the Philosophers,
that conceived all perturbations to arise from the Complexions, or Humors,
that is, from the body and carnal part of man.

The other is of Divines, 2. Divines, from the Soul.
that hold all perturbations, howsoever they may be occasioned, from the diverse
Temperatures of Nature, yet to proceed immediately from the disposition of the
Divine Soul, either qualified with grace, and so expressing the same in the
further aim and employment of such Affections, as tend to good, or else
oppressed with corruption, and so discovering it self in those Affections of
Malice, Envy, etc.

This latter to be true, appears first by the Operation From the Soul proved.
of the Soul in these perturbations, without the use of Senses, as in dreams:
secondly, as also by the contrary temper of Diseased parties, when such humors
do most abound, as in the Iaundize, though Choler abound, yet there ^s least
sign usually of Anger: thirdly, and especially seeing these are Evils of
sin, therefore seeing the Soul is the immediate subject of sin, and not
the Body, the Body accidentally sins for the Souls sake: it must needs
follow, that these Affections proceed from the Soul, and not the Body, not
the Humors, etc.

And therefore, though Answ. to Object.
the Soul seem to follow the temperature of the body, in regard, that the
body being out of temper, the mind also fares accordingly: yet neither is
this general, but only in some persons, and upon some occasions. Neither
that, that it may only at all be so referred to the body, as that it does
actually work upon the soul, making it suffer thereby. But either this falls
out, in regard How the Soul suffers from the Body.
of the near conjunction of the soul and body, the soul sympathizing herein
with the body, as a loving companion: or the Justice of the Lord, by this
outward chastisement of the body, arrests the soul, to give up it account, or
affects the same in mercy, to renew repentance: It being a certain ground,
that the soul is the only ^^d prime mouer of the ^ody, and all the actions
^hereof: so that it were ^onstrous and preposte^ous, that the body should ^oue
any such Affections (...) the soul, contrary to it ^mmortall and impassible
nature.

And therefore howsoe^er the wisdom of flesh was enforced to acknow^edge the
Immortality of ^he soul, both in that the ^nward power thereof, in ^ccusing,
and excusing sin, necessarily reaches beyond this life: And it ^aturall
light soaring a^oue these earthly things, does argue plainly some further
happiness to belong thereto, then to this life is incident: yea, th^^ not
satisfaction thereof in any earthly thing whatsoever, does plainly evidence,
that there is some further happiness to content the same: yet seeing this
Light serves only to make inexcusable, as appears by the contrary practice
of men to their knowledge, therefore has it been justly given up to such
dotages, and blockish imaginations: which, though they cross even natural
light, yet they may serve to the satisfaction of the flesh, that so enjoying
herein a show of happiness, they might be prevented of the search of ^he true
happiness, which ^oncernes the Life to ^ome.

And hence arose these ^^range and contrary O^inions Ground of these false
Conceits, concerning Affections.
concerning the Affections, according to those diverse Models and ^deas of
happiness which ^he wise men of the world ^^amed to themselves. For whereas
the Stoikes placed 1. Stoikes.
their happiness in such a ^ind of tranquillity, and ^eace of the mind, which
^ight rather be senseless ^f evil, then sensible of any ^ood, because they
had no ^se, nor experience of Grace, to the subduing of their affections, and
orde^ing them to the true ob^ects and ends: therefore in their carnal wisdom
they coniected such a kind of senseless happiness, as might be free from all
affections: As esteeming them to be no better then Perturbations, tending to
disturb the peace of their minds, that so they might put out that light of
conscience, expressed in the Affections, and accusing them of Enill, whereby
they were bound to the punishment of another life, and so thereby confirm
their imaginary happiness in the things of this life. Wherein, though they
did not obscurely discover their notion of the souls immortality, in that
they labored hereby to prevent that use of conscience which convinced the
same, by the sense of future punishment due thereto: so herein also did they
plainly prove the wisdom of the flesh to be enmity against God, and their
own salvation, in that they placed happiness in such a benumbed and
senseless an estate, which of all other was farthest from true happiness, as
having no feeling nor comfort thereof, and by it sense lessenes in evil
proved necessarily the high way to most certain condemnation, as serving to
make up the measure of sin. And like unto these, is the conceit of the
Libertines, who mis-conceiuing the power and application of Christ, as if he
came to take away only the sense of sin, and not the power and guilt of it,
do therefore hereby measure their interest in Christ, that they are senseless
in sin, commit it most greedily without any remorse, and wallow most securely
and desperately therein.

Thus as the Stoike and Libertine placed their happiness in mere stupiditie
and blockishnesse, so the Epicure on the contrary, placing happiness in the
sense, and in such things as might best affect the same, for the enjoying of
present delight, and car^all appetite, as esteeming it no happiness, which is
^ot by sense enjoyed: ^onceiued therefore so ^nely of the soul, that it ^erued
only as salt, to keep the body from pu^rifying, and make it sen^ible of
delight, and so ^oncluded of the Affecti^ns, as to be only the ef^ects of the
Complexions and Humors of the body, ^eruing only to express their natural
inclinations and operations, to the sa^isfying of the Flesh: 2. Epicure, and
his confusion.
Wherein, as they plainly discovered their estranging from the life of God,
through the ignorance that was in them, in their confining their Affections to
(...) carnal and senseless pa^^ of nature: I mean, the body, separated from
the soul, whereby they v^terly excluded themselue^ from all true notion o^ the
Deity, from all tru^ fellowship with Him which is only attayne^ by the Mind
and Affect^ons thereof: so in thi^ their prostituting of these noble affects of
the diuin^ soul to the guide and lur^ of corruptible flesh: eue^ wherein they
seemed t^ be wise, they becam^ fools, co^founding themselves in their own
imaginations, and overthrowing that sensual happiness which they fancied
herein. For whereas they placed their chief happiness in the sense and
feeling of carnal delights, Let us ^at and drink, for to mor^ow 1. Cor. 15
we shall die; they did utterly deprive themselves of that which they most
aimed at, namely, ^o enjoy the sense and comfort of these sensual means: in
that they deri^ed and placed these affections only from and in ^he complexions
and hu^ours, which of themselves are altogether void of sense, and appetite.
Wherein, as they altoge^her bewrayed their igno^ance of the true happi^esse,
and so justly depri^ed themselves thereof, in that they placed it only in the
enjoying of suc^ corruptible things, which end with this life: so, howsoever
their main aim herein was, that by imputing these perturbations to
complexions and humors, they might hereby conclude a determining of sinn^ with
this life, and so a^ hope of the determining (...) punishment. (seeing these
affections ending here the other which proceede^ therefrom, must necessarily
end also:) or else, seeing these humors are im^patible, senseless, etc.
therefore sin proceeding hereof, must neede^ be a mere privation, a
nullitie, etc.

Yet as herein they discovered themselves to be without God, and so without
hope of the life of Glory: so hereby they made up more speedily the measure of
their sin, and so were led like fools unto the Stocks, and Oxen to the
Shambles.

Wherein, that they might make up the measure of their damnation.

Behold herein a further delusion of the Sadduces, 4. Sadduces.
imagining, that these carnal Affections shall accompany us to Heaven; that
the Happiness thereof consists only in satisfying our carnal appetites, that
so we need not make scruple of them; nay, that we may give the bridle most
freely unto them: as being the next way to have an Heaven upon Earth, to
prepare our selves on Earth unto Heaven.

Thus the Wisdom of the Flesh, as it is enmity against God, so it justly
proves i^ Romans 8. 7.
own confusion. And therefore it being apparent by that which has been said
before, that our Affections cannot proceed immediately from the Complexions, or
Humors, but from the Divine Spirit; these grounds may be further added, by way
of conclusion, for the confirmation hereof.

As first, that the Affections in wicked Men, even 3. Reasons proouing, that
they arise from the mind.
in the best complexions, and temper of the body, even when they are furthered
with all outward contentments, to the satisfying of the flesh, as in the best
measure of health and outward prosperity, are then most vile and outrageous.
Whether we consider such Affections as concern the acting of sin; as
appears in the pursuit of our Lust, Revenge, or such like: or take notice of
such as concern the punishment thereof, as Fear, Horror, and the like. As
appeared in Belshazz^r, Dan. 5.
in the midst of his greatest riot, and pompous Excess. Which plainly argues,
that they follow the temper of the Mind, and not the condition of the Body.

As also, on the other side, the Affections of the godly, in the worst
constitution, and condition of the Body, and Outward Estate, are yet
notwithstanding, by the grace of God ruling in the heart, made more pure and
tempera^e, more conformable to the will of God, more fitted to the right end.

Secondly, unto which if we add, that it is the Tit. 2. 11.
Grace of God only (whereof the Soul is only capable) that alters and
purges our affections of their corrupt and pestilent qualities, and so turns
them to their contrary and proper Objects; as, Slavish Fear, into Filial
Fear, Carnal love, into the love of God, and goodness, etc. By this it
necessarily follows, that our Affections proceed immediately from the Soul,
and have their residence therein.

Thirdly, if we shall consider, that our most principal and noblest
Affections, of Love and Joy, are not determined and perfited in this life, but
do accompany us after death; as whereby we express our enjoying of eternal
Happiness, even when the body lies rotten in the Grave: this is a plain
evidence, that they arise out of the Soul, as their proper Fountain.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the wise governing and trial of the Affections.

ANother special help to constant Obedience.

Here observe First these general Rules concerning Affections, in Rules for
judging hereof.
regard of judging thereof.

That they are not simply to be discerned by 1. Their condition.
themselves, as being in themselves, for the most part, not simply good, or
evil: but as they depend upon their true Grounds, affect their proper Objects,
and aim at their right Ends.

And therefore Know we, that the true 2. Their true ground
ground of all holy Affections, is sound Knowledge of Prou. 19. 2.
the thing we affect, and of our estate and right to and in the thing we do
affect: so that no Knowledge, no sound Affection, no Right therein, no Hope for
well-ordering of them.

Secondly, observe we, That all holy Affections 3. Touching their Objects.
have generally one maine Object, namely, Our God in Christ Jesus, and so
subordinate, The salvation of 1. General.
the Soul.

But particularly, each of 2. Particular.
them has it several and proper Object, whereon it is bent, and conversant
therein; so that here the Rules are.

That the particular Objects With their Rules.
must be subordinate to the general, and included therein, both for direction
1. Rule.
and Limitation also: all must be from the Lord, in him, and for him, Romans 11.
for the obtaining of salvation.

The particular Objects must be the Bounds to 2. Rule.
each particular Affection; as shall appear afterward. Our hatred must
properly be against sin, not goodness; our love to Good, and not Evil, etc.

Our Affections must so 3. Rule.
be squared to the Objects, as that it only level therein at that which is
proportionable thereunto. That whereas there is in the Object the person, or
thing, wherein the quality is, and the Quality it self; and the person, or
thing, is to be diversely affected, in regard of the different quality thereof.
Therefore the sincerity of the Affection appears, in aiming at the Quality,
and so, for it, respecting the person, or thing. As to affect a thing for it
goodness, to hate it, for the evil. And yet so, as whereas the substance is
of God, and the quality of Satan. Therefore here may be a concurrence of
contrary Affections in one maine Object. As that the person of a sinner (being
Gods workmanship) is to be beloved; though we hate the sin of the person:
the good of the same person may be loved, though we hate the contrary evil in
him.

And therefore, whereas 4. Rule.
the Ground, next unto Faith, as of our worship of God, and duties unto Men,
is Love; howsoever our affections are different in themselves, yet they must
all be derived from this principal affection of Love: We must hope, grieve,
rejoice, etc. because we love; and love must be the end and aim of ^ll:
Therefore we are angry, we fear, we hope, we joy, that we may still love,
and make better way for the manifestation thereof.

And so, as love is an affection, 5. Rule.
that is the ground and end of all other affections, and therefore all must be
subordinate thereunto: so also is there a subordination of other contrary
affections one to another, that they may end in this love: as hatred is
subordinate to love, grief to joy, fear to hope, etc. as being not contraries
in diverse subjects, but all the same general: as no otherwise respecting
diverse subordinate Objects, but that they aim at one Principal, as furthering
each other in their particular contrary, and different Objects to that one
Principal, namely, the glory of God, and salvation of the Soul.

Hereby shall we know 6. Rule.
the sincerity of our Affections, if they are proportionable to the Object,
and measure thereof: as, If the sins of the Times be grievous, and
extraordinary, so our grief be suitable: If the mercies of God, and his
deliverances, be wonderful, so our Joy and Thankfulness be answerable. And
this may serve for the just conviction of our Times.

First, In that though Use 1.
there be some fear of God, yet it is not proportionable to the means.

We have been better taught, then to fear God so little.

We have had greater Judgments, then that we should be so secure.

Secondly, In that we 2.
set not our Affections high enough in good things, and yet rack them too
far in evil things.

We fear not God enough, and yet fear the World too much.

We love the World too scantly, and love our profits too excessiuely: And so
there is a jar in both. Our Fear in spiritual things, is defective; in
worldly things, excessive.

So, in this proportion, if we love God without limitation, as the most
excellent Object, and our Neighbor as our selves; this is to proportion the
Affection to the Object.

Our Affections are good Servants, but bad Masters; 7. Rule. Limitation.
that is, they must not bear rule, but still be in subjection to their
several Limitations of the Word, our Callings, the common Good: without which,
the best Affection, even of Zeal and Love, may be evil: Not only ^ill
Affections, or such as ^re more inclinable there^o; but even the best must ^hus
be tried, if they make ^s fitter for Gods service: ^s Anger, if we can fall to
^ray; Zeal, if we can re^it private Offenses, etc.

First I say, our Affections 1. By the Word.
must be informed and ^imitted by the Word: that is, Whereas the Lord has
given us a sure Word, both as a Light shining in a dark place, to enlighten
the darkness of our nature, and so as a Guide, to the well-ordering thereof:
If our Affections now follow, and not run before our Knowledge.

We first know what to love, and then affect the same: and if our Affections
are proportionable to our knowledge, we affect so far, as we are informed
and persuaded of the truth; and according to the particular truth we know, so
our particular affection is leuelied at, and confined thereunto. This is a
certain evidence of the true light and ordering thereof: Hereby we shall hold
out, and continue therein.

Whereas otherwise, if we affect what we know not, this may either arise from
some tickling delight of the flesh, from Vaineglorie, and such like, or else
from some outward ^casion of the World, as ^leasure, Profit, etc. or it ^ay be
some illusion of ^atan, to deceive us with Error, in stead of Truth. Or at the
best, it will ^rooue no better then some sudden flash of the ^ll-lightning
Spirit, to make us more inexcusable. Our Heb. 6. 4. 5.
affections, in all these respects, will vanish and decay, according to the
failing of those several Occasions.

And secondly, if our affections exceed our Judgment, and knowledge of the
Truth, we shall not only be driven to question the truth of our Judgment:
but also by our affections, exceeding our knowledge, we may either be caused
to do things doubtfully, without found information, and so sin therein, Romans
14. Or else, by the strength and violence of our Affections, we may be drawn
to do that which is contrary to our Judgment; and so therein also offer
violence to our Consciences.

And thirdly, if our Affections only aim at generals, 2. To the Objects.
and are not confined to their particular Objects; We conceive we love God,
and yet cannot seek him only in Jesus Christ; and in such Ordinances as
reveal him unto us, cannot rest therein, for the quieting of our Consciences,
and enabling us to Obedience. Our Affections are not in Faith, and so cannot be
acceptable unto God, because all our affections unto God must arise from the
knowledge and apprehension of his love unto us in Jesus Christ: We love him,
because he loved us first, 1. Ioh. 4. 17. Not as if we could deserve his
Love, by loving him first; or could answer his Love with equal measure: but
because he has freely, and infinitely loved us, therefore we labor, in our
weak measure, to love him again, to approve hereby our thankfulness unto
him, and so to give him the glory of his free goodness.

Secondly, I say, that our 3. To our Callings.
affections must be squared and limited according to our several Callings, in
regard of the execution of them. I say, in regard of the execution thereof
outwardly, That though every Christian is equally bound to love God above all,
and so to testify his love, not only by affecting his glory, grieuing at his
dishonor, but also by all outward occasions, as may express the same: yet
seeing the Lord has ordained several Callings in the Church and Commonwealth,
and these both distinct, by their several Offices and Duties, and so also
subordinate to each other, for the maintenance of the common peace and public
good. Therefore also, according to these distinct and subordinate Callings,
there must be a different and subordinate execution of our affections. As, that
though all must equally affect the glory of God, according to the inward
measure of grace the Lord has vouchsafed, Romans 12. 3. yet each must severally
express their affection herein, as their Callings do limit or enlarge the
same. As that the Magistrate may testify his zeal to Gods glory, not only
in being angry at sin, but in punishing the same; which a private man may
not do: His only Weapons herein, must be Prayers and Tears. And so the
Minister may testify his zeal to God by his public Calling, in reproouing,
conuincing, and censuring publicly: all which, a private man may not do,
because God is the God of Order, and requires no more at our hands, then he
allots unto us. 1. Cor. 14. 40.

Thirdly, I say our affections 3. The Occasions.
must be suitable to the occasions and condition of the Times and Church where
we live, and so to our own particular Occasions. As that we must weep with
them that weep, and rejoice with them that rejoice. Romans 12. 15. 16. In
general calamities or sins threatening them, we must be mourners, Ezech. 9.
Ierem. 13. 17. Howsoever the Multitude are senseless, and careless, Prou. 14.
16. In general Blessings, we must rejoice and abound in Thankesgiuings to our
God, Psalm. 126. 34. Psalm. 118. Howsoever the Wicked may gnash their Teeth, and
pine away, Psalm. 112. 10, 11.

And yet seeing there is 9.
an holy Order to be observed in our Affections, according to the more
excellent Objects: As that our God and his Glory must have the chief place;
the public Good, the next, before our own private: Therefore our ^^^ctions
must be suited and mixed accordingly. As if it stand with Gods Glory, to
punish Nadab and Abihu with fire from Heaven, for offering strange fire unto
God; Aaron, their Father, must prefer Gods glory before the good of his
Family, Leuit. 10.
and in silence submit to the will of God. Though Nehemiah for his own private
be in good case; yet because the house of his God lies waste: therefore, though
he stand before such a Monarch, as would not endure any such melancholy
passion; yet his sad countenance Nehem. 2.
must needs bewray his Affection to his God, and compassion with his
distressed and desolate Church.

Yea, such must be our holy wisdom and temper herein; as that seeing the
public must be preferred before the private: Therefore, though our private
case be safe, and yield us sound matter of rejoicing; yet we must withal be
sorrowful for the public: yea, our particular joy must give way thereto: And
though in private it go ill with us; yet we must rejoice in the public good,
and be comforted in our particular distress, by the confideration of the
public welfare of the Church of God.

Thus of the Object of our Affections, and Rules therein.

Now, concerning the The End.
End of all our holy Desires; this is suitable to the Object, Even the glory of
God, and salvation of the Soul, subordinate thereunto: And so the Rules are
also accordingly.

A second general Rule there is concerning our Affections; That as they must
be informed by Knowledge, so they must be bounded thereby: reaching only so
far unto their objects, aa the Word allows. Our Desires must be
subordinate to the Will of God, all tending to Holiness, and building forward
to Heaven.

And hence arises a Aff^^^ions (...) (...) ^pirituall Thrift.
third Rule, That as ou^ Affections are, so we shall profit in the Word, and
holy Duties. And therefore we should labor not so much for Knowledge, which
may puff up, as for good affections, which may so humble us in our selves, as
withal they may quicken to well-doing.

And hence arises a fourth Rule, That as the affection is, so will be the
acceptance of our service. It is not the thing done, but the cheerful mind
that God accepts, 2. Cor. 8. 12. 2. Cor. 9. 11.

And this affords also another comfortable Rule, 5.
That as God accepts the will for the deed; so though we fail in the
outward Act, yet it is the good affection, that shall stand in stead thereof.
It is enough for Abraham, Genes. 22 11, 12.
to be willing to sacrifice his Son. This is the Trial of his Faith; this is
the Deliverance of his Son, and the confirmation of the Covenant, Genes. 22.
and 2. Cor. 8. 12.

And hence also arises 6. How to judge of the sincerity of Affections, in the
corruption of them.
another sweet and comfortable Rule, That whereas our Affections, as all other
parts, are but in part regenerate; so that in the best temper and measure of
Grace, in the well-ordering of any of them, there will be a mixtu^^ of that
which is (...) with that which is ^^^^^tuall: Here therefore we must be wise,
to dis cerne between things that differ: And so to judge of the sincerity of
our Affections; not as they are not mingled at all with contrary tincture (for
this it must be, for the Evidence and Trial of their sincerity, in discerning
and mastering of them:) but rather by that which is predominant in this
mixture, which preuayles in the end; first, by drawing us nearer unto God in
holiness; secondly, by most abasing us in our selves; thirdly, by enabling us
to more conscionable practice of Divine worship; fourthly, by making us more
profitable to the Saints, for the increase of Christ's Kingdom.

As for example: All our Affections must aim at Love, and be ordered thereby;
That must be predominant: And so Sorrow must be subordinate to Joy, Fear to
Hope, etc.

A seventh Rule concerning How to distinguish between Affections, and their
Tentations
our Affections, is, That we be wise to distinguish between our Affections
themselves, and the several Tentations that do accompany them, and are
shrouded under them.

Because, as in the wicked Note.
every affection being wholly impure, is nothing else but a mass of
Tentations; all inciting to evil, all hindering from goodness: So also in the
godly, being but partly regenerate, the purest Affections want not their
mixture, as of Corruption, so of Tentation arising thereupon: Which usually is
either so like the affection it self, or so ouer-shadoweth the same, as we
can hardly discern the Tentation, and Color, from the affection and purity
thereof, in the time of Tentation.

And therefore learn we thus to distinguish between the affection and
tentation, accompanying the same.

First, as it was in the Rules hereto 1.
Travail of Rebecca, that Esau came out first, and Jacob afterward; so usually
it falls out in the Travail of our affections.

The profane motion The Tentation first breaks out
will usually peep out first: The flesh will first seek it self, that so it
may prevent the onset of grace, and quash it in the beginning and first
quickening of the Affection.

And this falls out either And why. 1. Want of preparation.
for want of due preparation to the duty, in curbing the Flesh, and tying the
Ass, when we go to sacrifice.

Or though we be never 2. Satan's Policy.
so well prepared, Satan will now put in, by stirring up Corruption, to dampe
the Fruit in the first peeping out thereof.

And the wise and gracious 3. Gods prouiden^e.
God, by this impudency of the flesh, stirs up the Spirit to a more glorious
resistance, by an earnest setting of the heart on God, and craving his
assistance, by confounding the flesh, and stripping it of all confidence and
partnership in the w^^ke, that so he may have all the glory.

And therefore the Rules Use hereof.
herein are, first, to distrust our Affections in the first motions to Good;
secondly, to examine and try them by the Word, to refine, and quicken them in
the Blood of Christ.

A second Rule, to discern 2. Rule. Constancy in Affections.
the tentation from the affection, is the Constancy thereof. For if the
affection hold one to the Object; and is the more inflamed thereon, the more it
is opposed: if it recover it coolings, and faintings, and so increase and hold
out, to the accomplishment of the work; this is a sign of the sincerity
thereof. But if it faint and vanish, and yield to the Opposition, then it is
carnal, and swallowed up of the Tentation; unless it be in time of Tentation.

A third Rule herein is, 3. Rule. Increase in power.
That if the affection begin in weakness, and so increases by practice of
holiness; then it is spiritual: but if be sudden and hot at the first, and
feel no increase by the Ordinances of God, but rather quayleth in the use of
them; then it is rather the Tentation, then the power of the Affection.

A fourth Rule herein is, That if the Affection outlast 4. Rule. Out-lasting
the Action.
the Action: either if it be accomplished, yet still we desire to better it; or
if it fail, yet still it is more kindled to recover again; this is a sign of
the inward Life thereof. But if it give over with the Action, either ending in
the thing done, or quayling, because of the thing undone; this rather is the
power of Tentation, doting upon the outward Action, then the power of
Affection, approving it self unto God, and not measuring it self by the
success of the Action, either way, but by the love of God discerning inward
and general obedience.

A fifth Rule hitherto is, That if our Affection has 5. Rule. Sound Ground.
a sound Ground, and rely on the Word; then are they spiritual: but if either
ignorantly or superstitiously they are carried to any Object; this is rather
the power of Tentation, then the Rectitude of the Affection.

6. And so if our Affection 6. Rule. Direct means.
carries us by indirect means, here we may suspect the strength of Tentation.

7. Especially, if they 7. Rule. Right Ends
draw us to contrary ends, this argues plainly the power of Tentation, and
conuinceth manifestly the corruption of the Affection.

Thus may we discern between the Tentation, and Affection.

And these are the Rules concerning the Right Judgment of our Affections.

And so of such Directions as concern the right ordering of them.

CHAP. V.
How to order affections for our selves.

Unto which we may add these Rules, for the more holy ordering, and so
benefiting, by them: as also for the Trial of Sincerity therein.

Whereof some concern How to order Affections for our selves.
our selves: as that,

First, When the case concerns our selves, we must ever learn to suspect our
own Opinion, and Affection: as being ouer-weened with eonceit of our selves,
and so subject to much self-love and deceit in our selfeiudgement.

Secondly, We must labor more for Affection, then for Knowledge; because
Knowledge puffs up, and so causes barrenness; but Affections humble, and
provoke to obedience: by the one, we may rule others, but by these, rule our
selves.

Thirdly, We must make In company.
our Affections as little known in company as may be; so did Joseph: because
the discovery of Affection causes imputation of Hypocrisy from others unto
us, and causes occasion of offense, by perverting them to the flesh from us
unto others.

Fourthly, We must try By use,
our affections hereby, that if they make us less fit to pray, more unable to
do the good we should, less careful to avoid sin, then they are evil: But
when on the contrary, they can provoke us to well doing, prevent sin; the^
they are quickened from Gods grace.

Fifthly, If whatsoever we have in the Judgment, we and Practice.
have also in the Affection, endeavoring to practice as we know, and so
desiring still to know more that we may practice; this argues the sincerity of
our Affections. Thus they are to be ordered: Because this implies the
subjection of the will and heart, and so of the whole man, to the obedience of
Christ Jesus.

Sixthly, Hereby also we By contrary Bent.
shall discern the sincerity of our Affections: If as by nature we inclined
to one Vice more then another; so now we are more affected to the contrary
Virtue. As if by nature we were more disposed to Choler and Fumes; so now we
are more affected to peaceablenesse and meekness. If naturally we were more
inclined to Sloth; so now we are more active and diligent in good things.

Seventhly, Yea this is By contrary measure.
a notable Trial hereof, That whereas naturally we were furious, and violent
to evil, we can be now more zealous and fervent in good: whereas before we
were more obstinate and desperate in evil, we can be now more constant and
resolute for good: whereas before we were more desperate, in unnecessary and
wilful troubles, we can be now more courageous and victorious in those that
are laid upon us, for good things. If the more violent our affections were to
evil by nature, the more fervent they shall be in the work of Grace; this is
a certain token of the true change of them.

The reason hereof is, because usually whom the Lord conuerteth from a more
desperate estate of sin: as hereby they are more bound unto him; so shall they
express what he aymeth at herein: namely, to be more jealous of his glory, to
labor more abundantly therefore.

Thus as the Apostle Paul was more violent in persecuting the Saints; so was
he more zealous for the glory of his God: so did he labor more abundantly
then the rest, for the advancement thereof, 1. Tim. 1. Cor. 15.
1. 17. Thus, because much was forgiven to that great Sinner, therefore much
more did she love; the more she had offended her God before, the more did
she labor to please him afterward, Luke 7. 47.

Eighthly, Whereas the By their sincerity.
trial of Sincerity in general is, That God must be preferred above all
things, above all earthly things whatsoever, yea above all heavenly things, as
they concern us, or any interest we have therein: We must respect God simply
for himself, and for that goodness that is in him, without any respect of
whatsoever benefit may redound to us thereby. Therefore by this Rule also we
may try the sincerity of our Affections: That as they come more nearly to the
nature and absoluteness of God; so they are more pure and heavenly: that as
God loved us for his own sake, and not for ours; so we can love him for his
own sake, and not for any benefit redounds unto us hereby: nay, rather then
we will fail in our love unto him, and his Glory, we can be contented to
renounce all love unto our selves; not only to suffer whatsoever afflictions
for his sake, but even to be accursed, rather then he should be dis-honoured,
Romans 9. 12. Exodus 32.

So because our sin it is, which displeases God, and it is the punishment
that may displease us: If therefore we can grieve simply for our sins,
because our God is grieved with them, and not rather for the punishment whereby
we are like to smart: being rather willing, if it could be put to our choice,
to undergo even Hellish torments, so we might be free from sin, whereby we
may offend our God; then to enjoy Heaven, with condition of impuritie: so, that
though there were no Hell to punish, nor Heaven to reward us; yet we could
hate sin, and love righteousness. This is a very gracious Evidence of the
sincerity of our Affections: Hereby we may know a great measure of Gods grace
in the mortifying of our Affections, and quickening of them to the life of
Glory.

Ninthly, Concerning Concerning evil and good.
our Affections to evil: because they are like the waters, that if the
floud-gates be open, grow headstrong and irresistable; therefore we are to nip
them in the blade, nay, if it be possible, stifle them in the Womb, lest they
grow so violent, as that they cannot be mastered. But touching good Affections,
because they are like the (...). 4. 19.
Morning Light, that shines more and more unto the perfect Day; therefore they
are to be cherished daily, and quickened by the Word, and Prayer: that so they
may master not only our corrupt desires, but also bring in subjection all our
gifts of Illumination.

Yea, all other saving Note.
Graces may be turned as it were into Affections; that the zeal of Gods House
may even eat us up: Nothing may be seen, in comparison of our Affections;
these may prevail and reign over all.

7. As we must take notice of this, That we are subject to one Affection more
then another.

First, in regard of our different Condition: as in Prosperity, to Pride,
Anger, Uncharitableness, etc. and so in Adversity, to Fear, Impatiencie,
Despair, etc.

Secondly, and so in regard of our Natural different disposition, by reason of
Complexion and Education, Society, etc.

Thirdly, as also in regard of our different Callings, as to Covetousness,
Ambition, Deceit, etc.

So in regard hereof Rule herein.
know we, that it is a good sign of Grace to discern the predominancie of the
special affection, so that we labor principally against the same, avoiding
the Occasions lawfully, and strengthening our selves, by the contrary means
to subdue and weaken the power thereof.

8. If we can turn all the Graces of God into affections, as to hear with
Fear and Joy, to pray with Feruencie and Zeal, to give Alms cheerfully; so
that indeed the whole action is swallowed up of the Affection, and converted
thereunto.

Tenthly, Whereas every In regard of the combat.
regenerate man consists of two contrary parts, namely, the New Man, which is
renewed according to the Image of Christ; and the Old Man, that remainder of
Corruption which we have received from Adam: the Condition of both which is,
that they are always striving against each other; The Spirit lusts against
the Flesh; and, the Flesh lusts against the Spirit: so according to this
continual Combat, the Affections are to be ordered, and tried.

As first for the ordering of them: The Affections For ordering.
of the unregenerate part must be always led and ordered by those of the
Regenerate; our love of Earthly things, directed by, and subordinate to our
love of the Heavenly; our fear of Punishment ordered and subdued to our fear
of God and his goodness.

Secondly, For the trial And Trial.
of our Affections, here also the Rule is, That seeing we are but in part
regenerate; therefore our Affections are then most suitable, when we can
express contrary Affections about the same Action.

As first, That we can rejoice Note.
in our God, and his goodness, and yet grieve that we are not answerable
thereto; that we cannot comprehend the measure thereof, that we cannot walk
worthy the same.

Secondly, That we can so grieve for sin, as that we can also rejoice in
this, that we do by unfeigned sorrow testify our Obedience unto God, our
hatred of sin, and our endeavor to Repentance: That we can so fear our God,
and his Goodness, as withal we can hope and trust in his mercy, and rely
thereupon.

The reason hereof is, that as by the one affection we justify our
Regeneration in part; so by the other contrary, we convince and mortify the
unregenerate. By both, thus contending with each other in the same action, we
approve the truth thereof in the presence of God, and so labor for the
acceptance of it above the worth thereof, in the merit of Christ, and we also
maintain the Spiritual Combat between the Flesh and the Spirit.

9. If our affections run In regard of the Object.
more upon heavenly then earthly things, and we can begin our desires for
earthly things from a spiritual ground, and so can use them with a spiritual
desire, still to thrive in grace, and to a spiritual end, namely, to further
us to Heaven; this is an argument of the circumcising thereof: thus may we
learn to order them aright.

10. Our affections must In respect of reflection
begin from our selves to others; and from others, return unto our selves
again.

11. We must labor to quicken and order our Affections, by Prayer, Singing,
and Meditation especially.

12. In most weightiest Occasions, we must especially Note.
watch over our affections, because now Satan will by them pervert us herein.

13. Our affection must be suitable to the quality of the Object, and hence to
be rightly judged.

Concerning others, Our affections are to be ordered thus toward Men.

First, According to the diversity of Gods graces in them, so must we affect
accordingly, and not according to outward endowments of Nature, or Worldly
Happiness. For this is to have respect of Persons; and so is condemned, Iam.
2, 3, 4. Act. 10. 34, 35.

Secondly, According to present Necessity; so we must affect those that are
in greatest present Want, howsoever far inferior in Grace to others, that
are not in such extremity: and out of our tender compassion, minister present
relief unto them; that so it may appear, we do it for Gods sake, and not
upon any goodness in them: expecting our recompense from the Lord; which we
are like to loose from men.

Thirdly, Whereas there Affections united to the most excellent Object.
are some Callings on Earth which do in some sort represent the Majesty and
Office of God: as the Calling of the Magistrate, Minister, etc. Therefore
herein also there must be a wise ordering of our Affections. As that,
howsoever, in general, we must affect where there be best Graces; yet now, if
the case stand between a Magistrate, though wicked, and a private Christian:
we must more affect the Magistrate, because he is the Image of Gods Majesty,
Power, etc. and in regard of his Place and Office, is to execute the Will of
God, whether for good or evil, and so is an image of Gods free and absolute
Power. I say, in these respects we must more lone, fear, and regard the
Magistrate, then any private Christian howsoever, superior in spiritual
Graces.

The Reasons are:

First, Because the outward Reasons hereof.
Calling of the Magistrate, and such Gifts as may concern the same, is that
which the Lord in wisdom has set over not only the persons of private men,
but even their best Gifts also, either to reward them for the Good they do, or
else to punish them for the Evil they do: yea, to correct them also for the
good they may do, because they have failed in the measure thereof: so that,
wherein we think we have most cause to spurn at government, because happily
it lays the burden upon the wrong horse, vexing the Doves, and acquitting the
Crows, as he says. Yet herein we have greatest cause to love the Magistrate:
As not only being herein an Image of the Divine Providence, in bearing with
the wicked in great patience, and correcting his children; but also expressing
herein the Divine Goodness: first, of his general Providence to the Wicked,
in sparing them; and therein, his special Providence to the Godly, in sparing
the Wicked, for the trial of his Children; and so of his Goodness herein to
his Saints, in correcting them here, that they may not be condemned hereafter;
and so of his special Providence to the Wicked, in hardening them by his
patience to the Day of Slaughter.

The like may be said concerning the Faithful Minister: That whereas he is
the Interpreter, one of a thousand, to declare unto Man his Righteousness,
Job. 33. 22. Yea, is so gracious with God, as both to be the Mouth of God unto
the people, the Lord revealing his Will for our salvation, by their Ministry;
aa also to be the Mouth of the People unto God, both to obtain Blessings for
them, and also Iam. 5. 17.
to remove Judgments from them, Exodus 32.

So that if he do not pray for them, the Lord will not hear their prayers,
Ierem. 14. 11, 12. If he pray for them, the Lord will be gracious, and pardon
their Offenses. And so he is, as the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, to
preserve the Land from desolation, and maintain the peace thereof. Therefore
as these are worthy of double honor, 1. Tim. 5. 17. so we must affect them
accordingly, as those which watch over our Souls, and must give up their
account for us, that so they may give it up with Joy, and not with Grief, Heb.
13. 18.

Yea, howsoever the person Note.
of the Minister may be exorbit^^t and scandalous; yet in regard of his
Calling, we are bound to hear him: And if we affect him not, we cannot
Matthew. 23. 1
profit by him; ^hee may benefit us, though himself be reproved, 1. Cor. 9.
Yea, with the Apostle: If Christ be preached, whether Phil. 1. 16.
of Envy, or Uaineglorie, or any such by-respects; yet we must rejoice in the
Truth, and the rather embrace the same, as having herein a gracious trial of
our Sinceriti^: that we receive the Word, not with respect Iam. 2 4.
of Persons, for the Uessels sake; but as from the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. and
in Obedience to his Ordinance. As also, having matter to exercise our
spiritual Wisdom, in discerning things that differ: to sever the truth of the
Word from the scandals of the Parson; to try all things, and hold that which
is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.

Yea, herein we have singular matter to exercise our Love; both in praying for
his Parson, that God may make him more profitable: and so mourning for his
Defects, as that by our Meekness and Humility we seek by all holy means
to win him to more faithfulness, by being faithful in the obedience of that
Truth which he has delivered: as knowing, that our sin is the cause that
our Pastor is so defective.

And therefore mourn we especially for our own Sins; so we may give him
example to do the like, or else make him herein inexcusable.

Which as it reproves the Use.
giddiness of our people, which heap up Teachers 1. Tim. 4. 2.
unto themselves, according to their own Lusts, forsaking and disgracing those
whom God has set over them, upon pretense of their insufficiency of Gifts, or
other defects; so it ought to advise us, to be humbled for our own sins,
when any such stumbling blocks are offered.

Assuring our selves, Note.
That if we can truly examine and compare, not out vain and presumptuous
Affections after the most eminent Gifts, but our measure of profiting
answerable to the meanest Gifts in truth, we shall find, if we deal truly
with our own Hearts (may I not speak of those that presume most in this case)
that we are generally to learn the very first grounds of Religion, Heb. 5.
11. and so are short of answering the meanest Gifts.

And so may justly fear, that whereas we would be Note.
generally thought better then we are, as being ashamed that we have been so
short in answering so long and gracious time of our Visitation: therefore God
has given us up to this Presumption, to judge of our Teachers, that we may
justify our selves, and so to this wandering and hunting after those, as we
take it, of the best Gifts; that so, by following them inordinately, we may be
conceited to be that we are not, men of greater understanding, of more
spiritual experience, as being able to reach and attain to their measure, and
so thereby be further hardened in our own ignorance and corruptions.

Thirdly, Our Affections to others, must be derived from our Affection to our
selves: we must begin at home, and so be enlarged abroad; so love others, out
of love to our selves; so to be zealous against others sins, as to begin at
home, etc.

And secondly, Our Affections to others must return home again: if by
grieuing for others sins, we can do little good upon them, let our grief
return home for our own sins; yea, let us be grieved, that they are not
grieved.

Fourthly, Our Affections to others must be always bounded within the Rules of
the Word, and the glory of God: We must so affect the salvation of others, as
may stand with Gods glory, with the good of his Church, according to his Word.
We must so grieve for their sins, as that we submit to Gods will, and not
hinder our Callings, 1. Sam. 16. 1.

We must so pity them, as not to harden them in sin, not to pamper them in
wantonness, etc.

Secondly, Toward God.

For the right ordering of our Affections toward Order of Affections toward
God.
God, this general Rule must be observed, That there are some Affections which
properly and only belong unto him: as Trust and Hope; these are peculiar only
to the Lord: so that it is high Treason to that supreme Majesty, to transfer
them to any other.

As for Trust: Only in the Lord; Not in Princes, not any, Psalm. 146. 2, 3.

So for Hope: Only in God; not in Man.

The meaning is, not that we must not trust them, that is, yield some civil
credit to them, as to their words, to their actions, etc. in regard of
temporal things, nor that we must not hope well of them in charity, 1. Cor.
13. in regard of spiritual, because we know not the contrary: but we must
not repose any religious confidence in them concerning salvation; neither hope
in them, as being able to effect the some: in which sense we here speak of
these Affections.

A second Rule is, That though some Affections respect our selves and others,
yet they must be subordinate to our respect of God. Our Affections to God must
be without Limitation: We cannot love him enough, we cannot fear him too
much; so far as possibly we may, our affections must be enlarged
proportionably to the Object; they must be boundless, and endless, as the
Object is. But those to our neighbor must be confined within their Limits, both
subordinate to God; and secondly, as our Callings, and the condition of the
party does require, with reference still to Gods glory.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Benefit of the right use of holy Affections.

FIrst, Hereby we shall be sure to profit and thrive in all well-doing: for as
the thing is affected, so it is increased and continued.

Secondly, Hereby we shall discern undoubtedly the true work of Grace begun
in us; for as is the Affection, so is the truth of the heart: Look what we
love, what we fear, what we rejoice in, what we are sorry for; these will
discern the uprightness of the heart.

Thirdly, Hereby also we shall approve our selves in the growth of Grace: for
as our Affections are more quickened to holy duties, as we more love and
rejoice in them, as we more fear and hope in the continuance of them, as we
are more grieved in our selves for our failing, are more zealous against sin,
more angry against it; so we do thrive in well-doing. And

Fourthly, So also by our Affections we may discern our perseverance, and
constancy, in welldoing; each of them being furtherances thereunto, and
assurances thereof.

Fifthly, Our Affections rightly ordered, will enable us to have more
comfortable fellowship with God in Prayer, Meditation, etc. as quickening our
zeal of his Glory, our love unto his Majesty; procuring our more free and
bold access into his glorious presence, our more entire and cheerful
society with him, our better contentment in his providence; enabling us with
more patience to wait upon him, and so to strive more effectually with him,
that we may not be sent empty away.

Sixthly, These also well ordered, will prove gracious helps for our more
comfortable society with men, to our mutual profit and advantage: As whereby,

First, we are enabled and enlarged to do them most good.

Secondly, and so hereby fitted to maintain the fellowship, as being enabled
to overcome whatsoever evils may arise, to the breach thereof, with our
Patience and Meekness: And so fitted to further each other to the Heavenly
Communion.

Seventhly, Especially whereas there are three special Times, wherein our
Affections are not only much distempered, but even quite perverted, so far
as we can perceive, from their right Objects, and use; namely,

First, The Time of Desertion; when our God with-draweth the Light of his
Countenance from us.

Secondly, The Time of violent Distress; by reason of acute Diseases: as in
Fevers, power of Melancholy, etc.

Thirdly, The Time of vehement Tentation; by the Malice of Satan.

In all these, as we must be wise to judge of our Affections, and our selves
by them; so we may reap sound comfort thereby, both to prevent distraction
and despair, as also give hope of recovery thereout.

As first, generally, That our Affections must not be measured by any of these
extraordinary Conditions; we may not be judged by the distemper of our
Affection in them.

First, because the distemper is contrary to the maine bent of our hearts, in
our ordinary course of Sanctification: and,

Secondly, When we come to our selves again, and can judge rightly of things,
we are the first that judge our selves, and condemn our folly and ignorance
in such distem pers: and Ps. 73. 22.

Thirdly, Our God looks upon us, not as we are transported with these
distempers, but as he has from everlasting loved us in Christ, and in his
singular wisdom and mercy, has intended to turn our distem pers, as to the
manifestation of our privy corruption; as it was in Job, Cap. 3. so to the
purging out of more inward and dangerous evils; of Pride, Vaineglorie, etc. And
so to the advancing of his free mercy, and goodness, not only in sustayning
us by his mighty power, in these Desertions; but in ouer-comming our
Distempers, by his wonderful lenity and goodness: as he dealt with Jonas;
and making Chapter 11.
way hereby, for the better quieting and settling of our unruly and carnal
heat and affections, for the time to come, by casting us wholly out of our
selves upon his free mercy in Christ Jesus, and so renewing us in him to more
constant and sincere obedience. And so not so much respecting the present
disorder of the Affection, as preparing it hereby to that comfortable issue of
conformity to his Will, that so he may crown and perfect his own work in
us; merely, for his own sake, by his own mighty Arm, that he may have the
only glory of all his mercies.

Particularly, We may observe a special hand of God in each of these Occasions:

As first, In the Case of Desertion. And here let the examples of Job and David
be the instance of our Case.

It pleased God for a time to withdraw the sense of his mercy from them, and so
to exercise them with contrary buffettings and sense of his displeasure, Job.
6. 2. Ps. 38. 4, 5. Ps. 77. 8.

Hereupon follows a strange distemper of their Affections: in stead of Joy,
bitter Sorrow; yea, sorrow provoking to rage, and Ps. 77.
repining against the providence of God: whereby they increased the Job. 3.
Job. 62. 12.
burden, and were ready to sink under the same, by despair.

Yet we see how mercifully the Lord sustaines them in the midst of these
Terrors.

First, It befalls not them as they foolishly fear, and wish.

Secondly, They are kept in some measure of Sobriety, to leave the secret
work to God: yea, in some measure of Fatth, as to rely on the power of God:
yea, in some measure, nay, in an excellent measure of Love; though he
forsakes, yet he is still my God, Ps. 22. And therefore David concludes, Will
the Lord forsake for ever? Not so Ps. 77. 7, 9, 10.
much doubting, that he will forsake; as wrestling with God by Faith, that he
may not forsake for ever: as gathering from the former times, that he has
been gracious; and so concluding, from the faithfulness of God, that he will
not forsake for ever. Yea, victorious Job professes confidently his love unto
God, even in the greatest extremity, Though he kill me, yet I will trust in
him, Job. 16. 13. And lastly, when the Lord has tried them in the Furnace, and
their dross is purged out, their Affections return to their right kind
again, yea, much more refined; to the denial of themselves, and so to their
more sober and constant furtherance in the work of Grace, Job. 42. 2, 3, 4.

Secondly, Concerning the distemper of our Affections in acute Diseases:
wherein if Satan has not usually an hand, to increase the fire; yet the
violence of the Disease is sufficient to disorder and pervert the Judgment for
a time, and so to distract and distemper the Affections. Yet seeing we speak
and do that in these extremities, which is contrary to our former constant
course; and when we are recovered, we either have forgotten what we did, or
spoke, or else do condemn our selves for the same: herein is our comfort,
that our God will not impute unto us what has fallen out in this case.

And so we may also conclude of the Time of Tentation, That whatsoever
distempers fall out in this case, as they are mercifully bounded within the
general Condition, That nothing has befallen us herein, but what is incident
to Man; so their disorder shall not be imputed to us, but to the 1. Cor. 10. 13.
malice of Satan. And the Lord in mercy will give that issue, as that we shall
both bear the burden without groaning under it, and be freed thereof so
far, as shall make for his Glory, and our good. But of this elsewhere, God
willing, more at large.

Eighthly, Whereas it is a most desperate Policy in Popery, to detayne
unstable and deceived souls in their damnable Errors, and so to draw such like
Nouices to their Lure: That if it please God to afford light unto any, whereby
they have some inckling of their Deceits, and so have some inward motion, or
affection, to renounce the same, and embrace the Truth; they presently suggest
unto them, that this is a dangerous tentation, and devilish illusion: that so
they might hereby deter them from embracing the same, and so detayne them in
their Egyptian Bondage. This trial of Affections will prove an excellent
means to resolve them herein.

For as by those Rules formerly laid down, to discern the Affection from the
Tentation, they may easily discern the truth of Affection from the power of
Delusion: so especially, in that saving knowledge, is laid down both to be
the ground and bounds of all holy Affections; hereby they shall be sure to
discern the efficacy of Delusion from an upright Affection.

And so also, by a wise observation of these differences, may the weak
Christian be preserved graciously from Apostasy; as hereby knowing what he
holds, and so holding that which is good.

To conclude, there is not a better evidence of the sincerity of the heart,
then the well-ordering of the Affections: because howsoever we may bridle from
outward gross Actions, yet our Affections will discover the corruption of our
heart, and in^lination thereto.

And on the other side, howsoever we may be hindered from the outward action
of well-doing, by many occasions, as want of opportunity, violence of
tentation, inabilitie, and the like; yet our Affection thereto, either by
grieuing that we cannot do it, or going so far as our ability will serve,
or endeavoring above our ability, is a gracious evidence of the sincerity of
our hearts.

Nay, we shall find, that there is not a better spur to provoke us to
well-doing; not any more effectual bridle to restrain from sin, then are
our Affections.

For as if we do any good, we must first be affected with the love of it,
before we can attempt the same: or else if we do undertake it upon
by-respects, as to please men, to satisfy carnal ends; we shall easily give
over when these proppes fail, only it is the love of Goodness, for it self,
will make us constant therein: So, on the contrary, we shall never forsake
evil conscionably, unless we first hate it for it self, and loathe as well
the corruption thereof, as fear the danger of the same. If upon any other
respects we shall leave sin, as for fear of punishment, for credit, etc.
these respects will prove means sometimes even to return to such sins, or
worse; which have been the occasions to lay them aside for a season.

And therefore as it is the mercy of our God to show us often times in our
Affections what we may do in our Actions: so it is also his singular
goodness, to forewarne us of many evils which we may otherwise fall into,
even by the sway of our Affections leading thereunto.

What should I say? Can we have a better Evidence of the truth of our
Conversion, then the alteration of our Affections? Can we now delight in such
things, which before we loathed? And can we grieve especially at that, which
heretofore was our principal rejoicing? Can we delight in the mortifying of
the flesh? and rejoice that we can sorrow for sin? and can we so rejoice in
all spiritual comforts, as that we can also be sorrowful for our abuse of
them? so that we can be always sorrowing, and always rejoicing: rejoicing in
our God, and his Goodness; sorrowing, that we cannot rejoice as we should;
that we cannot do the good we would: rejoicing in this, that we have got the
masterie of some sins; and yet sorrowing for our many faylings, and faintings
even in those conquests, and for that body of sin, that hangs so fast upon
us? Can we discern our Affections thus turned vpside down? out joy into
sorrow, our sorrow into joy, that so our carnal joy in sin may be first
swallowed up of carnal sorrow for the punishment thereof: And our carnal
sorrow may be prevented of extreme despair, by the glad Tidings of Gods
mercy in Jesus Christ, speaking peace unto our souls, and breeding spiritual
joy by the evidence of our adoption. And so our joy in the goodness of our God
may still work in us a spiritual sorrow and repentance of all our secure
ways, that so we may cleave unto our God in new obedience: And so still as
we can now rejoice in the truth of our endeavors; so we can also mourn for
the imperfection of them; that so we may still labor to be found in Christ.
Surely, by these changes and contrarieties of our Affections, we may
undoubtedly conclude a truth of our Conversion, and proceeding therein.

A Case of Conscience, here to be resolved, Whether it be an argument of
unsanctified Affections to be more placed on Earthly then Heavenly things.
THe Resolution hereof consists in a wise distinction of our Affections: which
may be considered either as they are mixed, and so they are at the best; or, as
they are predominant, and so the better part preuayles against the worse.

Take them as they are mixed: And so because the corrupt part first breaks out,
and so is more sensible, and so still accompanies the better part in the
process of the Work, and will have a fling even in the issue, to share with
God, and rob him of his Glory; and so though happily the intention and purpose
be to the best, and in the issue of it, may prove best to the confounding of
the flesh: yet in regard of the appearance of that of flesh, as being more
natural and sensible to a carnal eye; it may be coniectured, that the
Affection is more upon that which is carnal, then that which is spiritual.

Especially if we consider, That as Earthly things have a present and
necessary use in all Occasions; so bring they a kind of Warrant with them: As
to use them, so to affect them, that so we may take comfort in them; and by
this comfort be provoked unto thankfulness.

So that thus to affect, is not to affect them as earthly, but as heavenly
things; as turned to the right end, and being good Foundations and Evidences to
a better life. 1. Tim. 6. 19.

Only the Trial is in the setting of the Affection, and resting of the same
in these earthly things, Psalm. 62. 10.

Col. 3. 2. It is one thing to affect even the meanest things, as Gods
blessings, which we are to receive cheerfully, and return thankfully unto
our God. And another thing, to set the Affections upon the^, that is, first, to
rest in the thing, not in the giver thereof. Secondly, so to rest in the
present, as we place happiness herein, and not make it a step to a further
happiness. Thirdly, so to give way unto these affections, for the possessing
of our hearts, as that either we leave no room for spiritual Objects, but are
wholly taken up with desire and pursuit of earthly things, or so to divide our
hearts to the entertainment of these diverse Objects, as that either they do
equally share in our desires; we are indifferent to either, we can serve God
and Mammon alike, we can be as eager, take as great delight in the prosecuting
and enjoying of these, as the other. Or else, as it usually fails out, that if
once we grow to this equal partition, the Handmaid will shortly perke above
the Mistress, the carnal Object will prevail above the Spiritual, and so
we shall labor more for the meat that perishes, then for that which endures
for ever.

Thus to set our Affections upon earthly things, is indeed to give more room
in our hearts for the World, then God, and so to exclude God, in regard of the
World; and this is carnal and devilish.

But so to affect earthly things, as to make them steps to higher blessings, as
to acknowledge our faithfulness in the least, because God loves a cheerful
giver, and husband of his meanest blessings, is indeed in earthly things to
affect heavenly: The resolution rests in the means, and end of affecting these
things; that if we prosecute our Affections by holy means, and subordinate
still these things to better; we may affect them lawfully, and thereby affect
the better.

This is to live by Faith, and not by Sense, even in outward things. This is to
rejoice in God, and not in the things themselves. This is to lay up a good
foundation against the Day of Christ, 1. Tim. 6. 19. 20. Especially if we
consider these two things.

First, that the Lord conueyes Note.
unto us even the most spiritual Blessings, by outward and carnal means; as
the Word, by an Earthen Vessel; the Sacraments, by outward Elements. And
secondly, that we receive such blessings by the Ministry of the Flesh; as by
hearing the Word, eating the Bread, etc. which, as the Wisdom of God, no
doubt, has intended, for the humbling of the Flesh, that it should not rest in
the outward Instrument, but in the inward operation of the Spirit; so also has
it his especial work for the trial of the Spirit, that it leads us from that
which is obuious to Sense, to that which is apprehended by Faith: that so being
in the Flesh, yet we Romans 8. 4.
may not live after it, but rather use the flesh for the mortifying of the
flesh. As that, if we were not Flesh, we should not be thus led along with
rudiments and elements, to the capacity thereof; and because we are thus led
with elements, therefore the Lord having now supplied our Infancy and
weakness, we should not be weakelings still, needing Milk, etc. Heb. 5. 12.
but rather grow on to strength, and power of Grace, that so we may digest the
strongest Meat.

The sum of all is: The Wicked affect heavenly things with an earthly
appetite, and so all things are impure unto Tit. 1. 15.
them: the Godly affect earthly things with an heavenly appetite, and so all
things are pure unto them. The Wicked affect heavenly things for earthly
things sake, and so all become earthly unto them: the Godly affect earthly
things for heavenly things sake, and so all things become heavenly. The Godly
find a loathsomenesse in affecting earthly things, and so are provoked to
hunger after heavenly; the Wicked find a loathsomenesse in affecting heavenly
things, and so rather seek to quench their thirst in the puddle of earthly
pleasure: the Godly findea want of Heavenly things, and so still affect the
best Graces; the Wicked are never satisfied with Earthly things, and so still
tire themselves in pursuit after them. So that it is the predominancie of the
Affection, that determines the right ordering thereof. Whereupon it settles
most, wherein it sets up it rest: How it subordinates the inferior to the
superior, and aims at the chiefest end, even the glory of God, and salvation
of the Soul.

And secondly, it is the issue of the Affection, that approoues the sincerity
thereof. If God give Solomon abundance of Earthly things, and he give his
heart to seek out pleasure, and contentment therein: yet, if upon experience
of the vanity and insufficiency of these things, to content the mind, he
renounce these carnal Delights, yea, even what is good in them, in regard of
the end that does accompany the same, and so soar up higher by this
experience, to the highest good; Is not this the right use of all Earthly
desires? Is not this to sanctify even these desires of Earthly things, by
making them Whetstones, to quicken Heavenly Affections, and so to settle them
more firmly upon durable and proportionable Objects?

FINIS.
To THE CHRISTIAN Reader.
ACcording to my Promise, in my last Treatise of the Government of the
Thoughts; I have now supplied thee (dear Christian) with some further
directions for the wellordering and subduing of thy unruly and rebellious
Affections: A Task as so much the more difficult, then the former, of ruling
the Thoughts, by how much carnal Reason and fleshly wisdom, bears more sway
herein, and so gives more strength and warrant to the excesses thereof: so in
this respect also the more necessary to be undertaken, as being that wherein
even the best do much fail in the wise temper thereof, and yet are very
hardly brought to discern their aberrations therein. For what one the one side
through the ignorance of the right Objects whereon our affections are to be
placed, and the right measure of Proportion to their Objects: And on the other
side, by reason of such collusions of carnal wisdom, making good our
distempers therein: very lamentable it is to observe how easily many, other
wise good men, have been miserably transported into these aberrations either
in the excess or defect. As also how hardly they have been reclaimed to the
right temper again: nay, not so much as to discern wherein they have fallen.
May we not observe both these true in Jonas his case? how easily fell he through
ignorance, and self love into a violent fit of rage, and how hardly was he
reduced to see his error herein. That which he should have rejoiced in, in the
truth of Judgment, that the Lord had mercy upon that People, voiced to
destruction: we see proves an occasion, through spiritual Pride and
Selse-loue blinding of him; that I say, proved a means to make him even burst
with anger, not sparing God himself in his rage and fury: And with what great
Patience does the glorious Lord seek to allay his heat? how hardly is he
brought, so much as to the sight of his distemper, but that he is still ready
to Justify his fumes, though it were to the condemning of God himself?

The like we might exemplify in the other affections. And had we not then
great need of some light to further us herein, both that we may see our own
errors herein, and also be graciously enabled to moderate the same. Accept
then I pray you my endeavor herein: And in the fear of God make use of such
directions as are afforded hereunto. I doubt not but as thou shall perceive a
right aim herein, so thou will not measure the truth of God by my
infirmities, but rather take occasion hereby to glorify God the more, if that
his power shall any whit shine throughout such mists of humane corruption. In
the conclusion of my last Book howsoever I may be censured to give way to too
much passion, yet for mine own part, I bless God with my soul, for giving
me so much Patience, as that when I might have righted my self by deeds to
the utter wrack of such who have sought by slanders and desperate practices
my utter undoing. It has pleased my gracious God so to guide me therein, as
only to give them a general Item of their wicked designs, that so they may be
brought to Repentance: which as I do heartily pray for, so my endeavor by
Gods mercy shall be to watch over my affections with more heed and
resolution: that so I may keep my peace more comfortably with my God,
howsoever I make account still to be more and more encountered by unreasonable
men. And so I desire thee also to walk after the same Rule, laboring so far
as possibly thou may to be at Peace with all men, by possessing thy soul in
patience and ouercomming evil with good.

And so I commend thee (heartily) to the Grace of God: wishing thee to expect
shortly as here a general directson for the Affections in general: so a
particular discovery of each Affection in their lively colors, that so thou
may be furnished with what may particularly inform thee herein, and
thereby be enabled to walk peaceably with God and Men, to thy comfortable
being in this thy Pilgrimage, and so to the better preparing of thee to thy
Country which is above.

To this end, And so I rest Thy poor Remembrancer at the Throne of Grace. Th.
Cooper.


