A true and most Dreadful discourse of a woman possessed with the Devil: who
in the likeness of a headless Bear fetched her out of her Bed, and in the
presence of seven persons, most straungely roulled her through three Chambers,
and down a high pair of staiers, on the four and twenty of May last. 1584.
At Dichet in Sommersetshire. A matter as miraculous as ever was seen in our
time.

depiction of a headless bear

Imprinted at London for Thomas Nelson.

To the Reader.
Beloved and curtious reader, we have to consider by this strange discourse,
how ready Satan is to take hold on us if we fall from God never so little. He
continually runs up and down seeking whom he may devour: But
notwithstanding his temptations which are great, the mercy of God is greater,
who never fails to send comfort in temptation, if we accept thereof.

Great are the examples, both of Gods mercy and might, to put us in remembrance
of our sins which are infinite and loathsome, wherein if we continue, let us
vndoubtledly look for the reward thereof, which is an everlasting destruction
both of body and soul.

Let not this which is here declared seem a fained fable unto thee, but assure
thy self that all such things are sent as warnignes for our wickedness: and
to put us in mind of the stay of our salvation, which is an assured faith in
Christ Jesus: from which pillar if we once shrink, the Tempter is ready to
drive us in to dispaier of Gods mercy.

Many are the woonders which has lately happened, as of sudden and strange
death upon perjured persons, strange sights in the Aier, strange birthes on
the Earth: Earth quakes, commetts and fiery Impressions, and all to put us in
mind of God, whose works are wonderful.

Remember the late storm of haylstones in which many things were slain and
beaten to to the ground, which Hailestones were equal in greatness to a Goose
Egg, of eight inches about.

These and such like examples (good Reader) warns us to be watchful for the
day of the Lord which is at hand, least suddenly his wrath be kindled against
us. Let us therefore pray to almighty God to hold back his Rod, to be
merciful to us, and to forgive us all that is past: that through the
assistaunce of his Spirit, we may with penitent hearts live in his fear to
our lives end.

FINIS.
Strange News out of Sommersetshire.
Upon the nineth day of May last past Anno. 1584. Th^re was a Yeoman of honest
reputation, dwelling in the Town of Dichet, which is within three miles of
Bruton (the most ancient Town within So^merset shire) whose name is Stephen
Cooper (a man of good wealth and well beloved of his neighbors:) who being
sick, and lying in a weak state, sent his wife (whose name was Margeret
Cooper) upon the nineth day of May last past into Gloster-shire, to take
order concerning a Farm which he has in a Villedge called Rockhampton, alias
Rockington, at whose coming thither, it seemed all things were not according
to her mind. Thus continuing there one day and something more, she returned
home to her husband, partly agreeued at such things as she thought her
husband might reform if GOD lent him life. Now when she was come home again
to Dichet, she found her husband recovered to an indifferent health: to whom
she began to use very much idle talk, as well concerning the same Farm, as
also concerning an old groate which her son (being a little boy) had found
abought one week before. Thus she continued (as it were one that had been
bewitched or hau^ted with some evil spirit) until Tuesdaie at night
following, which night she took her rest something indifferently until
toward the morning: at which time she began with much vain speech to
disquiet her husband, and to use much idle talk: but her husband seeing her
in such a mind, and finding that she was as it were one that were desperate,
he persuaded her to call upon God, and that being the creature of God she
should not forget to call upon her Creator in the day of trouble: wherefore
he counseled her to pray with him, and to say the Lords Prayer after him,
which she partly did: But the devil who alwaie does build his Chapel so
near as he may to vex Gods Church, began to withdraw her from Prayer, and
put her in mind to call in most fearful sort for the groate which her son
had lately found, as also for her Wedding ring, desiring to see them with all
speed: her husband made no great have thereunto, but continued in prayer,
that it would please God to send her a more quiet spirit, and to strengthen
her, that faith might speedely vanquishe such vanity in her. But the more he
prayed and persuaded her to Prayer, the more she seemed to be as it were
troubled with some evil Spirit, calling still for the old groate which her
husband neglected to show her: whereat she began with a very stern and
staring countenance to look on her husband in most wonderful sort, as that
he was sore frighted with the same. The^ he called for her Sister, for that he
was not able to keep her in the bed: which when her Sister and other were come
into the Chamber, they kept her down violently in ye bed: and forthwith she
was so sore tormented that she fomed at the mouth, and was shaken with such
force that the Bed and the Chamber did shake and move in most strange sort:
her husband continued praying for her deliverance: so that within one half
hour after her shaking was left, she began to tell them that she had been in
the Town to beat away the Bear which followed her into the Yard when she
came out of the Country, which to her thinking had no head. Then her husband
and friends persuaded her to leave those vain imaginations, persuading her
that it was nothing but the lightness of her brain which was become idle for
want of rest. Wherefore her husband and friends persuaded her to say the
Lords Prayer with them, which she did, and after took some small rest: And
thus she remained until the Sunday following: in which time she continued
raging as it were bestraught of her memory, which came by fittes, to the
great grief of her husband, friends and neighbors. Upon the Satterdaie
following there was good hope of her recovery, for that she in the night
before had taken some reasonable rest: her friends and neighbors came to
comfort her, yet sometime she would talk somewhat idely to them, which came
by small fittes. And upon the Sundaie she seemed very patient and confirmable
to reason, until midnight: at which time the Candle which was set up burning
in the same Chamber was burned out: She then suddenly waking called to her
husband and cried out, saying, that she did see a strange thing like unto a
Snaile, carrying fire in most wonderful sort: Whereat her husband was amazed:
and seeing the Candle was clean burnt out, called to his Brother and her
Sister (which were in the house with other of their friends watching and
sitting up, to comfort her if her extreme fit should any way molest her) who
hearing her husband call, came in and brought a Candle lighted and set it on
the table, which stood near where the woman lay: She began then to wax as
one very fearful, saying to her husband and the rest, do you not see the
Devil: whereat they desired her to remember God and to call for grace, that her
faith might be only fixed upon him to the vanquishing of the Devil, and his
assaults. Well (quoth she) if you see nothing now, you shall see something by
and by: and forthwith they heard a noise in the street as it had been the
coming of two or three Carts, and presently they in the Chamber cried out
saying: Lord help us what manner of thing is this that comes here. Then her
husband looking up in his bed espied a thing come to the bed much like unto
a Bear, but it had no head nor no tail, half a yard in length and half a
yard in height: her husband seeing it come up to the bed, rose up and took a
joined stool and stroke at the said thing, the stroke sounded as though he
had stricken upon a Featherbedd: then it came to the woman and stroke her three
times upon the feet, and took her out of the bed, and so roulled her to and
fro in the Chamber, and under the bed: The people there present to the number
of seven persons were so greatly amazed with this horrible sight, that they
knew not what to do, yet they called still upon God for his assistaunce: but
the Candle was so dim that they could scarsly see one another. At the last
this Monster which we suppose to be the Devil, did thrust the woman's head
betwixt her legs, and so roulled her in a round compass like an Hoope
through three other Chambers down an high pair of stairs in the Hall, where
he kept her the space of a quarter of an hour: Her husband and they in the
Chamber above durst not come down to her, but remained in prayer weeping at
the staiers head, grievously lamenting to see her so carried away. There was
such an horrible stincke in the Hall, and such fiery flames, that they were
glad to stop their noses with clothes and napkins. Then the woman cried out
calling to her husband, now he is gone: then (quoth he) in the name of God
come up to me, and so even upon the sudden she was come so quickly that they
greatly marueiled at it. Then they brought her to bed, and four of them kept
down the clothes about the bed, and continued in Prayer for her. The Candle
in the Chamber could not burn clear but was very dim, and suddenly the
woman was got out of the bed, and the window at the beds head opened, whether
the woman did vnpin the window, or how it came to pass they knew not, but it
was opened, and the woman's legs after a marvelous manner thrust out at the
window, so that they were clasped about the post in the middle of the window
between her legs: The people in the Chamber heard a thing knock at her
feet as it had been upon a Tubbe, and they saw a great fire as it seemed to
them at her feet, the stincke whereof was horrible: The sorrowful husband
and his brother imboldened themselves in the Lord, and did charge the Devil
in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, to depart from her
and to trouble her no more: then they laid hands on her and cried to the
Lord to help them in that their great need, and so pulde her in again and
set her upon her fette: Then she looked out at a window and began to say: O
Lord (quoth she) me think I see a little child, but they gave no regard to
her: These words she spoke two or three times: so at the last they all looked
out at the window: and lo they espied a thing like unto a little child with a
very bright shining countenance, casting a great light in the Chamber, and
then the Candle burned very brightly, so that they might one see an other: then
fell they flat to the ground and praised the Lord that he had so wonderfully
assisted them, and so the child vanished away. Then the woman being in some
better feeling of her self was laid in her bed, and she asked forgiveness at
Gods hands, and of all that she had offended, acknowledging that i^ was for
her sins that she was so tormented of the evil Spirit. And so God bethanked
she has ever since been in some reasonable order, for there has been with
her many godly learn^d men, as M^ister Doctor Cottington, Parson of the same
Town, and Maist^r Nicholles Preacher of Bruton, with other chief Preachers
from diverse pl^ces of the Country.

FINIS.
These be the names of the VVitnesses, that this is most true.
Steven Cooper. John Cooper. Ales Easton. John Tomson. John Anderton. Miles
Foster. With diverse others.

