THE ART OF Giving. Describing the true Nature, and right use of Liberality:
And proving That these days of the Gospel have far exceeded the former
times of Superstition in true Charity and Magnificence.

BY THOMAS COOPER.

LONDON, Printed for T. Pauter, and are to be sold in Iuy Lane. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir John Rotheram, and Sir Gilbert Wakering,
Knights, and their virtuous Ladies, especial Patrons of my studies, T. C.
wishes all increase of the blessings of Heaven and Earth.
Right Worshipful:
THe occasions that has moved me to treat of this subject of true
Beneficence in these latter days are First, to propose it as a lively
Touchstone for the trial of our holy entertainment of the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ: Secondly, to confound hereby the vain confidence of this
deceitful generation, which seem to be somewhat herein, when indeed they are
nothing; deceiving themselves, even as clouds without water, in their false
liberality. And so to convince the Atheist, that says, where is the promise of
his coming? seeing this very decay of true love, is among other, one of those
pregnant signs, that the day of the Lord Jesus is near at hand, that so the
wise in heart may see the plague, and hide himself. And seeing he that is
coming will come quickly, with his reward with him, to give unto every one
according to his work, yea, will come suddenly in an hour, that no man knows
of, ought we not always to have Oil ready in our Lamps, that so we may enter
in unto our masters joy?

Surely were there nothing else to move us hereunto, but the commandment of
our heavenly Master, this should provoke us to love one another, this should
adjure us to abound in Charity, that so we might avoid eternal vengeance,
seeing all the commandments are fulfilled in this, that we love each other,
and to fail in one duty is guilty of the breach of all. But behold what love
the Father has showed us, that, what was impossible to the commandment in
regard of the transgression, whereby sin revived and became (...) of measure
sinful: and so the hatred increasing, we had no hope, but were as water spilt
upon the ground, that we could not be gathered up again: Our God which is rich
in mercy through his great love, wherewith he loved us, supplied by a most
gracious and wonderful remedy, namely, the precious blood of his dear son,
as of a Lamb undefiled and without spot. This is that blood that has spoken
better things for us then the blood of Abel, not only stopping that loud cry
of Vengeance which our sins called for, but opening unto us the gates of
righteousness, and enabling us to walk in the similitude of the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, that so we might be partakers with him of
eternal glory. And this is that blessed Lord Jesus, who has not been a
stranger unto us, or soiournour with us for a season, but has been lively
described in our sight, and even crucified among us, in the glorious and
constant publishing of the Gospel of Peace. And could greater love be showed
to us by any then that the son of God should lay down his life for his? And
if the Lord so loved us, ought we not to love one another? Is not this our
evidence that we love God whom we have not seen, in that we love our brethren
whom we see daily? Is not this our warrant that we are translated from death to
life, because we love the brethren?

Behold then our trial of the right entertainment of the Gospel. And have we
brought forth this fruit to repentance and amendment of life?

Surely we must needs acknowledge that our glorious God can truly justify him
against us: What could he have done unto us which he has not done? Enquire we,
in the name of God, of the days that are past, which were before us, since the
day that God created man upon the earth, and ask from one end of heaven to the
other; if there came to pass such a great thing as this, or whither any such
like thing has been heard: What nation is so great unto whom the Gods come so
near as the Lord our God is near unto us in all that we call unto him for?

Had ever nation the Gospel of Jesus Christ so long continued with such
constant outward peace and prosperity for the better entertainment thereof? Was
ever nation delivered out of so horrible a pit, as was the Gunpowder treason?
Thus may the Lord justify himself against us, but how have we justified our
God in a conscionable embracing of so great salvation, bringing forth fruit
answerable thereunto?

That we have a name to be alive, who may deny us? Is not yet the Gospel
preached in our streets? Do we not draw forth with joy out of these fountains
of salvation? How is it then that we bring forth wild grapes? are we not for
all this even now dead, and plucked up by the roots? Yea, if we may be believed
our selves, we say that we are rich, and increased with goods, and have need
of nothing? But is not this because we know not that we are poor, and lame,
and blind, and miserable? Are we not willingly ignorant of the truth of our
estates, judging of the same by false rules, as Opinion, Custom, Estimation,
Multitude, and such like: and so are deceived in our imagination, esteeming our
selves to be somewhat, when we are nothing, at leastwise nothing to what we
should be? Have we brought forth fruit answerable to the time of our visitation?

Surely, if there were nothing else to convince our barrenness and
unprofitableness in the entertainment of so great salvation, the very bleating
of the Sheep, and lowing of the Oxen; the cries and complaints of the poor,
ringing daily, and piercing the heavens for their contempt, and des^lations:
the divisions of Ruben, should cause great sorrow of heart; this might justly
challenge a great decay of unfeigned love. Is not Ephraim against Manasses, and
Manasses against Ephraim, and both against Judah? Has not the abundance of
self-love eaten out all hearty and true affection to each other, while every
one seeks his own, and not that which may concern the common good: nay, with
the general wrack of the public weal? And if we thus bite and tear one
another, shall we not be devoured of each other?

Learn we hence, in the name of God, to see the plague, and hide our selves.
Is it not already begun; shall I say in the uttermost part of the host, or
not rather in the host and eyes thereof? And is not the Kite ready to seize
upon both? The Lord give us understanding in all things. Is not this the day of
Jacobs travail? Does not the Judge stand at the door? Will not the Master
come in an hour which that servant dreameth not of, and give him his portion
with Hypocrites, where shall be weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth?
Surely, were it not that the Lord had reserved a remnant of the holy seed among
us, we had long since been as Sodom and Gomorrha: And is not the righteous
daily taken from the evil to come? Is not Ezekiell daily made a sign to the
house of Israel? And is not the hand of the Lord stretched out still? Who so
is wise let him understand these things, and to whom the Lord shall reveal
them; for the ways of God are holy and righteous, and the just shall walk
therein, but the w^^ked shall fall in the same. Must not the Gospel be a
stumbling-blocke to the Jew, and foolish to the Graecians? Do any of the
Rulers believe in him? nay, is it not an offense that the poor receive the
Gospel? And shall not the Lord stay his hand till Lot be removed out of
Sodom? shall not the Gospel be continued till the remnant be gathered in? And
may we not daily observe a great Harvest abroad, even the barraine and desolate
corners of the Land, hungring after the Word, and catching the Kingdom, with
all holy violence? And why then stand we idle in the Marketplace? Why help
we not the Lord against the mighty? Is not the Canaanite yet in the Land? Has
he not increased by our contentions and security? Why join we not together
against the common enemy? Does he not beast of false liberality? Does not the
harlot begin to encroach upon us by her offerings of Peace and pretenses of
reconciliation, by her glorious shows, and sugared greetings, entending more
desperately to kill, when she kisseth and croucheth, that heaps of men may
fall by her might? Can we ever forget that hidden Mine? Shall we not ever
suspect such fawning Absalons, and deep Achitophels?

Is not this the age of complements, and formalities, vanishing merely in
shows and bodily worships? Was ever deadly hatred carried more cunningly under
sugared words, and feigned devotions? Is not our friendship turned into flattery,
our hospitality to stately houses, and gay clothes, our Beneficence to vain
boastings, and cold words: Nay, to evil deeds? Witness our enclosures and
turning out of our brethren from their ancient habitations, and placing in
their rooms herds of beasts: Were it not better to be such Gentlemen's sheep
then their Tenants? Were it not better that such great ones had not a foot of
the earth, then that hereby they should endanger the loss of heaven? What
shall we think of that innaturall encroaching and undermining of each other
in their callings and liuelihoods? Tradesman eating out Tradesman, Merchant
supplanting Merchant, one Brother undermining another, the common wisdom and
misery of the times? Do not they argue that both conscience and charity is
dead among us? And ought we not then to strengthen the things that are ready to
die, that so we may recover our first love? Surely what these poor labors
shall come short of herein, that shall I not fail to make up with my best
desires: All which I do here, with whatsoever I humbly commend unto your
Worships good acceptance in Jesus Christ, as acknowledging hereby my self, and
all mine deeply indebted unto your Worships for your fatherly love unto us in
our afflictions, and binding my self hereby in all hearty affections and
endeauours, at least to take away just imputation of unthankfulness. And thus
commending your Worships to the grace of God in Jesus Christ, I ever rest:

Your Worships poor kinsman, ever bounden in Jesus Christ THOMAS COOPER.

The Contents.
FIrst, it is declared what Giving is, generally. Chap. 1 The kinds of
Liberality described. Chap. 2 Is discovered who is the true giver. Chap. 3 The
true nature of Liberality is declared. Chap. 4 Together with the properties
thereof, as that, first, it must be free. Chap. 5 Secondly, we must give of our
own. Chap. 6 Thirdly, we must be wise in our bounty. Chap. 7 First providing
for our selves. 2 Giving where there is most need. 3. Providing that we may be
still able to give. Yet, 4. Keeping within the compass of our ability. 5. Not
endammaging any by our bounty. 6. We must give in faith, that is, 1. Believing
that our persons are accepted, and so are our endeauours. 2. Not looking for
recompense again. Where especially is taught that we must love our enemies,
and how far. Chap. 8 We must give out of a loving and affectionate heart.
Chap. 9 We must give constantly. Chap. 10 We must propose right ends in our
giving, which are: 1. Assurance of salvation to our selves. 2. Benefit to
others in soul and body. 3. The good of the Church. 4. Furtherance of Divine
worship. 5. The glory of God. Chap. 11 The vices contrary to Beneficence are
laid down generally, both such as hinder altogether, as also such as corrupt
the sincerity thereof, both on the left hand, and on the right. Chap. 12
Certain motives are laid down to provoke to bounty. Chap. 13 And so are
commended diverse helps and preparatiues to Liberality. Chap. 14 As also it is
observed what punishments are due, and have been inflicted upon the breach of
this duty, and exercise of cruelty and unmercifulness. Chap. 15 Together with
the use of these punishments. Chap. 16 The several lets and rentations against
beneficence are laid open in their places, As, 1. Because they are our own. 2.
All little enough for our selves. 3. We shall be soon emptied, and become
beggars. These are urged and answered. Cha. 17 Other lets are proposed, as 1.
Care of posterity. 2. Marriage of daughters, etc. Chap* 18 A third sort of
Tentations, arising from the unworthiness of such as need, and little good
redounds thereby. These are answered, and in special is declared how Witches
may be relieved, and though the poor be unthankful, yet we must relieve
them; yea, though dissemblers, yet must not be neglected. Chap. 19 Other
Tentations discovered, whereby liberality is excused, as charge for the
commonwealth, lays for the Church, maintenance of the Ministry and such
charges, for the Sacrament, assessings for the poor, etc. these are removed.
Chap. 20 A fifth sort of Tentations proposed for the hinderance of bounty,
namely, Christmas-feasts: these are answered. Chap. 21 Diverse special
practices of Satan are further detected, whereby he has and does hinder
Beneficence. As 1. Enclosing of land, together with the remedy thereof. Chap.
22 2. Excess in diet, with the remedy thereof. Chap. 23 3. Pride, and excess
in apparel, with the remedy thereof. Chap. 24 4. That excessine hunting is an
enemy to bounty, with the remedy thereof. Chap. 25 Of fear to be accounted
Papists, that it is an enemy to liberality, with the remedy thereof. Chap. 26
The tentation, that we sin in the best, and will do no good least we should
sin, discovered and removed. Chap. 27 That idleness is an enemy to true
bounty, and that it abounds in this age, with the remedy thereof. Chap. 28 The
last and maine enemy to liberality is unthrifty and unlawful games. Here is
first proved, that they are unlawful. As namely, Dicing. 2 Carding. 3 Cock
fighting and Bearebayting. 4 Stage Plays and Enterludes. 5 Dancing. Chap. 29
Certain general remedies are proposed, and commended against these unlawful
delights. Chap. 30 Conclusion of the whole. Chap. 31
THE ART OF Giving.
CHAP. I.
What Giving is in general, namely:

AN imparting of what the Lord has given us, as either cast upon us
extraordinarily by his providence, or obtained by ordinary means of our labor
and industry.

2 To the necessity of our poor brother, as he is nearest unto us in the
Lord: And that both willingly, and bountifully, to his sound comfort* And
wisely also, providing especially and principally for our selves. And that, in
all holiness and humility unto God.

Giving him the glory of what he has enabled us to give unto others, and
laying up thereby a good foundation, by making us friends of this unrighteous
Mammon, against the day of Christ Jesus, that we may be received into
everlasting habitations. 1 Timothy 6. 19. Luke 16 11. 12. etc.

CHAP. II.
Observe we the diverse kinds of Liberality, and that to good ends.

THe first and special work of Charity is to provide for the salvation of the
soul. Sect. 1.


To this end serve,

1 Provision, that it be instructed by the word of God. Rom 10. 10.

2 Reproof for sin, and plucking it out of the fire. Iud. 2. 2.

3 Comfort, and consolation, raising it up out of the deep and pit of
despair. Gal. 6. 1. Iam. 5.

4 Chastisement, and humbling of the flesh, that the soul may be saved. 1 Cor.
5.

5 To this end serves the maintenance of the Ministry, as a special work of
bounty, as also 1 Cor. 9. 2. Cor. 11.

6 The erecting and maintayning of the Universities, and Free-schooles, for the
instructing of youth, etc.

A second and next work of Beneficence is, Sect. 2.
to relieve the body of our poor Brother: And this is properly called Alms:
this is done;

1 By giving freely unto him to supply his want. Hebr. 13. Math. 5.

2 We must also lend unto him, which steeds him more sometime then giving.
Deuteronomy. 5. 8. Luke 6. 35. Exodus 22. 25.

3 We must remit due debt, or money lent, if the party be not able to repay.
Exodus 22. 26. Nehem. 5, 11.

4 We are to hinder and put off such wrongs as may be done unto him. Pro. 24
10. 11. 12. As also, as our callings will allow, to right him therein, and to
be avenged of those that offer them.

6 Yea, to this end we are to provoke others to tender his case, by making it
known.

7 Hitherto serve set contributions, and treasuries for the poor.

8 By conscionable selling, we perform true bounty.

A third kind of Beneficence is where gifts are given between parties for
civil respects. Sect. 3.


1 Are gratulatory, such as Genesis 45. 23

2 Or placatory to appease wrath, as Jacob to Esau, Genesis 34.

3 Some for reward, as those of the Prince to the Subject. Dan. 2. 48. Hest. 6.
2.

4 Or to procure favor of those of the meaner to the superior. 1 Samuel 15.
Pro. 21. 14.

5 Some to help and promote just causes as Jacob to his son Joseph. Genesis 43.
11.

6 And also to maintain mutual love and friendship. Nehem. 8. 1 Reg. 10* 11.
12.

7 To the advancing of the worship of God. 1 Chronicles. 19. Exodus 35. 20.

8 By thankfulness we are given unto God.

9 Also gifts are given in sign of homage and subjection. 1 Samuel 10. 27.

Secondly some are to evil ends. Sect. 4.


1 As to the erecting of Idolatry. Exodus 32.

2 To the coruprting and enthralling of the soul. Revel. 17.

3 To the corrupting of judgment and justice. Pro. 17. 23. 2 Samuel 16. Pro. 17.
8.

4 To the ensnaring, and entrapping into danger. 1 Samuel 18.

5 To the enthralling and abasing of men to serve the worlds turn.

6 To obtain greater benefits again, fishing with a Gudgeon to catch a Pipe.

CHAP. III.
Of the true Giver.

1 GEnerally only the regenerate man may truly give, Sect. 1.
because he only has right in what he has. The wicked being no better then
thieves.

2 Particularly the rich are bound to give. 1 John. 3. 17.. 2 Cor. 8. 14.

3 The poor even of that little that they have, are also bound to give. Ioh.
13. 29. Ephesians. 4. 28. As the widow must give her mite, servants must give of
their wages.

4 Yea we must empouerish our selves in some cases, to give to others in cases
of necessity. Act. 5. Nehem. 5.

Exception.

1 Those that are in paricular subjection to others, Sect. 2.
as Servants to Masters; these may not give in selling, etc. unless it be out
of their wages.

2 Subjects cannot give, but from that general authority committed by the
laws of the land, unto them, answerable to the laws of God, concerning
relieuing of the poor, etc.

3 The Wife may not give in some cases, unless it be of such things as are
common to both. 2 As also of that which she has excepted from manage.

3 And that with the consent of her Husband, either expressed, or presumed,
from the general liberty given to her.

4 In a case of extremity, when all is like to be lost, and the Husband unfit
to govern the family. 1 Samuel 25. 19.

CHAP. IIII.
Observe more especially what true giving is, as it properly belongs to the
elect of God, and of the several properties thereof:

Namely:

A Most free, frank, and liberal imparting some meet and convenient portion
of that wherewith God of his goodness has blessed every man.

1 To the maintenance and advancement of Gods pure religion and worship. Hebr.
8. 3.

2 To the merciful relieuing, comforting, and succouring of all such as we
see: or for want of such, of those whom we do by credible report understand at
any time, to be in any present necessity and need. And that in such manner as
God himself would have his own worship to be vpheld and furthered: And the
poor among his people in all Christian Churches, to be comfortably relieved
and succored.

CHAP. V.
Of the conditions and property, of true liberality, gathered out of the
former difinition.

1 IT must be free, Sect. 1.
and from a frank mind, First it must be free.
Luke 6. 33. 34. 35. Prou. 25. 21. 22. even to our enemies. Math. 5.

2 To those that cannot requite us again. Luke 14. 12. 13 14.

3 And that not sparingly and grudgingly, but bountifully. 2 Cor. 9. 5. Philem.
14. Luke 19. 1 Pet. 4. 9.

Because. Reason.


1 It must be from the heart. 2 Cor. 9. 7.

2 This is it that God loves and accepts. 2 Cor. 8. 12.

3 Yea, though the gift be small, yet the heart makes it acceptable. Luke 21.
Act. 9. 36. 1 King. 18. 3. 4. Obadiah and Lydia, Act. 16. Exodus 35. 20. 2 Chronicles. 39. 31. 36. and 35. 8. sub Hezekiah and Josiah, Deuteronomy. 20. 8. Exodus 36.

Marks of this free giving: Sect. 2.
Are,

1 To give bountifully of a little, so the widow. Luke 21.

2 To strain our selves even above our ability. 2 Cor. 8. 4.

3 To prevent importunate asking.

4 Not to defer and put off til to morrow. Pro. 3. 28.

5 To give with joy and gladness of heart. 1 Chronicles. 19. Deuteronomy. 26. 10. 11. 14.
yea, to rejoice theerein as well done.

6 To give of the best, and costliest, as is fitting to the party. John. 12. 3.

7 And that accordingly as God has blessed us. 1 or. 16. 2.

8 Yea, according as he has determined in his heart 2 Cor. 9. 7.

9 Not to tie our liberality strictly to the law of men, but besides that, to
do over and above according to our ability.

Provided.

1 That others be eased, and we our selves not grieved. 2 Cor. 8. 13. Pro. 5.
16. 17. Luke 3. 11.

2 In a case of extremity to relieve others, we must sell even our
possessions, Luke 12. 33. Psa. 112. 9. of which more afterward.

Now that we may give cheerfully, Sect. 3.
these things are required;

1 A delight in the thing to whom we show our beneficence. Helps hereunto.
Psa. 131. 2. 1 Chro. 29. 2 Samuel 6. Psa. 16.

2 Faith: both that we are persuaded that this well-doing is acceptable to God,
Heb. 13. 16. Phil 4. 18. Hose 6. 2. That God also will bless and provide for
those that are liberal, notwithstanding the fear of after wants.

3 A third help is Humility, acknowledge our selves unworthy of those
blessings which yet our gracious God has made us stewards of, to give to
others. Genesis 32. 10. 1 Timothy 6. 17. 18. 19.

4 Consider we the uncertainty of our life, that if we neglect to day we may
be cut off tomorrow. Gal. 6. 10.

5 Meditate we daily on the free and and undeserved bounty of our God toward
us, how seasonably it comes, how plentifully above our desires.

Considerations and motives to give bountifully and freely: Sect. 4.
Are,

1 Hereby we come nearest the nature of God.

2 We provide wisely for our selves, as undoubtedly being assured that we shall
be plentifully rewarded. 2 Cor. 9. 10. 11. of the Lord.

3 We make us more friends of our unrighteous Mammon in the world. Luke 16. to
further us to heaven.

4 We give sound contentment to the receiver hereby: whom if we should defer,
we provoke to despair, murmuring, etc.

5 We turn that which is usually a snare, hereby to be a blessing and good
foundation against the life to come. Luke 16. 1 Timothy 6. 19.

6 Whatsoever we give unto the poor, we give it unto Christ Jesus himself.
Math. 25. 44. 45.

CHAP. VI.
A second thing in beneficence is, that we must give of our own, that
wherewith God has blessed us.

That is:

We must give in righteousness, Sect. 1:
Psalm. 106. Deuteronomy. 24. 13. Dan. 4. 24. Psalm. 112. verse. 2. 2 Cor. 9. 9. Mat. 6.
Pro. 5. 25. 1 Chronicles. 21. 24. Luke 19.

And that because.

1 It is approved hereby of God: as being the lively fruit of faith. Heb. 11.
6. without which all liberality is theft, etc. Esaias. 61. 8. Deuteronomy. 23. 18.

2 Hereby only it will prosper, and benefit the giver.

3 Yea, he to whom it is given can have no assurance of blessing and comfort,
but that it may be a snare unto him, unless it be given in righteousness,
because he is the receiver to a Thief.

This condemns.

1 Those that rob the poor, to grease the rich.

2 That hope to make amends for their ill gotten-goods, by a little charity at
their deaths.

3 Color their injustice with cloaks of authority, necessity; etc.

4 As also such receivers, as indeed are no better then brokers, and sharers
with those thieves.

Now we give in righteousness. Sect. 2.


1 When we give of our own, that is, what we have gotten by holy and
conscionable labor.

2 What comes unto us by inhetance, gift, etc.

3 And that is then truly our own which we do sanctify both by the
acceptance of our persons in the sight of God, as also by daily prayer for the
blessing of God upon it: unless these latter be added nothing is truly our
own.

4 Then also a thing is our own truly, when as we have gotten it honestly, or
it comes to us by inheritance, etc. so we employ it faithfully in some honest
calling.

And this,

1 Reproves Gentlemen and others, that having goods and possessions, either
gotten, or come unto them by inheritance, think their only end is to spend it
in housekeeping, and worse, never respecting the poor, otherwise: neither
walking in any calling, etc.

2 Generally the prophanes of all that make no conscience of sanctifying the
blessings of God, nothing regard how their persons are accepted, only stand
upon the credit of these things.

We give in righteousness when we give where there is best desert, Sect. 3.
and more bonds to tie us thereto: Here then,

1 We must give to the household of faith. Gal. 6. 10. and Church of God. And
that not for any by-respects, but even because they are beloved of God. Mat.
10. 41. 42. 43.

2 To our country and common Parent.

3 To our natural parents and kinsefolkes. 1 Timothy 5. 4.

4 Leaving these, we may make a difference, giving one more then the other, as
they are purest in religion, or likeliest in condition, or nearer in blood. So
Jacob loved Joseph, Joseph Benjamin, etc. Genesis 37 Genesis 43. 44, etc.

Ob. But our Saviors lesson is, we must love our neighbor as our selves:
therefore there must be no difference in our affections. Again this may seem to
be partiality.

An. There may be degrees in love, and yet all may be loved truly: our Savior
bidding that we love our brother; it hinders the quality of our love, not the
quantity.

5 Next these are our friends.

6 Then our neighbors.

7 Strangers.

8 Our enemies Romans 15. 24.

CHAP. VII.
A third point in beneficence is Wisdom: Sect. 2.
wherein observe, Psalm. 112.
that first I must provide for my self before others. Pro. 20.
Here then is condemned, Pro. 5. 15.


1 COmmunity of goods, Mat. 22.
as if all should be common, none should have any propriety in any thing,
compare the 19. of Mat. with the 5 of Acts. and the 4. verse.

2 Giving of our patrimonies, and whole estates to the maintenance of idle
Monks and Friars: which is the best charity of the Papists.

1 As being unfit for such men to manage.

2 Unconscionable for any to give, because he robs his present issue, and
posterity of what the Lord has cast upon him.

3 He renounceth his right in the heavenly possession: whereof the earthly was a
sign. And therefore we shall find that the Lord gave straight charge that
the Jews should at no hand part with their possessions: if for want they were
compelled to sell them, yet they were to redeem them after, if they were able:
if not, they were freely to be restored, and return unto them at the year of
Iubily. Leuit. 25. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 1 Reg. 21. 3.

4 He maintaynes idleness, and so all kind of wickedness.

3 This also condemns that vaineglorious and foolish charity of many, who to
be counted maintayners of others empty themselves, and so bring untimely and
unjust misery: yet most justly upon themselves.

A second point of wisdom is, Sect. 2.
that we must give where there is most need presently, so that without our
help, life will perish. And that because,

1 This is most impartial; when we simply respect our own flesh, and are not
led with any more special circumstances. Esaias. 58.

2 This is most seasonable, because now it does good: And,

3 Generally every one bears the Image of God, and so we are to relieve him,
least in him we reject God himself. Math. 25.

And this condemns:

1 Those that neglect well-doing in such extremities, upon pretense that such
are forsaken of God, and so to be left to his justice; as presuming that if
they were Gods they should not be left to such extremity: whereas the Lord does
this either to try our charity, or show his extraordinary mercy, etc.

2 Those, that cast water into the Sea, pouring in where there is no want.

3 Those, that because they fear they may bestow amiss, therefore they will
not relieve at all, much less in this extremity.

A third point of this wisdom is,

That we not only give as present occasion is offered, Sect. 3.
but, That we set apart a moitie of our substance, as the Lord increases it,
to be as a Treasury continually, as occasion is offered to draw forth for the
poor. Pro. 5. 15. To this purpose compared to a Cesterne, etc. 1 Cor. 16. 2.
For

1 Hereby we show our determinate purpose to give. 2 Cor. 8. which is
discovered by actual giving upon occasions.

2 We provide for constancy, and scasonablenesse of bounty, as having somewhat
always ready, and so continue to such end.

And this serves,

1 To reprove those that among their bags have forgotten this: Or,

2 Think so of themselves, as that they ought not to let their stock lie
dead, and thinking, whereas they may employ their stock for the further
maintenance of the poor.

Hereunto appertains,

1 The appoynting of set officers, Sect. 4.
for the distribution of the Alms unto the poor. These in the Primitive
Church were called Deacons, and are used in all reformed Churches; like unto
which are our Collectors for the poor.

Whose office was.

1 To have a particular Catalogue of the names of the poor.

2 To discern the measure of their poverty, and to this end to ouersee them
weekly, And,

3 So to distribute the relief of the Church among them, by such portions as
may not linger them in a pinching famine, but indeed cheer them, and make
them serviceable to God, the commonwealth, or both.

4 That they should give an account of this their distribution to the Pastors
and governors of the Church.

2. To this purpose ought there a public Treasury to be provided. Sect. 5.


1 Not only of those weekly contributions, which are ministered by the Saints:

2 As also of those pledges of thankfulness which are given at the Sacrament:
But,

Further, every man is monthly, or quarterly, as he is able, to cast in his
mite into the Treasury, for the increase and continuance of the common
Treasury, not only to relieve their own poor, but if occasion shall serve,
to comfort other Churches in their afflictions and wants.

A fourth point of wisdom in giving, is to keep within the bounds of our
ability. That is,

1 First to provide necessary things for our selves, and so consequently to
distribute.

2 To measure our ability, not by what may be, as fearing by giving to diminish
it, but by what is; so depending upon the providence of God for the increase of
our estate, if we bestow on our Brother. Pro. 11. 24.

3 If the case of the Church so require, our ability must come within a
narrower compass: not only not to respect the time to come, but so far to
enlarge our selves for the time present, as to part with the inheritance of our
Fathers, and to sell our possessions, for the relief of the Saints, reserving
some part for our necessary relief: and herein also for the time to come
resting on the providence of God. Luke. 3.
Luke 21. Widow. 2 Chronicles. 31. 3. 4. Hezekiah. Nehem. 10. 32. 33. Number. 31. 25.
Act. 4. 32.

Reasons,

1 Because, as it is a trial of our faith to Godward, if we will lay down our
lives for his sake: so, if the Lord do spare us herein, yet seeing we must
suffer with our brethren, therefore we must manifest our love by parting with
our possessions to their relief.

2 If we ought to part with our lives for our brethren sake, then much more
with our goods. 1 John 3. 16. Romans 9.

Provided that this be in times extraornary, and cases of extremity, otherwise
we are not bound to diminish our estates.

This

1 Reproves all Popish charity and profession of wilful poverty.

2 As also those that only of their superfluity do bestow, thinking it in no
sort lawful to impart their patrimonies to this end, whereas such will make no
bones to sell away whole Lordships, etc. to maintain dicing, whoring, etc.

3 Hereby the love of the Saints may be tried abundantly.

Apoynt of wisdom is, Sect. 7.
That none may be any way dammaged or hindered by our benefice. This may be,

1 When sin is manifested by the same: As in the maintenance of Rogues and
idle Beggars, which though they can yet will not work.

Quest. Are not these then to be relieved?

Ans. Yes, if they begin extreme necessitiy.

2 And be first punished for the breach of the Law.

3 And so tied to work when they are able, that so they may live of their
own: otherwise both the giver sins in breaking the law, 2 These. 2. 12. and the
receivers sin is maintained, by nourishing idleness, etc.

4 If they be impotent, they are to be relieved at their houses, and not
suffered to wander. 2. When our estates are lauished and consumed hereby,

To this end we must give: Ordinarily

1 As God increases our estate.

2 As may satisfy only the present necessity of our brother, that so he may
as well depend upon the providence of God as we.

3 When Superstition and Idolatry is maintained thereby. Exodus 23. such is the
Popish charity, in maintaining Jesuits, etc.

4 When idleness and vanity is thereby maintained, and this is the usual
bounty of our land: whose housekeeping and excess, what else does it
maintain, at solemn times, but gaming, and all excess of sin; tending to
the hurt both of the giver and receiver?

CHAP. VIII.
A fourth circumstance and condition of Beneficence, that it to be done in
Faith:

That is,

1 THe person that performs it; must believe in the son of God. Sect. 1.
because whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14* 2 Cor. 8. 5.

And this,

Reproves the liberality and munificence of all Atheists, Papists and profane
persons whatsoever, yea, the hypocrites Alms is here condemned. Math. 6.

2 It must be done according to the word, Sect. 2. Leuit. 19. 2 Deuteronomy. 24. 19.
and so all voluntary and conceited charity is also reproved, as also that
depends only on man's law.

3 We must give with assurance that though man do forget, yet God will
recompense, and abundantly repay both in this life, and the life to come.

4 To this end we are to join prayer with our liberality.

And this condemns.

The infidelity of believers, Sect. 3.
that doubt of this. As also the prophanes of the world, that expects it not.

Another note of faith in giving, is, that we give, looking for no recompense
again from man, yea, there cast our bread, where there is no likelihood, even
upon the waters. Eccles. 5. This we shall perform

If we give,

1 To the poor, etc. that are not able to recompense us. Math. 5.

2 To our enemies, and such as instead of good, usually recompense evil unto
us. Math. 5. Romans 12. Pro. 25. etc.

And that because,

1 Herein we come nearest unto God, who loved us when we were his enemies. Romans
5. 6. Math. 5. 45.

2 We obtain a most glorious conquest over our own corrupt nature mastering
hereby the pride of ou^ hearts; whose fruit is anger; and effec^ revenge. Romans
12.

3 We attain not only the spiritua^ meaning, but the most difficult practis^
of the law of God, and so hasten to perfection.

4 Hereby also we may win them or make them inexcusable, or bridl^ them at
the least. Pro. 25. Pro. 16.

Now the love that we ought to show to our enemy, Is,

1 In heart lovingly and heartily to affect him, so far forth as that we desir^
even the salvation of his soul, and s^ consequently of his body, etc.

2 Secondly in speech. Math. 5. 21 Bless them that curse you. 1 Samuel 24. 7.

3 In action, etc. Do good to them 1 John. 3. 18. Exodus 23. 4. Prou. 25. 21 2
Reg. 6. 14. 19. 21.

4 Yea, in that action which may mos^ benefit their souls, namely Prayer Luke
23. 34. Act. 7. 60.

Exception.

1 We must put a difference between the cause and the person, the person we
must love, but hate the cause. Psalm. 139. 21. 22.

2 Some enemies are published and professed against God and his truth: Others
private to our selves and secret, these we must love, the other we may hate. 1
Cor. 16. 22.

3 Public enemies are either curable, such as will receive instruction, etc.
these we must pray for, etc. or incurable, such as scorn instruction and
prosecute the means; these to be prayed against: and so David and Peter, Psalm.
109. 10.
etc. prayed against Gods enemies, as having a special insight into their
final estates, Act. 8. 19.
by extraordinary illumination, 2 Timothy 4. 14.
and spirit of prophecy, which because we have not, therefore we are 1. not to
pray peremptorily against them, as if we did judge them finally, 2. but
conditionally, and only respecting their present estate, where in they do
desperately oppose the truth: 3. yea rather praying that by some temporal
judgment the LORD would cross their purposes, and bring them to repentance,
then that they might be left to final vengeance. So these places are to be
expounded. 1 Ioh. 5. 16. Deuteronomy. 7. 2.

And this reproves

1 The Popish love, Use.
which hold, that we are bound not to hate, but not always to love our
enemies, save in two cases: 1. When he is in necessity. Note.
2. In the case of scandal; we give offense to others in not relieuing him.

2 The practice of the world, which renders what evil it may, and pretends
cause.

3 Though it forgive, yet it will not forget.

4 We must not profess enmity against any.

5 Nor speak evil of them, etc.

CHAP. IX.
A fifth point in Beneficence, Sect. 1.
is, that it be done in love:

That is,

THat my bounty proceed from a tender heart, in true compassion of my
neighbors estate, Mat. 15. 3^.
and hearty desire, to give him sound comfort hereby:

This shall appear,

1 If I principally respect his soul, and in all my bounty labor the good
thereof.

2 When together with my outward relief I join loving speech, and sweet
behavior, and make my self equal with him of low degree. Esaias. 58. 7. Hide
not thy self, etc.

3 When together with my well-doing I prevent such evils as are inward: by
reproof, exhortation, etc.

4 And do it, also to that end, that God may enlarge his bounty over him, not
to hinder him from further comforts, either from God or man.

5 And be not weary hereof, but rather provoke to ask, then deny being asked.

6 To this end join we prayer to our bounty, that God may bless it; else it
may prove a curse to our selves, and to the receiver. Pro. 12. 10.

7 And be we not driven off from well-doing, either by the malice of the
world, or unthankfulness of receivers, or hardness of the times, or example
of oppressors, but know we that true love respects none of these.

8 And to testify our love herein, we are bound not only to give when it is
demanded, but even privately to enquire and seek out the poor among us,
(because the most honest poor will hardly discover their wants) and so
accordingly minister unto them.

9 To this end it is not amiss, even with our own hands to distribute what
God has enlarged us to, to the greater comfort of the poor, and better
security of our Alms: not to reserve it to the end of our lives, when we
must part with it, whether we will or no, etc.

10 Yea hitherto appertains, that we receive such small tokens as the poor
offer us, to testify their thankfulness, etc.

11 Then also do I give in love when I so provide that my charity may do good.

To this purpose is required. Sect. 3. Charity when it does good.


1 That I give not niggardly, to linger them in misery, but plentifully, that
so I may recover them out of the estate of pinching famine, and so enable them
to strength, and laboring for themselves.

2 As I relieve them thus far; so here I must not cease, least health not
employed make way for idleness, and so for all manner of sin. And therefore
now I must provide that idleness be prevented, by seeing them employed in some
handie-craft, or such like, whereunto they are fittest, and if they will not
labor not to relieve them.

3 I am bound to testify this love by reproving them for their idleness, and
furthering them by the help of the Magistrate to punishment, if need be, for
the same; yea, I am to supply them with some stock as their trustiness shall
be, and to watch over them brotherly, that they may follow their callings,
taking some account of them, and withal aduising them as occasion shall serve.

CHAP. X.
A sixth Circumstance in Beneficence is, that it be constant, and unchangeable:

As Pro. 5. 15.

HErein, best resembling the mercy of God, which is continual.

2 Best trying our faith: And,

3 Seruiug most for the comfort, and occasions of the poor, who if they shall
be always with us, then we must not omit to relieve them.

This is seen,

1 In relieuing him so often as his occasion shall require, if we be able; not
putting him off with this; that he must now seek elsewhere, but rejoicing that
we have still this means to sanctify our estate; and being glad herein to
prevent others. Math. 26. 11. Pro. 22. 2. Romans 12. 13. Gal. 6.

Because,

1 Our God deals so with us, as often as we seek, he supplies; and we must be
merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful.

2 Hereby we prevent much distraction and endless labor, which otherwise we
put him to, in putting him over to others.

3 The Church is freed from inordinate and idle persons, by this constant
contribution. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. 7. 8. 9.

4 To this end serves that common treasury, to be leauied and stored up for the
poor, of which before.

CHAP. XI.
A seventh thing to be considered in Beneficence is the ends thereof,

Which are,

1 THe assurance of salvation to the giver, who testifies hereby the truth of
his faith. 1 Iam. 23. And lays up a good foundation against the day of Christ
1 Timothy 6.

2 Is the benefit of the party, both in soul and body, to whom he gives.

3 The good of the Church of God which is hereby both honored by the
maintenance of her members. Leuit. 25.
2. And provoked to the like by such examples. Deuteronomy. 15. 2.


3 And 3. hereby enabled and outwardly preserved, when the word and means
thereof are maintained.

Hence follows the

1 Necessity of the maintenance for Ministers, 1 Cor. 94. Gal. 6. 6.

2 The equity of Tithes to this purpose. Deuteronomy. 16. 16. 12. 19. Act. 21. 24. not
as a matter of Alms, but due, Luke 10. 7. 1 Timothy 5. 3.

4 This Beneficence has good place in the solemn duties of Gods worship, as a
part and inseparable companion thereof, So

1 It is a part of the sanctifying of the Sabbath in general. 1 Cor. 16. 1.

2 A necessary companion of public Thankesgiuings. Hest. 9. Nehem. 8.

3 As also public fasts are not well solemnized without it. Leuit. 25.

4 It does accompany the Ministry of the word. Nehem. 8.

5 Hitherto also belongs those revenues which have been given to the
maintenance, and repair of the house of God. Which howsoever in some part to
superstitious uses, yet by the godly have been well converted, and established
to such good ends.

And so are to be continued and increased,

1 So that we remember we are in the time of the Gospel, where less outward
pomp is required* then under the law. Exodus 36. 5. 6. Hagg. 1. Mala. 1. etc.

2 Where the Lord is to be worshipped in spirit and truth, and not in outward
ceremonies and unnecessary vanity.

3 Where we are sometimes to remit of our right, rather then to stand upon
unnecessary and superfluous maintenance. Ezra. 8. 22. Act. 20. 33. 34* 1 Cor.
4. 12. 2 Cor. 12. 13. 1 Thessa. 2. 3. 4. 5. 17. 9. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8.

1 As when the Church is in some extraordinary persecution and difficulty.

2 To stop the mouth of false Prophets and accusers, that condemn the
Ministry as mercenary, and that they do all for what will you give.

And this

1 Condemns the insatiable ambition and covetousness of the Church of Rome.

2 And generally all such as would bring religion from the heart to the eye,
and set up a pompous and carnal worship.

3 It teaches all faithful Pastors to be content with a sober maintenance,
and to bear a part of the burden of the Church in all the difficulties and
streights thereof.

5 And lastly and especially, as above all, the maine end is, The glory of God.
1 Cor. 10. 31.

Which we wholly respect by,

1 Private and secret liberality, not blowing a trumpet, etc. but so that our
right hand may not know what our left hand does, Math. 6.

2 This principally reports the humility of the heart, which if it be free from
hypocrisy and vainglory, it skills not though the gift be open.

3 By thankfulness unto God that has made us, not only able, but wiling to
part with our own, and that in such good order and measure as that we may be
persuaded of the acceptance thereof. 2 Chronicles. 29. 14.

CHAP. XII.
Now because things will better appear by comparison of their contraries,
therefore having showed, the good properties belonging to Beneficence; let us
now in the second place consider of such Vices as are contrary to godly and
Christian Beneficence.

These are of two sorts.

1 SVch as hinder the same altogether. Of the Vices contrary to Beneficence.


2 Such as corrupt and pervert the power and sincerity thereof.

Those which hinder altogether are, Sect. 1.


1 Covetousness, whereby we think we never have enough for our selves. Haba.
2. 2. And so in steed of giving, rake what we can from others.

2 Churlishness, whereby we cannot endure to do good to others, as neglecting
society, etc.

3 Pride, as thinking our selves worthy of all things, and therefore we will
not part with any thing.

4 Envy, as not enduring the good of another, and therefore we will rather
choke our selves then others shall have good by us, nay we will hurt our
selves, that we may hurt others.

5 A base account of God and his worship, and his servants. 2 Samuel 25. Who is
David?

6 Distrust in Gods providence, as if we should want our selves if we should
distribute to others.

7 Confidence in riches which has so possessed and forestalled our hearts, as
that they have no corner to admit compassion to others.

8 Self-love, as if all were too little for us, and we could not bestow too
much cost on our selves, being only borne for our selves.

9 Voluptuousnes which so imployeth our state, and drowneth us in pleasure, as
that we regard not the afflictions of Joseph.

10 Atheism, thinking this life to be only our happiness, and therefore we
will take our fill, and wholly possess it our selves, and none shall share with
us therein.

11 Unnaturalness, as having broken the bands of nature, and so neglecting all
duties thereto. 1 Romans 27. 2 Timothy 3. 5. 6.

Those which seek to corrupt our Beneficence are, Sect. 2.


1. On the left hand.

1 Hypocrisy, whereby we make show of what we mean not to do.

2 Vainglory, doing it to be magnified of men.

3 Conceit of merit, as if God were beholding to us, and we did a work of
supererogation.

4 Injustice, giving of ill gotten goods.

5 Superstition, when we do good to maintain Idolatry, etc.

6 Policy, when we do good for a greater hurt, or to procure unto our selves
some greater benefit of men.

2 On the right hand,

7 Prodigality, giving beyond our ability.

8 Presumption of Gods providence hence.

9 Neglect of spiritual and civil means to uphold our estates.

10 Unthankfulness unto God for enabling us hereto.

CHAP. XIII.
Further consider we such Motives as may stir us up to the performance
thereof:

These are,

1 THe commandment of God, expressly enioyning the same. Galat. 10. Math. 6.

2 The examples of the Saints that have been plentiful herein. Our Savior
himself though he lived of Alms, yet he gave bountifully. Math. 15. 32. so
Abraham, Lot, Jacob, Joseph, etc. Genesis 18. Genesis 19. Genesis 47. Exodus 2. Exodus 18.
Moses, etc.

3 The benefits that do redound to Gods children hereby, which are manifold.

1 What we do here inconscionably, it is accepted as done to God, and Christ
themselves. Math. 10. 40. 41. Math. 25.

2 The Lord will recompense it, according to the excellency of the occasion
which he vouchsafes to give, whether greater or lesser, and according to the
greater, or lesser measure of says and love, wherein the same duties are
performed: yet so as the least kindness done in truth, shall be requited with
manifold advantage. Gal. 6. 6. 1 Timothy 6. 1. Hagg. 8.

3 This will be a great comfort unto us in the time of trouble. Job. 30. As
also a pledge of our recovery out of the same. Esaias. 58.
2 Chronicles. 31. 1 King. 18. 13. Psalm. 37. 25. 26. Pro. 13. 22.

4 Yea, hereby the Saints are provoked and emboldned to pray for mercy for
others: and so cannot be denied it. 2 Timothy 1. 16. 17. 18. Phil. 4. 17. 18. 19.
10. 1 Reg. 17. 15. 2 Reg. 48.

5 The very wicked have been blessed for their beneficence to the Saints. Act.
28. Genesis 42. 43. 44. etc.

6 It is a means to establish and continue our estates for ever. Psalm. 122. 6.
9. 10. to our posterity. etc. Pro. 13. 22.

7 Yea, an undoubted pledge of our right, and enjoying of everlasting
happiness. Math. 25. 40. Pro. 11. 17.

8 The more we scatter, the more we increase our estate in this life. Pro. 11.
24. 25. Pro. 28. 27.

9 We make the Lord hereby a debtor unto us. Pro. 19. 17.

10 Hereby ill gotten goods are sanctified. Ezech. 18. 7. 8. Luke. 19.

11 It is the means to make our prayers accepted of God. Esaias. 58. 7. 8. 9.

12 Yea, hereby we have received Angels into our houses. Hebr. 13.

13 Observe we how Job, Ezechiah and others, were abundantly recompensed. Job.
42.

14 Hereby we gather much assurance that we are in the favor of God 1 John.
3. 14.

15 We approve our selves to be living and true members of Jesus Christ. 1 Cor.
12. John. 15.

16 And manifest our selves to be like unto our heavenly Father. Iam. 1. 5. 6.
Math. 5.

17 And do witness that we are pertakers of the holy Ghost.

18 We adorn and beautify our profession.

19 And make our calling sure. 2 Pet. 1. 9

Motives hereto,

4 Weigh we the uncertainty and danger of riches, and think we how by
liberality we make them durable and eternal.

5 By liberality to the poor all superfluous expenses are cut off in Diet, and
Apparel, and the like, Buildings, Plate, and so, much sin prevented.

6 Hereby we show our selves faithful Stewards unto God in a right bestowing
of the blessings he has put us in trust withal. Math. 25.

7 We make the lives of the Saints comfortable, and ease them of many grievous
burdens.

CHAP. XIIII.
Consider we wisely some helps and preparatiues to Beneficence:

And for our better encouragement herein.

1 WE must consider wisely of the poor and needy, that is, Judge charitably
of them. Psalm. 41. 1. 2.

2 Hereupon will follow: a taking to heart of their estate, and true compassion
thereof.

3 This will be furthered by considering that it may be our case, and so as we
would be comforted our selves, we are moved to comfort them.

4 Hereupou yet to move compassion more, we proceed to take notice of their
misery, to reason with them of it, to enter into the house of mourning; and
discern the particulers thereof.

5 Hereupon we con^^^ue the necessity, and equity of doing good, and so are
convinced in conscience, that it must be done.

6 And so as we are persuaded in our hearts, we proceed to seasonable bounty,
and so cause the loins of the poor to bless us. Job. 30.

7 To this purpose consider we, that the poor in their need are true owners
of what God has made us Stewards of. Pro. 3. 27.

8 And that we may be willing to power out to others, set we not our hearts
upon these things. Psalm. 62.

9 Consider that these blessings are burdens unto us, and therefore by giving
to the poor, we ease our selves of this burden, and go lightlier to heaven.

10 Yea, we ease them of their burden of poverty, that they may also be more
cheerful companions in our heavenly journey with us.

CHAP. XV.
Observe we the punishments that are due and have been inflicted upon such as
have failed in this duty of Beneficence, and exercised the contrary sin of
Cruelty and Unmercifulness.

1 THe neglect of this duty has been punished with famine. Hag. 2. Esr. 7.
23. Mal, 3. 8. 9. 11. Pro. 20. 25.

2 The unmerciful man is utterly deprived of all comfort in his soul, from
God, of all his riches. Eccl. 6. 1. and 59.

3 God esteems these as usurpers of such blessings which they do not
sanctify through liberality.

4 God takes away riches when they are not thus employed. Pro. 11. 24.

5 Yea, when they are in need he refuses to succor them. Pro. 13. 21. Zac. 7.
8. Mich. 3. 1. 2. 3. 4.

6 If we do not hinder what we may the cruelty of others, there is grievous
punishment threatened. Pro. 24. 10. 11. 12. 1 Samuel 14. 45.

7 This want of bounty is a means to shorten the days of men, as Pro. 55. 23.
Psalm. 140. 11. 12. Psalm. 11. 26.

8 Hereby men do expose themselves to the curses of the poor. Pro. 11. 26.
Exodus 22. 23. 24. which God will take notice of and avenge.

9 Yea, this is the means to bring a curse, not only on themselves, but on
their posterity. Psalm. 109. 6. Nehem. 5.

10 Sudden death is likewise a fruit of this sin. 1 Samuel 25. 9. Psalm. 73. 19.
20.

11 Yea, it is the cause of a most shameful and dishonorable death. Ierem.
22. 13. Esaias. 14. 3. 4. 5. 6. and that such shall become a proverb, and
byword to all posterity. Abac* 2. 6.

12 This was one of the sins, for which Sodom was so destroyed. Ezec. 16. 49.
and the old world drowned. Genesis 6. 13.

13 The unmerciful person is no better then a rotten branch cut off from the
true Communion of Christ, howsoever he be in the Church, and in show a member
thereof. 1 Cor. 11. 1 Timothy 6. 5

14 The covetous person shall not inherit the Kingdom of heaven. 1 Cor. 6. 10.
Ephesians. 5. 5. Psalm. 17. 14. 1 Timothy 6. 9. 10. Psalm. 69. 22. Iam. 2. 13. judgment
merciless. Math. 25. 41. 42.

15 Hereby a wicked man does most resemble his father the devil; John 8. and
so has his condemnation already.

16 It transformes men into brute beasts: so the holy Ghost calls oppressors.
Amos 4. Psalm. 10. to a Lion, etc.

CHAP. XVI.
Here then is a Glass for diverse sorts of men to look their faces in.

1 FOr those that rob their Ministers in tithes and offerings. The use to be
made of these punishments.
Mal. 1.

2 That deny contributions to the poor, and enlarge not toward them.

3 For Officers in corporations, who are put in trust with Legacies given to
the poor, that they employ them to the best advantage.

4 For such overseers of Testaments, that they lick not their own fingers,
but faithfully distribute.

5 For masters of Hospitals, that they make not their places matter of
preferment, but indeed, as they were first intended, places of bounty, etc.

6 For Almoners, etc. that they bear not the bag as Judas did, and think
the cost ill bestowed that is employed on Christ's poor members.

7 For every private Christian to make him friends of his Mammon, etc.

CHAP. XVII.
Lastly observe we such Lets and Tentations, as Satan uses to hinder this
duty, Sect. 1.
and how we are to overcome the same.

Of Tentations.

1 COncerning their own estate: Tent.
Satan alleges, that they are our own, and therefore we may dispose them as
we list: and why not wholly for our pleasure and profit?

2 They are no otherwise our own, Reply.
then that we are Gods Stewards to dispense them according to his word, which
seeing it commands us to employ them on the poor, therefore we may not lay
them all on our own backs and bellies, least they prove nothing less then
goods unto us.

But all is little enough for my self, Sect. 1.
(may the miser reply,) Tent.
charges are so great, and gettings so rare: and therefore though I have more
then many thousands, yet I have enough to do for my self.

1 If thou which have such abundance, Conquest.
have tittle enough for thy self, how little then have they, that have nothing
to take to?

2 If God then will provide for these, do thou doubt, by obeying Gods
commandment in relieuiug these, to be scanted?

3 Who have already experience of Gods mercy above these, and if thou beleeuest
shall see greater things then these.

4 And have this abundance given thee, to impart unto these, that by this means
thy store may be increased. Fear not thou want where God commands to
distribute, and believe the promise, that thou shall have plenty.

5 And as God restrayneth his hand in such scarce and miserable times, so
restrain thou thy unnecessary expense in apparel and diet, and so thou shall
have yet to spare, for thy needful brother.

6 And live here by faith, and not by sense, so shall thou be increased, though
thou may fear the contrary.

If I should give to every one, Sect. 1.
I may soon give all away, and so I shall make my self a beggar.

1 God would have thee in giving first to provide for thy self, and therefore
thou may not give to all. Neither

2 God has so enlarged thee, as that thou can give unto all, and therefore
he requires no more then for what he gives.

3 Thou art to give only to such, concerning whom present occasion is offered,
in discovering their present necessity, and so much only as in good discretion
is meet, upon such special occasion.

4 Thy rule here must be thy ability, and from thy love to thy self must
proceed thy love to thy neighbor.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Tentations concerning care of our Posterity. Sect. 1.


I But (says Satan) thou must provide for thy posterity. Tent.
1 Timothy 5. to leave them portions, they are nearest thee, etc.

1 Thou shall best provide for them by sanctifying thine estate, Conquest.
and laying up for them in the Treasury of the poor.

2 As also by leaving the care of them to God, in the obedience to his
commandment: who either will so bless thy beneficence that thou shall be able
to leave them sufficient: or if necessary occasion require thy further
employing, or the Lord hereby have a purpose to try thy faith: know thou, that
the posterity of the faithful are the Lords portion, and he will see them
provided for abundantly.

3 No Scripture enioyneth us to leave a set portion to our children: that which
is employed thereby is, that we be not guilty of neglect and carelessness
herein.

4 The best patrimony Parents can leave their children is true Godliness.
Psalm. 37. 26. Psalm. 112. 2.

5 And therefore so to provide for our children, as that we neglect this
principal duty of charity, is to betray our children, and expose them to all
misery. Psalm. 109.

6 Yea, hereby Parents commit a double sin. First in not taking a right
course for the provision of his children. Secondly, hereby also he provoke
his children to esteem more their earthly, then their heavenly Patrimony, and
so with the Cadarens, to prefer their Swine before Jesus Christ.

7 Because the children of rich men are usually graceless, etc. therefore it
is far better to be a father to many Orphans, or fatherless children, in
feeding and cherishing them, of Christian love and pity, for the Lords sake,
who professes himself a father unto them, then to leave the greatest
abundance that may be to such children of a man's own, as for want of grace
show themselves so lewdly minded, that they will wantonly and unthriftily spend
all that shall be left unto them. And therefore it has been the practice of
many godly Christians to supply for the present, where there has been need
in Gods Church. As for their children, they have rather in their life time put
them to honest trades, whereby they might be able to live of themselves, then
to leave them any great portion after their deaths.

8 The sum is, that we know the commandments of God are not contrary to each
other: as if because the Lord bids us provide for our families, this did
contrary that other commandment, to distribute to the poor* But rather that
the one is a means to the performance of the other. They both implying
frugality, and conscionable carriage in our civil callings: Note.
by which we shall be enabled to both these duties, and each of them
furthering the other: namely, that in pitying the poor, we shall provide for
our family, because there is an extraordinary promise of God to such
beneficence, and in careful providing for our family, we shall also be moved
to relieve the poor: because they are our flesh also, Esaias. 58. So that in
truth he does not provide truly for his children that respects not the poor:
Neither does he wisely respect the poor, that is not moved to begin at home,
because he cannot continue herein.

But yet Satan replies further. Sect. 2.


Thou have Daughters as well as Sons: Tent.
these will not be preferred without portions, their bringing up will becostly,
etc.

My Daughters virtue and godliness shall be her best portion, Resist.
which that she may be furnished withal. Her education shall be such, as may
humble her, and subdue the corruption of nature: little cost will serve this
turn. As for a portion of goods, he that will have my Daughter shall give me
somewhat for her. So was it among the Jews, so it was among the Saints. If her
virtue will not marry her, a portion will rather mar her marriage: for so
long as it lasts, so long shall my daughter be beloved, and it is not my
daughter, but her portion that shall be married.

And seeing my purpose is that my daughter shall have the blessing of manage,
therefore I will rather make choice of a man who will take my daughter for
love, and if there be love, there will be no lack: and what need then my
portion? Notwithstanding I will respect my daughter in her place. My God shall
first be honored with my substance, and next his poor Saints, my daughter if
she stand more in need then they, shall not want necessary comfort; otherwise
she shall depend on the providence of God, as I have done, and what is her
portion she shall have it in her place.

CHAP. XIX.
Other Tentations there are in regard of the pretended unworthiness of those
that stand in need to be relieved.

1 SAtan objects: Tent.
That hereby many shall be, first maintained in their idleness. Secondly,
Which will be hurtful to the commonwealth.

1 Though it be a sin for the poor, Reply.
etc. to live idly, yet my intent is not by my liberality to maintain them
in sin, but relieve their want, and so to obey the commandment of God. If
they abuse my mercy, it is their greater sin.

2 Yet that they may not abuse it, I will see they shall be set on work, if
they be able, if not I will relieve them that they may be able, and then if
they will not work, they shall not eat.

3 Because I have not authority to set them on work, therefore I will acquaint
the Magistrate, who will supply in this behalf.

4 And what is in my power shall not be wanting: Namely, godly exhortation and
admonition to leave their sin, as also more sparing relief, as a kind of
punishment of their idleness. By this means I shall perform relief both to
soul and body.

Seeing some poor folks are suspected of witchcraft, Ob.
and some convinced, shall I therefore give to those?

If they be but suspected, Answ.
then they are to be relieved, because Charity is not suspicious. If convinced,
yet I am to relieve them, because hereby I shall heap coals on their head:
And still they are my flesh, yea hereby I may be a means to bring them to
repentance.

But if I give them, Reply.
they by this means have power over me, etc.

If I accept of their company, Answ.
and yet suspect them to be such, and so for fear, that they may not hurt me,
do give them, then it is just with God to punish my infidelity. But if they
have extreme need, and so are relieved not of fear but love, because my
flesh, I shall either prevent their malice, or all will be for the best.

But Satan replies.

Though thou give them never so much, Tent. 3.
they are never the better, for it all goes down the throat, it is little
seen on them, they have still as much need as ever they had, and therefore it
may seem that God does not bless it unto them: and therefore secretly seems
to forbid thy charity toward them.

1 Indeed to give usually, as the world, does sparingly and miserable, rather
to linger on a pining state then to set the poor on their feet, as we say,
that they may be able to work for themselves: this as it does them little
good, so it is not accepted of God, who wills us to give, not sparingly, but
plentifully.

2 And therefore I will give, that it may do good, with a large hand, as God
has given, to set them up, and provide them of some stock, and withal to see
to their following of their calling, and thriuing therein.

3 If for all my pains and cost I yet see them never the better: yet here is
my comfort: that God accepts my purpose, and my faith is hereby more tried:
that I cast my bread upon the waters.

4 Yet if still I see that no good will follow, but rather my bounty is
wilfully abused, to be a cloak for sin; here I may lawfully change my soil,
and sow my seed where there is better hope.

5 And yet rather then the vilest should perish, I am bound and will relieve
them, though he sin in receiving; yet I shall not sin in giving: and my
well-doing shall return into mine own bosom.

Oh but (says Satan) the poor are the most unthankful wretches that may be,
Tent. 3.
and therefore what comfort can thou have in relieuing them?

1 I do not relieve them, Reply.
that they may be thankful, but because God has commanded so, and promised
to recompense, whose faithfulness shall content me, notwithstanding man's
unthankfulness. And

2 If I should seek praise of men, I should dishonor my God, and therefore it
is his mercy that men should be unthankful, that so I might give him the
whole glory of the work. Yet

3 Though I find men unthankful, yet let me not cease to do good: for hereby
I shall in the end overcome evil with good. Romans 12.

See thou not (says Satan) what dissemblers these professors are, Tent. 4.
while they have need of thee, who so holy as they, but yet when their turn
is served, they embrace the world. And therefore, seeing thou know not who
are the household of faith: nay indeed; can have little hope, but rather to
maintain hypocrisy, cast not away thy money, etc.

1 Though men may deceive me, yet my God will not.

2 And therefore my well-doing is not cast away, though the person may be a
castaway.

3 It may be I may win him hereby: If not, I make him without excuse.

4 And what know I whether I may not add sin to sin: First in not
relieuing him: Secondly, in judging him an hypocrite, seeing the sin of
hypocrisy is so hardly discerned?

5 Howsoever, the person may be: yet will I not be cast off from doing good
unto him, because it is not for his sake, but for the Lords cause, that I do
it, who will accept my single heart herein, ^owsoeuer he may punish the others
hypocrisy.

6 Lastly, if I should play the hypocrite, in not giving where God commands,
upon such and the like pretenses, where as indeed my wretched and covetous
heart is the cause thereof: What will it advantage me to complain of the
hypocrisy of others, seeing therein I do condemn my self? And this will be
the issue, that he will one day condemn me of hypocrisy for not giving, who
now pretends his hypocrisy, as not worthy to receive.

CHAP. XX.
Other tentations whereby covetous men would excuse one charge with another.

Hearken I pray how Satan assa^^ts them.

1 What art thou not charged sufficiently with expenses for the Commonwealth,
Tent. 4.
and to the Prince, how many occasions are offered to draw money from thee? Is
not this sufficient for one, are not these to go for beneficence: and may they
not excuse thee to be more sparing another way? Nay, do thou not give (as
thou art ceased,) weekly contributions? do thou not moreover give some
Alms at thy door, and what more can they require at thy hands?

I call to mind my offenses this day: Answ.
indeed it is unmercifulness that is the especial means to draw down
judgments upon the land, as famine, wars, etc. and I cannot excuse my self
herein: And shall I seek to remove the judgment by the increase of my sin?
shall I help forward he affliction by my unmercifulness?

2 If God has enabled me to do the greater good, namely, to relieve my
Prince and Country, shall I disinable my self to do the less, seeing the
charges of the Prince are so moderate and conscionable?

3 If my Prince be partaker of my goods, etc. is it any more then is due unto
him? Nay, owe I him not my body goods and all? And does not he plentifully make
me amends by the benefit of the law? May I not ease my self? nay, do not rich
men bear least of this burden? Is not the protection of the Prince a
sufficient recompense hereof? Am I not hereby better enabled to do good to
others?

4 Besides, what trial is this of my bounty to do that which is due? Nay what
will be exacted of me whether I will or no? Ought I not therefore to do good
otherwise, where it is in my choice?

5 If the Lord offer extraordinary public occasions: this shall not hinder me
to show my willing mind: what I am able (God willing) I will bear a part in
the burden, and ease the affliction.

6 As for determining what is sufficient it is not in my choice where God
commands the contrary, and therefore I may not neglect the poor, though I
think I am sufficiently charged elsewhere, seeing the same God that commands,
will enable me to perform.

7 And what if I give weekly to the poor? this I am compelled to: and what
trial is here? this I may do of vainglory: and where is then my reward?
does not my God daily give? does he stint his mercies? Is not his hand
continually enlarged? and shall I shut my bounty? where he offers occasion?

8 As for the Alms that is given at my door, this is wrung from me, and done
usually for custom: I must moreover visit the fatherless, if I will be
truly religious: and seek out where I may do good, not only be sought to
for it.

9 It is not what man may require or be contented withal, but what my God
requires and enables me to perform, my conscience witnessing hereunto, and
occasions offered to manifest the same.

A second Tentation that sets upon us, in this kind, is drawn from

1 Such contributions and lays as are leauied about the Church, for
reparations.

2 That which goes out toward the maintenance of the Ministry.

3 For Bread and Wine at the Communion, etc.

Hereupon Satan urges thus.

God is a Spirit, and he will be worshipped in Spirit, what then need so much
about outward decency and comeliness?

1 Why should the Ministers take Tithes in these days? This is Iudaisme, which
they say, is abolished; 2. Why ought they not to labor with their hands, as
the Apostles did, to ease the charge of the people.

3 Why will not a reading Minister serve the turn, who will serve for less?
Seeing thou may as well edify by him, as by a Preacher, whom thou can not
understand, who will seek to curb thee, and cross thee in thy pleasures? And
if I must needs be charged with all these, is not this great liberality? Can
you require more at my hands?

For answer hereunto.

1 Know we that spiritual worship cannot be performed publicly without the
help of the body: Answ.
for which, seeing there must be a set place of Gods worship; therefore it is
fit it be so provided, that not only the body be sheltred from injury and
danger, but fitted also by decency and order to the service of God.

2 Which seeing it may be done without excessive charge, therefore much the
rather ought convenient cost to be bestowed hereupon.

3 And if the Lord be at the cost to bestow his son upon us, is it not
reasonable that we should be at the charge of such sacramental signs as may
represent and seal up the benefit of our salvation unto us?

4 As for Tithes due to the maintenance of the Ministry, howsoever they were
enjoined by the ceremonial law, yet the equity of them is moral, and so to
continue for ever.

1 Because they were paid by the law of Nature, before ever the Ceremonial law
was instituted. Heb. 7. 9. 10.

2 They are not now required to be paid in any ceremonious or figurate respect,
but as a moral duty, to the upholding and maintenance of the divine worship,
according to the affirmative part of the second commandment, of the first
Table: And as a duty of civil honor and justice, according to the fifth and
eight commandment of the second Table.

3 As the Sabbath remaynes, though the Ceremony be changed, so ought Tithes to
remain for the maintenance of the ministry, to the sanctifying of the
Sabbath, the Ceremony being removed.

4 Unless the Christian Magistrate (in whose hands the ordering of such things
does lie) shall determine of a like bountiful and constant course for the set
maintenance of the Ministry.

As for the example of the Apostle Paul in working with his own hands.

1 There was no other of the Apostles but he, that did so.

2 He presses none to do the like by his example, unless upon very special
and extraordinary occasion as 1 Cor. 11. 7. 8. 9. 10.

3 Nay as allowing a certain and settled course of maintenance, he preuents and
meets with this unkind objection of this kind of people, as 1 Cor. 9. 1 Timothy
5. 17. 18.

4 Besides the times then and now are different.

1 Then the Church was in her cradle, now she is in her growth, then not
established by the Magistrate, who is the approuer and confirmer of the
maintenance of Ministers, as now it is. 2 Then the Apostles were furnished with
extraordinary gifts of miracles, etc. to procure and compel extraordinary
maintenance. Act. 5. Now these gifts are ceased.

3 Then men's hearts were inflamed with the power of godliness. For then happy
was he that could lay down his possessions at the feet of the Apostles. But

Now the form of Godliness has bred coldness of compassion, so that glad is
he that can withdraw from the Ministry.

4 There the zeal of teaching subdued men to the Church. Now the zeal of
teaching, because the Harvest is well in, drives hypocrites out of the Church.
And winnowes the Wheat into a narrow compass. And therefore if the Ministry
should not have a set maintenance, seeing it necessarily prouokes enmity, and
maintaynes such opposition against the world, little voluntary devotion would
appear.

Lastly, let these consider what their forefathers have parted with to the
Queen of heaven, and the Golden Calfe, etc. Ier. 44. Exodus 32. And see whether
their blind devotion will not condemn this repining of their children to
maintain the sincerity of Gods worship.

Nay let them wisely consider whether they spend not more unnecessarily and
wickedly upon the idols of their belly and back, then upon the maintenance of
the worship of God.

And if they can content themselves with a Leuite that will serve for ten
Sheckels, and a suite of raiment, because they will not be at the charge of the
preaching of the Gospel, let them look to be served as Micha was, their
Leuite will be the man to betray their souls, through ignorance, prophannesse
and the like, and if he can find a better Master, their hireling will show
them a fair pair of heels.

CHAP. XXI.
Another tentation which Satan has to hinder true bounty and liberality to the
poor, Is

FRom pretense of such expenses as are wastfully employed in keeping great
excess at Christmas, etc. whereupon he infers that the poor being
fufficiently relieved the in, they may be excused all there year after: and so
has brought it to pass among great ones generally, that so they keep jolly
rout and riot at that time, they privilege themselves from further hospitality.

For the encountering of which Tentation.

1 Know they, that this solemnity of feastings at that time, is one of those
works of supererogation which one day will be brought within the compass of
that Quere. Who required these things at their hands. Esaias. 1.

2 Admit it were lawful to use such excess at that time, yet is it far from
true bounty.

1 Because the poor have least part thereof, they are no fit guests at these
times, especially religious poor will mar the sport.

2 What they have is not wholesome and of the better, but the refuse, that
which the Dogs and Swine do leave.

3 They have it also with sauce of swearing and cursing, and that is far from
sanctifying the devotion unto them.

4 The glut that they have at such times, makes them more greedy and dainty,
yea, more idle, and unfit for their calling, and spare diet all the year after.

5 That which they then have, will not maintain them all the year, as they
must be relieved. Nay.

6 Usually to maintain such Bacchus feasts, the poor are racked, and fined
and grinded to powder.

7 And this Charity is also subject to such vanity and ostentation, as that
happy it is, if it has it reward in this life.

And therefore,

Seeing what is wastfully spent at such times would maintain many poor, even
a whole year, it were much better to abate such unnecessary expenses, and so
at convenient times to distribute to the necessity of the Saints.

Besides these tentations, consider we certain maine policies of Satan,
whereby he has in these late days, even stockt up liberality, and utterly
abolished the same.

CHAP. XXII.
The first maine policy which Satan has used in these latter days to prevent
liberality, is, Enclosing of grounds, etc.

BY which his drift is, that the people of God being turned out of their
dwellings might so perish through the unmercifulness of the weather, and so
the Land being dispeopled, these cormorants might riot freely, no more might be
troubled with the cries of the poor, might themselves wholly consume, that
they call, their own, without envy or controulement, and so fat up themselves
against the day of slaughter. Ier. 12. 3.

For remedy of which mischief I would such did consider these things.

1 That the rich and the poor go together, the Lord is the ordayner of them
both. If the Lord had not seen it fit they should be together, he might and
would, no doubt, have made all rich. Pro. 22. 2. But as our Savior says,
likewise the poor we shall have always with us.

To what end I pray you with us? surely,

1 That the poor might be a means to humble the rich: And

2 The rich might be a means to comfort the poor.

3 That so the loins of the poor might bless the rich.

4 And the fleece of the rich might cloth the poor: And so of either, such as
do belong to God might by this means further each other unto God. And

As for such as do not belong to the Election, the Lord has also appointed
this mixture of the poor with the rich, for the contrary end: Namely,

1 That the estate of the poor might breed contempt and hardness of heart in
the rich. And

The oppression of the mighty might nourish discontentednesse and worldly
sorrow in the poor.

That the poor hereby being often provoked to spoil the rich.

The rich might be enraged to make havoc of the poor, and so the justice of
God wonderfully accomplished in making each other the instrument of their
destruction. And yet all for his glory and good of his children in purging a
Land hereby of much corrupt blood, and out of evil manners establishing good
laws, yea hereby proceeding for the better execution of them.

And therefore,

Know we that they which by enclosures would root and weary out the poor.

1 They fight against Gods ordinance, and therefore they shall not prosper; as
may appear by the visible judgments of God daily brought to light upon such
Nimrods and deuourers. Habac. 2.

2 They are enemies to Religion, and the worship of God, being occasions that
the houses of God are laid waste and converted to Barnes, Stables, and kennels
for hounds, whereby Atheism and profaneness is set in the seat of the
scorners.

3 They are also enemies to the commonwealths: First, in decaying tillage,
which maintains labor, and so keeps in humility: so that in steed thereof,
idleness and pride is maintained. Secondly, in decaying the people, which are
the glory of the Prince, and strength of the land whereupon the land is exposed
to the spoil of the enemy, as also civil wars are hereby often times
occasioned, and the Famine, Pestilence, etc. procured. Thirdly, hereby also the
estate of Princes is endangered: In that great ones having now no inferiors to
be humbled by, through the insatiablenesse of pride and ambition grow to envy,
and so to leauy at the highest: whereupon proceeds treasons, and subversion of
Kingdoms.

4 Our neighbor is many ways exceedingly iniuried.

And that

1 As being outlawed, and deprived of the common benefit of habitation.

2 Driven most inconscionable to the cursed estate of beggary. Genesis 4.

3 Compelled even to steal, and so the Author of his own destruction.

4 Deprived of the public benefit of Gods worship.

5 Forced to a most discontented and desperate estate.

5 The greatest wrong of enclosing, redounds to the Authors themselves.

Because,

1 They exclude themselves out of Gods protection, in excluding the poor out
of their protection.

2 They lie open to Gods heavy curse in this oppression of the poor.

3 They deprive themselves of the use of Charity, whereby they argue themselves
to be no better then infidels.

5 As also they strip themselves of the use of society, and so grow savage and
brutish.

6 They also exclude themselves from the necessary protection of their own
flesh.

7 And arm the same with cruelty against them.

8 Hereby they make way to pride, and all kind of impiety.

9 As also they do expose themselves to beggary, etc.

10 And not only so, but their posterity is liable to the curse, and so to
desolation.

And that we may grow to an healing of this evil: Consider we wisely the
causes hereof, which are:

1 Atheism and contempt of God, for if we were contented to be under God, and
did acknowledge we held of him, we would then suffer others to live both by us
and under us.

2 Pride, which cannot endure either equal or inferior.

3 Covetousness, as if all were too little for our selves.

4 Distrust of Gods providence, as if God were not able to provide for us, if
so be that others lived by us.

5 Hatred of mankind, in that we cannot endure his presence and society.

6 Inordinate love of this world, and these corruptible things.

7 Setting up our rest in the happiness of this life.

8 As also a secret renouncing of the heavenly bliss.

9 Envy of Superiors and discontentednesse, which are forerunners of treasons,
etc.

10 A bloody and cruel mind deuoyd of all remorse and pity.

3 Observe we the particular remedies of the same,

Which are either.

1 Inward, concerning the reformation of the mind.

2 Outward, reforming the party.

Outward are these,

1 Sincere love of God, whom we have not seen.

2 Consideration of our wants and infinite occasions, and then we shall see
that he is a very mean one, whom we may not stand in need of, and therefore
despise we none.

3 Contentedness with our estate, and so shall we endure the poor to live
under us.

4 Remember we the day of account, that as now we would have all, so we must
give up the larger account, and think we if it were not much better to have
others to ease us?

5 Know we that so much as we exceed in enclosing and coveting, so much we do
detract from the holy use of Gods blessings, and so shall be guilty of cruelty
against our selves, because we shall want whereon to employ them.

6 Meditate we on death, etc. when all our glory shall be confounded, that
seven foot long at most must contain us.

7 Record we the curses of God which are threatened and executed against ioyners
of house to house, etc. Esaias. 5. Hab. 2. Mich. 3. etc.

The outward Remedies are,

1 Frugality in apparel and diet, whereby being good examples to those with
whom we live, as we shall not be driven to spoil them, so not using them as
instruments of our lusts, they shall not lie open to our cruelty.

2 Care, that we and our Tenants prosper in religion and honesty, for the
neglect of these, and contrary, bolstering of them in sin, is an occasion to
make us tyrannise over them.

3 Conscionable obedience in our own persons to those that are set over us, so
shall we continue merciful to those that are under us.

4 Conuersing lovingly, etc. with those of the lower sort, inuiting them to our
society, Tables, etc.

5 Maintenance of Tillage.

6 Moderation of hunting, and such outward pleasures.

7 Necessary provision by Musters and trained Soldiers, against the days of
war.

8 Progress of Princes, to view their people, and rejoice them by seeing their
faces.

9 Wholesome laws against depopulation, and conscionably executed.

11 The estimation of the subject with the Prince, and pretiousnesse of the
life of man is a special means hereto, whose example will be the best law to
those great ones that are under him.

CHAP. XXIII.
A second enemy to Charity is excess in Diet: either by

1 GLuttony, or

2 Drunkenness: Whereby

1 Self-love being nourished, And

2 The flesh pampered, And

3 Sin growing insatiable.

4 And so others drawn into the same excess.

5 And our estate wasted, etc. Hereby

1 The love of our brother grows cold.

2 Their bellies are pinched.

3 And all being thought too little for our selves, every thing is thought too
much for others.

4 And that which we impart to others, as the intent is to draw them into
fellowship of sin; so hereby not only they become thieues to their families,
but draw down the judgments of God upon them, as famine, etc.

6 Yea, in that hereby our estates are wasted and consumed: are not great ones
hereby driven to the spoil? and who more likely to be spoiled, then those that
have been instruments in sin?

7 Carnal love does most usually end in extreme hatred. 2 Samuel 14. And so the
weakest goes to the wall.

8 And how can we but be cruel unto others, when we are not merciful to our
own souls.

And therefore

1 In vain do Epicures boast of false liberality.

2 And extreme cruelty is the best fellowship of drunkards.

3 Little comfort in that speech, that a belly-god is no man's foe but his own,
seeing he is an enemy to God, to his neighbor, to the creatures, and his own
soul and body.

4 Less warrant therein, that they spend but of their own, seeing their
spending is abuse, and abuse makes it not their own.

5 And for the cloak of hospitality, what shall it avail, seeing the poor
are more pinched: and fat hogs are only fed up to the slaughter.

Learn we in the second place to remedy this evil: And that

1 By enforming the judgment aright, concerning our liberty in these things.

Here first know we that what liberty and Lordship we had over these things,
was utterly lost in Adam, so that by nature the best are slaves to the
creatures: being so far off from any right over them, or ability to use them
well, as that our best right in them is, that they are executioners of the
divine vengeance against us, and our best use is by abusing them to provoke
them to a more speedy and sharp execution thereof.

2 Consider we hence that it is not because we have most of them cast upon us,
therefore we deserve them, and so have power to use them well, seeing usually
they are the wickeds portion in this life, to fatten them up to the day of
slaughter. Psalm. 17. 14. Ierem. 12. 3.

3 Neither if we are scanted of them, ought we to flatter our selves, that we
are beloved of God, in that he diets us of these things: seeing it is a
punishment of sin to be stripped of these comforts. Deuteronomy. 28. Joel. 1. Psalm.
107.

And therefore,

That we may use them aright, we are to seek for the recovery of our right in
Jesus Christ, who being given us of the Father, does give us with him all good
things else: so that in Jesus Christ we are restored again both to our
Lordship over the Creature, and holy liberty also to use them aright for Gods
glory, and our eternal salvation.

Now being restored to an holy Liberty in these things, we are to know in the
second place, that this liberty is bounded within these limits.

1 We must in all these things aim at Gods glory. 1 Cor. 10. 30. and therefore
so to use our liberty in Diet, as first, may especially further the sanctifying
of the Sabbath: Secondly, and fit us to all holy duties: Thirdly, may empty us
of carnal love to, and confidence in, the creature: fourthly, may keep still
our power and liberty over the same.

2 In the use of these outward things, we must have respect to the salvation of
the soul.

And therefore,

We must first sanctify them unto us, that the soul may have aright in them,
and grace to use them holily. 1 Timothy 4. 4.

2 We must discern that in the use thereof, the soul be especially furthered.

1 As discerning insufficiency in them to satisfy the soul, and therefore
being weaned from the love of them, even by the use thereof.

2 And yet discerning in the least of them, a pledge of Gods love, and so being
contented with our own, and returning the strength unto our God in more
conscionable obedience.

3 Still being provoked by experience of Gods providence in these things, to
hunger after the best graces.

4 And communicating, even of our ^ittle, to the good of others. Job 31.

5 Abstayning from our liberty herein, that we may be fitter for heavenly
duties.

6 Seeking rather to satisfy necessity then the eye or palate.

7 And still when the body is satisfied, discerning the souls want. And

8 Redeeming wisely the one with the loss of the other.

3 We must in the use of these things, respect a common good: And therefore,

1 To be ordered herein for the quality of our diet, by the authority of the
Magistrate, As also,

2 As occasions shall serve for the measure thereof.

3 Using that which our own country best affords, and most cheap. And lastly
being laws unto our selves, where otherwise we may exceed, not considering
what our purse can do, or our callings will allow, but wherein we may best be
examples of frugality to others, and best able to maintain the common charge;
especially may be a mean to stand in the gappe to keep out the common scourge.

CHAP. XXIIII.
A third enemy to Bounty is, Pride, and excess of Apparel.

AS not only exceeding herein our callings.

But also stretching beyond our abilities, Putting even whole Lordships not so
much upon our backs, as upon our shoes, yea sometimes our very garters and
shoes-strings.

And so hence follow racking and turning out of Tenants. Eating out of
Hospitality.

Running deep into the Tradesmens books, yea, undoing of them. Maintenance of
all riot and excess in sin, etc. In fine, the Prison, and beggary.

The Remedy is partly, as before in Diet, concerning the general: Unto which
we may add these following in particular.

First that we use such apparel as may best serve to express and adorn our
Christian callings, furthering to mortification and abasing of the flesh.

And secondly such as may serve to maintain human society, by keeping the
common fashion of the Country, and such as beseemes our several places, in the
commonwealth. Esaias 3. Zeph. 1. Wisely admitting such civil distinctions, as by
the wisdom of state are devised, both for ornament, and difference of
callings.

Avoiding, as on the one side slouenly and brutish attire, so on the other,
curiosity and preciseness.

And rejecting all diuices, to adulterate nature; making us fair; straighter,
etc. as painting, etc.

And so endeavoring to express all modesty and gravity therein.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Hunting, that it is an Enemy to Liberality: And how many ways. With the
Remedy thereof.

And first, that Hunting is an enemy to Liberality appears, Because,

1 IT entendeth too much the satisfying of our own pleasures, and so hinders
from respecting the necessities of others, 1 Cor. 13. 2 Timothy 3. 2. Lovers of
pleasures, and without natural affection, go together.

2 It with-draweth natural affection from our own flesh: and conuerteth it to
dogs, so that it were better to be a huntsmans dog, then his poor neighbor.

3 It breeds vnnaturallnesse and cruelty, in that the sport thereof is in
shedding of blood, and bathing their hands therein, whereupon it comes to
pass, that by degrees the blood of the poor is as little regarded, as the
blood of a beast, yea it makes more delight in the company of beasts, then to
converse with men.

4 Hereby Gentlemen are provoked to rack their Tenants and spoil the poor,
to turn them out, etc. even to maintain stables for their hunting horses, and
kennels for their hounds.

5 Also much good ground is restrained for the maintenance of such wild game,
which otherwise might be converted to tillage for the relief of the poor.

6 Much good grain is consumed in maintenance of Dear, and Dogs, which the
poor ought to be relieved with.

7 Yea, Gentlemen think themselves excused from relief of the poor, in that
so many quarters of grain goes out to such pleasurable provision.

8 Yea, much grain is spoiled on the ground by the unreasonable pursuit of
this unbridled sport.

9 Herein also much precious time is so wasted and rioted, that the estate of
the poor cannot be intended, and looked into: much less relieved.

10 For this abuse of creatures, the Lord many times punishes a Land with
famine, and so the poor are further pinched for the offense of the great ones.

11 Yea, the poor hereby are so grieved and enraged many times, that being
thus despised above wild beasts, they grow wild and outrageous, and so give
such bloody hunters even their fill of blood.

The Remedies hereof is,

1 That we be able to discern of the true bounds of our Christian liberty:
that so we do not turn the same; as an occasion of wantonness. Gal. 5. 11.

2 That we consider of the pretiousnesse of time, and so learn to redeem it,
in making sure our election. Ephe. 5. 16.

3 Consider we wisely whether we can make one corn, etc. or hair, etc. and
then lay we it to our hearts, what a grievous sin it is to riot and wast out
so many creatures of God: yea wilfully to kill such serviceable horses, etc.

4 Know we that hunting is a recreation to make our selves and other fitter
for our better callings: not to rob our selves and others of health and means
of life: not to cut off employment in more serious affairs.

5 Resolve we that our private pleasures must be submitted to the public
good, so that both expediency must be respected, as well as what is lawful: yea
we must in no case offend the weak brother, 1 Cor. 8. least otherwise while
we satisfy our lusts without respect of offending others, we loose our
natural affection, and so loose the affection of others, 2 Samuel 20.

6 Expect we undoubtedly that if we neglect our own flesh, and set our
affections upon brute beasts: we shall make our flesh sauadge against us,
either the Lord for our vnnaturallnesse, shall make man precious, as the gold
of Ophir; so that for want of help, we may be exposed to be a pray unto the
beasts; or the rage of our enimes shall be so great that no gold shall be ble to
redeem us out of their hands. Esaias 13. 12. 13. Pro. 11. 8.

CHAP. XXVI.
A fifth Policy, whereby Satan keeps men from charity and true bounty, is a
foolish fear that they may be esteemed Papists, and therefore they will do no
good works, because the Papists glory therein, because this is a mark (as
they say) of their Religion.

Yea, are they not hereby condemned; as merit-mongers? etc.
Are not their goodly monuments cast down and demolished?
Are we not taught justification by Faith, so that good works may seem to be
thrust out of doors?
The Remedy hereof is.

1 TO consider, that the Lord has commanded us to abound in good works, and
therefore we should (not casting these fears) be obedient to his will.

2 We teach justification by Faith, which works by love, so that howsoever
by faith in Jesus Christ we justify Gods righteousness in pardoning our
sins through Christ his merit, in whom we apprehend the acceptance and
justification of our persons, as standing righteous through him in the sight of
God. So by the virtue of Christ his righteousness, we are invested with a true
inherent righteous, whereby first in thankefulnes unto our God, we abound in
good works: secondly, to declare that we are justified, both to our own
consciences: thirdly, and also unto men. James 2. fourthly, to approve our
conformity unto our head Christ, as living members: fifthly to be made meet for
that glorious inheritance with the Saints in light.

And therefore

We condemn the Papists, and have demolished their glorious Sepulchers: that
their rotten and stinking bones being discovered, their faces may be covered
with shame, that they might seek the face of God in Christ Jesus, whom they
did daily crusifie by their abominable Masses, Hori Murders of infants,
Thefts, Rapines, which were discovered in the demolishing of those abominable
sinkes and cages of all uncleanness.

And though we have converted some few of those houses to be places of Gods
worship, purging them of the idolatrous use and end, by which they were abused.
Yet have we wisely defaced the multitude of them, as being altogether
unnecessary, to cut off the hope of nurcing Popery again.

To restore to the Commonwealth, what has unjustly been extorted from
thence, by the covetousness and feigned devotions of those Abbey-lubbers.

To root out idleness, and such other mischiefs as were nourished in those
abominable Stews.

To restore the people to their liberty, who were very fearfully enthralled,
not only in their souls, but even in their bodies, by those towers of Babell.

Specially to make free way to the execution of Justice which was defeated by
such sinful Sanctuaries. And to restore the Tithes for the maintenance of a
learned Ministry which we wish may (as in part it has bin begun) be further
converted to that end. And have we not since the time of the gospel restored,
exceeded them notwithstanding, in true bounty?

Yea surely:

Blessed be God, in Jesus Christ, that has confounded the false charity of the
Papists, by discovering the rotten foundation and cruel ends thereof: Blessed
be the name of his Majesty for ever, that has confuted their slanderous
imputations against the glorious Gospel of his Son Jesus, as if it abolished
good works, had banished all true love and charity. Has not the glorious Lord
advanced and justified the power of the Gospel, in kindling the hearts of the
true professors thereof to perform such renowned and glorious works as cannot
be matched in any age of Popery? Has not these times of the Gospel yielded
the supply of four new stately and magnificent Colleges in the Universities,
very richly endowed for the maintenance of true religion and learning to all
posterity?

Have they not furnished the honorable City of London with a most ample and
worthy College, endowed with constant and sufficient mayntenance both for a
Reader of Divinity, as also with several Readers of the seven liberal
Sciences, to prepare the better for the Universities, and so to ease such of
that journey which will receive their seasoning here?

And are not the foundations laid of another famous College, by the pious and
magnificent authority of our Sovereign Lord King James, the most constant
enemy of Antichrist, and defender of the true Christian, ancient, and
Apostolic faith, for the maintenance of such worthies of our Church, to employ
their studies in refuting the adversary, and justifying the truth of Jesus
Christ?

Is not a good part of that College already erected? Is it not still
furthered and undertaken by the Sovereign Majesty, who for the glory of GOD
will finish that glorious work?

What should we speak of those hundreds of free-Schooles, that have been
erected since the days of glorious Queen Elizabeth, of happy memory, for the
rooting out of ignorance; the very nurse of Popery, and trayning up of youth in
Learning and Religion? Shall we not ever remember, not only how many sinkes of
Antichrist were converted to Hospitals, for the cure of the diseased, and
nourishing of Orphans in the City of London, By king Edward.
and elsewhere, and have not their revenues been much increased by worthy
Citizens from time to time?

Have there not been scores of new Hospitals erected and endowed in each part
of the land, for the relief of decayed and decrepet persons?

Shall not the memory of Sutton be glorious to posterity, for that his
magnificent College, so stately for the House, so bountiful for the Revenue
of at lest six thousand pound by the year, for the sustentation of decayed
Soldiers, Scholars, Citizens, etc. to continue for ever?

And has not the stream of this bounty, yet flowed more boundantly to our
Universities?

Is there any College almost in the Universities, which has not received,
even new glory from these times of the Gospel, not only by enlarging of the
buildings and beautifying thereof, but by addition of large maintenance for the
increase of their Fellowship and Scholers-places, to continue for ever?

It not that glorious Library, exceeding the Vatican, or any now extant in the
World, furnished with all sorts of books, and constant mayntenance for a
Keeper thereof, and continual supply for the same, a very true and blessed
monument of the bounty of these times, a very lively fruit of the true Religion
of Jesus Christ? Shall not the memory of devout Bodley be blessed for ever?

And can we forget what is now by Gods mercy even finished, that magnificent
building of the University Schools, so stately for the structure, so
sufficient for mayntenance, begun even from the foundation, and finished by
the procurement and charge, especially, of those most worthy instruments: The
Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of London, a true Kingly and
Hieroicall Spirit; and that illustrious Sir John Bennet, both living members of
the Church of Christ Jesus, both sometimes brought up in that magnificent
College of Christ Church.

Surely if we shall add unto these, the multitude of new Bridges, erected
substantially in the needful places of the Land of free stone etc. The
building of many Gates in the C^tie of London, etc. It may appear that the
Gospel of Christ has been most fruitful in good works.

Especially if we be wise to distinguish of the times, it will appear that the
charges of such great buildings and endowments do in these days far exceed
those of former ages, though of the like bulk and quantity. Both in that the
Land does now much more abound with people then in former ages, in regard of
the long peace our good God has vouchsafed. And so in regard hereof the
prices of all things being much enhansed, charges of building must needs be so
much the greater.

And this the rather, because the wise and gracious Lord, has also furnished
the Land with more abundance of treasure then formerly: which as it is an
occasion to make things deerer, in that men are better enabled thereby to
procure their necessaries: so does this serve for the great enriching and
contentment of the Land.

That our inbred commodities shall pass at a round price, as has elsewhere
been truly and sufficiently proved: see my Lord Cokes preface to his Reports.

Lastly, if we shall consider, that as the doctrine of the Gospel teaches
what is the nature and property of true bounty, so also it enableth to an holy
practice of well-doing. It will easily appear, that though it should be
granted that the former times has exceeded us in the outward work, yet seeing
they failed in the true use and end of well-doing, they cannot justly compare
herein, with the times of the Gospel. And that well manifestly be discouerd by
these differences.

1 Because the good works of popery were done in darkness; refused the light
and true touchstone thereof, and therefore wanting knowledge wherefore, and
faith to make the person acceptable, they could not be good in the sight of God.

Whereas the Gospel teaches to do all things by a good warrant from the
Word, and in the faith of JESUS CHRIST, doing all things in thankfulness unto
God for his love unto us in Jesus Christ, informing us, first to labor the
acceptance of our persons, in the Lord Jesus, and so through him to offer up
this sacrifice.

2 Popish works, as they wanted a good foundation, so they failed in the
manner and means.

Either doing evil that good might come thereof, Romans 3.

Or being stinted in well-doing, not by the word, but by the orders of their
superiors, and several rules of their professions.

Whereas the Gospel teaches, to do good by good means, not according to the
will of man, in a voluntary devotion and imitation of angelical perfection,
but according to the blessed will of God, each keeping himself within the
bounds of his calling. Whereas in Popery, either the calling is not lawful at
all, and so no good can truly be there done; or else liberty is taken to
usurp an other calling, as that of the Magistrate: or else they presume of an
extraordinary calling, as the best ground of all their heroical and great
exploits, as they call them, indeed, their devilish, and monstrous enterprises
upon States, Princes, whosoever stands in their way.

3 Popish works fail in the true end, which is to give glory unto God, and
procure salvation to the soul, as being done, first, to merit by them and so
to rob God of the glory of his free mercy, and Christ Jesus of the efficacy of
his all-sufficient merit: secondly, being done to deprive the soul of it
salvation, as teaching it; first, to rest in the outward works, without faith:
secondly, by outward works to excuse and satisfy for any gross and notorious
wickedness, and so gives the bridle to all sin, with greediness, and
utterly excludes true repentance.

3 By their good works to merit heaven, and so to deprive themselves of the
only true way thereto.

4 Only tending to the maintenance of present credit and profit, and so to
build up an imaginary happiness in this life, and thereby to exclude
themselves eternal happiness.

But the Gospel teaches to aim in all things at Gods glory. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
To propose salvation not any present respect only as the mark of well-doing.
3 Phil. 13.

Not to rest in the thing done but in the acceptance thereof.

To labor perfection of well-doing, not by Evangelical councels, but by the
warrant of the word. And in this, confounding all Popish well-doing, that we
especially aim at the sincerity of the heart, and yet deny still our own
righteousness, that we may be found in Christ Jesus.

And that, wherein the Papists do well, therein we may be like unto them, and
have exceeded them: but we must not be stinted by their measure, nor misled by
their ends.

They do well without knowledge, without Faith, to merit thereby, excusing
hereby their ignorance, Idolatries, and all other kind of abominations.

We do good works out of knowledge of the will of God, out of Conscience to
obey Gods will, as true branches, deriuing our goodness from the Vine Christ
Jesus, performing and bringing forth fruit only as we are engrafted in the
Vine, and daily receive virtue and sap from thence to enable thereto; having
the imperfection of our goodness daily covered with the righteousness of
Christ, that we may be accepted of our God, etc. By the power of Christ
dwelling in us; we are daily led on to perfection, daily ascribing our
righteousness to our maker.

CHAP. XXVII.
Hereunto appertains that Tentation.

That because,

1 WE sin in the best we do, Stherefore we will do no good at all, least
we should sin.

To which we may answer,

1 That it is a sin to omit well-doing, as well as to do evil.

2 That sin which accompanies well-doing shall not be imputed, if there be a
willing mind.

3 Our persons are accepted in Christ, and therefore our faylings are covered
with his righteousness.

4 This life is not a time of perfection, but of growing and hastening thereto,
and therefore though we be not perfect without sin, yet if we do it truly
without hypocrisy, it shall be accepted.

5 The sin which accompanies well-doing is not ours, and therefore we shall
not answer for it.

And yet by

6 Sin we are still humbled to give glory unto Christ.

CHAP. XXVIII.
A seventh device to draw men from true bounty, is by nourishing them in
Idleness, and so disinabling thereto.

And that this sin abounds in this age is manifest.

1 BY the general poverty of the Tradesman and Artificer, each laboring
only from hand to mouth, to maintain life and soul together (as we say:)
the rest of the time being spent in idleness and unthrifty sports, etc.
Whereas the hand of the diligent might have plenty.

2 By that ordinary sleightnesse to which all Trades are grown, each making
things only saleable to the eye, without substance, etc. Idleness, having
found out a nearer way to deceive it self and others.

And is it not just with God to give up the deceiuer, to be deceived? Is not
the deceitful Artificer, that works slightly, because he loves idleness,
and cannot, through his poverty, forbear payment; is he not, I say, met with
all by as cunning as himself? Has not idleness bred up the Cony-catcher to
strip him of his deceitful gain.

Has not idleness fostred and instructed the slye and deceitful gamester, to
fleece him threadbare?

Is not the Stage-plaier, a right bird of this idle neast, ready to entice him
yet to more idleness? Is not the Tavern and Alehouse door open to receive
such a guest? Is not the bawdie house ready to send home this Prodigal by
weeping-crosse, that he may cry late repentance?

Does not the abundance of these nurseries of idleness, convince the raiging
of this sin in these times? would not the fire be quenched, if there were not
such fuel?

What should we speak of those swarms of sturdy roagues, and Idle beggars,
whose meat is for the most part ease and idleness, who had rather starve then
be set a work?

And are not such usually forced to steal, that they may not starve? do not
the abundance of these convince the Land to swarm with idleness?

And by your leave, is it not now a fashion to live in idleness? My high borne
younger-Brothers, because they have no lands, therefore they have nothing to
do what they should; they cannot dig, to beg they are ashamed: meet the
enemy they dare not, and therefore they will be meet with their friend, if they
can, by cheating, if not by plain cutting, and so they will do what they
should not, and so in the end suffer what they would not.

Well then it is apparent that idleness abounds. Learn we now in the next
place, the remedy hereof.

1 Labor we to get grace in our hearts, for he that is in Christ will be
always bringing forth fruit in due season, he cannot be idle that has the
spirit working in him.

2 And therefore let us stir up the spirit by prayer and holy duties, that
howsoever the world count, the service of God idleness, yet we may find,
that when our God is honored he will honor us before men, in giving us
diligence, that we may stand before Princes, and giving us wisdom and
faithfulness in the least.

3 And give we not our hearts to pleasures and delights, abuse we not our
liberty in the creatures of God, for these will draw on and confirm in
idleness.

4 Consider we how the creatures are in continual employment.

5 And observe we that the devil is never idle to hurt us.

6 Remember we how unprofitably we have spent the time past, and consider we
what warrant we have for the time to come.

7 And know we that the mind can never be idle, if not working for good, then
certainly for evil.

CHAP. XXIX.
An eight practice of Satan to hinder bounty is, by enticing men to exhaust
their estates in vnlawfnll recreations.

As

DIcing.

Carding.

Cock-fighting.

Beare-bayting.

Stage Plays, etc.

As

1 Being the common Recreations of the time.

2 Taken up not by the basest, but even by the best, and so countenanced by
example.

3 Having some pretense of Christian liberty.

4 Having also some sweet baits of profit and pleasure.

5 And being good means to pass away the time.

For the remedy of this evil know we,

1 That these recreations are utterly unlawful. As

1 Dicing. Because

It consists in hazard and casting of a Lot, which being a religious ordinance,
appointed of the Lord in weighty euasions, to determine the doubtfulnesse
thereof, ought not to be transferred to matter of recreation. Act. 1.

2 It is performed by many cunning and deceitful sleights, not so much
depending upon the bare chance, as by advantage of dice, etc. intending to
overrule the hazard, and by the chance to rob and spoil others.

3 And so, besides the occasions of swearing, loss of time, corruption of
manners accompanying these sports. Is not satisfied usually without spoil of
estate, yea, many times of lives also.

2 Carding unlawful.

1 And that because it partly consists of hazard, and therefore is an abuse of
divine ordinance.

2 The skill thereof consists in cousenage and out-facing tricks.

3 It maintaynes Covetousness, and hunts after gain by unlawful sleights.

4 And so in stead of recreating the mind, does much distract the same with
hopes to win, and fear to loose.

5 It steals away our precious time, and nourishes in idleness and
effeminate delights.

6 And is not usually performed without blasphemies against God, and tearings
of each other.

7 At the best, it is but an indifferent thing, and therefore being more
subject to abuse, is wisely to be avoided.

8 Especially seeing it is a sport of no good report, used especially by the
profane, and by them grossly abused, and taken up to ease a troubled spirit.

3 Cocke-fighting and Beare-baiting unlawful.

1 Because the ground of them is the enmity of the creature, which was the
punishment of sin.

2 They provoke to cruelty, and unmercifulness.

3 And withdraw the mind from the right use of the creature, which is to
contemplate the justice and mercy of God in the preservation and government
thereof.

4 It is contrary to the nature of a just man, who is merciful to his beast.

5 By this unmercifulness to the creature, unnaturalness, and brutish tyranny
is oft-times discovered and maintained.

6 And the creature eft soones provoked to cry quittance with man.

7 Besides, the profanation of the Sabbaths, blasphemies and whoredoms, the
drunkenness, etc. that accompany these games.

4 That Enterludes, etc.

First because,

1 They are expressly forbidden by the Lord, who has commanded tha we should
not imitate the heathen in their sports and pastimes.

2 They were first invented and appointed by the Devil, Tit. Liu. Decad.
to pacify his wrath in the time of a famine, as if he were the author of the
judgment of God: And so

3 They were invented to the high derogation of the power and Majesty of God.

4 They are the teachers of sin, yea, enemies to Repentance, as both
expressing sin lively, and making a mock^ of it.

5 They are the very bands to all hypocrisy and dissimulation, as making show
of what they are not, and expressing vice under the habit of virtue.

6 They alter the order that God has placed in his creatures, changing the
resemblance.

4 Stage Plays are unlawful and abominable.

Of men into women, a thing expressly forbidden by the law of God. Deuteronomy. 22.

They are means to exclude the preaching of the Gospel, as contenting the
people with such formal shows, and so thereby persuading them, that because
they can learn more at a play, then at a Sermon, therefore, the play is
better, the Sermon needless.

And seeing the people can endure sin to be reproved in a play, which they will
not abide in the Pulpet: This causes not only to despise the power of the
word, but even to make a mock of sin.

And so are the means to nourish Atheism, and all desperate impiety.

Of dancing: That it is an enemy to liberality, and utterly unlawful as it is
now used generally.

Howsoever the Scripture does commend unto us some kinds of dancing.

Namely,

That of David, to show his joy and thankfulness unto God for the reducing of
the Arc: as also 2 Samuel 6.

Those holy dancings of Moses and Miriam, in thankfulness unto God for their
great deliverance. Exodus 15. 1. 2.

Yet are those no warrants to justify the profane and lascivious dancing of
these ages.

1 These were performed in an holy manner: namely, in modesty, and great
wisdom, to avoid occasion and appearance of evil, the men by themselves, and
the women also together.

2 These dancings, of old, were performed to holy ends, namely, to express
thankfulness unto God for his mercies vouchsafed unto them.

But as for the dancings of these times.

They are both occasions of evil in regard of the promiscuous dancing of men
and women together, as also, because of those lascivious gestures and
behauiours that accompany the same.

Especially they entend most wicked ends; as uncleanness, wantonness,
effeminatenesse, etc. if not murder and adultery follows the same. And are
they not also maine enemies against liberality?

Yea certainly,

As not only exhausting our estate in vanity of apparel; maskings, etc.
whereby we are usually disenabled from performing this duty.

But by these vain recreations enflaming the heart with pride, etc. whereby it
is alienated from the poor. Yea nourishing in idleness, and provoking thereby
to all excess of lust, whereby still the estate is more emptied, and misery
hastened.

And so exposing oft-times to the just scorn of the world, and necessity of
relief from others.

And thereby thrusting forward to shifting and spoiling of our brethren, whom
we should and might relieve. And does not open robbery and murders usually
hence ensue? Will such gallants labor? are they not ashamed to beg, and must
they not live? Will they not have it by hook or by crook, as we say? must
they not cut it out of the hides of others?

CHAP. XXX.
How to abstain from these delights.

1 COnsider we that at the best they are subject to much abuse: And therefore
choose we rather such recreation as may turn good to the soul, may provoke to
see our vileness, and humble to repentance.

If we will needs try conclusions in these sports,

2 Then resolve we to play freely, and so we shall shortly play alone:
secondly, if we play for ought, let us then use our selves to give a way
whatsoever we win, and to pay of our own what we loose, and this will also
quickly end us of our company, and ease us of our labor.

3 Instead of these, we choose such as are of honest report, as shooting, etc.
Secondly such as are not so subject to sleights and advantages to deceive: such
as may further the health of the body, as exercises of running, wrestling, etc.

Such as may fit us the better to the service of our country, as handling the
Pike, feats of actiuity, and such as are performed laudably in the Artillery
garden; shooting with the Piece.

And such as in general may further to spiritual duties of Prayer,
thanksgiving, may provoke to contemplate the power and wisdom of God, in the
variety of his work, and such as may serve to humble the flesh, and may enable
us the better to this grace of liberality, as tillage of the earth, grafting,
and may imitate even childish simplicity.

But especially labor we to weane our souls from these delights.

And therefore,

That our hearts may be weaned by degrees from these perilous vanities.

1 Let us consider, not so much how we may pass away the time present, as how
we have misspent the time past, and therefore have deserved that time should be
no more, and this will even work this conclusion, that it is sufficient that
we have spent time past after the manner of the Gentiles, that it is the
mercies of the Lord, that we have not been over taken in our foiles, that it
now stands us upon to walk more circumspectly, redeeming the time, because the
days are evil.

2 Consider we what fruit we have in those things whereof we are now
ashamed, at the best, no better then vanity and vexation of spirit.

3 Observe we the reason and common ground of these sports, namely, to ease a
troubled mind: and judge we wisely what unfit and desperate Physic this
proves thereto; serving at the best to dead the conscience, to exclude
Repentance, to increase sin: and so to hasten to vengeance.

4 Consider we that the practice of these sports tends not only to the
profaning of the Sabbath, but to justify this prophannesse, under pretense of
Christian liberty, and recreation.

5 And so consider we wisely the companions of these games, as whoring,
drunkenness, murder, cousenage, and swearing.

6 Resolve we daily to reckon with our selves for the expense of time, and then
we shall be ill apaid to bring any such stuff into reckoning.

7 We shall have enough to do to account for ordinary escapes, and sins that
hangs so fast upon us, so that we shall have little need, to draw on sin
with cart-ropes, to make a sport of it.

And therefore in all these recreations labor we to become fools, not
affecting any extraordinary skill in them, neither seeking for masteries by
them, unless they be such as may make us serviceable to the common good,
observing daily the vanity of them, or at least their insufficiency to give
content to the pure mind: and considering the shortness of our lives, and
suddenness of Christ's coming to judgment, imagine we whether these will
prove Oil in our Lamps, to meet the Bridegroom withal, or not rather
stubble to help to kindle the fire of Gods jealousy, to burn us vnquenchably?

And learn we to make God our delight, by walking always in his presence.
Rejoicing in his word.

Meditating of his admirable power and wisdom in all his works, especially
refreshing our souls in the beauty of his face in Jesus Christ. And rejoicing
in the hope of that love that shall be revealed.

Delighting in the excellent that ar^ earth. Psalm. 16. and laboring to
ma^^tayne the fellowship by walking as lights amidst the darkness of this
world, saving some by fear, plucking out of the fire. Iud. 22.

Exhorting each other daily, that we be not hardened by the deceitfulness of
sin. Hebr. 3. 13.

And waiting for the glorious revelation of the sons of God.

Laboring especially to avoid the causes and occasions of these vanities.

Namely, pretense of Christian liberty as before.

2 Idleness. Being diligent in our callings, and committing the issue to God.

3 Security, as because we are safe, all is well, therefore we may be merry,
we may take our fill of pleasure.

4 Atheism, as thinking all our happiness consists in this life, and that
this happiness appears in the satisfying of the flesh, and therefore let us
eat and drink, play and sport, for to morrow we shall die. 1 Cor. 13.

5 Lastly, consider we that these sports (...) the most part, as they were
banished by the wiser heathen out of their commonwealths, so they are also
condemned by the laws of our land.

The parties using many of them, accounted no better then common rogues, as
Players, Bearewards, etc. And so as Rogues to be dealt withal.

FINIS.

