Meditations and Prayers, gathered out of the Sacred Letters, and Virtue (...)
Writ^^^ Disposed i^ (...) ^^bet of to (...)

(...) Co^^ out of the L^^^^ (...) ^^cred Minds.

Multae tribulatione^ Iustorum, and de omnibus liberabit eos Dominus. Psalm. 34.
Imprinted at London by William How. An. 1571.

E Elect by will of mighty love,
in Royal Roumth to sit:
L Living in Chaste Dianas Law,
with Sacred Sabas wit.
I Juno dis^^^ide with stately Rule,
has (...) Heavenly Ma^^
Z Zenobia serves ^ise Pallas s^^^
fair Venus seeks her gra^^
A ^lso wi^^ (...) Heavenly do^^
(...) ^^^dome to define:
B Bound (...) she be to Natures Law,
or if she be Divine.
E Empiring us unworthy wightes,
whose gratitude may gain:
T That our renowmd Elizabeth,
H Here Nestors years may rain.
To the High, puisant, renoumed Princess of al Virtue, our most redoubted
Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, of England, France, and Irelande Queen: Defendour
of the Christian Faith: your Majesty's true and Loyal servant John Conwaye,
Prays all things beseeminge the Height of your Royal Desent, Imperial
Crown, and dreadefull Dignity.
TReadinge the weary March of this loathsome Laborynthe, besieged with the
horrible Host of Satan our Anciente foe: we find (most regarded Prince) to
the blessed Soul, no way so sure a shield, and Fortress, as the
unspeakable v^rtu^ of daiely Prayer: the same deckings man's brickle Body with
the perfectness of true Glory, assistinge his decayed parts with sound
health, nourishinge his vital Spirits with sweet confirmed hope, geuinge
the furious Fend of Hell, pininge pounishmente, and most bitter conflicte: And
being faithful, hu^mble, and feruente, is not only to our Celestial Father,
the most sweet Oblation, and Sacrifice, but to every true Christian, a most
blessed comfortable exercise: wherein, as we lay abroad our yrksome
transgressions by natural defectes to the Almighty, requiringe the Fortress
of his Holy Promise to defend us from this politic, and wicked Warrior. So
by often conference as it were, even with the Deity it self, we are trained
Soldiers to the Battle of each affliction.

By Prayer, Despair is avoided, and the horrible sin of Presumption
ouerth^owen, all Impurenesse laid aparte, all Rancour foregotten, and rigorous
Envy dissolved to mild Love: else shall we want the things we pray for.

Then if Prayer doothe only enforce us to a reformation of our misdeedes,
purchasing us a stately Mansion in the House of God, free from the heavy yoke
of Sin, and Death. The Holy Augustine rightely spoke these words: Oration
est Animae Sanctae praesidium, Angelo bono Solatium, Diabolo Suppliciu^, gratum
Deo Obsequium, and Poenitentiae Religionis Laus tota, perfecta Gloria, Spes
certa, Sanitas incorrupta. And also Cassidorus: Oration posita est, per quam Ira
Dei suspenditur, Venie procuratur, Poena refugitur, and Praemiorum Largitas
impetratur: Et nullus inde respuitur, nisi qui in ea tepidus inuenitur. Let us
therefore present the Highest with this Incense of true Prayer, discoueryng our
minds, and confessing our unworthiness, with assured hope to receive the
benefit of his sweet Promises, due to each penitente Soul that asks in
the simpleness of heart with tears, and steadfastness, reiectinge all
tremblinge hope, which then gains our true perfection therein, and also
confirms these further words of Augustine: Si pura, and casta sit Oration,
Coelos penetrans, vacua non redibit. O sweet Sentence: nay, o more blessed
travail, so employed, where nothing is found so necessary to the lost
Child, nothing more pleasant to the afflicted man, nothing more profitable to
the weak despairinge mind, neither any thing so well beseeming every estate,
arminge them with able force to encounter the wicked Serpent. Against whose
malignities, as the Heavenly gifts of prudente skill, and Learning are shrined
in Royal Seat of your unspotted Life: associate with most lowely nature ^he
true Victors of Regale renown, exercisinge each virtue in proper kind, that
justly may procure you everlasting reward of undefiled Battle: so under
Bulwark of those Angelical beauties pearsinge highest poincte of starry
Firmamente, and mount, I say, of Heavenly Humilities, universally resoundinge
all Europe, and making England specially blessed: im imboldened to lay
before your Highness, these words of Solomon King, touching this effect, who
called his household to Prayer, and commended the force thereof. Because
(says he) I communicate with God of good things, I will have Honor of the
Elders, I will be found a ready young man in Judgment. In conspectu potentium
admirabilis ero, and facies principu^ mirabuntur me. Create is the force of
Prayer to a Prince that loves it, greater to him that uses it, greatest to
him that needs it: The comfort whereof (most puisant Prince) holds back
my over feebled spirit, from her last step to that vglye Hell of
desperation, deeming there was never erst infelicitie in any degree, equal to
mine, whose foes by sinister suggestions, have not only usurped the reward of
my single intent, and true service: but Zoylus has stirred the ministers of
your heavy wrath against me, to the abandonyng of my desired liberty,
suppression, with utter ruin of my poor sequel, and buried my half living
Carkas in the grave of deep forgetfulness, where my voice is hoarsed with
cryinges, and my tongue fainted with vtteringe the grief of my sorrowful
mind: No doubt, a just scou^ge to the hidden faults of my passed life, but
to the very case of my committing, wherein I am wounded, maym^d, wronged and
lost, it needs a true Confession, and not a false Defense in any thing by
me thought or done, to the prejudice of your Royal person, Crown, State, or
Dignity: I profess before the Almighty, as innocent as the Child vnseparate
his Mothers intrayles: Test se^pso, whose wrath I crave in Judgment to my
thoughts, of any harm to your Highness, wherein amidst my sorrows, yet I
joy, sithence my miserable matter concerns your excellency, and my
punishment, at your Noble pleasure, continued or released, which in weary
state, I attend powringe my pitiful plaintes before the Majesty of the
Highest, to dissolve your worthy heart to accustomed leuitie, and to fortify
ab^ade of these sweet words in your Royal breaste, rendered to a sely
suitor, that your Highness would ioy^ with any inferior of my Friends, in
the trial of my truth. Wherein O gracious God, what else does your Highness,
but scourge the schorchyng, Phaeton that goes too fast, and wantes a slower
reign, for whilst you wish my truth, which has no want, I wail my
unworthiness, and fall into deep Hell of Desperation, (Nihil enim est, quod
tantum me terreat, nec est aliquidquod tantum me delectet, Qua^tum huius tuae
in me bonitatis commemoratio, terret, inquam me, indignitas propria, sed me
delectat haec tua virtus and excellentia) being assured, my whole study,
force, travel, nor adventure, shall ever be able to Ca^cell the Records of
your Princely thoughts, touching my true Loyalty, which no Antecedent of
passed life can accuse, nor any poisoned tongue in true touch, by present
annoye.

What more woorthely beutifieth the Majesty of Kingely rule, aduaunceth
wisdom to her Highest step of glory, or can so sweetly make the chief
Harmony of al good government, as against the woeful afflicted, to deliver
Clemency: to each offender, Mercy: to the virtuous Reward: and in causes
doubtful, to suspende judgment. Truly, these are they, which not only
satisfy the Heavens and Earth with a right aspecte of Divine Justice, but are
chief moouers, that the long abandoned Virgin Astrea, has resigned sacred
seat, to become your handmayde to high Glory, through al Provinces, and
stre^gthneth my feeble parts amid these conflicting days, increasing chief
delight, to nourishe health against infection of place, vbi.

Vnda locusque nocent and causa valentior istis:
Anxietas animi, quae mihi semper adest.
Thus do I strive (most seemly Sovereign) tossed in the Sea of many
troubles, bruised with the Ankore of griesly grief, and meished in the
tumblinge toil of froward Fortune, thirstinge victory to the only end, that
protected by your Virtue to wage true trial of my owing homage, and faithful
heart, before the Imperial Seat of your clear, and able Judgment: where I
doubt not, but a single truth, whose end has no being, and so Priuileged,
that she triumphs of Time, and not Time of her, and will in fine advance
her self, and by her Justice free me of suspicion, and so wholly discipher my
honest intent, true, faithful, fervent, and duetifull care of your Royal
Person, Common Weal, and happy Government, as my dealinge therein equally
heard, shall keep weight with the truest, and most faithful Subject,
belonginge to your Stately Rule, with the remainder of my life, found by ready
show of owing Homage, and duetifull good will and forwardnes, worthy your
Princely Clemencies added to my chokinge calamities, by your Heavenly
disposition, without the which, I had estsoones perished, where yet behold I
rest, like subject to the daiely peril of such ensuinge Battle, as
obedient to your further will and pleasure, whereunto I only cast the Ankore
of my well doing, and hope of my health. Having gathered without Fenne, or
Paper, this ha^dfull of pietifull Prayers, that give my pininge ghost, her
best solace: Which effect, I lay before your feet, to which boldness
(most triumphant Prince) if you add desired Pardon, allowinge the ripe grain
of my good will in the rudeness of this roughe act, I shall deem my self
thrice happy, and imboldened to present your excellency, with the larger
parts of my employed travel which I trust, shall better agree your
Highness farther likinge, and would have made it my rather oblation, in
steed of this small piece, but that I want apt instruments to pullishe the
same, and contagion of place, that often annoyeth, and depriueth my senses their
duetifull office, but shall never enforce me from the bounden duty of true
^llegeance, as knows God: to whom of daiely custom your Majesty repayreth
to be eased of the yrksome burden of ordenary sin. At which time, if your
Highness vouchesafe the perusinge these few things, by me selected, there
shall appear the unfeigned griefs I suffer. Which known to your Majesty, I
have my desire, attending^ a better exchange at your Princely pleasure, when I
shall most willingly Sacrifice my Body in each duetifull service. Deeminge my
life most happy, when death shall challenge the same in your quarrel, for
tribute of your worthy Merits: in whose effects you shall never repent,
neither your Highness conceived good in thoughts, nor committed compassion,
in geuinge relief to my drenched state: which if I further find not, Gods
will be done, your Majesty preserved, your Enemies confused, with all Peace,
Tranquillity, and Happiness, whilst you live in this soil of sorrow, as
exile from our Heavenly Father, whose joys (through his dear Son) God
grant you participate after this Life, to the heyght of your desires, and
deapth of my daiely Prayers.

Your Majesty's in triple bonds of Homage, I. Conway.

To the Reader.
I Deem it vvil be cause of great wonder to thee (gentle Reader) that I,
whom neither daily experience of Learning has instructed, long use of exercise
has perfected ne yet the frequented Study of ^acred Muse has authorized,
would enterprise the Publication of any work, and hazard the danger of
detracting tongues: chiefly of so pure, and Divine a cause, as effect of
Prayer, which I do not commit to open Eyes, as a thing worthy of Learned
view: or deeming the store of like matter rare to thy Age, having choice, and
abundaunce, neither yet through Pride of Vain glory moved, or otherwise, that
I would be reputed more Religious, then Virtuous. Chiefly have I wrought the
same, Priuileaged through the Zealous Love my gracious Gouernesse, has in all
Virtue, to approach her stately presence, as the Image of my devvtiful memory,
boast of my true Loyalty, and view of my deep misery. Consequently being
tormented with infinite troubles: Broken with the Ankor of many cares:
restrained of Liberty: spurned of Fortune: forsaken of health: forgotten of
Friends: couched in Cave of deep Foregetfulnesse: My faithful Service
misconstrued: sinister practices allowed: my true Loyalty thereby suspected and
with my renowned Sovereign sinisterly defaced. Among these rigorous rages of
rankours reign: among these fretting furies of fickle, blind, and froward
Fortune: among these cruel chances of Worldely choking calamities: Among these
sturdy striving streams of stubborn stormye state: Since I find nothing that
gives my consuming carkas comfort, but only Prayer being the most ready calm
to appease these troublesome tempests: and further findinge it the faithful
Imbassidour, and perfect Pathe to each man's eternal bliss, have thought it
not altogether in Vain, and repugnaunte, to divide with thee (gentle Reader)
the excellency, and benefit of the same, to be holden with thee, as a daily
exercise of thy delights, and most sure staff to all thy purposes: so shall
thou shun the shipwreck of all adversity, and continue with increase, the
beawtie of thy prosperity. Make me thy Presidente, I beseech thee, search
the records of my passed Life. Credit not Fame, who wants truth, and
measure in all things: and when thou will enter Judgment, have reason for
thy guide, and dew proved Acts for thy ground: so shall thou not err.

Which recorded in mind, rifle the race I have run, I pray thee unfold the
Table of my Acts good, or ill. I boast a life, free from deed, or pretense of
any disloyalty against my renowned Sovereign. I compare a Heart so true, and
faithful in the Weal of my Native Country, as may equal (I protest before
the majesty of the highest) the best, and not inferior to the truest. Yet I
acknovvledge I worthily bear this my exiled liberty (whose Fruits in part I
offer thee) for that I have rebelled against the Omnipotente GOD, and my chief
LORD: for that I have been negligente of his Precepts, and slothful in this
use of Holy Prayer: Whereunto, I hope easy persuasion shall suffice, so to
incorporate thee in Love, Fellowship, and daily exercise, as sharply to take
revenge of thy sluggish body, in whatsoever Day thy ungrateful Spirit shall
become negligente of thy dewetie therein.

Consider, I pray thee, the pain, Passion, merits, and immense goodness, of
a mild, loving, and merciful Savior Jesus Christ, toward thee: forgeat
not, that being dead through Sin in thy first Father ADAM, and worthily
condemned to eternal dampnacion. He, without other mocion, then his own mercy,
brought thee to live again. If this so great mercy, cannot bring in the
bonds of thy owinge dewtie, and move thee by daily use of thanks giving
through hearty Prayer, to cancel the records of such gratitude, be yet reduced,
by considering the scorching pains prepared in guerdon of the ungrate, and
reprobate. Accept the troubles, wretchedness, and Martirdomes of this lothsom
life, as true Figure of his favor, and signs of his blessing: be not
unthankful by omission of Prayer toward so natural and more then loving a
Father, that he has stauled thee on earth, not only replenished with many
wholesome Herbs, Flowers, Fruits, Waters, Trees, Plants, and many worthy
Creatures to thy behoof and Subjection, but has farther given thee a most
comfortable and infallible promise, and grant of his holy Spirit, and divine
grace, to arm, guide and defend thee, so well, against the trains of thy
Aunciente foe Satan, as also how to use these his wonderful works, loving
kindness, and great mercy so that with hearty and faithful Prayer, thou
call to him for the same, yea and has left thee a form of Peticion, by Prayer
to him for all thy necessities, and lastly has given thee, a special
commandment, to Pray, promising to hear and grant thy request.

Wherefore it is requisite to thee and such as pray: First well to consider of
this promise, whereby may be kindled in them a more Ardent desire Faithfully
to pray, for without this special commandment enioyning us to pray, except
also God had promised he would hear us, neither thou nor any creature,
could obtain the least thing by his prayers. And here thou may see when we
obtain any thing the grant is not to be attributed to our prayers, or
worthiness, but to the unspeakable goodness of GOD, which preuenteth our
prayers with his promise and commandment, whereby he does move us to
pray, that we may learn he is careful for us, and much more ready to
grant then we to ask or receive. And because he offreth to us more goodness
then either we dare, or can in any wise desire, let that blessed bounty of
GOD so kindle and confirm thee, that thou always pray without doubting.

For specially in acceptable prayer, is required: that we mistrust nothing the
providence of the almighty, by that he chiefly promises that he will hear
us, and gave a precept of praying, only to settell and confirm our sure
belief that he would hear us: as in the.21. of Matthew and.11. of Mark is
said: Whatsoever you ask Praying, believe you shall receive it, and it shall
be given you. Luke likewise. 11.

Every one that asks, receives, he that seeks, finds, and to him that
knocks, it shall be opened. With these and like, so well promises as
commandments, thy mind is to be confirmed faithfully to pray, assuring
thy self thou shall receive all that thou do ask. But if thou doubt of the
will of God, in thy Prayer, and pray rashly, thou co^mittest two offenses.
First, because through thine own fault, thy prayer is of less value, and
labor in vain. For (says S. James) If any man require ought of God, let
him ask with Faith, not doubtinge: For he that doubts, is like a Surge of
the Sea, which is tossed of the wind, and carried with violence: Neither let
that man think he shall receive any thing of his Heavenly Father, because his
heart is not sure and quiet: for Faith keeps ye heart quiet, that it may
receive ye gift of God. The other is that thou beleeuest in God as in a light
and frivolous Person: deeminge him either not able to perfourm his promises, or
that he will not. These pluck away the Glory and Name from the high God,
(which believe he is not faithful and true.) And this Sin is so great, that
of a Christian it makes a Heathen: for God is not only denied in this Sin,
but he is utterly thereby lost, neither is there any hope of recovery, so long
as thou abidest in this infidelity.

And if it happen to any that prays without sure trust, that he obtain any
thing, that guifte is given of God (being angry) to the destruction both of
Body and Soul: that at the least sum Honor may be done to the holy
Scriptures, which may be uttered from men full of sin, distrust and contempt
of God.

Furthermore they do not judge right, which think to obtain in prayer by
their own worthiness.

This is not to be regarded, whether thou be worthy, or unworthy, that
praiest: for prayer consists not in the worthiness which we bring, but in
the infallible truth of Gods promise. And truly, if prayer be grounded,
either upon it self or any other, it is vayn and frustrate: yea though it
seem to proceed from the Godly affectes of the Heart, and eyes pouring out
abundant tears of Water, or Blood. But let us pray to be Judged worthy and
be heard, because we perceive, our own vnvvorthynesse, and are bold
through the only goodness of God and Faith. Although thou perceiuest thy self
unworthy in desert, either to ask, or receive any thing of thy Celestial
Father, let this only be regarded, that thou shall obtain it through the honor
of his name, which is true: and let not thy unbelieving Faith hold his
promise, for an untruth: Neither shall vnvvorthynesse hinder thee, as also thy
worthiness shall nothing further thee. But Unbelief only shall damme thee,
and Faith shall make thee worthy, and save thee. Diligentely therefore bevvare
that thou never deem thy self worthy to pray or receive, but even when thou
feeleste thy self able boldly to lean to the sure, and true promises of thy
chief Creatoure: of whose mercy, thou ought to be so much the more sure,
because even as he promised thee unworthy, and without deserte, that he
will deny thee nothing. So likewise, though thou be unworthy, yet he vvil
hear thee, that he may perform the promises he gave thee. So that nothing
is left to thy deserts, or worthiness but the truth, and mercy of the most
Highest do challenge all things to themselves. From whence al promises flow
as out of a Fountain, that this s^ying might be fulfilled: Psalm. 25. All the
ways of the Lord are mercy and truth: for his mercy we do se in his
promises and his Truth when they are fulfilled, and kept. And likewise in
the Psalm. 32. Mercy and Truth are in his way: that is they are met and
seen, joined together in any one work or gift, which we obtain in our
prayers. Finally we ought so to moderate our Faith in Gods promises, that
we assign no end, time, or place, to the Majesty of the Highest, but leave
all to his Will. Wisdom, and Omnipotency, being sure it shall be done: Ye^
although there appear neither place, time, nor reason, how it shall be
brought to pass. It is sure his divine wisdom far better knovveth and
forseeth then we. Therefore believe GOD, and refer all to his will and
disposicion: so shall he bring to pass thy demand by Miracle, if no other
way it may be.

As in the people Israel which believed God would deliver them from their
Enemies, yet appeared there no mean how: Suddenly he opened the Red Sea,
and gave them safe passage, and the Enemies all he overwhelmed and drowned.

Likewise the holy Judith, when she heard the City of Bethulya had taken
Counsel, and determined that unless God within five Days would send them
help, they would yield the City to the Enemy, she greatelye rebuked them,
saying: Who are you which thus tempt the Lord: This communication is not to
provoke mercy, but rather to stir anger, and kindle wrath. Have you set a
time for the Mercy of the Almighty, and will you appoint a Day in your own
Judgment? This Faith in the holy Woman was so well accepted of the God of all
Victory, that with a maruailous mean he delivered her, that she cut of the
Head of Holifernes, and preserved the City with bitter repulse to his whole
Army. Likewise Paul says Ephesians. 3. This is the manner of God, that he will
do all things by a far other, and more better way, then we can pray him or
understand. So we perceive our selves to be far inferior, then that we may
appoint, or prescribe in our prayer, time, or, place, manner, or other
circumstance. Wherefore cease thou not (gentle Reader) to pray, and refer all
to his Divine will, steadfastly believing that he will not fail to hear and
help thee. So shall thou make his brightness shine upon thee, procure his
tender kindness, tovvard thee: dravve his Rod, the Lot of thy unbelieving,
from thee and be as Mount Sion, that can not be removed, but stand fast for
ever and ever. To the stately top of which blessed Mansion, the rather shall
thy vvillinge foot be able to ascend, if with mind, and memory thou observe
and imitate the Holy Ambrose who teaches thus: Sit oration pura, simplex,
dilucida, atque manifesta, plena grauitatis and ponderis, non affectata,
eligantia, sed intermissa gratia.

For the true, and acceptable prayer consists not in the rablemente of
words, ^e yet in the vehemency of voice, but in the steadfastness of thy
belief in the beavvty of thy desires, and in the pure intentive thoughts of
thy heart fixed on his Divine mercies at such time as thou do pray.

It avails not otherwise, thou seek him with long labor of lips, thy
mind distracte with vani^^es and thy Heart in Pilgrymage with Worldly
carefulnes: vvherof if thou make scruple through insufficiency of this
vnlatened Writer, let the saying of the Sage satisfy thee, who tells man's
Prayer to be of perfect value when he acknowledges him self to be brickle
Clay, and Duste: humblinge him self: chalenginge no vvoorthynesse of Virtue to
himself: but confessing wholy the good he doothe to proceed of the only
motion, and mercy of his Heavenly Maker, attributing to him only the due
glory, and praise. This, John vvorthely confirms: Deus adoratur Spiritu, and
Veritate: I say then Non in magnificis, and amplosis verbis adoratur. Which
let suffice thee (gentle Reader) from me, and be eased in farther trouble of
my unlearned style: yet know from me, how hardly I have bin distressed in
gathering the same to thy behoof, both anoied with anxiety of mind by
condition of place, and of taking my diet without use of any T^encher (beeinge
estranged all other means) thereon with leathie Pensell of Lead, to bring to
thy grateful Hand, this small Quantity of Spiritual Food, which I hope vvil
move thy humble Nature to allow thee rather of this my good vvil, and
travel. In any learned skill that I offer thee, I confess, I may not well
boast: Neither do I assure thee, my self not to have erred. I can not
challenge singularity: Yet grant me (gentle Reader) thy pacient peruse, and
Friendly correction when my Faults present their number before thy learned
vievve: so shalt thou free thy self from foul Ingratitude, and give me
equal pay of my pains: Wherein I have not fed thee with Sugared sape
distilling from PERNASSO. I hold it an unpleasant discord in Heavenly
H^rmonie: not because MERCVRIE bathed him in ARGOS Bloudde, do I refuse his
aid, but because I am taught by the Apostle that Faith is not grounded in the
beauty of Orators Eloquence, ne yet in Pride of

(...) (...)wards me unworthy, which do hear with contrite heart, and bowed
knees appeal to the height of thy mercy and louinge kindness, to accept my
unequal thanks for the same: humbly beseeching thy Fatherly goodness, that
thy holy hand may still renew in me thy former gifts, plentuously powered
upon me from the Prime of my birth unto this present: not remembering (good
Lord) my unworthiness of the same, nor frailty of my passed years that
speaks against me, but alteringe the ministers of thy wrath into mild
mercy. Grant I beseech thee, that through the assistau^ce of thy holy Sprite,
I may be led to correct that is amiss, and that I may now persevere in
setting, ordering, and perfourming, all my trauelles, counselles, and studies,
as best may accord with thy blessed will, and cancel the bands of my heavy
charge, wherein assist me most puisant Prince of all power, with thy prudent
skill, and heavenly grace, ye I may be truly hable to auance Justice, and to
hate wrong, and so be found a faithful Minister over thy people. In whom plant
I beseech thee, thy Heavenly grace, and fear, with obedience toward thy
Minister, and kindle in me, the love of thy holy Spirit, that I may persevere
in the truth of thy word, without doubt or wavering to the end. Grant this,
oh mighty God of Hoastes, for the Merits, and Passion of thy dear Son, my
Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen.

Eccl. 4. Deliver him that suffers wrong, from the hands of the oppressor,
and be not faint hearted when thou sit in Judgment, decide Law with
Equity, and Justice with Mercy, be favorable to the Fatherless, and be in
stead of a Husband unto their Mother, so shall thou be blessed in fight of the
Highest, and he shall love thee, more then does thy Father and Moother.

Eccl. 12. Day and night let the broad Gates of thy bounty be open to the
Discrete and Virtuous. Set honor always upon the head of the Lowly. But to
the proud and ambitious, keep thy self secret and strange, give not thy
bread unto him, least he become mightier then thy self, nor trust not thine
Enemy, at any time: for like as Iron cankreth, so does his wickedness,
though he humble him self greatly, yet lock up thy mind and beware of him,
set him not by thee, nor on thy right hand, least he turn, get into thy
place, take thy room, and possess thy Seat.

Prou. 16. The cheerful countenance of the King is life: his louinge
favor is as the Evening dew.

Duce Deo.

HONI SOIT QV MAL Y PENSE:



E Encrese Knowledge.
L Let Virtue guide.
I In Prayer persevere.
Z Zelously ask.
A Acknowledge Sin.
B Beware of Presumption.
E Envy no man.
T Tender the helpelesse.
H Hope for Heaven.
R Remember thy Rule.
E Incline to Justice.
G Grant gifts by Defert.
I In Mercy delight,
N No Flatterers prefer.
A Accept the Wise.
Holy, brief, and comfortable Meditations or Prayers, disciferyng in Alphabet
form the Royal Name of our most Virtuous Sovereign.
EXercise mercy, and set thy Bread and Drink, upon the table of the poor and
hungry: cover the Naked with thy Clothes and these shall deliver thee from
Sin, and Death, and not suffer thy Soul to com in Darkness.

Zechiel the prophet says, When the wicked tourneth from his ungodliness he
has done, he shall save his Soul.

With thy Servant Esaie therefore I say (oh Lord) thou art a great, and
fearful God. Thou kepest covenant, and mercy with them which love thee, and
keep thy Commandments.

And with thy Apostle Barnabie, I acknowledge I have sinned, I have offended. I
have bin disobedient, and gonne back, yea I have departed from all thy paths,
and Judgments.

Lord to thee belongs righteousness and Mercy, to me, shame and
destruction for mine Iniquity.

Yet Lord enter not into judgment with thy Servant, for no fleash is righteous
in thy sight: neither correct me in thy wrath, for then I shall not abide it.

Have mercy upon me (oh Father) from the deapth of thy mercy take pity upon
me: forgive (Lord hear my Prayer) and blotte out mine offenses.

Let thy loving face shine over the work of thy hands, that lies waste:
Lord for thine own sake do it.

Incline thine ear and hear me, behold how desolate I am stretch out thy
hand, and help me, Lord, I desire to comme to thee, and my weakness is
such as without thy help, I am not hable to raise my self unto thee.

Therefore Lord remember thy sw^^^e promises, tarry not over long, strengthen me
with thy holy Spirit, hear my Prayers, and wash me in thy righteousness.

I cast not these peticions before thee, hoping in mine own Merits, which are
none, but trusting in thy great mercy, and sweet promises. Wherefore Lord
hear me, and forgive me, and I shall live for ever.

LEt Enimitie pass, which seeks Death and Destruction and before thou
Praiest, forgive, else thou heapest vengeance of thy self. Lord make thy
ways known unto me, that I may walk so perfectly, that no kind of Sin
overcome me.

Thou leadest straight in judgment, and geuest sight to the blind.

Thou art near unto them that call upon thee with faithful heart: have mercy
upon me, hear me, and give me a Heart to pray unto thee.

Lay not against me my sins past: but for thine own sake forget them.

I understand not al mine errors, my sins have taken hold on me, and of my
self I am not hable to return.

Send me therefore thy holy help, to strengthen mine infirmity.

Keep my mouth and lips, and let the thought of my heart be acceptable in
thy sight.

Permit not the word of Truth to depart my breaste: suffer not Malice to
dwell in my heart.

Deliver me from false surmises, and accusacions of men: rule me after thine
own will and pleasure.

Remove from me vanities, and let not the foot of Pride take hold on me, so
shall I be free from the greatest sin.

Stay and keep me from every evil way, for in thee I trust, it is thou only
that can help.

Look unto me with thy mercies, and grant me grace in thy sight. Amen.

IN Equity, Love, and Truth, gather all thy Riches: in the hands of the
Poor lay up thy Alms, and these shall defend thy evil: fight for the against
thine Enemies, better then the strength of mighty men, preserve thy favor as
the apple of an Eye, and rise with thee in the day of Judgment, to pay thy
reward on thy head. IN hope of thy Mercy, and Forgiveness (most mighty and
dreadful God) whose truth is unspotted, I am bold to com before thee.

My trust is good, I shall be heard, for that you have ever been the true head of
all Justice, and delightest in Truth.

Deny thy self thou can not: for thou have promised, In what ^^^e soever a
Sinner does with a broken heart, repent his wickedness: at that instant thou will cansell the records of thy remembrance: and the fowlenesse of his fault
shall remain no blemish to his Soul.

Hear me now therefore (oh Maker of Heaven and Earth) I acknowledge I have
sinned, and done unpleasant things in thy sight.

I confess the misdeedes, which rebel against my Soul, with Saul, saying: I
have sinned, I have played the Fool, and have erred exceedingly.

And with like humble, lowley, and faithful heart, as did King David: who
unfeignedly cried out his Sin, and became thy servant.

So (most Holy) in hope of the same hire, with contrite heart I sighe and say:
I have broken thy Laws, and not walked in thy Commandments.

If I should now recite, and number the mountains of my misdeedes, which
ouerwhelme my body, and that are eger, enemies to my pining Soul, the day were
to short.

Lord I need not, thy blisfull Seat is above the starry Firmament, and thou
sit on high beholding what is done amiss in the Earth below.

My wickedness that I most secretly have committed, to thy Celestial eyes,
has been manifest.

Forgive me good Lord, that my tongue may justify thy everlasting Truth,
that others beholding in me thy manifold mercies, may likewise with me be
ashamed of their evil, and seek after thy mercy.

Woe am I, that my heart has been so long unacquainted with the Welsprings of
thy Truth, that my hands have wrought unrighteousness, and heaped sin upon
sin.

Turn away from the sight thereof, the fullness of thy fury. Exchange the
roughness of thy rage into meek mildness, before thou correct me, most
loving Savior.

I am not able to abide thy heavy displeasure: if thou chastise me with thy
rod of Justice, I perish.

I have not one good deed to prefer, mine offenses bear number with the
flowers and blossoms of the Spring: my truth is no whit, and with
unrighteousness all is defiled.

Forgive me, oh Heavenly King: Forget, thou that art the sweet spring of my
Soul.

Give me thy holy Spirit, that it may be with me, and labor with me to
attain thy blessed favor: for mine ignorance cannot desire that I ought,
neither can my feeble force, without thine aid, raise me to thy presence.

Thy Spirit will help my debility, and make right intercession for all my
necessities.

Thy spirit will make me pray with such humbleness of heart, and sorrowful
sighinges, as no tongue can tell.

That gift most precious, will hold me up, where fleashe would fall, and guide
my feeble feet in the light of thy Law.

Thy Spirit (I say) will purge me from all earthly effects, and lift me up to
heavenly things.

Therefore conioyne me (oh God of all mercy) to thy holy Spirit, to teach me
to tread the steady steps of thy worthy will.

So shall I lead my Life in the true Law of thy louinge kindness, and with
a strong and stable mind, persevere in Prayer unto the end.

Grant me therefore for thy Truth and Sons sake, that I may enjoy this
sweet possession of thy holy Spirit, which may always lead my labors
after thy liking, and keep my heart in thy fear.

Sweet Jesus make a covenant with me, that I never become enemy with thee any
more, neither be found unworthy of thy ritche mercy and bountiful benefits:
but that the remainder of my life employed in thy Service, may justly move
thee to forgeat the iniquity of my tender years.

Continue thou God of all comfort with increase, by the assistaunce of thy
grace, what I have hear begun.

So shall I live to glorify thy might and mercy for ever and ever. Amen.

Zeal, anger, carfulness, and sorrow, cause celetitie of old Age, Justice,
mercy, equity, and truth, make glad the Holy Ghost: and to a merry heart is
given long life, and svveete taste. Zachary spoke from thee (O Lord) saying:
Like as I devised to punnishe you, what time your Fathers provoked me unto
wrath, and spared not.

Even so am I now minded to do well unto the house of Judah, and Jerusalem,
therefore fear it not.

Now the things you shall do (says the Lord) are these: speak every man the
truth to his neighbor, execute Judgment truly and peaceably within your
Ports, none of you imagine evil in his heart, and love no false oaths.

O Lord, of my self I am so sinful and ignorant, that I cannot speak or
think a good thought, much less to do well in deed.

Assist me therefore with thy grace, that I may do as thou have commanded.

And let me comfort my self with thy sweet words by thy Prophet, which
are, That as the house of Judah and Israel were accursed amongst the Heathen,
so thou dooest promise to make them a blessing.

Am not I an Ofspringe of that seed (O Lord) to whom thou did promise
this blessinge?

Or were not these things written to put me in mind of thee, and cause me
turn from my wickedness, and trust by thy mercy to obtain favor again?

Remember then (O Lord) in thy Mercy, Turn me, and I shall be turned: say to
my Soul, I am come unto thee, thy health and thy salvation.

A Double tongued man is to be abhorred: and he that bears hatred, can
neither pray rightly nor speak truly, of whom beware, for the malicious
and double tongued, has overthrown High Palaices, and laid waste strong
Cities, who so harkeneth to them shall never find rest, nor dwell in safety,
near the Prince they are more perilous then a Fistula in the breast to the
health of Man. AVenge not thy cause on me thou God of all justice: forgive me
my contemptes of thy Commandments, and omission of Prayer.

If thou give me equal pay of my Merits, I perish.

Forgette my unkindness I beseech thee, and clothe me with comfort of thy
compassion.

Purify my Soul and Body, wash away my wickedness with the blood breakinge
from the wounds of my Savior Christ, and I shall no more be unkind.

Give me wisdom to know all thy precepts and pleasure: grant thy mercy
ever to keep me, and thy grace to guide me.

It yrketh me, that ever I did forsake so sweet a Lord and Savior: my
sorrow wastes me, and my sighs ouerwhelme my heart.

Have me in remembrance therefore, for I tremble and quake: were not thy
mercy known, I should utterly despair.

Turn away the stroke of thy vengeance from me: bring my mind out of
trouble into rest.

Fetch now again (thou most precious Prince of all power) that which thy
puisaunt might has shapen.

Restoare (Son of the Father thee Almighty (that which thou have so well
guided, and bought with thy terrible torments.

Take again into the Sacred seat of thy blessed custody (Lord God Holy Ghost)
my Body and Soul, that have wandered.

Thou haste pitifully preserved them long from the violence and utter
destruction of the wicked Serpente, and throws of worldly chance.

Most mighty God, since thou haste advanced thy Glory by such compassion,
continue in me hearty Prayer: put about me the girdle of thy grace, and link
my love in the lore of thy laws, and my heart shall be thankful.

Day and night will I say, blessed is the Lord. And will praise thy Name, and
magnify thy mercy for ever and ever.

BE ashamed of sins and unrighteousness: be ashamed to turn thy face away
from thy friend in his need: be ashamed to obbrede thy friend with thy
guiftes: be ashamed to take, and not to give: but be not ashamed of the truth
of God, and his Couenaunte: but do thy best to fulfill it, and thou shall live
BE my comforter in all cou^selles and dangers (oh God) make clear my
understanding, and heap my sort with new effects, and Spiritual motions.

Renew my Body and Spirit, that all sin fly from me, and grant that I
live to righteousness.

Power upon me the Spirit of thy grace: load me with the True knowledge of
thy word.

Hold my heart always in thy fear, build a true faith and hope of thy
promises and mercy in the Bowels of my breast.

The heavenly Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, has promised it unto me, for
his Sons sake I seek it: and for that thou may overcome when thou art
Judged, deny me not.

Though there belong nothing to me but confusion and shame, yet (Lord)
correct me not in thy dreadful displeasure, but with the loving favor of
thy face, look upon my festured wounds. Heal them (good Lord) from the
bottom let them be healed.

Mingle thy mercy and precepts, and sow the seed of them so deep in my
Heart, that no burninge blastes of persecution make ashes thereof: neither any
thorny cares of this life do choke it: but that it may bring forth, as thou
have appointed like good ground, thirty six, and an hundred fold.

The fruits of my harvest Lord, shall be the flowers of thy glory: My tongue
shall always speak of thy maruaylous works, and my heart shall keep thy Laws.

I will not deny thee (my God) for the power of any wicked, but will seek thy
grace, hope of thy mercy, and say: The mighty God of Israel is to be loved,
feared, and obeyed, world without end. Amen.

Evil seeds see thou sovv not in the Furrows of unrighteousness, so shall
thou not reap thee seuenfolde labor: sue not unto Man for any Lordship,
neither unto the King for the Seat of Honor. EStablish my heart (oh Heavenly
Father) in league and love with thy laws: printe thy Precepts in the bowels of
my breast, and sequestre my mind from all thoughts, studies, and labors,
that may draw me from thee.

My Soul consumes in care to be with thee, and my bodily eyes tremble to
behold thee: only because thou hate sin, and abhorrest iniquity.

Alas there is nothing in me but unrighteousness, and the examples be
dreadful, which declare how grievously thou have punnished sin.

Thou did drown the world for sin: Thou did send fire upon Sodom
and Gomorrha: Thou did cast forth Adam and his Ofspringe out of Paradise
for sin: Thou did grievously punnish thy servant David notwithstanding
his hearty repentance: yea thou persecutedst Solomon in himself and his
Posterity, with many other to our example, and all for shameful sin.

Lord since these examples are true, and mine iniquity equal with theirs: what
should become of my Soul, if I had not a mediator, Christ, whose bloody
Passion then appeased thy wrath, when nothing else could.

By his Death I am once redeemed, (oh God) therefore let me now not be
consumed, bearing thy Image: but grant the pains of his pitiefull Passion may
put out all mine offenses.

With my voice I will spread thy mercy over all Nations: my Life shall
glorify thy name, and all that thou geuest me, I will acknowledge to be
thine, with everlasting praise. Amen.

THe greater thou art, the more humble thy self in all things, and thou shall
find favor in the sight of God: for great power belongs only unto God,
and he is honored of the lowly. TVrne away thy face from mine
unrighteousness: Lord no Creature is clear in thy sight.

If thou should call thine Angels to the Bar, they might not abide the
Sentence of thy just Judgment.

I come unto thee for succor, Lord under the wings of thy mercy receive me.

Thou delightest not in any Sacrifice or burnt Offerynges: but thy accustomed
condition has been ever to accept a sorrowful spirit, and a broken heart.

Lord, if thy louinge kindness be such: I hear present thee with a heavy
heart, a broken body, a martyred mind, and a sighing soul.

These all appeal to the^ (O Lord) for thy mercy, and cry out with the
Prodigal Son, saying: I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee: wash
me therefore with thy ritche mercy, not that any good in me does deserve it,
but because thou art God of all mercy, and it declares thy mightiness to
forgive.

Thou did show compassion upon the woman of Canaan, for her great Faith,
and from the beginning thou have not rejected the effectual prayers of a
single heart.

Lord I give glory to thy name with the highest: thy mercy stretches above
the Firmamentes: the sure hope and trust I have in thy unspeakable truth and
compassion, is equal with the strong Faith of the Cananite woman.

I confess my sins manifold: But Lord I know thy mercy, and sauinge
health are infinite:

Lord since thou art of power to forgive above that I can offend: for thy
names sake, release my sorrow: cut the sack of my sins, and make me
strong in thee.

So shall I live, and all my thoughts acknowledge thy praise. Amen.

HAppy is the man that has not fallen with the Word of his mouth, and is not
pricked with the conscience of sin, that has no heaviness in his mind, and
is not fallen from his Hope. HOw mighty thou art (oh God of Hosts) in thy
precellynge power: by Creatynge this World of nothing, we are taught to know.

Thou do govern the same, and put down with thy hand the proud and
traitorous Tiraunt thereof.

Thou destroyest their devises, and keep the raging Sea within her bounds.

These and such like declare thy power over all.

The plenty of thy bountiful hand, gives not only of things, but also of
every kind of things show forth thy louinge kindness.

Thou do multiply yearly and daily these kinds: How many seeds (good
Lord) do you increase of one seed, Lord what manifold Springes comes
thereof.

These cannot, but keep us mindful of thy exceeding Riches and Mercy.

Lord, if to thy enemies (as to the greatest number of the world which love
thee not) thy condition be to deal thus bountifully, what shall I deem
rests with thee for thy friends.

Truly such blisfull joys and rest, as makes me only desire of thee to be
desolued from this earthly and unclean body when thy pleasure is.

I am the fresh Image of thy self, and the work of thine own hands, take
me therefore unto thee, burnish me a new, free my Soul from the poisoned
prison of sin, that it may give equal thanks unto so sweet a Lord and
guide.

Whilst I abide in this wretched body of Sin, I cannot see thee (oh Lord)
yea it is a heavy habitacion, and depresseth down sore my Spirit from the
familiarity which it else should have with thee my loving Father.

Lord this world and life, is a doungeon of Darkness, a Mountain of
miserable Martirdomes, a lewd laborenth of of lothesome Lusts, a cankred
course of chokinge Calamities: being void of all virtues to gain eternal
Life.

Make me therefore strong to walk upright in this wretched wilderness, and
Arm me with the gift of thy grace, against ye power of Satan my Ghostly
enemy.

Here is nothing where I am Lord, but daily assaults of Temptations,
troubles, torments, careful calamities, contencion for thy word, horrible
hatred, and worldly ambition: against which Lord perfect me in knowledge and
strong faith, and with thy right hand beat down mine enemies, that thou
may be known to be my God and Shield.

REfuse not the Prayer of one that is in trouble: turn not away thy face from
the needy: despise not the sely sewter: nor grieve the heart of the helpelesse:
for if he complain in the bitterness of his soul, his prayer shall be heard,
even he that made him shall hear him. Regard in me (oh God) the Image of thy
self, though I looked back from thy Laws, chastise me to amendment: but
suffer not the work of thy hands to perish.

Thou have created my heart, and given me a will to order the same: so Lord I
most meekely yield the same again into thy hands.

I pray thee by thy holy Spirit, so direct my ways, counsels and works,
that they may be of chief regard with thee, good God the geuer of all mercy,
suffer not my Soul to perish through infirmity of my Flesh.

For thy Sons sake, and thine own glory, set both now and ever his death
and Passion between thy just judgment and the peril of my Soul.

I thirste after thee, my God, and since thou feast my hearty desire is to serve
thee, and live in thy rule, and to dye in thy Faith and favor, allow of me,
and with thy mighty hand assist me.

Grant that the Celestial kingdom of thy grace and mercy ever occupy my
heart, and worthily purchase me the sweet participation of thy glorious Throne
and Majesty.

Deliver me Lord through thy grace: for in all my proper works and diuises can
be found no sin^ shield of defense for me.

Cast not away my sorrowful soul: Remember the pitiful Passion of thy dear
Son, and suffer it not to perish.

Guide my feet in the shining light of thy Verity: carry me aloft from the
snares of the ungodly: and from the traitorous trappes of the malicious save
me.

Suffer not thou (oh Prince of al power, who rulest the heavens and earth)
that any canckred, or malicious stomach rebel, or increase against me.

Pardon my cursed crimes: release my dyrefull debtes: give me again thy
grace: wrappe up my woeful wounds that fester in my feeble fleash: graffe me
a new with the garnishinge of thy grace: so shall thy glory grow, and my
gained gladness heal my grouing griefs.

If I deserve the fullness of thy fury to fall upon me, yet as a loving
Savior, rule over the roughness of thy rage, and let thy most meke mercy
measure my pain, as thou haste done unto numbers.

Grant most gracious God of all victory, that I may ever have thy power, and
right hand to be my resident Rock of refuge.

Give gracious ear to my requests: be thou my stay in every storm and peril,
for all man's stays are unsteady.

Beat down therefore mine enemies with thine own hand and Swoorde, which
art mine only aid and Protector: give me thy grace, and I shall never cease
to give thee glory: both with my tongue and heart shall I joyfully singe:
Dominus illuminatio mea, and salus mea, quem timebo? Dominus Protector Vitae
meae, a quo trepidabo. Amen.

Incline thy heart to mercy: delight thy thoughts in equity and Justice: then
shall thy light break forth as the morning spring, and thy health florishe:
thy righteousness shall preserve thee, and the glory of the Lord shall
embrace thee. ENritch me (oh God) with thy grace: illuminate my mind with thy
understanding: be unto me a sure salvation, and whom should I fear?

Truly neither will I fear any enemy bodily or ghostly, thou being the
strength of my life.

Though innumerable hosts do rise against me, my Spirit shall trust in thee,
and in my heart will I never be afraid.

Arm me with thy strength of war (oh God) and teach my hands to wage
battle.

And I shall lay flat the enemies of thy Truth, and joyfully resist all those
that rise against me.

My life shall ever declare thy sauinge health, and my soul shall not cease
to sing thy praise.

Thou have delivered me from the chains of Hell: and when I have been wrapped
in the dangers of Death, thou have cleared my paths of all stumblinge blocks,
and made thy rich mercy my candle.

Lord, if I have benne unthankful, a broken mind shall be thy Sacrifice: my
heart shall ever dwell in the place of thanks giving, and Spirit still mourn
for her unkindness.

Save me, Lord I beseech thee, in the day of my distress, for thou art
the horn of my health, the shield of my glory, and bear up mine
infirmity.

Let them be consumed in their diuises, that shall work against me, and fail
of their force in the hour of their pretense.

Pour upon them the Vyall of thy wrath, let them sink by themselves, and
save thy Servants that trust in thy mercy.

I will honor thee for my savior, and praise thee for a God above all Gods.
Amen.

GOd is gracious and merciful, he forgeueth sins in time of trouble, and is
a defender of them that seek him with hearty prayer, and wholly put their
trust in his mercy and truth. GVyde my feet (oh Lord) in the ways of
peace, and keep my hands clean from innocent blood.

Lord give me grace to perfourm the tauailes of this Pilgrimage before thee
with pure mind and clear conscience, that when thou shall show thy self
toward every creature to their deeds, I may be ritche in thy mercy, and not
dreadde thy presence.

Whilst I tread this weary laborinthe, leave me not Lord to my self, but
grant me thy continual grace for my staff,

I am not of might (Lord) in my self to do any thing that is good: my
righteousness and glory stand in thy hand.

Therefore (oh Lord) I appeal to thy mercy, and pray thy grace, that I may in
mind be made strong with thy holy Armoure, which I desire may be thy
righteousness for my Breast plate: firm faith for my Targette: hope of mercy
for my Helmet, and true knowledge of thy word for my Banner: so that I may
stand here strong and perfect against thine enemies, and in a new life
participate thy joys.

I will blow thy wondrous name through thy people, and will praise thee
amongst all the faithful.

My praises shall have being unto the farthest part of thy congregation, and
my vows will I perform in the sight of all that fear thee.

I will endeavor that the ends of the world shall remember themselves, and will
do my best to turn them unto thee.

Give me therefore ioyfulnesse of heart, rest of conscience, continual
comfort in thy word and truth, and that I may with a thankful mind,
advance thy name for ever.

IN the fear of God who so lives, shall gather his Fruits in a pleasant
Garden of blessing. It gives the true Honor, Glory, Triumph, and joyful
Crown. IN the multitude of all my sorrows that ever I have had in my heart:
Thy comforts (oh Lord) have ever refreshed me.

Such is thy loving kindness and above all thy mercy: that if I should stray
farther in my unthankfulness, mine own thoughts would accuse me.

Therefore I do comme unto thee to be taught thy Testimonies, that I may make
thy laws my delight.

Truly hopinge of thy grace for my assistaunce, I do mean to make thy
commandments an Alley of my pleasures to walk in, and the Truth of thy
words will I wear on, as an Armor against mine enemies.

Guide my fleashly eyes (oh Lord) least they behold vanities, and my heart in
thy righteousness.

Pluck my feet into the paths of thy precepts when they would wander:
printe the remembrance of thy goodness always in the table of my heart, and
let my power fail to offend thee.

Heap my hands with sure hope of my Salvation, satisfy my faith in the
forgiveness of my sins, that my frail fleashe waver not in thy mercy.

Temper my tongue (oh Lord) that it always teach thy testimonies, lock up my
lips, that out of my mouth do not proceed neither blasphemy of thy name,
Hazerde to my soul, nor hinderaunce to any Creature.

Bow down thine ears (oh Lord) and strengthen me in these requests. For
behold, I bow the knees of a contrite heart, and with assured mind do hope
them for thy truths sake, which I will euerlastinglye praise.

NO glory exceeds the bewty of a chaste life, the memorial is immortal, it
is Crowned in all triumph with God, and Honored of al rightuous: for it
wins the reward of undefiled battle. NO fleash is rightuous in thy sight
(oh Lord) whosoever think they are clean, and have not sinned, they deceive
themselves.

Therefore I confess (oh Lord) I have not committed one sin, but rather
infinite sins: and acknowledge if thou should observe mine iniquities, I
were not hable to abide it.

Enter not therefore into judgment with thy Servant (oh Heavenly Father) for
no fleashe is rightuous in thy sight: let the penssue heart, from whence my
prayers commes, pearse thy Celestial Throne.

Bow down thy mercy Lord, and wash me with the blood of my Savior Christ:
cloathe me with his humility, and revive me with his Resurrection.

Remember Lord thou haste spoken by the mouth of thy servant Esaye, That if
my sins be as red as Scarlette, they shall be made as white as snow.

And furthermore thou delightest not in the death of any sinner, but that he
rather live, and be converted.

Lord, thy words never failed, and thy compassions have no end: by virtue of
the one, and substance of the other, purify me from all mine iniquity.

I need not to tell thee (Lord) if time would not fail me, the large
examples of thy manifold mercies, besides thy compassions showed on thy
Servant Mary Magdeleyn, Peter, and Paul, with whom, Lord, let me be so
cleansed, purified, and received, as O may with them be Coheyres of thy
everlasting joys. Amen.

AS the barraine and unthankful soil, which after good use and diligence
of the Tiller gives forth Darnell for good seed so ever does the fainte
hearted, and ungrateful friend in the Harueste of thy necessity. But if thou
would choose him by virtue of the Grape, and suffer him to be old, as thou
do, thy wine, then should thou drink him with pleasure AT midnight my
tongue and lips shall singe praise of thy holy name, and my Spirit shall
glorify thee, sittinge above the highest Cherubins.

Awake (Lord) awake, deny me not for thy names sake, ^^^gh otherwise
unworthy of ^^y portion in thy ritche guiftes to the world.

Lord, thou have so loved the world, that thou made thy dear beloved son
to clime the steps of death, who bare the Image of thy substance, and
brightness of thy glory to purge our mortality and sin.

I beseech thee therefore, as thou haste so vouchsaued, and also said by the
mouth of thy Servants, that thou haste given him to that most dreadful
death of the Cross to put away al sin, and to satisfy thy justice.

Lord and merciful Father, let me now for all be so deliue^^^ and clearly
purged by this pitiful passion of thy dear son my Savior, that I may say,
and singe with the blessed Cherubins, and Seraphins, Apostles, Saints, and
Virgins: Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God on high, all Honor, Power, Dominion, and
Glory be dew to thee for ever and ever. Amen.

The Versicle.
FOr thy dear Sons sake (O Lord) hear and receive my Prayers.

The Answer.
ANd in thy truth and mercy pardon mine offenses, and grant me thy grace.

The Collecte.
O Lord Jesus Christ, son of the pure Virgin Marie, thou, thou art not only
the sweet spouse of my soul health, but with God the Father a most meke
Mediator, full of Mercy and Truth, wash away my sins with the most
precious blood of thy holy passion: make me rich in thy mercy, and my Faith
so strong in thee, that assisted with thy grace, and holy Spirit to all duty,
and works in this life toward thee, I may enjoy afterward the glory of thy
blessed Kingdom, with thy holy saints, and Virgins in everlasting honor and
triumph. Amen.

The Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, which have redeemed all mankind from sin, Death, and
Hell: thou which have said: I am the way, truth, and life. A way in Doctrine,
Commandments, and examples: Truth in promises: Life in reward. I pray thee,
by thine ineffamable love, wherewith thou have vouchsafed wholly to bestow thy
self for our security, that thou will not suffer me ever to stray from thee,
because thou art the way, nor at any time to distruste thy promises, which art
Truth, and perfourmest what so ever thou promisest: neither let me rest in any
other thing, because thou art eternal life: without the which, there is
nothing that ought to be desired, neither in heaven, nor in Earth. By thee we
learn the sure and expediente passage unto true health, that we wander no
longer in the Labor in the of this world. Thou haste exactly taught what to
believe, and what to do, what to hope for, and in whom we ought to rest.

By thee we learn, how we were of that first Adam unfortunately borne: By
thee we are assured there is no hope of health, but through Faith in thee: that
thou art the only brightness which geuest light to all men travailing the
dark Deserts of this world, where is nothing but a profound dimnes, whereby
we can neither see our calamity, nor from whence we ought to seek remedy of
our evil. Thou did vouchsafe to descend into the Earth, and disdainedst
not to take our nature upon thee, that by thy doctrine thou might shake of
the dimnesse of our ignorance: by thy commandments might direct our
feet^ in the way of Truth and Peace.

By the examples of thy life thou have showed us the way to immortality: and
by thy steps have restoared to us a plain, easy, and profitable way, out of
an uneven and roughe way. So thou art made unto us a way which knows no
error: in the which, least we should be weary, thou haste vouchsafed to
uphold us in thy benignity with great and sure promises: for who can be
weary, accoumpting him self ready through thy steps, to enter thy Heavenly
Heritage. Therefore whilst we be in this journey thou would be a sure hope
unto us, to be in steed of a staff unto us wherewith we are sustained.
Neither was thy goodness content with this, but knowing the weakness of our
fleash, in the mean while with the comfort of thy Spirit do so refreashe
our strength, whereby we run cheerfully.

And as thou being made unto us a way, do drive away al error. So being
made Truth, do take away all distrust.

Finally being made life unto us, dooste revive the dead in sin, to live by
thy Spirit, releeuing all things, until in the resurrection, al mortality
utterly abolished, we may always live with thee, and in thee, when Christ
shall be to us, all in all. For eternal life is, to know the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost to be one true God, who^ now through Faith we
behold only in a Glass and Ridell: and then seeing more feloly the glory of
the Lord, we shall be transformed into the same Image.

Therefore I beseech thee, most merciful Savior, that thou would nourishe
Faith in thy Servant, that I may never waver in thy heavenly doctrine.

Increase obedience, that I never turn from thy Precepts.

Fortify constancy, that entering into thy steps, it be not pulled back,
nor through the terroure, or intisements of Satan overthrown, but may
persevere in thee, which art the true way unto death. Build my sure trust that
accustomed with thy promises, I never wax old in the exercise of Virtue: but
forgetting those things which are paste, I may continually strive to come to
perfiter. Accept my contrite heart, the woonted sacrifice of thy delight, and
the oblation of these my peticions, grauntinge the sum of my requests. Blotte
out all mine offenses for thine own sake, and increase thy grace in me, that
I may in all things carry upright sway, and equal judgment: governing thy
people in the light of thy word, and fear of thy Laws. And daily more and
more die to my self, and live and be lead by thy Spirit, fearinge nothing
but thee, then the which nothing is greater or mightier: loving nothing beside
thee, the^ whom, nothing is more to be beloved: gloriynge in nothing but in
thee, which art the glory of al saints requiring nothing beside thee, which
art the best: desiring nothing but thee, which art the full, and perfect
felicity with the Father and the holy Ghost above the starrie Firmamente: to
whom be praise both now and ever. Amen.

A discrete, and wise woman is an high portion: she honoreth GOD, and
bewtifieth the world: upon her right hand stands loye and Peace, and upon
her left hand, Riches and Honor: her Body is the sweet tree of long life to
him that lays hold on her, and blessed is he that keeps her fast.

EVerye one, that says, Lord, Lord, shall not enter the Kingdom of heaven.
Therefore confirm my Faith strong in thee, O Heavenly Father, and in my
Savior Christ: quiet my mind with sure hope of his promises, and thy
Salvation. Destroy in me, the Kingdom of Sin, the power of Satan, the
desires of the world, and the delights of the Fleashe. Guide my feet in the
paths of thy precepts: bring the conflictinge days of mine enemies to end.

Make me, that am weak in my self, strong in thee, to conquer the force of
their Arms.

So shall my lips pour out continual praise unto thee, O god of my
Salvation, and magnify thy Majesty, world without end. Amen.

L
Look not extremely what is done amiss in me, for no fleash is rightuous in
thy sight. I offer up my self wholly with all my unsavory, and corrupt abuses,
both in will and works unto the flowinge fountain of thy mercy, to be
chasticed, poullished, and washed, and made clean even at thine own will and
pleasure. Wherefore impute not the frailty of my tender years unto my charge,
but that thou may overcome when thou art judged. Forgive me, receive me, and
so arm me with thy holy Spirit, that I may tread the rest of my days with
an upright sway, a clear conscience, and a single heart, to thy Glory, and
profit of my Soul. Amen.

I
I Live (O God) in a most wretched Vale of misery, where continually thy
creatures are strained with sin, assailed with affliction, tossed with
troubles, choked with cares, infected with ambition, vexed with temptacions,
blinded with erroures, ouercomme with vanities of the world, and miseraly
wrapped in all untruth, and wretchedness, wherefore (O Lord) arise, stretch
out thy hand, help, and comfort me. Assuage my sorrow, assist me with thy
Holy Spirit, that mine own substance overcome me not: this glitteringe vain
world of infinite sorrows, and few felicities deceive me not: that Satan
supplant me not: but give me invincible power, to encounter them: patience in
suffering them: and in thy word, constancy in perseuering to the end. Amen.

Z
Zeal, anger, hatred, and from respect of any persons in Judgment, Lord
make me free. Arm me with the patience of my savior Christ: give me the
Breastplate of his righteousness, and the helmet of his equity. Make me to
exercise his Mercy, Truth, Meekness, Faithfulness, Temperance, and
Humility. Cast out of my heart, all that may offend thee, and disprofite my
Soul.

Let all worldly things be vile unto me: for thy sake let me rejoice in
nothing without thee, nor love nothing, but to thy glory. So shall my heart
keep thy laws, and my mouth for ever and ever speak thy praise. Amen.

A
Accept me (Lord in the number of thy elect: behold in me the Image of thy
self, and the work of thine own hands: remember thou haste given thy dear
Son to the bitter Passion of the Cross for my redemption. Let me not be
rewarded therefore according to the deep sea of my sins, for then I perish.
But for thy Truth, Mercy, and dear Sons sake, correct me, strengthen
me, and embrace me: yea, link me so surely to the love of thy Laws, that I
never leave thee: and in the day of my trouble, and hour of death, Lord
deliver me: so shall I live, and glorify thee, through all worlds. Amen.

B
Behold my infirmities (O Lord) and consider my frailnesse, best known unto
thee.

So often as I shall fall, make me lift up my heart again unto thee, seek thee,
fear thee, and love thee, and ever to be soary with so steadfast a purpose of
amendment, that my earnest desire may rightly stir up thy mercy, and
procure me the assistaunce of thy grace to conioyne me to all Heavenly
things, and to destroy all earthly affections and temptacions, that daily
pluck me back, and rebel, not sufferinge my soul to live in rest. Against
which, build thy fear in my breast: true knowledge of thy word in my heart:
fortify my faith with sure hope of thy Heavenly bliss: and enter the shininge
light of thy word so deep in my mind, that all my studies and thoughts,
only occupied therein, my other parts may ever want power to offend the, and
my tongue and lips ever be singinge thy laud and glory, Amen.

E
ENritche my Soul with the continual fellowship of thy thy Holy Spirit,
whose divine humanity may so temper my gross substance with true condition,
that always I may seem low in mine own sight, and neither pride nor selfloue
overtake, or at any time allure me to exercise the unseemly pleasantness of
nature, but ever preferringe a pure and chaste life, may win the victory of
al uncleanness, and glorify thee, which art the head and Patron of al mercy,
truth, and singleness, whose triumph my tongue shall never cease to advance.
Therefore most loving Savior, leave me not to my self, but stand always by
me, and with thy strong hand make my ways sound and perfect and confound
mine enemies in their devises, Amen.

T
THou have said (most sweet redemer Christ) that the Mountains shall
remove, and the Hills shall fall down, but thy louinge kindness, word,
mercy, and truth shall not move: and also, that the band of thy peace shall not
fail us. Dear Father I beseech thee for thine own Truth, and mercies sake,
remember this thy Promise and Covenant, grave it so deep in the inward
parts of my heart, that I may never forgeate, neither fall from thee, but ever
acknowledge thee mine only God and Savior: Love thee with all my heart, and
thy people for thy sake: exercising justice, mercy, and Truth to all thy
Creatures, and never suffering me to do, that may move thy wrath, but more
and more assisted with thy grace, may increase thy love and likinge, and
finally obtain thy joys everlasting. Amen.

H
Hear these my Prayers, (sweet Lord Jesus) and for thy exceedinge Love, which
brought thee from the Sacred seat of thy Fathers breast into the womb of the
blessed virgin, to bannish Death and Sin, to redeem man's nature, whereby in
thy astere Passion, as thou haste restoared me, and with so blessed a Shield
defended mine eternal death: by the self same Love call me, that have
wandered, home again to thy Fold: renew me with thy Spirit: confirm me
with strong faith: nourish in me such thy abundant love: garnish me with thy
plentiful grace: lade me with infallible hope of thy mercy: finally restore
all parts in me which are decayed, and quicken in me, what so is dead, and
should live, that my spirit set at liberty from Terrestrial things, thou
may ever dwell in me.

And my Soul and body assisted with thy ritche guifte of all these, may fully,
purely, safely, and strongly settle them in thee.

To whom be praise both now and ever. Amen.

R
REnder me thy grace (O Lord) that from this day, I never becomme enemies
with thee again, but that I only rest in thee. Guide me with the clear light
of thy word through the dark deserts of this wretched world, where no
misery, nor trouble lacks: where every place is full of snares of mortal
enemies: yea, whereon trouble, and temptations ouerpassed, and other ensues,
and the first enduringe, a new battle suddenly assayleth, whereby I never
have peace and want wherewith to war.

wherefore with contrite heart I cry, Lord, Lord, assist me with the power of
thy holy Spirit: and as thou have commanded I come unto thee, prayinge the
guifte of all these my requests, and specially Lord, I require the sword of my
Sau^^ur Christ, true and firm faith, that established in thy Truth, holding
that for my defense, may be safely armed against all mine enemies, and strong
to cut down the thorns which shall spring in my way of passage unto thee, in
whom sweet savior, above all honor, glory, triumph, sway, rule, power, and
dignity, make me settle al my joys: yea, above all health, riches, beauty,
fame, and felicity, to desire thee, love thee, and magnify thee, which geuest
all: and therefore of al to be beloved and sought art most worthy. Amen.

E
EAse (O Lord) the pains I suffer, and the troubles of my soul: let the
fountains of thy grace ouerflow my barraine body, and the floudes of thy
mercy batten my feeble spirit: let thy loving kindness cover mine
infirmities, and thy suffered drops of dew upon the Cross drownde mine
iniquity. Thy word is Truth, and thou have said, Thy delight is not in the
death of a Sinner, but would he should convert and live.

Teach me therefore to number my days in the love of thy Laws, that I always
thirste after thy Kingdom, and never forgeat thee: but in this, that I have
here begone, may persevere and increase, setting at naught all worldly pomp,
respect of persons, and man's help, and only cleave to thy omnipotente power,
mercy, strength, and goodness: wherein Lord make me so rich, as I never
have power to swerue from thee, nor want thy grace to resist all temptations,
neither yet thy strength to tread down mine enemies, and so my heart shall
joyfully live, and give thanckes to thee my God of all truth, mercy and
victory. Amen.

G
GOD, merciful Father of my redeemer Christ, which have promised to hear the
peticions, of them that ask in thy Sons name, give down thy fear into my
heart: conioyne thy holy spirit to the fellowship of my soul: pour upon me
the blessed dewes of thy grace: enritche me with thy high understanding, and
send wisdom in her glory from thy Sacred seat to dwell in me, that she may
guide me, uphold me, and labor with me, to the end: that in all my
trauelles, enterprises, proceedinges, and studies, I may prevail to thy
glory. Do this dear Father, for the triumph of thy name Bow down thine
ears, and mercifully hear, and receive the sum of all my requests, and
grant that all things which I ask according to my necessity, I may
effectually obtain, to thy glory, and profit of my soul, through Jesus
Christ my Lord. Ame^

I
I Give and commit into thy hands dear Lord my Spirit, yea rather I may
say thy Spirit, seeing thou have given it me, lincte it to my body for a
season, and seeing it is thy image and Figure, made after thine own likeness,
seeinge thy dear Son did clime the dyrefull steps of death for redemption
thereof. O most favorable Father and meek God of al mercy and compassion, I
eftsoons commend this my Spirit into thy hand, I am thine what so ever I
am, receive thine. I beseech thee preserve me and comfort me, for no man
can help me besides thee. Only thou art the sureste resister of all
mischief, thou art (O God) the readieste help in all trouble, thou art my
hope and strength. In thee do I put my trust, let me not be confounded, let
me never be rebuked: thou art my strong rock and my Castle, thou art my
savior, my portion is in thy hands. Lighten thy face upon thy Servant, and
save me (O Lord) in thy Mercy. Amen.

N
NO brickel nor corrupt gold or Silver has redeemed my soul (O Heavenly
Father) but the precious blood issuinge from Christ as of a Lamb undefiled and
without spotte, make me therefore (O Lord) for his sake to put on his
humility, patience, virtue, and unspotted life, rendering such account of this my
Pilgrimage as best may agree to his merit and thy mercy. Let me not be
found unthankful in so sweet a Lord and savior, what is most rightuous,
acceptable, and pleasante in thy sight, let me always (O God) prefer in
faith and works: and what so ever is to approve me unworthy of his tender and
surmountinge love, that may alter his loving kindness, or exchange his
wonted compassion toward me, Lord let me ever fail in strength to do it,
but assisted by thee, I may everlastingly be found to live in him. Amen.

A
ALmighty God, which fliest with the wings of the Air, ridest upon the
Cherubins and have Empire above the starry Firmaments. Thou, thou, that sit
in Sacred seat most hie, beholdeynge the wretchedness of man in this low
Earth, attending through thine own love his deserts, when with any occasion thou
may offer thy mercy.

Bow down thy pitiful eyes, and favor in me the Image of thy self, as thou
did vouchsafe in Zache when thou calledst him out of the Fig thee:
enritche my ears with the same voice of Remission and Gladness, as thou
did his: incline thine ears and hear these cries, (oh loving redeemer)
for though I am but Dust, Earth, and Ashes, yet I am bold (strengthened with
thy truth) and merits of Christ's death and passion, to lay my Prayers before
thee, requyringe mercy, and forgiveness of all my sins, and also the
assistance of thy Grace, to do thy will all the days of my life, and to
obtain all these my petitions, through Jesus Christ thy dear Son and my
only savior: to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be all Honor, power,
Dominion, and Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A Meditation upon the Lords Prayer.
Our Father which art in Heaven.
Truly thou O almighty father haste just cause to execute thy severe
judgment upon us sinners, which so often and grievously move thy wrath and
indignation against us, but sithence by thy mercy thou dooste not only
pardon, but also commaundeste and teacheste by thy Son Jesus Christ, that
we should hold thee for a Father, we pray thee through him that thou will
give us, a full and sure trust in thy Fatherly clemency, and that we may
likewise feel some taste of that security which thy Children have, and with
joy call thee Father, acknowledge thee, love thee, and in all our troubles
call upon thee: defend and guide us that we may perpetually abide thy
children, and let us not go out of thy protection. Though we be the children
of wickedness, yet let us not hold thee in steed of a severe Judge, when thou will that we shall not only call thee Father, but our Father: and that we
pray not in our own name alone, but in the name of all thy Children. Give us
therefore an uniform and brotherly love, that in deed we may perceive our
selves to be Brothers and Sisters, and thee our general Father. Let us pray
for all the rest no otherwise then Fathers were wont to pray for their
children: neither suffer any of us to seek his own, and forget his brother:
but taking away what envy, hatred, or discord, so ever reigns emonge us,
that as becomes Gods children, we may mutually love one another, and truly
call thee, not Father, but our Father. Of our carnal and earthely Father we
receive this brickle body, and he is such a one as is subject to death, neither
are we sure how long he shall remain a father. Furthermore if adversity
happen he can not change, that, but thou art a Heavenly Father, truly far
better and more Nobler. So much more right is it then, that we contempne for
thee, our Father, Country, Kindred, Riches, Fleashe, Blood, yea and what so
ever is in this world under the scope of Heaven.

This also grant to us, that we may be thy heavenly Children, whom thou do
teach that we shall regard nothing but the soul health, and that heavenly
Heritage, least in this carnal and earthly Country, deceived, stirred up, or
let by riches, we become heirs of sensuality but truly let us say our
heavenly Father, and that truly we may be thy heavenly Children.

Hallowed be thy name.
ALmighty God heavenly father thy holy name is miserably profaned many ways
in this world, scorned, taunted, and blasphemed, when it is applied to those
things, in which is no glory of thy Deity: yea many abuse it, imployinge it
to sin, and truly that unworthy life in a Christian man, deserves to be
called a profanation of thy holy name: grant therefore to us good Lord,
through thy mercy, that we may beware of all those things, by which the
honor and glory of thy name is diminished, and purify us that the Arts of
Magike may be abolished, let people cease to enchaunt Devils or other
Creatures, by thy name, see that all distrust and supersticion perish, Heresy
and wicked Doctrine also, (which notwithstanding they prefer thy name, yet
they deceive many) let them perish and be brought to nothing: grant that
thy people be not deceived through any outward show of truth,
righteousness, or holiness. Suffer not any man to forswear him self, lie,
or deceive others, by thy name.

Take from us (O Lord) all false aids, which take upon the^ a show of thy
name: remove from us that spyrite of Pride and vain glory, and the study of
praise and glory. Grant that in all our troubles and euiles we may call upon
thy holy name, yea in the fear of our conscience, and even when death
assaileth, let us not be forgetful of thy holy name. See that in all our
success both in words and deeds we may praise and worship thee only, and
not seek out of these, ours, but the glory of thy name, which alone possessest
al things: take from us (O Lord) that most foul vice of ingratitude: Plant in
us such good works and life, that others may be allured to us, not to our,
but to thy praise and glory. Lord let not others be offended, through the
vices or evil works which yet remain in us, least thy name for our sins
should be ill spoken of, or not henceforth praised. Suffer us not to ask any
thing of thee, either momentary or eternal, which agrees not to the glory of
thy holy name and praise: if we do ask any such thing of thee, in that
hear us not: grant us so to live as becomes Gods Children, that we seem
not unworthy of thy holy name.

Thy kingdom come.
IN this miserable and wretched life all kinds of sensual apetide and
wickedness bear rule in us, and the evil spirit, head, and fountain of all
sin, has gouernmente. But in thy kingdom (O Lord) grace and virtue guide
the sway, and Jesus Christ thy dear son true patron of all grace and
virtue holds Empire. Thou therefore dear Father, favor us with thy grace:
Give unto us a true and constant faith in Christ, fortify us with a firm
hope in thy mercy, wherewith our weak and feeble conscience may be raised up
from the feling of sins: lade us with an earnest love, both toward thee and
al other thy good Creatures. Take from us distrust, desperation, and hatred,
remove from us the delights of the fleash, and plant in their steed an
earnest study of chastity, with perfect faith in thee, which may worthily
win the reward of undefiled battle. Make us free (O Lord) from discordes,
ambition, war, and discention, and let thy kingdom come, and let us lead a
peaceable, mutual, and quiet life.

Grant, that neither zeal, anger, or other vices (with the which
dissemblinge hatred are nourished) reign in us: but a mild simplicity,
brotherly love, al kind of duties, contentment, and humility, suffer us not to
be affected with immoderate sorrow and heaviness, but let us feel the
pleasantness of thy grace and mercy: and that in fine, all my sins may be
taken away, and we abounding through grace and virtue, in good works, may be
thy kingdom. I say, our mind, our soul, with all our strength which thou
have powered on us, may obey thy commandments, and bear thy government, and
neither follow themselves, the world, the fleash, nor the Devil. See Lord that
this thy kingdom happily begone in us, may so grow and be increased, that
we be not unadvisedly oppressed of sin: nether causeless do cease from
good works, for so it may com to pass that we shall labor in vain. Give
thefore unto us a firm faith, wanting no strength, which not only may instruct
us to a better kind of life, but also in that same may happily go forward and
ever among increase, as the Prophet says, Psalm. 13. Illuminate mine eyes that
I sleep not, least whilst the Christian life but begone, we negligently go
forward, and finally come again into Satan's power. Grant that we may
constantly endure, and thy kingdom to come may perform and consummate the
rule begone in us. Take us from this life which is full of sin and dangers:
make us to desire that other life, and let us begin and continue to hate
this: grant that we do not fear death, but rather wish and desire it: let us
cast out of our mind the love of this life, that thou only may reign in us.

Thy will be done
IF we should confer our will with thine, it is always naught, but thy will is
ever best, which deserves that we should love and desire that. Therefore
have mercy upon us dear Father, and let not any thing be done after our
will. Grant if any thing happen contrary to that we would, we may
patiently bear it: temper so our brickle metal, being the work of thy
hands, that if any either speak or hold his peace, do or omit any thing
contrary to our will, that thereby we be not provoked to anger and impatience.
Let us not blaspheme, complain, cry out, judge, condemn, or maliciously
accuse others therefore, but grant that we may quietly give place to those
which work contrary to our will, and praise them geuinge thanks as to those
which stir up thy will which is good, against ours which is ill. And
further assist us that we may patiently bear all trouble, need, poverty,
sickness, slander, imprisonmente, and all other discommodities, and
acknowledge al these to happen unto us by thy will, that our will may be
mortified: let us patiently bear injuries, and take from us the desire of
reuengement: suffer us not to encounter one evil with another, nor resist
force with strong arms, but grant thy will which has thrown us into
those evils may satisfy us, and that with thanks giving we may bear
aduersiries. If any ill come contrary to that we would, grant we beseech
thee, that we judge not that calamity to proceed either of Satan our wicked
enemy, or of ill men, but of thy divine will, which does Minister all
things, so that it may let our will, whereby thou might the better reign
and bear rule in us. Grant that we may patiently and with joyful mind die,
least being overcome with impatience or desperation, we seem less obedient
to thy will. Grant that al members of our body, eyes, tongue, heart, hands,
and feet, follow not their own delights, but ouercom and constrained, may
do al things after thy will. Take from us O Lord a hardened and intractable
heart, free us from frowardness, obstinate and stubberne mind, grant that
we may obey thy will, that we commit our self wholly to thy judgment in
all things, whether they perteine to the body or the soul, whether they be
momentary or eternal, take from us these horrible vices, that we impeache not
the fame of any, flaunder any, rashely judge, accuse, or condemn them, that
vice of the tongue (I beseech thee) amend in us. And teach, that if others
commit any evil, we may retain and hide it, to thee only let us show it,
and leave it to thy judgment, that we may remit what is committed against
us, and let us take pity upon them: teach us to know that none can hurt us, but
he shall more disprofite him self before thee, that we may be the rather
stirred to mercy, then to anger: in any thing let us not rejoice, if they be
thrown into calamity which either have not obeyed our will, or whose life
has been little allowable to us, neither let us hate their good success.

Give us this day our daily bread.
THE bread is our Lord Jesus Christ, which feeds, and refreshes the
soul. Thou therefore heavenly father, grant us this through thy mercy, that
the life, words, and deeds of Christ, with his Passion, may be every where
truly preached, acknowledged, followed and kept.

Grant that both his dooinges and sayings may be ensample to us, to the which
we may compare our life, and live more rightly. Confirm us, that in
calamities and trouble his Cross and passion may strengthen and comfort us.
Assiste us, that by his death our death may be ouercomme in true Faith, that
we may constantly follow him, being our Captain, to eternal life. Bring to
pass, that they which have taken upon them the ministry of thy word, may
happily teach, and with the great profit of the hearers, work, that those
which hear thy word, acknowledge Christ, and diligently go forward. Let it
com to pass, that the strange and wicked sects, who teach not Christ, be
thrown out of his Church. Let the true understanding of thy word so shine
in Bishops, and Pastors, and likewise upon all Magistrates, whether they have
care of ye body, or Soul: that being illuminate with thy grace, they may
rightly teach us, and be exsample unto us, as well in Doctrine, as in pure
life. Let not the weak in f^^th be offended through the Sins of the
Maiestrates.

Pourge us (O Lord) from all heresi^s and wicked Faith, that we may be singly
and daily fed with one bread, and may abide agreeable in Christ's words,
teach us by thy grace that we may well study upon Christ's Passion, and
rightly hold that, and let his imprinted steps stick and be found in us.

Grant that the Ministers of thy Church may treat, and use the Holy
Sacrament worthily, and to the great profit of thy Church. And furthermore
that we, and all Christians may in his kind worthily, and to his soul health
receive the Sacrament.

Give us peace and concord: take from us, wars contention, ambition privy
hatred, bloody hearts, usurping hands, and al other kind of strifes, yt those
things which we have to the sustentation of our body, we may enjoy with
thanks giving. Give unto thy servant Elizabeth our most gracious Queen and
Gouernoure, thy equal guiftes to her estate and dignity with vprighte
Iudgememente in all things, and to all magistrates true faith and single
judgment with loyal minds to keep the public peace, that her joys and
Rule may long stand and multiply. Take from al Subjects, Sedition and
disobedience: teach us by thy Holy spirit to order household affairs, that
we may instruct our Children, and Families to worship, praise, and glorify
thee. Grant O good Father, that our children and family fall not into any sin
and wickedness, neither be overthrown in any danger or calamity, whether it be
either of body or Soul. Comfort, and deliver thou most louinge Father, the
captive, the hungry, thirsty, naked, oppressed, miserable, the comfortless,
widow, the orphane, sick, and the sorrowful, and defend the fields and
cattle from tempest, venomous woormes, and wild beasts.

Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them, that trespass against us.
GOD will that we patiently bear al things, and requite not evil with evil,
nor revenge injury done against us, but that we should return a benefit
for an injury, after the ensample of our Father, which suffers his Sun to
shine as well on the evil as on the good: and powers down his reign both
upon the thankful and unthankful. O good Father stir up our conscience,
both now and in the end of our life, which is grievously feared with the
sight of our sins, and dred of thy ^udgemente: make our hearts quiet and sure,
that with joy we may expecte thy judgment when thou shall judge, for in thy
sight shall not any man be found rightuous, teach us to lean, not to our
own good works and merits, but to thy unmeasured mercy, and thereunto let
us wholly commit us. Likewise suffer us not to fall into desperation for our
sins committed, but grant that we may perceive and feel thy mercy to be
far more ample, greater, and stronger, then our wicked led life. Be present
with all those, which are either in danger of death, or afflicted with
desperation. Forgive us, and even our sins, comfort us, and bring us again
into thy favor. As thou have commanded, so render thou also good for ill unto
us: beat down satan that horrible false detractor and accuser of our life,
both now and at the hour of death, and in all other anguishes of our
conscience, Satan does accuse us, our conscience likewise does accuse us. But
thou (Lord) dooest not Judge after their sentence, hear not the voice of our
enemies which complain of us before thee, night and day. Take from us (thou God
of all mercy) the grievous burden of our sin and conscience, that it being
made joyful and confirmed with the hope of thy mercy, we may both live and
die, do, and suffer all things.

And lead us not into temptation.
WE are vexed with three kinds of temptation: the fleash, the world, and the
devil. We pray thee therefore O Father, to assiste us with thy heavenly grace,
that we truly may be able to quench the flames of the fleash: that we may
avoid excess of meats and drink, over much sleep, sloth, and idleness,
wherewith the prone fleashe is the rather kindled: that likewise with fasting,
moderate diet, and cloathinge, our bed not to soft: with watching and labor
we may be made the more apt to good works. Help thou us also that we may
fasten to the Cross of Christ, and mortify that inordinate concupiscence,
and all other stirringes unto vain pleasure, that we may with strong power
resist them.

Plant our hearts in the pleasant garden of thy continual fear: sow the
sweet seeds of heavenly grace so deeply in the furrows of our inward mind,
that when our outward eyes shall behold the rare bewty, and work of thy hands
in any fair, well proporcioned, or semely creature we may not be therewith
allured to exchange our thoughts of pure deity, through desire to exercise
any delicate delight of our wanton fleash, but ever geuinge unspotted Chastity
sway in us, may the rather be moved to praise thee, in all thy creatures.

Grant that when our ears are delighted with any sweet Harmony, or
melodious sound, that we may not apply it to our own pleasure, but to thy
triumph and glory. Take from us covetousness and inordinate study to heap up
Riches. Remove from us ye study of Glory, Power, and Ambition: suffer not the
malice of the world to provoke us to impatience, reuengement, hatred,
dissimulation, or other vices. Work in us that we hold in hate, and despise,
the deceiptes, subtilty, lies, craft, guile, false promises, unthankfulness,
and ingratitude of the world, with all other, whether they be good, or badde
(that Original Sin also which in Baptism we know) and that in this mind
we may endure, and evermore increase. Put from us the temptacio^s of Satan
that we fall not into pride and admiration of ourselves, being puffed up with
wealth, Nobility, Power, Rule, Learning, Dignity, Beawty, Shape, or other
guiftes, and so despise others. Purify, and cleanse us from privy hatred,
secret sclaunder, egreenuie, and inward dissimulation. Make us to deal justly,
carefully, truly, faithfully, freendely, and constantely with those that put us
in any trust, and well and equally with all others. Confirm, and strengthen us
against all temptations, and dreadefull assaults of Death, that neither in the
General day of accoumpt we tremble in our hope of thy mercy, nor in the
summons of death we fall into desperation, but vpholden with firm hope of thy
mercy, and armed with strong Faith, and invincible belief of thy Salvation,
we may live in our resurrection, participate thy joys, and rejoice in thy
coming. Moreover we entirely beseech thee (O Heavenly Father) that thou
vouchsafe with the careful eyes of thy mercy to behold and strengthen all
them, which are assailed with any grievous temptations, or weakness of Faith.
If any yet stand, confirm them (O God) and those which are fallen, lift thou
up.

Let thy grace defend us all in this miserable life, which is replenished
with so many dangers, and bitter enemies, that as it becomes Christian
Soldiers, we may be strongly gyrte with true Faith, to thee: in loyal
obedience to our Prince: brotherly love toward all men, and so become
coheyres of thy Celestial Throne and blessedness.

But deliver us from evil.
THy grateful benignity (oh Heavenly father) has once delivered us from that
most unclean Spirit and subtle Serpent Satan, ye wretched workman of all
endless woe, death, and destruction, washed from sin by thy son Jesus
Christ, and has chosen us into the honor of his blessed Name and Heritage.
Wherefore cease thine indignation (O Lord) which justly we incur through our
daily contempts of thy holy will: free us from the pains due to our sins:
deliver us from the floods of perdition that compass us round about, and the
flames of thy fury that our wickedness has kindled, stay the stroke of thy
vengeance, that the blasphemy of our tongues, has justly moved thy long
sufferaunce to lay now upon us: deliver our Soul from the deadly wounds of
our dissembling lips: take from us the full corruption of all envy, and
hatred: keep our minds from pride and presumption: breathe into us through al
parts thy love, humility, faith hope, charity, and patience, which may
bewtifie us with the beams of thy brightness, and quicken our souls and all the
powers thereof that they may cleave fast, and be joined to thee in Ghostely
rauishinges. Destroy the force of this our aunciente foe Satan, which always
makes battle against us: power upon us the greatness of thy goodness, that
thy right hand may be gloryfied in us: deliver us from all unclean desires of
the fleashe: inspyre us with the fervent flames of thy love, to consume the
festerynge phantisses of our mind: conioyne amd knytte the senses and poures
of our inward parts in thee, make us hold in hate al earthly substance and
transitory things, and by thy grace stro^glye to tread down, and conquer al
motions and occasions of sin: deliver us, most benign father from all
rancore, malice, hatred, bloudsheding, lying, backbiting, swearing, and all
such horrible evils, what so ever they be, yea, from lighteninge and tempeste,
from murder and battle, grievous plagues, and other diseases, good Lord
deliver us.

Finally deliver us from all anguish, troubles and mishappes, emine^t either
bodily or ghostly, and with thy mighty hand defend our Riches from abuse, our
brickle body from corruption our Soul from dampnation, even as best shall
accord with thy holy will and true glory of thy Majesty. Deliver us Lord
from the chains of sin, the ropes of Hell, and all peril of destruction, so
that being certified in conscience, our Prayers worthily of thee accepted, and
we delivered from all assaults of the devil, his wicked crafts and
inticementes to damnation, and by thy holy spirit assisted, may persevere in
this goodness (whereof thy mercy and kindness is true Aucthor) to the end of
our days in holiness and righteousness, to the honor of thy Kingdom,
power, and glory both now and ever. Amen.

E
ENgraue thy Laws in the deapth of my heart (O Lord) that being instructed in
thy co^mau^dements, I may serve thee in fear, and rejoice in thee with
trembling, and take hold upon thy discipline in all things.

Least at any time thou become angrye, and I perish from the right way. Amen.

L
Lord, give me me help from my trouble, for vain is the help of Man: in thee
I have strength, and thou bring unto nothing those which trouble me, let my
soul be subject unto thee, for from thee proceeds my patience, for thou art
my God and Savior, my helper and I will not depart from thee. In thee is my
health, and my Glory, thou art the God of my healpe, and my hope is in thee.
Amen.

I
I Have broken thy Fold and wandered long as a lost sheep, let me return
again (O Lord) because I have not forgotten thy commandments, the
misdeedes, and ignorances of my tender years, remember not Lord, according to
thy mercy have mind on me. For thy goodness (O Lord) keep my soul, and
deliver me: let me not be ashamed because I have trusted in thee.

Turn my heaviness into joy, cut of my sack of sorrows, and girde me with
gladness, that my Glory may singe unto thee, and I shall not be grieved.

Z
ZOrobabell King of Judah, in the deapthe of thy displeasure tasted of thy
mercy, and received by the mouth of Ageus thy Prophet, sweet comfort and
knowledge of thy favor and grace: yea after thy determination to destroy the
whole Kingdom of the Heathen, thy right hand did preserve him, and thy
incomparable mercy did choose him for a seal to thy self. Lord this happy
King in thy goodness was but an earthly Creature, and then could he have no
righteousness in him self to move such thy compassion: if it proceeded from
the multitude of thy mercies, that surmounte the iniquity of the whole world,
and that thou did only vouchsafe to behold in him the Image of thy self.
Bow down thine eyes Lord, and behold the self same in me: Certify my
conscience with remission of my sins, that my sorrowful Soul be at rest
within me: send down thy holy spirit to remain with me, that I may become
with that good King thy chosen seal and servant. And so govern thy people,
that I may with them and they with me never deserve further then to taste of
thy Rod of favorable correction, but that all my labors and studies may ever
bend to the performance of thy holy will, and discharge of my duty. Amen.

A
ARise and illuminate my mind (most benign Savior) that I sleep not at
any time in death, least mine enemies say they have preeuailed against me.
They which trouble me will be glad if I be cast down: but I have fixed my
hope in thy mercy. Enter not into judgment with thy Servant, for no living
Creature shall be justified in thy sight, I will ever look upon the Lord, for
he shall be on my right hand that I be not moved: for this my heart is glad
and my tongue rejoices, yea moreover my fl^ash shall rest in hope. Amen.

B
BE thou unto me (O Lord) in the day time a defendour, and in the night
season a place of refuge, that thou maiste save me: for thou art my strength,
and unto thee I fly. Lord God deliver me from the hand of sinners, and from
the Lawebreaker, and the wicked dooer: for thou Lord art my patience, thou art
my hope even from my youth: in thee I am confirmed even from my Mothers womb:
thou art my protector: in thee shall be my song for ever and ever. Amen.

E
EVer my tongue shall be tellinge of thy ritche mercy and woonderous works (O
Lord) for thou have caused me to pass through fire and water, and have
leadde me into a freashe place: thou haste given my soul life, and have not
suffered my feet to fall. According to the multitude of my sorrows, thy
comfortes have made my Soul merye.

My Soul is like a Sparrow taken out of the foulers snare: Thou have delivered
my life from death, and my hands from blood yt I may please thee (O Lord) in
the light of the living. Amen.

T
THou art just (O Lord) and all thy Commandments be true, and al thy ways
mercy, truth and judgment. And now (Lord) be mindful of me: take not
reuengemente of my sins: remember not mine offenses, neither the offenses of
my Fathers, because we have not obeyed thy precepts. Give me an heart of
understanding, and set thy fear always before mine eyes, that I may be
obediente in word, deed, and thought to all that is thy will.

Lord give unto me the power of thy Holy Spirit, to rule and govern thy
people committed to my charge, in all godly fear and knowledge of thy word,
and that I may be unto them an ensample in all godliness an^ virtue: to the
praise of thy Holy name. Amen.

H
Heal me (Lord) and I shall be healed: save me, and I shall be saved. My life
cleaves unto the Earth. Quicken me according to thy word: according to
thy mercy relieve me, and I will keep the testimonies of thy lips: help
me (Lord) so shall I be safe: and I will from henceforthe study thy
righteousness: thy mercies are many (O Lord): according to thy word restore
my health. Amen.

R
Regard my Prayers (O thou God of my life) leave me not in the thoughts of
evil: Deliver me from the wicked man: let not the foot of pride com upon
me, and to vain glory give me not: take from me all sinful lusts: let
no desire of uncleanness take hold upon me: give me not over to an
unshamefast and obstinate mind, but correct me in thy mercy, for into thy
hands I commit me. Amen.

E
ENter thy Judgments in the tables of my heart: destroy my affections with
thy love: send thy wisdom from the holy Heavens, and from the seat of thy
majesty: that she may be with me, and labor with me: that I may know what
thing is acceptable before thee, and may Judge thy people rightuously and
deserve between good and evil.

G
Gracious (Lord) thou that art the most hie God above all the earth, long
suffering and of much mercy, sorowinge the sins of man and of thy great
goodness haste promised to the penitent remission of sins.

Lord I have sinned, my iniquity is multiplied above the sands of the Sea,
and there is no hope of life in me, because I have sturred the to anger in
multiplying offenses before thee. And now (Lord) trustinge in thy mercy, I
bow the knees of my heart beseching of thee goodness: distroye me not
together with mine iniquity: for the dead, whose Souls are out of their
bodies, can neither praise nor thank thee: but the sorrowful heart and the
thirstye Soul ascribe praise unto thee. O Lord, I power my Prayers before
thee, and require mercy in thy sight, save me which am unworthy, and reserve
not eternal punishment for me: for thine own sake I ask it and will praise
thee all the days of my life. Ame^

I
ILluminate my heart (O Lord) with the light of thy word: lead me Lord in
thy way, and I shall enter into thy Truth: printe thy fear in my heart, that I
may rejoice in thee: let thy word be a Lantern unto my feet, and a light
unto my paths.

So shall I not err from the right way, but walk with an upright heart, a
clean conscience, and single eye before thee this day, and evermore. Amen.

N
Never will I cease to call upon thee, most m^ghtye God of Hosts, which
fittest upon the Cherubins, and haste dominion over all the kingdoms on the
earth. Thou which made the Heavens, and all things comprehended in them, bow
down thine ear, and hear: open thine eyes, and behold: save me from the
hand of mine adversaries, suffer no evil to happen unto me, that all the
people may know that thou alone art my God. Amen.

A
ASsist me (O Lord my God) with thy Heavenly grace, and renew in me a right
Spirit, that I may receive strength and ableness to do thy rightuous will,
and to stand against all the assaults of wily Satan, that they may have no
place in me, but that the Old man which I bear about in my body may be
crucified, and daily die in me: that the desire of sin, and error of
worldly vanities may utterly be destroyed: that I may evermore be renewed in ye
Spirit of my mind: that ye life of my Savior Christ may always appear in
me. To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all honor, triumph, and
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

JOAN. I.
SI confiteamur Peccata nostra, Deus fidelis est and iustus, vt remittat nobis
Peccata nostra, and emundet nos ab omni Iniquitate. Si dixerimus, quoniam non
peccauimus, Mendacem facimus cum, and Verbum eius non est in nobis.

IOSVE.
Fili mi, da Gloria^ Deo Israel, and confitere, atque indica mihi quid feceris
ne abscondas.

AGVSTINVS.
Confessio, est salus animarum, dissipatrix Vitorum, restauratrix Virtutum
expugnatrix Daemonum.

Quid plura? Obstauit Os Inferni, and Paradisi Portas aperit.

Cassidorus super Psalm. 77.
O beata Confessio, quae aeternum tollit opprobrium. Nam quicquid Reatum
inuenerit Poenitentia, perpetuis Seculis reddit Absolutum.

An inward speech, vvherevvith Christ does comfort the Soul of the sinner,
desiringe to live better. Gathered out of the works of sundry holy Writers.
I Love them (says Christ) that seek me, and my delight is emonge the
children of me^. Sic dilexi Mundum, vt in mortem datem animam meam, vt non
periat, sed habeat vitam aeternum quicunque in me crediderit: I have so loved
the world that I gave my self unto death, that who so ever believed in me,
should not perish, but have euerlasing life.

O thou Soul, O Daughter, I have labored, hungered, thirsted, I have been
despised, and suffered persecution for thy sake: I am wounded for thine
iniquity: I am weried through thy wickedness: I am dead for thine offenses, and
risen again for thy justification: the love which I bear to thee, has forced
me to do and suffer all these things, and to make choice of thee for my
child. Wherefore amend thou, and return to me, wash thee in the blood of
my wounds, and deck thee with virtues and merits of my life: All these things
I willingly give thee, nay rather as a most loving father offeringe these
things, I run to embrace thee, and receive thee with imbracinge and kissing,
alluring thee to love me: again return Daughter and be clean. Praebe cor tuum
mihi, quia praeter hoc aliud abs te non desidero. Be sorry that thou have sinned
because thou have offended me, or at the least, sorrow because thou can
not perceive thy self pensive, for often it comes to pass that it better
pleases me, and is more profitable to man, to have a will to be contrite and
devout, then to perceive contrition or devotion: Because this contrary desire
of willing and unwilling engenders affliction of mind. Therefore be sorry and
angry with thy self, ye judge thy self worthy to be damned, because thou
have sinned and art not sorry as thou ought.

This contrition although it be not sensible, yet it is such, though thou
suffer persecution, as will bring thee to health eternal: for I know your
miserye, your weakness and necessity, so that in no wise a willing mind ought
to despair, what soever oldenes or coldenesse of conscience he feel. But you
will say, I have committed innumerable offenses: how shall I perticulerly sorrow
every one of them. O my daughter need thou comfort? let only truth comfort
thee, if thou have many sins, have also one general contrition, in the
which thou will include all and every offense, so that there be no sin,
which (although it came unto thy mind) would exempte from thy penitencie,
and which thou would not eschew and forsake.

For this general contrition extends it self to all and every offense, yea
unto those which thou haste forgotten and canste not remember, neither do I
require that you should necessarily have for every offense several
contritions, according to the number and manner of your sins: for thus I
have spoken of Mary Magdalaine. I have forgeuen her many offenses for that she
loved much. I said not because she loved oftentimes, neither could this
Magdalaine in so sudden a compunction be otherwise sorry then for all
together. Thou likewise so be sorry for all, that there be no sin which may
delight thee, whether generally or particularly it come into thy mind. Sorrow
not out of measure, nor suffer such imaginacions and fantasies take place, as
though I were so angry that I would not be pleased, pardon, nor receive thee
again into favor, for these are the suggestions of the wicked Serpente,
wherewith he indeuoreth to train thee to desperation, whose custom is in the
beginning of his illusions to pluck the remembrance of me from their hearts,
to promise my mercy to them that sin, and confirm the security, boldness,
obstinacy, of an ungodly will, but afterward finding them declining, and
that they will forsake him (if by other means he cannot procure them to evil)
he sets upon the weak and fearful minds with the assault of desperatio^,
he persuades to unbelief, he tells them that evil custom cannot be
ouercom, he fears them with the greatness of their sins committed, and like
a liar tells, that I will not forgive sin. But thou, my Daughter, believe
him not whatsoever thou feel, fall not into desperation. This contrition
suffices that it pitieth thee of mine anger, wishing thou had not
transgressed: and determinest not to sin any more. But if thou do err, yet
rise again, yea again with hearty repentance, purpose to sin no more: if
thou fall the third time, yet rise again, if the fourth or fifth time, yea
lastly if thou fall seventy times seven times, so often return to me and I
will receive thee. Is it not better that I should receive thee, then lose thee,
together with all my labors and pains which for thy redemption I have
suffered? let nothing O Daughter call thee away, O Daughter let nothing keep
thee from me, which art redeemed with my blood: though thou have given thy
self to the Devil, denied me an hundredth times, taken my name in vain,
spitte at me, slaundered my holy word, only be sorye from thy heart that
thou have done this, and I will forgive thee. Let no offense be so great in
thine eyes, that it pluck away the hope of pardone, no sin so ponderous, that
it may be able to overcome my mercy, I make no difference, whether from few
or many sins I deliver thee: all have need of my mercy, which flows
aboundauntly to every man faithfully askinge it. Thy wickedness cannot
exceed my mercy, the more thou have sinned ye more willingly I forgive thee
being per^tent: for the greater the sinner is, on whom I bestow my compassion,
so much the greater is my glory, I am not hard nor sparinge, but liberal and
bountiful to thee (my Daughter) if thou only had committed all the
offenses that be, and I forgive them, my mercy is no whit the less. There is
peradventure some other thing that fears thee, yet when thou were
ouerpressed with sin, that which you did then willingly commit^e now against
thy will art compeiled to bear, whatsoever unwillingly thou suffer, shall
not damn thee, nor spoil thee, of my grace for sin must be so voluntary,
that if it be not voluntary it is no sin: bridell therefore thy will from
consentinge, and then suffer the Fleashe and the Devil to rage, and though by
thy former life and conversation, thou have deserved ill, yet because thou
truly repentest thereof, and dooste study to live better, thou shalt not be
guilty of that thou suffer, so thy will consent not. And if at any time the
devil suggest thee with blasphemous or cursed thoughts against me and my Holy
ones, be not therefore troubled or fainte hearted. For so long as thou have not
voluntarily erred, or performed consent, thou dooest rather suffer then do
offense, when these things bring thee rather heaviness and affliction, the^
delights, they are no way to be feared, but I suffer thee to feel them, and
they to molest thee, that tho^ might be rather thereby de^^led. Therefore
truly the Devil stirs up those things that whilst thou go about to
resist them, thou might be hindered and let from the taste of my love:
and being so much astonished, fear to come to me.

For he rejoices when thou wallowest in doubts, and troubles: but thou
Daughter, fear no such thing: look not toward them: answer them not:
strive not against them, nor take any heed to them. But rather as one
untroubled, go forward in thy exercise, passing by, and contemning such
chances, as the barking of dogs, and hissinge of geese. For if thou would
renew, dispute, fear, and descusse them, thou dooste always more printe them
in thy mind, and tangle thy self in greater trouble. The penitent Soul,
after it has taken sum knowledge and taste of my goodness, considering
that I am so good, and so merciful: and finally that I am so slow to impute
sin, that I do not only pardon it, but also receive him into my favor and
freendshippe, as though he had never sinned: I comfort him and bestow on him
guiftes.

Thus whilst the afflicted conscience does meditate, yea even of his fall, I
say, he gets to him self a great occasion of feruentnesse, and thankfulness
toward me: a far greater occasion of hatred and displeasure toward him
self, whilst he rigorously accuses his own folly, for despisinge me a God
so merciful unto him, as whom justly I might both condemn and destroy, I
spare, comfort, and deal bountifully with: so that how much the more he
perceives mi mercy to him, so much the more is he moved with greater zeal of
Justice against him self, and in a manner desires to be revenged on him
felfe, for the contempt of me: whereby it comes to pass that he doothe not
only desire pardon and reconcilation for his sins, but suffers the dignity
of my Justice: humbles him self, and punishes him self, because he has
wickedly lift up him self against me. Whereof proceeds, that how mutche the
more he perceives him self comforted of me, so mutch the more he abhors
and detesteth his own unworthiness, and with sorrow disdeigneth the
enormitye of his sins, marueiling how he could be so ungrateful to me. As a
drop of water on the burning fire, so are the sins consumed of that Soul
which is come to this zeal, that it no less loves my Justice, then mercy.
Therefore emongst al kinds of repentance, there is not a better for man, then
continually to consider my great love and fidelity toward him, and
contrarily his own infidelity, ingratitude and frowardness toward me.

The Devil is so envious to my Servant, that he omitteth no time in tempting
them: and even when they are about to repent, and bewail their sins he
chiefly casts in doubts, causinge them again and again to confess their
faults, that thereby might never attain to any quietness, but distrust all
their confessions, when they find any circumsta^ce or offense neglected,
whereof they have not made mention. But beware, O my Daughter, thou fall not? I
am thy Confessor. It is only I that can ease thy burden: cure thy wounded
conscience: and refreash thy hungry Spirit.

O how it greeueth me to se thee always conuersaunt in corruption, and be
troubled in recoumpting thy sins to him, that cannot forgive thee. Wherefore
cast thy self on me only, and I will deliver thee: for if a thousand years
thou would search thy self, and be confessed of ten thousand, thou shall
not be cleansed. Quando enim exhaures Abissum? Therefore commit thy self to me
only: I will make thee safe, when so ever with all diligence thou shalt go
about to confess thy fault: let me alone with mercy: to thee acknowledge
that thou can not cleanse thy self: say that thou had need of my mercy:
confess that thou can not answer one word to a thousand things wherewith
I might charge thee: but art in every work vnsufficiente, and have need of my
mercy. Wherefore trust not to thy confessions, but in my mercy, for by it thou
shall be justified. And whilst thou art to much conuersante in the care of thy
sins, you might turn unto me, and enjoy my gracious presence. Do thou
not note the subtlety of the enemy? To this end he suggesteth thee with the
number of thy sins, and thoughts of thy wickedness, that thou might
neglecte things to thee more wholesome. Know thou this therefore chiefly, that
my delighte is that thou should think of my goodness, and seek me in
simplsnesse. Thou shall find me, gentle, godly, full of compassion, and chief
in mercy: trust in me hope in me, seek my favor, seek my freendship, and
familiarity: and for ye better obteyning of these, direct thy exercise in
Holiness.

Thou shalt undoubtedly feel a far more beautiful fruit, if thou
diligently care how to love please, and solowe me, then by brofinge thy self
with scruples of thy confessions, for deeminge to search out, and abolish
doubts thou dooste rather engender to thee doubtfuller things: thou can not
think me too pitiful, or merciful, so that thou do not presume upon my
mercies, neither canste thou give me over much credit. Wherefore accustom thy
self to think well of me, and believe that I will not condemn thee: For
truly whosoever ever is willing to correct his life, and dispaireth not, him will
I save. I am well pleased, O Daughter, that thou art soarie thou have offended
and that thou will not sin heareafter. Now thou art in state of Salvation,
why fear thou? I am rich in infinite mercies. Thus think of me, for
thereby thou do me more honor, the^ if thou did imagine me cruel, and
hard, or should so mutche fear, as though I watched only to entrap men,
if this, or that doubt, or circumstance they had omitted: But yet when any
great offense comes to thy mind, confess thy fault with all humility, and
sorrow of heart, and desire grace to amend, and after rest in peace, and cast
all the Diuelishe doubts upon me, I desire thee. I am willinge to enjoy thy
freendshippe, I require to be loved of thee: se therefore that thou answer my
good will. Understand, know, and judge thy self to be a sinner. Say in many
things thou haste offended, that thou art most ungrateful, a Rebel,
spiteful and blasphemous against my Commandments and will: And heareof so
much humble thy self, that thou dare not once lift up thine eyes before me,
since thou art full of lothsomnesse, and abominations. There be certain so
esteeminge their committed euilles, that they are moved with them, either to
pleasure, and delighte, or contrariwise to desperation, or some such like
inconvenience. But thou, when thou will think thy self a sinner, and humble thy
self, shake of the dreams of thy sins, and turn unto me: confer with me
touching thy sins, and infirmities: pour out thy complaints before me:
reason with me: accuse thy self to me of thy crimes committed, so shall thy
accusation of sins be converted into Prayer.

Wherefore when thou have turned to me, plead thy cause in Prayer: for by
this means thy conscience shall be made clear, and quiet, thy affection also
to me directed, shall be by me inflamed. But now of Satisfaction for Sins:
Embrace this counsel: That what so ever thy hand is hable to do, that
instantly work: yet not with that mind, or to that end, as though therewith
thou could make Satisfaction for thy sins: for to the accomplishing of
this, thou ought to think all thy works too unworthy, and far unable.
But do that thou canste every way to please me, whom thou haste offended:
desire me, that with the merits of my passion, and most holy life I will
pullish thine offenses, and satisfy my Father for them.

This humility, this sure trust in me, with which thou debasest thy self,
and thy works, and extollest me, and my merits, excelling the works of
thy satisfaction, since that one drop of my blood is of more valewe to
Satisfaction, then al man's deserts, which has already made satisfaction
for the sins of the whole world. Such humility allureth me to thee, and
causes me to communicate with thee, the treasure of my merits. Wherefore let
this chiefly be thy study, which thou neglect not my good pleasure,
continually to think on me, desire me, love me, and what so ever I
command, and will, that diligently perform: then if thou had infinite
heaps of sins, I will forgive them al, as freely as if you had but one,
neither is it less easy for me to forgive many the^ few, It is a maruailous
thing that I will say but yet most true and certainly to be believed: if the
whole world wear a fiery Globe, and in the middeste of it were thrown a
bundell of flax, this of his natural effect should not so soon receive the
flame of fire, as I will receive the repentant and sorrowful sinner to mercy,
for in that natural act is required some tariance through very little and
peradventure not to be perceived, but hear is no tariance at all, between the
penitente and him that forgeueth, between the sorrowful and him that hears
the sighs. Thou therefore Daughter reiecte all inordinate fear, desirous to
please me with thy holy heart, study to be Holy, for I am holy willingly
offend not, though in never so little or light a thing, but shun the
occasion so much as in thee lies, wisely withdraw thy self from the society of
man's superstitious communications, and from unprofitable and evil occupations:
be not Solitary: be not Idle: spend the time thriftily to my Honor: occupy
thy self in readinge the Holy Scriptures, where thou shalt find my life and
Passion: plant in thy heart my trouble, Cross, and persecution, walk before me
in Holiness: with fear and reverence perswadinge thy self that I am never
absente from the Godly, but do instantly hold the^: diligently bridell and keep
thy senses and tongue, if thou love much babbling thou can not profit,
embrace soberness and reasonable continences, shun vanity and the pomp of
pride: sensuality and unlawful pleasures see thou follow not, but diligently
endeavor to keep thee vndeflied: sight courageously against vices: and
faithfully pray to me that thou may break and overcome the wicked passions
and inclinations: do as much as you art able, yet trust not to thy endeavor,
but to the healpe of my grace, for if thou trust to thy self and to thine own
industery thou shalt easily fall, thy well doing never ascribe to thy self,
nor usurp any thing upon my guiftes, for of thy self thou can not but
offend, of thy self thou have nothing but sin, which proper is to thy
self, desire not vainly to please any mortal man, wisshe rather to be known
of few then many, and to be despised rather then praised, never esteem thy
self any thing worth, nor think thy worthiness of any value, but with out
faining, account thy self vngraceful unworthy, and vilest creature alive:
Humble, and imbase thy self beneathe all men for my sake, love all men
with a pure love, yea those also which persecute thee, wish the prosperity of
thy Brother: despise none, despair not at the well dooinge of any, slander
none, judge no man, what thou see and hear of others, interpret it to the
best, with all study mortify thine own apetite, and singulerly embrace my
will gladly, and willingly obey me in all things: and men, in those which be
lawful: leave thine own will and deny thy self, commit and yield thee,
wholly to my providence, with firm trust in me, in all temptation, peril and
necessity, for I have care of thee, and diligently attend thee, as if thou
only liuedst. Daughter, learn to receive every adversity and affliction, no
otherwise then as from my hand sent only, and patiently bear it to the end for
my sake, for trouble is ye cup of blessing, whereon I have made all my chosen
drink: There has not ben any of mine, which outwardly or inwardly has nor
suffered some trouble. Wherefore reiectinge all weakness, what so ever comes
to thee, take it in good part, and believe it to be sent to thee for thy health
for the great love I bear thee. Suffer adversity, it is the kingly way which
leads to heavenly Heritage,, walk therefore in it, rejoicing, and give me
thanks that I have so regarded thee, that I would give thee somewhat that
thou should suffer, when any do moleste thee, and work thee injury or
spighte, think him sent by me to prove thee: Be not agrieued with him, give
him not sharp and bitter words, neither think of reuengement, mark not the
man (which is my instrumente and scourge) but attend on me, which suffer
such things to be done by man. O Daughter, in every trouble and sorrow be
patient, resigning thy self to me, for I purge thee by afflictions, and make
thee apt and worthy to be married to me. But if of thy human infirmity, or
other defect thou fall to impatience, be not discouraged, neither waver
dispairinge in thy good indeuoures: but forthwith arise, turn to me, and
call upon me with a sure hope of pardone, I know the general weakness of
man, I know also thy peculiar frailetie, trust to me, thy hope and full trust
cannot be too assured in me, if thy life be good and repentante. Wherefore
hastily fly unto me, I will take thee up, heal, and defend thee, what do
thou fear yet, O Daughter, why do thou not even now desire death, for what
evil can death bring thee: Truly after thou haste bequeathed thy Carkas to
the ground, thou shall no more offend me. Thou shalt no more be defiled with
sin, if thou love nothing in this world death can take nothing from thee,
if thou love any worldly thing, will thou stand to the danger, nay rather
thou love thine own perilles. Therefore before thou die cease to love worldly
and transitory things, if thou fear not to much to die, yea if thou love me
alone in this life, be glad thou shalt die, for but by death thou can not
get what thou love. But I know what thou fear, truly nothing in this
world thou love, nothing thou do possess that either thou carest to
enjoy or would sorrow the loss, but trembling and fear vexes thee,
because thou knoweste not whether thou be worthy love, or hatred: Thou know
not how thou shall be received of me, either to rest, or pain: None of
these shall thou know O daughter, neither is it expedient truly. Though thou
fear, yet abide in hope and sure trust in me, whether thou live or die: of
thy self thou canste neither live nor die well, both thou haste of me, if I
give thee to live well, shall not I also grant thee well and happily to die?
seeing thereof thou have all of me, seeing thou look for all things at my
hand, how is it the^ that thou hopest one thing and dispairest another: Trust
then and cast all thy thoughts and care upon me, as living thou art able to
resist no temptacion, nor avoid any sin, so neither dyinge art thou able,
if faithfully I prevent temptations, and moderate them in thy life, the same
will I do in thy death. Never enter battle with thine own force and arms
but leave it unto me, and leaninge to me, I will fight for thee, and I
fightinge for thee, and defending thee, what cause haste thou of fear, neither
doubt thou of the condition or kind of death. Nullum est genus mortis, quod
nocere potest iusto. No kind of death is able to annoye a just man, for ye
just with what death so ever he be besette, is in safegarde: Therefore be
nothing careful whether at home, or abroad, in bed, or in field thou shall
die, neither fear whether thy death be natural or violent: But as the Apostle
counsels, study to live soberly, justly and godly, that thou may well and
happily die. An evil death does not follow a good and just life, but the death
of the just is precious in my sight, how so ever they end this life, whether
in the water, in the fire, or in bed they die.

A sweet and comfortable Consolation for all weak minds: to confirm and
strengthen them against Desperation.
Whosoever refusinge ye hope of pardon, runs headlonge into the goulfe of
desperation: does not only distrust the omnipotency of God: (perswadinge him
self that there is some crime, which he is not able to extinguish) but also
makes him a lier. By the mouth of his Prophet he has promised free
remision of sin so soon as the offender bewaileth: but frowardely doothe the
posterity of Caine say: Such is mine iniquity, as I shall never obtain
remission.

What say thou caitif? If God be not able to pardone because of the
greatness of thy sin thou robbest him of his Omnipotency: If he will not do
that which he can do, he is a Liar, and too light, not to perform the
thing, which so often he has promised by the mouth of his holy Prophets. It
is said of the Psalmiste, God is gracious, and merciful, long sufferinge, and
of great goodness: The Lord is loving to all men, and his mercy is over
all his works. Is there any thing then more admirable, then the creation of
the heavens, with so many shininge bodies: then the making of the Earth with
such singular variety of living Creatures, Trees, plants Fruits, and all
other things: then the fabrication of so many pure Celestial Souls? So that
who durst be bold to affirm (had not the Prophet manifestly spoken it) that
the mercies of God do excel the glory of his handiwoorkes. Holy Scripture
sometime terms the mercy of God, great, sometime to great and sometime it
amplifieth the force thereof by the name of multitude, or number. The Kingly
Prophet David in one self place comprehends both ye greatness and multitude
of heavenly mercy, saying: Have mercy on me O God, after thy great
goodness, and according to the multitude of thy mercies do away mine
offenses.

Wheare great iniquity is, there needs much compassion. If thou but weighe
how heinous the offense of David was, thou will acknowledge the greatness of
Gods goodness: If thou consider how often he offended in that sin, thou
shall se the multitude of his mercies. That God which is our King, our
Father, our Master, our spouse prescribes no determinate number of offenses,
but as often as through true repentance we return to him, he forgets, and
forgeueth the punishment which he threatens to us: he enterteineth us amongst
his Family, leads us into the chaumber of his love, and receives not us
only, but forgets our offenses: He brings the lost sheep upon his
shoulders to the staules and bids the Congregation of the chosen to his
reioysinge: He goes to meet the Prodigal Son, returning from his long and
lothsom journey, and puts a Robe, and a Ringe upon him, and commands the
fatteste Caulfe to be killed for him.

What other thing doothe this signify, but the immense or, as I may say, the
overmuch mercy of God? It is no marvel, though his mercy excede, which
loves us so exceedingly. Paul fears not to write thus to the Ephesians, We
are (says he) by nature become the Children of wrath: But God, which is ritche
in mercy, for his tender love, wherewith he loved us, when we were dead to
sin, has raised and reconciled us again to Christ. S. John, in his Gospel
more plainly expresses the maruailous love of God our Father toward us,
saying: So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
who so believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Whereunto Paul aptly agrees, He that spared not his only Son, but gave him
for us all: has he not given us al things together with him? This so great
love: this so great kindness, does it not worthily appear unmeasurable,
because we have nothing, which we have not freely received of God. What so
ever we do, what so ever we possess, it comes by the mercy of God: Yea it
is the mercy of god that made the Angels, and created the world. If he had
wroughte it to himself, his power and policy might have been praised: but since
to our use he has framed al these things, shall we not acknowledge his mercy
to be maruailous. For whom have the Celestial Airs their course: to whom
lends the sun his beams by day: the Moon with the Stars, their
brightness by night, but for Man? For whose use made he these things of
nothing? For whose sake, but for man's only, do the hanging Clouds give
their shade, and bedewe the pleasant fields?

Why blow the winds: why flow the Rivers: why spread the Springes: why
encrese the Seas, but for the use of man? Who reapeth the commodities of the
fertle earth, which engenders so many living things, such wealthy store,
but manne? There is nothing that God has not made subject to man: only he
would that man should be obedient unto him. Many times our merciful God
sends adversity, either to clear us of our transgressions, or to deter us
from sin, or to minister occasion of weldooing. Thus was Abraham tried: so
was Job proved with many miseries: thus is every one which lives in Jesus
Christ tried in this world with sundry afflictions, as the Gould with the
fire: where are those that murmr against God, when either infirmity of
health, or death, and loss of wife and children, or decay of worldely wealth
happens to them: nothing knowinge that these are the manifest signs of a
merciful God. Let us give ear to the counsel of Solomon: My son (says he)
despise not the word of God, nor forsake his correction: For whom the Lord
loves, he chasteneth and delights in him, as a Father in his son. The
Apostle Paul has ye like saying to the Hebrews, Whom the Lord loves, he
corrects: and rebukes every Child that he receives.

Then (by Paul's counsel) when any storm of adversity arises, let us stand
fast in the Truth: knowinge, that he offers him self to us, as to his
children, like a merciful God. If the love of God lend us prosperity, let us
give him thanks, and be careful that we abuse not his bounty. It misery
oppress us let us nevertheless give thanks to him, and commit our selves to
his Judgment To obtain health, thou geuest thy self up to the Physician:
thou yeeldest thy self to the Coarde, Saw, and searing of the Surgeon: And
to enjoy everlasting health feareste thou to trust thy Creatoure, thy Master,
thy Father, and only Savior? Thou dare not say to the physician, thus and
thus cure me? And will thou prescribe to God ye means of thy sauinge health?
Let every one of us descend into ye deapth^ of his conscience: let us consider
how often, and how grievously we have offended God, how his benefits are defiled
with our iniquities, and so we shall see, how much we are indetted to his
infinite mercy: which has borne with our frailty so gently: which by so many
means calls us to repentance: which so w^^lingly pardons the penitente,
and convert. Truly he is greatly to be lamented, which refuses the fountain of
everlasting life, and never by repentance returns whence he departed. The
Prodigal child straied far, leaft, and forsook his Fathers house, and yet
returned. Peter was far gone, when he denied his Master thrice: but yet
remembringe the words which Jesus spoke to him, he reca^ted, and wept
bitterly. How gently does the Lord in Hieremie under the person of ye wife
(which having forsaken her Husband, gave her self to every man) call his
people to repentance: Return my children, and be converted (says he) because I
am your husband.

But oh wretched is the man, that stops his ears at this voice of the
Lords. To day (says the Psalm) if you hear my voice harde^ not your
hearts: This is our day, as long as we live (in which the Lord cease not
to call upon us to repentance, offering us prepared pardon.

God him self in Ezechiell does not only promise remission to him that
forsakes his evil, but voweth oblivion of all his former offenses. For after
he had reckened all the erroures which man fell into, he added: If the wicked
man will be soary for his sins, keep my commandments, and do the thing
that is right, he shall live, and not die: and I will not remember ought that
he has done. Have I pleasure in the death of a sinner (says the Lord God)
or rather would I not his conversion from his evil ways, that he might live?
And again he says, Return and repent you of your faults, and your
iniquity shall not prevail against you. Cast away evil cogitations, and
take you a new Spirit. And why will thou die. O House of Israel: I will not
the death of a sinner, return and thou shall live. O wretch, why despairest
thou, sith to this end God sent his Son into the Earth, that thou
might have comfort. This is the love of God whereof David speaks saying:
We have seen thy louinge kindness, even in the midst of thy Congregation.
Be early at the Church occupied in prayer: abide in the Apostolic faith:
beware of Idolatry embrace the louinge kindness of God who cries
vnceassantly: I will not the death of a Sinner, but rather he convert and live.
Hark to this sweet Oracle, shake of the drowsiness of error: and rise with
Christ, that thou maiste live in him.

Mark how liberally he promises, At what hour so ever a sinner shall
repent, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance. He has no
respect to the nature of thy faults: he forces not the greatness, or number
of thine offenses: repent, but as thou ought, and he will blotte thy
wickedness out of memory. That our prayer may be more acceptable to God: the
Prophet Osee tells us how we should pray: Return unto the Lord, and say
to him: Lord, take away mine iniquity: and receive (if I have any) my
goodness, and I will give thee the batlinges and Sacrifice of my lips. Let
us reuerte that have shamefully erred, to him which takes away the sins of
the world: and let us say, Take away from us the evil which we have done:
and accept this good? what good? Even the Sacrifice of our lips: we give
thee thanks mighty God, to whom we owe all that we have: Take from us which
is ours, and accept of us ye which is thine own. Return (says Ioell) to your
God, because he is loving, and gracious, long suffering, and of much mercy, and
ready to pardon mischief. Though the weight of sin astonne thee: yet let ye
mightiness of Gods mercy uphold thee: which the Prophet doothe many ways
exaggerat.

God (says he) is gentle: which he adds, that we should not despair of
pardon: God (says he) is gracious, that we should understand how he not
only helps us, but that he pitieth our miseries: And thinking not this
sufficient, he adioyneth, Long suffering: And yet art thou doubtful, sinner?
Harken then what follows: And of great mercy: If thy faults be many, care
not: great is the goodness of God.

What remains now, but that thou turn and go to him that inuiteth thee.
Thou will say, the horrible threatninges of punishmente fear me: Give ear
and mark: And he is ready to pardon mischief: that God which is so often
stirred to anger, of his own accord moves thee to repentance: calls thee
to forgiveness: forgets his threats denies thee the tormente of hell, in
steed of punishmente: gives thee his blessing: not only turns to thee that
repentest, but wilingly goes to meet thee, and embraces thee. This is it
which was promised by Zachary Turn unto me (says the Lord of Hosts) and I
will be converted unto you: What means he by Return unto me? that is
acknowledge thy weakness, and ask mercy. And what is meant by this: And I
will be converted unto you: That is, of a revenger I will become a healper: I
will assist your endeavors: and look what through your own strength you can
not bring to pass, thou shall attain to by my favor. No man can freely
hate his own sin: unless God mollify his stoany heart, and give him a
fleashly heart: unless for a defiled conscience, he make a clean heart: unless
for a corrupt soul, he renew a right spirit in him. Peruse, Read, vnreade
the conversation and life of Christ there thou shalt find nothing, but of
his everlasting mercy toward all men. He freely healed the sick: fed the
hungry: delivered them yt were in danger: cleansed the Leapers: gave sight to
the Blind: restored the Lame: cast out Devils: raised the dead to life, and
pardoned the wicked. Search again the universal discipline of God, what other
thing contains it, then the maruailous compassion of the Almighty? Does he
not inculcate into our minds by Parables, to the intent we should not fall
by any means? To that end serves the parable of the lost sheep, which was
brought again on the Sheepeheardes shoulders: the Parable of the lost, and
found groate: of the hole men that wanted not a Physician: of the servant to
whom his debts were forgeuen: of the Publicane, and the Pharisey: of ye broken
man whom ye Samaritane cured: of the good steward toward his dettours, and of
the crafty Steward toward his Master: of the Prodigal Child taken again
into favor. As touching the bare name of the Gospel, does it not promise
mercy? Yes it gives light to the Blind, liberty to the Captive, Health to
the broken, and last of all a grateful gain to the Lord, who thirsts
nothing, but the Salvation of sinners. Likewise the name of Jesus, that is (of
a savior) what else does it promise to the sinner, but mercy, and
blissfulness? If he had come representinge the Majesty of a Judge, there had been some cause why every one might have feared: but knowinge him to come as a
Savior, dooste thou despair Salvation? for the surer hope of Salvation, the
Son of God suffered death, and offered up him self a valiant Sacrifice for
the sins of man.

And hanginge on the Cross, prays for his persecutoures, and thinkeste thou
that he will deny thee the forgiveness of thy sins, that dooste acknowledge
thy wretchedness, and crave remission? Trust him that is merciful, and thou
shalt find compassion: A sure hope obtains any thing at Christ's hand:
who so mistrusteth the Physician, hinders his own health. The wooman of
Canaan, cried, and her Daughter was cured: The Centurian believed, and his
Servant was made whole again: The Father prayed, and his Son was cleansed
of the fool spirit: The Apostles cried out, Healpe Lord for we perish: and
they were delivered. And we see, that in diverse he has not respected the
Prayers of the mouth, but only the Faith. He did but perceive the faith of the
people, and said to the sick of the Palsy, Be of good cheer my son, thy
sins are forgeuen thee. The Mother and her companions do but weep, and her
son is raised from death to life: Martha, and Mary did but mourn, and
Lazarus was revived: Mary the sinner bewaileth: he annointeth her, kisseth her,
and says: Thy sins are forgeuen thee. He sufficiently asks, that
confesses his infirmity: he asks effectually, that lamenteth, and
believes. The woman troubled with superfluity of blood, secretly touched the
vesture of Jesus: and immediately she felt the force of his mercy. We Read
also of many others that wear healed by touching his garment: so never
unprovided is his goodness: and at all times he gives comfort to the weak.
If thou be afraid to call upon Jesus: if thou can not come unto him, yet at
the least touch the edge of his garment: Read the Scriptures: follow the
doctrine of the Apostles: for by them he often shows his virtue, and tells
of thy saving health. O blind, and unthankful, which despise the grace of
God, so ready to be obtained. But oh thrice wretched, which despair in that
which is willingly and freely offered, he is easily pacified, that is revenged
against his will.

What other meaning has this Phrase, but that ye Lord leaves no way vnsoughte
for, to bring us to Salvation: and we wittingly forsake the hope of
Salvation? And why will thou die O house of Israel? with tears he lamented
Jerusalem, which heaped vengeance unto it self by their malicious erroures.
O Jerusalem (says he) how often would I have gathered thee together, as
the Hen gathers her Chickins, and thou would not? Our humble Savior
weepeth, because he may not save us, miserable sinners, and we despare in him,
as though he would not save us. All the House reioysed where the Son which
died, was revived, and received again that perished. That good Father calls
the company of the Heavens to rejoice over the penitent sinner: and thou
wretch despairest, enuiynge both thine own safeguard, and the gladness of
God. Shall we believe that he will not pardon malefactors who lamenteth the
death of a sinner, and rejoices at the conversion of the penitent? He calls
al men to the marige Feast: he would have his house filled with strangers:
makes the Blind, and the lame to com in: And why staiest thou Caitiffe? Why
forsakest thou not thy swinish Soil? why striuest thou against the mercy of
God? there can be no greater folly, then for vain and variable things to
forsake Eternity. There is no greater wisdom, then for a little sufferaunce,
to gain Immortality. Great is their ignorance therefore, which persevere in
their naughtiness: But greater is the wisdom of those, that live in newness
of life. O what cost we bestow, what pains we take in findinge corruptible
mettalles, and how little we care for the treasure of Gods mercy, which
is laid open, and freely offered to us.

The Lord is ritche in mercy.

The treasure of worldly wealth may be wasted by profuse expense: But the
bounty of Gods goodness has no bottom. God has assured his Faith to man,
and (as Paul writes) he can not deny himself. He offers to be challenged,
and reproved, if he has not performed his promises. For thus he speaks in
Esau to a wicked generation: Lift up your selves, and be clean: take away the
thought of evil: cease from mischief: learn to do good: seek Judgment:
help the oppressed: Judge the Innocent: defend the Widow, and com and reprove
me (says the Lord.) Hear thou now wretched man? what else requires our
gracious God of thee, but amendment of life? And that the enormity of thy
heinous crimes may not exanimate thee, attend to the ready remission. If thy
sins (says he) were as red as Scarlet, I will make them as white as Snow:
and if you will harken to me, you shall eat the Fruits of the Earth. O
cursed Progeny of Eve, why do thou yield to the disceiptful promises of the
Devil, that allureth thee to destruction? And art deaf at the Son of God,
which would assoceate thee with everlasting joy. Repent (says he) for the
Kingdom of God is at hand. The Son of God promises: the Father commands
thee: the Holy Ghost inuiteth thee: and yet thou art Scrupulous to receive
that which is offered. The voice of the Apostles, is the voice of God: and they
cry Repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of
your sins: and receive the guifte of the Holy Ghost. Forsake your foul,
filthy, and abominable traditions, and seek the Kingdom of Heaven. There
run unto Christ, Soldiers, Publicanes, Harlottes, Idolaters, Mansleares,
sorcerers, bawdes, Incestuous persons, none are exempted, all have free course
to the mercy of God: their former life is not imputed to them, if they repent
and amend their lives. Like as the ground often moystened with Heavenly dew,
and yet yields to his tiller, nothing but thorns, and brambles, is worthy
to be had in contempt, and to be given to the fire. So God many times, for the
contempt of his goodness, gives sinners up to their reprobate sense.
Wherefore it is best to leave of procrastination of amendment of life: and
when the Lord calls us to cast of the Old man, with his deeds, and
concupiscences: least God, which has been denied to be hard, at the least
refuse to hear our complaints. Horrible is the voice wherewith he threateneth
those which will not hear him that so graciously calls. Because (says he) I
have called, and you have refused: I have stretched out my hand and there was
no man, that would look: because you have despised my counsel, and set at
naught my admonitions, I will laughe at your destruction, when that shall com
to pass, which you feared: when abortiue misery shall com upon you, and the
storms of destruction shall preuente you: when sorrow, and anger shall
possess, and oppress you: then will you call upon me, and I will not hear:
They will rise betime in the morninge, but they shall not find me: because they
have hated my Discipline, and have been void of the fear of God: have not
harkened unto my counsel: and have defied my correction. In this life there is
hope of mercy.

Wherefore while thou live, call for the grace of God, and amend thy life. The
careful God of our Salvation, has suffered mighty, and marvelous men to
err, that we by their example might have comfort, and no^ despair in hope of
pardon. In Holy Scripture who is more commended, then King David: who was
both a King and a Prophet: a chosen man after the hearts delighte of God: out
of whose stock came the Savior Christ: But into how many, and grievous
crimes fell so mighty a man: Yet hearing Nathan pronounce the grievous
threatenings of God, cried out: Lord, I have sinned. And Nathan said, But the
Lord has taken away thy sins: thou shall not die. God suffered Peter to
offend grievously and yet when he had lamented, he obtained mercy. When he
gave him charge over the sheep (for which he shead his precious blood) was it
likely yt he meant to remember the deniyng of him thrice? No no, he had so
freely forgotten it, that there remained no jot imprinted in the memory of our
loving God. We have many examples of sinners: and not a few of the penitent:
the example of none ought to move us to sin: let us not to much try God:
if any man be encumbred with iniquity, he has examples of repentance: let him
not despair. They do evil which will not repent with them whom they have
transgressed withal. After David had willingly confessed his fault, and
acknowledged the just judgment of God: behold what great hope he conceived of
the mercy of God: Sprinkle me (O Lord says he) with Isope, and I shall be
clean: wash me and I shall be whiter then Snow. By the sprinkling of the
blood of the immaculate Lamb he promises to himself clearenesse too, though
he acknowledge his conception to be sinful, yet by this washing he hops
after the whiteness of innocence, which passes the white of the Snow. And
he trusts not only in the Innocence, but looks to see his doubtful
penitencie turned into Heavenly joy. Thou shall make me hear joy and
gladness (says David) that the boanes which thou have broken may rejoice.
Give me the comfort of thy healpe, and stablish me with thy free Spirit.

O singular Faith of a sinner: what man has at any time cried Jesus have
mercy on me: but forthwith he has obtained grace. Take pity Lord (says
the woman of Canaan) and her Daughter was healed. The blind poor man cried
out, O Son of David have mercy on me, and he received sight. Let us heartily,
zealously, constantly call on him, and in the midst of our miseries, say: Jesus
thou Son of David have compassion upon us: And of poor impotent beggars, he
will make us fellow heirs with him of the kingdom of heaven. He has opened the
Sanctuary of his holiness, and thou runnest i^to the Dungeon of despair: he
has stretched out his hand to thee, and thou turneste away thy face: he
opens the gates of Heaven, and thou hastest to destruction: behold the
bosom of his goodness, and thou creepest into the Lake of unhappiness. The
Thief that hunge on the cross heard him, saying: This day thou shall be with
me in Paradise: and thou offerest thy self to the Devil. The mercy of God
came unto us, when he sent his son into the Earth: let us therefore go to it:
Let us incline to him, as he did to us: The way is first to leave our life.
For first the Physicians use to purge the body, that they may minister
holsomer Medecines. Forsake O thou sinner, thy wicked imaginations, which fight
against God: leave to lust, be not covetous, refrain riot, fly arrogancy,
that God may power his blessings upon thee. He that persisteth in his
wickedness and calls for grace, is like to an enemy which being ready armed
asks peace of his Master, he that asks, receives: he that seeks,
finds: and he that knocks, has it opened to him, if thou will desire
mercy, crave it truly: if thou seek it, seek it in deed, if thou knock at
the gate of forgiveness, knock earnestly If thou require an example of one
that faithfully craved the favor of God: Mark the prodigal Child, who
leauinge his swine, returned to his Father, and said: Father, I have sinned
against Heaven, and against thee: make me as one of thy hired Servants.
Mark the Publicane which for ye giltines of his conscience dare not lift up
his eyes to heaven: dare not come to his redeemer, but standinge a far of
knocks his breast and says: Lord be merciful unto me a sinner. S. Hierome
affirms the offense of Judas to be greater in despayringe the mercy of God,
then in betrayinge Christ, as Cain stirred God to anger, more through
desperation of pardon, then by the slaughter of his brother Abel. Many which
have persecuted Christ, being converted, and beleeuinge in him have obtained
pardon: and are made examples to man, that he ought not to distrust the
remission of his wickedness, seeing the death of our Savior is forgeuen to
the penitente: Will thou hear says Augustine, the mercy of God, leave thy
abomination and he will forgive thee? Will thou see the truth of God: do good
and thou shall be crowned with Justice. God is not so merciful to use
injustice, nor so just to be unmerciful. But some man will say, men increase
their offenses by to much hope: but how much do they enlarge their giltinesse
by distrust of Remission? If there were no forgiveness, then thou would
rage, and say: I am wretched: I am condemned: why is not my lust law: why
shall I not fill my self with facietie: if after this there be naught but
tormente: this would be thy saying, O worse then despair it self: He does
better therefore that corrects thee with promise of forgetfulness, and
says: I will not the death of a Sinner, but that he convert and live. God by
his promise would not have sinners to presume: but his will is they should not
in any wise distrust: and therefore he has made them ignorant of the day of
their death: if thou repent, present pardon is provided: no day is prefixed
Wherefore to conclude, if thou have lived well till this day and still abidest in
this life, live well: amend thy life: and behold forgiveness: and be sure
that what he has pardoned, shall not be imputed to thee again, which for his
mercy he grant: that takes away the sins of the world. Amen.

Consolatio.
NVlla meroris magnitudo, nulla angustiarum acerbitas, nulla defectuum
multitudo, nulla scelerum enormitas, te ad desperationem, nimiamne
pusillanimitatem adducat: Quantumcunque peccaueris, semper Dei misericordia in
infinitum excedit tuas iniquitates; Quantumcunque infirmus sis, semper illius
benignitas adiuuare parata est tuam fragilitatem. Vult, and potest Deus sanare,
ac liberare te, si ad eum vere conuerteris, atque humilis factus, ipsum Pie
inuocas, and speras in eo. O quam homini salutaris, and Deo grata est spes,
atque confidentia illa, quam Dei amor, sanctaque humilitas parit, and quae
hominem non ad negligentiam vel in curiam sese emendandi, neque ad facilitatem
peccandi pertrahit, sed magis ad conatum proficiendi extimulat.

The Aucthours Prayer.
IN the deapthe of thy mercy (O Lord) bow down thine eyes, and behold,
incline thine ears and hear, stretch out thine Arm, and help, for I am thine
unworthy Creature, and hapless man, that through thy rod of wrath have
experience of most wretched misery. Mine enemies pursue me with gaping jaws,
and whetted teethe, saying within them selves let us now devour him, for the
time that we looked for, is come, we do find, and see it. They have
fortified round about me, and have enclosed me with torment and travel. My
fleash and skin are made old, my boanes are bruised, they have hedged me
that I cannot geat out: and have laid heavy Linckes upon me.

Healpe Lord thy servant, whom thou never failedst, I cry and call pitiously,
yet am I not heerde: my innocence is trodden down, and my life subdewed with
false surmises. My mourning they daily hear, but comfort I find far of.
They have stopped up my ways with quartered stoanes, and made my paths
crooked. They lay wait for me as wild Bears and devouring Dragons with open
mouth: deliver me from their greedy gripes, and free my feet from the paths
of such venomous serpents.

O Lord, thou see they have stopped up my well springes of truth: how they
have broken me in pieces: preferred their guiles, and altogether laid me
waste: I am made their mark to shoot at: their strongest bows have they
bente against me: out of their malicious quiver they have shot their sharp
shaftes of eger envy, yea, even into my raines. They laugh me to scorn in
their dissembling hearts, and yet bear me fair countenance.

No regard is had of my truth, and utter confusion is com upon me: thy gifts
Lord, proper to my self are holden from me, and I perish in want, having of
mine own. The leaven of my Bread is made with cruel cares, and my drink
m^ngled with salt tears: they have overwhelmed me with heaped stoanes, and
have buried my innocence in shameful grave. I am sequestered from all freedom:
and thou Lord know I am not guilty.

Correct me not in my misdeedes toward thee Lord, but in the mildness of
thy mercy: for I acknowledge I have don things unlawful against thy Throne,
and am no more worthy to be called thy Child. Yet Lord from the bottom of a
broken heart I ask thy Pardon, and my Spirit trusts in thy mercy, and
requires that mine enemies may no longer triumph over me. Sweet Lord look
down and remedy my misery and thraldom: Remember how long I have been fed
with sorrow and care: how my Body wastes, and my Soul melts away. I fear
Lord thou have forsaken me, and set up the horn of mine enemies: that thou
geuest them this long Glory over me.

O merciful Father, do not so I beseech thee. If my scourge be determined
(with thee) for any my conte^ptes of thy will: yet deliver me from the hands
of the malicious. I acknowledge my faults toward thy Celestial Seat, and
say: my righteousness all is stained. I appeal to thy mercy, for thy truth,
and Sons sake. But Lord if my breast ever harbored any unjust pretense, or
act against thy Servant Elizabethe, my gracious Queen and Gouernoure, as a
joyful pray bestow me amongst mine eger enemies. To this day, from my
birthe, thou know Lord, I have honored her with Loyal love, and served her
with true heart, and innocent hands.

Now Lord, if such discharge of dewtie has ever won victory over any her
worthy thoughts, I beseech thee, not in my deserts to thee, but for my
truth to her, multiply in secret breast such thoughts to sure increase of
firm belief, as through thee inspired with my large truth, which might never
boast her self: I may be saved from the snares of the malicious, and my
innocence known to her.

Wake Lord, I beseech thee, and renew on me thy mercies, and help, as ever
thou have don of old. My Soul says within me, thou Lord art her only
portion: and therefore she will hope in thee. And my body have thou always
delivered in greatest peril, when so ever I have put my trust in thee. Arise,
most mighty helper, and aid thy servant, who only seeks succor of thee.
Sure I am, in mine enemies pittes, thou will not mine Innocence perish:
neither destroy me utterly in mine unrighteousness toward thee, for that my
contrite heart appealeth to thy mercy: and thy condition is not to seek the
death of a sinner, neither to be found untrue in thy promises, wherein my
Spirit only trusts.

Amidst my sorrowful plaints and scorchinge sighs, Lord pour out ye
comfortable dewes of thy compassion. For in no other healpe will I trust, but
in thine, though the whole earth would assure me. Mine enemies swarm as Bees
to the Hieue, and spread as flowers of the Spring: my friends walk in single
number: and hundreds that erst professed faith, deny their sentence: such
as would my good, want the mean thereto: and those that best may, with
Fortunes threats are beaten down, and made lame. Wherefore, Lord wash the
understanding of my gracious Gouernesse, with the flowing springs of my
truth. Cause her with speedy hand to restoare my decayed parts: Guide her
mind still in thy love, and fear: who with such perfect wisdom, true
justice, and pitiful compassion, shewinge whose member she is, has thus
woorthily preserved me.

Yea further Lord guide so her course on earth, that thou may afterward of
right, equal her joys with thy blessed Cherubins above the high heavens:
Continewe in her thy grace, which geuest every good guifte: that as she is thy
chosen vessel, no vsurpinge heart, nor bloody hand may ever have power
against her: But replenished with thy holy Spirit, may execute thy will and
walk in thy paths, never wanting ye strength of thy right hand to beat down
her enemies. But found worthy of thy ritche goodness, we may long enjoy so
matchless a Head, and Governor. Grant this Lord, I beseech thee, with
exchange of my hard state into better, even at thine own will: and my Spirte
shall never cease to give praise and thanks to thy holy name, Amen.

To the Reader.
MY willinge mind sundry ways annoyed in the purpose of my Pen, is forced
with other labors, not only to estrange her Royal Majesty the final
parts of this small piece, but here to offer thee (courtuous Reader) in
supply of void paper, these few selected Sentences in both tongues, out of
Holy Scripture, and other Divine, and Ancient Writers: which for their
worthiness, thy behoof, and less labor, if thou accept better placed then
barraine paper, and grant their once readinge, I have my desire. For after
deem I, if knowledge of Virtue may allure thee, or view of vice abashe thee,
often will thou read, and vnreade them, to embrace the good and eschew the
ill. Which the heavenly Father grant us al his grace to fulfill.

Sentences out of the holy Scripture.
THe fear of God is worship, and triumph, gladness, and a joyful Crown: yea,
who so fears the Lord, shall be happy, and when he has need of comfort he
shall be blessed.

The Seed of them which fear the Lord shall be brought to Honor: But the
generation of the proud, disceiptefull, and malicious, shall perish with the
shame of their wickedness.

Labor to geate thee a good name: for that shall continue by thee surer then
a thousand greater treasures of Gold. A good life has a number of days: but
a good name endures for ever.

The untruth of a lying tongue murdereth the Soul: upon the head of the
backbiter, and blasphemour, with terror shall the Lord send the thunder of
his wrath, and consume them hastily.

He that loves Riches, shall not be justified: And who so follows corruption
shall perish in the same.

Goulde, and Silver is the tree of falling to every one, that greedily seeks
the same: blessed is the Rich, which is found without blemish.

Travail, and carfulness for Riches, takes away the sleep, and makes the
flesh to consume: they help not in ye day of judgment: Righteousness shall
crown thee: Through thy evil gotten goods shall thou perish.

The joy, and cherefulnesse of the heart is the pure life of man: And his clear
conscience a sure fortress against death.

The Tree of the field is known by his fruit: So are the rotten thoughts of
the dissemblinge person by his open deeds of malice.

Forgive thy neighbor the hurt, that he has done thee; so shall thy sins
be forgeuen thee when thou praiest.

Remember the end, and let enmity pass which seeks death and destruction:
abide in the commandment of thy God: that thou maiste reap his blessinge.

They that rejoice at the fall of the rightuous, shall be taken in the snare:
anguishe of heart shall consume them before they die.

Wrest not you the law: nor know (...) whose eyes veweth all virtue: seeks t^
punish al wickedness, be not in the number of such.

Hester. 16.

My right hand shall not spare the sinners: and my sword shall not cease over
them, that sheadde the innocent blood upon earth.

Esdras. 15.

Despise not a man that turns himself away from Sin, and cast him not in
the teethe withal: but remember we be all frail and offenders. Ecclesiast. 8

Three things there be that my Spirit favors: the unity of Brethren, and
the love of Neighbors, a Man and wife that agree well together.

Three things there^f which my Soul hates: a Rich man Covetous, a poor man
proud: an Old man that is unchaste. Eccle. 25.

Oppress not thou the Law, nor know any person, neither take any reward, for
gifts blind the wise, and pervert the words of the Rightuous, that which is
just shall then follow that thou may live. Leuit. 19.

See that thou know no faces in judgment, nor do any unrighteousness in
judgment, in meatte Yearde: in Waighte: or in Measure: true Balances: true
waightes: a true Eph^: and a true line shall you have to all men. Ibidem.

Thou shall not favor the poor, nor honor the mighty: but in
righteousness shall thou judge thy Neighbor. Ibidem.

Thou shalt not aduenge thy self, nor be mindeful of a wrong: but shall love
thy Neighbor even as thy self. James. 1.

As the Sun rises, is heat, and the grass withers and his flower falls
away and the bewty of the fashion of it perishes: even so shall the malicious,
rich, unrighteous, and dissemblinge person, perish in the wickedness of his
ways.

Judge nothing before the time, which will lighten things that are hidden in
darkness, and open the Counsels of the hearts, so shall every man have praise
of God. Corinth. 4.

See thou rob not the poor, because he is weak: and oppress not the simple
in judgment, for the Lord him self will defend their cause: and do violence
to them that have used violence. Proverb. 22.

God resists the proud: and gives grace unto the lowly. James. 4.

Despise not thou the chastening of the Lord: neither despair when he gives
thee adversity: for whom the Lord loves, him he chasteneth: yea he scourges
with affliction every son that he receives. Hebr. 12

Let every man be swifte to hear: slow to speak: slow to wrath: for the
wrath of man works not that which is rightuous before God: wherefore lay
aparte all malice: and with all meekness of heart, exercise truth and
quietness. James. 1.

Lay aside all maliciousness, and all guile: fainednesse, and envy: all
backbitinge: and as newborn Babes, desire ye that Milk, not of the Body,
but of the Soul: which is without disceipte, that ye may grow thereby unto
salvation. 2. Epist. Petr.

The eyes of the Lord do govern the Rightuous, and his ears open unto their
Prayers. Ibidem. cap. 3.

The desire of the Lowly is acceptable, and the Lord will increase it: but
the hope of the Proud, is the indignation: and in the freshnes of their
labors, will he root them out

He that casts out his words rashly, woorketh care to his life: but who so
through silence seasoneth his thoughts with wisdom, is the Authoure of long
rest.

Every labor gives forth his fruit, only lip labor destroys time,
and brings forth penury.

The days of adversity are a blessing of God, and a clear conscience is a
continual feast: A malicious man kindles strife: a fool utters his wrath
in have: but a discrete person covers wrong.

The Lord abhors the prayer of the malicious: but who so humbles his
Prayer in faith and Charity, shall find his desire

The desires of the Covetous man, bring upon him confusion: but who so
gathers his Riches with love and favor, shall prosper.

Through Mercy and truth, sins are pardoned: and through Righteousness and
Faith are thy prayers heard, and evil eschewed.

Rightuous lips are pleasant unto Kings, and dissemblinge tongues
overthrow hie Palaces.

Better it is to be of humble mind with the Lowly, then to divide the spoils
with the proud.

Presumptuousnesse goes before destruction: and after a proud stomach
follows a foul fall.

Mercy and faithfulness preserves the King, and with loving kindness his
seat is holden up.

Who so follow Righteousness and Mercy, shall find both life, righteousness
and honor.

Like as the Golden pillars are upon the sockettes of Silver: so are the
bewtifull parts of the body upon a wooman that has a constant mind.

The heart of the foolish is like a Carte wheel, and his thoughts run
about like the Axeltree.

The wise man tempereth his rage with patience, and seasoneth his words with
wisdom.

Who so is Merciful and gives Alms, that is the right thanckes offeringe:
but he that stops his ears at the cry of the poor, shall be cast down:
cry him self, and be not heard.

All that is of the Earth, shall turn to the Earth again: all Brybes and
Unrighteousness shall perish: but Faithfulness and Truth, shall endure for
ever.

Rewards and gifts blind eyes of the wise, and make him run that he cannot
tell men their faults.

Let not thy mouth be accustomed with swearing, for in it there be many falls.

The heaviness of the heart is all the pounishment, and the wickedness of a woman
goes above all.

Like as to clime up, a sandy way, is to the feet of the aged, even so is a
wife full of words to a still quiet man.

That woman that has been unfaithful to the Law of the Highest, and has
broken Covenant with her Husband, her children shall take no root: and as for
her branches, they shall bear no fruit: A shameful report shall she leave
behind her: and her dishonor shall not be put out.

Like as the Sun when it arises, is an ornamente in the high Heaven of the
Lord: so is a virtuous wife the bewty of all her house.

Perpetual are the foundations, that be laid upon a whole stoany Rock: so
are the Commandments of God upon the heart of a holy woman.

What so ever happen unto thee, receive it: suffer i^ heaviness (...) showed
unto thee, that be above the capacity of men.

Be not ashamed of thy friend in his adversity, and keep not back thy
counsel, when it may do good: neither hide thy wisdom in her beawty.

For righteousness, and truth strive unto death: and God shall fight for thee
against thine enemies.

Make no tarryinge to turn unto the Lord, and put not of from day to day:
for suddenly shall his wrath come, and in the time of vengeance he shall
destroy thee.

Trust not in wicked riches, for they shall not help thee in the day of
pounishment, and wrath: Equity, Mercy, Justice, and Truth shall deliver thee.

In the bewtifull days of thy prosperity forgeat not the foggy mistes of
adversity: and when it goes not well with thee, have a good hope it shall be
better.

Happy is he, that has no heaviness in his mind: and is not fallen from his
hope.

Let not to pray always: and stand in fear reformed unto death: for the
reward of God endures for ever: and unto them that will repent, he has
given the way of righteousness.

Note all these hither, to be out of Ecclesiast.

A dissembling person will unfold thy Secrets: But he that loves thee in
truth, will faithfully stand with thee in peril.

Through the lyinge lips of the malicious, the innocente is destroyed: But in
the beauty of his truth, time shall deliver him.

The innocente dealing of the just shall lead them: But the wickedness of
such as dissemble shall be their own destruction.

The Lord abhors them that be of fained heart: But he has pleasure to
increase ye seed of the humble and faithful.

Every man shall enjoy good according to the sayings of his mouth, and after
the works of his hands: Do they sum righteousness, and speak the Truth.

The innocente person shall be delivered out of trouble: and the double dealer
shall comme in steed.

Mercy, and Faithfulness let never go from thee, bind them about thy neck,
and write them in the tables of thy heart. Prou. 3

Be not wise in thine own conceit, but fear the Lord, and depart from
evil: So shall thy virtue shine, and thy healthes grow. Ibidem.

These six things does the Lord hate: A proud look: a liynge tongue:
hands to shead innocente blood: an heart that goes about with wicked
imaginations: feet that be swift in running to do mischeife: a false witness
that brings up lies: and such a one, as sows discord amongst brothers.
Prou. 6,

Dissembling lips keep hatred secretly: evil will stirs up strife: but
love covers the multitude of sins. Prou. 10

The patient abidinge of the innocent shall be turned to gladness: and the
days of his trouble are the sure signs of his Salvation. Ibidem.

The peril that the ungodly are afraid of, shall come upon their heads: But
the faithful, and the rightuous shall enherite their desires.

He that by violence sheaddeth any man's blood, shall be a Runnegate to his grave:
and his Posterity shall be confounded with shame.

A man that deals faithfully, shall be filled with blessings: and he that
makes too much haste to be ritche, shall not be vnguilti.

Like as Hell, and destruction are never full: even so the eyes of the
couetuous men can never be satisfied.

The Seat of the King, that with Justice, and equity faithfully judges the
poor, shall increase, and stand for ever.

Many men like the Bread that is gotten with deceit: But at the last their
mouths shall be filled with gravel. These three Proverb. all.

No force is least unprepared against the day of battle: But the Lord gives
the victory.

He that sows the seeds of malice, shall reap sorrow: and in the harvest of
his cruelty shall he perish.

The end of Equity, Justice, patience, and Truth, is Riches, Honor
Prosperity, and Health.

Who so gives rewards, shall obtain the victory, and triumph: But he takes
away the Soul of such as receive them.

Rejoice not thou at the fall of thine enemies, and let not thy heart be glad
when he stombleth: Least the Lord, when he sees it, be angry, and turn his
wrath from him, to thee.

He that turns away his ear from the needy, or from his Neighbor in
necessity, his Prayer shall be abominable.

Sow no evil seeds in the furrows of unrighteousness, for the Lucre of any
other man's Lordeship, labor not unto the King for the seat of Honor: so
shall thou go untouched of any misfortune. Ecclesiast. 7.

Who so unjustly challenges rule to himself, shall be hated of the people.
Ecclesiast. 20.

Carry thy wrongs with patient heart, and think of no revenge: the Lord
knows how to deliver the Godly out of anguish, and to reserve the malicious
unto the day of judgment. Petr. 4.

If our hearts condemn us not, then have we trust to Godwarde, and what so
ever we ask we receive of him. Job. 3

For this purpose appeared the Son of God, to lose the pains of Hell, and
the works of the Devil. Ibidem.

Wars with great discretion ought to be taken in hand, for through
strength of good Counsel, things prosper that men devise. Pro. 24.

When thou go out to battle against thine enemies, and see Horses and
Charrets, and people more then thou, be not afraid of them, for the Lore thy
God is with thee. Deuteronomy. 20.

If you go to war against your enemies that vex you, ye shall blow with
the Trumpets: and you shall be remembered before the Lord your God to be saved
from your enemies. Number. 10.

The victory of ye Battle stands not in ye multitude of ye host but the
strength and Triumph comes from Heaven. Macab. 3

He that has clean hands, and a pure heart, and that has not lifted up his
mind to vanity, nor sworn to deceive his Neighbor: he shall receive the
blessing from the Lord, and victory of his enemies, and righteousness from
the God of his Salvation. etc. Psalm. 24.

FINIS.
Sententiae Diuinae, e Sacris Scripturis, Patribusque collectae.
Deus.
DEus est Spiritus, qui adorant eum oportet vt spiritu ac veritate eum adorent.

Alanus de conquestione Naturae.
Deus est splendour nunquam deficiens, vita indefessa, non motiens, fons semper
scaturie^s, seminale vitae seminarium, sapientiae principale principium,
initiale bonitatis initium.

August. super illud Pater Nost.
Deus est in scipso sicut ALPHA, and OMEGA: in Mundo, sicut Rector and Auctor:
in Angelis sicut Sapor and Decor: In Ecclesia, sicut Paterfamilias in Domo: in
Anima, sicut sponsus in Thalamo: in Justice, sicut adiutor and protector: in
reprobis, sicut pauor and horror.

August. super Io. Ser. 29.
Deus tibi totum est: Si esuris, panis tibi est: si sitis aqua tibi est: si in
tenebris es, lumen tibi est: si nudus es, in mortalitate tibi vestis est.

Christus.
Io. 8
Ego sum lux mundi, qui sequitur me, non ambulabit in tenebris, sed habebit
lumen vitae.

Ambro. in quodam ser.
Omnia habemus in Christo, and omnia in nobis Christus. Si a vulnere curari
desideras, medicus est: si febribus aestuas, fons est: si graueris iniquitate,
lustitia est: si indiges auxilio, virtus est: Si tenebras fugis, lux est: si
Coelum desideras, via est: Si cibum quaeris alimentum est.

August. super Mat. 155.
Ego sum via, veritas, and vita, tanqua^ diceret, qua vis ire, ego sum via, quo
vis ire, ego sum veritas: vbi vis permanere, ego vita.

August. super Ioa.
Ambulare vis, ego sum via: falli non vis, ego sum veritas: mori non vis, ego
sum vita.

Homo.
Job. 14
Homo natus de Muliere, breui viuens tempore, repletur multis miferijs, qui
quasi flos egreditur, and conteritur and fugit velut vmbra: and nunquam in
eode^ statu permanet.

Barnardus.
Video hominem prius quartuor virtutibus amictum, quid huic deerat, quem
Misericordia custodiebat veritas docebat, Iustitia regebat, Par fo uebat.

Aristoteles interogatus, quidnam esset homo? respondit, imbecillitatis
Exemplum, temporis Spolium. Fortunae Lusus, inconstantiae Imago reliquum vero,
pituita and bilis.

Barnar. de consider. vtilit. humanae.
Septem sunt de essentia hominis, quae fi Homo confideraret, in aeternum non
peccaret. Sci licet materia vilis, operatio turpis, exitus flebilis, status
instabilis, mors tristabilis, dissolutio miserabilis, damnatio detestabilis,
and consideratio gloriae ineffabilis.

Peccatum.
Io. 1. Cap. 1.
Si dixerimus peccatum non habemus, ipsi nos seducimus, and veritas in nobis
non est.

Hieron. liber. 1. super Amos.
Primum peccatum est cogitasse quae mala sunt. Secundum cogitationibus
acquicuisse peruersis.

Tertium, quod mente decreueris, opere compleuisse. Quartum, post peccatum non
facere poenitentiam, and in suo complacere sibi delicto.

Cass. super Psalm. pro eo vt me diligerent detrahebant.
Tribus modis omne peccatum contrahitur Primus gradus delictorum est: non
reddere bona pro bonis. Secundus, reddere mala pro malis. Tertius est tribuere
mala pro bonis: contra haec sunt tria laudabilia. Primum impendere bona pro
bonis. Secundum, malum pro malo non reddere. Tertium perfectissimum virtutis
genus est, bonum pro malo tribuere.

Poenitentia.
Luc. 5.
Non veni vocare Iustos, sed Peccatores ad poenitentiam.

Luc. 15.
Dico vobis, quod ita gaudium erit in Coelo super vno peccatore poenitentia^
agente, quam super nonaginta nouem justice qui non indigent poenitentia.

August. lib. de Poenitentia.
Poenitentia languores sanat, Leprosos curat, and mortuos suscitat, sanitatem
auget, gratiam conseruat, claudis gressum, aridis copia^, coecis restituit
visum, vitia fugat, virtutes exornat, mentem munit ac roborat.

Conuersio.
Ezech. 33.
In quacunque hora ingemerit peccator saluus erit.

Ambro.
Si autum tibi offeram, non mihi dicis cras veniam, sed iam exigis, nemo
differt, nemo excusat, redemptio animae promittitur, and nemo festinat.

August.
In Inferno erit poenitentia, sed sera, ergo infructuosa: Vis vt sit fructuosa,
non sit sera: Hodie te corrige, qui viuus es: nam qui Iudex tuus futurus est,
ipse hodie tuus aduocatus est.

Oration.
Mat. 26.
Vigilate and orate, ne intretis in tentationem.

Io. 6.
Si quid petieritis patrem in nomine meo dabit vobis

Gregor. in moralibus.
Ille Deo ^eram orationem exhibet qui semetipsum cognoscit, quia Puluis sit,
humiliter videt, qui nihil sibi Virtutis tribuit, qui bona quae agit, esse de
misericordia conditoris agnoscit.

Isidor. de Sum. Bon. Lib. 3. ca. 8
Oration Cordis est, non Labiorum, neque verba deprecantis Deus atte^dit, sed
orantis cor aspicit: Melius est cum silentio orare Cord sine sono vocis, quam
solis verbis, sine intuitu mentis.

Cassiod.
Oration, est Consolatio flentium: Cura dolentium: sanitas aegrotorum. Haec
Animae remedium: haec Miseriarum omnium, cognoscitur esse Suffragium: nam qui
tali munere priuatur, ab omni benificio Consolationis excluditur.

Ieiunium.
Tobias. 12
Bona est Oration cum Ieiunio, and Eleemosyna, magis quam thesauros Aurite
condere: quonea^ Eleemosyna a morte liberat: and ipsa est quae purga Peccata,
and facit inuenire vitam aeternum.

Origin. super Leuit. Hom. 10
Vis tibi vt ostendam quale te oportet ieiunare Ieiunium? Ieiuna ab omni
Peccato: nullum Cibum sumas Malitiae: nullus Epulas Voluptatis: nullo Vino
Luxuriae concalescas: Ieiuna a Prauitatibus: abstine a malis Actibus: contine a
malis Sermonibus, imo a cogitationibus pessimis: noli contingere Panes furtiuos
peruersae Doctrinae: non concupisces fallaces Philosophiae Cibos, qui te
Authoritate seducant. Tale leiunium Deo placet.

August. in Ser. de Ieiunio.
Ieiunium purgat Mentem, subleuat sensum, Carnem spiritui subijcit: Cor facit
contritum, and humiliatum: Concupiscentiae nebulas disperdit: Libidinum ardores
extinguit: Castitatis vero Lumen accendit.

Eleemosyna.
Proverb. 2.
Qui obturant aurem suam ad clamorem Pauperis, and ipse clamabit, and non
exaudietur.

Petr. Rau. in quodam Ser.
Manus Pauperis, est Gazophylatium Christi, and quicq^id Pauper accepit,
Christus acceptat. Da ergo Pauperi Terram, vt accipias Regnum: da Micam, vt
accipias totum: da Pauperi, vt detur tibi. Omnia quicquid pauperi dederis, tu
habebis: quod Pauperi non dederis, habebit alter.

Joan. Chrysostom. super Mat. Sermon. 9
Eleemosyna amica Dei consistit, and semper ei propinqua est pro quibuscunque
voluerit, facile munus gratiae impetrat: vincula Peccatorum dissoluit: fugat
Tenebras: extinguit Ignem Huic cum multa fiducia Portae Coeli aperiuntur.

August.
Eleemosyna mundat Peccata, and ipsa interpellat pro nobis ad Dominum, quia
quicquid Pauperibus dederimus, ipsum intigre possidebimus.

Charitas.
Paul. ad Collos. ca. 3
Super omnia autem haec Charitatem habete, quod est vinclum Perfectionis.

August de Doctrina Christiana.
Sola Charitas est quae vincit omnia, and fine qua, nihil valent omnia: quae,
vbicunque fuerit, trahit ad se omnia. Scientia si sola sit, inflat quia vero
Charitas edificat, Scientia non permittit inflari.

Gregor in Pastor
Nihil perfectius Deo, virtute Dilectionis. Nihil desiderabilius Diabolo,
extinctione Charitatis.

August. ad Martianum
Dilectio est Pacis vnda, Ros gratiae, Charit^tis Imber. Semen Concordiae,
affectus Gentium, amoris Fructus, and ad summum, Dilectio Deus est.

Vbi Charitas non est, non potest esse Iustitia: Dilectio enim proximi malum
non operatur.

Iustitia.
Prouer. 10
Benedictio Domini super Caput Iusti: Os autem impiorum operit: Iniquitatem,
Memoriam Iusti cum laudibus and nomen Impiorum subuertet.

Proverb. 21
Facere Iustitiam, and Iudicium magis est apud Deum, quam imolare Hostias.

Gregorius
Iustitia omnium virtutum Princeps, tuta, and fida comes humanae vitae, ea enim
Imperia, Regna, Populi, Civitates reguntur: quae si a medio tollatur, nec
conflare: posset hominum Societas.

Cassiod. super illud Psalm. and operatur Just.
Iustitia non nouit Patrem, non nouit Matrem, Veritate^ nouit, personam non
accipit. Deum imitatur.

Ambros. de Offic.
Bonus circuitus est, si Iustitia quaerit? Prudentia inuenit: Eortitudo
vendicat: Temperantia possidet: vt Iustitia fit in affectu, prudentia in
intellectu, fortitudo in effectu temperantia in vsu.

Menander
Vir iustus est, non qui non iniuria afficit, sed qui iniuria afficere potens
non vult.

Budaeus.
In iustitia administranda secundum merita causae non sanguinis Gradum,
Assinitatem, Nobilitatemque.

Lex.
Esaias. 10
Vae qui condunt Leges iniquas, and scribentes in Iustitiam: Scripserunt vt
opprimerent Pauperes in iudicio.

Paul. ad Colloss. 3
Lex est vinculum Perfectionis.

Marcus Tullius.
Lex vinculum Ciuitatis est: Libertatis fundame^tu^: Fons aequitatis: Men's,
Animus Consilium, vt corpora nostra sine mente. Sic Ciuitas sine Lege, suis
partibus ac Neruis, Sanguine, and Membris vti non potest.

Cicero. 2. de Legibus.
Legis virtus, est imperare, vetare permittere, punire, persuadere aliquid, non
omnia vi, ac minis cogere.

Cassiod.
Iura publica certissima sunt humanae vitae solatia, Infirmiorum auxilia, and
Potentium frena: vnde and Securitas venit, and Conscientia proficit.

Index.
Exodus 23.
Non declinabis in Iuditium Pauperis: Infantem, and iustum non occides, nec
acipies munera, quae excoecant etiam Prudentes, and subuertunt verba Iustorum.

Leuitic. 19
Non facies quod iniquum est, neque unjust iudicat: non consideres personam
Pauperis nec honores vultum Potentis. Just indica Proximo tuo.

Greger. in Moral.
Iudicate digne de subditis nequiunt, qui in subditorum causis non Merita, sed
odium vel gratiam sequuntur.

Isidor. de sum Bon. Ca. 58. Li. 3
Quatuor modis humanum peruertiur Iudicium, Timore, Cupiditate, Odio, Amore:
Timore, dum metu Potestatis alicuius veritate^ loqui buescimus: Cupiditate, cum
premio Muneris alicuius corru^pimur: Odio, cum contra quemlibet aduersarium
molimur: Amore, dum Amico, vel propinquis placere contendimus.

Innocentius de miseria Homi. 6.
Iudices mali non attendunt merita causarum, sed Pecuniarum merita: non Iura,
sed Munera: non Iustitiam, sed Pecuniam: non quod ratio dictat, sed quod
voluntas affectat: non quod Lex sentit, sed quod men's cupit: non inclinant ad
Iustitiam animum, sed Iustitiam declinant ab animo: non vt quod licet hoc
libeat, sed vt liceat quod libet.

Isidor, de Sum. Bono. Lib. 2
Grauius lacerantur pauperes a prauis iudicibus, quam a cruentissimis hostibus.

Cassiodor.
Si iudicas, cognosce: si regnas, iube. Qui iustificat impium, and condemnat
iustum, vterque abominabilis apud Deum.

Acceptio Personarum.
Deuter. 11:
Nulla erit distantia personarum, ita peruum audies vt magnum.

Hier. super Amos.
Quicunque consanguinitate, aut amicitia, vel e conuerso, hostili odio, vel
inimicitijs in iudicando ducitur, peruertit iudicium Dei Christi, qui est
iustitia.

Hiero. in Epist.
Alienum te a personis omnium read iudicio: ac propter Iniustitiam in iudicio
Pauperem ne desendas, nec propter gratiam Diuiti indecenter assistas: aut si
non potes facere, cognitionem respue causarum.

Iudices iniqui errant a veritate sententiae, dum intendunt qualitatem
personae, and exulcerant saepe iustos, dum improbe defundunt iniquos.

Isidor. Lib. 4 de Summo. Bon.
Dives cito muneribus corrumpit iudicium, pauper dum non habet, quid offerat,
non solum audiri contemnitur, sed etiam contra veritatem opprimitur.

Innocen. Lib. 4 de Huma. Conditionis.
Pauperum causam cum mora negligitis, Diuitum causam cum instantia promonetis.
In illis rigorem ostenditis, in istis ex mansuetudine dispensatis: illos cum
difficultate respicitis, istos cum facinore tractatis, illos negligenter
auditis, istos ascultatis subtiliter.

Adulatio.
Ecclesiast. 28.
Lingua duplex multos commouit, eosque ex ali in aliam gentem transtulit,
Civitates muratas Principium destruxit, and Domos magnatum effodit. Lingua
duplex strenuas profligauit Mulieres, suisque laboribus defraudauit. Qui
attente audit eam, tranquilitatem non inueniet, nec quietam vitam.

Hieronym.
Adulatores sunt Hosts and scintillae Diaboli.

Ecclesi.. 18.
Est qui nequiter se humiliat, interiora eius plena sunt dolo.

Alanus de Complaust. Naturae.
Adulatores a voluntate vultum ab animo verbum, a mente linguam, ab intellectu
loquelam amplo dissensionis interuallo diffibulant, plerumque enim exterius
plausibiliter applaudendo collaudant quos interius contradictoria derisione
defraudant, foris vultu applaudant virginaeo, intus Scorpionis pungunt aculeo,
foris adulationis mellicos compluunt imbres, intus detractionis euomunt
tempestates.

Ambitio.
Regum. 14.
Contentus esto Gloria, and sede in Domo tua.

Eccle. 7:
Principatum a Domino ne petas, nec a Rege sedem Magnificam.

Gallat. 6:
Non assiciamur inanis gloriae cupidi inuicem prouocantes, inuicem inuidentes.

August. super Psalm.
Quoties hominibus praeesse desidero: Toties deo meo praeire contendo.

August:
Diabolus ruit, quia elegit potius praeesse quam subesse.

Innocen. de Vtilit. conditionis Humanae.
Ambitiosus semper est pauidu^, semper attentus, ne dicat, quod disiderat,
humilitatem simulat, honestatem, mentitur, affabilitatem exhibet, Benignitatem
ostendit, subsequitur and obsequitur: cunctos honorat, vniuersis inclinatur,
freque^tat curias, vifitat optimates, assurgit and amplexatur, applaudit and
adulatur, vnde nouit illud Poeticum. Et si nullus erit puluer tamen excute
nullum.

Ibidem.
Ambitiosus statem vt est ad honorem promotus, in superbiam extollitur,
iactantia effraenatur, non curat prodesse, sed praeesse gloriatur, praesumit se
meliorem, quia cernit se superiorem, priores dedignatur Amicos, notos ignorant,
externos comitatur, contemnit antiquos, vultum auertit, Ceruicem erigit, fastum
ostendit, grandia loquitur, sublimia meditatur, subesse non patitur, praeesse
molitur, subditis onerosus, ommbus infectus, praeceps, molestus, arrogans,
grauis, and importunus.

Superbia.
Ecclesi. 10.
Initium Superbiae hominis apostatare a Deo.

Cas. super Psalm. 18.
Superbia de Angelo Diabolum fecit, and homini mortem intulit, and concessa
beatitudine vacuauit, omnium malorum matter, scaelerum fons, vena nequitiae.

Hugo.
Quatuor funt, quae elationis Currum trahunt, amor dominandi, amor propriae
laudis, contemptus and inobedientia rota vero sunt, iactantia mentis and
arrogantia, verbositasque leuitas. Auriga in hoc Curru est, spiritus superbiae
amatores Mundi sunt, qui feruntur in hoc Curru infraenes sunt equi, volubiles
Rotae auriga peruersus, and qui portatut, infirmus.

Cast. in Epist. Humanae Con.
Omnis fere vitiosus diliget sibi similem solus superbus odit elatum vnde inter
Superbos semper sunt iurgia.

Euripides.
Quum videris in sublime quempiam elatum, splendidis gloriantem opibus, ac
genere supersilioque supra sortem suam fastuosum, illius celerum diuinitus
exspecta breui vindictam.

Nesis superbus Sapientia: neque fortitudine: neque diuitijs, vnus Deus est
sapiens, potens and Beatus.

Auaritia.
Luc. 12.
Cauete and videte ab omni Auaritia, quia non inabundantia cuiusquam vita eius
est, exijs qui possidet.

August. de verbo Domini.
Rapit semper Auarus and nunquam satiatur: non Deum timet: nec Hominem
reueretur: nec patri parcit: nec Matrem cognoscit: nec Fratri obtemperat: nec
amico Fidem seruat: viduam opprimit: pupillum inuadit: liberos in seruitium
reuocat: Testimonium falsum profert, res Mortui occupantur: quare and qui
faciunt non moriuntur? Quae est illa animarum insania? amittere Vitam:
appellare Mortem: acquirere Aurum: and perdere Coelum.

Barnard. super Canti. Ser. 38.
Auaritia rotis vehitur quatuor vitiorum: quae sunt pusillanimitas,
inhumanitas, contempt^s dei mortis obliuio. Porro iumenta trahentia, tenacitas,
repacitas, and hic vnus auriga ambobus praesidet: Ardor habendi, hic auriga ad
vrgendum trahentia flagellis vtitur acerimis, libidinae acquirendi, and metu
amittendi haec sola Auaritia, quia conducere plures non patitur, vno contenta
est seruitore.

Hugo. Lib. 2. de Claustro animae.
Duo sunt quae illicite solent acquirere. Scilicet, Superbia and cupiditas: and
duo quae male fruuntur acquisitis, Gula, and Luxuria: duo sunt qui male
possidere volunt: Scilicet prodigus, and Auarus, vnus vt congreget, alter vt
dissipet, and duo quae possessa defendunt: Scilicet, Inte^perantia, and
prudentia Mundi Superbia a Diabolo clausit Coelum. Gula primo parenti abstulit
Paradisum, Auaritia Diuiti aperuit insemum, Intemperantia vero adhuc corrumpit
Mundum.

Hiero. in quodam Ser.
Cum caetera vitia senescente homine, senescant: sola Auaritia iunenescit.

Ibidem.
Nihil aliud est auarus, quam bursa principum, cellarium latronum rixa
parentum, fibilus hominum.

Cupiditas.
Paul. ad Timo 1. ca. 6.
Fons Perditionis est Cupiditas, quam quidam appetentes errauerunt a Fide, and
inseruerunt se doloribus multis.

Petr. Rau. in Ser.
Omnium malorum radix est Cupiditas, Transgressionis Matter, Magistra nocendi,
primi Pilarij Iniquitatis, Auriga malitiae, Sicaria virtutum, Seditionis origo,
Fouea Scandalorum.

Innocen:
Tria maxim solent homines affectare, Opes, voluptates, Honores: de Opibus,
praua: de voluptatibus turpia: de Honoribus, vacua procedunt. Nam opes generant
Cupiditatem, and Auaritiam: Voluptates pariunt Gulam and Luxuriam: Honores
nutriunt Superbiam, and lactantiam.

Innocen. de Vtilitate Conditionis Humanae.
Radix nequitiae est Cupiditas haec Sacrilegia committit and furta, Rapinas
exercet and Praedas, Bella gerit and Homicidia, Simoniace vendit, and emit,
inique petit and recipit, unjust negotiatur and foeneratur, instat dolisque,
imminet fraudibus dissoluit Peccatum, and violat Iuramentum, corru^pit
testimonium, and peruertit Iudicium.

Ira.
Proverb. 15.
Sicut fremitus Leonis, ita and regis Ira: and sicut Ros super herbam, ita and
Hilaritas eius.

Eccle. 25.
Non est Caput nequius super caput Colubri, ita non est Ira, Ira inimici
perniciotior.

Gregor. Lib. 5. Moral.
Per Iram Iustitia relinquitur, quia dum perturbatta men's, Iudicium sine
ratione exasperat, omne quod furor suggerit, rectum putat: per Iram, gratia,
vitae socialis amittitur, quia qui se ex humana ratione non temperat: necesse
est, vt bestialiter viuat: Per Iram mansuetudo amittitur: per Iram concordia
rumpitur: per Iram Lux veritatis amittitur, quia menti Iracundia confusionis
tenebras incutit: Huic Deus radium suae cognitionis abscondit.

Gregor. 26. Moral.
Si is qui corrigere nititur, Ira superatur: opprimit antequam corrigat: nam
dum plus quam debet, accenditur: sub iustae vltionis obtentu ad immanitatem
crudelitatis effraenatur.

Cass. Psalm. Irascimini.
Vbi est feruida vindicta, non est temperata Iustitia.

Gregor.
Quoties Ira animum inuadit, mentem edoma, vince teipsum, differ tempus
furoris, quum tranquilla men's fuerit, fac quod placet.

Euripides. in Aeolo.
Quisquis Irae preceps indulget, in malam finem eruit.

Inuidia.
Ia. 3.
Vbi zelus and Inuidia, ibi Inconstantia and omne opus prauum.

Isidor. in Syno.
Inuidia cuncta bona deuorat ardore pestifero: Inuidia animae Tinea sensum
comedit Pectus vrit, mente^ affligat, Cor huminis, quasi quaedam pestis
depascit.

Sen. in Epist.
Venenum quod Serpents in alienam perniciem effundunt, five sua continent, non
ita vitium Inuidiae continetur: nam inuidus torquet and macerat, bona odit and
extenuat, Iniurias vero delatat and auget.

August. super Johan.
Toll Inuidiam, and tuum est quod habeo: tollam inuidiam, and meum est, quod
habes.

Valerius Max. li. 4. de Amicitia.
Nulla tem modesta foelicitas, quae malignitatis dentes vitare posfit.

Phocylides.
Ne inuideas bona socijs, ne maculam contrahas: sine Inuidia coelestes etiam
inter se sunt: non inuidet Luna multo prestantioribus Solis Radijs: non Tellus
Coelestibus altitudinibus, cum subiter ipsa fit: non flumina, Pelagis, sed
semper concordiam habent.

Malitia.
Reg. 1. ca. 22.
Si perseueraueritis in Malitia, and vos, and Rex vester pariter peribitis.

Bernard super Cant.
Habet Malitia Currum suum Rotis quatuor consistentem: Saeuitia, Impatientia,
Audacia, Impudentia: valde enim velox est Currus iste ad effundendum Sanguinem,
qui nec Innocentia sistitur, nec Patientia retardatur, nec Timore fraenatur,
nec Pudore inhibetur: Trahitur autem duobus pernicibus Equis, and ad omnem
perniciem paratissimis, terraena Potentia, and Seculi Pompa. Porro praesident
his duobus Equis, Aurigae duo, Timor, and Liuor: Timor quidem Pompam: Liuor,
potentiam agit.

Gregor. Lib. 12. Moral.
Men's praua semper in laboribus est, quia aut molitur mala, quae inferat, vel
metuit, ne sibi ab alijs inferantur, and quicquid contra proximos cogitat, hoc
contra se cogitari a Proximis formidat.

Seen. in Epist.
Malitia ipsa maximam partem veneni sui bibit, at venenum quod serpents in
alienam perniciem perferunt, sieve sua continent, non est huic simile hoc
habentibus pessimum est.

Idem in Prouer.
Malefacere qui vult, nusquam non inuenit causam: maleuolus semper sua natura
nititur.

Calumnia.
Malachi. 3.
Accedam ad vos in Iudicio, and ero Testis velox Maledicis, and Periuris, and
qui calumniantur mercedem Mercenarij.

Herodot. Lib. 4.
Calumnia res est granissima: in qua duo sunt qui Iniuriam faciunt, vnus qui
afficitur: Calumniator enim Iniuriam facit, non presentem accusans, and
similiter, qui Accusanti fidem habet antequa^ vere rem cognoscit: Qui autem
abest, Iniuriam patitur, tum ab illo Calumniatore, tum ab eo, qui ipsum aures
Calumnianti praebens, pro malo reputat.

Theocrit. in Epist.
Ea est Calu^niatoris natura, in crimen vocare omnia: probare vero nihil.

Loquacitas.
Prima. Petri. 3.
Qui enim vult vitam diligere, and videre dies bonos coerceat Linguam suam a
malis, and Labia sua, ne loquatur dolum.

Eccle. 42.
Non duplices sermonem auditus de reuelatione sermonis absconditi, and eris
vere sine confusione, and inuenies gratiam apud omnes homines.

Bernard. in quodam Sermon.
Lenis quidem Sermo, quia leniter volat: sed grauiter vulnerat: leniter
transit, sed grauiter vrit: leniter penitrat amicum, sed non leniter exit:
leniter profert, sed non leniter reuocatur: facile volat, ideo Charitatem
facile violat.

Gregor. Lib. 8. Moral.
Lingua sub magna moderaminis liberatione seruanda est, non insolubiliter
obliganda, ne aut laxata in vitium defluat, aut restricta etiam ab vtilitate
torpescat.

Hugo Lib. 2. de Anima.
Lingua labitur, vt Anguilla penetrat vt Sagitta: tollit Amicos: multiplicat
Inimicos: mouet Rixas: seminat Discordias: vno ictu multos percutit, and
interficit: blanda est, and subdola, and parata ad exhaurienda bona, and
miscenda mala. Qui custodit Linguam suam, custodit Animam, quonia^ Mors, and
Vita in potestate Linguae est.

Taciturnitas.
Jacob. in Epist. cap. 1.
Sit omnis bomo velox ad audiendum: tardus ad loquendum, and tardus ad iram.

Ambros. Lib. 1. de Offic.
Silendi patientia, oportunitas loquendi, and contemptus Diuitiarum, sunt
maxima fundamenta virtutum.

Proverb. ca. 25.
Sicut Vrbs patens, and absque murorum ambitu, ita vir, qui non potest in
loquendo cohibere Spiritum suum.

Hieron. in quodam Epist.
Diu considera quid loquendum sit, and adhuc tacens provide, ne quid dixisse
poeniteat, sapiens vt loquatur, multa prius considerat, quid, aut cui, loco vel
tempore dicat.

Humilitas.
Luc. 1
Deposuit Potentes de Sede, and exaltauit Humiles.

Quanto mayor es, eo te geras submissius, and gratiam apud Dominum reperies:
multi quidem altitudine fortunae, gloriaeque excellunt, sed mansuetis
reuelantur Archana. Quoniam potentia Domini magna est, and ab Humilibus gloriam
consequitur.

Pet. 1. Cap. 5 Luc. 7. and 8.
Dominus Superbis resistit Humilibus dat gratiam. Et omnes qui se exaltat,
humiliabitur: and qui se humiliat, exaltabitur.

Bernard, super Cantica Sermon. 45.
Scio neminem absque sui cognitione saluari, de qua nimirum, matter salutis,
Humilitas oritur, and timor Domini, qui and ipse sicut initium Sapientiae, ita
and salutis est.

Bernard. super Miss. est.
Non magnum est esse humilem in abiectione magna, prorsus and rara virtus,
Humilitas honorata.

Valerius in quodam Sermon.
Humilitas in paupere grata est, in Diuite, gloriosa: Humilitas inter inimicos,
blanda: Superbia inter amicos, ingrata: blanda est and officiosae semper
Humilitas, in amicitijs, grata, in contumelijs otiosa, non extollitur
prosperis, non mutatur aduersis, non extorquet seruitium non requirit voces
Adulantium, nisi quam se laudatione nouit indignum.

Beanard. in Epist.
Fode in te fundamentum Humilitatis, and peruenies ad fastigium Charitatis: vis
capere celsitudinem Dei? cape prius humilitate^ Christi: sola est virtus
humanitatis, reparatio laesae Charitatis.

Amor Proximi.
Johan. Apost. Epist. 1. Cap. 3
Qui diligit fratrem suum, in lumine manet, and scandelum in eo non est, qui
autem odit fratrem suum, in tenebris est, and in tenebris ambulat, and nescit
quo eat, quia tenebrae obcoecauerunt oculis eius.

Gregor. Lib. Moral. 4.
Duo sunt praecepta Charitatis Dei: videlicet, and Amor Proximi: per amorem
Dei, gignitur amor Proximi, and per amorem Proximi, Dei amor nutritur: Nam qui
amare Deum negligit, perfect diligere Proximum nescit. Et tunc before in Dei
dilectione proficimus, si in dilectionis gremio Proximi charitatem colligamus.

Basil. in Hepam.
Thesaurus indeficiens, est amor Diuinus: quem, qui habet, dives est: quo,
quicumque caret, pauper est.

August.
Vbi Charitas non est, non potest esse Iustitia, dilectio enim proximi, malum
non operatur.

Amicitia.
Proverb 12. and 17.
Qui negligit damnum propter Amicum, iustus est. Omni tempore diligit qui
Amicus est, and frater in Augustijs comprobatur.

Ambr. Officior. Lib. 3.
Pietatis custos, Amicitia est, and equalitatis magistra: vt superior
inferiori, and equalem se exhibiat, and inferior superiori.

Ambrosius ibidem.
Solatium huius vitae est, vt habeas cui pectus tuum, aperias, cui Arcana
communices, cui secreta tui pectoris committas, vt colloces tibi fidelem virum,
qui in prosperis gratuletur tibi, in tristibus compatiatur, in persecutionibus
adhortetur: facilis vox and communis tuus sum totus, sed pautior est affectus.

Ecclesiast. 27
Qui denudat arcana Amici, fidem perdit, and non inueniet Amicum ad animum suum.

Ecclesiast. 12
Fidem posside cum Amico in paupertate illius, vt in bonis illius laetaris. In
tempore tribulationis illius permane illi fidelis vt in Haeriditate illius
cohaeres fis.

Job. 6.
Qui tollit ab Amico misericordiam, timorem Domini derelinquit.

Ecclesiast. 6.
Amicus fidelis medicamentum Vitae, and Immortalitatis and qui metuunt Dominum,
inuenient illum.

Fides sieve Fidelitas.
Johan. 22.
Qui crediderit in me, etiam si mortuus fuerit, viuet, and omnis qui viuit, and
credit in me, non morietur in aeternum.

Marc. 9.
Si potes credere, omnia possibilia credenti.

Ambr. Lib. de Cain and Abel.
Fides radix omnium virtutum, and quod super hoc fundamentum aedificaueris, hoc
solu^ ad operis tui, fructus and virtutis proficit mercedem.

August. de verbis Domini.
Nullae maiores Diuitiae, nulli Thesauri, nulli Honores, nulla huius mundi
mayor est substantia, quam est Fides Catholica, quae peccatores, homines
saluat, Coecos illuminat, Infirmos curat, Cathecuminos baptizat, Fideles
iustificat, penitentes reparat, Iustos augmentat, Martires coronat, Virgins,
and Viduas, and Coniugales casto pudore conseruat, Clericos ordinat, sacerdotes
consecrat, in haereditate aeterna cum Sanctis Angelis collocat.

Ambr. Lib. 1. Officiorum.
Liquet in bello fidem, and iustitiam obseruari oportere, fundamentum enim
Iustitiae est Fides.

August. de Fide ad Petrum.
Hoc est humanae salutis initium sine hoc nemo ad filiorum Dei numeru^ potest
pertingere vel peruenire, sine hoc omnis labor hominis vacuus est.

Conscientia.
2. Corinthians. 1.
Gloria nostra haec est, testimonium Conscientiae nostrae, quod in simplicitate
cordis, and sinceritate Dei and non in s^pientia Carnali, sed in gratia Dei
conuersati sumus in hoc mundo.

Hugo. Lib. de Anima Cap. 9.
Conscientia bona, titulus est Religionis, Templum Salamonis, Ager
Benedictionis, Hortus Delitiarum, Aureum Declinatorium, Gaudium Angelorum, Arca
Foederis, Thesaurus Regis, Aula Dei, Habitaculum Spiritus Sancti, Liber
signatus, and clasus, and in die Iudicij aperiendus.

Bernardus in Libro de Conscientia.
Bona Conscientia quotidie virescit, laboribus non affligitur, denique afficit
gaudio viuentem consolatur morientem, aeternumque durat.

Misericordia.
Luc. 6.
Estote Misericordes: sicut and pater vester Misericors est.

Proverb. 2.
Misericordia and veritas custodiunt Regem, and roboratur clementia Thronus
eius.

Chrysostom. super Matheum.
Misericordia est Salutis praesiduum, Fidei ornamentum, Propitiatio peccatorum:
haec est quae iustos probat, Sanctos roborat, Dei Cultores ostentat.

Misericordiae virtus tanta est, vt sine illa, coeterae, et si sint, prodesse
non possunt.

Quamuis enim aliquis Fidelis sit and castus, and sobrius, and alijs maioribus
ornatus insignibus, si Misericors tamen non est, Misericordiam non meretur.

August. de Seruo. Domini.
Beati illi qui subueniunt miseris quoniam eis rependitur, vt per Misericordiam
Domini de miseria liberentur. Nam id ipsum videtur iustum, vt qui a potentiore
adiuuari vult, adiuuet inferiorem, in quo est ipse potentior.

Cassi. in Epist.
Benigni Principis est, ad cleme^tiae commodum transilire terminos Acquitatum,
quando sola est Misericordia: Cui omnes virtutes honorabiliter cedere non
recusant.

Veritas.
Psalm. 116.
Veritas magna est, and fortior prae omnibus. Omnis terra Veritatem inuocat:
Veritas Domini manet in aeternum.

Eccle.
Non contradicas verbo Veritatis vllo modo, and de Mendatio Ineruditionis tuae
confundere.

Bernard. in Sermon.
Veritas sola liberat, sola saluat, sola lauat.

Bernard. de Gra. Humana.
Cum sint tres gradus, seu status Veritatis, ad Primum ascendimus per laborem
Humilitatis: ad secundum per affectum Compassionis: In primo Veritas reperietur
seuera: In secundo, Pia: In Tertio, Pura. Ad Primum ratio ducit, qua nos
discutimus. ad secundum affectus producit, quo alijs miseremur ad Tertium
puritas rapit, qua ad inuisibilia subleuamur.

Christ, de Laudibus Pau, Hom. 3.
Talis est condito Falsitatis, vel Erroris, vt etiam nullo sibi adsistente
consenescat, ac defluat. Talis autem e diuerso Veritatis status, vt etiam
multis impugnantibus suscitetur and crescat.

Seneca. in Epist.
Magna est Veritas, quae contra omnium Ingenia, Caliditatem, Solertiam, and
contra fictas hominum Insidias facile se per seipsum defendit.

Castitas.
Timoth. 5. and Sapien. 4.
Teipsum Castum custodi. O quam pulchra est Casta Generatio cum Claritate.
Immortalis est enim Gloria illius: quoniam and apud Deum nota est, and apud
homines.

Corinth. 7.
Qui Matrimonio iungit, Virginem suam been facit: and qui non iungit melius
facit.

Cypri. de.xii. Abusionibus.
Castitas est ornamentum Nobilium Exaltatio Humilium, Nobilitas Ignobilium
Pulchritudo Vilium, Solamen Merentium. Augmentum omnis Pulchritudinis, Decus
Religionis, Minoratum Criminum (...) quam Angelorum. Angeli enim sine Carne
viuunt: Virgins vero in Carne triumphant.

August.
Virginitas est Soror Angelorum Regina Virturum, Possessio omnium bonorum.

Virtus.
Johan. Epist, 3 Cap. 1.
Qui benefacit, ex Deo est: qui malefacit non videt Deum.

August. in Epist, ad Macedonium.
In hac vita Virtus non est, nisi diligere quod diligendum est: id diligere,
prudentia est: nullis inde auerti molestijs Fortitudo: nullis Illecibris
temperantia est, nulla Superbia, Iustitia est.

Seen. Epist.
Virtus extollit hominem, and super Astra Mortales collocat.

Sen. in Epist. 75
Virtus, Regna, Vrbes, Prouincias temperat, fert Leges, colit Amicitias. Non
minor est si ex altiore fastigio, in priuatu^, ex Regio in humilem subducitur,
ex Publico, ex spatioso Rure, in angustus Domos, (...) (...) Angulos coit.

Cicero in Lib. Amicitiae in Princi.
Virtute ipsa non tam multi pred^ti esse, quam videri volunt. Hos delectat
assentatio.

Boethius.
Imperante, florenteque nequitia Virtus non solum Premijs caret, verumetiam
Sceleratorum pedibus subiecta calcatur, and in loco Facinorum supplicia luit.

Post Cineres Virtus viuere sola facit: virtus nullius Fortunae Inco^modis
obnoxia.

FINIS.
IMPRINted at London, in Fleetstreete, by William How. 1571.


