A FAMILIAR TREATISE, laying down CASES OF CONSCIENCE, Furthering to
perseverance in SANCTIFICATION.

By Thomas Cooper, preacher of Gods word.

Printed at London by John Beale, for William Welby, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the sign of the Swan in Paul's Churchyard. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, MY HEARTY Wel-willers, the Lady Rumney, Mr.
Springham, Mr. Slany, Mr. Parkhust, Mr. Clarke, Mr. Vincent, Mr. Mosley, and
Mr. Thaire, and the rest of my Christian auditors, and loving neighbors, grace,
mercy and peace from God the Father, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be
multiplied.
RIght worshipful, and dearly beloved in the Lord Jesus: It is the mercy of
the Lord, that we are not utterly consumed, because his compassions fail not.
Has not our long prosperity hardened our hearts, and lulled us in security?
And when we say, peace and safety, may not a sudden destruction come upon us,
as the travail upon a woman with child, and we shall not escape? Do not our
impudent and desperate sins, daily call down for vengeance against us, in
that we put the evil day far from us, that we may still approach to the
seat of iniquity, hardening our hearts yet more and more that we cannot repent?
And is not the envious man busy to sow tares, now we are asleep? Are not our
adversaries watchful and dil gent in their malicious and bloody practices
against the Church of God, practicing daily the overthrow thereof? will any
thing serve their turn but to root cut and destroy, and are we generally any
better then such trees as are able to be hewn down, and cast into the fire?
Has this unprofitable fig tree for all this dressing and fencing, for all this
lopping and donging, yet brought forth fruit worthy of repentance? Surely
though we should never so much stand upon our justification with Saul, that we
have fulfilled the Commandments of the Lord, that we are an holy people, the
Lord shall find no iniquity in us, etc. yet the bleating of the sheep, and
lowing of the oxen: the sparing of Agag. and reserving of his offals, is a
notorious evidence to convince our hypocrisy. And therefore, though we flatter
our selves with Agag, that the bitterness of death is past, because happily
the Lord in great patience has yet waited upon us, and put off many desperate
blows, that might have light heavily upon us: yet certainly when he sees a
convenient time he will execute vengeance, and wound the hairie scalpe of all
those that go on in their wickedness. And is not this a special evidence,
that we go on in our sins, and intend not repentance, because we either hate
to be reformed, and have cast the word behind our backs: or else heap up
teachers according to our own lusts, which may prophecy of new wine and strong
drink, to morrow shall be as to day, or much more abundant? And is it not a
fearful argument of the wrath of God, ready to seize upon us, in that we
have chosen and embraced the world, that thirsts after our blood, and have cast
out that sword which should stand in the gappe, to turn away the vengeance?
What then is the reason that we are not utterly consumed that our adversaries
the Papists, have not had their desire? Surely they shall not say, where is now
our God? because they shall not blaspheme that great and glorious Name of our
God, which is called upon of us: And therefore, not unto us oh Lord, not unto
us, but unto thy Name give the glory, even for thy truth and righteousness sake.
Though we are not worthy of the least of Gods mercies, though we have deserved to
be overwhelmed with all his plagues, yet the Lord is worthy of all praise and
glory: and therefore he has delivered us, that we might glorify him: and
shall not the Judge of all the world do right? will he punish the righteous with
the wicked? must not Lot be taken out of Sodom, before the vengeance be
inflicted? shall not even one be a means to spare the City for his sake?
Behold, here another ground of the patience of God, even the holy seed that yet
remains the Lord has a little flock which is as dear unto him, as the apple
of his eye: this has he chosen it unto him in Jesus Christ, before the
foundations of the world were laid. This he has made glorious through his
beauty, which he has set upon it: this he has promised to be with us to the
end of the world and can any thing be against us if the lord be with us? shall
not he make our enemies our footstool? shall not the lord tread Satan under our
feet? blessed be God in Jesus Christ, that has made bare his mighty army in
the sight and acknowledgment of our enemies? Did not the papists once
acknowledge that God was become a lutheran? do they not feel to this day, that
he that keeps Israel does neither slu^ber nor sleep? has not our God watched
over us, when we have slept in security? has not he foght for us, when our
carnal weapons have bin confounded? has he not got himself the glory of al our
deliuera^ces, that so we might at length give him the glory of his free
mercies, that so we might not be afraid of any evil tidings, that still we
might fear, and depart from evil while the wicked rage, and are careless?
surely howsoever the pit is dug for the wicked, and the consumption decreed
shall pass over to the confounding of hypocrites howsoever sinner in Sion
shall be afraid, and fear shall take hold of the hypocrites, when Gods wrath
approaches yet shall the upright heart then lift up their heads because their
salvation draws near. The purging of the Church of hypocrites shall be the
preparing thereof to greater glory and safety, and the anointed of the Lord
shall gain more honor and security, when the Lord Jesus shall be more advanced
upon his holy hill of Sion. And are not our enemies hastening hereunto? has
not the patience of policy enraged them more and more, and does not their
wickedness so break out, that it can no longer be endured? Is it not time
together with the safety of our souls, to provide also for the security of
our lives and states? Blessed be the Lord for the vigilance and courage of the
state. Oh, blessed be our God for his watchfulness over us, were not all our
building and watching else in vain? And is it not then more then time to keep
our God waking by our prayers and tears? Is it not his time to awake out of
security, that so we may make our peace with God, that he may still for his
glory preserve the peace of his Churches, that he may still prevent and
confound the enemies of his Church? And could I now hold my peace in this day
of good tidings, when the Lord has even again given us our lives for a prey,
and plucked us as a prey out of the teeth of the deuourer? Have I not vowed a
yearly remembrance, for that great deliverance from the gunpowder Treason? and
does the glorious Lord still give new occasions to revive that great
deliverance? Are not his mercies renewed every morning unto his, so great is his
faithfulness, and shall not we renew our thankfulness by renewing our
repentance? Shall we not remember from whence we are fallen, by remembering
from whence we have been delivered, that so we may justify the free mercy of
our God in our great deliverances: and renewing our right in Jesus Christ that
so we may recover our first love, and be enabled to walk worthy of the mercies
of our God, in strengthening the things that are ready to die, and continuing
with all patience and perseverance, that no man take away our Crown from us?
Are not our earthly Crowns often shaken, that so we may be sure of the
heavenly inheritance, which cannot be shaken, that so we may hasten from this
prison, to that city which is above? And has not our gracious God given us
even Eagles wings, that we may mount up from the love of this world, that we
may fly away from the entising vanities theeof, and so come to that eternal
rest? May we not live by faith in the experience of these so strange and
unexpected deliverances: that he which has delivered, does all still deliver
us, yea for his Names sake will deliver us from all unreasonable men, yea from
every evil work, that so we may be made meet for that glorious inheritance?
And shall not this little spark yield some light hereunto, till the depth of
mischief being further discovered, the candle may be lighted, and set up upon
the hill, to direct all to come out of Babylon, to further the Saints in their
journey to the heavenly Jerusalem: surely as it pleases God to lend
opportunity and liberty, so shall I not be wanting by Gods grace, from that
light, to kindle such a torch, that may either burn up all the stubble of
Popery, or else may sufficiently warn us to avoid the danger thereof. Mean
while I have thought good to take this occasion, to maintain the soundnes of
our spiritual standing and recovery out of any decays therein, that so we
may be thereby fitted to those further mercies which the Lord has in store
for us. And seeing it has pleased God to make you instruments (beloved) of my
settling in the City, and exercise of my calling, I have accounted it my duty
to consecrate these first fruits of my settled labors unto you: beseeching the
Lord to give you understanding in all things: and to preserve you blameless
and unspotted in these evil times, unto the day of Jesus Christ, to whose
gracious protection I do most heartily commend you, resting in him.

Your worships poor remembrancer at the throne of Grace, THOMAS COOPER.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, WISDOM TO DISCERN HIS Estate aright, and grace to
grow forward to perfection.
Beloved in the Lord Jesus, it is a most dangerous, and yet very easy and
plausible delusion, to conceit unto our selves an estate in grace, when as yet
we remain the bond slaves of Satan. And it is a very difficult, and yet most
necessary trial, to discern our constant abiding and proceeding in this
estate of grace. For (to pass by these who make a mock of conversion, as
being a touch of novelty, a brand of inconstancy, and imputation of
hypocrisy) who is there almost that flatters not himself to be in the favor
of God, and so interessed in his grace? And has he not many such pretenses
and colors hereunto, which may so abuse his judgment, Galat. 6.5.
that he may think himself to be somewhat, when he is nothing; and so
refusing to be found in Christ, by being lost and emptied in himself, thereby
become worse then nothing? Better never to have been borne, then so to be
deceived. Oh how the wisdom of the flesh proves here enmity against God!
Romans 8.7. John 9 43. Occasions to conceive a false conversion.

1. Complexion. 2. Natures impotencie.

Is not this the judgment upon the world, that they which see not, might see;
and that they which see might be made blind? Consider first, I pray you, how
nature occasions this deceit. Is any less badlie disposed by the benefit of
his complexion? Is any restrained from some act of evil by natures impotencie
and deformity? Behold, even these to the natural man prove very dangerous
stumbling blocks to rest in nature, as affoording some show of good, more then
is of others of an harder constitution, as breaking out less into gross
evils, then such who by natures ability are more prone and provoked thereto,
and so to reject the holy means of conversion: and is it not esteemed a
sufficient measure of goodness, to be less evil then others, howsoever the
desire and fountain of corruption be the same in all? Is not the seeming good
which by natures benefit shows forth in the world, accounted current
holiness, and thereby excludes the true power of well-doing?

For is this any more then what brute beasts may boast of? Is the heart less
evil, because the hand cannot act, nay is it not more rebellious, the less it
has it desire? do not such wish for, and talk delightfully of what they
cannot do: will they not sport themselves in others that can do the same? will
they not take their fill, if power be restored? or is the heart the better,
because through benefit of complexion we are ingenuous, sociable, etc. are not
these fitter matter for Satan to work on, to draw us into fellowship in evil,
to make us instruments to deceive our selves and others?

3. Education.
Especially, if to this show of natures righteousness, Education be adjoined,
whereby the mind being informed in knowledge, and restrained by civility,
natures evil is hereby more kept under, and it seeming good, set out more
saleable and beauteous to the sinister judgment: howsoever now nature being
puffed up hereby, has gained no other then a weapon of unrighteousness, to
fight against God and his word, to commit sin more dangerously, by how much
it is enabled to couch it more closely, and smooth it more cunuingly; yet this
with the world passes for a current conversion; Must we not only not do
evil, but also do good, and can we do any good of our selves, until we be
in Christ? and will we hunger of Christ, until we deny our selves: especially
if some such change now appear in the outward man, whereby we may either
differ from the rudeness and gross abuses of our parents, or differ from the
barbarous and desperate sprouts of our childhood, and untamed youth? Is it not
hence conceived that we are now converted, seeing now our childish and
youthful vanities are restrained, seeing we are grown more sober and
regular: although all tends to no better then civil honesty, to fit us for
the world, that so we may more hopefully and easily swallow the baits thereof?
although when we are from under the rod, we break out more desperately into
all gross wickedness, or else at the best exchange our sins, from
wantonness to covetousness, from frowardness to ambition, increasing still
in our lusts and plotting the satisfying thereof, that we may set up our rest
in the world, and cast care away.

And if now the Lord shall give the wicked their desire, 4. Restraining spirit.
in affoording them so far the use of his blessed Spirit, as to restrain yet
more inward corruption, by it power, and terror, that so they may be fitter
for such outward prosperity, as they have especially made choice of in this
life, and so renounced their interest in Heaven: And withal may frame better
to society, both of the good, to whom now they shall do less hurt, as also
of the evil, whom by this means they may provoke to good; that so Gods
government of the world may be more beautiful and glorious, and his will more
righteously accomplished in the elect and reprobate. Is not this restraint
apprehended, as a great conquest over corruption; and so a conversion hence
vainly concluded, seeing the inward heart is no whit renewed, but only the
corruption restrained from the outward act? Nay, is not corruption more enraged
inwardly, the more it is outwardly bridled and smothered? and so sin made out
of measure sinful: as being more inexcusable, the more it is curbed: Romans 7.
Note.
as breaking out more desperately, when the bridle is rejected: as ripening
more dangerously, the more it boileth within: and so sealing up vengeance more
certainly, yea more fearfully hastening it, as proceeding to despite the
spirit of grace. Heb. 10.27.28


5. Spirit of illumination. Math. 7.
And what though the Lord bestow on the wicked many excellent graces of his
Spirit, inabling them to teach others, to do wondrous things, furthering them
so far in the show of holiness, as that they shall seem for a time to
outstrip the sincere professor? May they not teach other, 1. Cor 9.
and yet themselves be rejected? May they not do miracles, and yet hear, I
know you not? May they not begin in the Spirit, and yet end in the flesh? and
can they continue that have taken no root? can they call on God at all times,
that have made the world their hope and their belly their Gods can these earth
worms endure any thing that may purge out their dross, and prepare them to
glory, Job. 27. Gal. 6.10. 2. Tim. 3.
who sew to the flesh, and shall they not of the flesh reap corruption? Shall
not the candle of the hypocrite be put out? Does not this fair show of the
flesh, deceive, and prove deceived?

6. Afflictions,
What should I tell you of that change that is wrought by afflictions? Will not
the wicked in their troubles seek the Lord diligently? Must not the vilest
forbear, when they cannot otherwise choose? And is it any masterie, not to
revenge, Psalm. 78. 2. Pet. 2.
when power is not in our hands? Will not the swine that is now cleansed,
return to the mire again? Is it charity, then to forgive the world, when we
see no time left for execution of malice? Is it patience, to forbear when we
can neither will nor choose? Is it obedience, to tremble under the whip? to
fear God only for his justice, and not to love him for his mercy?

7. Prosperity.
Oh but we are (...) of trouble, and restored to great happiness. Behold, we
are blessed on the earth: and are not we then truly blessed? Is not this a
mark of holiness, to be prosperous in the world? Would God bless our
labors, if we did not serve him? May not this change from affliction to
prosperity be a certain evidence of an inward change from worse to better,
and so prove unto the flesh a conceit of conversion?

Surely, if the world be Judge, the case is quickly ruled, Who is the good
man, but the rich man? Either his riches shall be the cloak to hide his faults
by greatness, bribery, cunning packing, friendship, etc. or his evil by the
flattery of the world shall be accounted good, he will not do so for his
credit: he needs not steal, oppress: he has wheren it hall: his
covetousness is thrift; his pride, cleanliness; his prodigality, bounty; his
looseness, liberty and prerogative Has he not power of all in his hands? And
may he not do what he list? Is not his lust a law, his example a rule and
warrant? He fears no trouble; therefore he deserves none. Who can say Black
is his eye? because, who dares say so? Nay, who will not say, black is white,
if it may please him? Thus prosperity makes a convert, if the world may give in
evidence.

Especially if our fullness in the world be graced with some civil calling,
whereby we are honored of the people, 8. Civil calling.
and taken up with imploiments; is not idleness now much prevented, and so
such sins as do accompany the same? Does not credit now restrain, where
conscience cannot? Is there not now a cloak for sin, and countenance for
iniquity? What defense is fathered hence for neglect of spiritual duties* What
opportunity offered, to color oppression and deceit? What pretense for
licentiousness, and excess in the abuse of the creatures? What wrapping up of
abuses, where there is fellowship in evil? Is not here a glorious mask, for
sincerity and religion, where outward honesty in a civil calling becomes a
warrant of uprightness, seeing our faith is showed by works? Are we not true
and just in our dealing, do we not pay every man his own, do we not help
our neighbor by trusting him with our goods, being surely for him, do we not
maintain good neighborhood, by feasting one another, and making peace among
men. And what more obuious and commendable then our civil imploiments, so
beneficial to the Commonweal so necessary for our private, so successful
in the issue, as who (in opinion) more blessed? What is it, if not godliness,
that is so plentifully recompensed in this life? If now the wicked eat the
labors of their hands, and drink their wine in bowls, may they not sacrifice
to their nets? May they not cry ay me unto their souls, Oh well is thee, and
happy shall thou be? Thus civil imploiment with worldlings is accounted
religion: and to be morally just and true in contracts and bargains, goes
current with men for stanch and sound holiness.

But if we enter into Gods sanctuary, and by the rule of the word determine
hereof; Is not the Lord good unto all, and do we know love or hatred by these
things. Eccl. 9.1. Nay is not prosperity the portion of the wicked. Psalm.
17.14. Are they not hereby fatted up to the day of slaughter? Ierem. 12.3. Is
not an hypocrite in affliction, an Atheist and mocker in prosperity. Is not a
proselite in prosperity, an Apostate and Blasphemer in affliction. Have not the
best lost by prosperity, and are not the worst made inexcusable thereby? does
it not usually pervert and spoil them of what they seemed to have had,
breaking all bonds of civil honesty, and so makes them worse then bruit
beasts, without understanding. Do not the poor receive the Gospel, when the
rich and mighty are sent empty away, because either they cannot come, or come
with their outward man: their hearts run after their covetousness: Is the word
entertained with such, otherwise the^ for state or co^plement, or else to make
them merry. To condemn the rashness and folly of such as will reprove, or to
deride their flattery, that will call light darkness, must it not dance after
our pipe, and serve our lusts, to harden us in sin and ripen us to vengeance.
Is not thus the prosperity of the wicked their destruction, Prou. 1. Psalm 55.
Ier. 48.11.
and not their conversion? Does not the old sent remain in Moab, because he
was not changed from vessel to vessel, but enjoyed constant prosperity
thereby, was settled on his lees, and rooted more obstinately in natures
dregs, thereby exercised more greedily and desperately the lusts thereof? Ose
4.7. Psalm 78. Ose 5.
Can the change of the outward estate change the inward man from worse to
better? As they were increased, so, did not Gods people rebel against him, who
in their afflictions sought unto him deceitfully? Is not here a change from
better to worse? we fawn on God till we have our desires, and when our turn
is served, then depart from us Lord, we will not the knowledge of thy ways,
what profit shall we have if we serve the Almighty. Job. 21.15.16 We have now
no need of God, and therefore it is in vain to serve him.

As for walking in a civil calling, Civil honesty no evidence of conversion.
howsoever this (being sanctified by the spiritual) may be a means to lay up
a good foundation against the day of Christ. 1. Tim. 6.19.20 yet to the
natural man there is not a more dangerous outward means to exclude grace,
then the greatest measure of honesty that is seen therein. For is it not the
grace of this calling to rest in it self, for good success, without
invocation of Gods assistance, or reference to his blessing? Is not our pursuit
hereof a privilege to exempt from holy duties, We must live, and therefore we
cannot be bookish. We have no leisure to the Church. Or is it not enough to
come when we may have leisure? Is it not sufficient that we are not Papists in
profession, though we are Papists in ignorance and profanation to; yea gross
Idolaters in making our belly our God, the world our confidence: Is it not
meritorious that we give alms, and receive our maker once a year. Psalm. 15.4.
that we are no whores nor thieves, we do no body any wrong: we live of our
own, does not this utterly exclude religion in the family? does it not banish
all love to the power of religion? does it not extinguish all sense of inward
corruption. Is it not to stick in the form of Religion, and so to renounce
the power thereof. Is not this to say in our hearts there is no God, seeing he
is only in our lips and not in our raynes, do we not deny him in our lives,
and carnal worship, who is a spirit and will be worshipped in spirit and
truth: howsoever we boast that we know him enough? And do our mouths
otherwise acknowledge him then at best, by profaning his great name, and
blaspheming it ordinarily in our daily communication? Nay, is it not a price
proposed to encourage diligence in these worldly businesses, even license to
profane the Sabbaths, to despise the word? etc. And what if men keep touch
and day in paiments and contracts? What if a little eye service be used in the
outside of their wares. Is it for conscience to God, to whom they desire to
approve the truth of their hearts, or only a care for the maintenance of
trading, and mutual commerce, which without this outward seeming equity must
needs be abolished? Who will trust, or shall be trusted, if word be not kept?
But is it kept any further, then may clear from touch of man's law? Is promise
kept here to our hinderance, so we may wind out by the arm of flesh? Is the
substance of our wares any thing less then answerable to the show? Is not God
robbed of his glory, while we sacrifice to our labor and wit? Is not this
great Babel, which I have built for the honor of my name? etc.

Eccl. 9.1.
Surely as these outward things are common to all: so no man knows love or
hatred, either by prosperity or adversity. Well may a good man (by right usage)
make these good unto him; but these of themselves may well make him worse:
otherwise they have no power inwardly to better him Only it belongs unto God
(through the ministry of his word) to convert the soul, as tendering (to this
end) unto us, Psalm. 19. 1. Per. 1.18.
not corruptible things, as silver and gold, which make outwardly happy in this
life; but the precious blood of Christ, 1. Ioh. 1.8.
as a Lamb undefiled, and without spot, whreby we are cleansed from all our
sins, and redeemed from our vain conversation, received by the tradition of
the fathers.

8. Profession Practice. Math. 7. Luke 8, Mark. 6.25.
But harken I pray you, unto a further plea of the hypocrite: Have we not heard
thee teaching in our streets? Nay, Have we not taught in thy name? Have we not
received the word with joy, and done many things accordingly? Can the best do
more? Do not we in many things offend all? Is not this a sufficient evidence
of an effectual conversion?

Surely where the grace of God which brings salvation to all men, Tit. 2.11.
has appeared effectually, there it teaches us, not only to eschew all
evil, in thought, Math. 5. Act. 15.19.
ward and deed; but on the contrary to prosecute all good, both 1. inwardly in
heart and mind, as being purified by faith, whereby with constant purpose we
clean unto God, and also 2. outwardly in the life and conversation: Iam. 3.1.
Act. 11.23.
Ephesians. 1. Romans 12.1. 1. Cor. 6. yea generally and universally, having respect
to all Gods commandments: Psalm. 119.7.8. and constantly, also continuing and
abounding, yea increasing in grace, and finishing our course, that no man take
away our Crown: Revel. 3. 1. Cor. 15. Profession and some practice of
religion, no evidence of true conversion. 2. Cor. 2.14. Ioh 15. Psalm. 119.
Ezech. 33.3^, 31. Heb. 4.2.
58. Ephesians. 3. Collos. 1.2. Pet. 1.8.9. 2. Tim. 4.3. Phil. 13.

And therefore seeing the word of God must be a savor of death unto death,
unto some who are to be renounced, and made inexcusable thereby; hence is it,
that though they receive it 1. with joy, as being ravished with the sweetness
thereof; yet being not mixed with faith, it becomes unprofitable; yea a
witness aegainst them, and so the joy of the hypocrite lasts but a moment,
he is like to be beaten with more stripes, because he knows his masters
will, and does it not: Math. 12.47. yea though it comes also to pass, that
for carnal respects, as vainglory, credit, satisfaction of others, whom
they desire to be like, the hypocrite also may do many things according to the
letter of the word, though not answerable to the power thereof; nor from the
purpose of his heart, renewed by the holy Ghost; but executing therein the lust
of his heart, as spiritual pride, hypocrisy, etc. Yet neither shall he be
able to continue in any substance of well-doing, because he has no root; how
soever for his credit and profit he must sometimes show religious, yet by
reason of difference of company, change of times and occasions, he must even
for the same ends of credit and profit, cast off his visour of holiness, and
so appear in his true likeness, to the satisfying of such, to whom nothing
but gross and desperate wickedness will give any contentment. This is
certain, that as the hypocrite in his best devotions, aims only at carnal
ends, so in his best worship he fashions himself to the world, and measures
himself by it love: either he must only go, and so far as the time will
bear, or his leaders go before, or flesh and blood will brook; and it is his
wisdom to turn with the time, to be ruled by his betters, to be indifferent
to all strains, that so he may gain by all. Nay does not this necessity lie
upon the hypocrite, that howsoever for a time he must gloss and fawn upon the
truth, while it is his pack horse to further him to promotion, riches, etc. yet
when by plunging himself into worldly courses, he must necessarily cross in
his outward actions, the power of that truth which he makes profession of, and
so thereby wound and gall his conscience: must he not now for his credit abase
and vilify that truth which before he so magnified? as being either too
severe and precise because he cannot reach it: 1. Cor. 1.21.
or being foolishnes and madness: and therefore he is now more wise, more
sober, then to be guided by it. you must pardon his former folly and
giddiness: he will do no more so; he will be more wise, moderate, etc.

And all this but a color to hide or ease his wounded conscience, which not
being able to endure the power of the word, must therefore in wisdom reject
it; and so fly unto carnal Physic, to purge out melancholy, and yet still
under pretense of Christian liberty, that he has knowledge enough, and yet
more desperately to deceive himself hereby and others, as preserving an
opinion of his righteousness, as if he were unjustly challenged, and therefore
may justly except against this evidence, and so preventing sound repentance,
and thereby, casting off the bridle, gives liberty to sin, and so hasteneth
vengeance.

This is the issue of an hypocrites supposed conversion, answerable even unto
the measure thereof: which being not rooted in the heart, nor aiming at Gods
glory, no marvel if the glory of an hypocrite prove his confusion. And is he
not justly deceived in this fancy of regeneration? Is he not hereby excluded
from the power of conversion, because he rests in the shadow thereof?

But to admit a true conversion: Is the combat now at an end? or not rather
now begun? Is there any place here for idleness, security, remissness in our
calling? Surely though the foundation stands sure in respect of God, 2 Timothy
2.19 2 Pet. 1.10
who knows who are his; yet it lies much in us, either to make sure and
beautify the building, by being watchful and diligent in well-doing; 2 Phil.
12 Psalm. 51 Psalm. 73 Malach. 3
or else by our negligence and security, to deface and interrupt it, yea many
times to our sense and feeling, even utterly to overthrow the same. For proof
hereof, take we wisely a scantling of the times wherein we live, and then lay
we thereto such experience as this Treatise affoordeth.

Concerning our times it may not be denied, but that our means might have
yielded such a growth in holiness as by the time we might all have been
teachers of others, in regard of our abundant measure of knowledge: yea we
might have been leaders to other Nations in the power and practice of
godliness, having by Gods mercy such lively presidents of sanctification set
before us: And therefore, as we stand only upon our name, and credit of
profession, it must be assumed, that seeing we have had such means, therefore
the Lord shall find no iniquity in us, that were shame and wickedness, Ose 12
1 Reg. 22
seeing God has a few names among us, that walk in white, and keep
themselves undefiled from the great offense. Therefore when went the spirit of
God from us unto them? why should they that have had the same means yield also
like fruit of conscionable obedience? why should not we stand upon our holiness
with the best: seeing we have found out riches in all our labors: God
prospers us in our affairs abroad, and all is peace and hushed at home; Zach.
11.5 Revel 31 7
and therefore blessed be God, for we are rich, and increased with goods, and
have need of nothing: Thus as the bountiful love could do nothing unto us
which he has not done, so if our own words will be taken, Saul. 1 Samuel 15
Esaias 66.5 Ioh. 26.1.
we have fulfilled the commandment of our God, all the Congregation is holy,
whatsoever we do, let the Lord be glorified, we think we do God good
service, in casting out of the Synagogues. Thus continuance of gracious means
brings us to a form of godliness and the form of godliness prouokes us to
deny the power thereof, that so we might be more inexcusable, because we cannot
plead ignorance nor justly challenge our God of any failing toward us: and
hasten hereby upon us the just judgment of God, because we hate that in
others, whereof we assume the glory, and deny that in our obedience, which we
arrogate as our chiefest hold in the favor of God, the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord. And shall not then our glory be our shame, because we are
earthly minded; and does not our security in this estate, presage speedy
vengeance? And is not the sickle already put in? have we not sharpened the
sword that threatens our destruction? shall the Lord repent him of any evil he
intends toward us, seeing we harden our hearts daily, and will not repent?
Will the Lord be merciful unto us, seeing mercy and compassion is banished
from among us? Every one seeks his own, and not each others good, our mercies
are plain cruelties, our tables snares, our love to the flesh the betraying
the soul? thus lest we should be counted non proficients, we presume of
practice answerable to the means, And hereby we would seem to have hit the
just measure of holiness, because we compel others to our measure, and stent
them by our line, as if we were absolute paternes to them of godliness, as if
whatsoever were beyond our compass, were superfluous, and exorbitant. If now
it please God to awaken the conscience of any that has been overtaken with the
deceitfulness of the time, or otherwise damped with the security thereof: so
that he begins to bethink himself, and remember whence he has fallen: is
it not the policy to stop his mouth with offals of the world, to drown him
in pleasure, to ariue away melancholy, to drink away this heart qualms or play
it away, in abuse of Christian liberty. Or if yet the Lord maintain his
controversy, by the terrors of conscience, to bring to repentance: Oh then the
cry is, that he is mad, or desperate, a fool, or an hypocrite. Thus are the
hearts of Gods children more cast down, whom the Lord has humbled, and all to
maintain our seeming happiness, all this to harden our hearts, that we may
not repent. And have we not to this purpose in great estimation, many accursed
and damnable engines of Satan, the rather yet to harden the heart, by making a
mock of sin? What shall we conceive of that common practice? let no man
reprove: sin must not be dealt withal in earnest, lost our confidence be
confounded: or if it must be dealt withal, then let us hear of it in jest,
it must be taught upon the stage, and yet made matter to sport with, that so
we may account it but a sport, that so the fool may make a mock of sin
surely, though blessed be God, sin goes not uncontrolled, and that by Gods
holy ordinance to convince and confound the same: yet is not the sacred word of
God made a jest of too: a subject for stage plays, a byword at tables, that
so we may yet more desperately scorn the same and so yet further harden our
hearts, that we may not repent. And though the glorious Lord has even from
Heaven avenged his cause against those horrible Theators of all abomination,
burning one of them to the ground, setting daily the marks of his wrath upon
them, by madness, epilepsie, etc. yet will not the filthy be filthy still? Must
they not still remain to be factors for Popery: brokers for Atheism, and
bauds to all odious wickedness, so advance the pride of our holy mountain; to
nouzle in security; as if we now had leisure still to play, as if still we
might do naught else, but eat and drink, and rise up to make our selves merry
with surfeiting on the sins of others. And has Satan compassed in vain by
these his wiles? Is not Popery increasing, and grown to some hope to build
Jericho again. Does not close Atheism abound generally, the Lord is
acknowledged in word, but in our works we do deny him? Does not gross and
palpable Atheism reign aloft in our cursed blasphemies of God in taking his
glorious Name in vain: Jude 15
Is not this the crown of our pride to draw near unto God with our lips, when
our hearts are far from him: and is not our glory our shame: Esaias 29 Job 3
because we with the same mouth breath out cursing and blessings? Is not this
another bitter fruit of this accursed tree, to pretend what we are not, nor
ever mean to be? And has not desperate profaneness hence got his strength? Is
not liberty given hereby to all licentiousness? Does not Popery on the one
side satisfy the flesh whiles it pretends to have it in no estimation,
nourishing the pride of the flesh in voluntary devotions, justifying and
satisfying the lusts of the flesh, under a pretense of wisdom, notably
discovered, in auricular confessions, in indulgences, voluntary vows, counsels
of perfection, etc. pretending perfection, to cloak sin, that we may not be
challenged for it, confessing sin, that we may commit it more greedily, vowing
continence and poverty, that we may enjoy the contrary more secretly, and
giving pardon for sin, that we may practice it more securely: And does not
Atheism on the other side increase the score, giving the bridle more
desperately unto sin, because the Lord is hid in the clouds, and will neither
do good nor evil, because he forbeares, therefore he is like unto us, he likes
of our sin: or else we say in our hearts, there is no God at all: no hell for
sinners, but to be hindered in sin, no Heaven, but this, to satisfy the
lusts of the flesh: And does not hypocrisy now make up the measure, presuming
on Gods mercy, that we may sin continually, pretending infirmities, that we
may be borne withal howsoever, resting on the form of godliness, to cloak
any desperate wickedness: Therefore we shall be delivered, though we have
committed all these abominations; because we are Christians, the just Temple of
the Lord is with us, therefore he shall see no iniquity, and stinting Religion
to flesh and blood, that so flesh and blood may take it swing, and thereon be
most religious, Job 9
because it does it best, it cannot do otherwise, it does what others do: It
acknowledges no failings, and therefore it makes up it measure: therefore
sin remains upon it, because it sees no sin, it acknowledges no iniquity.
And does not the kingdom of Satan swarm hereby, and therefore shall not the
hypotrites be beaten with more stripes: The Lord make us wise to see the
plague, and hide our selves. Has not the Lord been as a moth unto Israel, and
to the house of Judah as rottenness: have we not a name of peace, and yet
behold inward divisions and heart burnings on all sides, Ephraim against
Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both against Judah. Do we not boast
of abundance, and yet behold scarsitie, our wealth moltereth away, and we
know not how we enjoy outward peace on all sides, and yet are impouerished
hereby, whereas our neighbors are enriched with continual wars, we sow
much, and reap little, and what we bring in is put into a broken bag: Does
not the just Lord secretly blow upon us, because we prefer not Jerusalem
before all our mirth. The Lord give us understanding in these things. Have we
not a blessed peaceable government, and yet still remain discontent? Have we
not abundance of the Gospel, and yet grow worse and worse. And is not this an
argument of inward rottennes: Though our pretenses are glorious, and means to
be desired, yet have we for the most part, yielded any better fruit then
moathie rottenness, fained shows without inward soundnes? Blessed be God in
Jesus Christ, that yet the means are continued unto us, is not there yet hope
of our repentance? is not this the way speedily to effect it: even to lay the
axe to the root of the tree. Behold how the Spirit here deals with this
Church of Ephesus, and take this for thy glass to behold thy present state in:
discern wisely what thou have received, and if thou have left thy first hold,
learn to take hold again by unfeigned repentance. It is no shame to be
chalengd of failings for the best are not without and it shall be thy wisdom to
reform the least seeing otherwise thy God may come against thee. For thy better
enabling herein.

Peruse this treatise ensuing: let it be in Gods fear, a touchstone unto
thee, to make trial of a sound conversion; Revel. ^
and take it as a preservative, to keep thee in the power of godliness, that
so thou may not leave thy first love. If by pride or security thou have been
left to thy self, and so have left thy former measure: view thy self
diligently in this present glass, and use it as a means for thy recovery and
perseverance. If by second thoughts, thou have now gained more light: glorify
God for any increase, and comfort thy self, that thou may also increase yet
remember that we are still to grow: and therefore, expect not what may be said,
seeing my health and study affoords only brevity, and my manifold afflictions
might have occasioned a decrease, or at least have cut off all liberty to
impart my store unto thee: and therefore bless God the rather, for this
lengthening of days and do not distaste, because it smells of the smoke, least
if thou fear affliction, thou shall find no comfort herein. And let me again
advise thee, not to stare upon the color which happily may bleare thine eyes,
but to look into the woofe, to humble thine heart. Neither misconstruing what
may be well digested, left thou be perverted by a stumbling block, nor
despising the pearl, Math. 22.14
because it is unpolished, least thou loose the nut, because thou can not
crack the shell. Though many are called, yet but few are chosen: and therefore
if few digest this pill: let them not condemn the physic, but their own
il-disposed hearts. 2 Cor. 4.6, 7
Those that can get meat out of the eater and sweetness out of the strong, let
them praise the glorious Lord, Ioh. 12
who brings light out of darkness, and not cease praying unto our gracious
Father, that he would turn our darkness into light, and enable us to work
while yet we have the light: that so we may approve our selves the children of
the light, and be prepared to that light which shall never be changed into
darkness. Even so be it. Come Lord Jesus. Come quickly.

In whom I rest thine unfeignedly, THOMAS COOPER.

PARTICVLAR OBSERVATIons, and Cases, and Conscience treated herein.
1. The supply of a powerful Ministry, is a gracious means of reformation.
1. Case. How to discern our estate in the acceptance of God, by the use of the
word.
2. The best have their infirmities, and are subject to grievous sins. 1. Why
infirmities abide in the Saints. 2. Caso. How nie our estate in sanctification
by infirmities. 3. Sin to be striuen against, though we cannot possibly
subdue it wholly in this life.
3. Sin is to be reproved. Case 1. How to reprove sin. 2. Trial of our
estates by enduring reproof.
4. The least sin in the Saints is sufficient to make the Lord to come
against them. Case 1. Why God chasteneth sin in this life. 2. How God
punishes sin in his children, which he has punished in his Son. 3. How to
make peace with God in our corrections and try our estate in grace thereby.
5. Quest. How the Church may be said to leave her first love, seeing she is
commended before, that she fainted not. 6. Sin of omission to be severely
reproved. 7. The Elect must go forward, and persevere in grace. Case 1. Why
perseverance and growth in grace is necessary. 2. How to grow in grace: 1. By
avoiding Apostasy. 2. What are the meanee of Apostasy, namely, 1. Corrupt
judgment. It marks on the left hand, and on the right. 2. Corrupt practice.
It manner and signs, and that on the left hand, and on the right.

Motives to provoke us to constancy in well-doing. Means to enable us to grow
and increase. Means to prevent Apostasy in the sense of our failings. Marks
of trial, that we have thriuen in grace. Doct. 8. Every true convert has a
first love. Case. The marks of first love. The reasons why God vouchsafes his
first love unto those that are converted upon their first calling.
Doct. 8. The Saints may leave their first love. Case. Means whereby first
love is lost twofold. 1. Withdrawing that which may cherish: what this is: 2.
Adding that which may cool. What these are.
Namely 1. Spiritual Pride, how this cools and decays love, and how to
remedy it: what is falsely reputed spiritual pride, and the remedy. 2. Carnal
policy, by what means this abateth first love: 1. How a friend to Religion.
2. How our enemy.
3. Prosperity, how first love is hereby decayed, and it remedy. 4. Abuse of
Christian liberty, how this decays this love, with the remedy. 5. A corrupt
and dead ministry, that this also cools first love, and by what means,
together with the remedy. Here observe False imputations of leaving first love.
Case 1. In the right use of their Christian liberty. 2. By enjoying
prosperity. 3. By use of spiritual wisdom in avoiding of trobles. 4. Faith
how and when to be given account of, and to whom. 5. How to discern inward
sufficiency, to make open profession of faith in the time of trouble. 6. How
to discern an outward calling to witness to the truth in perilous times. 7.
Wherein we may be silent, and how. 8. Names and habits, whether in affliction
they may be changed in times of persecution, and how far. That 9. Apparel may
be changed, and how far. Other imputations of leaving first love, as 4.
Discretion in reproouing sin. 5. Outward and inward afflictions. 6. Honest
provision for the family. 7. Liberty in the use of things indifferent. 8.
Whether want of former feelings of joy, may be an imputation. Case That we have
left our first love. Gods providence and resolution of judgment herein. Just
occasions of this want of feeling of comfort from our selves. Case. How to
behave our selves in this want of joy. Means to resist tentations that arise
from this want of comfort. 1. To remember the suffering of Christ. 2. And his
glorious conquests. 3. That this is an argument of the soundnes of conversion.
4. That these inward buffetings prevent outward baits of pleasure. 5. That God
is able to deliver us, proved by many reasons. 6. That he will deliver us. 7.
That the time is not past. 8. That the stronger tentations, the shorter and and
more comfortable issue. 9. This is a means to try and renew sound repentance.
10. God knows what is fittest for us. 11. Satan's tentations prevented by
accusing of our selves. 12. That we are not the greatest sinners yet. 13. It is
not vnpofitable to conceive our selves to be the greatest sinners. To this
end, 14. Call to mind former mercies. 15. That God differs our refreshing in
great mercy. 16. That we must not judge our selves by our tentations, or
condition therein. 17. That all the saints have drunk of this cup unto thee
Doct. 9. That the Saints may leave their first love. Case. The symptoms
thereof: And effects of the same. Means of recovery. How far they shall
recover.

Doct. 10. That the Saints shall not fall finally. Case. How far they may
fall.
Difference between lukewarmnes, and leaving first love And between leaving of
first love, and loosing it altogether.
A PRESERVATIVE against Apostacy.
REVELAT. 2.4. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee: because thou have
left thy first Love.


Our blessed Savior, having by the Ministry of his Apostles planted diverse
Churches in Asia: directs his servant John the Evangelist, to write unto each
of them, for their further strengthening in the faith. And, because the Church
of Ephesus, Occasion and coherence.
was both famous for the outward glory, and inward graces thereof, as also in
a sort the peculiar charge of the Apostle John, Verse 1.
therefore does he first send greeting to that Church; giving very just and
true testimony unto her of the great graces of God bestowed upon her, and her
profitable use of them, in the second and third verses. And that she might not
be overcome of spiritual pride, to which in regard of such excellent graces
she might be subject; yea, was so tainted therewith, as that it wrought in her
some security, and thereupon remissness: he therefore gives her notice of
this her decay and cooling in the fourth verse: telling her that He had
somewhat against her, because she had left her first love; both therein
expressing the greatness of her fall, by the excellency of the thing wherein
she failed, namely, her first love; as also, aggravating this her fall, by the
just esteem thereof in the judgment of her Savior Christ: namely, that it
gave occasion for him, that was her advocate, now to come against her, and to
have a controversy with her, as an enemy; Ose. 4 1. Lament. 2. Romans 8 31.
and thereby giving her to conceive in what a fearful case she stood, having
him now to be against her; who if he were on her side, she need not fear who
were against her; who being against her, all other things, though with her,
must necessarily serve to her further condemnation.

Sum and sense.
So that these words, do contain a description of some declination in this
Church of Ephesus, with some arguments, to lay this her estate more closely to
her heart, that so she might be prevented of further Apostacy, and so by
repentance recover her self again.

Scope and intent of the Spirit of God herein.
And the drift and purpose of the Holy Ghost herein, is by this seasonable
reproof to prevent further apostacy, and so by raising up this Church again
out of this decay, thereby to lead her forward graciously to perfection.

Wherein first we may behold the singular wisdom and mercy of God unto this
poor decayed Church, that intending heartily the recovery thereof, and so to
bring it forward in grace, he does graciously supply unto it the effectual
means of it raising up again. And though he was absent in body, yet by his
spirit and word he plies it conscionably, and calls upon it by his mighty word
to awake out of it sleep, and stand up from the dead that Christ may revive it
again.

1. Observation. The supply of a powerful ministry is a gracious means of
reformation.
Whence we may observe, That where the Lord continues a powerful Ministry to
his Church, there howsoever there may be some decaies and gross corruptions,
yet there is hope in Israel concerning this. Either the Church visible shall
recover it former glory and beauty, or at least the elect shall hereby be
bettered and furthered to perfection.

This we see to be manifest in the Church of Corinth, which though it was
degenerate not only into many foul corruptions in life, 1 Cor. 11, 25. 1 Cor.
15.
but also to many errors in doctrine: yet so long as the blessed Apostle by his
faithful and zealous labors watched over the same, and reproved it for it
faylings, as 1. Cor. 3. 1. Cor. 5. etc. it graciously reformed many grievous
evils, and so was kept on foot in the power of godliness.

This also is apparent in the Church of the Jews: which though it fell away to
many horrible corruptions, and gross idolatry; yet by the Ministry of the
Prophets it was eftsoons reclaymed, and attained at several times, many
glorious reformations, as in the times of Asa, Ezechiah, and Josiah, 2. Chron.
15. 2. Chron. 30.31. 2. Chron. 34. etc. yea it was not past hope of recovery,
it was not utterly given up to that abomination of desolation, until it had
utterly rejected the word of the Prophets, and grew to persecuting such, as
sought to reclaim them, as appears 2. Reg. 18.14.15. 2. Chron. 36.14.15.16.
And the reasons hereof are,

1. Because the power of the word is Gods only ordinance, as to plant a
Church, so also to water, and increase the same to perfection, 2. Pet. 1.1, 2.
Ephesians. 4.5.6.

2. The Church of God, has as much or rather more need of the word after it is
planted, for the further growth thereof, then it had for the first founding and
establishing of the same. And that,

First, Because, having now tasted how sweet the Lord Jesus is, in his holy
ordinances, it will now more hunger and thirst after further comfort, till it
be made meet for that glorious inheritance.

Secondly, No Church at the first planting, can be so perfectly set in order,
but that still it may and ought to grow and increase: though happily the Form
thereof may be perfect, yet their submitting to that Form, must be wrought by
degrees, they will not at the first so easily digest the strictnes thereof.

3. Especially if we consider, that now Satan will step in, by all means to
hinder our subjection to the ordinances of God: either laboring to distract or
disioint, 1. Cor. 3.4, 5, 6.
by inward diuisio^s; or by outward persecutions see king utterly to overthrow.
And have we not then still need of the Word within, to co^pose all differences?
had we not need of the word to quench all the fiery darts of Satan, to prevent
his stratagems, or else to confound them?

4. And seeing we must daily grow and increase to perfection, can we thrive
without daily food? must we not necessarily fall away, and pine utterly,
unless we be sustained constantly by this comfortable repast?

Use.
And therefore, First they are here reproved that conceive that the Word indeed
is necessary for the planting, and gathering of a Church, but when it can go
alone, they conclude it is needless, or at least indifferent, we may do well
enough without it: we may have it for state, and ornament, to maintain the
outward name, but for us, we have knowledge enough, we are sure of our
estates, we fear no dangers, and therefore let us prevent none.

Secondly, This serves for reproof of the ordinary Ministry, that esteem
places of Charge, rather rewards of former pains and study, then any
necessary bonds to tie us to further pains. Either being painful only in
the Universities and Seminaries to gather their seed, but neglecting to scatter
it, and so grow idle when they are called into the Vineyard; or if for credit
and profit they will take pains at their first entrance into a Charge, that
they may gain an opinion of learning, and so settle them for their further
advantage, yet are after willing to frame to the present state of their people,
nouzeling them in ignorance, that so they may rule them better, and encouraging
them in any gross profaning of the Sabbath, under pretense of Christian
liberty, and good neighborhood, that so they may be more easily and fully
fed by them.

Thirdly, Also here is met withal, that damnable and Atheistical Position,
That we may have too much knowledge, too much Teaching, That it puffes up the
people, and makes them new fangled. Seeing the truth is, that though the people
were better be without, then with that which is mixed with poison and trod
under our feet, for indeed there is too much of that; This generally excuses
for, or excludes that which should be wholesome: so we have rather just
cause to complain of the want of the other, we ought rather to wish that all
Gods people could prophecy: we should pray that the Lord would still thrust
out Laborers into his Vineyard, and thrust out those loyterers and deceivers
of their souls: we have just cause to fear, that the Lord has a controversy
with the Land, because the people perish for want of knowledge, we cannot have
too much of the grace of God, and therefore ought still to have the Word dwell
plentifully with us to convey the same.

Secondly, Here is matter of instruction, to try our estates by: That if we are
not weary of the Word, if we desire to have it dwell with us, not only in
the Church, but in our Families too, to be a constant Guide of our ways, and
Judge of our corruptions, to bring us to daily repentance, this is a sound
evidence, that we were converted by it; this is a gracious pledge, that we are
growing to perfection. Are we not hereby taught to cleave unto the Word, that
so by it we may be led along to the full measure of the age of Christ.

Thirdly, we may hence also have some conjecture of the providence of God to
his Churches, that if he continue unto them the power of the word, howsoever
they may be tainted with many gross corruptions, and fallen away fearfully
from their former standing: yet there is hope that they shall recover again,
if they submit in any measure to the power thereof. But if once they shall begin
to put the word from them, Act. 13.46.
and so the just Lord remoues their Candlestick: though happily they have
endured the word with much affliction, and esteemed indeed the same as their
greatest cross and trouble, as still speaking no good, but evil unto them:
yet now they shall find, what they falsely fathered on the presence of the
word, shall justly overtake them by the absence thereof; they shall be first
exposed to the delusions of false Prophets, that being hardened in their sin,
they may make up the measure thereof: and when the measure is made up, the
sickle shall be put in, the wrath of God shall lay them desolate, and root
them out from the face of the earth. And shall we not then mourn when the
Bridegroom is departed, and the Candlestick remoouing? may we not herein see
the plague and hide our selves, that so we be not swallowed up with the common
desolation?

Uses. Of comfort. 1. For certainty of our estate to come.
Lastly, hence is matter of exceeding comfort unto the Saints, not only
concerning the certainty of their estate, seeing the Lord will never leave
them destitute of his word, or else in steed thereof will give them the
Annoynting to abide with them for ever, and to keep them to the end.

2. For security of our estate present and future in this life.
But if in such times of renouncing the power of the word, they shall yet make
it the delight and joy of their hearts, cleaving faster unto it, the more the
world seeks liberty, and loving the feet of them that bring these glad
tidings, howsoever in the world they are esteemed monstrous persons, pestilent
fellows, not worthy to live etc. howsoever happily, they may endure reproach,
and undergo many worse afflictions, yet shall the word which they obey,
minister sound comfort unto them, and also prevent more grievous judgments:
that when the Lord shall bring the consumption decreed upon the mockers and
despisers, then shall he set a mark upon these mourners, to save them out of
the common wrack, and so reserve them to more glorious and peaceable times.
Psalm. 119. Esaias 28.19. Ezech. 9.6.7.

Thus does the Lord mercifully stick to his Church in the needful time. And
is there not great reason so to do? Yea certainly.

Behold this glorious Church of Ephesus, now decayed in her zeal, and if she
be once down, she is like to run amain: Though she was planted in
perfection, yet she walked not according to that rule, but grew remiss in her
zeal and love to the Brethren, and so left her first love unto her God, and so
is here challenged thereof by her best beloved Jesus Christ.

Whence we may learn secondly this lesson. 2. Doctrine. The best have their
infirmities, and are subject to grievous sins.
That as the best Church, so the best Christian has, and may have some
infirmities and corruptions; as appears by those places: 1. Ioh. 1.9. James
3. 2. Chron. 8.36. and by the examples of the best: David, 2. Sam. 12. commits
murder and adultery; Peter denies his master, Matthew. 27. Moses did not give
glory to God in believing his word; Noah was drunken, Manasseth an horrible
Apostata, and bloody persecutor.
Solomon idolatrous, etc. Numb 20. Genesis 38. Genesis 9. Thus have the Saints of God
been subject to infirmities, and that not before their conversion only, but
even after also; as the Apostle Paul in the name of all the rest, acknowledges
for himself in the seventh to the Romans 19.20.21.22.

And surely, Ephesians. 2. Col. 2. Romans 5. 1. John 1.8. Ephesians. 5.23.
seeing the Lord Jesus has satisfied the wrath of his Father for us, in
fulfilling the Law, and undergoing the penalty thereof: and so continues daily
our Intercessor and surety, to answer unto the justice of God for our
offenses, and to obtain pardon for them: so that there is no necessity that
we should be freed quite from sin, and so perfect, as to fulfill the law of
God, seeing the Lord Jesus has performed this already, and therefore for us to
undertake the same, were to intrude into Christ's office, and so to rob him of
his glory: Romans 6.12. Romans 8.1.
Therefore that some infirmities and corruptions do remain in us, seeing now
the guilt and punishment, yea the dominion and rage of sin is taken away by
Christ. It is very convenient and profitable* and that first:

Reasons. Why infirmities remain in the Saints. Ephesians. 5. 1. Ioh. 1.8. Romans 4.
1. That Gods free mercy, may be daily advanced in the pardoning of sin,
Psalm. 51.12, 13.

2. That the merit of Christ Jesus, may be glorified, in satisfying for sin,
John 9.

3. That our salvation may be better assured unto us, in the daily experience
of Gods love, in the forgiveness and healing of our particular corruptions, 2.
Pet. 1.8.

4. That the graces of the spirit may be exercised in the daily resisting and
conquering of sin, Ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13. 1. Pet. 4.

5. That the power of God may be perfited in weakness, 2. Cor. 12.8, 9. 2.
Cor. 4.7, 8.

6. And the Lord only might have the glory of his works in us, Romans 4. 2. Cor.
12.

7. That we may be daily humbled in the sense of our infirmities, and so
preventing pride and security, we may forget that which is behind, and hasten
to that which is before, Phil. 3.13.

8. And so the conscience of our daily infirmities, proves a gracious means to
prevent Apostacy, As

1. Being occasions daily to suspect our selves, and fear our estates, and so
to renew our repentance.

2. To be more watchful over our ways, by how much we are subject to fall.

3. To redeem the time and entertain all occasions to prevent sin, and make
sure our election, so to have our accounts always ready against the coming
of Christ.

9. And are we not hereby made more compassionate toward our brethren, as
being subject to like temptations with them. Galath. 6.1. Genes. 38.

10. Do not the wicked hereby take offense, who seeing the infirmities of the
Saints; and from thence, their chasticements, take hence occasion, to condemn
the generation of the just, and to ripen their sin by adding affliction to
affliction, Zach. 1. Psalm. 73. etc.

11. Are not the Saints provoked daily to renounce their own righteousness,
and fly unto Christ, living the life of faith, and contenting themselves with
sufficiency of Gods grace: 2. Cor. 12. Abac. 2.

12. And seeing, that as long as they live, they shall be subject to
infirmities: therefore also hereby are they weaned from the love of this life,
and the pleasures thereof, which are no better then fuel to their sin.

13. And also, provoked to hunger and sigh after their dissolution, that so
they may be delivered from this body of sin: Romans 7.24.

And this serves, first for reproof, Uses. 1. Of reproof. 1. of the Papist.
and that first of the Papist, that boasts of merit and perfect obedience,
not acknowledging that to be sin which is, and counting that good which is
evil, robbing thereby Christ of his glory, and himself of the assurance of
his salvation.

2. Of the profane Protestant, 2. Profane Protestant.
that flatters himself in his sin, with this, That all have their faults,
and the best has some infirmities, and therefore he will live in his sin; he
hopes to be saved as well as others: what need we make so much ado?

3. The ignorant Protestant is here condemned; 3. The ignorant Protestant.
who though in general he confess that he is a sinner, yet denies that he
has in particular broken any of the commandments; he is no whore, no thief;
deceiving himself by the letter of the law, and in truth thereby denying that
he has any sin at all.

4. The carnal Protestant.
4. The carnal Protestant is here also convinced, and that in many respects:

1. In that he hates to be reproved; whereby he would be conceived righteous,
and without fault.

2. That he will not strive against his corruptions, because he cannot wholly
be rid of them: pleading it to be impossible, and so in vain to be attempted.
Whereas it is:

Sin to be striuen against though we cannot fully and wholly subdue it in
this life.
1. The commandment of God to strive against sin, though it still remain.
Col. 3.5.

2. By striving we conquer some gross sins, as swearing, whoring, etc. so
that we never fall into them again.

3. We by this spiritual fight do weaken and diminish the force of all
sin, and so daily get ground thereof.

4. We by taming of sin, make it serviceable unto us; by outward
corruptions, purging out secret abominations; so that all does turn to our
exceeding good.

5. And so continuing in this spiritual warfare to the end, we fight the good
fight of faith, and finish our course with joy: 1. Tim. 6. 2. Tim. 4.

And hence proceeds the just condemnation of the times wherein we live,
wherein, though iniquity abound and is ripe to the harvest, yet the cry is,
all is well, let no man reprove, or it is but our infirmity, and so we must be
borne with. So the hypocrite either sees no iniquity at all, or if the
grossest sin break forth, yet it must be but an infirmity, that so he may
be hardened therein, that he cannot repent.

5. The weak Protestant.
5. The weak Protestant is here reproved, that esteems his case singular, when
he is overtaken with any gross sin.

2. Use, of instruction
Secondly, this serves for instruction, and that many ways: as,

1. To rest only on Christ.
To teach us to rest wholly on Christ in the matter of our salvation, and to
esteem all as dung in regard of him; to desire to be found in him, not having
our own righteousness, but the righteousness which is of faith: Philip. 3.
verse. 8.9.

2. 2. To be humbled with inward corruptions.
We may hence learn to be abased and truly humbled; not with outward
afflictions, which may breed worldly sorrow, but with our inward corruptions,
which may cause godly sorrow to repentance: 2. Cor. 2. James 4.8, 9.

3. And seeing the best has his infirmities, 3. To be compassionate to others.
here is a notable means, to teach the proudest to have compassion, to put on
meekness of spirit, and tenderness of heart; in relieuing and raising up his
afflicted brother, that so the communion of Saints may be maintained by the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: Galath. 6.

4. Here is matter of trial in this state of infirmities, 4 To try our estate
in sanctification by infirmities.
which seems common to all; whether yet we are such as are renewed in Christ,
to whom our sin shall not be imputed: namely, If

1. We hate all sin indifferently with a perfect hatred.

2. Strive unfeignedly against all sins, even the least infirmities, not
allowing our selves in the least corruption.

3. Judge our selves daily for sins particular so for as we know, or are
justly challenged therewith.

4. Condemn we secret corruptions and motions to evil.

5. Wholly rely on Christ for pardon for sins.

6. Hunger after death in regard of sin: Romans 7.

7. Endure reproof patiently, and amend.

8. If we feel the power of sin daily weakened in us.

9. Especially of such sins which have most prevailed heretofore.

10. And mourn unfeignedly for the sins of others.

10. Laboring to pluck others out of the fire, and warning them by our example.

2. Use. Of comfort. That we have right in Christ.
Thirdly, this serves for comfort, and that many ways, As,

1. In that God has left infirmities in us: therefore have we hence assurance
of our right in Christ, who came to save sinners, and shall have experience of
the power of Christ, in the daily subduing, and mastering of our corruptions.
And therefore

To prevent despair.
2. Let us not despair in our greatest tentations, seeing the greater misery,
the greater mercy. As it is God our Father that has left sin in us, yea in
the dearest, 1. Ioh 1.8. Ephesians. 5.19.20.21. Romans 5.3, 4. Galat. 4.6, 7.
to advance his free and constant love: so has he given his Son to reveal
this love unto us by the operation of the Spirit, shedding it abroad in our
hearts, through the daily assurance of the pardon of our sins, and continual
enabling to conquer the same: Romans 5.2, 3.

Not to imagine our case singular.
3. To this end let us not think our case singular, seeing the best have not
been exempted from infirmities, whereby Satan would drive us to despair; but
rather the greater our infirmities are, the greater experience may we look for
of the mercies of our God, who will lay no more upon us then we shall be able
to endure, 1. Cor. 10.13: but will give an issue with the temptation, that so
we may be able to bear it.

That infirmities shall not fester in us. Job 33.15 Acts 2.36, 37, 38.
4. Lastly, though we have infirmities; yet let this comfort us, that our God
will not let them fester in us, but by the power of our conscience, or
ministry of the word, or by some outward chastisment, etc. we shall know our
iniquity; that so we may perform seasonable repentance: and this is the next
observation that follows in the text, out of the practice of our Savior with
his Church; who does not flatter her in her sin, by concealing the same, (as
a false Prophet would have winked at it, and only stood upon commendation, yea
happily ascribe that which was not true) but deals faithfully with her. As he
commends her for her good parts: so he reproues her for that evil of her
decay.

And this teaches us, 3. Doctrine. Sin to be reproved. Leuit. 19.17. Reasons.
that

We must reprove our brother plainly for his sin: So do we testify, and
approve;

1. The faithfulness of our calling and duty unto God, in delivering the
whole counsel of God, as well reproof for sin, as praise for well doing. 2.
Tim. 3.16. 2. Tim. 4.2.

2. Our love to our brother, both in preventing Gods judgments by our
reproves, or else sanctifying them unto a sinner. 3. At least we justify God,
4. and make the sinner without excuse: Ezech. 33. 5. and save our own souls.
6. As also hereby we provoke him to repentance, and so by renewed repentance
to perfection: Leuit. 19.17.

And shall we not hereby put the Christian to the trial of his soundnes. If
he will endure reproof, there is hope of him, he is best able to bear it, he
will make best use of it? Tit. 1.15. or is not this the means to make him
sound. Is not this a means to cast off the hypocrite, and so to rid the Church
of her most dangerous enemy.

And this 1. condemns the flatterer, Use. 1. Of reproof to the flattering
teacher.
that either will see no evil in his brother, but is still beating upon the
good that is in him, puffing him up with conceit thereof; or if he see any
evil, will not reprove him plainly, but either excuse it, or diminish it, or
daube it up, hardening him in his sin, etc. Ezech. 13.

2. They are here reproved, 2. Of the perverse and malicious that calls
darkness light, and light darkness 3. Of the respecter of persons.
that justify the wicked and condemn the righteous: Esaias 5.21. whereas our
Savior iustifies the good, and condemns the evil.

3. As also, they that stumble at strawes, and make mole-hils mountains;
omitting the sins of great ones, or the great sins of their brethren: for
favor and affection, but enforcing to the utmost, every light escape in the
godly, or their enemies; putting more thereto, yea, taking occasion thereby to
disgrace their profession, etc.

Whereas our Savior Christ, here spares not the greatest and most famous
Church, and whatsoever is amiss in her, lets her know plainly of it.

2. Of the people. 2. Tim. 4. Galat. 4.
The people also are here condemned, that hate those that reprove them, and
rather heap unto themselves such teachers as will flatter them in their sin,
then intertaine those that deal faithfully in reproouing: Amos 5.11. Micah. 2.

2. Use of instruction. Hos. 6 5. Esaias 58.1. John 16.2.
Secondly, here is instruction, 1. to praise God for faithful teaching, when
God cuts down by his Prophets, and conuinceth the world of sin. 2 And also
to mourn where the Church is pestered with flatterers; that cry all is well,
Peace, peace; all the congregation is holy: Jeremy 6. Numb. 16. Jeremy 28.
Ezech. 34.13, 14.

3. Here is matter of trial both for Minister and People. If the one will
rebuke sharply, and the other brooken. If the Minister will not cease to
reprove, till ^e have either converted, or convinced. If the hearer will
desire to be smitten till he do amend, yea when he does his best, still
desires to be humbled and searched, that still he may increase.

4. We learn here by our Saviors example how to reprove for sin: namely,

1. Exemplary, not being pertakers with him in his sins, but by our contrary
constancy and good example justifying our reproof, taking away all
exceptions, and this has place always when other means of reproof will not
be admitted.

2. Truly, not chalenging of what is not, not condemning all for some, nor
being carried with hearesayes or surmises, but as we know, and what we know:
Thou have lost thy first love.

Sin, how to be reproved.
3. Plainly: Thou art the man, 2. Sam. 12.

4. Particularly: Letting him see his particular sin, not in the clouds, not
generally: and yet here we may use sometimes Parables, and propose it in
another case to provoke us to apply use to our selves. 2. Sam. 12.2, 3.

5. Lovingly, not with reproachful terms, not with imperious and insolent
vpbraydings, but with grace, and compassion, considering our selves, and
preventing obstinacy and imputation of malice, using to this end insinuations
of our love to prevail the better, Romans 9. and hazarding our uttermost to save
a soul, not behind his back, but to his face, adding the promises of the
Gospel if he do repent, and so using all means to give him hope of recovery.

6. Powerfully: To humble him for his sin, by denouncing the wrath of God
against the same: I have somewhat against thee: that is, I have a controversy
with thee, I am angry, I will be avenged of thee for it, adding to our
reproof, denunciation of vengeance.

7. Constantly and seasonably, not letting him lie in it, taking the fit time,
etc. as Abigail did, 1. Sam. 25. meeting with the beginnings of evil, and not
giving over, till either we have reclaymed, or made inexcusable.

8. Impartially and sincerely, not sparing the greatest nor dearest unto us; no
nor the house of Judah, Amos 7.8. 1. Sam. 12.
Esaias 58.1. no not the most excellent Church; not David, though a King; not our
children, not any, Eli, 1. Sam. 2.

Lastly, here is great comfort, 3. Use, of comfort.
that being reproved for sin, we are judged in this life; and so by the
grace of God being brought to repentance, we shall not be judged in the life to
come: 1. Cor. 11.31, 32.

Thirdly, in that the holy Ghost testifies here, Doctrine 4. The least sin in
the Saints is sufficient to make the
that Christ does come against his Church for this sin: here we learn, That
though God loves always the person of his children; yet he is displease with
their sin: he will come against them for it, and chastise them for the same:
Psalm. 89. 2. Sam. 8. etc. Ezech. 18. And that because he is,

1. Righteous, and hates iniquity, Psalm. 5.4. and therefore will not endure
it in his own.

2. He is merciful, and therefore will not suffer sin to dwell in his
children: but by his corrections will cleanse them: Esaias 1.25. Esaias 27. Iere.
19. Psalm. 89.

3. The sins of his children do more grieve him, and indeed are more
grievous in themselves: First, because

They have more grace to resist. Secondly, do give more offense to the weak.
Thirdly, open the mouth of the wicked more to blaspheme God and his truth: 2.
Sam. 12.

4. That the wicked may have their vengeance hereby sealed up, in that the Lord
spares not his own children: Prou. 11.32.

6 That his children might not be condemned finally.

7 That he might weane them from the world, and provoke them to draw near unto
him in prayer, and so have in our selves further experience of his love in the
issues thereof.

8. Their sin is not theirs, but proceeds from Satan and the old man, which
he therefore remoueth by his chastisements, that so he might manifest and
confirm his love more and more to their persons in fitting them to glory.

But how stand it with Gods justice to punish sin in the Elect which he has
punished in his Son?

Answer. He does not punish sin in us as he did in his Son according to
the exactness of his justice, and defect of our sin, for then we shall never
be able to abide it.

2. He does not intend to punish sin, but to amend the sinner, and so
qualifies his corrections accordingly: As accompanying them with the word,
giving us strength to bear them, or framing them to our weakness, ministering
abundant consolations to conteruaile them, and giving a gracious issue out of
them, either taking away the rod, or giving patience to endure it.

And this serves,

1. Uses.

1. Of conviction to those that by reason of prosperity flatter themselves in
integrity.

2. Those that are impatient under the rod deserving the same.


To condemn the wicked that flatter themselves in their righteousness,
because they prosper, and are not plagued like others, nor afflicted as the
sinners, seeing they are fatted up hereby to the day of slaughter, and the
elect by afflictions prepared to happiness: Ierem. 12.3. Act. 14.23, 24. Job.
21. Psalm. 17.14:

2. To reprove the sinners that provoke the Lord by their sin to become
their enemy, and then being afflicted, complain of wrong, and condemn the
love and faithfulness of God, as if in chastising them he hated them, seeing
of very love and faithfulness he does correct them: Psalm. 119. Psalm. 73. Job
6.9.

3. 3. Those that judge peremptorily the estates of men by outward things.

Use 2.

Instruction how to keep God our friend.

2. To be patient under the rod.

3. To try our estate by the use of the cross.


To reprove the world that judge of men by these outward things, seeing all
things are alike unto all men: Eccl. 9.1.

Secondly, here is instruction: 1. To teach us how to keep God to be our
friend: namely, by keeping our selves from sin, or else by renewed repentance,
daily renouncing, and reforming the same.

2. To bear patiently the hand of God, seeing we have deserved hell; and this
affliction which is but for a moment, will procure unto us an inestimable
weight of glory: 2. Cor. 5.16.

3. To try our estate under the rod, namely, 1. if we feel the Lords
displeasure, and so fear and depart from evil: Prou. 14.

2. If we can find comfort in the word.

3. And wait patiently on our God in our greatest afflictions.

4. Not seeking so much the remoueall, as to have the corrections sanctified
unto us.

5. Either by bringing some sin past to light, and judging for it, or else
preventing sin to come.

6. Making us more tender in conscience,

7. More compassionate to our brethren,

8. More out of love with the world,

9. More to long after heaven,

10. More zealous in holy duties, more jealous of our selves, more confident on
God, more ready for death.

And thus does the holy Ghost amplify the sin of this Church, by signifying
that the Lord is angry with her for the same.

1. But let us consider what this sin is, namely, That she has left her
first love, a sin of omission, she has failed in that zeal, etc.

How the saints though leaving their first love, yet may be justified that they
faint not.
Quest. But how may she be said to have left her first love, seeing she has
formerly the testimony that she endured patiently, and did not faint?

Answ. She might fail in the measure of her love, though not in the substance
and truth thereof.

2. She might fail in the outward action, though not in the inward purpose.

3. She might have been formerly zealous, but now she was decayed, and her
present decay might not being prevented breed a further relapse, and so
threaten either some grievous scourge to pluck her out of this pit, or else
might occasion final Apostasy.

4. She might maintain the doctrine of the Gospel, though to the enduring of
manifold afflictions for the same, and yet neglect the holy discipline, and so
grow remiss and careless in the practice of godliness.

5. She might not be so zealous as she was, and yet have so much zeal as not
to give over finally; for a time she might be cooled, but not quenched in her
zeal, etc.

And yet we see the Lord is not satisfied herewith, but she must recover what
she has lost, and still increase in holiness, nor utterly reject us for our
failings yet would not he have us lie in them.

6. Wherein observe we the care of the Lord Jesus unto his Church, Doctrine 5.
that though she was not overtaken with any gross and apparent evils, that
she did not altogether fail in doing of good, yet he does here reprove her
for some measure of decay, for omitting what she should have done, intending
thereby to provoke her to perfection, and to recover her of her failings, that
so she may grow to perfect holiness.

Whence we may further learn, that the Saints of God are to be reproved fos
sins of omission, even for omitting or neglecting that which they should do,
yea for failing in the measure thereof, as well for gross and apparent breaches
of the will of God. Thus have the Prophets reproved the people of God, for
failing in what they should have done, and for carelessness in holy duties.

Thus was Eli challenged of the Lord, for neglecting to reprove his sons, 1 Samuel 2. Thus are the Corinthians charged for neglecting due preparation to the
Holy Sacrament, for neglecting the due execution against the incestuous person,
1. Cor. 5.2.3. 1. Cor. 11.23.24.

The Reasons hereof.

1. Because the Saints do not easily take notice of these failings, if they
avoid scandalous evils, if they do in any sort perform outward duties, yet
they fail in the measure, as not performing them in zeal and courage, and
herein they many times think they may be excused, because they are not yet
perfect; because they are subject to infirmities: or by carnal wisdom be
induced to more moderation, (as they call it) or abatement in them; yea happily
under pretense of Christian liberty, may have some allowance hereunto.

2. It is that, wherein the Saints do most fail in, and may most dangerously
deceive themselves hereby; as

3. That these sins of Omission may be occasions to give us up to gross and
open sins, even to commit many foul offenses against the Law of God; as
causing the Lord to leave us to our own lusts, that so neglecting what we
should do, we may commit what we should not, to the confounding of our carnal
confidence, and provoking to more zeal, as 2. Sam. 12. Are not many overtaken
with the sins of the time, because they cannot mourn for them, or
courageously remove them.

4. These sins of Omission do most grieve Gods Spirit, and challenge the
power of sanctification: most hinder our growth in grace, and are dangerous
occasions to hypocrisy and lukewarmenesse.

And this serves, to reprove the fashion of the Times, which is either not to
reprove at all, or at the most to reprove for gross and open sins, as for
faylings in what we should do, these are either not touched at all, or rather
excused and justified under the pretense of infirmities, and in that specially
the power of godliness is generally challenged of too much more then needs;
therefore, this measure is approved, as being what flesh and blood can do,
what is common with the time, what will best serve the looseness and
indifferency thereof, what will best secure us against the snares thereof.

2. Here is matter of trial, that if we take as well to heart our faylings in
what we should do, yea be humbled in our wants, when we have done our best
as well as for gross and open prophanesses, this is a good testimony of the
power of Grace, that the Lord has begun his work in us, and so by this narrow
trial intends to make us better.

3. We are hereby also taught how to deal with our own hearts, even to be
jealous of our selves, especially, for sailing in holy duties, to examine our
hearts principally in this case, how we are cold in prayer, insensible of
Gods judgment, that we cannot mourn for the sins of the Time, that we do
not reprove the common sins thereof, the abominable swearing, profaning of
the Sabbaths, etc. for this shall be a means to keep us from the like abuses,
this shall be a gracious help to increase in holy duties, and so to submit to a
conscionable ministry to this end, comforting our selves, that if we belong
to God, our gracious Lord will not let us escape in the least sailing, but if
his word will not prevail, he will come against us with some secret or open
chastisement, to recover us betimes, and so to prevent us from Apostasy, that
we may increase and follow hard after the mark. And this is that which we
further learn herein.

That though the Lord accept the purpose of the heart, and will not quench the
smoking flax; Doctrine. 6.
yet he would have us recover our selves, and grow in grace, and follow hard
after the mark; we must abound in grace, and be plentiful in good works; The
elect must go forward and persevere in grace, laboring to perfection.
we must do the first work, nay, we must thrive in well doing, expressing
outwardly what we inwardly desire, and subduing the whole man to the obedience
of the spirit: 1. Col. 1. Pet. 2.1.3. Ephesians. 1. Phil. 2. Pet. 1.8. Psalm. 92.
Job 17.9. 1. These. 5. perseuering with all patience and constancy unto the
end, Ephesians. 6.13.

And that, First, because the Lord has commanded, That we should be holy, as
he is holy, 1. Pet. 1.13, Reasons.
14, etc.

2. Christ Jesus has deserved to make us perfect, by his perfect obedience.

3. And by his Spirit daily dwells in us, to lead us into all truth.

4. Hereby we make sure our election, and attain to the certain knowledge
thereof, 2. Pet. 1.10. Ioh. 7.

5. Hereby we make our selves meet for that glorious inheritance, 1. Col.
11.12.

6. Hereby we provoke others to glorify God, Matthew. 5.16, 17. and strengthen
the weak.

7. We daunt and confound the enemies of the Gospel, 1. Pet. 2. stopping the
mouth of all iniquity and reproach.

8. And adorn and beautify our glorious profession, 1. Phil. 27.

9. And gain more glory to our blessed God, Math. 5.10.

And this serves,

Uses. 1. Of reproose to those that deceiuer themselves with good intents and
motions. Of such as go backward.
To condemn, 1. all those that flatter their hearts with good intents, when
they are utterly void of good fruits, Prou. 3. Esa. 29.

2. Such as stent their measure of holiness by flesh and blood, and such
carnal Rules as square thereto.

3. As also those, that upon presumption that they are better then others,
cease to better themselves, and so standing at a stay in religion, go backward
therein, 1. Cor. 4. Revel. 3.

As fear to be noted of singularity.
4. And those likewise that fear to abound in holiness, zeal, etc. lest they
be accounted singular noted men, precise, vainglorious, etc.

As justify decays.
5. And these especially, that have not only slacked their zeal in religion,
but do justify this decay, as being now more wise, sober, etc. in their
profession, where as before they were fiery, rash, indiscreet, etc.

Use 2. Of instruction, how to increase. Means of Apostasy. 1. Corrupt
judgment.
Secondly, here is instruction, and that first, we must labor to increase and
grow constant in godliness, and that by these means:

1. By avoiding the means of Apostasy, which are,

1. Corruption of judgment, and that,

First concerning Holiness.

1. We may be too holy:

2. That our forefathers were saved with less, and therefore, what need we
strive for more?

3. That we have been too forward already, and therefore it is now wisdom
to abate, to be more indifferent.

4. Or measure the worship of God by prosperity.

5. That seeing we cannot be perfect, therefore it is in vain to labor
thereto.

6. That there is no time past to serve God; If we can do it on our death
beds it will serve the turn.

7. That the best and freest service of God is to make no bones of sin, because
this is true peace of Conscience, liberty this argues, the abolishing of sin
by his death, to commit it greedily without remorse.

8. That we may serve God and the world too. Luke 16.

9. That less will serve the turn, because many do less, and we hope are
saved, Acts 14.

10. That Gods mercy does more abound in our failings, Romans 6.1.

11. That we need not to be so perfect, seeing Christ has finished all for us:
seeing Christ has therefore perfited all things, that we might grow to
perfection, Heb. 12.1, 2. John 15.

12. That the service of God is a matter of indifferency: if we doeit, it is
well? but if we fail, God will be merciful.

Secondly, We must take heed of corrupt judgment, concerning Apostasy, And
that on the right hand, As that,

1. Decay in former zeal and measure of sanctification is not Apostasy, but
rather a reedifying of former rashness, and ignorance, by spiritual wisdom,
teaching us more moderation and humility, not to presume above others, to
maintain society and peace by returning rather unto others, then to be so
strict, as to bring them unto us.

2. That it is Apostasy to admit any change of judgment, seeing we know but in
part, and so are subject unto error, and therefore we may be, and are often
deceived, and therefore must change our opinions, and this change is not a
decay, but rather means to increase in godliness,

3. Thar it is Apostasy to differ in judgment, and so in practice from a
Church otherwise truly grounded, and established: seeing the Lord gives not to
all a like measure of light, neither to all, at one time, what is necessary.
And therefore either we may not yet see what is fit, and so are not to be
condemned Apostates, for what we know not; And can we consent with good
conscience to what we know not; or else it may please God to let us see more
then happily is discerned, or will be acknowledged, Romans 14. for what Church is
without it imperfections? And shall we shut our eyes against any light that
shines, ought we not to practice, as we are convinced, and being converted,
ought we not to strengthen the brethren? ought we not to grow up to perfect
holiness; And therefore seeing we forsake not the society for it
imperfections, but rather walk therewith in the common light, and if we differ
from it, wherein it is short of perfection, do we not hereby let it see it
imperfection, and so by our wise difference lead it to perfection; and shall
we then be accounted reuolters from the Church?

Especially if Bethel become to be Bethauen, if in the beginning it was not so;
if Ephesus have forsaken her first love; If the faithful City, whose faith
was once published through the world, be now become an harlot, shall we be
condemned as Apostates from that cursed Synagogue which is so fallen away from
it former purity. Ought we not rather to provoke her to do the first works:
and if she will not hearken, shall we not still protest against her? shall
we now measure our selves by her crooken lines, that so being partaker with
her in her sins, we may be partaker with her in her plagues. But of this
more hereafter.

Secondly, We must avoid corrupt judgment on the left hand, concerning
Apostasit, As

1. That every failing in Religion, every breach of Gods holy will is properly
Apostasy: for then the best must be Apostates; all will be subiest hereunto.
Because though every sin, yea the least, makes way for Apostasy, if we lie
therein without repentance, and fall to excuse and allow our selves therein,
yet by the mercy of God the Saints recover, and so their faylings by the
special indulgence of the Almighty, are means of their more sound and speedy
proceeding in the work of grace.

2. And therefore far be it from us to conclude, That any the most grievous
sin in the Elect, is Apostasy; That is, such as excludes all hope and means
of repentance; seeing though in it self it deserve that God should utterly
forsake us, and so give us up utterly to forsake him, and fall away from him;
yet because God is our father, and will not reward us after our sins, nor deal
with us after our iniquities; but howsoever he forsake us for a while, leaving
us to these corruptions, yea to be chastened for them, yet in wrath he
remembers mercy, sanctifying these corrections to bring us to repentance, by
opening our eyes to see our sin, and humbling us with the sense of them hereby,
that so we might deny our selves, and hunger after mercy in Christ Jesus.
Does he not now return unto us in great compassions, enabling us by faith to
lay hold upon Christ in him to apprehend the pardon of former sin; through
him to obtain grace, to prevent future sins, and so to walk more humbly and
constantly with our God, and so by him to perfect the work which he has begun
in us.

A second means of Apostasy is, Corrupt practice: 2. Corrupt practice.
And that on the left hand.

1. When either we live by examples of the greatest:

2. Or by the lover of the word of God, Matthew. 5.

3. Or by the stream of the time:

4. Or only by the laws of men:

5. Or follow the most in religion:

Secondly, On the right hand.

1. When we grow spiritually proud of well doing:

2. Or grow to singularity, and so to forsake the fellowshippe upon pretense
of their corruptions, that we may not be defiled with them. Esaias 65.5.6.
Hebr. 10.23.

3. Or affect curious, and unnecessary knowledge, to puff up, and not to
edify. 1. Cor. 8.2.

4. Or study only to know, making no conscience to practice as we know. 2.
Col. 4.

5. Or stand more upon trifles and circumstance then many matters.

6. Or serve God only so far as we gain thereby, avoiding afflictions as
hindrances thereto.

7. Or pretending, because of afflictions, that either now we have no leisure,
or else it is in vain, or too late to serve him.

8. Or grow secure and dead in the performance of holy duties, performing them
for custom, carnally, hypocritically, etc.

Libertine.
9. Or grow inconstant in holy duties; intermitting the set times, of prayers,
hearing the word, etc.

10. Or grow negligent in converting others.

11. Or admit of humane inventions, with the worship of God.

12. And upon pretense of peace, give way in the least against conviction of
conscience.

13. Or prove unthankful unto God for his particular mercies, 1. Romans

14. Or fall into gross sins, and lie in them without repentance: Psalm. 51.

15. Or judge uncharitably of our brethren, withdrawing our compassions from
them:

Secondly, Motives to provoke us to constancy in weldoing.
consider we these motives to make us abound in good works, and grow constant
therein.

1. Consider we the faithfulness of our God, who loves to the end. Ioh. 13.1.

2 Remember we the continual service of the Saints in heaven, they incessantly
glorify God, and also continually: 1 Thessalonians. 4. Revel. 4.

3. Consider we the power of Jesus Christ still remains to cover our
imperfections, and to strengthen us to perfection: Heb. 12.1, 2. and to this
end makes continual intercession for us.

4. Know we that the Comforter does abide with us for ever, Ioh. 17. to lead
us into all truth: and so forward in all holiness: Ioh. 15.16.

5. 1. Pet. 4, 15.
Consider we that the righteous can scarcely be saved. 1. Pet. 4.15. and what
pains the best have taken toward heaven.

6. Remember we that Jesus Christ has taken away all the rigor of weldoing,
and yet enables us by his spirit, to perfection, accepting our weakest
endeavors, so they be sound, and enabling of us to fulfill all righteousness
in due season.

7. Discern we often how we have failed heretofore, and this shall provoke to
more industry hereafter.

8. And lay we to heart the sudden coming of Christ, and so we shall be
provoked to make haste.

9. And propose we unto our selves that glorious Crown, and so we shall fight
that good fight of faith, and finish our course with joy.

10. Observe we the providence of our gracious Father, in turning about all
things, that they shall work together for the best to further us to
happiness. Romans 8.28.

1. As causing our greatest afflictions to be means of remoouing all lets,
especially our sins, and spurs to perfection, Esaias 1.25.

2. And making our very sins matter to prevent or subdue sin, and so to
provoke us to more endeavor of holiness, by how much we have been cast
behind, and what shall then separate us from the love of God? what shall not
further us to hasten to perfection? Romans 8.33.34.35.

11. To this end, take we a view of the special privileges of godliness,
which are,

1. That it only has the promise of this life, as well as of a better.

2. It only can give us sound Comfort in our greatest troubles,

3. And give us certain victory over them all.

Only this sanctifies all Gods blessings unto us, that they may be pledges
of eternal life, 1. Tim. 4.5.

This only gives contentment in all occasions, and so does possess us of
heaven in this life, 1. Tim. 6.

12. And seeing that in our Fathers House are many Mansions, and those that are
most faithful, shall have greater increase of glory, Therefore, let this
encourage to increase in grace, that so we may be partakers of greater
happiness. Lastly,

13. Consider we how unwearied the wicked are in evil, what policy they use
to continue therein, using variety of Objects to prevent loathsomenesse and
satiety; arming themselves with diversity of means, whereby they may be
better able to accomplish their lusts, and with more pleasure enjoy them
longer. And shall they take more pains to go to hell, then (...) to Heaven?
Shall they be still striving, and never weary, to their own Condemnation?
and shall not we be still endeavoring to make sure our Election.

Thirdly, practice we these means of Growth and Constancy?

1. Retain we soundness of judgment, concerning the power of godliness?

2. Do we all things from the ground of the heart, as in the sight of God? 1 Thessalonians. 1.

3. Cleave we still to the power of the word, and strive we to increase in
knowledge? 1. Phil. 1. Coll.

4. Practice we constantly the duties of piety and charity, not serving God
by spurs, but keeping a constant course in holiness, that so the service of
God may be more easy and comfortable.

5. Watch we daily over our hearts, in a true searching and examining the
same, Psalm. 4.5.6.

6. See that we renew our repentance, as often as we sin.

7. Labor we the conversion of our brethren, and judge we charitably of them?

8. Make we conscience especially of Sabbath duties, because our powerful
practice thereof shall better enable to a general increase, and to constancy
therein. And,

9. Avoid we curiosity of knowledge and meddling in others affairs.

10. And stick we not in the beginnings and elements of Religion? Hebr. 6.1.

11. And because we shall be sure to encounter many enemies that will seek
to hinder us in this spiritual grows; therefore put we on the whole armor
of God, that so we may resist in the evil day, Ephesians. 6.11.12.

12. Especially seeing the love of the world will mainely endeavor to press
us down, and hinder our proceeding upon pretense of providing things
necessary; etc. therefore, that we may in nothing be careful, let our
requests be manifest unto God in prayers.

13. And labor we true contentation in whatsoever outward measure the Lord
has dispensed, that so we may still hunger after spiritual graces.

14. And prepare we our souls daily to afflictions, submit we to whatsoever
our loving Father shall lead us into; that so carnal security may be
prevented, our corruptions purged, and we daily provoked to perfection.

15. Quicken we and enlarge our desires of heavenly things, and this will be a
means to spur us forward to practice.

Measure we not our condition by any measure atetained, but still forget we
what is behind, and hasten to that before.

16. Walk we always in fear of our selves, and suspect we all our works,
yea then most, when we enjoy greatest graces: Pro. 28.13. and maintain we
tenderness of Conscience, in all things.

17. Remember we our ends, and uncertainty of our life, and the account we
must make: 2. Cor. 5.10.11.

18. And resign we our selves daily into the hands of our God, resting on his
providence, 1. Pet. 5. Mat. 6.

19. Entertain we cheerfully the motions of the Spirit, and put them in
practice diligently, Ephesians. 4.

Thus shall we grow constant in well doing, and persevere unto the end.

Mean to prevent Apostasy in the sense of our failing.
1. Mean while let it stay us from Apostasy, that our gracious God requires no
more then he gives, if he give us but one Talent, he will not require
according to three; and therefore though we be far from what we should be,
or what others are, yet let not this discourage us in our present measure, or
from attaining further, because he which has given others more is the same
also unto us, and will be in like measure, both accepting what he gives for
the present, and perfiting of his own work in due season.

2. That though we are sometimes ebbing, and sometimes flowing in the measure
of holiness, yet our God is always the same unto us. And therefore measure
we not his love, by our different measure of increase; but rather resolve we,
that as when we increase more, we have more cause to love him; because he
answers our endeauours: so when we seem to go backward, we have then cause to
love and trust him more, that so he may recover us; as we have more need of
his love when we fail, to lead us forward again; so we have as great need of
his love when we have done our best, to empty us of all carnal respects of
vainglory, etc. that so it may appear his only love has occasioned this
increase, all this service shall redound to his glory.

3. That in the work of grace we must live by Faith, and not by sense, not
measuring our estate by what we are in our selves, but by what we are in
Christ; not what we are for the present, but what we shall be in the life to
come: And therefore comfort we ourselves, that as the least spark of grace is
an evidence that we are ingrafted in the Vine, so being the Vine we shall be
daily purged and prepared to bring forth more fruit; that what we do for
the present shall be accepted as perfect in Christ, and the more sense we have
of the imperfection thereof, the more may we be assured of our interest in
Christ Jesus, the more shall we be provoked still to be found in Christ, not
having our own righteousness, that so in him and through him the work may be
perfited.

Fourthly. Make we trial of increase by these marks:

3. That we grow in every part, as well inward as outward.

2. That we discern our corruptions more, and are more humbled for them.

3. That our affections to the world are more lessened and quieted.

4. That we are more contuetned with our estates, and can more cast our care on
God.

5. That we are more willing to endure afflictions, and ready to lay down our
lives for the Name of Christ.

6. That we can more grieve for the sins of the time, and yet labor more
heartily the conversion of sinners.

7. That we are more sober and wise in the use of Christian liberty.

8. That we are more cheerful and able to holy duties, and so do more
hunger after our dissolution, and are willing to die.

9. That he can be emptied of all, by respects, yea of all respect unto our
selves for the glory of God.

10. That we find such sins most weakened, to which formerly we have been
most subject.

11. That howsoever we differ in practice, yet still our desires are more
enflamed, especially upon our failing to more constant obedience.

Lastly. For our comfort learn we, that our God, that commands perseverance,
gives grace to the same, and therefore we shall continue, and not finally
decay: we shall leave out first love, but not loose it altogether: 1. Philip.
6. John 13. Luke 22.33.

Wherein note, That every convert has a first love, that is, Doct. 7. Every
true convert has a first love.
when God has revealed his love unto him in Christ, and by the Spirit of God,
it is shed abroad in his heart, then is the heart of a sinner inflamed to love
God again, then is it enlarged with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1. Pet. 17.
for so great salvation: then does it strive to express it thankfulness unto
God, for so great mercy: then is love as strong as death, much water can not
quench it, Cant. 8.

And this is called his first love: and it is discerned by these marks:

1. By his renouncing of all, in comparison of it, and parting with the dearest
for the enjoying of it: First love discerned by marks. Matthew. 13. Ioh. 6.
Coloss 3.1.
so did the Apostles forsake all in act: so must we forsake all in affection,
and in act too, so far as it may hinder our enjoying of Christ: Zacheus, Luke
19.6.7.

2. When we endure any affliction for the Words sake, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.10. and
that with great joy in the holy Ghost: Hebr. 10. Ephesians. 1. submitting our
selves to the power of the word, though it be never so bitter to the flesh, and
cross the lusts thereof.

3. When we reverence highly the Ministers of the Gospel, Galath. 3.4.
thinking nothing too dear for them. Act. 16.

4. When we clear our conscience of all sin, by which our sweet fellowship
with Christ may be hindered: so Zacheus, Luke 19. not being ashamed to confess
our particular sins, and renouncing them unfeignedly.

5. When for Christ's sake we love his poor members, 1. Tim. 1.15.16, 17.
and impart of our worldly goods bountifully to their relief, Luke 19.
Zacheus. 1. Ioh. 2. Ioh. 13. Psalm. 16.2.

6. When we continue in the powerful means of the divine worship. Act. 2.

7. When we consult not with flesh and blood, nor communicate with it, but do
utterly renounce the same in regard of heaven, Act. 9. Galath. 2. Matthew. 8.
etc.

8. And being ravished with the sweetness of the love of Christ, Luke 22.33.
we enlarge our selves to declare the same to our brethren, laboring to bring
them to Christ, by plucking them out of the fire: Ioh. 1.18. Jude 22.

The wisdom and mercy of our God in vouchsauing his children upon their
conversion this lively and ardent affection of holy love is manifold. Reasons
of this first love.


First hereby to scale unto them the truth and assurance of this blessed
Change, by this sensible and sweet change of their affections, that whereas
before they could not relish and brook the power of the word, neither had any
delight in the excellent, but esteemed their persons contemptible and odious,
deemed of their ways as madness or hypocrisy; now finding by the mercy of
God their hearts enflamed to the love of the word, though it utterly confound
all former hopes, and cut off wholly all future expectations for the flesh, and
withal pretending such to be most dear unto them who are hated of the world,
and in regard of outward appearance, are not able to requite our love, and yet
because they are in Christ, are therefore for his sake to be beloved; may we
not hence assuredly conclude unto our souls, that we are translated from
death to life, because we love the brethren; is not this our evidence, that
we are now chosen out of the world, because we love those whom the world
hates? is not this an argument that we are now in Christ, because his love
only constraines us to love his members? and seeing our love unto them is, to
make them like unto us, is it not our testimony, that we are converted unto
Christ? and could we submit to that word which is so rejected of the world, so
irksome to our corruptions, unless the love of Christ did constrain us in
obedience to his Majesty; unless this love of Christ did hereby provoke to
have all our imaginations brought in subjection by the power thereof, that so
we might retain nothing to grieve the blessed Spirit, unless we were
overcome by the power of Christ's love, to receive the stamp of his Spirit, and
furniture of his graces, whereby we might in some measure show our love unto
our Christ, could we possibly receive the word in such affliction, and yet
with such joy in the holy Ghost, unless the love of Christ did ouerflow in
our hearts, to so allow up all those troubles, unless all such troubles were
hereby counteruailed with unspeakable Comforts?

And had we not need of some special means also to preserve us from falling
away, though we have tasted how sweet the Lord Jesus is: yea certainly our old
enemy will now seek by all means to re-enter again, and he wants not his
occasions, even from the estate of our first conversion to attempt the same.

For either now upon our conversion, the world will step in with it glorious
and pleasant baits of prosperity, and great matters to search and blast (if it
be possible the birth in the bud, or if it cannot divert and withdraw us from
the right end of our calling; yet at the least to cool and hinder us in the
pursuit of the true end, and that by pretense of our Christian liberty;
because now we have right in the best, and why may we not use them who more
fitly for these who are better able to use them; especially if we shall be carried
to measure our inward estate by them.

Or if this will not prevail, but that it is the will of our gracious God,
that by manifold tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven: then
Satan will put in on the other side to drown the birth by whole flonds of
tribulations, Reu. 12. stirring up our own house to become our enemies, because
we will not be ruled by them, because our contrary courses do secretly condemn
them, stirring up the great ones to persecute us, as enemies to government,
disquieters of the common peace, yea rather then fail, adding affliction to
affliction, laboring to persuade us, that because we are thus afflicted,
therefore God hates us, and so we are deceived in our estate, we are not the
beloved of God.

Against all these serves this special grace of our first Love, the power
whereof is such, that it proves both an excellent preservative against the
allurements of prosperity; as having so ravished the heart and taken it up to
an higher quest, that the love of the world is esteemed no better then doung in
steed of loving the same our holy fear is procured, lest it may infect us; and
therefore holy wisdom gained to have as little to do with as we may, lest it
do infect us, and so also becomes a gracious remedy against the flames of
affliction; as so selling our hearts in the assurance of Gods love, that all
things shall work together for the best, so preparing us by the love of Christ
to encounter any afflictions, so enabling us for the love of Christ to endure
the greatest troubles, so assuring us, that through Christ Jesus we shall be more
the conquerours over them, so sweetning all our troubles unto us, that we
shall be provoked to love our God the more in that he accounts us worthy to
suffer with his son Jesus, so confirming unto us that those light afflictions
which are but for a moment, shall procure unto us an inestimable weight of
glory in the Heaven.

This is our first love, these are the marks thereof, and by the same it is
graciously preserved, and increased.

Use. To condemn flashes and tastes.

To try our conversion.


1. Whereby all those sudden flashes, and fained and inconstant affections of
hypocrites are rejected: Heb. 6.4. and,

2. We put to the trial, for the soundness of our conversion, if we have
found such a love in our hearts by such evident marks.

3. The world is here condemned, that boasts of the favor of God, when it
has no argument of it conversion by this love: To reprove the worlds deceit.

To comfort the Saints.


nay, esteems it a wonder and madness to be converted.

4. And the Saints are comforted, that seeing their love unto God depends on
his love unchangeable to them. 1. Ioh. 4.1. Therefore as his is unchangeable,
Ioh. 13.1. so shall theirs be; well they may leave it, but they shall never
lose it. And yet it is a great affliction that they leave their love: Although
of a certainty.

Doct. 6.
The Saints may leave their first love, so did David, Peter, Solomon, etc. Psalm.
51. Galat. 2. 1. King 11. The Elect may leave their first love.
And the reasons are,

Because as the fire is slacked by two means, either by withdrawing fuel from
it, or putting water, or ashes thereto:

So there are two means, And by what means.
whereby the love of the Saints does decay in them,

Either when they fail in such means as do nourish the same: or,

Do add such, as may corrupt and cool: Namely, Means of leaving first love

1. Withdrawing and neglecting that should nourish it.


when either they,

1. Neglect the powerful ministry of the word, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.20.
submitting to carnal or lucklesse means.

2. The constant practice of private and public prayer.

3. Or the fellowshippe of the Saints, Hebr. 10.24.25.

4. Or the motions of the Spirit:

5. Or neglect to examine their hearts daily.

6. Or fail in daily repentance.

7. Or neglect to conoert others.

8. Or abate of holy order and discipline which holds up the power of
godliness, as if now we could be laws unto our selves.

Or else do add that which may corrupt:

1. As spiritual pride of Gods graces.

2. Carnal policy, subiecting religion to the same. 2. adding what may cool
and quench it.


3. Prosperity, and setting their hearts thereon through covetousness: Psalm.
119. Luke 18.1. Tim. 6.

4. Abuse of Christian liberty, in the enjoying of pleasures, etc. 1. Cor. 10
1. Cor. 8. and use of things in different.

5. A corrupt and carnal Ministry: 1. Spiritual pride, an occasion to leave
our first love and how.


Concerning spiritual pride, as Conuerts are subject hereto in regard.

1. That now not being as others, yea, as themselves were, yea, being in some
measure made partakers of the divine nature, and advanced to the hope of so
glorious an inheritance; 2. Pet. 1.3.
may they not hereby be entised to justify themselves, and despise their
brethren: to condemn, where they should endeavor to convert? etc. Esaias 5.6.

2. Even their desire to keep themselves in this estate, may be an occasion
to Satan to breed spiritual pride in them. As namely, that being now plucked
out of the common condemnation, and separated from the world and wicked ones,
by their effectual calling; may not the Saints upon pretense to keep
themselves unspotted and undefiled, grow to singularity, and so to separation,
which are very dangerous branches of spiritual pride.

3. The execution also of their callings is subject to much spiritual pride.

Either they may neglect altogether their civil callings as too base, and
derogatorie from the providence of God, and their Christian liberty, which is
a fruit of spiritual pride, Eccl. 1.9.
seeing the Lord has imposed these callings to humble them. Or else they may
so carry themselves in their Christian callings, as by their morositie,
discontent, etc. they shall not obscurely discover much spiritual pride.

4. The special providence of the Almighty, in leading them to perfection,
and disposing of his graces diversely, may also through the subtlety of Satan
be an occasion of much spiritual pride, And that,

1. Either in regard of such chastisements which the Lord exercises their
nature to cleanse the same, in the impatient bearing whereof, pride is
discovered.

2. Or else the prosperity of the wicked, may be an occasion of spiritual
pride, as being provoked by Satan to fret and repine thereat: Psalm. 37.1.
Ierem. 12. Job. 1.

3. Either the falls of others may give occasion of this pride, as provoking
them to the judging of their brethren, and condemning their estates.

4. Or the more eminent graces which the Lord bestows on other, may provoke to
envy and discontent, and so discover pride, yea, may further occasion a
condemnation of themselves, as if because we are short of others, therefore
they are nothing, therefore they may doubt of their estates, or else,

5. This abasing of themselves in comparison of others, may tend to affect
commendation from others, and so bewray this inward Pride.

6. Or they may rest in themselves on the sense of their encreasings, and so
robbing God of his glory, shall discover their pride.

7. Or they may be puffed up with this, that they are low in their own eyes,
can despise the world, can endure afflictions, can reprove sin, etc.

8. Either they may be puffed up with those wonderful deliverances, which the
Lord in his mercy bestows on them in their conduction to glory, 2. Cor. 1.
ver. 9, 10. 2. Cor. 12.7,

9. Or else they may rejoice at the destruction of their enemies, and so be
tainted with spiritual pride: Job 31.

10. Either they may be hasty in expecting the reward, and so for want of
patience, discover spiritual pride: Heb. 10.

11. Or else desire death, in regard of their continual troubles, and so
discover their pride, in not waiting the Lords leisure: Job. 3. Jonas 4.

12. Either they may be crossed in their expectations, and so preferring their
credits before Gods glory, bewray their pride: Jonas 4.1.2.

13. Or else, beyond their hope and expectation, they may be endued with
extraordinary graces, and so are subject to be exalted above measure: 2. Cor.
12.7, 8.

Thus may the Saints be subject to spiritual pride, and so thereby give
occasion of the loss of their first love.

1. The Lord resisting the proud, and bringing low the mountains; emptying the
high minded, and giving grace to the humble: 1. Pet. 5.5.

Or judging others, they are left to judge themselves. Matthew. 25. Ephesians. 4.30.
2. Their pride making them secure, uncharitable, and so not using their
talents, they are for a time taken away.

3. The Spirit hereby being grieved, cease to work in them, nay happily
leaves them to grievous buffetings.

Therefore to prevent this tentation, and overcome the same:

1. Consider we whence we came, and if we did justly strip our selves of
all, if we conferred nothing to the attayning of grace; but rather were our
greatest enemies in wishing the same, shall we now be thankful for the least?
shall we not be humbled in the greatest? what have we which we have not
received?

2. Lay we to heart, how we entertain the graces of God, at the best
unprofitable, generally cold and careless, defiling the work by juncture of
our corruptions.

3. And yea, overthrowing the work by our confidence therein, our rejoicing
and boasting thereof, and may we not fear that this dead Fly will corrupt the
most precious ointment, that if we rob God of his glory, he will deprive us
of the comfort, either we loose our labor for the present, or shall be stripped
of Gods graces, that we may labor no longer. Has not Lunacie been an effect
of this sort of sin in many bountifully endowed? Is not barrenness a common
plague hereof in the ordinary Christian?

4. Observe we the Providence of God in the diverse dispensation of his
blessings, though he give to some more, yet is not the least sufficient if it
be in truth, and is it not then in truth, being lodged by a lowly spirit, is
not the greater measure bestowed on others, ours also for use: is it not
useful for us to provoke to perfection? is it not auailable to humble us in
our lesser measure, to submit our spirits to the spirit of the Prophets, to
send us daily to the tents of the shepherds? is it not a means to nourish
love? does it not submit us to the will of our heavenly Father, to depend more
upon his mercy, to crave his assistance more earnestly, to submit to
afflictions, to hasten after perfection in a better life.

5. Discern we wisely the providence of God in leading us to perfection, and
this also will be a gracious means to prevent spiritual pride; for seeing
the Lord shows his power in weakness, that he may have the glory, seeing he
brings light out of darkness to confound all rejoicing in the flesh, working
out of our very sins a way of increase by humbling us thereby in our selves,
and causing us to deny our own righteousness, and still sending us unto
Christ, to be renewed by his grace; have we any cause to be proud of our
sins, to rejoice in our confusion, can we deny our selves truly if we have
confidence in the flesh? can we be enabled in Christ, unless we be wholly
emptied in our selves? and seeing affliction follows sinners, and our sin
in Gods justice eternal death: If now the Lord shall not only take away the
sting of our Troubles, but make them comfortable pills to purge our Corruption?
is not his power wonderful, to bring light out of darkness? is not his mercy
peerless, that he only may have the glory, shall we be proud of afflictions,
that are the punishments of sin, at least no way likely of themselves to
raise such good unto us.

And say the Lord should deliver us out of greater tribulations, seeing yet the
sin remains with us, may we not fear that though we be made whole, yet a
worse thing may befall us? are not new afflictions daily to be expected; and
is there here any time to behold the sun when it shines?

6. At the best, judge we wisely of our best measure of grace; is it either
any other then what the Saints have gone before us in, who yet notwithstanding,
through pride, Math. 26.
and the effects thereof have taken many a foul fall. Remember we Peter's vain
boasting, and what a plunge it put him to. Consider David's pride in numbering of
his people, and did he not smart deeply for the same, was not his humility the
best means to make his peace again? 2. Sam. 24.15, 16.

Or is it such, but that still we are not perfect, and therefore must we not
forget what is behind, that we may hasten to what is before? Philip. 3.12.13.

7. And alas, what is all we have in comparison of our Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, has he not commanded us to be lowly and meek? has he not done all
for us, that we may boast of nothing? did he not walk before us in great
patience and humility, even humbling himself to the death for our sakes? is
not all our holiness a drop of that Ocean, less then a drop in comparison
thereof? and shall servants ride on horseback, when their master went on
foot? Eccl. 10,
shall we be proud of his graces, when he was so abased in the greatest
measure of his own?

And therefore practice we thus:

1. View we our selves often in the glass of the Law to abase us thoroughly:

2. And see we a far off into the glorious inheritance, How to prevent this
pride.
so far exceeding any worth of our weldoing: are the afflictions of this life
worthy of the glory that shall be revealed? Romans 8.24. who are we that God
should thus advance us?

3. In steed of judging others, let us daily examine our selves, so shall we
be more compassionare of our brethren, considering our selves: Galat. 6.1. so
shall we still think vilelyer of our selves, that so we may be fitter for
mercy from our God.

4. And labor we daily to renew our life in Christ, that we may have still
to rejoice in him, and not in our selves; that his glory may swallow up all
pride of flesh, and his love may still prevail in us, to the further denial
of our selves, that so still we may be found in Christ, not having our own
righteousness; that being daily perfited by his grace, we may be found of him
in peace at his glorious appearance.

5. To this end be we willing to endure afflictions; and maintain we
tenderness of conscience in all our ways.

6. And observe we wisely our inward corruptions, labor we to discern the
deceitfulness of our hearts, and shall we not abhor our selves because we
know not our hearts? shall we not much more be abased, knowing them to be so
abominable, so froward, so rebellious, so touchie and full of horrible
wickedness, such blasphemous thoughts, such filthy motions? if we do not
tremble hereat, is it not because yet the fear of God has not seized upon us,
because yet we do not endeavor to worship God in Spirit and truth, Ioh.
4.24.25.

7. And so daily prepare we our selves to death and judgment: Is here any time
to be puffed up, seeing we must pass through horrors? is it not wisdom to
fight lo, that we may enter in at the straight gate? shall the righteous very
hardly be saved, and shall we not then work out our salvation with fear and
trembling? Phil. 2.12. Math. 7.11.12.

8. And seeing many seek to enter in, and shall not be able, Luke 13.21.
ought we not daily to suspect our selves? shall not he that stands, take
heed lest he fall, shall we be high minded, or not rather ever fear our
selves, least we also be deceived in our standing, and so depryued of our hope.

Lastly. That we be not deceived in the judgment of spitituall pride, and so
be justly challenged therewith.

1. To stand upon assurance of salvation no pride.
Know we that it is not pride and presumption to be assured of our salvation as
the Papists challenge, seeing God has commanded us to make sure our election,
and has given us his word and Spirit to seal it up unto us; but rather pride
to question Gods truth, not to believe his word, not to accept so precious a
jewel.

2. Neither to labor to perfection.
2. It is not spiritual pride to labor to perfection, though we exceed our
selves, and go before others, not shuting our religion to the will and ability
of man; but extending it wisely to the rule of the word, and example of Christ,
seeing God has commanded it, and Christ has begun it, and he will perfect
it; and all things work together for the best unto his Elect; rather it is
pride to dream of perfection, when we will use no means thereto; nay, gross
presumption and impudency in such as seem to condemn us of pride, for
laboring after perfection, seeing they all persuade themselves that they have
already attained it: is it not the common voice, that all is well, we need no
means of building, we hate to be reproved; we have been always of the same
belief, we fear we may be too holy: are not these the ordinary dreams of
general perfection: and therefore, if they have attained this perfection with
such ease, will they fault us that take such pains for it, should they not
rather pity us, and further that we may attain it more easily; or if they
condemn for laboring to perfection: do they not condemn themselves, 3. No
not to confess Christ in the time of trial.
that they never had it, seeing it cannot be had without great labor.

3. Neither is it spiritual pride to make a good profession of the truth, to
confess the Lord before men, to stick to the truth in time of trial: is not
this a denying of our selves to confess the Lord? Is it not an abasing of our
selves that God may have the glory? Will it not be a pride in the flesh to
humble us? Is it not a trial of our soundness that we will endure for Christ?
Is it not a spur to perfection? Rather, it is pride to deny our Master, as if
we were ashamed of him. It is horrible Pride of life, and love of the world
that causes this denial, we dare not confess him because we love the praise
of men more then the praise of God. If we were truly humbled, we would in all
things glorify God. If we set not by our flesh, we would not quitch at any
troubles: Remember what caused Peter to deny his Master, and the Lord gives us
understanding in all things.

4. And is it not an imputation of pride when we are unjustly challenged to
maintain our Innocence. We justify our selves, we will be found in no fault,
we will condemn our Judges of wrongful measure. Is it not the practice of the
world to justify the wicked, and condemn the righteous? And yet it thinks
to do God good service, in censuring the children of God, because they are
contrary to it, in excusing and approving the wicked because they sort with it
ways. Are the best without faults and may they not therefore be condemned. Is
not the best done in hypocrisy? And therefore are they not worthy to be cast
out of the Synagogues? Thus does the world stumble at the infirmities of the
Saints, and because they are faulty in some things, does therefore conclude
that nothing is sound. And ought we then to give way unto these their slanders?
Is not the cause the Lords, that is herein challenged, shall we not harden them
in their suit hereby, and so prevent them from sound repentance, shall we not
betray the peace of our consciences, and cause the Lord to take that from us
which we dare not justify? Indeed though man compared with God cannot be
righteous, though we must daily deny our own righteousness before God, that we
may be found in Christ to be clothed with his righteousness: yet seeing the
Lord has done great things for us? shall we not in thankfulness acknowledge
Gods graces in us? shall we not propose our selves, here by examples to our
brethren: Nay says holy Job God forbid that I should justify you. I will
never take away mine innocence from my self. Job. 27.6.
And is it not humility in us to acknowledge what we have received, had we not
need of lowly spirits, to encounter the malice of the world, because we will
not forsake our Innocence and undergo such afflictions which hence will be
raised against us? Is it not an argument of sound denial of our selves, that
hereby we seek rather the glory of God then our own: that hereby we labor
the confirmation of the weak. And seeing the gifts of grace are such wonders
to the world, such eye-sores, and in so base account therewith, is it not a
gracious abasing of our selves to rejoice in that which is so offensive to the
world, to triumph and boast of such gracious gifts, which are so debased by it?
surely if we shall take our aim aright, it is rather pride in the world to
condemn another man's servant? do they know our hearts? will they generally
censure us hypocrytes because some are such? and because the best are not
without their failing they condemn our profession as if it taught no better?
Blessed be God we esteem not to be judged of them nor of man's judgment; 1
Cor. 44.
he which judges us is the Lord: to him we stand, to him we fall: as for the
world well may it discover it malice and pride, in condemning the generation of
the just, but they must know that the Saints shall judge the earth: if they
condemn us because we fail, then do we much more condemn them that are so
far behind us. And is it not a wonderful condemnation of the world that they
which with one blast condemn us to be too short, that so they may justify
themselves, do also even with the same breath condemn us that we are too
forward, to zealous, that so their deceitful measure may pass more currantly?
do they not herein condemn themselves wherein they censure us? If we have our
faults, why do they not help us forward; and if we have got some ground why
do they then condemn us for increase, seeing they condemn us for failings?
shall we happily diue into the mystery thereof? do they not condemn us for
failing, because they would discourage us to go forward? do they not condemn
us for going forward, because we condemn them for being behind us? do they not
condemn our fa^^ings, because they would hereby take occasion to condemn the
word, as if it occasioned and justified such (...), that so they might harden
their hearts, in the base account of the word, and pu suit of their worldly
courses, and thereby also put us from the most lively means, which should
raise us up again, and so enable us to perfection? And do they not condemn on
the other side, our proceedings in grace, is counterfeitings, madness, etc.
because the wisdom of God is foolishness unto them: they never yet tasted of
the love of Christ, else would they think they could never do him too much
service? And therefore seeing that which is highly esteemed of men is
abomination in the sight of God: as we might have cause to distrst our
condition if it were approved of the world, so have we a found evidence of the
truth of grace, that the world hates us, not for our evils, as they pretend
(for they could let us alone, if our ways did not shame and confound them) but
for the Image of our God renewed in us. And shall not the haters of God be
found liars, shall they not wish to die the death of the righteous, do they not
imitate our ways, though they deny the power of them? they dare not set foot
to foot by us. Who so is wise let him understand these things?

5. To conclude, it is the common censure of the world, that whatsoever iumpes
not with it, stoopes not to it lure, it is pride, vainglory, and whereas
though it may be a mark of an abject and degenerate spirit to be swayed
thereby, yet to be contrary to the fashion thereof, must needs argue great
humility; so to leave our greatest earthly content: so to expose our selves to
a world of troubles.

Thus the world calls light darkness, and darkness light, esteeming that
pride which indeed is true humility.

Shall we now take a further scantling what this spiritual pride may be,
surely I take it, it consists in these things.

First in presuming above that is meet in matter of knowledge. And that when we
pry into those hidden mysteries which either are fit to be known of, or are
apparent only to the divine Nature.

Secondly, when we vanish in idle and curious speculation, tending only to
sense and singularity, and not to edification. 1 Timothy 4.

Thirdly, when we affect knowledge for complement or ornament, and not for
reformation of life.

Secondly, spiritual pride is seen in matter of action, and that either in
respect of our selves, or others.

In regard of our selves we may be overtaken with spiritual pride.

1. If we stand more upon public devotions then private humiliation.

2. If we rest more in the form then in the power of Religion.

3. If we rest in our selves, for well doing; and not on the power of Christ.

4. If we challenge merit for our works; and not rely on the mercy of God.

5. If we arrogate more unto our selves then either is truth or convenient.

6. If imagine that we may be present in this life, and have an overplus of
righteousness for others.

And will not follow our Master, through the fire.

In regard of others we may be tainted with spiritual pride.

1. If we forsake the fellowship, and are not equal with those of the lower
sort, leaving the Church for corruptions therein.

2. If we judge peremptorily of any before the time.

3. If we give not unto each his due, howsoever we are the Lords and depend
only upon him. Mat. 11.

4. If we cannot become all unto all, that so we may win some unto Christ. 1.
Cor. 9.

Thus may we discern some footsteps of spiritual pride, and thus have you
heard, how to master the same.

Secondly, touching policy: by it, 2 Policy, a means of cooling our first
love.
I mean that wisdom which civil government discovers in managing it
affairs, for the adorning and preserving thereof. This how soever it may be an
handmaid to Religion, yet carries some sway in the manner thereof: as,

1. In ordering, the time, and place, Policy, how a friend to Religion.
and outward decency for the divine worship.

2. In compelling the outward man, to the outward form and means of religion.

3. As also, in executing the holy censures of the Church, upon the refractary
and obstinate.

4. And in protecting the innocence and uprightness of the Saints, from the
rage and wrongs of the wicked: and,

5. Punishing the enemies of the Church.

Yet may it also prove an enemy to sincerity, and so be an occasion (if we be
guided thereby) to leave our first love, and that in these respects: As,

First, How an enemy and so a means of leaving our first love.
when it undertakes to judge and authorize the rule of religion: namely the
word of God.

2. When it adioynes to the same, the inventions of man, making it equal with
the word of truth.

3. When it stands more upon the form then the power of godliness.

4. When it excludes the substance of religion for the outward complement
thereof.

The practice of popery in maintaining their religion.
5. When it becomes a means to justify the wicked, and condemn the righteous:
Esaias 5. Mat. 27.

6. When it presumes to limit sincerity to times, persons: and,

7. When it insulteth and lords it over the conscience, by inquisition into the
secrets of the heart, and violent forcing the same, contrary to the
tenderness, and true information thereof.

8. When it fashions the form of religion according to the frame of worldly
government: as Antichrist patched up his anarchy, partly from the Jewish
Synagogue, partly from the form of the heathnish Empire.

Thus may policy be an enemy to Religion, and so a means of the leaving of our
first love.

And thus may we learn to prevent this great mischief.

1. That in matter of religion we consult not with flesh and blood, pinning
neither our judgment nor practice upon the sleeves of men. Gal. 2.

2. That we admit no humane invention, as part of Gods worship. Mat. 15.

3. And considering that the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God,
resolve we to endure the contradictions of the world in the worship of God, and
that, that is sincerest, which the word most condemns.

4. That in all matter of divine worship we be ordered and informed according
to the word, as well for matter as manner agreeable thereunto.

5. That we do all things as in the presence of God out of the good purpose of
our hearts, to be approved of him in the inward man, and not with bodily
service to be seen of men: Mat. 6.

6. That we are more conscionable in private duties in the closet, family,
sanctifiyng the public worship by private preparation, and trying the public
worship by private examination.

7. That we measure not the worship of God, either by any measure we have
already attained: as if we had holiness enough, or by any outward success
thereof in the world.

8. As by the acceptance of men; by prosperity, or by any particular issue.

9. For the present that in the greatest measure of sanctification we stand not
upon the evidence of our own conscience, As to be justified thereby, though we
know nothing by our selves, but still deny our own righteousness, that we may
be found in Christ to be still enabled by his righteousness to have the
testimony of the acceptance of our persons, and so to have the comfort not only
of the acceptance of present service, but to be enabled by Christ to constant
obedience. 1. Cor. 4.4.5. Phil. 3.10.11.12.

10. That in the worship of God we be not misled by carnal ends, as profit,
pleasure, vainglory, etc. But that in all things we purpose the glory of God,
and the salvation of our souls, subordinate thereunto. 1. Cor. 10.31.

11. That in our best measure we acknowledge our selves unprofitable servants,
and so cast our selves upon the mere mercy of God in JESUS CHRIST. Luke 17.10.

Thirdly, And so may also Prosperity cool first love.

1. If either having much, we set our hearts upon it. Prosperity an occasion to
cool our first love and how?
Psalm. 62.10. and so are withdrawn to execute the lusts of our hearts:

2. Or are afraid of afflictions, and decline them by carnal means.

3. Or measure our estate in grace by our prosperity.

4. Or are not willing to be abased, as we do abound.

5. Or grow secure and uncharitable hereby, either despising our poor
brethren, or insulting over them. 1. Pet. 5. much less being enlarged in
compassion of their affliction, Psalm. 30.6.
or open handed to relieve them: or promise constancy of this ticklish estate
unto our selves.

6. Or grow to despise the simplicity of the Gospel, as if it were then but in
it infancy. And so as power is in our hands adorning the worship of God with
vain pomp and outward complements. As if this were an argument of the
increase and perfection of religion, that it is now more glorious and
acceptable to the world

7. Lastly, whereas prosperity usually puffes up with a conceit of goodness, if
now therefore being aloft, when we have brought religion to our lure, as to
countenance our greatness, and sort with our excess, we shall now (as the
manner is) grow to esteem basely of religion, as stooping to our lusts, and so
either neglect the power thereof in our obedience thereunto, or rest in the
form thereof, contenting our selves with carnal and corrupt means: will not
this corrupt the judgment, and so make way for apostasy, will not this cool
our zeal, and dead our hearts, making us confess, indifferent, lukewarm, etc.

And therefore that prosperity may not work these effects in us,

1. Know we, that where God gives more, there he requires more at our hands.

2. That hereby we are prevented of many lets which might hinder our
proceeding, and supplied with many helps to do more good, to abound in
thanksgiuings.

And therefore carry we our selves thus in our outward increasing.

1. Acknowledging that from God we have received it, and therefore shame we to
honor God with our substance and with the first fruits of our increase.

2. Be we always jealous of estates, especially when we most abou^d, that so
being humbled in our outward measure, we may grow in the inward.

3. Employing our Talents now more plentifully to the good of others,
especially to further them to grace, not contenting our selves to give alms
for bodily relief, unless we also tender some good for the soul; enlarging
our selves, where grace is more enlarged: and so learning to be equal with
those of the lower sort, if they be equal with us, or exceed us in the graces
of God.

4. Taking now our opportunity to frequent the assemblies, and cleaving to the
power of the word, still to humble and rouse us up.

5. Being ready to undergo any afflictions, rather then abate one jot of our
sincerity.

6. And still in our greatest liberty, being laws unto our selves, not to
give liberty to the flesh, but rather now to make trial of the conquest of
our lusts, by how much we have power to execute the same, Galat. 5.11.

7. Using the world as though we used it not, 1. Cor. 7.

8. And still as strangers and pilgrims, looking for a City which is above,
and esteeming all as doung in comparison of Christ, and the glory that shall
be revealed, Philip. 3.8.9.10.

See more of the right use of prosperity in the daily Sacrifice, lib. 3. Cap 9.

Fourthly. And so also by abuse of our Christian liberty we may leave our
first love; as hereafter shall more fully be declared; where the remedy hereof
is also proposed.

Lastly. A principal means and occasion to leave our first love to abate our
zeal and conscience of holiness, is a carnal and corrupt ministry.

1. When either the word is delivered with the entising words of man's wisdom.

2. Or else not applied and laid close to the particular condition of the
Church.

3. Or not confirmed by the holy conversation and patient endurings of the
Minister.

4. Or mingled with curious questions, and corrupt doctrines.

5. Or aims only at carnal peace, and making good our present measure, and
does not labor by sound reproves and searchings, to lead along to perfection.

6. Or wants the power of the holy censures of the Church, to bridle the
profane, and cast out the obstinat.

7. Or peruerteth the discipline to worldly ends, to harden the wicked in their
sin, and discourage from perfection.

And can this choose but cool and abate the power of godliness?

1. Will not the people rather stumble at the corrupt examples, then be ordered
by the word.

2. Does not this mixture of humane ornaments, question the perfection of the
word, as if it were not of it self able to convince the conscience: does it
not usually cause the word to rest in the ear, and not sink down to the
heart, and so because it mooues not, therefore to conclude that either it is
not the word of God; or else we have no need of it, because it moves not

Will any discern his saylings, unless it be particularly laid to him,
unless his conscience be convinced therewith, and compelled by the sense of
Gods wrath to forsake his sin. And,

Is it not a dangerous occasion to condemn and reject the power of the word,
which might bring him to repentance, when he can have a Zidkiah to flatter him
in his sin, an Amaziah to promise him a nearer way to Heaven, to wish him not
to be so scrupulous, to pronounce life to him that is dead in his sins.

Especially, if here the practice shall be rather to fill his head with
knowledge, and to puff him up with curious and vain speculations, shall not
this rather prevail, to persuade him that his case is better, then bring him
to the sight of his particular faylings?

And if now for want of skill in dividing the word, or conscience to give each
his portion in due season; either the wicked shall be justified, and the
righteous condemned, or the poor soul shall be scanted of it ordinary food,
shall it not be discouraged on the one side, and pined on the other, for want of
due nourishment?

Lastly. If instead of fish, the poor soul shall be fed with scorpions, with
corrupt doctrine to poison his soul, shall not his spirits faint, and his
soul draw nere unto the murderers?

The remedy therefore herein is,

1, That we daily see our own faylings, and submit our selves to the word, to
be reformed thereby; because the maine reason why we are pestered with such
carnal means, is, because we either not see our want of it, and so is
tendered by the just Lord to harden us further, or else in our carnal wisdom
we heap unto our selves teachers according to our own lusts, that may
further blind our eyes, and harden our hearts.

2. That we, as much as lies in us, still keep our selves to a powerful
ministry, changing our habitations rather then our food, that so by it we may
be still quickened and kept afoote, howsoever we may some times hear others,
yet let us still try the spirits, and take that which is good, mourning for the
hand of God, and here specially resting on the anointing, which shall teach us
all things.

3. Laboring to be laws unto our selves in these lawless times, and what we
cannot attain abroad, to endeavor in our families to be Kings, and Priests,
and Prophets in our general callings, and in our civil to; as far as we may
possibly.

4. Especially, avoid we hypocrisy in divine worship, labor we simplicity
and sincerity of heart in all our actions, that so we may not need such
deceitful cloakes to mask it under, that we may not be given up to be
deceived by them.

5. And keep we our selves close to the communion of Saints, not forsaking the
same for such corruptions therein; or for fear to be defiled and corrupted by
them, least we depriving our selves of the benefits, we may receive by them,
and so be justly best to deceivers, that study to carry disciples after them,
and to make them twofolde more the children of hell then they were before,
Math. 23.11.12.

6. And keep we our selves undefiled and unspotted of the world, avoid we
gross sins and presumptuous wickedness, that so we may not need of such
deceivers to justify by their example, to warrant and smother by unseasonable
tender of mercy. Lastly.

7. Renew we our repentance daily for all known evils, discern we the
deceitfulness of the heart, and inward corruptions thereof, that so we may
be more willing to have it searched by a powerful ministry, that so we may
with more evidence stand before it, as having interest therein; having still
need of the same.

And so our abuse of Christian liberty.
Thus may we leave our first love: by these means may our zeal be cooled and
abated.

And this serves,

Uses. 1. Of trial.
1. For our trial whether ever we had any first love, or no: namely, if we
shall find that by these means we have been cooled therein.

2. Of comfort.
2. And so for our comfort and found direction, that if we ever had this first
love, we shall recover it again: and,

3. Of instruction to recover.
3. That we may know how to recover it, by using aright such means, as being
abused, have been the occasion of this decay: the manner whereof is laid
down hereafter.

And this serves further,

4. Of reproof
1. For reproof of our times, who may be justly charged to have left our first
love, by trying our selves by the former means, whereby this first love is
slaked.

2. And yet lest this general reproof may be perverted to the disgrace of
the power of godliness, and discouragement of such who desire to walk with
God in a daily increase: therefore seeing God has a few names in Sardis, that
endeavor to keep themselves unspotted of the world, and so are not only
signs and wonders in the world, because they will not run with it into the
same excess; but are therefore challenged of reuolting and falling from their
love: for their further establishing and comfort.

Know we, that we may be subject to a false imputation of leaving our first
love, in many respects.

As 1. The Saints may be unjustly charged to have left their first love, and
how.

Math. 22. And that, first in the true discerning use of our Christian
liberty, whereby we submit ourselves to lawful authority.

2. In that we are endowed with outward prosperity.


when upon the just consideration of the nature of our Christian liberty, as
being spiritual, we limit our zeal within the bounds of our callings: so
giving unto God the things that are his, that we deny not also unto Caesar that
which is. This moderation, howsoever with the Anabaptist it be traduced as
lukewarmenesse, and temporizing with the world, to avoid affliction: yet indeed
it is an holy rectifying and ordering of our zeal by humility and wisdom,
that so it may hold out, and be perfited through patience, and that from the
commandment of the Lord our God: Romans 13.

2. We may be falsely charged to have left our first love, when we are
outwardly increased with temporal blessings. As if because prosperity is apt
to cool, by making us secure, and forgetful of our God: therefore it must
needs follow, that wheresoever there is outward abundance, there is inward
leanness and barrenness: Psalm. 106.15. Which imputation is hereby proved to
be most unjust.

1. Both because the Saints of God have increased outwardly, and thriuen
inwardly too, as Abraham, David, etc.

2. The virtue of that promise makes hereunto: that if all things (then surely
outward blessings) shall work together for the good of the elect, Romans 8.29.
especially seeing the Lord gives grace to use these gifts aright.

1. Tim. 4.8.
1. And seeing godliness has the promise of this and the more the Saints
partake of the mercy of God, the more their thankfulness and being knit
seeing the more they and so by 1. John 4.20. Genesis 20.
and approve their love unto God, by as hereby they are more deeply interessed
in the prayers of the Saints, 2. Cor. 1.7.8.
to love that God See the daily sacrifice for the right use of prosperity. 3.
Spiritual wisdom in avoiding of troubles, an occasion to charge us with
loss of first love.
until being full of grace and abounding in every good work, they are made
meet partakers of that glorious inheritance: 1. Colloss. 12. Math. 25. 1. Cor.
15.

And may not out spiritual wisdom in avoiding of unnecessary troubles,
expose us sometimes to this false imputation, that we have left our first love?

1. Yea surely, if either by wise and modest answers we avoid troubles.

2. Or by concealing of that truth, which we are not bound in conscience to
discover, we so escape.

3. Or by avoiding the rage of our enemies, when our time is not yet come, we
are yet freed from troubles by removing from our habitations.

4. Or by changing our habits and features, we so avoid the fury of the
adversary: if by any of these, through the blessing of God we escape such
troubles, which others, for want of this wisdom, are overtaken with;
presently we are charged with want of zeal, we are condemned to be lukewarm,
to have left our first love: and, etc.

5. Especially if we use our goods, as a means to redeem the body from
trouble, oh, this is censured as unlawful; and so avoiding troubles as by
unlawful means, we are challenged of cowardice, want of zeal, corruption,
etc.

An imputation how unjust and uncharitable it is, may appear by these
circumstances:

1. And cleared from this imputation. Faith how, and whom to be given account
of.

1. To the magistrate and minister, and why.


Because we are not bound to give an account of our faith to every private man,
but only to the Magistrate, and whomsoever has lawful authority to require it
at our hands, as the Minister, and such as have charge over us. And that,
because

Hereby they may have comfort in discharge of their duty, that they have not
labored in vain: or,

2. May be humbled in our want of profiting and growing in knowledge, and so
increase their pains and prayers for us.

3. They are in Gods stead, and in refusing to give an account unto them, we
deny and renounce even God himself.

4. They may be provoked hereby to perseverance and maintenance of the truth.

5. Though they must not be Lords over the conscience; to make, or alter the
truth, yet they are witnesses unto the conscience concerning the truth, yea
they are approuers and maintainers thereof, to the comfort of the believer, and
furtherance of his faith. And therefore,

Though we give not account of our faith, either

1. To the scorner, that hereby will take occasion to insult and blaspheme our
God and his sacred truth.

2. Or to the open enemy, that as he has no calling to require, Faith to whom
not to be given account of.
so we have warrant to conceal it, as being bound to preserve life, and not
cast pearls to swine.

3. Or to the ignorant, that desires not information thereby, lest we bear
the air, and run before we are called, expose our profession to contempt, etc.

4. Or to the private Christian, otherwise then in a case of necessity on our
parts, to remove a false imputation; and on his part, to guide him that is in
darkness, and desires our help.

Yet do we not herein betray our faith; but rather wisely maintain the
honor, and preserve the virtue thereof, both in defending the same from the
reproaches of the wicked, as also in reserving the use thereof to it fit season
and occasion, when our God shall be best glorified, our profession justified, and
brethren informed and confirmed thereby. And this is,

1. When we have an especial calling to witness a good profession, as being
inwardly furnished with gifts, and outwardly led forth by the Spirit, to
maintain the cause of Christ Jesus our Savior.

The one of these we shall discern;

How to discern inward sufficiency to make open profession of says in the
time of trouble.
1. By sound knowledge of the cause in particular, which we are to make good by
whatsoever sufferings, so that our judgments are thoroughly informed, and so
our consciences convinced with the truth, do find rest and comfort therein:
Ephesians. 3. Phil. 1.

2. By our ardent love unto that truth which we have apprehended, and hearty
desire, that by any our never so great affliction, it may be glorified in the
hearts of the Saints.

1. Philip. 27.
3 By our especial apprehension of Gods singular mercy toward us, in
accounting us so worthy as to make profession of that truth.

4. Hence we even long and desire to taste of that cup which the profession of
that truth may cost us.

5. Yet so, as that our most ardent desires are subject to contrary buffetings
for fear of our own inability in our selves: and therefore, John 19.


6. Rather desiring the grace of the Spirit so to conduct us in the combat,
that Gods cause may be honored in our constancy therein; then we in any sort
magnified thereby, nay that we shall have in respect of the flesh, any good
issue out of them, howsoever we have many gracious promises, yea likelihoods
for the same.

7. And therefore simply submitting our selves to the will of our gracious
Father, rather to undergo any the most grievous extremity, then the least
disparagement may redound to his glorious truth:

8. Finding in our selves a gracious contentment in our God, arising upon long
experience of the deceitfulness of the world, and faithfulness of our
gracious Father: and,

9. So discerning in our selves a readiness to death, as being prepared thereto
by daily mortification, and experience of our sweet society with our blessed
God.

10. As that withal we especially for this end desire life, even to witness a
good profession, and give glory unto our God, in auouching and sealing up his
eternal truth, with our moment any sufferings. To this end,

11. Finding in our selves an ability of faith, relying rather on Gods promise
to guide us with his counsel, then our own experience, to wade through the
affliction.

Thus may we discern inward sufficiency to make profession of our faith.

And for outward calling, How to discern an outward calling to make public
profession of faith in troubles,
and leading forth by the Spirit thereunto, there are these marks of it:

First, in respect of us: as that,

1. We have already published and declared that truth, and so now much more (it
being called in question) are to justify the same.

2. Are also provoked by our people, that have depended on us, to make good the
same for the establishing of their faith; lest our suppressing or denial, may
shake, and make shipwreck thereof.

3. Are especially called thereto by the Magistrate, who may require a reason
thereof, and forced by the gainsayings of the enemy, to defend the same.

Secondly, in respect of the truth. And that,

1. When it is openly resisted and gainsaid of a perverse generation, not only
privately and indirectly: and when,

2. By the suppressing thereof, the glory of our God is necessarily impeached,
the power of religion undermined, etc. otherwise in matters

Wherein we may be silent.
1. Of difference, which reach not thus far, we may be silent, respecting the
peace of the Church, and dealing rather with our God in prayer for the
reformation of such breaches, and by all private and peaceable means, rather
enduring an inconvenience or covering an infirmity, then by any public
opposition, making a rent and division in the Church of God:

2. As also, if our persons rather in malice are aimed at, then the truth
oppugned, we may avoid the rage, by flying, concealing, etc.

3. At leastwise, though we be not altogether silent: yet so far we may
conceal the truth: 1. As it is not demanded: 2. And may satisfy the honest
purpose of the questioner: 3. Yea, may happily, by stumbling of him, and
turning his edge upon another, so thereby divert his malice from our selves. So
did our Savior put the Pharisees and Sadduces together, and thereby escaped.
So did he for a time go aside, and walked no more openly, neither committed
himself unto them, because he knew what was in them, and his time was not come.

Nay, may we not shape such an answer to our adversary, not only to conceal
part of truth, as Samuel did. 1. Sam. 16. but even to give up the wicked to
their own counsels, that will not obey the truth; bidding them go up and
prosper, as Michaiah did, 2. King. 22. yea in an holy derision, vpbraiding
their carnal confidence: Rejoice oh young man, and take thy fill. Eccl. 11.
And seeing they will not be reclaimed, and hate to be reformed: may not the
prudent keep silence in such evil times? 2. Chron. 2. Amos 5. Or so only
speak, as to leave the incorrigible to their lusts, Prou. 9.
ceasing to rebuke a scorner, that we may wisely avoid his hatred, and so
pronouncing the wrath of God against him, in yielding him up to his own lusts;
as that he may bless his soul in this fearful liberty, and we by this
wisdom may maintain our holy liberty. Oh that we were wise to consider of
these things, and to whom the arm of the Lord shall reveal them. Ose 14.
For the ways of the Lord are righteous, and the just shall walk in them, but
the wicked shall fall therein.

As for the changing of our features and habits for a time, to avoid
unnecessary trouble: herein, I take it, Names and habits whether they may be
changed, and how far. Names not to be changed.
we may thus far be justified. As though

1. Not to change our names. And that because they are of a divine institution,
as well as civil; imposed not only to make distinction of our persons from
others, but to be witnesses, and pledges of our profession, and both memorials
of Gods former mercies toward us, as also evidences of Gods everlasting
covenant with us, to be our protector and preserver for ever. And therefore not
to be denied if we be demanded the same, lest therein we deny our faith:
neither to be changed, because our profession must not be changed. Especially
seeing by denial, or changing, we shall not only not advantage our selves to
the thing we intend: namely, not to be known, seeing by other marks of
proportion, or complexion, we may be bewrayed: but being discovered, we shall
hereby add unto our affliction, not only being justly exempted out of Gods
protection, by rejecting the badge thereof, our names, but exposed also the
rather to the rage of man, as being tainted hereby with dissimulation, etc.

Abraham's name changed and no warrant, because this was done by God, and the
case different. Feature.
Add we hereunto, that not only we have not any president in the Scripture for
the like in this case, but also this changing of names is practiced by such,
as, either in their judgments, or lives, or both, deny the Lord that has
bought them, namely Jesuits, Seminaries, Thieves, Couseners, etc.

For our feature, so far as that may be altered by changing the fashion of
the hair, beard, etc. this being but civil, and differing according to the
diverse guise of each nation, so no painting or disfiguring, abhorring to
nature, or denied by ciuility, and religion, be added; I see not but this
liberty may be used, in a case of necessity, for the preservation of life: so
it stand with our callings, and tend to Gods glory.

Apparel may be changed.
The like we may determine concerning change of apparel, as being a civil
thing, and therefore both subject to a religious end, the preservation of life,
with a good conscience, and also subject to change, according to the diverse
guise of nations, callings, condition, and occasion, of prosperity, or
adversity, keeping our selves within the bounds of our Christian liberty,
becoming all unto all; as to win others, so to preserve our selves for their
good; 1. Phil.
as most desirous to be with Christ, which is the best of all, and yet ready to
follow the Lord in any good occasion, for the preservation of life to benefit
the Saints, and make sure our own election: Provided that we,

1. Keep our selves within the compass of our religious, and civil callings.

Deuteronomy. 22.
2. That we change not that which is usual to the other sex.

3. That we deny not our profession, if this means will not conceal us,
being demanded particularly.

4. That we simply intend, in our preservation, Gods glory, for the benefiting
of others.

A fourth occasion of this false imputation that we have left our first love,
A fourth occasion, is the use of spiritual wisdom in reproving for sin.
is our discretion in reproouing sin, when either we cease to reprove
scorners, although our souls do not cease to weep in secret for them, and
our contrary conversation is a conviction of them, or reprove privately, and
generally: If in public, yet making difference of persons in regard of their
calling and quality of their sin; saving some with fear, and yet raising up
others with the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. etc.

1. Which imputation how unjust it is, may appear by the rules of the holy
Ghost; 1. Tim. 5. 1. Mat. 19. And also.

2. By the practice of the Saints: Nathan. 2. Sam. 12. Paul: Compare the
practice in reproving the Church of Corinth, first Epistle 11. chap. and the
Church of Galat. 3. chap. but above all, the practice of our Savior is
peerless, in his different reproof of the Scribes and Pharisees: Mat. 23.
Luke 11. and of his disciples. Mat. 8. Mat. 26.27.

A fifth occasion of this unjust challenge, A fifth occasion, is outward and
inward afflictions.
that we may loose our first love, is, when the hand of God lying heavily upon
us in some outward emptying, because our estate is decayed outwardly, therefore
the world concludes a decay within: especially, if we surcease in a measure
such duties of charity, wherein before when our cup ouerflowed; we abounded
toward others. 2. Cor. 8.12.13.
Which by this may appear to be most unrighteous; because it is the purpose of
the heart which God respects, which may be no less open to our brother,
though our purse be straightened, yea being scanted of this outward devotion, A
sixth occasion, is the hohonest provision for our families. 1. Tim. 5.
may be more enlarged in spiritual alms, to procure mercy for the soul, and
contentment in all estates: Act, 3.6.

A sixth occasion there is also of this false imputation, when we rectify our
charity by wisdom to our selves, so distributing to others, as that we
provide for our own, lest we be worse then infidels, and so loving our
neighbor, as that we prove not cruel to our selves; so dividing to others,
that we prefer the household of faith, Gal. 6.10. both doing the best good,
and, as we may, continue and hold out longest therein. For which, seeing we
have the warrant of the holy Ghost, as we ought to avoid all appearance of this
evil by moderation, in our procuring and usage of these things: so need we not
fear hereby any cooling of our love. Only make we this use of this unjust
imputation as to suspect our selves inregard of our carnal love, and to try our
abiding in the love of God, by such a love unto our selves, as may provide for
the flesh, to the humbling and mortifying of the same, as may further our
selves and others, to those durable riches, which are at the right hand of our
God for evermore.

A seventh occasion to this unjust challenge, that we have lost our first love,
is the use of our Christian liberty in things indifferent. Act. 10. Romans 14. 1.
Cor. 3. 2. Tim 4.5. Tit. 1.15.
Lastly, we may be falsely charged to have left our first love:

When increasing of knowledge of our right in Iesur Christ, and from him in
these outward things we take liberty for the use of some things, (which before
we refrained, as being either not informed, or not thoroughly resolved
concerning them) either because they are indifferent, and so are all ours in
Christ, and being sanctified by the word and prayer, may be lawfully used,
seeing to the pure all things are pure. Or else being simply good, are now of
conscience to be embraced, and cheerfully practiced, that they may further us
to the chiefest good. Which, how false an imputation it is, seeing the rules of
the Word, and practice of the Saints have made good: 1. Cor. 9. Gal. 2. etc.
Therefore let us fear the cooling of our love, The right use of Christian
liberty in things indifferent. Phil. 1.9.
in the use of this liberty, so that our consciences be persuaded, and practice
warranted by these rules: namely first,

1. That the means of our increase in knowledge be the word of truth, not the
authority of man.

2. That we be able to discern between things that differ: not stumbling as
evil things under the pretense of indifferency; not subiecting things simply
good, to the nature of things indifferent, making the necessary worship of God,
a matter of indifferency, as the preaching of the Gospel, catechizing,
fasting, etc. yea thrusting out the substance of holiness for the complement
thereof. That as we despise not order, so it further true devotion: so we rest
not in the outside and make an idol of bodily service; Romans 14.1. Philip. 9.10.

3. That in this liberty we offend not our Christian brother: neither the
Magistrate, by refusing what he lawfully imposes; nor the weak brother, Rom
13.
by not informing him in the true use of these things; or using what may justly
give occasion, either of doubting in faith, or corruption in life: 1. Cor. 8.
Romans 14.

4. That herein also we not only avoid what may hurt* but in all spiritual
wisdom do that which may further to the best good, even the salvation of the
soul: 1. Cor. 9.

5. And all this to the only praise of our glorious God, through Jesus Christ:
1. Cor. 10.31.

Thus may we be falsely charged to have left our first love, and thus may we
be established against these false imputations.

But say, what others fasten upon me, 8. Whether want of feeling of former
comforts may be a just imputation that we have left our first love.
that I fear in my self, I feel not that joy and inward comfort I sometimes
had: these ouerflowings and extraordinary sweetness, though I faint after
them, and refresh my soul with the meditation thereof, yet I find them not so
abound and run over, as in former times: may I not hereby conjecture, that I
have lost my first love? nay may I not fear that all is lost?

Nay now I find it contrary with me; instead of joy I am overwhelmed with
sorrows, instead of Gods gracious presence, I fear he has forsaken me, I
have no answer in prayer, no comfort in any duty; the sorrows of the deep
do seize upon me, and the jaws of hell do gape upon me.

Surely the Lord give thee wisdom herein, that thou do not wrong thine
own heart, and prejudice the wisdom and mercy of thy God.

Gods providence discovered herein. Job. 13 15.
Genesis 22. Yea though thou have no inward feeling of comfort, yet shall thou
trust in God, even though he kill thee. And this is the victory of thy Heb.
11.1.
and present. And Romans 4.20.
even when he seems to have forsaken And can thou have a better trial of
the power and pureness of thy faith, then above hope to believe under hope in
the promises of thy God, subiecting thy chiefest good unto the glory of thy
God? and through want of present sense being guided to forget what thou have
enjoyed, lest through spiritual pride thou might rest therein, and rob God
of his glory,thou do the rather make haste to that which is before, by the
power of thy faith seeing a far off, yea, laying fast hold on eternal life,
by renewing thy strength in Jesus Christ? And seeing we are now assured of the
truth of our conversion, by this seal of Gods love shed abroad in our hearts,
working in us a fear of his Majesty, and refreshing our hearts with
unspeakable co^forts: have we now such need of the continuance of them, as if
all were lost because we still feel them not: or we could not go forward
without the daily sense thereof? will we still be children, that have need of
dandling and entticing with such toies, or rather are we not growing to be men:
and so to be hardened with trials and strange abasings. And is it not best to be
abased within, that so we may be fitter for any outward emptying. Is it not fit
to be a while disused of these spiritual joys, that so we may most hunger
after everlasting joy, that we more earnestly labor and hasten thereafter. And
may we not give our God just cause to withdraw his countenance from us, by
falling into gross sin, doting on the fading joys of the world, etc. and so
we may be so wisely scanted of perfect joy, as that still we shall be
recompensed with what is fitter for us for the present, with what may further
us to eternal comforts.

Is not the Lord herein wonderful, that by withdrawing sense of present joy,
he both purges us of such evils as may corrupt the same, namely spiritual
pride and security, and also causes us hereby to lay faster hold on Jesus
Christ, who only must perfect the work that is begun in us? And can thou
express thy love in greater measure unto thy God, then to love him then, when
he seems to have forsaken thee? then to follow after him when he seems to run
from thee? does not this advance the sincerity of thy love? does not this
exceedingly approve thy conformity to thy Savior, that as he was contented to
be abased in himself, yea to become of no reputation, that thou may be
accepted; so thou art contented to be emptied, that God may be glorified, thou
can willingly want present comfort, that thy God may have unfeigned worship,
when now, not so much for thine own sake as for his glory, thou do believe
in him, when though he kill thee, yet thou will trust in him? And can thou be
a looser, where the Lord is such a gainer by thee? can thou leave thy love,
when the Lord does purpose to try the soundness of it, when the Lord
provoke thee to live by faith, when by the power of faith he will thus enable
thee to lay hold of eternal life.

Note.
Surely as this is the life of faith to exceed present sense; so this want of
present comfort thus conceived, and applied, shall be both a means to enable
thee to make better use of such joy, when the Lord shall again turn his
countenance upon thee: and in the mean time minister exceeding comfort unto thy
soul that thou do constantly believe in, Resolution herein.
and unfeignedly love the Lord thy God. And therefore doubt not herein of any
decay of thy love unto thy God, because the Lord in his wisdom, for thy
trial, withdrawes the For neither could thou endure at all, in thy sense of
this want of present comfort, if thy God did not secretly uphold thee with
inward and unspeakable consolations. And Note.
as that by faith thou apprehendest that unspeakable joy which thou have not:
which that it does euacuate and empty thee of sense of present comfort, it is
no more marvel, then that the glorious light of the Sun should obscure the
light of a candle, or that a drop should not be discerned being cast into the
main ocean.

Only for thy full satisfaction herein, examine thy heart in this case, by
these rules;

Trial hereof.
First, that thou have not given thy God just occasion to withdraw these
comforts from thee: either.

Occasions of leaving our first love,
1. By not prising them highly, and inualuably:

2. Or by not being throwly humbled with them: else

3. Through beholding of the Sun when it shined thou wast dazzled and puffed up
therewith.

4. And so did not employ them to the best use of thy Master, advancing his
glory, and to the good of thy brother.

5. Either thou did measure the infinite love of thy God by them, and so
did ouerrate these comforts.

6. Or else thou did corrupt them by mingling them with the flesh, and making
them serve the lusts thereof.

7. Either thou conceiuedst basely of the means that conuaied these comforts
unto thee, namely, the ministry of the word, dreaming of revelations and
extraordinary means,

8. Or else being ouerioyed with these comforts, thou becamest presumptuous and
idle, neglecting thy calling which God has appointed to humble thee, and
thereby to fit thee to greater comforts.

Or if thou have given thy gracious God just occasion (as who does not) yet
still thou art ready to justify thy God, and condemn thy self, and therefore
here

Secondly, examine thy judgment and affections in the want of these present
comforts.

1. Yet that thou esteem not thy case desperate for want of them: Neither,

2. Be so contented with this dispensation of thy God, but that it rejoices
thee unfeignedly to remember what thou have felt, and so esteem thy case
formerly better then now.

That thou acknowledge it just with God to strip thee of this measure, yea that
thou have deserved utterly to be forsaken of him.

3. Yea it rejoices thee at the heart to observe the happy end glorious
condition of such excellent ones that are ravished with this love of Christ,
that are thus enflamed with zeal of Gods glory, walk thus cheerfully and
constantly in their holy calling, that so though thou have cause to mourn for
thine own particular, yet withal thou can rejoice for the public joy, and
so interest thy self hereby in the same.

4. Thou do unfeignedly mourn for the want of this gracious aspect, and
withal

5. Do unfeignedly hunger after the return, and increase thereof. And to this
end

6. Do use conscionably, and rejoice in, the means of the preaching of the
Gospel, and effectual prayer for the recovery of the same. Cant. 1. and 5.

7. Yea do labor to confer with the Saints, and holy ones, making trial of
their feelings, and quickening thereby thy dulnes, by provoking their prayers
etc.

8. And waitest patiently the leisure of thy God, for the return of comfort,
as may stand with his glory resolving thy self, that his grace is sufficient
for thee.

Thus if thou art resolved in thy judgment, and art thus established in thy
affections,

The less thou feel the love of thy God, the more is the trial of thy love
toward him; and the more he tries thy love, the more is his love toward thee,
and therefore thy love to him must needs be enlarged: which thou do express
by thy faith, in believing beyond thy feeling, and hereby giving glory unto
God, thou do grow in his favor by the power whereof thou art increased in
his obedience, and so followest hard after the mark, to obtain that crown of
glory.

If now it shall please thy gracious God to humble thee yet more and more, and
so leaving thee yet further to be buffeted by Satan, who will now step in to
take advantage of this thy jealousy, and doubting of the loss of thy first
love, thereby to call in question the truth of thy conversion. And so inferring
that thou have been utterly deceived, that all thy former labour has been in
vain, shall thereby confound all thy present hopes, and so provoke thee to a
kind of despair, as if now it were in vain, or loo late to begin again; and
so hereby procure thee to neglect the true means As being that which rather
will now more condemn thee, and so shall tender thee the use of carnal
remedies, either for the present comfort of thy appalled conscience, or at
least to dampe and lay it asleep in desperate security.

That thou may now resist the devil, and graciously prevent an utter and
irrecouerable downfall, have thou always in readiness these preservatives.

First, that thou never wast, neither can ever be so low brought in this pit
of despair; 1. Remember the sufferings of thy Savior etc.
but that thy blessed Savior tasted far more deeply of this cup for thy
sake, when his soul being heavy unto the death, he cried out in the anguish
and bitterness of his soul, that his God had forsaken him: And seeing he is
such an high Priest, as therefore was subject to our infirmities, that he might
have compassion on us, and sanctify all our greatest infirmities and abasings
unto us, by these his sufferings: seeing he was therefore thus tempted, that
he might succor us in our greatest tentations; and by his agonies has taken
away the sting of our greatest defections, His glorious conquests.
that so they shall not only not hurt us; but also prove gracious
preservatives unto us, to prevent worse evils, seeing he has overcome that
heavy distress, and now triumphs for us in Heaven, and makes continual
intercession for us, in our greatest emptyings; seeing his fullness of joy is
ours already in title and possession; yea, so far in use as may fit us to the
like fullness: therefore, also in Christ are we more then conquerours, and that
we may have experience of our glorious victory in him: therefore it pleases
our good God to leave us thus far to this heavy distress; that so in these our
sufferings, we may be conformable to our Head, and thereby have a testimony,
that we are his true and loving members, who in all our sorrows had his
portion at the full. And so suffering with our Savior in this bitter agony, we
may not only as lively members fulfill in our soul and body, the sufferings
of our Savior: but seeing he is now gone up, and will draw us all after him*
therefore will he also pluck us up unto him, even out of this horrible pit;
and make our triumph and victory to be more glorious, by how much we have
endured with him, and for him greater afflictions.

2. That it is an argument we are truly converted, because Satan chalengeth
the same, and seeks to reenter.
Especially if we consider, that were we not plucked out of Satan's possession,
did not the stronger man now possess us, we should be quiet and nouzelled in
security. That strong man would not now seek to reenter in again; he would
not thus question and labor to confound our blessed hope, if our hope were
only in this life, because now we are trauayling toward Heaven; therefore
does he thus labor either to disappoynt, or at least to interrupt our journey
thither, and at least hereby to make it more uncomfortable and tedious unto us.
And is it not good for to have this experience of his malice, that so we may
still be put to the trial of our sound walking in this way, that we may walk
more humbly and watchfully with our God, 3. That these inward blessings prevent
outward baits of pleasure.
that so we may more heartyly faint and long to be at our journeyes end: that
so we may make more speed to come to the wished haven? Does not our wise and
gracious God turn about this malice of Satan in troubling us within, to
prevent many worse baits and allurements of the world, and the pleasures
thereof, which might happily more distract us outwardly, and hinder our journey
which happily would take more place with us, if we failed with a constant gate
of inward peace and joy. Is not this an undoubted testimony of the soundness
of our conversion. Is not this a gracious means to growth and perseverance? If
now in the next place, it shall be suggested, that though indeed our Savior Christ
endured such bitter agonies, yet he was God, and so by the power of his Deity,
overcame these extremities: as for us, we may not presume upon any such power,
and therefore may not expect the like issue? Consider we that whatsoever power
the Lord Jesus was invested withal, it belongs also unto us, because Christ is
ours; 3. That God is able to deliver us.
and the same power which raised up Jesus from the dead, will also raise us up
out of our lowest abasings. And therefore, howsoever we cannot yet be
persuaded of the particular will of our God in our present recovery: howsoever
this sense of our own unworthiness may for the present stand between the
sight of Gods love and our faith, that we cannot apprehend what we so heartily
desire, yet let the power of our faith break through the fogge of our desert,
and ascend freely to the power of God, persuading our selves that our God is
able to recover us to what we would, or at least to sustain us in our greatest
extremity. And, 1. Proved from the sense of our present decay.


Have we not a lively evidence hereof even from our present condition, whether
we consider our unworthiness, which seeks to blind the eye of our faith, or
respect our present abasing, which intends to sink us in despair: for if we
shall lay to heart what we have deserved, might we not long ago have been
plunged into the sense of these torments which now we fear? might not hell
have devoured utterly, which now does but gape upon us. Nay if we shall
acknowledge unfeignedly our present desert, 2 From the conscience of our desert,
and so what we might have fallen into thereby.
might we not be given up to a deeper measure of distress, then possibly we
could bear? might we not break out into more desperate blasphemings and
horrors, to violence against our selves, then yet by Gods mercy we are left
unto? surely if we consider what Satan would have, we may build upon it; that
as it is our damnation which he aims at, so he cares not how soon he finish
his work, that so he may have more work to increase his own damnation. He
would not be contented to scarre us only with the fear of hell, 4. That God
is ready to deliver us, and willing to help us.
but his desire is to fill up hell with speed, and so to plunge us in
irrecouerable torments. And therefore as we may behold here the power of our
God in bridling Satan, not that he has not his full swing at us, that yet we
are not past hope. So if we shall lay here unto the conscience of our
unworthiness, we may safely conclude, that the love of God appears also in
this his dispensation, not dealing with us according to our deserts; but in
this show of his anger, remembering mercy, and sustayning us by his mighty power
from sinking utterly.

And therefore, that we may hence gather this conclusion, that though we fall,
yet we shall rise again; because the Lord puts under his hand, seeing Satan
will now put hard to us, that the time is past, that our hope is perished from
the earth; therefore learn we thus to expel these fiery darts.

First, consider we that Satan is a lier from the beginning, 5. That the time
is past.
and therefore conclude we that the time is not past. The rather

2. Because we must know that the times and seasons are in the Lord, only to
dispose and determine of; It is council to Satan presumption so to conclude.

3. We have hereby a gracious evidence, that the time is not past: because we
yet live, and are capable of mercy, and the means of mercy are yet tendered
unto us; yea, we have need of Gods mercy, we feel the want of it, and
therefore it belongs unto us: now is the time to be partaker thereof, seeing
our God is an helper in the needful time of trouble: Nay, we heartily desire
it, and neglect no means to obtain the same, seeking this comfort where it
may be found: and therefore they that seek, shall find, and if we knock,
it shall be opened unto us, our will is to be delivered, as it is of God, and
not our selves, so being his gift, he will perfect the same in fulfilling our
desires; it argues him willing to help us, because he gives the will to
desire it, and our will shall be accepted, till he accomplish it.

If yet our gracious God differ to help us; If happily our afflictions
increase, 6 The stronger the temptation, the shorter and more comfortable issne.
even while we seem to be delivered from them. If the more we pray the less
comfort we find, the more we are put off, the more Satan rages, and so
happily prouokes to impatiency or deiects with distrust. Know we for a
certainty, that the more the devil fares the shorter, is his time, the more
we pray and obtain not, the more is obedience tried. That we pray because we
are commanded, the more is our faith tried, that we can wait on our God with
patience, that so patience may bring forth his perfect work. The less comfort
we have for the present, in any service of God, the more is behind in the
acceptable time.

Mean time know we, that it is no mean portion of comfort to hunger after
Gods countenance though yet we have it not; It cannot but yield sound comfort
to the poor soul, to be contented with the will of God, yea though the Lord
should kill him, yet not to cast away his confidence: and yet to obey his will
in hungring after a further measure, that so it may be unto us as we do
believe.

And shall beggars be their own caruers herein, 7 This serves to renew and
try the soundnes of our repentance.
does not God know what is fittest for us. Have we not provoked our God to
deal far more sharply with us, and is it not his mercy that we are not utterly
consumed, are we fit to be comforted, before we are healed? And do not our
great sins require a sharp corrasiue can we be brought to sound repentance,
till we be cast out of our selves, and but by a sentence of death; even by the
terrors of hell must we not have some sense of what we have deserved, that so
we may by repentance avoid the vengeance to come. And may it not now so fall
out that the Lord will not hear our prayers, because we regard iniquity in our
hand, shall Israel prevail, while the excommunicate thing remains. Are we fit
for the comfort and joy of Gods favor so long as our sin stands before him
to grieve his spirit, must he not go unto his place, that we may seek him
diligently?

8 God knows what is fittest for us, and he does what is best for our present
condition to bring us to repentance
And therefore in stead of complaining on God, that he has done us wrong
herein, let us in the name of God complain against our selves. What is it
which he could have done, which he has not done unto us? And what have not we
done against him which we should not do: how have we not in all things
requited him evil for good. And therefore in stead of desiring comfort, let us
search and try our hearts how we have offended our gracious God, let us judge
our selves that we may not be judged of him: so shall we take Satan's office out
of his hands in accusing of our selves, 9 The way to prevent satan's accusation
is to accuse and judge our selves.
so shall we stop his mouth, and confound his malice, and making hereby our way
unto the throne of grace, we shall find the blood of Jesus to speak better
things for us then the blod of Abel, first to wash us thoroughly from our sins:
and then to minister joy and gladness unto our souls.

10 That we are not the greatest sinners.
For our further comfort herein: because when we are about this practice of
judging of our selves, and the Lord by this inward rod draws us thereto: It is
now Satan's policy to keep us in these distractions, and so to suck us in
despair, by perswadings that our case herein is singular! Either none are so
grievous sinners as we are, or else none so deeply plunged in this extremity as
our selves.

Therefore learn we this, to resist his fiery darts.

First, though we should be the greatest of all sinners, yet shall the mercy of
God appear the greater in pardoning so grievous a sinner, more glory shall
redound to his name, in being so incomparably merciful: more love is due from
so great a sinner, more care to please so bountiful a Father.

Secondly, it will not appear that we are greater sinners then any: so long as
we feel our sins and desire to be eased of them: seeing these two things
make up the measure of sin: Who is the greatest sinner
either not to feel sin at all, by reason of hardness of heart, and the
conscience being past seeking, or else to despise and reject the remedy against
sin: though we have some sense thereof either through Pride that we need it
not, or through despair that we think it will do no good.

Thirdly though we are not the greatest sinners in comparison of others: 11 It
is not unprofitable to commence our selves to be the greatest sinner.
yet shall it not be amiss to comence our selves to be such: partly because we
know our own estate best, and not others; and therefore in this respect we may
esteem our case more heinous then any other: and partly because we are more
enflamed with the love of Christ, and so in the abundance of his love do
discern our unworthiness and corruptions more and more in our selves. That so
still we may more deny our selves, and labor to be found in Christ, not having
our own righteousness: ought we not in charity to think others better then
our selves, may we not hope the best of the worst, because the Lord may recover
them: And is there any outwardly so vile, but that our hearts tell us we find
far more fearful corruptions within us, then possibly we can challenge others
by that which appears outwardly: and shall not our charity to others call us
more into our selves, that so we may more narrowly search our own hearts, more
judge our selves, that we may not be judged of the world? shall not the sense
of our vileness make us more compassionate unto others, that so the Lord may
have compassion on us? And can we be too vile in our eyes, that so we may
hunger more earnestly after the mercy of God? And therefore though others may
be greater sinners then we, yet is it wisdom for us to feel our selves to be
the greatest, that so there may be no place left for going further on the
score, that we may now think it sufficient that we have spent the time past,
yea too much that we have already so provoked our God, that we may not differ
our repentance any longer, that the means of God may not be rejected of us. If
we wisely consider the policy of satan herein, howsoever he lay to us that we
are the greatest of all sinners, yet hereby he intends to plunge us deeper in
sin, to drive us to despair, that so we may despise mercy, and so deprive
our selves of the possibility of it. And therefore to admit we were the
greatest sinners, though we feel our selves to be in worse case then any, this
shall be a means to be more emptied in our selves, the more to faint after the
mercy of God in Christ Jesus. Nay is it not satan's policy by persuading us
that we are of all sinners the chief, if he cannot plunge us in despair, yet
to make us secure and careless: We know the worst, and therefore let us make
no bones of sin, let us not trouble our selves with any such reckoning, Gods
mercies are greater, Christ merit is sufficient, do we what we can Gods
purpose can not be altered. Thus does satan play upon the left hand, and on
right, now urging to despair, because never any so bad as we, then provoking
to presumption, be we never so bad. And does not our wise and gracious God
bring light of this darkness, that because we are so vile therefore we not
presume any further. It is the wonder of Gods love to tender grace to so great
sinners, and shall be the glory of our father to give hope to such castawayes: it
shall be our greater comfort that he accepts such forlorn wretches: It shall
be our greater care now to redeem the time, and to labor more abundantly in
more powerful obedience, to testify again our love to so exceeding
bountiful a Savior. And shall we then doubt that our God will again receive
us into favor, who has so freely loved us being his enemies. And therefore,

To this end call to mind former mercies.
Be we wise now to call to mind the days of old, remember we that the favor of
God has formerly shined upon us, meditate we of the wonderful things that the
Lord has done for our souls, and can the Lord forget to be merciful? shall
the covenant of the day and night be broken, Ierem. 33.20.21.22.
that then should not be day and night in their season. Then may the covenant
of the Lord be broken with his servants; surely all the army of Heaven cannot
be numbered, neither the sand of the sea measured, so will the Lord multiply
his mercies unto his children, so will he never fail them, Heb. 12 3. Esaias
49.15.
nor forsake them: though a mother should forget the fruit of her womb, yet
will I not forget thee, says the Lord, though I correct thee in judgment, yet
will I not utterly cast thee off: Ierem. 30.11. says the Lord: for I am God in
the midst of thee, whom I love, I love unto the end: Ioh. 13.2. and therefore
for a while have I forsaken thee, yet in everlasting compassions will I gather
thee again, Esaias 54.8. As I have sworn that the waters of Noah shall no more
go over the earth; so have I sworn, that I will not be angry with thee (for
ever) nor rebuke thee (to thy destruction) yea well may the mountains remove,
and the hills fall down; though heaven and earth shall pass, and the night and
the day shall be no more: neither yet shall the covenant of my peace fall away
says the Lord that has compassion on thee; for my word endures for ever; I
have sworn by my holiness, that I will not fail David.

And what shall then separat thee from the love of God, 13. That all the Saints
have drunk of this cup unto thee.
hall thy greatest sins serve to magnify the love of God unto thee. Oh, but
here Satan does reply that herin thy case is singular, never any so dejected
and cast down as thou art: the saints of God have passed their time more
cheerfully, they have been confident in God, resolut of his favor: they have
been heard of the Lord, in their greatest extremities, they have been delivered
and revived again and therefore, seeing thou remainest still in this agony, and
can find no comfort, has not the Lord forsaken thee, that reiects thy
prayers, that neglects thy tears, seeing thy affliction increased, thou see
no end thereof.

Surely the Lord give us understanding in all things, say our case were such as
never were any like unto us, yet may not the Lord do with us what he will? if
he should cast us into hell, should we not desire his glory above all things?
And if by this our greater abasing, he intends to propose us as ensamples to
them which shall believe in time to come, to make us presidents of his exceeding
mercies; shall not he have the more glory, and we have the more comfort in the
end? And yet for our present comfort herein; is there any tentation here
befallen us, that belongs not unto man? that the Saints of old have not gone
before us in, that every child of God, more or less, must certainly
undergo: nay, have not many of Gods children exceeded us in this temptation;
Job. 3.1.6.2. Psalm 77.
consider we the example of Job and David, of Jeremy and the rest? have not
the venom of Gods arrows drunk up their spirits? have they not broken out
into many bitter complaints and blasphemies, through the extremity of their
pains? have they not even seemed to forsake the Lord, and given over their
interest in his love and goodness, Ier. 20. And has the gracious Lord yet
kept thee from these horrible out-breakings? or may thou happily be left so
far as the worst? yet seeing our gracious God has restored every one of
them; yea, then refreshed them when they have been at the worst, wll he not
also raise thee up again, oh thou of little faith?

14 That God differs our restoring and refreshing in great mercy.
If thou think he will not, because he does it not, consider how long this
rod has lien upon thy betters, and can thou not be content to stay the
Lords leisure as well as they; shall not the Lord recompense thy longer stay
with more durable comforts? Had not David these buffetings even all his life?
have not many of Gods dear children been exercised heerewith to their death,
yea in their death have been hereby stumbling to the world, as if they died
desperately, unto whom their holy life and doctrine was a condemnation, because
they would not be reclaimed thereby; and shall this encourage to profaneness,
and exclude utterly repentance, to see such die so uncomfortably, whose life
was so conformable to the word, so contrary to the world. And therefore though
I cannot here promise thee any time when the Lord will return thy captivity,
and refresh thee with former comfort; yet I dare promise thee that there is a
time of refreshing, Act. 3.19. at hand. And whatsoever thy emptying be now,
yet then thou shall be filled with the fullness of God, and so enjoy at his
right hand pleasures for evermore; yea all thy abasings in this life, shall be
means to further and hasten thee thereunto; if thy afflictions are at the
worst, they will have the sooner end, and thine everlasting joys shall be begun
the sooner; though it should by thy death, yet thou shall be a great gainer by
it. And I dare promise thee further, that the Lord will lay no more upon thee
then thou art able to endure, 2. Cor. 10.13. but will give an issue with the
tentation, that thou may be able to bear it, though the righteous perishes,
and no man regards it, Esaias 57.1.2.
yet they are but taken away from the evils to come.

2. They shall rest in their beds, and sorrow shall fly away. 15. That we must
not judge our selves by our tenrations.


Only here let me adjure thee to stay thy self herein by these rules; First,
that thy God will not esteem of thee, as thou art in thy tentations, they
proceed of Satan's malice, and thine own infirmity; and therefore thy gracious
Father will not impute them unto thee: yea thou strive against them, and
condemnest them, and therefore thy loving Father will not condemn thee for the^.

Secondly, be thou wise to judge of thy better part, thou striuest and can
not prevail, thou prayst, and art not heard: what then, are thy prayers not
heard at all, because thy particular request is not granted? Is not thy person
everlastingly accepted, and so a cup of cold water shall not loose his
reward. In the name of GOD I adjure thee therefore not to judge peremptorily
of thine estate by any present or particular action or success. Is not the
Lord wise to turn thy sins to good, and will he then let thy true endeauours
fall to the ground? though he answers not thy prayer in yielding thy
particular request, yet does he not answer it better, in giving thee still
grace to pray unto him, does he not recompense thee bountifully in teaching
thee patience to wait upon him, and must not patience bring forth the perfect
work? had thou not then need of patience, when thou have done the will of
God. that thou may receive the reward: and what is the reward thou waitest
for? is it only that thy prayers may be granted for the present? may thou
hereby happily have thy reward already, and so to be deprived of that great
recompense of reward. And does not the Lord begin this recompense in answering
thy prayers to what is fit for thee? does he not prepare thee to this
recompense, by enabling thee hereby in patience to possess thy soul, and to
wait the good pleasure of God? does he not hereby teach thee to commit thy
soul in well doing into the hand of thy gracious Creator, that so thou may
work out thy salvation in fear and trembling, and so be made meet for that
glorious inheritance.

To avoid idleness, and walk faithfully in our callings, tenuring our
repentance for former failings.
3. And therefore let my adjure be precious unto thee not to disquiet thy self
for delay of comfort, but rather to take heed of idleness and curiousity
whereunto Satan will now labor to draw thee, as taking advantage of thy
dumpishnes and distraction. Be diligent in Gods fear, so far as thou know
in thy calling God has placed thee in, and judge thy heart soundly for former
sailings, and then I dare assure thee thou shall not want comfort in thy
obedience unto God, if fit for thee for the present, and the more thou fittest
thy self hereby for joy, the sooner it shall return, either in this life, if
thy ways are now constant and more spiritual or else in the life to come
never to fail again. But of this more hereafter, and commenced, and
especially in a treatise (if God will) to be published to this purpose, called
the Cure of a wounded Spirit.

If yet thou art doubtful of thy abiding in love: As thou may decay; so thou
art jealous of thy self herein:

I say unto thee, Prou. 28.13. How to know whether we have left our first love.
By these marks.
Blessed is the man that fears always.

And that thou may be resolved, whether thou art decayed or no, observe for
thy trial these marks thereof: which are apparent symptoms of the leaving our
first love.

1. Know thou that if thou have lost that peace of conscience, whereby thou wast
wont to come with boldness into the presence of thy God, and power out thy soul
in strong cries and tears unto thy God, and so can not pray with that
evidence, as in former times, with that patience and constancy ouercomming thy
God.

2. If thou growest fearful of troubles, and use carnal policy to prevent
them.

3. If thou growest worldly and covetous, withdrawing thy hand from the
necessities of thy brother, and neglecting the occasions of charity, etc.

4. If thou growest negligent in hearing the word, contenting thy self either
with none, or an ineffectual Ministry.

5. If thou can dispense with thy self in vain sports and recreations,
gaming, vain talk, etc. whereof heretofore thou made some conscience,
wasting thy time and wit in them.

6. If thou can frame to all companies, and temporize with each, as presuming
upon thy protection, from thy Christian calling. Ephesians. 5.1.

7. If thou art afraid of death, and neglectest the daily and constant
examination of thy ways, and holy duties in private, unto thy God.

8. If thou can so joy in these earthly things, as either not to feel a
loathsomeness in them, or not to use them as sparks to increase the fire of
thy spiritual joy.

9. If thou measurest the happiness of the life to come, by that sense which
for the present thou have thereof; thou do not live by faith, and therefore
thou have left thy first love.

Symptoms that follow the leuuing of our first love.
And for thy comfort observe herein an especial mercy of thy God, that there
will follow this loss of love:

1. Inward trouble of conscience, which will give thee no rest, till thou have
resolved thy case with God, and recovered: Psalm 6.38. etc.

2. Some outward sensible stripe, either in thy goods, person, children, to
open thine eyes the better, and bring thee to repentance, Job. 33.15.16.

3. Now the world will not fail to flatter thee, and as it were to own thee,
that so thou may suspect thy self the rather.

4. And yet that thou may discern the worlds love, thou shall not want some
mock and reproach, to cast the dirt of thy decay in thy face, that so thou
may be ashamed and confounded in this decay.

5. And happily thou may be given up to some gross sin, the more to
discredit thee with the world, that so thou may not be corrupted with the
flattery thereof.

And therefore thus thou may recover out of this decay:

How to recover first love.
1. Rest upon the promises of thy God, that thou shall recover, out of any
effects that proceed from thence, and thy latter end shall be better then the
beginning.

2. Meditate on the former experience of the joy of the spirit, that so thou
may press the Lord from his wonted mercies. Psalm. 77. 1. Sam, 17.

3. Consider the means that the Lord used to plant this joy and love in thy
heart, and by the same know, that he will renew this work, and therefore at no
hand be driven from the means. Cant. 1. Cant. 4.5.

4. Resolve that thy former estate was better then now: Ose 2.8.9. and
therefore return to thy first love again, that so the Lord may renew and
increase thy love unto him.

5. Acquaint the experienced soldier with this thy estate, that so he may be a
means to quicken thee again.

6. Give we not over our pursuit of these comforts: spare we no pains: think
we all time too little, impose we extraordinary afflictions, as fasting, and so
groaning under the burden, and detesting our selves: give we the Lord no rest,
till he has returned to his rest, and recovered our decaies. Cant. 5.

To this end use we the means before set down to recover from Apostasy.

And be we comforted, that we shall not altogether loose our labor, though we
have left this love.

How far we shall recover.

1. Either we shall recover what we have lost in the same kind, namely the
like joy and extraordinary comforts of thee

2. Or else if we have it not in this fruit of our love, yet we shall be sure
to recover in another kind, which shall be more profitable to further us to
happiness.

3. As the less we feel this love, the more we shall express our care to use
all holy means whereby we may recover it again:

4. The more we shall learn to live by faith in the expectation of a greater
measure,

5. The more compassionate thou shall be to others that are cast down by this
affliction, and so labor more earnestly to raise them up again; that so
together with them, thou may be perfected. Heb. 11. vlt. that so maintaining
the fellowship here on earth, thou may be better fitted to the communion in
Heaven.

6. And as thou have hereby greater occasion to advance the mercy of thy God in
not leaving thee altogether, in sustaining thee so wonderfully, and save thee
in this thy decay, so shall thou be provoked hereby to trust more perfectly thy
God, though he should abase thee further, not only in leaving thee to this
inward trial of a languishing spirit, and eclipse of joy, but, as the manner
of Gods providence is to prepare us by these inward afflictions to outward
troubles, for the further trial of our faith, and increase of his power and
mercy in our protection and deliverance. If now it shall please our glorious
God to lead us through fire and water, to pronounce a sentence of death against
us, that we may not trust in ourselves, but in the living God which raises
from the dead. That so after we have suffered a little, we might be fitted to
eternal joys: that so in our outward sufferings our inward consolations may
abound? Is not here a gracious recompense of our former loss? Is not here a
marvelous means so to restore the same? that God may have the glory, that we
by this means may be prepared unto glory? shall not our love be now gloriously
tried in suffering for the will of God? shall it not be much more testified in
enduring so great afflictions? shall it not hereby be purged of all self-love
and carnal respects, that so it may be fitted to fullness of joy? shall not
our patience here be tried, in waiting the good pleasure of our God, that so we
may be perfect, and entire, wanting nothing. 1. Iam. 3.4.

Surely howsoever it fall, yet let it comfort us that the holy Ghost does not
here challenge the Church of Ephesus that it has lost all her love, or that it
has absolutely lost her first love, but only that it has left it for a time,
and therefore it may recover again. And it has but left her first love, not
altogether is bereft of all love: well may it leave it first love, but it shall
not loose all.

And for our further satisfaction, take we these rules that we are soundly in
some measure recovered, and have regained true joy and comfort of our salvation.

1. If our joy being restored, we are also more enabled in the practice of
godliness, growing more in grace, and in obedience to the word.

2. If our joy be daily accompanied with sorrow for sin, and fear of our
selves that we may fall again, with more sobriety in the use of worldly
comforts, and more hunger after durable joys.

3. If we are more weaned from the love of the world, and take less joy in
the flesh, and earthly things: knowing no man after the flesh.

4. If we can rejoice in the further increase of the Church, and flourishing
estate thereof abroad, though it go not so well with our own particular.

5. And can also weep with them that languish abroad, though our own cup run
over.

6. Still submitting our self to the cross.

7. And triumphing in our greatest tribulations.

8. If our joy be powerful, to raise us daily from sin, that so renewing our
repentance it may be increased.

9. If it be sincere and pure, not so much resting in our selves, as that God
may have the glory, even comforting our selves that for Gods sake principally
we have done his will, and not for any by respects unto our selves.

And this is the last lesson to be observed out of this Scripture: Namely;

That the Saints shall not loose utterly, Doct. 7. The Saints shall not loose
their first love Reason 1. Ose. 2.19. Esa. 49. Esa. 27.
though they may leave for a time their first love: Luke 11. Psalm. 92. 2, Tim.
4.19.

1. Because the Lord has promised to continue his love toward them: Ioh. 13.
1. Ioh. 17. Ierem. 31.33. etc.

2. Their afflictions do tend to their perseverance, as purging out their
sins; Esaias 1.25.

3. Their sins turn to their continuance in grace: 1. as making them afraid
of sin: 2. and more expert to conquer the same: 3. more fit for grace, by
making them more humble and hungry after it: 4. more merciful to others, and
therefore moving the Lord to have more compassion on them.

4. His hand is continually put under us in our greatest failings, and
therefore we shall rise again: Psalm. 37.24.

5. His end in leaving us for a time, is to make us take faster hold on him,
to make us more deny our selves, that we may be found in Jesus Christ in heaven.

6. Their Savior lives, and triumphs, to make them more then conquerours:
Romans 8.36.37. Ioh. 12.32. and to draw up all after him.

7. The spirit and word shall abide in them, to hold them on in grace: Ioh. 15.

And therefore,

1. This condemns the blasphemy of Papists, who teach, that the Saints may
fall finally, and therein do impeach the power and faithfulness of God; or
that they may so loose their faith for the present, that it must be repaired
anew again.

2. It checketh the insolency of the wicked, that rejoices at the falls of the
Saints, and insult over them, seeing that though they fall, they shall rise
again: Mic. 7.9. Psalm. 41.11.

3. As also it reprooueth the infidelity of the Saints, who doubt of their
recovery, and wrong the faithfulness of God, and power of their faith, grieve
the blessed Spirit, and deny in a sort the merit of Christ.

4. Here is first instruction for the world, to justify Gods faithfulness,
seeing he does not forsake for ever: Lam. 3.24.25.

5. Here the Saints are lessoned, as to fear their falls, and not to sin
upon presumption of recovery; so not to distrust of Gods mercy in their
greatest failings, seeing the Lord is faithful, and they shall recover, though
not so sensible a measure as before they had yet sufficient to fit the^ to the
enjoying of that happiness that the Lord Jesus has purchased for them. And
therefore let them use the holy means that they may recover, namely such as
are before laid down, in the recovery out of apostasy, and regaining first
love, and hold out to the end. And if happily with all our labor we shall yet
be to seek of what we would have: For the further satisfying and comforting of
the conscience, observe we thdse two things.

First, that it is one thing to leave our first love, and to be lukewarm
neither hot nor cold.

We may not have such feeling of Gods love as formerly we had, Difference
between leaving first love and lukewarmnesse.
and this may provoke us to more industry to recover again, as the joy of Gods
spirit may be an occasion by reason of spiritual pride, that we may remit of
our zeal, and yet we may still be resolute in judgment: what should be done
though happily in our practice we may abate of what we have formrly done. 1.
Wheretas luke-warmnesse arises from a perverse and deceived judgment, that
we are rich, we want nothing, and therefore what need we now be so earnest and
painful, why may we nor abate of our labors, and sit down and take our ease,
may we not be wholly, etc. 2. Hereupon it is another note of luke-warmnesse to
grow indifferent to any side; to be between both, ready to entertain what may
stand with the stream, and so to run with the tide as occasion serves. But
it is not so with such as have simply lost their first love, they are never
quiet till they have recovered again: they cannot endure any other love to
share in their affections, oh it rejoices them to consider what a true and
faithful love they had; they are now more fond of him, when he absents
himself at every stone must be rolled, all corners searched, to find him
again. Cant. 5. and they give not over till they have recovered him.

2. That there is great odds between leaving our first love, and loosing it
altogether: we may leave, in regard of a former measure, and yet hold a true
gain which shall clear us of luke-warmnesse: and though we leave a measure,
yet we loose not all, because the least remaining will be a means to recover
again, if not so much as we have had, yet so much as shall serve both to keep
from final apostasy, and further to eternal glory.

6 And therefore here is matter of exceeding consolation to the elect of God,
not to trust their own unbelieving hearts, much less Satan's lies; but to rest
on the faithfulness of God, not judging themselves by what they are in their
decay, but by what they were in their first love: and so pressing the Lord in
his faithfulness, and their former experience, they shall be vpheld in their
greatest failings, by a secret power, and in good time the Lord will appear
unto them to bring forth their righteousness as the light, and their weldoing
as the noone day, that so their latter end may be better then their beginning.

Glory be to the Lord Jesus.

