THE VVELSPRING of witty Conceits: CONTAINING, A Method, as well to speak,
as to endight (aptly and eloquently of sundry Matters: as (also) see great
variety of pithy Sentences, virtuous sayings, and right Moral Instructions:
No less pleasant to be read, then profitable to be practiced, either, in
familiar speech, or by writing, in Epistles and Letters.

Out of Italian, by W. Phist. Student.

Wisdom, is like a thing fallen into the water, which no man can find,
except it be serched to the bottom. AT LONDON, Printed by Richard Jones:
dwelling at the Sign of the Rose and the Crown, near Holburne Bridge. 1584.

To the Right worshipful, Master David Jews, Doctor of the Civil Laws, one
of the Masters of her Majesty's Court of Requests, high Judge of the
Admiraltie, and Master of S. Katherins: R. I. wishes continual health both
of body and soul, increase of godly worship in this world, and eternal
felicity in the Heavens, through Jesus CHRIST.
RIght worshipful Sir, it may seem a point of great presumption in me, to
commend into your protection, this small book, being another man's labor,
and yet (notwithstanding) the first fruits of my poor Press, since the
coming in of this new year: but these few things, being duly considered,
may (I trust) deliver me from the blemish and suspect thereof: One thing is, the
absence of the Author, who (not only) delivered the Copye hereof unto me to be
printed, but (also) committed the dedication of it to be disposed (by me) to
my best liking: Another cause is, the witty conveighances, handled in the
woike: but (principally) the hearty affection and duetifull good will, that I
bear to your worship, with an (assured) hope, that you will accept it in as
good part as my faithful meaning is toward you: For (sometimes) a pretty
Conceight, well contryued, may content a wise man's mind, no less the^ a grave
and great book: Yea, (otherwhiles) a seely Subiet, applied to good purpose, is
not (only) acceptable, but (also) commendable: A little flower, if it have a
good scent, is worthy smelling: a little stone, if it be precious, and
(therwithall) well set, deserves to be worn: a poor Pamphlet, if it tend to
some good effect, may (happily) at some convenient time, be worth the reading: I
beseech you (therefore) give a poor Welwiller leave to present your worship
with this small Collection out of diverse notable works, to the help and
profit of many English Readers: and not any thing hurtful to the learned, in
other la^guages: and (although) the Phrase do not (fully) satisfy the Curious,
it will (I hope) sufficiently delight and content the wise: for the further
contents whereof, I refer your worship to the Authors Epistle, and then to
the work it self: most humbly praying your worship to receive the same into
your protection and Patronage, as an infallible token of my good will toward
you, and to continue the just defender thereof, against the scornful crewe of
MOMVS, his backbytinge Mates, to whom, all good things, are (continually) in
contempt: And I shall (daily) pray unto God, for your worship, long to
continue in health, to the pleasure of Almighty God, and the great desire of
all your Welwillers.

Your Worships, most humble, to command, Richard Jones.

The Authors Preface.
THe Conceits or Devices of our minds expressed, either with Pen, or by
Speaking, do tend to this end, namely, that they may Persuade: And to
Persuade, is as much, as that one man should make others believe, that our
talk, or the thing whereof we reason, is either True or False, and our
Reasonings or Speeches, be either public, or private: Public, are those that
are used universally to ye people, and also, to those that govern ye people:
Private, be such as are used with Private Persons, which be assembled
together, and they be of three sorts: for they be either of Things present,
of Things passed, or of Things to come: Present, do comprehend Virtues,
which are praised, or on the contrary side Vices, which be blamed: Things
past, as Manslaughters, Rapines, and all the offenses and debates, which are
brought into judgment, in which consist to Accuse and Defend: Things to
come, are those, in which we have need: first, of Counsel, afterward, of
Election, or making choice. The first kind, is called Demonstratiue: the
second, Judicial: the third, Deliberatiue: all which (notwithstanding) that
they do chiefly respect public persons, yet they be ordinarily used toward
private persons, the which do many times give counsel amongst themselves, do
Accuse, do Praise and Reprove. Other sorts of reasoning, as to Rejoice, to
Bewail, to Complain, and all others be reduced under some of the three
aforenamed kinds, and have for their end to Persuade, the which is sometimes
brought to pass with reasons either Probable or Apparent, and sometimes with
moving men's affections: which things be principally given by nature, and
afterward ruled and fitted out with that wonderful order, which is showed us
by Aristotle, and by other, both ancient and late excellent Writers, who
through their rule and order observed, have been the occasion that the fruits
of many Authors shall live for ever: out of whom I have taken some part of
these Conceits or Devices, which I have understood to be most learned, most
meet, and proper to apply unto all kinds and manners of Speaking, or of
Writing familiarly, and those that were most brief, deeming that in the
quality, and not in the Quantity of words, and of Sense, does consist the
Elegancie of a commendable Speech, or Writing: and that heerby we may, in what
Reasoning soever it be, or in writing, receive light of Invention, and with
such Eloquence adorn our matter, as shall contain fit Numbers, comely
Figures, Metaphores, Similitudes, Sentences, Authority, and Examples: as
those do show forth that I have here placed in order: and to make serve with
few, and with many, according, as shall be most convenient, either in Writing,
or in Speaking: and because one discourse of Words, and one Letter or Epistle
shall not have occasion to weaue together all these common places, it shall be
expedient that they be of judgment, and have regard how to apply every
Sentence in his due place, according as Time and ye Matter does require, they
which shall go about to imitate any thing herein. Those Sentences, which I have
gathered out of Ancient and famous Authors, their names (for the most part)
are coted in the Margent: others which have been partly the invention of late
Writers and partly mine own I have not coted. Thus wishing for a frenedly
acceptaunce, in recompense of my free goodwill, I cease.

Farewell in the Lord.
The Wel-spring of Witty Conceights, etc.
The Manner to express by word or writing, how we rejoice, and what it is.
TO rejoice, is a conceipte of the mind, that grows of the pleasure which we
receive of those things that delight us: like (as contrariewise) to be sorry,
grows of the displeasur that grieueth us. And this Co^ceipt expressed in
words, or in writting, is divided into three special sorts, which be, the
goods of the Mind, of the Body, and of Fortune: under which, are comprehended
many kinds of rejoicing with others, of their consolations, and of proper and
common words, apt unto all sorts of persuading.

OF HEALTH.
1THat you (most dear Friend M.N.) be in good health, I am as glad as I trust
you understand that I am.

2 I needed none other consolation in this your absence (for to moderate my
grief) then the aduertisseme^t that you give me of your good welfare.

3. You, who know how careful I am of your he alth, I would that ye would
more often let me understand of the same then you do, except that ye go about
by this mean to make me (more ferue^tly) wish therefore, and so that
hereafter, I (as of a thing more desired) should esteem it double worthy the
acceptaunce, as in very deed at this time it has happened with me.

4 With small pains, of body ye might ere this time have relieved the
troublesome estate of my mind, being brought to pass through your abse^ce:
which (my comfort) is the news that you have sent me, concerning your good
estate, in which ye are, and of the which I continually do rejoice.

5 If you know, how that my cogitations were busied about nothing else, after
your departure, but in desiring news from you, ye should understand, that my
consolation has grown through the news that I have received of your health.

Of health recovered.
1 FOrasmuch (as I hear no news of you) I verily hope yt your malady is well
ceased, in which opinion I do so delight me, that I feel my self half
discharged of that grief, whereinto your disease had cast me.

2 Consider you how greatly my consolation has been in hearing the recovery
of your health, for that I feeling my self at that time in very ill case to
receive such, wished for news, did not (only) recover my former estate
again, but me thought ye strength (which I had lost) returned or came to me
again, double.

3 You, who do know, that your commodities and consolations, be my
commodities and consolations, may also be assured, that I could receive no
better (nor more desired news) then that which I received of your health.

4 That you have recovered the health (that ye had lost) has been a thing
(as joyful unto me) as the recovery of things being most precious, (when
they were esteemed to be utterly lost) was wont to be gotten again.

Of Dignity obtained.
1 I Am glad (not only) because of your present degree, but also for those
things that may be looked for (of you) hereafter. Cic. Lib. 2. Epist. Fa.


2 I do incessantly joy that your honest desire is reduced to such an end,
as your piety toward yours and the love toward your Country, have
deserved: And that the reputation, the which your singular love and famous
virtues have gotten to your consolation, has made a ladder unto G. Marcellus,
to the same degree. Cic Lib. 15. Epist. 10.


3 In this (my joy) I have embraced you with thinkyng on you, and have kissed
your Epistle, and do as heartly rejoice as of mine own matter. Lib. 3. Epist.
11


4 What delight I have taken, in understanding of our Brutus, his matter: you
may more imagine the^ I can write. Lib. 16. Epist. 12.


5 If you know how yt I have never ceased for any man in ye world, in being
disirous to do you service: you may also be assured yt none shall now stay me in
feeling the gladness of the dignity, yt ye have gotten.

6 Albeit, that there was never any doubt but ye you were likely to obtain
all manner, honors and dignities, that were wont to be granted to men of
wisdom and great valor: yet, understanding that you were made a Bishop, I
received thereby such great consolation, as was wont to be received of good
news, being not looked for, nor thought on aforetime.

7 I joy in all respects (for your sake) like as good Servant do, in wishing
for the contentation and advancement of their masters: Moreover, for such
circumstances and accidents as have made this your felicity appear unto the
world greater, for that it is most evident that the same was appoincted
aforehande, by the most prudent Judgment of our Lord God, to be received of
you to your great praise and commendations, commonly desired of all men.

8 I will not make any long discourse of words in giving an account to your
most reverend lordship, of the consolation that I received through your
promotio^ to the dignity of an Archbishop: since it is so, yt with your
profou^d judgment, you have always been able to pearce into the most secret
part of my mind.

Of dignity promised.
1 I Have taken a wonderful contentation of the infallible hope, which you
give me of your consolation, and not that I ca^ yet the more easily obtain the
same (for this were the end of an Epicure) but because yt your greatness is
of if self dear unto me. Cic. Lib. 3. Epist. 9.


2 Concerning the preferment that your Lord and Master has promised you, I do
also with you hold my self greatly benefited: I did never make account that it
would happen otherwise to your estate, as soon as I saw that you were placed in
ye house of so good, so gentle and loving a Lord: to whom do me infynite
commendations: I have just cause to rejoice with you of your good fortune: and
that, so much the more, inasmuch as in these our miserable times, it is no
small thing to attain to an honorable life. God grant you your hearts desire.

3 I joy with you, that as it were in your first youth with the gate of Virtue,
and with the company of fortune, you have been called to such a place, as
many of ripe years do with long study seek to obtain.

4 If Fortune do not stay in the course of your honors, but that it reach
to the full scope, and to the prefixed height of your merits, I also hope to
see this my gladness grow to such perfection, and your virtue to such a degree,
that neither the one nor the other of us shall need desire any more.

Of Goods gotten.
1 YOu are glad of your good fortune, and do sail in the quiet Sea of your
delights without being set on ground, or cast on rocks, so God conserve you
without any contrary wind for ever.

2 For, the provision or furniture that you received of the King: I do most
humbly thank his Majesty, and do account my self greatly bound to him
therefore.

3 You, who understand how much I love you, may also consider with your most
wise judgment of the satisfying or well liking that I receive of any your
gain and consolation.

4 I rejoice greatly (rather for the wisdom that you have showed in getting of
goods) the^ for yt goods themselves, forasmuch as to be wise, deserves more
praise then to be rich: And for your richesse also I do receive (as great
consolation) as is requisite to my love toward your virtue and goodness.

Of Inheritance gotten.
IN this notable pleasure and consolation, which I have received concerning the
inheritance that you have gotten: I should also wish for some excellent mean
to make my self merry with you, if I did not understand how that I have to
deal with you, yt is with a most prudent man, who with the quicknes of his
wit, sees eue^ into the midst of men's hearts.

2 You, which know how greatly I was wont to rejoice at any of your commodity,
how little soever it was, may also with ye prudence of your rare judgment,
consider what gladness I have received in my mind for those riches whereof ye
so worthily remain Heir.

3 Concerning ye goods which ye inherit I am very glad, but not so that I have
not kept a place for such joy (as I trust) I shall more greatly teele, by that
more plentiful profit and greater honor, in which hereafter your personage is
like to succeed.

4 Albeit, that my rejoicing with you for the inheritance granted you freely,
and for the gifts of fortune can not be without injury of the opinion which I
have of your mind, the which is of it self so great and high that it
dispiseth all worldly dignities: yet, notwithstanding as a man, and that most
affectionate to you, I can not cease rejoicing.

Of friendship gotten.
1 THis must needs be esteemed a great matter, yt in us whom fortune has
co^ioined familiarity, it does also lyncke together with friendship. Cic. Lib.
2. Epist. f. 2.


2 The mildnes and manners of M. N. (are such) that like as I am very glad that
you be entered into freendship with him, so I am sorry that all men have not
knowledge of him, that they all might reverence him as a most worthy personage.

3 This seems to me (only) to be the true fruit of ma^s life, that is to
say: the co^solatio^ which is gotten out of virtuous freendship, as I know
(assuredly) that your friendship with M.N. shall be.

4 I hope, that through the virtue and goodues of such a Gentleman, you shall
live ever more and more to your contentation and liking, and be comforted by
his practice, and that I shall every day rejoice more plentifully, as now I
do joy for that I have been the cause of your friendship with him.

Of a Reconciliation.
1 THe pleasure that I have taken of your reconcyling (with such a Friend) is
none otherwise to be compared, the^ with the displeasur and grief that were
felt in the controversy that arose betwixt you and him: but, I assured my
self that this debate could not last long, as being grounded upon ye
malicious persuasion of others: And this renewing of amity, I doubt not, but
that it shall wax every day more steadfast then other, through ye virtues of
each of you.

2 I seele such pleasure of your reconciliation and agreement, made with M. N.
that although I was grieved when as you were angry one with another: I know
not now, whether I would that this said altercation should have happened or
not: for, if it had not been so, I should not have tasted this present
consolation, the which is infinite.

3 Concerning your reconcyling again with M. N. I judge yt who so is not your
Enemy, must needs be very glad thereof, because that on him shall depend the
rest and quiet estate (not only of your self) but also of all your house.

4 Inasmuch, as you are reconciled again with your euemies at such time as ye
might have put the^ to the foil, you have therewith also vanquished that evil
opinion, which naughty disposed people had of you, and have established that
good opinion, that good men have of your valiance and excellency of mind,
whereof I do joy without ceasing.

Of being in a good opinion.
1 I Delighte my self with this (that I suppose) you do now vouchsafe to love
me more then you did before, and that you keep me still in memory, whereas
can abide nothing but that which is excellent (except it be I) whom you do
freely permit a place there.

2 Abeit, that my conscience does assure and testify with me what account ye
make of me, yet, I am greatly delighted, for that every body may now esteem
of me to be such a one, as I am by you, that is, by a most commendable man,
reported to be.

3 Like, as I do not greatly regard or set to heart, though ungracious and
infamous people speak ill of me, so I feel great pleasure and joy when
laudable persons do commend me.

4 Those Lords and noble men (with whom I do very often talk) have a most
honorable opinion of your goodness and virtue, of which thing I rejoice with all
my heart.

5 I, having seen the honorable mention (which you make of me in the letters
that you did send unto R.) have not only been pleased with the letters, but
have thought also the better of my self for haueing obtained such a man's
commendation.

Of return from a Voyage.
1 WHen as your Secretary came to meet you, I would with these my dutyfull
commendations, the which I delivered unto him by mouth, have borne him Company
also with these few lines, the which shall serve rather to salute you, and to
rejoice with you of your return, then for to set forth in any wise, the
relation of my faithful heart, which thing the said Secretary shall do for
me.

2 Because that the absence of a Friend both commonly monly make his presence
more dear: therefore, I am not able sufficiently to express the consolation
that I have received of your return.

2 Look, how much more long and dangerous your voyage has been, so much
great er is the affection wherewith I do joy (together with you) for your happy
return.

4 I am glad for your sake (not only of your happy and ready return out of so
long a voyage, but also, for your quick dispatch that ye had in your public
affairs: for, in the one is comprehended your great diligence: in the other is
seen your prudence and dexterity in dwing your business.

Of return out of Exile.
1 WHat greater thing can (naturally) be given unto men, then to every man to
have Children of his own? they are unto me so acceptable, both for the tender
love I bear them, and for the excellency of their wit, that they be more dear
then lise it self: yet, I never felt so great consolation in having gotten
the^, as I do now prove in that, they be restored to me agaime. Cr. pro Rose.


2 Nothing was ever more delectable unto any, then my Brother was unto me: yet,
I tasted not so mutch the sweetness thereof whilst that I enjoyed him, as I
did afterward when I was bereft of him: But after that, ye had restored him
again to me, and me unto him: it is an incredible thing to speak of the
joy, which I thereof conceived in my mind.

3 You be returned again so glorious from your exile, and with so great praise
in the opinions of all me^, that ye do (as it were) cause me also to wish my
self driven out of the country, seeing that the hope of returning thither
again, in such sort as you are returned, would counterpaise all the
displeasure and grief that I could feel.

4 You have been in exile, as it were in a furnace, (inasmuch) as your virtue
is thereby become bright and shining, is purged from the rust of other men's
Envy, which kept the same secret.

5 Like, as I have been one of those whom yo^^ unjust exile did most highly
displease, so now I (...) not stay for any body of the world to joy in my
se^^ for your honorable return into the Country.

Of Letters received.
1 I I have received from you two Letters, of which, both the one and the
other were very welcome, like as a thing so courteous and, wished for in it
selle, must needs be.

2 With my exceeding delight I have received the letter that you did write
lastly unto me, by which I most joyfully understood of your prosperous estate.

3 If I seem unto you too importunate, for that I put you in mind every hour
yt ye should writeften unto me, impute the fault thereof to the love which I
bear you, the which being seasoned with the beauty of your wisdom, do cause
that I feel an exceeding pleasure in reading your letters.

4 I have received a most great consolation by your letters, as being such, as
are full of much sweetness and pleasure, and passing the ordinary forte, the
which thing has caused me greatly to long for them.

Of Matrimony.
Of so houest and honorable a Matrimony, I will not at this time use any
circumstaunce of dutyfull congratulations, inasmutch, as concerning my mind
and good will toward you (I hope) ye be out of doubt: yet, I will this
lay, that I joy as greatly at your profit as I do of mine own.

2 You may be assured that God (who disposes and orders all these things
before yt they come to pass) has not without some great mystery compassed and
per fected this marriage, whereof I do (greatly) rejoice.

3 I judge this most holy knot of wedlock, so necessary for men, that without
it (I dare avouch) we cannot obtain perfect felicity amongst men.

4 Since that I am not able to express the pleasure which I feel of this
your matrimony, whereby ye may promise unto your self a quiet estate of all
the remnaunt of your life, I therefore will refer it to the discretion of
your judgment, and to that true knowledge which ye have of my love toward you.

5 I am like to be the last, that shall joy together with your excellency of
his most fortunate marriage, as being one of his simplest Servant: but I shall
hereby reap this commodity more the^ others have done, that (at the least)
the long tarying of duty may cause (this my rejoicing) to come in some
consideration and regard: whereas, it should aforetyme have been obscured
through the congratulations of many.

Of Childbirth.
1 NOtwithstanding, that every forte of your selicitie appears unto me
strange, for that through your manyfold merits, I have always persuaded my
self under your personage to obtain by ye goodness of the Lord God all manner
good fortune, yet, I have by this new Childbirth received an infinite
consolation.

2 The happy childbirth of your good bedfellow, has made us sufficient
demonstration, what care ye Lord God keeps of your pleasures and consolations.

3 I joy for this Childbirth not so much with you, as with all the residue of
the world, seeing, that the young child that is borne, being begotten by you,
must of necessity be also partaker of yt great brightness and excellency of
virtues, yt is in you: even so, I pray God that the beams thereof may spread
abroad, and endure continually all that time of life, the which does yet
remain unto your succession.

4 Concerning this most fortunate Childbirth of your consorte or yokefellowe, I
am greatly replete with gladness (not only with you) but together with the
whole City also, as hoping hereby to see your years prolonged in the person
of this Child: and so, that (both) I and they shall afterward see (in long
continuance) the fruit that we shall receive through your virtue and valor.

To wish or pray for:
and (first) for Health.
I Pray God, that he may make M.N. well again: Do not you suffer him any more
(to ye great damage of his friends and your great displeasure) to go thither
again.

2 I Would to God that with part of the light of mine own eyes, I might
satiffye the want of your sight, which thing, I would as gladdely perform
(if it were possible) as I do now speak it.

3 I pray God that he will vouchsafe to conserve ye health of your body, but
so as it may not be without the health of your mind, because, that like as
some venomous herb (being of it self deadly) when it is mingled with other
things, does make a wholesome drink, so the health of the body without the
health of the mind, is hurtful, whereas being aco^panied therewith, it is very
great help.

4 I will pray incessantly unto God, that he would maintain still (both) the
health of your body, and also of your mind: forasmuch, as nothing is worse,
then a sound body to dwell with a sick mind and Spirit.

5 I pray God, that he will conserve the health and noble estate of your
lordship, which thing shall be unto me a sufficient recompense for that
faithful service which I have done, and desire to do thereto.

6 I would, it might so happen, that God would grant a speedy end to your
maladies and troubles, and that he would vouchsafe me a beginning of beatitude
and rest, the which consists, and is utterly reposed in your health and
welfare.

7 Our Lord God, keep and save the person of your excellency or highness
with a greater felicity and prosperity, then it wishes.

To pray for Dignity.
1 OH that it might please God, that that singular virtue and goodness (which
glistereth in you) may not stay long without the company of some degree and
dignity, convenient thereto.

2 I pray God, that like, as he gave you the shoulders of Hercules (that is)
power to bear, any great and heavy weight: So, he also will illuminate the
heart of this our Prince, to honor you with any good dignity, which may be
comformable to the valor of your merits.

2 That you be in so grent hope and credit in that Court, as I understand by
all people there, that ye be, I do not much marvel thereat, inasmuch (as this)
and a greater matter have always been promised me, by your virtues: So, I
pray, God bring to pass that those houours and dignities, which aforetyme
appeared to my sight in your person, may be so worthy of you as ye be of them.

3 Might it so come to pass (that the thing I have pronosticated of your
Person) might be brought to such an end as Caesar did foretell of his own
personage: who going one morning to ye Co^menceme^ts, promised his Mother yt he
would not return home again to his howl before he was created Bishop, (which
thing) he happyly performed.

For Prosperity.
1 WOuld to God, the divine providence might so work yt the same selicitie
might abide with your lordship, might be stretched forth to yours, might be
so continued in your succession through an entyre accomplishing of that hope
which the world has conceived by the glorious fortune, and by the merit of
your virtues, and by your goodness, unto whom I am particulary most bound.

2 I recommende me most duriefully unto your lordeship, the which (for the
reverence that I bear thereto) I wish that I may feel and know to be most
fortunate.

3 I pray God, that he would deliver you from all trauail and grief, so as with
a more quiet mind ye may live free unto your self, and to your friends, amongst
which I may account my self one of the dearest.

4 With the good grace of your lordship, I recommend me infinite times, praying
for the prosperous estate thereof for ever to abide.

5 I have been exceeding glad to understand of your good prosperity, in which
our lord God increase you, and exalte you daily more and more, the which your
advancement can not be in so great a happiness, but I shall still desire it
to be greater.

6 I must now entreat you, that ye would be content to keep always in your
mind the great love that I bear you, and will always bear unto you: Our Lord
God, make you the most joyful woman yt lives: like, as he has made you the
most courteous.

7 I pray God, that he will give you such prosperity as ye desire (that I
also knowing your consolation) may thereby continue most comforted, if it be
possible that a mind (being brought into such an estate as mine is) may be
capable of consolation.

8 Since, that our fortune does on every side begin to shine again, God be
thanked, and also by all means pleased, because he brings it so to pass,
rather through his goodness and mercy, then for our desert.

To pray for a benefit, or good turn.
I Pray for time which may bring occation, whereby (through the effects of
experience) ye may understand what is the greatness of love yt I bear you.

2 God grant that I may within short space promise my self some other effect
that may be better for your commodity.

3 I pray God, that he will one day inspire your Master, to give you some
condign recompense for your long and diligent service.

4 God so bring to pass, that one day your ill fortune may cease, and that my
simple authority may increase, to the end that I may by way of a recompense,
and with some benefit, show you the gratefulnes of my mind, and how heartily
your virtues be well liked of me.

For Liberty.
I Pray God, that he will grant us grace to be able to wade out of this
servitude, to the end that we may not always stand to the discretion of such
as would us no good.

2 Whenever any mention is made of the ancient liberties, that this City
had in time passed, it shameth it to think of ye servitude wherein it is now.

3 Verily, the bridle of servitude, is a hard and grievous thing to any man,
but it is most grievous to the^ that be issued out of the chaste belly of
liberty, the which (I trust) God will one day restore us again, although not
for our deserts, yet because he will not suffer any more such tyranny upon
earth.

4 God be the restorer again of that liberty (which wicked men of a malicious
purpose) have taken from you after the manner of wild beasts, for a tyrant is
none other but a cruel wild beast, still being thirsty after man's blood.

For Peace.
1 Our lord God grant, that of this agreement may follow an universal quiet,
by which we be co^discended to peace, not without damage.

2 I pray God, that he will grant you the treasure of peace, so as hereafter
ye may live to the pleasure of God, joy of your self, your friends and
kinssolke, in perpetual richesse, the which does consist in the tranquillity
of the mind, soul, and Spirit.

3 Forasmuch, as there is nothing more convenient to a good man, nor more
worthy to a good Citizen, the^ to live peaceably: I pray God, that he will
lighten your mind with these cyuill passions, and that he will pla^t in you
such peace and rest, as every one desires, and as sewe do know how to procure.

4 I, as one disirous of your ease (can not cease) but still wish you peace,
and do pray unto God that he will grant you it speedely.

Not to be in an evil Opinion,
1 I know very well your true virtue, and I would to God that like as ye be
without fault, so that ye were also without suspicion.

2 I pray God, that this report, which is come unto mine ears, of you, do not
bring you into some sinister opinion, with others.

3 God grant, that for the bounty and faithfulness of this man, he be not
contrary wise dealt withal by them that with ye venim of their malice do not
cease to go about for to defile and peruerte the mind of that noble Lord, to
make him believe that white is black, and black white.

How to aduertice, and what it is.
TO advertise, is a word that has diverse significatio^s, for, it is taken, to
mark, that is, to take heed, to harken, to wait for, to observe, and to
regard: it is taken also for to apply, endeavor, and to have care of some
thing: like as is in this place of conceits, it is applied: the which do serve
to exhort for a comformitie: and is used in the deliberatiue and judicial
kind.

To advertise one to work warely.
1THe manner of your doing that matter, seems doubtful unto us (forasmuch) as
men will iugde thereof, according to the end. Cic Lib. 1. Epist 7.


2 If that the matter might be taken in hand and proceed, according to the
form as we would have it, every body will call you wise and valyant: but if it
be hindered hereafter by any evil fortune, they will all then say, that ye
were a vain and ambitious person.

3 I tell you, that men will give their judgment, not so much of the counsel
and deliberation that you shall have taken in the matter, as of the end that
thereto shall happen.

4 We ought not always to walk one and the self same way, but to tend our
course to one and the same end.

5 I pray God, that he will be merciful and assistyng to your counsels, but
much rather that he will make you to shun offenses, and cause you to have
care of your quietness, and of the good estate of your successors. Cic Lib. 4.
Epist. 18.


6 Since that I have showed you my judgment herein, it stands now in your
power to resolve your self in what sort shall be most agreeing with your
wisdom. Ye be come hither free and vnbownde, but beware that you depart not
hence sclaues and bondmen. Lib. 4. Epist. 10


7 It is time for us to open our eyes, for, when soever this people can find
occasion they will neither be withdrawn by conscience, nor yet, by shame from
doing us hurt, and they will laugh, us openly to scorn.

8 I wish, that in this matter ye would deal circu^spectly, and that you would
not pretermit or let pass any duty that might make you correspondent to the
expectation which this noble man has conceived of your intelligence,
dexterity, and integrity, doing you to wit, yt the same is a great
furtherau^ce to you, if in this (your beginning) he make a good report of you.
Pro R. G^.


9 You ought to be very wary in dealing herein, according to the importance
of the matter, concerning which (I am sure) that ye shall well discern, how,
besides the virtuous commendatio^s that you may thereby obtain, the estate of
my wealth, and honor does thereon leave and depend.

10 I would that above all aduertiseme^ts (which I have given you to work, and
do your business warily) ye should take heed (especially) that you do not
fall headlong into any such sin, by which your lust might overcome reason,
and yt you take heed of all such evil affections as might pervert your
understanding.

11 Take heed that you deal so cunningly, in the matter, that (as much) as is
possible the reputation of my deeds may live, the which be yours.

12 I put you in remembrance (not only to deal warily) but also preuily in
this matter, for it was wont to be said, that no attempt can go so well
forward, but the enemy thinks that it will be dashed.

13 Antisthenes, being demanded in what sort a man ought to seek profit of
the common wealth: Like, as at a fire (said he) which a man sitting too near,
does scortch himself, and being to far of, sustaineth cold.

14 Like as to a good governor of a ship it appertains yt he know how to
deal in the variablenes of winds and wether, so it behooves a man to frame
himself somewhat, according to the disposition of his Superiors.

To beware of Errors.
IT is the part of a wise man to foresee all matters that may happen unto him,
and to bear such hap as shall betyde him patiently, but it is a matter of a
far worthier counsel to provide for such things as may come to pass.

2 You must in this respect ponder with your self, not what I say, but what I
ought and might say. Pro Aulo Cluentio.


3 The young men of great wit be always more ready to be holden within orderly
bounds, then to be pricked forward with the course of glory. Pro. M. Celi


4 Those that be entered out of the deep Sea into Harborow and arrived at
haven, were wont to teach others diligently which go that way, how they must
take heed of the tempests, of the ordering of their course, of the dangerous
places, inasmuch as by nature we are exhorted to favor those that enter into
the same dangers, that we have escaped. Pro Luc. Murena.


5 Consider with your self, that if you know ye be not fit, by your own only
industry to accomplish this business, it is better for you to procure aid
therein, which may supply in your imbecillitie, then that ye should fall into
any errors.

6 If in these your affairs ye deal so as your reason be not intermidled
with lusts or affections, I doubt not of any error to remain on your behalf.

7 Ponder with your self, how yt it is not best for you to innouate or devise
and begin any new thing besides my commission, for to prove a new way, whereas
the gain is doubtefull, and the danger certain, is the part of an unwise
man.

8 I would not be slack to advertise you, although I want knowledge how to
declare the abundance of dutyfulnes and service that I owe you.

9 Way with your self (that to satisfy) the affections of a particular man, is
no hinderaunce to your universal commodity and honor.

Of Traitorous dealings.
I Thought good to send unto you in have by this Calfurnius my very familiar
Friend, to the intent that you might assuredly understand, that I do most
heartily regard your life and honor. Cic. ad Attic.


2 Not only your enemy, but also some that protested themselves to be your
friends, taking occasion by this your necessity, have sought means to bring
you out of the peoples favor, and have so dealt, that what through the falsehood
of the judges and the malice of many others, they have perverted truth, and
not regarded your just cause. Lib. 1. Epist. 3


3 You may not be seduced in any wise by such fellows, nor yet give credit
to those counsels that they will give you. Lib. 2. Epist. 7.


4 If thou abydest at this stay, that thou desire to live more free, thou
ought not withstanding consider, that (as our chance may be) none of us
all does live in any great safety. Lib. 4. Epi. 9.


5 If thou should give a knife into the hand of a young child, or into the
hand of one that is fainte, or feeble through age: He (such a one with the
force (...)) can do no great hurt to any man: yet, if such (...) one should
thrust it to the naked body of any man, though he were a very strong man, it
might wound him: Even so, those whom thou accountest most simple, and of least
valor, if adversity should happen to leave thee unarmed and in misery, might
be able to put thee to grief. Pro P. Sestio.


6 A heinous thing is it for a man, to betraye such a one as reposeth
confidence in him, and look how mutch greater estate a man is, so mutch less
safety can he put confydence in any: yet, it is requisite that he put more
confidence: for (to be betrayed) is a thing yt more often happens to Kings
and Princes, then to others.

7 All things that be delectable, are not profitable, for often times that
which is hurtful, is pleasant and sweet, and that which is commodious, is
bitter.

8 Take heed above all things of betrayinges, forsomutch as the hatred, is
universal, which is even at your elbowes end, causes that ye can not
promise unto your self any particular safety.

9 I do put you in mind, that ye look round about you, and consider that with
all due diligente speed: you (being compassed about hardly with Friends) may
find means to arise out of this trouble.

01 Be wary and circumspect to have an eye unto betraying, for he that has
cause to fear every man, cannot, neither ought he assure himself of any.

11 Go to, take heed, as well as ye can how you repose confidence in any
body, before that you have had trial of him, least that in time to come, ye
repent your rash putting of great confydence in him, who deserved but little.

12 Like as the Wolf is a beast like unto a dog, even so a Flatterer, an
Adulterer, and a Parasite, is like unto a Friend: Take you diligent heed
therefore, that (in steed of trusty dogs) ye admit not wolfs to the keeping of
your flock. Epiteti,


Of Enemitie.
1 TAke as good heed as ye can that you foster not enemitie near your self:
for, as long as men shall live upon earth, so long will Enemies remain.

2 Ye must be very circumspect, least in the increasing of your dignity, your
enemies do also increase: for (undoubtedly) look how fast the one grows, so
likewise will the others (either publicly or privately) increase.

3 Thou ought three manner of ways to consider the quality of him, with
whom thou art co^uersant (that is) whither he be thy superior, thine
inferior, or thine equal: If he be thy Superior, thou must give him hearing
and sooth him: If he be thine Inferior, thou must persuade him with modesty
and mildnes: and if he be thine equal, thou must accord with him. So doing,
thou shall not fall into enemitie and hatred. Epiteti.


4 Like (as he) that is delighted in bodyly exercise, must beware of wrinches
and disordered falls, so he that glories of his good fortune, must shun envy.
Aristone.


5 All diligence must be applied, that you may be more reverenced then feared,
for that, the one comes of gravity, and the other, of inhumanitie.

6 Even, as he, that walks in the Sunshine, is accompanied with a shadow,
so he that walks through ye path of glory, has for a co^panio^ enemitie
Aristone.


Not to fall in an evil Opinion.
1 IT is a great alluring to make us fall unto wickedness, when as we
understand or think that we shall not be punished therefore. Cic. Pro. Mi^.


2 It is one thing to talk wisely, another thing to live thereafter: one thing
to be accounted wise, another, to be so indeed.

3 Anger, Pride, Cruelty, Wrath, and madness be the companions of victory: but
enemies be companions of co^querours, whom many valiant Captains have lustely
vanquished.

4 Do your self no injury, concerning the opinion (that is had of you): that
is, that ye be such a one as can not be vanquished, nor yet be deceived: the
one of which shall be yours, and the gift of fortune, the other shall only be
attributed to your wisdom.

5 Take this advertisement as of a Friend, and such a one as loves you, and
wishes you well, not of your enemy and one that means you harm: for (if
ye do otherwise) you shall give me occasion to think that flattery is dearer
to you, then friendship.

6 You (remember how that for to have the love of all men universally, and the
favor of some noblemen particularly) we have no surer way, then to think how
we may deserve the same.

7 There is nothing so hurtful as an ill report, for, after that, thou shall
have beguiled any one preuily with false perswasio^s, hatred awaketh and
hurts the innocent. Cleanthus.


8 Suspicions do breed more ill reports, then do the deeds themselves.
Menander.


9 Ye must beware of evil reports, allhough they be false, for most me^ (being
not capable of the truth) do follow opinions. Isocratee.


10 It behooves you to be very careful (rather to leave behind you a good
report) then great store of richesse to your Children, forasmutrh, as the one
is mortal, the other, everlasting: and with good fame, men may get richesse:
but with riches, a good name can never be obtained.

11 Many men (have often times received greater hurt by reproach) then by
Enemies.

Not to speak amiss.
1 I Would, that thou should principallye have this advertisement imprinted
in thy mind, that thou keep thy self esteemed for such a one as thou art, so
that like as thou art far from the filthiness of such acts, so thou might
be far from spaking thereof. Cic pro M. Cessio.


2 Like, as it is filthy and vncumly to write of such things as be not
convenient, even so) it is indecent to name the same. Pro R. co^^do.


3 A sword in a mad man's hand, may well be compared to an eloquent man without
wisdom: for as to the one, it should be commodious if he were without ye
sword, eue^ so, should it be to him, that he were without eloquence.

4 Take heed, that ye be circumspect in talk, considering that ouermutch
rashness in speaking, was wont to bring many hurtes.

5 If thou shall speak amiss of our matter, thou shall not speak against us,
but against Justice, against the nature of the matter, contrary to the manner
of men, and the opinion of the whole world.

6 Be circumspect and warye in talking, rather applying too much modesty,
then too much liberty: for, there is no man of such a crooked disposition,
which can not be pleased with the humanity of words.

7 In opening the mouth of a wise man, like as in opening the temple of his
soul, do appear what heavenly riches, and virtues be resident in him.
Socrates.


8 If thou covet to have diligent ear given to thy words, learn then to
speak well, and after that thou have learned so to do, labor to make thy
deeds correspondent to thy words: in so doing, thou shall get thee a good
report. Epit.


9 Simonides, was wont to say, that he never repented him to have holde^ his
peace: but oftentimes for that he had spoken. Cleanthus.


10 Xenocrates, assigning all parts of the day unto some business, appointed
also unto silence the due part: in ye which time he discussed privately with him
self, what manner he ought to keep in speaking.

11 Hippias said, that it was greatly amiss, that he had not determined a
punishment for Slanderers, as well, as he had for Thieves: Inasmuch, as they
steal away freendship, the which exceeds all richesse of the world. Plutar.


12 Albeit, ye backbyting has power to confirm (in some respect) the opinion
of them that give ear thereto: yet in process of time there is nothing more
feeble then it. Demost.


To be circumspect in writing.
1 IT is no point of true wisdom to see those things that be present, but to
judge of things to come a long time after. Terut. in adelph.


2 As your Letters were read with diligence, so they have also been well
understood, I think that (according to your meaning) there is no sentence in
it but I understand it well. I shall be very glad if you continue in your
wonted wariness of writing for a good consideration.

3 Way diligently with your self, that no man can be so circumspect, who in
this dangerous time of most wicked men can escape, but that some (which bear
a friendly countenance) will espy out and bewraye other men's secrets, for to
put them out of favor with this and that noble man, by dishonest means.

4 Above all things (I for your benefit) do put you in mind that ye be
circumspecte in writing, and also that you so deal as I may have no cause to
repent me for your sake, of a thing that I never committed.

5 Be wary, and as circumspect in writing as ye can, for (at this present)
the commodity of printing has caused, that men are grown to such a pass, as
many will comment, upon, not (only) writings, and words, but also the
thoughts and secrets of a man's mind.

To know himself.
1 HE, that will make profession to govern a multitude, it behooves him
principally to know how to govern himself. Cic f. 3.


2 If he will live after such a sort as good me^ do live, it is necessary that
he learn, and forget many things, and each of these things is very difficult
for one of his age to do. Pro P. Quentio.


3 It was wont to be said, that he is most wise, who has reason to discern
what is expedient for to do, and the wisest next unto him is he that is
obedient to such a man of most perfect wisdom. Pro Aulo Cluentio.


4 Phillip, King of Macedonie, after that he had obtained many victories
against the Graecians, because he might not wax proud therefore, ordained,
that every day after in the morning, he should be put in mind by a certain
young Child, that he was but a man. Elianus.


5 Heraclitus, being a young man, and exceeding wise, said, that he knew
noching. Aristotle.


6 Demonicus, being demanded, when he began to be a Philosopher: at such time
(said he) as I begone to know my self. Biantes.


7 A certain man demanding of Chilo, what was the hardest thing of all?
answered, to know himself.

8 Amongst the most principal things that are given men in this life, is,
that the greatest of them, (being given over to folly) some may apply
themselves to be wise. Aristo.


10 Diogenes said, that those men, which talk well and do not know themselves,
be like such Harpes, as have a pleasant sound, and are senseless. Demost.


To administer Justice,
1 MEn do become worse, when they have more liberty of sinning. He that
governs must not be mindful of enemitie passed, for, it is not seemly for a
governor, to be his own reue^ger neither must he be moved at the instance of
others, but by mere justice. Ter. in. Heant.


2 The judges ought to put on ye very same minds, that the Lawgiuers did use in
making the laws. Lisias.


3 Byon said, that it behooves a good Judge to depart from his office with
more gain of good fame, then of richesse. Solon.


4 Agatho said, that a Prince must imprinte three things in his memory: The
first is, that he bears, rule over men: secondly, that he rule according to
law: and thirdly, that his Empire is not his own, neither lasts ever. Iseus.


5 Those that punish the wicked, do defend the good from injuries.

6 In Thebe, the Images of Judges were made without hands, and with their eyes
deep in their heads, because that justice ought not be corrupted with
gifts, or regard the countenance of men. Plutarch.


7 A man that is in authority, ought excel other men, not only in
government, and commanding, but also in worthiness and prudence. Eusebius.


To conserve and maintain health.
1 FOr the love of God, set no worldly thing at this time more to heart, then
yt conseruatio^ of health, where with ye may the better do service to the
King, pleasure your self and your friends.

2 The change that is wrought by little and little, is an occasion that nature is
pliable according to the mutatio^ of time, which thing is showed us by God
himself, who does not cause us to pass on a sudden from winter to Summer,
setting between them the spring time and Autumn. Xenophon.


3 Your eating, drinking, sleeping, etc. would be temperat for the
conservation of health.

4 That order of living which many do use, serves to nothing else, but to
weaken the body, and to make it subject to every danger, and to make feeble the
understanding. Plutar.


5 The health of the body requires neither superaboundance, nor want of any
food or pleasures. Pithagoras.


6 Socrates warned Men, that they should take of such meats as do provoke the^
to eat when they have no hunger, and to drink when they have no thirst.
Socrates.


7 Gorgias, being demanded what manner diet of meats he had observed that he
had lived so long? He answered, that he never did eat any thing for pleasure
or wantonness.

How to blame, and what it is.
TO blame, is properly of the demonstratiue kind, and by accidents of other
kinds, it comprehends in it all sorts of evil speaking, as to reproach, to
find fault, to note, to disfame, to carpe and rail at: Also to reprove, but
to reprove does properly grow of love: on the contrary to (to blame) grows
commonly of hatred.

MANNERS.
OUr Country is spoiled and wasted through the corruption of evil manners.

2 The doing of injury unto others, is in two fortes, either by deceiptes, or
by force: ye one, of which is ye practice of the wolf: the other, of the lion,
and both of them are most far from humanity. Cic. Lib. 2. Epist. f. 5.


3 Like, as some men (by reason) of some malady that they have, and through
dullness of their senses, do not taste the sweetenes of meats, so those men
(that be wicked, leacherous, covetous, etc.) have no tasting of true praise.
Phillip.


4 He shows himself to be a very fool, who for to overcome the virtues of
any one does use yt force of wickedness, for, like as in running, a man must
get victory by running, so virtue is overcome by virtue.

5 Those things, that are evil and filthy, are always filthy, whether they
be kept secret, or made manifest. Diogenes.


6 Even, as foolishnes is oftentimes a disease that comes by inheritance, so
the wicked does co^munely beget such as be wicked.

7 Oh good Lord God, how true is that old saying, (that of a wicked Father)
is seldom hatched a good Son. Euripides.


8 Who so is deformed of countenance, and of evil manners, he does naturally
bring forth nothing but evil, like, as out of one Vipar, springs another
Vipar. Ecdorus.


The Mind.
1 THat cannot be said a Medecin when one pearceth with an instrument of
steel into a whole and sound part of the body, but is rather a very cruelty
and butcherlike dealing. Cic pro Sest.


2 Those that be of a base and brutish mind, and given to pleasures and lust,
Plato, in his first book, De Republica, does bannish from the holy fellowship
of Philosophy, as profane and unable to attain thereto.

3 Like, as a durtie soul poole, can not give forth clear water, even so a
mind replete with evil thoughts and vile lusts, cannot give good counsels.

4 Like as a path (when it is hardened) ca^ hardly be taken up and framed to
another fashion by any force, eue^ so, a mind long time accustomed to sin,
cannot by any sharp and bitter reprehension be corrected and amended.

Slacknesse in Religion, and an ill conscience.
1 HE that has once digressed out of the way of truth, will have no
conscience more to swear falsely, then to speak the truth. Cic. Pro R. Comedo.


2 It is not sufficient only to know God (which thing the very devils do, that
hate him,) but also to make diligent search what God would have us to do,
which ye may find in the holy Scriptures, if ye have the sprit of God for your
Instructor.

3 You shall by your slacknes in religion reap but small fruit in this life,
and in the life to come infinite and perpetual damnation.

4 I am bonnd to hate the vices of those yt through their little religion, and
great pertinacie would carry me headlong with them into cuill.

5 A wicked man pricked in conscience, suffers far greater torments, the^
any do by beatings, or by any bodyly afflictions. Pithagoras.


6 He, that does dishonest things, must not look to have them kept secret:
and albeit that he could keep them close from others, yet, they cannot be
hidden from his own conscience. Isocrates.


7 Biantis, being demanded what thing was in this life that was not
accompanied with fear? A good conscience, said he.

8 Periander, being asked what manner of thing liberty was? Answered, an
upright conscience.

9 What is he that is less fearful, and on the contrary side, more
coragious, then the conscience free from all evil? Diogenes.


10 We must not hold him in admiration that abounds in riches, but him
whose conscience is quite discharged from sin, and is made pure. Plutarch.


The small estimation of Friends.
1 TO make rehearfall of good turns done unto those that have received them,
is an vpbrayding them with the benefit bestowed, and to note them out, of
forgetfulness and ingratitude. Terence in Audia.


2 The benefits that men be checked withal by those that would be accounted
benefactours, do rather hurt, then gratify, and do show the small regard,
they have of a friend.

3 To reprove a man for benefits received (is no thing else) but to purchase
hatred.

4 To pass a man's life joyfully with his friends, is a thing full of
consolation: and on the contrary, not to use conversation with them, either
for hatred, or for the little regard that they have, cannot be without
perturbation of the mind. Euripides.


5 The troubled mind does greatly relieve it self in beholding the countenance
of the Friends: on the contrary part, to be void of such relief, is more
tedious then a cruel death.

Civil Wars.
1 He can not love dearly the private habitations of the city, the public
laws, the estate of the liberty, whom discordes, homicides, and civil wars
do delighte. Cic. fill. 13.


2 Unto what other end do tend civil wars then to make an end of all
good Citizens, yea, and to bring to confusion the City it self?

3 If we call the Tartarians and Scithians cruel (for they do exercise
cruelty against other Countries adjacent near unto them, for to amplify
their Kingdoms and Empire, or for the maintenance of their liberty)what shall
we term those that for to debase and destroy their own Country, do bathe
themselves in civil blood?

4 Civil and intestine dissentions, do hurt universally all men (inasmuch)
as they tend as well to the destruction of the Vanquishers, as of those that
are vanquished: Wherefore, love is good, and a common concord necessary to be
amongst persons. De^^^ (...).


Cruelty.
WHat Tyrant was there ever, who forbad the miserable to lament? Cic. pro
Sestio.


2 Who was ever so cruel, he forbad me^ to bewail within themselves, and to
make supplications unto others? Contra pish.


3 What Tyra^t is there in Scithia, which forbad (to them that had occation) to
weep? Pro R. Amer*


4 Forasmuch, as nothing can be so holy but that it may be at some time
violated through presumptuous boldness, there have been a singular punishment
deuiled against Parricides, to the intent that those that could not by nature
be contained within the limits of good works, might be withd: awen from the
evil and ungracious works through the greatness of the pain.

5 What These is there so lewd, or what Pirat so cruel, which if he can
obtain his pray without bloodshed, will shed blood therefore.

6 Cruelty is not worthy to be possessed of a ma^s mind, and he that will
be cruel and discourteous, must of necessity be spoiled of human and
reasonable nature.

7 Too much nycenes ingendreth dispraise, and makes a man little esteemed, but
crueltye breeds hatred.

8 It is necessary that a man be severe in executing laws: also that such a
one may be a pattern (in following himself) what the Law commands. Iseus.


9 Those, that take delight in other men's mishappes, do not know how that the
chances of fortune be commune to all men.

Pride.
1 CAn the hearts of wild beasts be tamed, and is the heart of me^ only
implacable? but ye heart of him is most vnappe aceable of all, who has with
cruelty conjoined an incomparable pride.

2 This insolent Person, being blinded with the smoke of his pride, is become
insupportable to his vassailes, odious to others, and to the most part of men
more hated then known.

3 Who ever saw the nature of any man like unto this, which hating his
superiors, can not abide his equals, and dispising his Inferiors, shows yt
he has no less beastlines, then pride in him.

4 This man is so imperious and proud, that he commanding every man,
presumes to show favor to some in commanding.

5 Socrates, seeinge Alscibiades (who went puffed with pride, and was become
very stately because of his riches and great lands that he possessed) showed
him a large map of the world, and said unto him, look well herein, if thou
can see thy Lands: Alscibiades aunsweared, that he saw them not: The^
Socrates replied, Oh Alscibiades, why art thou so lofty minded for those
things that be so little worth, that they have here no place appointed them.
Elianus.


6 Proud men be communely vile, and through their vylenes and pride they are
insolent in prosperity, and in their adversity, they become: abiected and
miserable. Chilo.


Avarice.
1 THere is no duty of friendship so perfect, nor obedience so requisite and
solemn, but Avarice will hinder both the one, and contaminate the other. Pro P.
Quentio.


2 Some were wont for the love of their Children to be desirous of richesse,
and this man for the love of richesse, has not cared to lose his children. Pro
Aulo Cluentio.


3 There is no speedier justice executed, the^ toward a covetous person, for,
his punish me^t is joined with his sin.

4 Socrates, being reproved by Xantippa his wife, because that he would not
take those many gifts that were brought him, said: If we should take
immediately that which is here ready to be given, we should not hereaster, when
we tought therefore, find any thing to be given us. Pithagoras.


5 When a certain man demanded of Socrates, how he might do to become rich, he
aunsweared: that he must make poor his lusts.

6 It is good to make election rather of loss, then of beastly gain, for
that, the one does put us to displeasure but once, the other for ever. Chilo.


7 Those that give themselves a pray, for to get richesse, and cannot tell how
to esteem of them aright when they have gotten them, be like unto those that
have a good horse in the stable, and cannot ride. Isocrates.


8 Diogenes, likened the covetous men, unto such as had the dropsy, for how
much the more filled, the one is with money, the other with water, so mutch
greater is the desire of the one and thirst of the other: to each of which,
their greedy desire is cause of their ruin and destruction. Democri.


9 If the desire of richesse be not bounded within a certain satiety, it is
mutch worse then extreme poverty: forasmuch, as great gredines of having
breeds also great necessity.

10 A man being very rich, and yet accompanied with a continual carfulness
of having more and more, is as like the life of a beggar, as of a rich man.

11 The richesse of covetous men, is like the sun when it is gone down, for
it comfort not, nor gives cause of rejoicing to any man.

12 Avarice, is the greatest evil that is amongst mortal men, for it
brings to pass oftentimes that those which go about to serape together, and
unite another ma^s riches unto theirs, be so deceived that they lay and
conioyne their richesse to those of other men.

13 Bion the Sophist said, that avarice was the chiesest mother city or
Metropolis of all ribaudrie. Eusebius.


14 Those that live to heap up richesse together, as if they would save them
until the other world, do forsake (both) themselves and all their felicity
in the mean season. Antipho.


15 Theocritus said, there be found many rich me^, which be not Masters, but
Tutors of their richesse. Plutar.


16 He, that would become rich, must not seek to increase richesse, but to
extenuate his affections. Epicurens.


16 Plato, seeing one wholly given to the spoil for heaping together riches,
he reproouing him, said, that he should not study to increase his richesse,
but to diminish his greedy coveting. Diogenes.


Prodigality.
1 He has consumed up all that ever he had, in such sort that there
remains at this present nothing sufficient, not only to satissie his lust
and desire, but also, for to succor his necessity. Pro Aulo Cluentio.


2 A ceriaine prodigal man, wondering at Diogenes, because that he had only
craved of him superfluous alms: I do this (said he) because that of others I
can but seldom get it, of thee never. Pithagoras.


3 Crates, likened riches of the prodigal unto those figs that first come
forth, wherewith the crows and such like fouls are fed, and not men, for ye
goods of the prodigal do feed (only) whores, parasites, etc.

4 It is not so much amiss to have riches, as it is to loose them disorderly.
Xenophon.


Anger.
1 EMNVS, called anger, the beginning of foolishnes, but unto many it has
been the end (both) of foolishnes, and also of life.

2 This man is more disdainful and angry, then ever was Caelius the Senator,
who being angry with one that was his client, the which agreed with him in
all things, and was obedient to him: yet, he being full of disdain, said,
thou do therefore not gainsaye me in any thing, because thou may make us
twain, two.

3 Although, it is a great matter to vanquish anger, yet, it is a far greater
to know how to foresee not to sall therinto. Dion.


4 Like, as those ships that abide stoutly the raging seas, be accounted
more valiant the^ others, so also, men that resist ye anger and perturbatio^ of
the mind, be esteemed for ye most constant of all others. Sotion.


5 Even, as smoke troubling the eyes, does let us yt we cannot see those things
which be before our feet, so wrath assaulting the understanding, dimmeth and
blinds our reason. Aristotle.


6 Servant, when they are bought, do not enquire whether their masters be
superstitious or envious, but whether they be angry or not. Plutar.


7 Mancrates, a wise man, said, that angry men be like unto lamps, ye which
how much the more they abound with oil, so much the more they flame.

8 It cannot be that a man chaufed with anger, ca^ do any thing reasonably.

Envy.
SOme me^ envying the praise of others, do like the pestilence infect, and
spoil our friendship.

2 Envy does always extend it self to those things yt be most high. 3 Like, as
where there is no light, is no shadow, so where no virtue is, there is no envy.

3 Envy, is only fed of evil, and is tormented by that which is good,
receiving in it self yt evil which it desires in others: wherefore Alexander ye
great, said, that enuyous men be their own tormenters.

4 It is not enough, that our own evils, ye which be very great, do torment
us, but also other men's blessedness, and happy estates, do vex us.

5 There was never any famous man, in any age, which did not with a heinous
countenance wonder at envy.

6 Envy, is one of those Enemies, the which are by no mean better vanquished,
then by flight.

7 Socrates, being demanded of Alscibiades, how he might fly Envy:
aunsweared, with living an abject and miserable, like Thersites, for, that
misery (alone) is without envy.

8 The enuyous person, is an enemy to himself, forasmuch, as he is always
beaten with continual passions of the mind. Menander.


9 Rust, consumes iron: ye mothes, cloth: worms, wood: but envy, as that
(which is worse the^ al evils) consumes man.

10 Envy oftentimes casts down those that have been exalted by fortune.
Apollon.


11 Few men there be that without envy does love a fortunate Friend.

12 Theophrastus said, that wicked and enuyous men, do not so much rejoice of
their own benefit, as of another man's hurt. Sophocles.


13 Those that are enuyous be the most unhappy of all men, for they do not only
sorrow for their own hurt: but also for the prosperity of others.

15 Socrates was wont to say, that envy is a wou^d in the foul. Democr.


Wanton love.
IF we would consider how much exellencie is in the nature of man, and how
much worthiness, we should also see how great shame it were to suffer it to be
governed by leacherie, by delicate living, and by a feminine spending of time
in voluptuousnes. Cic. Lib. 4. Epist. f. 12.


2 It is extreme foolishness, to delighte in those things, in which is
greater pleasure then profit.

3 The pricks of lovers, the slightes that they use, the snares that they lay,
and the deceipts that they sow for to possede the thing loved, do sufficiently
declare unto us how great the dissimulatio^ and wilines of love is.

3 Love, grows not on a sudden, as wrath does, neither passes it suddenly
away, although it is supposed to carry wings. Phitar.


4 Nm. N. is necessary to gratify a faint lover withal, but mutch more him
that has an heart francke of love. Menander.


5 Love, can not be said to be any other thing, but a madness amongst men.

6 Love, is an idle thing, unprofitable for any good enterprise, an Enemy to
labor, and that it is so, we see that, it, flying Beggars, ouertaketh rich men.

7 Love, is an excess of a certain unreasonable desire, which comes
quickly, but goes slowly away.

8 Theophrastus, being demanded, what love was, answered, it is the effect of
an idle Spirit. Theophrast.


Surfeiting.
1 Idleness, is the father of leachery, and gluttony is the mother.

2 Nothing is more vile, or does more prick a man, then gluttonnie.

3 Nature has given us a throat, not for an instrument to delight in
surfeiting, but only for a conduite and way, whereby the meat is guided to
the nourishment of the body.

4 Some men set all their study and care upon knowledge, some upon cheualrie,
and other-some upon other honest exercise: and this man (alone) has all his
mind upon the kitchen, and in the cookery, (as one who only has for his end
and purpose) excessive eating and drinking.

5 Like, as the root does nourish the plant, so the meat that the body
receives, ought to nourishe it self, and not lusts, and gluttonous eating and
drinking. Musomius.


Idleness.
1 SO great is the ruin and destruction of others, that through their
imbecillitie, (and not for our own virtues) we be accounted mighty.

2 Men being in prosperity and in idleness, when fortune laugheth on them,
they become unjust, intemperate, and do suffer themselves to be corrupted with
voluptuousnes,

3 It is no shame to take pains, but shame to be idle.

4 Vertne walks by the way of labor, and not by the way of idleness.
Hesiodus.


5 It was wont to be said, that exercise is the father of a good name.
Euripides.


6 There be many more become good through diligence, and good exercise, then be
by nature.

7 Goods do multiply with a man, if he take pains.

6 Hesiodus, lykened the idle persons to Drones, which be those bees that
having no stinge to defend themselves, do eat up the labors of other bees,
without travailing. 7 A sound man that is idle is more miserable, then one that
has the agewe.

8 Idleness, causes infirmity of the body, and dulnes of the mind. Eusebius.


Riches.
1 RIches be rather the Friends of vice, then of virtue, and do oftener allure
the minds of young folk to dishonest delights then otherwise.

2 Like a horse cannot be ruled without a bridle, so richesse cannot be
ordered without prudence.

3 Even, as garments, which be of themselves cold, do not increase, but
conserve the natural heat of man, so richesse and honors do not make men
happy, for as mutch as felicity consists in our mind, not in things
subject to the judgment of others.

4 Our nature has none more deadly enemy then richesse, a dire adversary to
virtue, and a minister of vice: neither did Diogenes without occasion say, that
virtue did not willingly lodge, either within the liberties of a city, nor yet
but in a few rich Palaces.

5 Plato, wisely said, that a rich man could but ill willingly be virtuous.

6 The intemperate desires of getting richesse be very pricks and rich
thorns. Antipho.


7 Richesse ill gotten, were wont to breed short pleasures, and long shame.
Epitt.


8 It is a hard matter for a rich man to be temperate, and for a temperate
man, to get great abondaunce of richesse. Alcides.


9 It is necessary to have a rich mind, and not a body clad with a great
ostentation of riches. Euripides.


10 The very fruits of richesse, be nothing else but leachery, covetousness, and
infamy. Menander.


11 Richesse be blind, and do make those blind that behold them.

12 Garments, which be too long, do hinder the going, and superfluity of
riches be an impediment to the soul, Democri.


13 Our affections by nature, are hard to bridle, but after that they be
accompanied with riches, they cannot possibly be bridled. Plutarch.


14 Bion said, that those were made a laughing stock which would give
themselves a pray unto richesse: for they are granted to a man by fortune,
conserved by Avarice, and gotten together by falsehood. Pithagoras.


15 Diogenes, called richesse the vomit of fortune.

16 Plato, being demanded what stoare of riches a man ought to seek for?
answered, so much as neither should breed any snares, nor have need of any
necessary thing.

Honors.
1 THis course of life which I hold, perhaps I offend in, which do maruail at
the bravery and outward show of this life, and do not discern the carefulnes
and great yerksomnes wherewith it is replete. Cic. Lib. 1. Epist. fa. 9.


2 Like, as Emnus said, in reigning or governing as King, there can be no true
faithful companion, nor credit given to any.

3 These smokes of vain honor do seem in my judgment, to serve for nothing
else but to make us slaves to the rouling estate, and madness of fortune.

4 If we consider diligently, how that these honors and worldly dignities, be
for the most part unsteadfast, we shall find also that it comes to pass,
because that they are grounded upon the instabilitie of fortune.

Pastimes.
1 FOr to feed the People with the vanity of such shows, is a thing but
little esteemed of goodmen, for it notes riotousnes, and is nothing worth. Cic.
Lib. 2. Epist. fa. 3.


2 Like, as it is but soolish wanto^nes to be carried about with a vain out rye
of others, and to follow the shadow of a false virtue, so it is an act of a
wa^ton and unconstant mind, to refuse the light and brightenes of that which
brings true glory, and is the most honest fruit of perfect virtue. Contra
piso.


2 I cannot esteem good that sort of pleasures which has been found out by a
wicked and naughty man, such a one as he was: for, nature does not so easily
admit a naughty plant to bring forth good frut.

3 We are so by nature inclined to pleasures and pastimes, that we delighting
indifferently in all alike, and making a confusion with good and bad together,
do also confound our selves.

4 To what end do serve pastymes, and gamings? but to steal away time, and to
busy our understanding in vain things, and without any profit.

5 All pleasures ought not to be followed (but those only) which have their
deriuation of honest things. Demost.


Beauty.
1 I Know not how I m ght praise beauty, seeing, that in women it is for the
most part accompanied with cruelty and ingratitude.

2 We must have regard to the goodness of ye mind, and not to the beauty of
the body. Euripides.


3 Byon, confirming the opinion of some that said, how that tyranny consisted
in beauty: said moreover, that from tyrants a man might by many means be
delivered, but from beauty, by no mean. Plutarch.


4 It is a very delectable matter to behold beautyfull things, (but to touch
them) cannot be without danger: like, as Xenophon said, the cook does broile
only those things that he lays on the coals: but beautiful things, do set
on fire also those that stand near about them. Fanorinus.


5 Like, as Gilliflowers and other most pleasant and sweet smelling herbs and
flowers, if they be cast into a Iakes amongst filthy dung, do forthwith
become vile, even so beauty, if it be, not accompanied with excellent virtues
and graces, waxes eftsoons, filthy and abominable.

Noblenes.
1 AL men are in this respect equal, that they have had all one manner of
beginning, and were naturally created after one fashion.

2 No man can challenge to himself any worthynes, for being borne of noble
blood and of famous parentage, but for that he has lived virtuously, and dyed
valyantly.

3 The nobility of thy parents and blood, do serve thee to none other purpose,
but that thou can not keep thy self unknown when thou would.

4 He glories of himself but in vain, which boasts of his dwelling in a
noble Pallaice (inasmuch) as the praise is not his, but his predecessors.

5 In my judgment (he that is a good man) is worthy to be accounted noble,
like, as (on the contrary part) I esteem a wicked man ignoble, although he
were descended of a father more noble then Jupiter. Euripides.


6 Nobility consists in prudence: and by understanding is obtained true
riches, but only at ye hands of God.

7 He that by nature is inclyned to virtue, he is noble, although his mother
were an Ethiopian. Theodor.


8 Antigonus ye King, going about to reprove Byon the Philosopher of
ignoblenes, asked him what he was, of what country, and where was his City,
and his parents? to whom Bion aunsweared, it belongs not unto Friends to
enquire where they were borne: but what manner of men they be. Bion.


9 It is better to glory of the praises of the mind then of the nobility of
the elders, being already extinguished through the obscurity of the
posterity. Phalarides.


10 Like, as the noblenes of beasts does consist in the disposition and
strength of the body, so the nobility of men consists in the goodness of
manners. Democr.


11 Diogenes, being demanded who were ye most noble me^? answered, those which
despise riches, vanity, pleasures and life.

12 Socrates, being asked of a certain man, what thing was nobility, made
aunsweare, that it was a good temperature of the mind, and of the body.

Flattery.
1 NO man whilst that he is in prosperity can tell whither he be loved or not.

2 Even, like as Acteon was torn in pieces with his own Dogs, that had been
nourished by him, so are those torn in pieces by flatterers, that do noorish
them.

3 Flatterers, be like unto certain sepulchers, in which is only written the
bare name of amity. Diogenes.


4 Antisthenes said, that there is less hurt found amongst Ravens, then
among flatterers, for, these do corrupt and eat the minds of such as be
alive: the other do but devour (only) the dead bodies. Isocrates.


5 Antisthenes, was wont to say, that Flatterers were like unto curtisans, or
harlots, which do look to have found in those that were inamored on them all
excellent gifts, except Judgment and wisdom. Pathagoras.


6 Crates, seeing a young man, who was very wealthy, accompanied with a
multitude of Flatterers, he turned unto him and said: Oh young man (I am sorry)
to see thee so solitary.

7 Demetrius Phalerius, exhorted Ptolome ye King, that he should buy him books
to read, such as treated of well governing a Kingdom: for, in them he should
find written such things, as those that were his true Friends, durst not, and
his falfe Friends would not show him. Iseus.


Ingratitude.
1 IT was a general fault of all them which did not defend me, and
(especially) of such as were bound thereby by duty. Dio. 1. Epist. f. 9.


2 All the good that I have done for him, is as good as lost, for, it is even
like, as I had done the same to mine Enemy.

3 It was wisely said yt there were two wounds in good turns: the one
reproving or vpbrayding of benefits bestowed: the other, forgetfulness of
such, as have been received, both of them be the mothers of ungratefulness,
and stepmothers to a good turn.

Malice.
1 THeir maliciousnes, makes them to credit that which they have has say of
others: that is, that I must debase my self. (...)


2 I should never have believed that thou would so little have esteemed our
recyprocall love, and the freendship renewed amongst us, that for one only
word, thou would seek to destroy my Brother Metellus, neither respecting
ye noblenes of our house, nor yet the great love that I have borne unto you and
to the common wealth, the which considerations might have moved you, to have
put up a little injury. Cic. (...).


3 The injury which that naughty toungued fellow has offered to this good
young man, has made his most shameful and impudent life manifest for ever.
(...)


Vide Cic. Pro Rof. Amer.
4 ME thinks that how much the more mighty and noble a man is, so much the
less he ought to show forth his power, especially toward the ruin of poor
men. (...)


5 Go not you about with honest words of your letters to cloak the
dishonestie of your mind, for those that have already an ill opinion of you,
will give no credit thereto.

Doltishnes.
1 OH God, what a cockesconbe is he: and how in amoured on him self without
any modesty or reason. (...).


2 He is so senseless and doltish, that nature seems even to have brought
him into the World for despite.

3 There be found some sort of men in the world such ydiotes in their talk,
that look how more they go about to beautify and enlarge their talk, so much
more they are mocked rather then harkened unto.

Composing or applying of things amiss.
1 MEn have used many times to adorn the^ selves with glorious words found out
by other men's industry. (...).


2 Those men that in co^pyling or co^posing works (do nothing else but imitate
others) are in my judgment like unto the popingaye or pie, which speak those
things that they do not understand.

3 Like, as he cannot run well, that seeks to set his feet only in traces
of another man's feet, so those cannot write well which go on imitating, and
never swerve from the bounds of others. Menander.


This life.
1 I Wist not that this life was short, and a vain course of glory. Pro
Sestio.


2 Of good, and of evil, consequently of godly men and of ungodly, there is at
this present no great account made: such is the life wherein we do live.

3 Our life (when fortune does favor) is like to a running brook, which is
all durtie and myrie, hard to get into, violent, making a great roaring and
noise, and lasts but a while. Epitt.


4 This our mortal and miserable life is none other but the likeness of a
shadow, and a birth unprofitable to the earth. Sophocles.


5 The Sea and land is full of evils and infirmities, which day and night do
compass about this troublesome life. Hesiod.


6 Good things (although they be sought) do hardly come, but on the contrary
(evils things) do come on heaps without seeking. Democri.


7 Man, is none other thing but an example of infirmity, a spoil of time, a
jest of fortune, an image of inconstancy, and a balance of envy and
calamity: remaining (only) fleagme and choler. Aristotle.


8 This (our life walking through a circle) is always subject to be intrapped
with evil, and can never abide in one estate. Herodotus.


9 This our life (travailing always toward the end) is like unto wine,
whereof (a little being left in the bottom of the barrel) does become vinegar.
Antipho.


To be sorry.
TO lament, or to be sorrowful with another, is an affection that grows of
the displeasure and grief that we receive by our own misfortune, or by the
misfortune or hurt of that person with whom we do lament or sorrow.

For the death of sombody.
THe death of your father (a man of most worthy memory) has deprived me of a
testimony of great authority, unto whom I was most bound. Cic. Lib. 2. Epist.
fa. 12.


2 Albeit, that I am assured that I can not bring you more hurtful news then
these, yet, because nature, or rather the providence of God is superior to all
men, I have thought good (not to hold my peace herein) howsoever the matter
goes.

3 In this respect the noblest and most valiant person in the world, is no
better then equal with the simplest and him that is most vile of conditions,
for, that with one bitter sort of death, the lives of them (both) are
extinguished alike. Cic. 4. Epi. 10.


4 Since, that it has pleased God (who is never deceived) thus to deal, it
is expedient that we be conformable to his will.

For sickness.
1 WHo does not see, how that many times ye hurt which we receive by the
Physician, is worse then the malady it self.

2 Concerning sickness, some sort of them were wont to come through efficient
causes, as by excess of heat, or of drought: some by material causes (that
is) by want of nooriture or surfeiting: othersome are bred in certain, the
natural parts of man, as in the blood, in the marrowe, or in the brain: at
some other times, sickness also do proceed of exterior causes: as by the water
(being unwholesome, by the soil of the country, by surfeiting, by penury, and
suchlike) by which means, I suppose that your sickness comes, whereof, for the
love (that I bear you) I am very sorry.

For poverty.
1 MY griefs do not only flow through the company of yours, but they do
also increase infinitely. Cic. 9. ad At. Epist.


2 The Goddess of poverty, as being most hateful, is without any Temple.
Euripides.


3 Poverty, is no small malady to those ye prove it. Diphilus.


4 There is no chance more miserable in this our life, then poverty: for a
good and virtuous man (if he be poor) is nothing esteemed. Crato.


5 Man has no greater enemy then poverty.

6 A poor man, as one that is fearful, is even a semblance of fear it self.

7 Men do communely account of rich men that they be wise, and on the
contrary make but a scoff at poor folk, although they be godly and virtuous.

For imprisonment.
1 It is so cruel a wound that I bear in my Spirit for this your
imprisonment, that I assure you, I of use no better easement nor rest in my
mind, then ye hape that I have to see you recover again your former estate of
liberty.

2 I do so greatly lament, for this your imprisonment, as is convenient for
our freendship, in consideration whereof, like as I (at this time) I am
exceedingly grieved, so (I hope) that hereafter my consolation shall be the
greater, when as I shall see you restored again to your former liberty, and
honorable, estate.

For Exile.
1 OH wretch that I am, that I should be the occasion of your so manyfolde
troubles, and so mutch the more wretched am I, as that your valiancie, your
goodness, and gentleness, deserved better fortune then this. Cic. Lib 14.
Epist. fa. r. 7.


2 Seeing, that no consolation can be greater then this that I desire rather
then my life: namely, that I might dye in thine arms, for as mutch, as by no
means I can so hope of thy deliverance, and that thou might be rewarded,
according to thy deserts.

3 Aristides, being demanded, wherefore he took sorrowfully his sending into
Exile? he answered, because of the shame that my Country receives of the
injury done unto me.

For liberty lost.
1 I Never desired at any time my fortune more fa^^^^, then to have the
accomplishment of the thing I now desire in these your tribulations, to let you
understand how that I esteem your liberty lost, a yoke of servitude upon
my neck: and albeit, that the residue of your Friends be of ye same mind,
yet, I have thought good to make manifest unto you mine affection, to th (...)
ye may measure it with your own affection, and with the affection of others,
and have experience thereof.

2 What greater misfortune can happen to noble minds, then the loss of
liberty yet (I trust) you will play the part of a wise and valiant man,
disposing your self, according to the quality of these (...).

3 I should lament for your liberty lost much more the^ I do, but that I
perceive how that fortune makes sclaues of such, as by virtue were made free.

For Reputation lost.
It is very lamentable that other men's wickedness have defiled the brightness
of your name.

2 If thou shall show a valiant mind in these thy mishappes: I can never
praise thee unto the full, but much sorrowing is (...) for thine estate.

3 Who will say, that he is spoiled of his ornaments, who by death is exalted to
everlasting honors.

4 The change of fortune is grievous enough to one that was sometimes happy
and fortunate: whereas he that has always been in adverse fortune, takes not
so mutch sorrow at the familiarity of calamities.

5 Calamities have dominion over men, and not men over calamities. Herodotus.


To comfort or give consolation:
And (first) for old age.
1I Know no cause why me^ should meruell that old age is subject to so many
maladies, seeing, it is even infirmity it self.

2 That old man is more foolish (who having passed over ye dangers of this
life, and is arrived at the end of them) would wish to begin his course new
again, then a trauailour, who having ended a long and yerkesome journey,
should desire to go it over again immediately (forasmuch) as nothing is more
acceptable to such as be weary, then rest and lodging.

3 It is not expedient for your wisdom, to wish for that, that ye have lost,
seeing, it cannot be recovered again, that is youth, for it is the property
of a mad man to love that which is lost.

4 Men ought to rejoice when they come unto age, wherefore they were borne,
seeing age, is the very rypenes of men, and is as profitable to be in men as in
fruits.

Of Death.
1 DEath happens to al men alike, wherefore thou ought not to challenge
unto thy self a privilege of life above others.

2 I dare not take in hand to comfort thee, or to offer thee any succor,
for, I know ye thou art wise enough, and of a most noble mind, wherefore it
should seem great presumption if I would go about to administer thee
consolation in this matter. Cic. 5. Epist. 17.


2 All things that be according to nature, be good: and what is more agreeyng
to nature, then for an old man to dye.

3 Thou ought to conform thy self, according to the good pleasure of God,
and to believe that he knows better what we need then our selves, and the
time when to draw again to him self his members.

4 In the raging Sea of this our tempestuous life, we have none other haven,
save death.

5 Thou may thus comfort thy self for the loss of thy Father, that since
in his life time he lived well, he has now with death obtained reward of his
virtues.

6 This world is a very Uallaye of waylinges, deep, obscure, and full of mire:
happy is he that well gets out of it.

7 Seeing, it is so ordained by nature, that he which first comes, must first
go: the son has no cause to lament for the death of his Father, for, he
does not thereby forsake him, but goes before him.

8 We may (truly) call the Earth a better Mother unto us, the^ she that has
borne us, for, she nourishes us but for a few months: and the other for a
great many years.

9 To lament for things that can not be gotten again, grows rather of too
mutch foolishnes, then of much godlynes and love.

10 Virtue, may make honest any sort of death, whatsoever.

11 Albeit, that my mind is not sufficient to comfort you, for that the sorrow
that I abide does suffer me to have no place of consolation, yet, etc.

12 He was not borne in vain that dies well, neither lived he unprofitably
that finished well his life.

13 Death is no death, but the end of travails, and a beginning of life.

14 There is no armor more strong against any cruel dart of fortune, then a
prudent mind: and I, being of opinion that you are most wise, do believe also
that you understand, how that no human thing can be perpetual or quiet.

15 If thou would consider, how that he was borne a mortal man, thou
would not sorrow of his death.

16 Socrates, beeying demanded, what was the greatest beatitude of man? He
aunsweared, to dye well. Eschines.


17 If sick men could be healed with tears, and that forrowe could cease
their grief, I would commend this wayling. Philomenes.


18 Inasmuch as we be mortal what thing should we else look for of this our
life, but mortality.

For Health lost.
1 I Trust with the grace of God shortly to see thee not only free from this
disease, but also from all ill humors, by means of this sickness, whereby they
shall be consumed, veryfiyng the old Proverb (that is) that one evil dryueth
away another.

2 Nothing (new or unwonted) is happened unto you, neither has fortune any jot
changed custom, nor nature, being always unsteadfast, unconstant and blind,
but we may rather say, that in this your malady, it has used the own proper
and natural constancy, which is, to be always unconstant, and never to abide
in one estate.

3 Sickness is a great dehorter from vices, and affections, and an exhorter to
modesty and goodness.

4 It is mutch more easy to abide the infirmity of the body, then the grief
of the mind, wherefore, I think it good that in this your sickness, ye shake
of all such thoughts as might trouble you.

5 Although, that man by nature is accompanied with many evils, yet, the worst
of them all, is the displeasure of the mind, take heed therefore, least ye set
any thing rashly to heart.

Of reputation lost.
1 I Am glad that your fortune is unlike mine: for there is great difference
betwixt being iniuried, and being utterly undone. Cic. 1. Epist fa. 7.


2 To be without doubt is toke^ of a good heart, which thing without all
peradventure, would both stay, his foolish rage, and bring you again to your
due place of honor. Cic 1. Fa 5.


3 The course of your fortune, although the case be unlike, yet it runs to
the same end that mine does. Epist. 7.


4 To the grieuousnes of the sorrow that I feel about your matters, I have yet
this consolation, that I trust the counsels of Friends, and the time it self,
which breaks the appointments of wicked men, shall give recompense to the
wicked wills of your enemies. Epist. 6.


5 Concerning this loss, if you shall make such account, as I have always
denied that you ought for to make, you shall do wisely, and shall with victory
triumph over your Enemies. Cic 3. Epist. 20.


6 The refuge of our studies is such, that although we cannot have the great
loss we had restored again, we may yet at the least be somewhat eased by
not thinking thereon. Lib 4. Epist. 3.


7 Do thou not remember how that with continual lamenting, thy troubles be
rather doubled, then raced out of memory.

8 Can not thou see things that are open and manifest, who with thy
quickness of wit wast wont to pearce to the knowledge of things most secret?
Can not thou know how that continual lamentyng does relieve thee never a
whit. Lib. 6. Epi. 16.


9 A man, that is rightly virtuous, ought to loose nothing by the multitude of
the wicked: Lib. 9 Epi. 3.


10 Thy valiancie is so great and worthy of it self, that for the sustentatio^
thereof, thou need no comfort of others, neither can I well comfort another,
which am deprived of all consolation, my self.

11 Like, as in the abundance of good fortune we are not straight lost, so,
we ought not to despair in the anguish, wherinto this fearful wave has
tra^sported us. Lib. 7. Epi 2.


12 Albeit, the distaining that is used to thy honor, is not to the loss of my
health, yet, there is such likeness betwixt them, that me thinks we could not
be sure Friends, except we tasted both of like greefes. Lib 1. Epi. ^.


13 Man's estate, was wont thus oftentimes to change, neither is there any
thing stable under heaven, he which yesterday was a Seruauant, to day is become
as a King: and another, who of late went clad in fine Purple, and commanded
the people, is now clad in vile rags, and become a bo^dseruant.

14 Pittacus said, that it was the duty of a wise man to know how to skirmish
with adversity, and the part of a valiant man to bear the same modestly.
Democri.


Of Goods lost.
1 LIke, a wise and valiant man, thou need not care if the unhonesty of men
shall rob thee of those things, wherewith fortune has indewed thee most
bountifully. Cic. 1. Epist. fa. 5.


2 I confess that thy grief is such, as thou can hardly receive any
consolation, so great is the loss of all thy substance, and so little hope of
recovering the same again: but yet, thou ought to moderat thy sorrow, and
not utterly to despair. Lib. 4. Epist. 3.


3 Nobodye is more unhappy in my judgment, the^ he, whom fortune has not
erst suffered to taste of her venim: for, like as the shadow accompanies the
son, so adversity follows glory and renown.

4 The long experience that I have known in you, concerning wordly things,
eases me of taking in hand to administer you any consolation (inasmuch) as I
know yt you were wont to arm your mind against the darted of fortune, I do
therefore verily believe that ye will patiently abide this burden of
poverty, that without any fault of yours, is fallen upon you.

5 Truly, your loss of richesse is great, but I esteem that you shall make
it mutch greater, if you shall also loose your self.

6 We must not believe that fortune loves those men more, upon whom it
fawneth, and such as it never displeases, the^ those whom it exercises with
continual travails: for, like as prosperity makes men fortunat, so does
adversity make them famous and tried.

7 Whilst that you torment your self for the loss of richesse, that you have
sustained, you do (without doubt) make the same greater: for, sorrowing for the
loss of richesse, you debase the worthiness of your mind, which teaches me^
to despise worldly things.

8 The loss that ye have sustained, is not so great but that your wisdom is
greater: wherefore with Judgment correct fortune. 9 It is better a godly poor
man, than a wicked rich man, for, the one is worthy of mercy, the other of
reproof. Antiph.


Of the loss of Friends.
1 IT is now time to put in practice the precepts that have been written by
most wise men, and to apply thy self to the use of such things as with long
study thou have learned: which thing (if thou will) thou may (though not
willingly, yet at least patiently) abide the want of those Friends whom thou
have lost. Cic. Lib. 7. Epist. fa. 3.


2 He, that in ye loss of terrene goods, as of friends, etc. knows how
prude^tly and with modesty to bear fortune, he may be truly called happy.

3 Verily the loss of so dear a Friend, which you have sustained, might shake
the stoutest heart that is: but (forasmuch) as me^ ought to be contented with
any chance that happens in this world, it is your part to be greatly
comforted in consideration of the honest and faithful freendshyppe maintained
betwixt you.

4 You show your self not to be thoroughly taught in ye law of friendship,
since you sorrow at the death of such a freende, who lived so well, that
there is no doubt, but the Angels have carried him into the sight of GOD, to
enjoy the fruits of his virtuous labors.

5 It is the part of a wise man not to be sorry for things lost, nor glad for
such as be present. Democri.


6 We ought not to be sorye for the death of our dear Friends, seeing, they
must of necessity dye: but rather for such as dye beastly. Pollien.


Of Imprisonment.
1 LIke, as a man that is sound and in good health, has no need of a
Physician: so a wise man has no need of consolation.

2 Do ye not understand, that he alone may be called a worthy and valiant
man, who never bowed his shoulders at the burden of misfortunes, who never
blamed nor panted at his chance: and inasmuch as it is so, you ought also in
this imprisonment show the liberty of your mind, altogether covered with
armor of your innocence.

3 It is less hurt to be imprisoned unworthily, the^ to have undeserved
liberty, and to suffer wrong in defense of justice, then through lewdnes to
abound in wealth.

4 What thing else is the earth, but a little Island, compassed round about with
the Ocean-sea, in the which we are put, as in a prison.

5 You have great cause to comfort your self in this trouble, and to give God
thanks that he has so endued you with his benefits, that like, as in
liberty ye did not want wisdom, so your courage and valiantness of mind
has not fainted in this imprisonment.

6 If it be true that the estate of virtuous and worthy men does consist in
the force of the mind, and not in this corporal matter: I repute any part of
consolation at my hands toward you, to be but superfluous, whose noble
heart I know, is at liberty, in this your undeserved imprisonment.

7 The prison does not minister so mutch punishment to the wicked, as it does
glory unto the godly, whose virtue does afterward shine more vehemently then
before, like a fire that has been kept secret and after bruseth forth in
great flames.

8 If you had by any means deserved this imprisonment, there were the^ cause
why I should seek to comfort: but since that the malice of your Enemies is
the only cause thereof, I leave giving of consolation to your sincere conscience
of a most verteous life, trusting to see you here after much more exalted then
you are now disgraded.

9 Socrates, being demanded, how a man might live without troubles? he
denying that to be possible, said: A city or an house cannot be without
those that dwell therein, and frequent the same. Antiph.


10 Those, that with waylings and lighings do take in ill part their
misfortunes are unwise, and do not remember how that many be, and have been in a
like and in a worser estate. Hipparcus.


11 Appollodorus, sorrowing and lamenting for Socrates, because he was unjustly
condemned to die, Socrates laughing said to him thou therefore (which art my
dearest Friend) would have me justly condemned. Xenophon.


Of Exile.
1 THat death is not miserable that is received for the common weal, neither
is that Exile loathsome that is caused for virtue. Cic ^. Epist. 1^.


2 If they shall take my life away, yet they shall not bereave me of my
reputation, though they shall afflict my body with Exile, for that, it is
mortal: yet, they shall not remove my mind from the common wealth.

3 Defend thy self stoutly from sorrow, and withstand Fortune, reuoluyng
always in thy mind how that in our City, and in the common weal many have
unjustly been sent into exile: I tell thee also (and I would to GOD, it were
not true) that thou art driven out of such a Country, where no good wise man
can live quiet.

4 I do not only exhort thee, but do also pray thee for the frendships sake
that has beens betwixt us, that thou would stablish thy mind against
misfortunes, considering with thy self in what estate all men are borne.

5 Your most noble mind, has no need of a common medecin, and that which I
should say for to comfort you in this your exile should be as a shadow in
respect of the light of your understanding.

6 He, which is unjustly sent into exile, ought to make himself merry, for
that he has Justice his companion of his exile, which suffers the ungodly
Citizines to persecute him.

7 The heart of a valiant man, does not faint at the first falling of fortune,
and what else is this your exite, but a disfavor of one chance of fortune for
a cou^terpaise of infinite favors, that ye have received of her.

8 Great folly it is to lament the dying out of ones Country, forasmuch, as it
is superfluous to have regard to the place where a man shall stay, dying,
when as he must immediately depart from all places.

6 Anaxagoras, dyeing out of his country, was demanded by his Friends,
whether he would have his body carried to the place where he was borne? He
answered, that the way that leads to Hell, is no further from one place
then from another.

10 Like, as the Mariners have instruments prepared (both) for prosperous and
for adverse sailings, so ought we to have ye affections of our minds made fit
(both) for good and ill fortune.

11 In what place foeuer a man be, he has one and the self same way
continual and plain to walk thorough this frail and mortal life, to an
immortal and everlasting life. Titus.


12 Idle fellows, and such as are good to nothing, are belieged with poverty,
even in their countries: whereas, on ye contrary part, such as be industrious
and wife, in what part of the world soever they be, do posseede sufficient,
and never feel want.

13 Even, as going out of one ship into another, we may still sail
prosperously, so going out of one City or country into another, we may
lead our life fortunately.

14 Like, as every quality of ye air is penetrable to the eyes of the Egle,
so every City and country is to a valiant man.

15 In what part soever it be of the world, where the earth does noorish us,
there is our Country. Plutarch.


16 Seeing, that we are by nature brought forth all free and vnbou^d, I know
not by what reason we should afterward bind and restrain our selves to one
corner.

17 Every part of the World, is free and open to a wise man, and to a valiant
mind, the whole world is his Country. Democri.


Of Poverty.
1 THou wast wont to comfort others, following the manner of ignorant
Phisiciants, who making profession to have skill in other folks diseases, know
not how to cure their own. Cic. Lib 4. Epist. fa 5.


2 I believe that in these corrupt and tempestuous times there is any thing
that can draw near to the true beatitude, save only. joyful poverty.

3 Poor men, that do content themselves with their estate, be dear unto God.
Menander.


4 Diogenes hearing, the poverty of a wicked man reproved, fayd: I never saw
any tormented for his poverty, but for wickedness. Elianus.


5 Diogenes said, that poverty was a learned succor to Philisophie:
for so much, as those things that Philosophy forced to persuade with words, ye
same were put in practice by poverty.

6 If thou shall never desire much, a little will seem to thee enough. Democri.


7 Drogenes, made this a answe be to one that attributed poverty to him for a
fault, oh unhappy man, I never same any man become a Tyrant thorough poverty,
but many thorough richesse.

8 The life of poor men, is like unto a sailing at Sea, when the ship is near
to shore, but the life of rich men, like to those that sail in the depth of
the Sea: To the one sort, it is easy to cast auker, and to fall into
harborough: To the other, it is more hard, and requires great labor.
Aristotle.


9 Like, as it is better to lie sound and in good health upon a simple
matterisse, then being sick to lie upon a large and rich bed: so also it is
better to live fortunately in mean fortune, then vnhappyly in great
abundance. Epitt.


10 Poverty, is not that which causes us to sorrow, but the overmuch
greedynesse of our minds.

11 Many men for injustice and evil doing have been put to death, but for
pduertie never any.

12 No man is more fortunat, then a poor man, for, he never fears to fall
from an high estate to a low. Diphisus.


13 Poverty, is a thing that is not enuyed, neither does any man strive to
obtain it, and without any garding it is defended and conserved: And how much
the more, it is despised, so much the more it is exalted. Xenophon.


To bewail or lament:
And (first) for death.
1I Had no comfort lest me, but only this, whereof death has depryued me. Cic.
Lib. 4. Epist. fa. 6. Ad Attic. Lib. 1 Epi. 8.


2 What great sorrow and grief I have sustained by ye death of my brother, and
of what commodity (both) public and domestical, I have been thereby
deprived of, you (who know my secrets) may consider, for, look what
consolation one man could enjoy by another, al yt I received at his hands.

3 The death of Lentulus (bear it as we can) is such, that we have lost a very
good and worthy man, who had the noblenes of his mind tempered with an
infinite humanity.

4 I know not what thing can be acceptable unto a man, that has lost him, who
was wont to be more dear unto him, then any other thing.

5 The death of this Noble man has so pierced into my Spirit, that I can
neither find words, nor reasons, that be able to comfort my self.

For things done unto us.
I Am well pleased at this that thou have tried what credit is in men with thy
small cost, as well as I know to my great damage. Cic. Lib. 1. Epist. 9.


2 We were caught in a snare, or at the least sore belayed and like to have
been caught.

3 I bear these things with a fair face, and a merry countenance, but in
very deed, they do inwardly destroy and consume me. Ad Attic. Lib. 5. Epi 10.


4 Thou see how things do fall out, for there is no manner of evil in the
world, that I do not at this present abide, and do look for to abide
hereafter.

5 It is a notable sayeing amongst men, that it is but a small matter to
reprove one, but to abide an injury received, is a burden insupportable.

Of times.
1 ALL the laudable customs of our councry be now decayed and utterly come to
nothing. Cic. 3. Epi. 3.


2 Our Country is afflicted and oppressed thorough the misery of the time.

3 The malice of these times is so great, that no remedy is able to discover
and make manifest the mind from those sorrows that shadow it.

4 Room, is at this time given to the spoil, Justice has there no place: to
conclude, all good laws and customs be there rejected. Epist. 5.


5 I doubt not, but that thou know how that at this present, the world is
full of deceiptes, dissemblinges and lies.

6 Grant us some respit to writ of doleful and miserable matters, conformable
to these times. Epist. 13.


7 Whereas in times past, we had great favor, great authority, and most great
renown, now all these things be quite gone. Epist. 14.


8 I spend all my time in reading, not for to find any medicine which might
heal me, but for to deceive the sorrow that does now oppress me.

9 Who is so dissolute, that he can at these things hold his peace and keep
silence.

10 We can see in these miserable days nothing but trouble, and anguish to
hang over our heads.

11 The length of time, cause us to see many things, and to abide much that we
would not.

Of Fortune.
1 THY Letters had bred in me a great sorrow, but that I have even determined
with my self to make a jest at Fortune. Cic Lib 2. Epist. fa. 16.


2 My heart is so hardened with continual despair that I can admit no new
sorrow into it.

3 The pensifenes of my heart has so tormented and spoiled me, that I am even
at deaths door.

4 Oh enuyous fortune, how ready art thou to change the very same benefits,
that thy self have given us?

5 When will this wind of evil fortune cease? never: The which transporteth
me from flood to flood in the Sea of worldly adversity, and will never suffer
me to see, or take ground.

6 Fortune, is sometimes our mother, sometimes our Stepmother in one and the
same day. Hesiodus.


7 Fortune does not give, but lends money to rich men.

8 There is no haven of richesse so strong, but it may be broken by occasion of
ill Fortune. Bion.


9 I have often times seen nobility vanquished thorough Fortune, and those
that have been nobly borne, have unworthily ben cast down by fortune.
Euripides.


To demand:
and (first) of Aid.
1 IN recompense of those honors that thou have received by my counsels, thou
ought to be contented, that I may lean somewhat upon the support, and with
thy lusty flowrishing youth to be some aid unto my feeble old age. Cic. Lib.
1. Epist. 11.


2 Thou know how greatly thou might help me now, neither do I require
ought else at thy hands, but that which thou shall judge to be for my
preferment. Lib. 3 Epi. 3.


3 In this respect you may stand greatly my friend, if that like as you
promised me, ye will at al assayes be the Protector of me and mine, whenever
need shall require. Epist. 9.


4 If you will proceed on to be such a patron and Defendour of men as ye
have been: Publius and Vatinius will also seek for your friendship and aid.
Epist. 11.


5 I would yt ye would place this matter of mine, in the Register of your own
affairs, to the end that I may with you here obtain those things that you have
put in my head to labor for. Ad Attic. Lib. 11. Epist. 1.


6 The friendship that in this matter ye might use toward me, is so great
that it ca^ not be expressed, in which my necessity if you would (as easily
ye may, stand my good Friend and Patron) you shall both show the excellency
of your valiant and true noble heart, to your no small honor, and also shall
bind me as an humble and obedient Servant with all manner duetyfulnes
toward you.

Favor or grace.
1 Esteem thus with your self, that if ye will in any thing show me
courtesy, you can in no wise better favor me then in this governing of the
province. Cic. Lib. 1. Epist. fa. 9.


2 I will be contented with any thing that ye shall do for me, but if you will
accomplish this my request, ye shall be the better satissied.

3 Albeit, I have sufficiently tried how great-your love is toward me: yet
without doubt I shall be the better resolved thereof if I may obtain this
present favor at your hands. Cic. Lib. Epist. fa. 21. Lib. 9.14.


4 For the strict bond of friendship and loves sake that is jointly betwixt us,
I request thee of grace, that thou will vouchsafe to use such courtesy and
humanity toward the Volteranes, as, etc. Lib. 10. Epi. 2^


5 I, being an undoubted testimony of the reverence thot I bear unto you, and
having already sufficiently experie^ced the love that you bear unto me, have
been bold to request so much gracious favor at your hands.

6 Notwithstanding, that I do not doubt, but ye will use the same liberialitie
toward us, which you have for your sakes heretofore employed (inasmuch) as ye
are not vnco^sta^t: yet, we would crave at your hands that singular grace which
you first promised, and erst used, to be now extended toward us
abundantly. Lih. 13. Epist. 25.


7 Seeing, that I am altogether out of hope of ever deserving your love by
merits of service, considering, ye greatness of your fortune and the simplenes
of mine, I will endeavor my self hence forth to meryt some grace at your
hands, by craving and by submissio^, inasmuch, as ye may of your virtuous
disposition as well esteem, the endeavor of an humble well willing heart, as
of such as do you diligent service.

Counsel.
1 THou shall be he, who in all matters of mine shall be my counselor, and
shall take the charge of mine honor, like as thou have done of my health, and
I will be at all times ready to follow thy will and decrees. Cic Lib. 1. Epist.
fa. 9.


2 I do not so mutch request your counsel for dispatch in my business, as to
obtain honor in conference with others, knowing, that to be, wise and
prudent, will be profitable both to him that counseled, and to the Counselor.

3 I esteem more, to be cou^sayled at your hands, then I do to be aided by a
great multitude of others together, for, on their aid depends nothing but a
little profit and honor, which (I know) is much regarded of you.

Pardon.
1 I Do humbly therefore with all reverence and duty that I can, desire pardon.

2 If yt I had not fallen in this lewdnes or offense, for the which I crave
pardon of your grace, neither had my* Fortune be discovered, nor your clemency
and nobleness of heart been made known and famous, as by this mean it shall.

3 I request pardon for such a thing as shall be well worthy your grace to
grant me.

4 I know not, in what matter I ever offended your worthiness: but since that
ye be offended, I humbly ask pardon, promising never to give you any cause of
offense again.

To Exhort:
and (first) to the fear of God.
1 PRaying, and such godly exercises be easy to such as seek the way to
salvation.

2 I admonish you that ye destroy our spiritual Enemies, which be vices, and
sensual lusts, and that ye give the scepter and dominion of your spirit and
inward parts to the fear of God.

3 I exhort you as earnestly as I can to the fear of God, whereby you may
look for an, assured and perpetual beautitude, if ye will first cut off all
vain desires that be fruitless.

4There be three virtues unto which every man ought chiefly to apply himself:
the first is to honor and fear of God: the next duty is, to the Parents that
have begotten us and brought us up: the third duty is to the Prince and
Laws: which who so observes shall acquire to himself a most beautiful crown
of glorious fame. Euripides.


To live well.
1 IT is now time that we leave setting our affections on this miserable and
most short life, and seek for that life which is happy and perpetual. Ad
Attic. Lib. 10. Epist. 5.


2 Believe me, the only way of praise dignity and honor, is to be praised
and beloved of good me^, and of such as be wise. Pro P. Sestio.


3 I exhort you as earnestly as I ca^ that ye would begin a new habyt of
living, and use such manners as tend unto virtue, which may make the mind
more capable of felicity.

4 Consider with your self how that the beauty of the mind is so much more
greater, the^ the beauty of the body, as a thing that is endued with
divinity, being famous and everlasting, is more wortthie then that thing that
is obscure, terrene, and frail.

5 Forasmuch, as human prudence is but a dream in respect of a well governed
Spirit, let us use the counsel and discretion, that God has appointed.

6 I do you too wit, that to live well and virtuously, is a thing that will
better satissie every body, then any thing else.

7When as at a certain time one said to Diogenes, that man's life was sull of
afflictions and evils, not the life, said he: but the ill living. Euripides.


8A wise man, when he goes on a long journey, does provide (rather) for
things necessary, then for such things as be precious and costly. Plato.


9 Like, as an house or a ship must have ye lower parts very strong, so the
beginninges and fundations of our actions, ought to be true and just. Demost.


10 Spensippus, being willed by Diogenes to leave that sitting still in a
corner that he used, and to stretch out his legs with going, answered: that
he lived not by legs, but by understanding. Fanorinus.


Unto virtue.
1 YE must have an eye to that which Plato did divinely write, that such me^
were wont to be citizens, as were the most excellen and worthy men in a
City. Cic. Lib 1. Epist. fa.9.


2 Thou must wholly endeavor thy self to such virtues as may get thee eternal
fame, if thou would attain to that degree that thou desire. Lib. ^. Epi 4.


3 Thou must of necessity answer to that expect ation which the People have
conceived of thee, if thou will look for any preferme^t, which thing thou
may easily accomplish, if thou shall apply thy self to a virtuous life.

4 We esteem that the bodies of worthy and valiant men be only immortal,
and that the motions of the mind and virtue, deserve perpetual glory. Lib. 3
Epi. ^.


5 Let us love our Country, let us obey ye Senate, let us imitate the godly:
let us despise the benefits of this present life, and let us seek for virtue,
accou^ting yt to be most good, which shall be perfectly just.

6 Him do I deem an able and worthy man, who ascends to an high degree by
his own virtues, and not him that ascends by another man's fall and misery.
7 Covet to get thee friendship, not with all those that seek to be srends with
thee, but with such as shall be worthy men, and such with whom thou may well
govern the City. Pro Roscio.


8 It is convenient that men do hold in greater price the soul then the
body: for, the soul is ye most perfect substance of man, and the body is but
a shadow of the man, ever changing and imperfect. Isocrates.


9 Like, as an huge image must be set upon some foundation, so ought a man be
founded upon honesty without ever shaking or being removed.

10 Agesilaus, King of Lacedemonia, being demanded, what were the things that
appertains to a Prince? he answered: bold courage against his enemies, good
will toward his Subjects, and readynes in giving good counsel. Plutar.


11 Zeno said, that the most precious ornaments of a City, were the virtues
of the Citizens. Eschines.


12 Like, as a lantern set on the top of an high cliffe, nourishing with a
little oil a great flambe, is a succor to Mariners, that pass that way through
the deepth of the Seas, even so is one good Citizen a great help to many
others.

To the obedience of the Prince.
1 I Admonish you for your own quiet and wealths sake, that ye show obedience
unto him, whom it has pleased GOD to appoint a Prince ever you, whereof ye
shall never fail if that you shall but measure his great power and dignity with
your own simple estate.

2 It is an ancient ordinance of laws, ye subjects should yield reverence and
obedience to their Prince. Euripides.


3 Epaminundas, seeing a goodly great host of men without a governor, said:
lo, what a multitude of beasts are here without any head. Plutarch.


4 Solon, being demanded, how a City might be brought unto a perfect
estate, answered, when as the Citizens shall obey the magistrate, and the
magistrate the laws.

5 Forasmuch, as Princes are upon earth, the deputies and lieutenants of GOD
himself, who, but mere Atheistes shall dare presume to rebel against, or not
to obey their sovereign Prince.

To the obedience of Elders.
1 IF you will follow the way that your Elders have taught you, ye shall be in
good hope to come to great preferment and dignity.

2 Those have attsined to a great part of virtue and righteousness, which do
reverence such as be worthy of reverence. Pithagoras.


3 The hands of young men be strong to labor, and the opinions of old men, be
apt for counsel. Euripides.


4 It is an old saying, that the work of young men, and the counsel of old
men, have great force.

To the obedience of Parents.
HE, that reuerenceth Father and Mother, is, not only in his life, but also at
his death, acceptable to God. Euripides.


2 He, that fears and willingly obeys his parents, is like (without doubt)
to become a good citizen. Orpheus.


3 God has respect unto such as withal reverence do give pre-eminence to their
Parents.

4 Behave thy self toward thy Father and Mother, even like as thou would
have thy Children do unto thee. Isocrates.


5 Pittacus, reproouing a man's Son that would contend with his Father, used
these words, if thou shall speak any thing amiss unto thy father, thou shall
be blamed therefore, and if there shall be nothing amiss, yet, thou shall be
deemed worthy blame. Elianus.


6 A certain young man coming from study, whereas he had heard Zeno many
years, was demanded by his Father, what thing he had learned in so long
space? he answered, that he would show him: but forasmuch, as he showed it
not forthwith, his fatherin a cholor fell upon him, and did beat him, which
beating, he supporting patiently, said: I have learned with patience to bear
my Fathers anger.

7 If thou be ungrateful toward thy Father and Mother, nobody will judge thee
to be ever mindful of any benefit, that they have done unto thee. Xenophon.


To favor the common weal.
1 THere is nothing that ca^breed thee greater profit and glory, nor of all
worldly things that can be more famous and worthy, then too do good to thy
Country. Cic. 10. Epist. 7.


2 I would exhort thee to go forward with that honorable enterprise that thou
have in hand: but seeing that of thy self thou have already done more for the
common weal, then I could demand, I ought rather to rejoice with thee
therefore, then to exhort she. Ad Attic. Epi. 7. Lib. 14.


3 That is a true Glory, and an undoubted praise of virtuous acts, and of
excellent deserts toward the common weal, the which is approved not only by
the testimony of all good men, but also by the common sort and all. Cic Fill.


4 It is our duty to provide for these things, and for this cause be we
placed in this estate, that as out of an high window, we might discry
counsel a far of, and with our wisdom to make the common weal without
danger and fear.

5 It is the duty of such as we are, to abide with a watchful mind, always
to do, to think, or to say, somewhat for the common weal.

6 He, that lustely defends his Country, not caring for death, envy, or
punishment in respect thereof, such a one may (truly) be called a man. Fro
Milone.


7 Pithagoras being demanded, in what sort a man may deal against an
ungrateful Country? aunsweared: as against his own mother. Eusebius.


To Constancy.
1 THere remains nothing else for me to do, but to pray and exhort thee,
that thou would stablish thy mind against all adversities of fortune, and
that thou will remember (not only those things that thou have learned of
worthy men) but also those virtues that with good nature and study thou have
achieved. Cle. 4. Epist. 13


2 We have seen (aforetyme) how that ye dealt wisely in the prosperity of
fortune, and that ye wan great praise thereby: Let us now see also how well you
can behave your self in adversity, without taking any great care therefore, so
as your noble heart may not seem debased.

3 Deal so as your gentle disposition and excellent learning may help you to
pass away valiantly the injury that ye have received. Lib. 6. Epist. 1.


4 I would have you to be of an heart (not only quiet) but also valiant and
strong, Pro Milone.


5 Be of good courage, so that if the malicious wickedness of some me^ shall
seek to diminish your worthiness, truth may make known their malice, and your
worthiness: and that whereas they shall go about to quench the same, they may
kindle more and more, ye flames of your virtue. 6 Beat down under the yoke of
your worthiues this calamity, tread it down with the feet of your wisdom: for
there is no tree that has so firm and sure rooting, as yt which has been
beaten with many blustering blastes of wind. 7 He, that has a sure and
steadfast mind, does easily obtain a perfect and stedie end of all those
things that he desires: but he whose mind is feeble and wavering, is never
safe from the hurtes of fortune, in what place so ever he be.

8 There can no mishappe chance unto him that groundeth his foundation upon
wisdom, temperaunce and continency.

9 Thou must strain thy self to bear the madness of fortune with a valiant
mind.

10 Like, as the good ordering of the body makes us easily to support (both)
cold and heat, so the good disposition of the mind, makes us constant to
bear anger, displeasure, with ye rest of human affections.

11 If thou will be a Lord as well of thy self as over others, deal so, as
thou may rather co^mande thine appetites, then thy vassailes. Isocrates.


12 Sophocles, showing to Pericles a very beautyfull young man, he answearing,
said: it behooves (Oh Sophocles) him that bears rule, to have not only
contynent hands, but also contynent eyes. Aristippus.


To patience.
1 IF any thing happen contrary to our expectation or worthiness, let us be
content with patience to abide it, ever looking for better, when God shall see
time.

2 We ought with patience to abide those things that shall happen, which
human wisdom cannot remeady, always comforting our selves with thinking,
that nothing is happened unto us, more then has happened to others aforetime.
Cie. 5. Epi 20,


3 I will never leave exhorting you to that patience which is proper to a wise
man, as ye are, and that ye persuade yourselfe to be ordered, according to
the will of God, who foreseeth all things.

4 Look, how much the more cruel the Master is, so much more famous
becomes the patience of the servant.

5 If you shall with greater patience abide to be vanquished, then shall you
be Vanquishours, ye shall be also reputed more valiant then they.

6 I wish you to apply your self, according to the quality of the time,
abiding patiently your present adversity, against which ye cannot prevail.

7 I exhort you that ye use the Armor of humility and patience: for, with
them ye shall vanquish the force of envy.

8 Forasmuch, as the chances of things are not applied to our wills, it is
expedient that we apply our will to those chances. Aristotle.


9 Our life is like to dice-playing, whereas me^ must be contented with their
chance. Socrates.


To gratefulness.
1 Ought not we to ymitate the fertile feelds, which do yield much more fruit
then they received.

2 If ye remember what I have done for you, ye will not forget to recompense
the same again, as duty binds you to do. Cie. ad Q. and C. Romans


3 It is the part of a grateful People to recompense those Citizens that have
been friendly to the common weal.

4 I will never cease to do well unto the common weal, and if it shall be
grateful toward me, I will be glad thereof, and though it shall be
ungrateful, in such a weight matter, I will in simplenes of conscience do it
good.

To loving kindness.
1 VAliant Knights do reign and bear authority more actiuely with a mild
and pleasant Reyne or bridle, then with an hard and displeasaunt.

2 Above all things I exhort you that ye continue still your old loving
kindness toward every body, for, as it is an old proverb, the favor of
every simple body, avails somewhat.

3 Like, as garments do cover the naked preuities of the body, so does loving
kindness and gentleness cover the defectes of the mind. Democri.


4 Aristotle, being reproved for that he had given alms to a wicked man,
which begged it of him, he aunsweared, I give not this to the lewd fellow,
but to humanity. Solon.


5 Scipio, willing to keep the memorial of Polybius, labored not to return
home to his house every night, except he had first gotten some Friend and
familiar companion.

6 If thou would go about to adorn a City with any manner race orname^t:
first of all, thou ought to bestoare thy self with ye singular orname^t,
which brings with it, humanity, justice, and liberality.

7 A Prince, or he that is in authority, ought rather to desire that his
vassayles should reverence, then sear him. Pithagoras.


To the good education of Children.
1 COnsider with your self how that ye ta^ leave no greater richesse, nor
worthier dignity, then good education.

2 You shall live after your death, in the life of your Children, if ye shall
bring them up in such sort as they may choose the good, and forsake the evil.
Photion.


3 Learn to bring up thy Children so as they may (not only feed the body) but
also thy spirit with food of immortality. Plato.


4 It is our part to seek for perpetuity of our generation, and to leave
behind us seruau^ts to God. Dion.


5 To beget Children, is a thing naturalll, but to bring them up well,
proceeds of a Godly love.

To fly sloth.
1 ALL the discourses and motions of our mind, ought to be exercysed, either
in giving honest cou^sailes, which appertain to good living, or else in
studying for knowledge and science.

2 All hurtes whilst they be new and fresh are easily healed, but if thou
suffer them once to rancour and wax old, they take such root as hardly ca^
they be ever rooted out or cured. Phillippica.


3 There is no thing amongst men so high and difficult, which, man's wit can not
attain, but without travail and pains, none can ariue at the perfection of
such things as may make him better and worthier, then the ignorant and doltish
sort of people.

4 Labor and travail, is adjoined with virtue and renown, and he that flies
the one of these, shall never attain to the other.

5 Forasmuch, as no thing is worse then ydlenes, I wish you, that when ye have
space and time, you will do so much as write some news to your Friends, and
especially to me, who love you most dearly.

6 I exhort you, to fly ydlenes, and to spend your time in the best and most
honest exercise that ye ca^: for nothing does more hurt time, then time it
self.

7 No worthy thing ca^ be accomplished without pains taking, and God does
willingly help such as be deligent. Sophocles. Euripides.


8 Labor, is no labor while it is a doing: afterward, it causes joy.

9 Zeno said, that man had no greater need of any thing, then of time.

To Study.
1 I Would that thou would let pass all sorrows and vain passions, and
would addict thy mind to ye study of doctrine, the which in prosperity would
be an ornament unto thee, and in adversity would succor thee. Cic. 5. Epi.
11.


2 I pray thee heartily, that thou will follow study, as thou have begone
too do, for that does noorish us with a most pleasant hope.

3 It is a thing worthy praise, and grateful to every body that a man should
trauail in those sciences, which may profit many. Pro L. Murena.


4 All other things be to no purpose in man's life, but the use of good studies
makes a man delightful in his youth, beloved in his age: is to us an orname^t
in prosperity, a refuge and comfort in adversity: it is a pleasure to us when
we be at home, and no impedyment when we be abroad: it abides with us
always, in bed, in our journey, and in the country, whersoeuer we be.

5 Seeing, man's wit is mutch like to iron, which being occupied, does look
bright, and lying still, both rust and consume: let us then spend our selves
rather in famous studies, then in obscure ydlenes.

6 Demosthenes, being demanded, by what means he had obtained ye art of an
Orator? he answered: by spending more oil then wine. Dethocri.


7 Like, as in battle the force of iron or steel is more worth then of gold,
so is science in this our life more of value, then richesse. Socrates.


To parle or descant:
and (first) of pleasant Speeches.
1THese Bathes are become very wholesome, contrary to their custom, but
peradventure, they be inamored with thee, and do apply themselves to thy
necessity, forsaking their own nature for to aid and help thee, which thing
if it be true, I will not greatly marvel it Heaven and Earth do leave their
natural propriety for to do thee service. Cic. 4. Lib. 8. Epist. 13.


2 I am fully resolved to come unto thee, and for to see and visyt thee, and
also to suppe with thee, for, I think that though thou have the gowte in thy
feet, yet thy Cook has it not in his hands. Cic. 9. Epi. 25.


3 Diogenes, being demanded of a certain man, why he went not to abide
amongst the Lacedaemonians, ye which might praise him? he answered, that albeit
the Physicians applied them selves to seek the health of men by medicines, yet
they did not minister to such as were in good health. Dion.


4 Democritus, seeing one thief lead to the prison by aleuen men: Oh villain
(quoth he) that have robbed so little, and not rather wast able to steal so
much as might have caused all these men that lead thee to be carried also to
prison. Serimus.


5 When, as a certain thief would have excused himself to Demosthenes,
saying, that he knew not that he had stolen any thing of his: Yea (quoth
Demosthenes) but it was enough that thou knew it to be thine own.

6 Diogenes, being demanded, whereof it came that men bestowed alms rather
upon such as were halte and lame, then to Philosophers, because (said he)
they fear that they shall sooner become halt and lame, then Philosophers.
Pithagoras.


Grave Sentences.
1 ME thinks that a Captain cannot guide well an Army, except he first
govern well himself.

2 The common people, except they be kept in some awe and good order, do
nothing well.

3 One hurt never comes without another.

4 Jesting, and merry talk must be used, like as men do use salt in their
meat, that is, sparingly. Socrates.


5 Whilst that me^ do fly death, they overtake it.

6 Diogenes, was wont to say that me^ do provide many things necessary for
their living, and but few things that appertain to live well. Democri.


7 Aristides, being demanded, what thing it was to be just? answered: not to
desire any thing, that is another man's.

8 Demades said, that the shamefastnes in ye countenance of a woman, is the
rock of her beauty.

9 A man ought not to seek means for to hyde his wickedness with words, but
to amend them with reproves. Pithagoras.


10 Those things that are dishonest to be done, are much more dishonest to be
spoken.

11 Arrogant Persons, are like to armor that is gilded without, for their
inward parts, do not agree with the outward.

12 Age and marriage, are much alike, for we wish for them both, and when they
are come, we be soon weary of them. Theod.


12 Seleucus, the Lawgiuer to the Locrenses, said, that the laws were like to
spyders webbes which catch small flies, but the waspes and bees, fly thorough
them. Plato.


Subtle and witty Sentences.
1 SOlon, being demanded, why he had appointed no punishment for such as
should kill their Fathers? because (said he) I thought there would be none so
wicked to commit such a part. Pro Roscio. Amer.


2 Aristotle said, that those which went about to show forth things that were
manifest already, did like as if they would show the light of the sun with a
candle. Diogenes.


3 Esope, used to say, that every body carried with him one purse or sachel
before, and another behind: in that behind he did put his own faults, in them
before other men's faults. Euripides.


4 Pitha, the Daughther of Aristotle, being demanded, what was the best
color of all others? answered, that which did grow in the shamefastness of
witty countenaunces. Democri.


5 Like, as wine fills empty bottels, so does opinion with fools.

6 Theanus, being asked, what was the duty of a matrone? he answered, to
please her Husband. Socrates.


7 A certain Romain, being reproved of his friends, because, he had forsaken
his wife, which was honest, rich, and beautiful, he holding out his leg,
showed his foot, saying, here is also a new and well fashioned shoe, and yet
ye will not believe how it greeueth me. Plutarch.


8 Nobody can govern a Horse well without a bridle, nor riches without reason.
Plato.


9 Socrates, being demanded, what manner of men handy craftmen were: such
(said he) as despise their equals. Socrates.


10 Diogenes, seeing one who erst had been very rich, and through
prodigality was come to extreme penury, supping with hard fare, said, if thou
had before time eaten on this fashion, thou might have supped better now.
Pithagoras.


To give thanks:
and (first) for goodwill showed.
1 I Make greater accounpt of this good disposition of your mind toward me,
then of any other thing that I ca^ look for at your hands. Cic. 4. Epist fa,
^.


2 It is a confort to me for to know that you bear me the like affection that
every man bears unto himself. Lib. 16. Epi. 11.


3 I see the great love, which Caesar bears me, whereof I more esteem, then
of all the dignities that I can ever receive by him. Ad Q. frat.


4 I feel great delight in the good will that Caesar bears me, more the^ I
do for all the promises that he has made me: for, I am not so greedy of
honors and renown, as I am desirous to have his goodwil continued toward
me. Lib 2. Epist. 18


5 I received your Letters, which were very welcome unto me, as well for the
news contained therein as for your goodwil thereby expressed: and I thank you
most hartly (both) for your certyfying me of the one, and of the other.

6 I assure my self undoubtedly of the love that you bear me, the which I
measure by the recyprocall love that I also bear you.

7 My man has made relation to me of your so great goodwill which you bear
me, and of the tender care that you have of me, that although you had never
done me pleasure erst in all my life, yet, for this cause I would hold my
self continually bound unto you.

8 I thank your lordshippe (most humbly) for the good report that you made of
me, for which (your great courtesy and noble goodwil, though otherwise) I
cannot by any service be able to deserve the same, yet I will not cease to
render unto your honor countinuall thanks, and daily to pray for you.

For benefits received.
1 I Remain your Debteur, and shall always think my self bound unto you,
for the benefit you have bestowed on me, who am Inferior to none of your
Friends. Cic. 4 Epist. 11


2 As often, as I look upon my wife, my children, my house, or my Country,
so often do I see the great benefits and good turns, that you have done me.

3 You may immagine easily with your self how laudable a thing it is to do
good for others, in as much as I esteem my self greatly renowned by the
benefits that I received at your hands.

4 Our Lord God granted me children, and you have restored them to me again,
when thy were lost.

5 I will honor the memory of your good turn done unto me with an everlasting
benevolence, not only while I live, but also, so as your fame may abide after
my death.

6 If I should do nothing but spend all the residue of my life. in showing my
self grateful to the benefactors of my welfare, it were but my duty, since
I can make them no amends.

7 Forasmuch, as the baseness of my poor fortune is so simple, and the
worthiness of your merits, and benefits toward me, is so great (I trust)
that you will vouchsafe (whereas no other recompense can be had) to content your
self only with the gratefulnes of my heart.

For favor received.
YOur lordship (who had never failed to stand my Friend) have now even drawn
me out of calamity, and set me in good estimation, whereof, I will never be
unmindful nor show my self ungrateful whilst I live.

2 I give you infinite thanks for the freendshippe which at my instance you
showed to my Friend, the which thing was as acceptable unto me for the desire
that I had to satisfy his need, as that, I take it for an evident argument of
your infailable goodwill that you bear me.

3 Your most loving letter was intermingled with so many, and such great
demonstration of your love toward me, as I might thereby have cause to yield
you abundance of thanks as to my especial fre^d.

4 I am to give you thanks (not only for ye favor that you have showed me)
but also, I abide in your debt, and that under such a condition, that though
not fully (yet to the uttermost of my power) I will at sometime requite your
courtesy.

5 Although your friendship showed me in this matter, cannot by me be
recompensed with the like, yet, I will never forget my duty toward you for ye
same.

For commendations received.
1 THat fame, which grows by any man of wisdom and authority, does
greatly increase the reputation and credit of him that is praised.

2 I cannot tell, in what sort I might recompense your courtesy, except, it be
in laboring to veryfie in some respects, the report, that you have made of me.

3 Seeing, that you for the love that you bear me have given me such
commendatio^s, as better might have beseemed me to have given you, I shall
abide your Debtor therefore.

4 The praises that you have uttered of me, albeit that I cannot hear of them
without being ashamed, yet, I thus account, that in as mutch as you can not
flatter, you have made this report of mere goodwill that you bear me,
wherefore I give you most hearty thanks.

5 Concerning the commendations that you gave me, whither you think as you say,
or that you feign like a Poet, I thank you hartly for the^: for to be praised
at a learned man's hand, yea though (it were fasly) cannot be without credit.

6 The praises that you unworthily attributed to my wrytings do assure me that
you have a good opinion of me, and that the most part of me^ will esteem
greatly of that which you allow.

6 I do so greatly esteem of the praises that you give me (by which I see
that I am in your favor) that it makes me to think sometimes the better of
my self.

For being advertised.
1 I Give you most hearty thanks, for that you have vouchsaued to write unto
me what was your counsel and judgment herein.

2 Every point of your letters were so far from offending me that I account
them most loving and dear, and for the^ I give you most humble thanks.

3 The Letters sent by your lordship, do declare how much my duty increases
toward you, daily more and more.

4 Your letters pequire no other answer at my hands (saving) that after the
good hope and friendly aduertisementes (wherewith you still incyte me) I may
have occasion more and more to give you thanks, and so mutch the more thanks,
as that the fruit of your deligence and goodwill, does more plentifully
abound.

FINIS
Certain worthy sentences, very meet to be written about a Bedchamber, or
to be set up in any convenient place in a house.
1 THe good Son, grafteth goodness, whereof, salvation is the fruit, But the
evil pla^teth vices, the fruit whereof, is da^natio^.

2 Therefore, at night call unto mind,
how thou the day have spent:
Praise God, if naught amiss thou find:
If ought, betimes, repent.
3 Thy bed is like ye grave so cold,
and sleep yt shuts thine eyes,
Resembles death, the clothes, ye mowlde
in grave when as thy body dryes.
4 Therefore, let not thy sluggish sleep,
close up thine waking eye:
Till with advice and judgment deep,
thy daily deeds thou try.
5 Who any sin in conscience keeps,
when he to quiet goes
More venterous is, the^ he yt sleeps,
with twenty mortal foes.
FINIS.
A brief Table, for the readier help to find out, every particular matter,
contained in this Book.
The manner or Method, how to rejoice, what rejoicing is, and of the
particular causes whereof (most commonly) men do rejoice. Vidz. OF Health. Fol.
1 Of health recovered. Fol. 2 Of dignity obtained. Fol. 3 Of dignity
promised. Fol. 4 Of Gooddes gotten. Fol. 5 Of Inheritance gotten. Fol. 6 Of
friendship gotten. Fol. 7 Of a Reconciliation. Fol. 7 Of being in a good
Opinion. Fol. 8 Of return from a Voyage. Fol. 9 Of return out of Exile. Fol.
10 Of Letters received. Fol. 11 Of Matrimony. Fol. 12 Of Childbirth. Fol. 12
How to wish or pray for. Vz. TO pray for health. Fol. 13 To pray for
Dignity. Fol. 14 For prosperity. Fol. 15 For a benefit or a good turn. Fol.
19 For Liberty. Fol. 17 For Peace. Fol. 17 Not to be in an evil opinion. Fol.
18
How to advertise, what it is, and wherein to advertise. Vz. TO advertise one to
work warely. Fol. 19 To beware of Errors. Fol. 20 Of traiterous dealings.
Fol. 21 Of Enemitie. Fol. 22 Not to fall in an evil opinion. Fol. 25 Not to
speak amiss. Fol. 26 To become circumspect in writing. Fol. 27 To know
himself. Fol. 29 To administer Justice. Fol. 30 To co^serue and maintain
health. Fol. 34
How to blame, what it is, and for what causes. Vz. TO blame evil manners. Fol.
32 To blame an evil mind. Fol. 33 To blame slacknes in Religion, and an evil
conscience. Fol. 34 The small estimation of Friends. Fol. 35 Civil Wars. Fol.
35 Cruelty. Fol. 36 Pride. Fol. 37 Avarice. Fol. 38 Prodigality. Fol. 40
Anger. Fol. 40 Envy. Fol. 41 Wanton love. Fol. 43 Surfeiting. Fol. 43 Idleness.
Fol. 44 Richness. Fol. 45 Honors. Fol. 46 Pastimes. Fol. 47 Beauty. Fol. 47
Noblenes. Fol. 48 Flattery. Fol. 49 Ingratitude. Fol. 50 Malice. Fol. 51
Doltishnes. Fol. 51 Surposing or applying things amiss. Fol. 52 To blame this
life. Fol. 52
How to lament, or be sorry, what it is, and for what occasions. Vz. FOr the
death of some body. Fol. 53 For sickness. Fol. 54 For poverty. Fol. 54 For
Imprisonment. For Exile. Fol. 55 For liberty lost. Fol. 56 For reputation
lost. Fol. 56
To comfort or give cousolation, in sundry respects. Vz. AGainst old age. Fol.
57 Against death. Fol. 57 For health lost. Fol. 59 Of reputation lost. Fol. 60
Of Goods lost. Fol. 62 Of the loss of Friends. Fol. 63 Of imprisonment. Fol.
64 Of Exile. Fol. 66 Of Poverty. Fol. 68
How to bewail or lament for diverse causes. Vz. For the death of our Fren^^
Fol. ^^ For things done unto v^ Fol. ^0 Of times. Fol. 71 Of Fortune. Fol. 72
How to demand, or request, upon sundry occasions. Vz. For aid. Fol. 73 For
favor or grace. Fol. 73 For counsel. Fol. 74 For Pardon. Fol. 75
How to exhort, to sundry purposes. Vz. TO the fear of God. Fol. 74 To live
well. Fol. 76 Unto virtue. Fol. 77 To the obedience of the Prince. Fol. 78 To
the obedience of elders, and Parents. Fol. 79 To favor the common weal. Fol.
80 To constancy. Fol. 81 To patience. Fol. 82 To gratefulness. Fol. 84 To
loving kindness. Fol. 84 To the good education of children. To fly sloth.
Fol. 85 To study. Fol. 86
How to parle or descant, diverse and sundry ways. Vz. With Pleasant speeches.
Fol. 87 With Grave sentences. Fol. 88 With subtle and witty Sentences. Fol. 89
How to give thanks, for sundry occasions. Vz. FOr goodwill showed. Fol. 90
For benefits received. Fol. 91 For favor received. Fol. 92 For commendations
received. Fol. 93 For being advertised. Fol. 94

FINIS.

