AN EXORTACION TO CHARITY, very needful at this time for each man and woman
to inbrace, Compyled by Wyllyam Conway.

The contents
CAstificantes animas vestras in obediencia charitatis, infraternitatis amore
simplici, ex cord inuicem diligite attencius, renati, non exsemine
corruptibili, sed incorruptibili, per verbum dei viui: et per manentis
ineternum. Petri. Episto i. Capi. i.

CHastyce your souls in the obedience of love, even in brotherly love, with
out faynyng, ernestly love ye one an other, even from the heart, being
regenerate not of corruptyble sede, but incorruptyble. And by the lively word
of God everlasting. Petri. Epis. i. Chap. i.


The contents of this treatys.
IN this little volume is contained a mirror for some men to behold, wherein
when they have looked, I would that they should use one condycyon, that I espy,
some Maistresses of Lendon, with other Bentylwome^ use. And that is, when they
look in their glass they have a wete spong ready, that so sone as ever they
espy a blot or spotte upon their face, by and by with the same they make it
fair and clean.

So likewise (in good faith) I would that the readers heareof, as soon as ever
they epsy their fautes in this myrror or glass, by and by would I that they
should amend and cleanse away the same blot, or else were it as good that they
looked not in this atal. But this treatise most chefely in deed tends to
charity, it entyceth and provoke every man to charity, in which is
contained all other virtues, for if men be charytable they shall not only love
God fear God, and serve God above all other creatures, but also shall help,
forther sucker and sustain their poor neighbors, with all their strength and
might, so that charity good reader, is even the hole content of this little
work. And in deed to my judgment charity is a thing most necessary in this
present time to be treted on. (:)

TO ALL THE GENTYL readers of this treatise gretyng in our Lord Jesus Christ.
FOrasmuch (good reader) as the most thing that we good Christen men should
look for now in this age, being fyxed fastened, and rooted in the faith of
Jesus Christ this. xv. C. and.l. years is charity, which brings with him in
company all other virtues. And makes a perfect full and suffycyent faith to
the salvation of man. For as holy Writ saytk, and al holy Doctors, and as the
Catholyke Church teaches, faith without charytye avails no more the soul,
then the sape of sour onions avails sore eyes. If faith I say then be
nothing without charity, for gods sake let each man that has faith use
therwiih charity. Now what charytie is anon by gods grace, I will show you.
And in the mean time (good reader) Let us somewhat talk of faith. And how
many faythes as I perceive and all men shall know, that will not be dombe when
they should speak, death when they should hear, and blind when they should se,
there is now used faith faynte, faith feigned and faith faithful. Now how
these kinds of faith are used, hereafter shall be declared. This I know well and
am assured, and thou reader know so well as I, that each man in this realm
has faith, or at the least wise sobre faith. And I think in like manner,
that each man supposethe him self to have a right and a good faith: yet in
deed it is not so: For as saint James says. Cap. ii. The Devil has faith.
But now to end this preface. First I shall desire al men of pardon, if by my
schaunce any thing shall escape me the auctour hereof, for as it is commonly
seen, a stranger shall espy a fault in a man's house sooner then he him self
shall. And so I think a man shall quyclyer espy a fault in this work, then I
my self, wherefore if there be any man that shall so do, most hartelye I
require him for to mende it. Secondly I shall desire the good reader not to be
discontented with me for any thing herein written. Least thereby thou shake
of clean all the fruytes of my book which tends chefely to charytie,
perhaps I will say somewhat that shall touch some men, wherefore

(...) (...) then full worthy art thou to be called charity or a charytable
man. This that I write good reader is true, wherefore I exhort the to follow
it, if thou deny the following thereof, thou art no Christian man thou art
neither good nor virtuous. For that I hearein teach is charity, and if thou
have no charity, thy faith is naught and of no value. There be now a days as
me seems. iii. kinds of faith used. The first is faith faynte, and that is he
which I talk of even now, for he has faith but it is not a right faith, and
so it seems by his behauour, for he takethe so feruente pains in persecutyng
his brother, that he waxes so faint he may no longer bear any goodness or
charity, but like a faint man fayntly lets all fall from him. Some other
have a feigned faith, that is to preach one thing and believe an other, I pray
god we have none of these Anabaptystes, Lybertynes, Arryans, and Maris
aduersaris, of which sort last resyted we had one not long since. A great
adversary to that most blessed and pure vyrgyn, and not only to her, but also
to her son Jesus Christ, and to us his members. I pray God I say that we
have no more of these heresies raynyng, I fear lest many may be lykened to an
aple which is fair with out and rotten within: If there be any such faynyng
people: I pray god sone open their hearts, least they should infecte simple
souls: and make them like to their selves, past al remedy, then there is faith
faithful, and those be they. Math. v.

Qui persecutionem patiuntur propter iusticiam. Which suffer persecution for a
just and right cause, of them I will not much speak, for although some have
so done, yet not so many as ought, the more pytie, and all for lack of
charity. For if they had loved Christ, so well as Christ loved them they
would not have stopped: but wyllyngly with all their heart, have suffered some
pain for his sake, that paid so great a price for their redemption, this
charity is good love, and good love is none other thing but charity, for
whether it be love to god or to thy neighbor, so thy love be good it is
charity it self. But if it be a feigned love, or a noughty love, then may it
in no wise bare the name of charity, for this word love, without any other
consequence or matter following, is a word indyfferente both to good and bad
as in example. I have hard a man say to his wife, wife I love the, to whom
she answered again and said, ye mary husband but your love is so little, that
I can neither feel it nor se it. Now (quod he) thou have judged as justly as
though thou had known my meaning, for in deed I said that I loved the,
but I told the not how, nor after what fashyon, so that I say, if love be
left alone, she may choose whether she will love well, or love ill, but if
charity be once named it can none otherwise be understood, but of good love,
without which a man's faith is nothing worth, as witnesses with me the blessed
apostle saint Paul writing unto the Corinthyans. Epist. i. Chapi. xiii. On
this wise. If I have all faith so that I may remove mountains, and have
therewith no charity. I am nothing, that is to say, my faith is nothing, ye
here now this little piece of saint paul's Epistle tells you what your
faith is without charity, wherefore still I desire you contynually to call for
charity, and to use charity, as needful it is now to preach charity, as it
was in the premityue church to preach faith, sith faith is no faith without
charity. But a lack who shall preach charity, our priests? Now in good
faith it greueth me sometime to here charity so scante among them, some of
the^ be not so charitable as I would wyshe them, for one preaches against an
other, one despyseth an others promocyon, one an others learning, and one an
others belefe: so that a man can not well tell how to avoid the venemus envy
of this world, but yet I would advise each priest to love other, considering
that all the Epystles saint Paul wrote almost, he has in them a treating
for unity. Saint James in his Epistle wylleth that if we fall at varyaunce we
should reconcyle our selves one unto an other, and open our sins before god,
he wylleth us always to love one an other, he specially there puts rich men
in remembrance of their duty toward their poor neighbors. Saint Peter
also gives great comfort for one to love an other, declaryng to each man his
duty toward maiestrates, for where disobedience is, there is no charity.
Saint John in his epistles fervently does declare what charity is, first
exortynge all men to keep gods commandments, declaryng that if they do
otherwise charity and fervent love to god is excluded, he shows the love
that god bare toward us, when he sent down his only begotten son to suffer
death for our sins: and he concludes of charity, saying, that who so has
charity has god: and who so loves not his brother, has no charity in him.
Our savior Christ says also to his Apostles John. Chap. xiii.

Diligite inuicem, that is to say. Love ye together, and then afterward he
tellethe them how they should love together saying. Sicut dilexi uos. That is
even as I have loved you. Now how Christ loved us to each man it is known,
part thereof might herein be expressed but for tediousnes, it is omytted,
wherefore let us all use charity and especially I say* to you that be prestes
show charity one unto an other, remembryng that Christ our master says unto
you. Math. v. Let your light shine so before men that they may se your good
works and gloryfye your father which is in heaven. Now sith you should be a
light to the world, for gods sake let charity be used among you, that other
men may the rather through your good ensamples learn to live charitably: then
shall each man louyngely live in this world, then shall sedcyyon cease and
charity floryshe: then brotherly love shall be among us. And without this as I
have alredye told you, your faith is nothing worth, if you list not to
believe me, look what saint Paul says in his first epistle, and xiii.
Chapter to the Corinthyans, read forth that charity and then shall you sone
se what fruits charity brings forth. Again I say that faith and charity
so charyshe one an other, that the one in no wise can be without the company of
the other. Wherefore still I cry after one sort and manner, for Gods sake
let each man endeavor him self to attain charity, and then use it and love
God (as I know no good Christen man does otherwise) above al things and thy
neighbor as thy self. Mary there be some that show small love toward him,
for they fear not to blaspheme him, to swear and stare by him, as though he
were more vyler then any creature that lyuethe, his wounds, his soul, his
heart, his blood, his sides, his nails, so that from the crown of the head
to the sole of the foot, they leave not one member of Christ vnrecyted, ye
and for a most common oath they take his hole precious body and make it their
sweryng stock, ye and this is done in the most excess of fylthynes that they
use, for when they are most drunk, then swear they most, when they are most
angry then they swear and teere Christ in pieces. But O wicked people, O
blasphemers of God, O tormenters of Christ, O ye worse then beasts, what
shall I call you, what shall I say unto you, ye fearelesse people, ye
shameless people, have you no regard of nature, have you no respect to
Christ? Know you not what you are, what you were, and what you shall come to?
O thou earth and ashes will thou blaspheme him so rygruslye, which came down
from his majesty to deliver the, whom the Devil fast had bound in the
chains of syn? Thou art much like unto the Adder or Serpent, of whom Ysope
tells a pretty fable, a husband man found this Adder in the cold snow, and
of his gentylnes brought her home, and laid her by a fire, where she was well
recovered and rendered to her former state again. (But now mark the gentylnes
of this Adder) when the good husband man came to her and touched her, to se
how she fared, for his kyndenes she caught hold about his boddy and stonge
him sore, wherewith the good man being vexed (and not without great cause)
took his Axe in his hand and cut her in pieces. Even so our master and savior
Jesus Christ, perceyuyng us vile and poisoned wretches, lyeng and quiuering in
the cold snow of sin: to our everlasting comfort, he descended from his
high trone, noryshinge us with the hot fire of fervent love, in preaching and
workynge for our behoof, and washing us in the sweet bathe of his most
precious blood, through the warmthe and swetenes whereof, we were brought
again into the favor of God, for which kind act and unspeakable benefyte,
we tormente him a fresh, we do our dylygent to vex him, we blaspheme him: we
set his most precious body in the fore front of al our marchau^dyse, we are
most ready to do those things which most ernestly he does forbydde. Beware
beware, beware be time, beware lest by your importunable vexyng of God through
your venemus and blasphemus oaths and abhomynable living: without either
virtue, shame or fear, he sodaynely with his axe or sword (the sharpnes where
of can not be expressed) cut and souder you from the lively members of his
mystycall body, and cast you into the deep Dongeon of hell, where shall be weeping
and gnasshyng of tethe, where you shall suffer eternal pain, where you shall
contynually blaspheme, and never cease though you would, and yet shall you
always suffer the torments due for the same, I think if you loved god, you
would not on such wise blaspheme him, you would I think fear somewhat the
punyshemente dulye ordained for such blasphemers. Are you paste fear?
remember ye not that the beginning of wisdom, is fear of our lord?
Wherefore wisely look upon your sinful soul: and lose not wylfully that
thing which Christ so derely bought, but leave your sweryng, leave your
blasphemyng. Ywys you learn it not in the new Testamente, for I am sure that
our sauyoure and redemer Jesus Christ says. Math. v. Thou shall not swear by
heaven for it is the seat of God, neither yet by the earth, for it is his
fotestole. Now in this word heaven, is comprehended all things therein
contained, and likewise by this word earth, is understood every thing
contained within the same, so that Christ leaves you nothing to swear by, as
appears by his words following in the same Chapter where he says, let
your co^municacion be ye ye, and nay nay. O my lord and God where be they that
keep those sayenges? verelye never so few in England, and again I think that
there was never so many that red these saiengs But now we may se that there
be many readers and few folowers. What, now there may not a boy tell a tale
but or he come to the end thereof, he must other swear by Christ or by some
member perteynyng to his most blessed body, nor now a woman can not sell a
poor pot with ale, but she must swear some oath to set it forth withal, ye,
eue^ though it be stark naught. O good God what mean these people? think
they to have here (Eternam mencione^ an eternal restyng place? Will they be of
the Adders kind we spoke of even now? Will you so vncurteouslye handell him
that so gentely ordered you? I must needs say you love not Christ, for he
says him self. John. xiiii. If ye love me keep my commandementes. Now you
break his commandments, whereof it must needs follow, that you love him
not, and in that you do not love him, you commyt sin. And Stipendium peccati
mors. The reward of sin is death. Romans Cap. vi. wherefore for gods sake look
well upon your selves. But ye drive of the time till the hour of death, or at
the least till syckenes or some other grefe happen to you* and then will you
cry. Escchyel. Cap. xviii. Thou wylt not lord the death of a sinner, but
rather that he should live and mende. But if you will follow my council, rest
not to much upon that point, for there is nothing more certain then death,
neither any thing more uncertain then the hour of death. Remember, remember
well these words spoken by the Prophet Escchyell. Cap. xviii. Turn unto me,
and you shall be saved. Here Christ by ddeth you turn unto him, and the form
how you should turn unto him, is written by the holy Prophet Iohell, look
upon it, and turn to Christ, while you have time, turn from your blasphemyng
and swerynge, from your perjury and evil living, give your perfect charity
unto god. Loving him and fearyng him with all your heart. If you turn unto
Christ on this wise, leauyng your former living, and applyenge your self to
follow gods commandments: I doubt not but God of his infynyte goodness
will look upon you, refreshe you, and save you, because he wylleth not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he should live and mende, such is the mercy
of God toward man. But ever take heed of boldenes, bolden not your selves so
much upon his mercy, to leave al his commandments vnfulfylled. For if you
run so far at rouers, like wantons and unbridled coltes, he must needs
scorge you, and beat you, wherefore I say play not the part of blind
bayerde. But give all honor, praise, glory, fear and love, to god above al
things heavenly and earthly, for he is to be loved above either Saint, soul,
Emperor, King, Father, Mother, Wife, Child, or any other creature. And also
bear fervent love and charity toward thy neighbor, of which charity I
have somewhat spoken before, and wylmore heareafter by gods license taking by
the way these words of Criste. Math. xix. Si uis ad vitam ingredi serua
mandata. If thou wylt enter into life keep the commandments. Now who so
endeuoreth not him self with all his power to follow and fulfill the
commandments of god, can not claim any interest or title justly in the
kingdom of heaven, and all the.x. commandments received of us Christen men
rests only in this word charity, the one toward god, and the other
toward our neighbor Well then sith without keeping of the commandments. a
man can not enter into heaven. I fear sore least our Basmongers shall not enter
into heaven, our raysers of rentes, our vserers with such like, as they that
bye their neighbors houses over their heedes. O ye Moules ye may well be
lykened to these rich men, ye cast up the earth hurtyng the good garden
herbs. and the earth so cast up you let it lie, and puts it to no good
use, but you go further and scrapes up more, in which doing is much hurt,
but at last comes master Moulecatcher with his spade and casts you up
pre^ely, and then destroy you. Even so those rich men castethe and scrapeth up
the gooddes of this world, which is the carthe of man, and hurdeth it on
heepes profitable, neither to them selves nor other men (but rather hurtefull.)
And at the length comes death and catchethe the moules by the back and then
the devil destroys them. But O ye Leasemongers, ye vserers, ye raysers of
rentes above the value of that you set it, and ye that bye your neighbors
houses over their heedes, give ear a little to Saint Paul, and to the charge
that he gave unto Timothe. The Bishop commaundynge him to charge other
therewith saying. Timothe.

Epist. i. Cap. vi. Charge thou the rich men of this world not to be high
minded neither to trust in the uncertainty of riches but in the living god
which gives us all things aboundantely to do good, to be rich in good
works, to give with a good will etc. Let this one piece of saint Paul's
Epistle be marked among our rich men, and then shall they soon know whether
that they do well in heapynge their goods and trustyng in their riches or no.
But I pray you to what use do they keep and store them up? Uerelye even to bye
their neighbors houses over their heedes, which is a thing very detestable:
and the smoke of such men's doings assendeth up to the trone of God, and
there stynketh odiously before the face of his deuyne majesty* wherefore take
good heed in time, least God sodeynely plage you. O ye wicked and
uncharitable men, that do bye your neighbors houses over their heedes, will
you for the entryng into a wretched house hear in earth, exclude and banyshe
your self from the everlasting kyngedome of heaven, suerly in those your
doings, you transegresse sore the commandments of God, and show your
selves to be both unfaithful and uncharitable, in handlynge your neighbors
so vncharytably, whom you should love and favor as your own self. Remember
that your life flies as a shadow, and never abides in one state and place,
wherefore most heartily I beseech every good man and woman to look upon their
selves: And even as they would other men should do to them, so would I the^ to
do unto their neighbor, calling unto their mind, that hence they must
depart, but how sone, how early, or how late they know not, therefore (as
the common proverb goes) live to day, as you would dye to morrow. Shake of
your old man, purge your sower leaven: put not sweet wine into musty bottels:
suffer not the devil to rule you any longer: play the man according to the
promise that you made at the font, which was to forsake the devil and all his
works, goo not back from thy word, but like a good Christen man take for
thy defense the buckler of faith, and to fight with, take the sword of Gods
most holy word, stand manfully that thou may say with saint Paul. Timo.
Episto. ii. Cap. iiii. Bonum certamen certaui. I have fought a good fight. Good
reader this may thou do through the grace of God, for which I pray the call,
that thou may overcome the temptacyons of the devil, which is a thing
soon done of a good willing man, for as saint Paul says. Phil. Cap. iiii.
Omnia possum in eo qui me conferrat. I can do althyng through him that
comfort me. Wherefore I say once again, stand steadfastly against the deuyls
temptacyons, and blaspheme not our savior and redemer Jesus Christ, at the
hearing of whose name: all the deuyls in hell do tremble and quake, and all the
Angels in heaven give reverence to it: on the other side be not rygorus and
cruel to thy neighbor, consider that he is thy own brother, a Christen man
as thou art and bought with as great a price as thou wast, although thy house
be full of gold and silver, and his body full of scabbes, though there be as
much difference between you two as was between poor Lasarus and the rich
man, yet at the day of Judgment God will regard that selly soul with all his
scabbes upon his body as much as he will do you with all your gold and
silver, ye and may fortune more to, onles you occupy it well whylest you be
hear. Thus far good reader, have I said my mind, because I would you should
bear a fervent love to God: and charity toward your neighbor, in the
doing whereof you shall not only please God most hyghely, but also show thy
self a good steward and baylye over that God has left to the in custody
which is thy faith. And now I will leave the, trusting that thou wylt follow
this little lesson, by me set forth for thy furtheraunce in grace, remembryng
that the chief point thereof is for the augmentyng of charity, and increase
of good love, which joined with faith, and so used catholykely, brings each
good manne and woman (after their progress in this world) to the everlasting
kingdom of heaven, there perpetualy abydyng in joy, whereas with most melodius
armony Angels contynually sing without ceassyng, Gloria in excelcis. to
which most glorius tabernacle and celestyal kingdom, our Lord for his
painful passion and incogitable love toward us borne, grant the, the
reader, and me the writer to come. Amen.

DEcetero fratres, quecunque sunt uera, quecunque pudica, quecunque iusta,
quecunque sancta, quecunque amabilia, quecunque bone fame, si qua virtus, si
qua laus discipline, hec cogitate, quae et didicistis, et accepistis, et
audistis, et vidistis in me, hec agite, et deus pacis eritvobiscum. Phil. Cap.
iiii.

BRethren as for other things, what so ever be true, what so ever be shame
fast, what so ever be just, what so ever be holy, what so ever are to be
loved, what so ever be of good report, if there be any virtue, if there be
any praise of learning, be myndefull of those things, and al which you have
learned and received, and hard, and seen in me, those things do you, and the
god of peace shall abide always with you.

Imprynted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the Gedrge, next to saint
Dunstones church by Wyllyam Powel.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


