A Sermon profitably preached in the Church within he^ Majesty's ho^oura^^e
(...) the City of London.

Before the Right worshipf^l Si^ O (...)

Pro^e^. ^.24 21.22. My son fear the Lo^d and the king, medd^e no^ with them
that are s^d tious.

For ^hei^ destruction sh^^l (...), for who know^^h the rui^e of them (...).

AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Waldgraue, and are to be sold a^ the sign of
the white Horse in Cannon lane.

TO THE RJGHT honorable Sir Frauncis WALSINGHAM Knight, of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Council, and principal Secretorie to her Highness, ANTHONY
ANDERSON preacher of Christ's holy Gospel witheth increase in Christ our Lord,
and much honor by him multiplied.
ALthough (Right Honorable) it seem much better to hear, yea, even to the
best learned, rather the^ to write of such argument, as by rugged enemies
hardly can be well digested, whose sharpened toongs enable to further hurt, as
burning coals do seek to scorch the godly: yet considering that in so
honorable a place I had pronounced the Sermon following, and by so many
earnest and godly persons eftsoons desired to pen the same, I rather
consented at last, to abide a present brunt, (sheltered under mighty
protection) and to discover in part the Popish adversary, for the benefit of
many: then cowardly for fear of some Romish storm, to thrust so bright a
ca^dle under a darkening bushel. And bethinking (as conueniency asks) on
who^ to crave a second shield for this my so spent time, your Honor first came
unto mind: to whose goodness I am not smally bound, for that benefit, which
erst by your honorable means I did attain. In regard whereof, though far
unable to render satisfaction, or approaching measure thereunto, I rest, not
debarred of former purpose, to present such short pay, in part of answer to
further debt, allured the rather by the well known godliness in your lowly
breast, which can and do content your self many times with a Mite, from a well
minded Widow, though much store of treasure cannot ballaunce your desert. My
will is much, but my wealth is small, yet sometimes small pearls for their
pureness, are accounted worth some greater stones of more glorious show. A
twofolde suite to your Honor I have for this, to say: that your wisdom
would not only accompanye your good liking of this my bold enterprise, but
also to vouchsafe your godly aid against such Romish Riots, as may percase
conspire by consulte, against this simple truth. For though their shows be not
all vnseem lie, yet their deeds do approve those of them which that way be
absolute, to be in this most horrible murder and sacrylege, by such Savage
Treason, more then Resolute. And therefore ought to be censured with Esaias the
Prophets sentence. Esaias. 26.10.
Show mercy to the wicked, yet he will not learn righteousness, but in the
land of vprightnes he will do wickedly, and will not consider the great and
mighty hand of God.

And of whose craftines to deceive, we may not (God grant that we be not) by
ouer-seeing them (not with insight necessary) be drawn secure of our safety,
Iosu. 23.13.
while they harbor in our bosoms. For Solomon does sommon our survey of such
with sharp conceit, Proverb. 26.24.25.
saying: He that hates, will counterfeite with his lips, but in his heart
he lays up deceit. Though he speak favorably believe him not, for he
bears seven abominations in his heart. But yet here is comfort: Hatred may
be coueredly deceit: but the Malice thereof shall be discovered in the
congregation. No better witness can be of Gods truth for this, amongst so many
honorable Co^ncellors, then your Honor, as to whom (for the discovery of the
present dissembling hate in the Catholic Romans) (bent against the sacred
state and person of the Lords anointed, our Sovereign Elizabeth) the Lord
from above has allotted you the height of such honor, and the pain of this
Pleasure, to sound the depth, and by seasonable search surely to find out,
as well the chief of the deepest dooers in this their most bloody attempt: as
wisely to weigh up the huge bulk, and hold Ancker of all their traitorous
Conspiracies. And as our hearts are inflamed with heaps of praises unto God
for this (as many as fear the Lord, and love their own safety) so were it
impossible to suppose, that such faithful Subjects, could be restrained from
continual prayer to God, in our sole mediator Christ, for the daily increase
of godly wisdom, gracious honor, and heavenly felicity, to the board and
bodies of such seasoned Senators, whose Honors deeply regarding the dangers
imminent, brought in this perilous storm, so wisely by divine Council, laid
present hand upon the helm of our stately ship, as by the still and most
sweet pirre of celestial winds, Eccle. 10.20.
she speedily (but miraculously) cut thorough the Roaming lofty Seas, so
many ways crossing, in suppose to sound and sink the same. But by his
fatherly providence (in these honorable Mariners diligence) our ship of
state, with her owner of high Majesty, yea and her whole fraught of Christian
peace and common tranquillity, floteth aloft with singular honor (the Lord
therefore be eternally praised) and in the prime of their wished tide, has put
the Bull and his Briggets to flight, which were prepared for her decay. Now
may Israel say, and that truly: Except the Lord had been of our side, we had
surely perished. But this is the Lords own doing, and let it be still
marvelous in our eyes.

And herehence English Israel pray thou to God heartily, and turn effectually
to the Lord thy God, Hosea. 14.
trust no more in Ashur, nor in thine own strength, for do thou not see,
that death and thy destruction was entered the Presence, where neither barbed
horse, or Cannon shot could have prevailed? watch and pray, for Satan is not
^ead, and the Pope with his, do yet hunger to prevail. Open your gates, ye
Princes, and let the king of glory enter in: so shall you be safe in your
Courts, and your in-sight shall be bright as the Sun, and then you shall
see, and be bold to say with the Prophet, that th^se wicked Rouers of Rome by
sea and land (the Judas Jesuits and their reconciled) which counterfeite the
forface of fined silver, are in truth by Touch, not better metal, then the
rust of iron: Even rebellious Traitors, walking craftily, Brass and iron. They
are all destroyers. The billows are burnt, the lead is consumed in the fire.
The founder melts in vain: Iere. 6.27.28.29.30.
for the wicked are not taken away. They shall call them reprobate silver* for
the Lord has rejected them.

Let the sage headed sound the depth of the popish profession, and record
their precious practice from first till now. And hereto adioine the clemency
of the Prince, the labors of the preachers, the love to win by policy in the
Counsel, and forgette not the prayers of the just, for their conversion, which
still seek our confusion and say as thou see (if thine eye be clear)
whether our Absolute Papists, be not Resolute Rust, as before is said? For
surely our most gracious Foundres Elizabeth, with her pitiful Clemency,
cannot melt, their sacrylegious malice against her long suffering person, but
even now after so many blessed benefits from the Lord, by her Majesty
bestowed upon the^, and us in common (were it but our long possessed peace) the
degenerate brattes of this fertile soil, do with eagre mood hunt in hungre,
the innocent blood of her sacred bosom: whose Romish thirst, cannot be
quenched except their Romulus, drink carowse in her guiltles blood. The
blowing bellows of gods holy spirit, and word (the godly preachers) cannot
make pure that which is but dross: and therefore they spend their lives in
their labors, al in vain, upon these Romanists: Or has the apt matter by
skillful art, more speedely to melte the metal, to say: the godly policy of
the most honorable Council with these so wicked men any better success: For
in recompense of their honors good policy to procure these: they may happily
find (could they possibly lend them hearing) that the rust of these Romanists,
would rather seek to win a Ioab in David his Court, 2. Sam. 14.2.30.
to procure the^ still favor and sparing, then by any their possible power
they can simply be brought to Christian obedience. But still these Catholics
labor to harden some, but to hinder more, and they allure many (not of the
worst calling) to draw away the faith of the most from God, and loyalty from
her Majesty, if so they could, and therefore our Recusants refuse their
presence, to the holy word and sacraments which is the prefixed purging
furnace, from a forced dross, whatsoever. But now at last perceiving all their
hope to be at end, they bend their ouerbold battery in wickedness against her
Majesty and this her highness la^d of vprightnes. Certes, in respect of our
purpose toward them the land is upright, and in comparison with them and
their Antichristian government, it is the Land of righteousness: where the
Gospel is sincerely Preached, the Lords Sacraments in substance soundly
administered, and the seat of holy (...) (ecclesiastical and civil) in all
christian sort erected and established. But yet when we consider our Case with
Gods Justice, we acknowledge great cause of controversy, with the whole
land, as did the Prophet Hosea, Hosea. 4.1.2.3.
for the inhabitants thereof. In whose time much wickedness, great
ignorance, and wilful contempt of knowledge did ouerflowe the coast.
Carnality and bloudgiltines bare a mighty sway, with an heaping together of
sins, even blood touched blood. viz. No spare of kindred, or cease from
horrible cruelty. O Lord, far be this blott from thy chosen nation of
England. But in respect of your Romish reconciliation, we confess very
many by you are made lame, and wickedly halt (which ought not once to limpe)
before God, and to her Majesty, whose wickedness do cause our dread of an
heavy Censure, and the more: because your present practice is a threat from
the Lord, of a direful day, if our speedye Repentance, and faithful prayers,
stand not in the gap before him. Psalm. 106.23.
But (...) ^^lice (ye foreign and domestical Romans) we firmly hold not
David and his subjects. The Lord will protect his Anointed, Psalm. 20.21.
Psalm. 2.
and conserve her person and state until the day of his decree, and she shall
with increase in much honor, continue the last moment, of that day, maugre the
mountains of your might, the Stratageams of Satan, and the furious sons of
perdition, by him sent: her to destroy. And also Christ's holy word, with her
sacred seat, and this most honorable Regiment shall in England still abide till
the same day of his determination, though Resyn and Romeliah, Esaias. 7.3.4.5
6.7.8.9.
in wa^hope for the future Tabeall. hunt now to make a breach in our
Jerusalem, and thereto persist to do their best. Against all their wicked and
most pestilent purposes. O Lord of hoastes, and father of Counsels, Psalm.
20.9.
save thou our Queen Elizabeth, and hear us for her, whenever we call upon
thee: O eternal father, let thy holy spirit dwell in her (our head under thee)
so shall we her true and loving members, in godliness and peace, long enjoy
her: which is the heart of all our desire. And direct O Lord our hearts and
powers as mourning Doves, to keep us Innocent from this great offense: But
make us wise as Serpents, to bend our backs to her in godly obedience: Our
bodies and our best to her defense: Our Souls, and selves to sing and sound
thy praise, for this thy miraculous preservation of her Majesty, and this thy
Church and Realm, in Christ our Lord we beseech thee. And here right
Honorable I cease to deteyne you craving pardon to this, and patience for this,
and protection as it may stand with godliness, and the safety of your Honor,
that my labor may more boldly ask the Consult, of all Satannicall consorts.
Why do you gentyles rage etc. God that is Eternal, Almightye, merciful, and
only wise, sign your Honor with your allotted proportion, in these his
Fatherly graces, and stall you long in honor and godliness, to live a Godly
governor with others like, under her Majesty, whose life the Lord prolonge
to her and our felicitye in him, Amen.

Your Honors humbly to command, Anthony Anderson.
London September, 30. 1586.
Why do the Gentiles rage, and the people murmr in vain. Psalm. 2.
IN the first of our holy labors I beseech you let us consider that every good
gift descends from above, and therefore in full persuasion of our heavenly
fathers love toward us through Jesus Christ his only Son, Let us faithfully
by earnest prayer cry for his holy spirit to his universal Church, and every
part thereof: and namely to this Church of England and Ireland etc.

Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine, murmr, and meditate, with
turbulent Spirits upon great mischief, yet all in vain. For neither have
they cause so to frette and fume, or can they possiblye bring to pass, yt
which so wickedly they have in their banded consultations confirmed by
conclusion.

The words are of David the Lords anointed, king of Judah, besette with sundry
enemies, hateful at his honor, and hautely devising which way to distronize
his excellencye, but for that they were too weak at home they banded
themselves with foreign mates abroad, so as they might the sooner attain the
end of that their wicked desire: Namely his home-dwelling Jews, as well of his
Court as Country raised rebellion, erecting an other king against him (even
Abner a Noble man in the land set up the son of Saul called Ishboseth and
he reigned two years in Israel) The Philistines they bent their sundry
battles also against David, and both beset themselves to his decay: But this
man of God heroically hearted, assured of his state for his election, and
therefore of his stay of Gods protection, penneth this Psalm to his comfort,
and to the Churches instruction for all times to come, declaring his rest in
Gods decree, whose holy hand is ever stretched out which his mighty strength
for every his anointed. The event aunsweared according his expectation: 2.
Sam. 3.28.
For not only Abner is slain by an other like himself, but also Ishboseth
that turbulent pretensed king, suffered slaughter by two of his captains in
his bedchamber, who yet for their Treason to their Lord, and master (For the
Lord wilbee revenged of every Traitor, 2. Sam. 4.
whether it be against the sovereign Prince, or beloved master) they were
both slain by the Kings commandment. And the Phylistines, Ammonytes, 2. Sam.
5.24.8. and 10.
Amorites, and the forrayne Nations, mightily by David, (Nay, by the LORD for
David) were slain in battle.

This Psalm is also Prophetical, foreshewing the malice of Satan, against
the Lords Christ, in the action of our redemption, by the Iewishe people, and
Heathen Prince Herod, Pylate and the Romayne power in Jerusalem. And it
remains to signifye to all christian kings, and Potentates, what they are to
look for at the hands of wicked men, at home and abroad, if once they bend
their best, to set forth Gods glory. Though many ancient histories in the
days of Israel, and other times, may prove this, yet need we no other search
for testimony hereof, then the present view of Satan's endeavor, in the fresh
traitorous attempt of this new conspiracy, by these sinful Satanistes the
Popish gentiles (I mean the Roman confederates and our English Italienated
Papists) part of which the axe of Justice, has discerned and cut off, and the
rest do yet attend, as ready to their deserved hire. Whose hearts the Lord in
mercy (according to his good pleasure) alter, to repent: whose heads and
hands, with the remenant of their cursed company, here and beyond sea, whether
noble, or ignoble: I heartily pray to God and his Magistrates, that they may
be signs (For they hung read Ensigns) to the terror of all turbulent
Traitors for his holy names sake. Why do the heathen rage etc. This text does
offer us this division:

The persons were of sundry nations, but one in purpose and profession, that is
to say, to bereave good David the Lords anointed, both of kingdom and life.
So is the traiterous attempt present, against the sacred Majesty of God and
our gracious sovereign his anointed Elizabeth, by the Popish combineds,
Roman confederates, and our English Italienates (both Traitors to God and
her Majesty) and in their Religion very Heathens, and not other. So as we may
rightly say of them, as David said of those: Why do the infernal Heathen of
the West-church, rise up in tumult, and conspiracy, against the Lord and
against his Christ, our gracious Lady, and only Queen of England.

The Papists would be counted Catholics in respect of their mother that
strumpet of Rome, but being her children, they are therefore Heathen and not
of the common weal of the christian Israel. It is no hard labor to find the
Romanistes still to remain heathen Gentyles.

Rome it is, the root of all evil: the mother of these men: which brag to
bear her name: she is by the Scriptures, and approved fathers ycleaped by the
name of Babylon: Babylon.
A City not only of the Gentyles, but of Heathen profession, Idolatrous
religion, and prepared to confusion. And for the very like effects, Rome
bears her name, that the godly should beware of her. The Scriptures do also
call her Babylon in the Revelation, and discovers her as well by her
situation, Revel. 13.17.18 etc.
as Sovereign power, and Heathenish practice in the Church of GOD. The
Fathers do likewise so term her, as Augustine, Hierome, Prymasius, Bernarde,
and others. In Psalm. 44. in praefat. lib. de Spiritu Sancto. Revel. 16.
She is that whorishe harlotte which brings out the bastard brood of
heathen Poperye: whose religion is descrybed by the Apostle John to be not
other then spiritual fornication, Lib. de consid. 4.
and all her Children to be sealed up in her gentility.

Of necessitye therefore the Traiterous Papists, Children of this second
beast, must be of her: second Babilonians, not for their situation, but for
their gentile profession, which what it is, the Apostle Paul, To. 1.23.25.
does tell us to the Romans, saying: when they thought themselves wise, they
became fools and turned the glory of God, to the mortality of men, and
beasts, and his infallible truth, to a manifest lie, serving creatures, so
forsaking the Creator, which is blessed for ever.

Paganism, is more pregnaunt then Poperye, in the invention of foreign Pettye
Gods, and will-worshippe, or more gross Idolaters, serving either living
creatures, or dead stocks, and therefore worthily (this proved by
demonstration) we may secondly conclude them to be Heathen gentiles. The
Popish Church does joy in this gentilitye, she makes choice therefore of
creatures both sensible, and senseless, namely the spirits of Saints, and
the Images of their earthy form.

For the Saints, their worship is no less to them, then if they were our
God, they invoke their names with the persuasion only dew, to the eternal
father, and most wickedly they give ye grace of our most loving Christ, to a
painted cross of silver, wood, or other substance. Does not their confirmed
Popish Christianity in ye councels of Trident, well declare the same? What
means else these manner of prayers to the virgin Marie, in that blasphemous
Hymn, Aue Maris stella, and the like to the sign of the Cross, and in
sundry other places, where contrary to their common assertion they endeavor to
make both that holy virgin, and the profane piece of wood, not mediators of
intercession, but workers and giuers of our salvation? For thus you are there
taught to pray: Hail star, etc. pour thou peace into us, so loose thou the
bonds and chains of sinners, bring thou light to the blind, drive thou away
our evils, and procure to us all goodness, use thy motherly aucthority, show thy
motherly power, let thy Son hear our prayers by thy mediation, O Virgin
pearlesse, the meek amongst all, make thou us meek and chaste, give thou us a
pure life, prepare thou us a safe passage, etc. Again: Save us, and save al
others with us, we beseech thee for ever. And to every Cross in any Church,
Chemnic. part. 3.156. a.
in the day of the Crosses exaltations, you are taught to pray thus: Hayle thou
cross our only hope, this time of the passion, increase righteousness in the
godly, and give pardon unto sinners. Again to the virgin Mary in this
blasphemous prayer. Gaude flore virginali, etc. As the Sun causes the light of
the day, even so out of al question do thou (O Mary) cause all the world to
shine, through and with the fullness of thy light and peace. O Mary mother of
God, be thou unto us the right way, and eternal joy, and ever bend thine
ears to hear us. I suppose (beloved) sufficient be said for this point, by
and from the Papists own store, to show that they remain resolute Romanists,
that is mere Heathen and Gentile Papists. But what account can ye Lord make
of such, but as of their elder parents, Ephesians. 2.
which were without the covenants of promise, estranged from the life of God,
and utterly without Christ and God in this world, of who^ we may rightly
conclude with Augustine ye good father, August. in Psalm. 44.
that they are Citizens of Babylon, and so make all that stick to them,
namely, to forsake ye Lord which made them, and to worship ye image, which
their own hands have filthily fashioned: ye papists I say, are (as other
Gentiles utterly without God, which is plainly proved by S. John ye Apostle:
Whosoever (says he) transgresses the doctrine of Christ, John. 2 9.
and abides not in his doctrine has not god: but ye papist (and every papist)
does transgress etc. and does not abide, etc. Ergo the papist has not God: is
therefore as his fellow gentile, void of Christ, and the promises of salvation
in him. That ye papist does transgress ye doctrine of Christ, is most apparent
in our papists in this Tower now worthily imprisoned and in their fellows gone
to death by the^ deserved. The doctrine of Christ is both general and
particular. The general doctrine is: they which worship God, John. 4.
must worship him in spirit and truth. The papists daily transgress this: for
their chief woorship consists in hypocrisy, and feigned (...) doctrine and
precepts Math. 15.
of men. Vz. not consonant: but all or most against the command of almighty
God. For Christ's particular doctrine take this for an instant. Give unto
Caesar that which appertains unto Caesar. But the Papist does of malicious
purpose tra^sgresse this doctrine: therefore he has not God. To Caesar does
belong amidst many things, at least his proper lands, and natural life: yet
our Roman Catholics will affoorde our sovereign Caesar neither of both: but
with bloody hearts bent against God, meditate, conspire, band, consult,
proclaim, Math. 25.3.4. Luc. 19.14.
and bray out against their Sovereign the Lords anointed: We will not have
this Woman to reign over us, she is the heir, come let us kill her, Math.
21.38 Luc. 20.14.
and let us take her inheritance, let us break their bands of doctrine, and
cords of Imperial command, and set up the son of Tabeall, Psalm. 2.4.
or the mother Athalia, and make a breach in Jerusalem for us. Esaias. 7.
But to say all their endeavor at a word: These Catholics seduced, and by the
Popes poison Italienated, do endeavor (...) her Majesty, and destruction of
this kingdom all in one moment. Therefore they have in unnatural sort
transgressed Christ's most holy doctrine, and set themselves most wickedly to
work their pestilent will, even opposite to his command. For as he says to
al, Give to Caesar, etc. the Catholic Traitors say to al theirs Take from the
Queen your Caesar, both land and life.

Secondly, neither do they abide in that truth, which the ancient Church of
Rome received, and a great time faithfully did hold, Rom 12.1. Chriso^t. 1.
tom.
as they were taught by the Apostle: Let every soul submit himself, etc.
(for he that refuses, refuses to his own condemnation) for their present
practice surely proves ye flat contrary. Therefore we may conclude, that these
English Papists, which would be called Catholics, are utterly without God, as
were their Fathers the Gentiles before them, and will do the works (...) their
Father Satanas: namely, to lie (...) murder* John. 8. Esaias. 26.
(...) to do wickedly in ^^nde (...), which is the (...) By these three
points, then (beloved and honorable Christians) ye see that our Roman foreign
confederates, together with our English Italienats (as they are professed
Catholics) so they are approved Heathens, not for nation only and foreign
birth, but also because of their religion, and deuilish devises, and these be
only they which mutter and proclaim, which band with foreign foes, and
break in and out at home, among their secret friends, this traitorous and
bloody sound: Come let us go kill this Elizabeth, as we have sworn. But
Lord, bless thou our blessed Elizabeth, and give her long life over us, and
with thee life for ever and ever, we humbly (sweet Lord) beseech thee. Thus
have we proved the papist to be an heathen and fellow Gentile with those his
Fathers which conspired against the Lords anointed. And we may boldly add,
that they be far worse then such Gentiles, whose care is (...) walk in
honest conversation. For ( C^cero says) (...) ^eth all (...) men to be (...)
weal, (...) excuse for his fault, Philip. 13. de respub. Arusp. 1. inuect. in
Catil.
which does evil demerite of the same, and that each man's natural Country
is as a Parent unto him, which he must even with death defend.

Again, if question do arise, and comparisons should grow, to whom we owe
our best, and most duty is belonging: Surely (says Cicero in his Offices) our
Prince, our Country, 1. Offic.
and our Parents be they, to whom we live, or should in all dutiful sort,
and to these we are all most bounde^. But our Catholics are degenerate from
this civil and gentile condition, and are begotten by their Father Sathanas,
to be despisers of their Wives and Parents, hateful to their posterity, and
natural blood, raunging to hunt the ruin of this their most noble Country,
and being of worshipful race, and gentle blood, (if none be found fur^her)
do put on Lions hearts, and weapon ^hemselues (...) claws, and puffed (...) find
no (...) cruel (...) of our most loving Lady and Empress, the Lords
anointed. They bend their battery at her tender body, whose Grace, by grace
from God, does stay the Pope from usurping his tyrannical power in her
Majesty's dominions. Psalm. 21.7.
But now are we sure that the Lord will deliver her, because she puts her
trust in him. Save our Queen Lord, that she may hear us when we have need
to call to her for Royal aid in our affairs, for thy holy names sake, and
make us heartily to give thee ye glory therefore, throghout this our English
nation. Sufficient is this display for the Gentiles who they be. Now it
remains to consider of the Treason and conspiracy, whet and against whom it
is, that these Catholics of England, and their confederates have decreed. The
manner of their conspiracy is as ye former Gentiles was: they murmr, and
medita^ ^t home upon g^^^ mischief, th^^ (...) ^es, a^roue to (...) de^ (...)
s^l^ (...) innocent Elizabeth, the Lords anointed. The purest papists their
Jesuitical Catholics, do return to work the feat, which ye gates of hell
have now decreed. Savage must answer his name, and play the savage beast, in
goring of her sacred majesty to the heart, and this is the manner and chief
matter of their conspiracy, but all in vain, thanks and immortal praise be
ever given to God therefore for this. They thus cry one to another in their
picked places, the garden houses (most fit corners for wicked conspiracies)
Come good Catholics, lift up your hearts, fear not the attempt, it is easily
brought to pass, the b^nde of our federacie is mighty and invincible, the
Court does couch us friends, the Country has many ready to our aid^ the land
is open before us, and the (...) our friends (...) of Rome (...) p^osper in
(...) most (...) by this high attempt win us fame, and break their bands of
doctrine, that does so much annoy us, and our Catholic Church, and let us
cast away their cords of auctority, and restraint of our pleasures from us:
For this Elizabeth shall no longer reign over us.

Oh Christian subjects, and dear brethren, do not your hearts bleed within
to see this prepared match without: namely, the utter desolation and final
destruction of your church, your peace and natural country? Oh untimely borne
babes, which as swine of the Romish Bore, enter the Lords vineyard, to root up
the vine, and to make barren this most fruitful soil. You fathers and country
men, behold in these men the fruit of your childrens passage over the seas,
to serve or see tho^ (...) look for (...) beaten (...) pass (...) ^norant of
these trecheries, against her Majesty and realm: for if not by the^, yet from
us, their friends at home (no doubt) they know hereof: and yet which of the^ do
lament ye case, or hasten from amongst them? but I pray you let us view from
David's words, this wicked determination. Let us, etc. Here may you see ye issue
of this Catholic consultation: Let us break their bands, and let us cast
their cords from us. The prophet uses 2. metaphors usual in the holy
scriptures: vz. bands and cords, which have their elega^t signification, as
this word vinculum is taken sometime for bondage Vinculum taken for bondage
etc Psalm. 107.14 16.
and captivity, or sharp restraint or servitude, as in this place: He brought
the^ out of darkness etc. and brake their ba^ds asunder.i. the gates of brass,
and burst the bars of iron. And in ye prophet Nahum, this den^^^i^^^io^ or
metonomyan the Lord also (...) deliverance to his peo^ (...) ^^ity and bondage
of the (...) Though I have afflic^^^ (...) thee no more: Nahum. 1.13
for (...) he from thee, and (...), lordship, and captivity, I will burst in
sunder. And in Esaias: Esaias. 28.22. Ierem. 2.20,
Now therefore be no mockers, least your (bonds or troubles, captivity or
plagues) increase. Again, Secondly for godly Laws.
this word Vinculum is else taken for good and godly laws, as well from God
given, as by godly Princes established and vred, and called bonds, for that
hereby the lashing lusts of carnal men are restrained, and they compelled to
live in civil sort that have not care of Christian condition, Jeremy Jeremy.
5.1.
the Prophet, lamenteth the wickedness of his time, that rich and poor, great
and small persons, did violate the Lords law, none would execute judgment,
seek the truth, and walk therein, that the Lord might spare them. Wherefore
surmising that the baser men were of the worst minds, he said: I will get me
unto the great men and will speak unto (...) they have kn^^ (...) the iud^^
(...) these (...) the (...) Psalm. 50.
their peaceable life. So even in this Psalm, by bonds, he means the
doctrine of health in his how ^a^^e and (...) coardes, the regiment o^ the
Prince, to guide them in godly obedience. ^a^ of all Paul the holy Apos^le,
does use this word Vin^ulum for Chri^tian unity in godly amity* exhorting
the Eph^sians to endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond (...)
pe^ce: he meane^^ that Gods Gos^^ te^ch^th us to ^e religious to God (...) to
our Prince, and peaceable to our own Country.

Now the metaph^r^^al word coards is not less significant in this place: (...)
for by the word coard, is sometime meant (and here i^) the ground or
i^heritance measured and assorted to their p^rtions. So David speaks in the
Psalm, confirming the faithfulness of God to Israel, and promise to their
fathers, he says: God has remembered, etc. saying, unto th^^ will I give the
land of Canaan, (...).
(...) or (...) of thine inheritance. (...) Israel did ^^st mea^ (...) with
lives, (...), and then cast lottes for their divided portions Also it is taken
for ruling compulsion, 2. Coardes taken for authority and commandment.
to abide the command of the superior, alluding to captives which are chayned
or coarded together, and constrained to obey, as in this our text psalm, and
many other places. But what is the inference upon all this collection?
forsooth when our Catholics as our Jewish Gentiles do cry: Let us break their
bands and cast their cords from us: then they say. Let us release the catholics
of the Gospels bondage, let us dissolve the present government, civil and
ecclesiastical, let us kill the Prince, spoil the cuntry, and take the lands
for our inheritance. Now have you the matter of our Catholics, and the manner
of their attempt against our David, and purpose against this noble City, and
^^ole region, whose (...) sorrow, i^ (...) storm^ (...) argu^ (...) ^ther
consolation and time to repent, has said, it shall not be so. No gracious
Father, grant if it be thy blessed will, that it never be, but as now, so
always in thy great mercy, let their troublesome heads be terrible tokens
to their confederates, whose brains do fervently boil to breed our common
calamities. The time does now require, that we speak also of the second
point before promised, that is, to show how vain is the attempts of al such
Catholics Papists, as purpose battle against the Father of heaven: Why do
ye meditate mischief in vain (says David.)

David be, which purposing his ou^rt^^owe, do not premeditate of hi^ (...).



very inconsiderate: For the one supposed of many friends in Iewry, by reason
they had such color to crown a king of the former kings line, namely,
Ishboseth Saul his son, 2. Sam. 2.8.9
and had Abner one of the mightiest men in the land, to be their Agent. And
the foreign foes supposed now their fittest time to make attempt, when cyuill
wars were rise in Isr^ell, deeming David now to be more weak, and
themselves to find good friends in the Land against him: both which people
had some show of reason, for these matters be not of small moment in civil
seditions. But yet the parties against whom ought to have been first
reg^rded: Israel was taught before, and Abner could tell it Ishboseth, that the
Lord had sworn to remove the kingdom from Sa^^ (...) and that h^^ (...) of 2 Samuel 3.9.10.
Daniel (...) even (...) done unto David especi^lly since the Lord did so
delight to (...) glorious Israel^ k^o^ (...) ^uer (...) ^r days the Ph^ly
(...) ^r enemies that the (...) fi^ht for Isra^ll, 1. Sam 4 8.6. ^0.7.13.
and they were (...) ^^^ses e it. So likewise our Cath^lique P^pists, with
their foreign confederates in this their savage Treason, be ^uer
inconsiderate, for they in hate of our most honorable El^z^^eth never so much
as dream of her most holy God* even the God of Israel, the Lord of Heastes,
under whose standard she stands constant with her displaied banner against
all his and her enemies: But her Majesty, seeing the weakness of their trust,
and her power to rest in the Lord her strength, Psalm. 2^* ^.
as David then in good simplicity, so her highness may now, in sound si^ (...)
with the Psalmist, Why (...) Catholics, the people my (...) ^o^ne, and the
genti^e Ro^ (...) madness: (...) ^ble mischief (...) whom they (...) Lord God
also, who has mercifully set me over them? Why do they so? This question
Quare? is not without his double Emphasis. Why do they so? Then if David had
said, but simply thus, The enemies do thus rage against me, for it rowseth up
the senses, and asks the spirits of men a reason of their bodily
endeavors. This figurate speech contains first a kind of admiration, as
thus: Is it not a wonder to see such men so mad? What cause have I given
them thus to rage against me? Secondly it offers the check with his
invincible mate: unto these inconsiderate Catholics? Why do ye so hotly
take in han^ (...) ^odigie, as never can the (...), or can (...) ^ger of
(...) yo^ (...) 2. king. 6.1^
Hoastes: but you shall be brought before the Lords anointed, who is
commanded to crushe you with his Iron rod. To the first Quare, then as a
sufficient Impedit, to all Popish Patrones, and Catholic practisers in
Popish treasons, let us lend our ears I pray you. Her Majesty in the
simplicity of her soul does demand of you her natural borne subjects (for
though her bountye has not wrought the confederates much benefit, yet she
wondereth not at them so much) why do you my english subjects thus rise in
rebellion against me? Are ye not my natural subjects borne? am I not your
loving and lawful Queen, answer me I pray you to satisfy my self driven
into mighty wonder for this your insolent folly? The seduced Catholic with
his D. Story, sh^peth her Majesty this short answer: we are not your
subjects. So said stone of the late executed: we have (...) your words
deser^ted to die, we have (...), and we are iust^^ (...) in deed we are
(...) and indite^ and condemned for. Behold a mighty work of God in this his
holy name be always blessed which has to the shame of all Papists, and the
prevention of credit to that counterfaite book by the Romish runagates at
Rheymes promised to be posted over hither, wherein they will counterfeit to
deny these men to belong to the Catholics, with the former also, which in
any sort, have sought the alteration of the state or hurt to her Majesty: For
we (say they) pray for the Queen of England every day: Oh subtle Satan: but
the stronger Captain has ouerthrown thee, this devise is to base* Saunders D.
S^und. in (...) Mon^^^^ not (...).
books before, and these men's voluntarye confessions now do lay open thy
infectuall treacherye. They have told us (...) ^sking, sorrowing at t^ (...)
^^ason again (...) colou^ (...) this (...) Qu^ene you pray for, we pray also,
if it please God to grant her better grace: But we be not Papists, our joy is
not in Mary the mother, No: we rejoice in Jesus Christ the son only, and in
his anointed our Queen Elizabeth as in the Lord it becomes us, and have our
hearts and hands ready against you and your Queen, whenever you should have
taken assaye of our preparation. For as Israel cried against the Medianites
for the Lord, and his Gedeon, Judge 7.1^,
so do we ^rew English subjects, cry against all Catholic Traitors, and
their future trust, for the Lord and his Elizabeth. And he that bears not
this mind here or else where in any wise belonging to her Majesty, whether he
be an Abner or Abyshaye, noble or ignoble, the Lord con^ert him or confound
him, for his mercie^ sake, to our English Israel: (...) But ye have not yet
answered this (...), Ar^ yea not her Majesty's sub^^^ (...)? ye English
Emperors yes, and (...) of you chosen into chief place of (...) of her secret
body (...) of whose bountye ye are largely fed. But yet are not now: what
is your reason? forsooth Sir Preacher this it is, your Queen is by the holy
father excommunicated, and all her subjects by his authority set at
freedom from their oath of alleageaunce, and natural bond of duetye. Is this
the matter? Well: we take first that you grant us. Videlicet, that you were
borne her loyal subjects, and that being further, her servants, you were
sworn to be faithful and loyal to her Majesty, and so by inference, ye
confess that before this excommunication she was your loving Mistres and your
lawful Queen also? Yea Sir, we do so: well then let us that be good
subjects ask of God, and good meu^^* ^hether any man in earth ca^^^^ (...)
subject of his de^ (...) ^ince, which (...) po^ (...) that does take upon him
to discharge us, of this charge, and by what aucthority. Israel it is, yt
commands al subjects to owe in heart and perform in faithful service all
honorable duty to their superiors, in these words, Honor thy Parents etc.
which word honor requires inward reverence, reverend account, and hearty
affection from the soul of the inferior and outward service with external
reverence and all kinds of duty, according to the bond of the parties
obliged. And the chief parent under God is the king or chief Potentate of the
country as in England our gracious Queen Eliz^beth. To kingly parents, Pet. 2.
the Lord ^^th ^^^^aunded and charged us to give (...), tribute, obedience,
will (...), silence, suf^ (...) honey ney^ (...) reign (...) they be neither
Christians nor comfortable to their subjects, but Heathen Princes, Idolatrous
kings, or cruel Tyra^ts, as these and many suth other places do prove. 1.
Sam. 10.25.8.11.12.13. Iere. 29.7. Exodus 21. Psalm. 20.82. Eccle. 9. Pro. 6.24.
Ma. 21.21. Mar. 12.17. Luc. 20.25. To. 13.1. 1. Pet. 2.13.17. 1. Tim. 2.1.2.3.
And the disobedience hereto draws Gods vengeance as the Apostle says, and
the scripture proves, as the plagues of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram: by the very
hand of God from heaven do testify, his hate of disobedience in earth, to
his appointed Magistrates. Yea, our fealtye, and allegeaunce ought to be such
unto them, as we permit not an evil thought to possess, nay, not to enter,
our bosoms (...) ^m. For the byrds of the (...) shall ^cle. 10.
bewray ei^ (...) ^ll reue^ (...) ^n. 18.9.
sho^ (...) either equal or above God, but for so much as he is the Lord
omnipotent over all, therefore it cannot be, that man or Angel can grant
either freedom against this commanded duetye, or in any sort to discharge us
of the same, yet nay the less that manne of sin, the Antichrist of Rome,
does take upon him in his Bulls, both thither and into France, to do the
one, and the other. And he has hereby besotted many fine wits, and made
dronken into this rebellion, not a few, able persons to have served her
Majesty, in much better sort. But I beseech you Sir Pope, by what aucthoritye
do you discharge our english subjects of their most bounden duty to her
Majesty, their natural Sovereign, since you are but an Italian Priest, or
Bishop, and have no place, much less setth Regal power in England? His
friends do answer (...) him thus: That ^ee is the Vicar (...) earth. Surely
sir, but not (...). For the scrip^ (...) sent, an^ (...), to the end of the
world. Mar. 16.20. Hebr. 13.21.
And for the civil government, he confirmed that Regiment he found, as of
old by himself established, commanding every nation to obey their superior
powers, and to give their King that which is his. Yea and Christ himself for
example to all Christians, though he be freedom it self and Subject to no
creature, but sovereign over all: yet both himself and his Peter, Mat. 17.25.
he paid tribute money, teaching by the miracle of the fish, that all possible
means must be made, by sea and land, of every subject bond or free, to our
duty unto our Caesar least we should in any such sort offend them. And
for the spiritual government, he never committed it unto one alone, no not
among the 12. Apostles: but rather reproved that ambition in them and set
this down for a law, that which of them should hunger after he^d ship he
should (...) far depre^ (...) his (...) hadd^ (...) And when he sent out to
preach he gave equal commission, saying: Go ye, Mat. 20.2^ Mat. 16.15.
and preach, and baptize etc. And the Apostle Paul says not, that Christ
has set not only one Vycarre in his absence till his return: But ascending
and leading Captiuitye Captive, Ephe. 4,
he has given (not one gift to one universal Pastor, or Elder upon the
whole Church but) gifts to men, as that in the person of many, his holy
spirit, may reign and rule in the hearts of all that fear him. He has
therefore given some to be Apostles, some Prophets some Evangelists and some
Pastors, and Teachers, that in this Aristocratia his spirit might govern his
Church, and not in a Monarchy, as ye Pope would have it. Neither does that
place so often alleged serve his turn: Tibi dabo claues etc. M^t. 26.
For besides that these keys, have no power to shut up the Palace from the
Prince, nor Royal kings from their Regal digni^ies, or yet other men from
their earth (...): But are given to open (...) of the Gospel by the office of
preaching, and to shut out of Gods congregation for a time, such as do
continue to hear his voice, and to obey his holy command: So, when this
promise was performed, it was given in common to all the Apostles with him in
equality, Christ saying to them altogether: Receive ye (not thou Peter alone or
first, or above the rest) the holy ghost: whose sins ye remit, they are
remitted etc. Thus Christ and his Apostles left the state of his Church. And
if it should be otherwise, I must needs wonder at Peter his softnes, that
having such authority above the rest given him of Christ, he would bear so
base a mind as to suffer not only his equals to usurp his pre-eminence, but
his inferiors, the Elders in the Church, to use as much power in doctrine and
government Ecclesiastical as he. Or yet that he would not excommunicat the
Apostle Paul, Gall. 1.
for reproving him openly before the people in Antioch.

Surely the very reason w^^ch^^^ that as he was (...) (a shrewde che^ (...) he
was of an heavenly spirit, and took reproof as a medicine to that disease,
and never set himself above his brethren, but joined himself with his
inferiors for calling (yet equal in power) saying: 1. Pet. 5.1.
The Elders which are among you I beseech, which am also a fellow Elder etc.
Consenior, is your vulgar translation, Feed the flock etc. Not as Lords
over Gods heritage: but that ye may be ensamples to the flock.

And when that chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive an
incorruptible crown of glory.

Note this good brethren, Peter is but a fellow Elder with his brethren, Heb.
13.20.
and does so entitle himself. And note also, that he refers the name of
chief, princely or head to the only Shephearde of our souls Jesus Christ
alone. And to conclude this point: if Christ gave not any one the pre-eminence
of all: if he appointed not a Monarchye, but a Church government
Aristo^^^ticall ( videlicet: to rule by sundry) (...) no larger keys then the
rest, if he took no more upon him then a fellow Elder, if he became not a
comptroler of the whole Church, but was under the censure of his brethren that
did discern him: how can it come to pass, were he Peter his successor (as
Simon Magus does rather challenge him) that under the name of Peter the Apostle
(whose limitation by Gods spirit was over the Jews, and Paul's commission,
rather more Bishoplike over the Gentiles) this Antichrist of Rome, should have
such aucthoritye over our sovereign, so far distant from his territorye, or
Bishopric, as to excommunicate her Majesty, to discrownize her Royal
person, and to release her subjects from the bonds of their alleageaunce, and
(as it fitteth the nature of that monstrous Hydra) to sanctify as saints, all
such cursed souls, as would embrue their hands in her right Innocent blood.
The answer is still, because he is Christ's ministerial head in his
universal Church, therefore he may a^^ does excommunicate. (...) and also
depose her of her Crown, and dignitye. If he be demanded who has endowed
him with this power, these miserable Traitors say, it is given him by Christ
Jesus our Lord, so says the Pope himself in the Canon law: Pastoralis cura
etc. C^^m^nt. de (...).
the Pastoral care of the whole Christian Church, is by the divine power and
commission laid upon us. Again, De nec^ss^t^te credendu^ etc. It is of
necessity to be believed, that every creature is subject to the Bishop of
Rome: A^ayne the Pope is set over all asw^ll over all Nations as kingdoms.
(...). de ma^^. and ob^di.
And again the Pope has power to transfer kingdoms at his pleasure and to
send one king into another kingdom. The Pope of Rome has in him, Cl^ment.
c. p^storal. de ie iudic. c. 2. ibid
the whole Monarchy of both powers, spiritual, and temporal. These be
blasphemous and thrasonicall braggs. But this proud and insolent challenge if
we confer with Jesus Christ's modesty and commandment to his Apostles, we shall
easily perceive, that from him neither Peter, or Pope can have such
commission. The kings of the nations reign over them says Christ, and they
that be great exercise aucthoritye over them: but it shall not be so with
you, but he that will be chief among you let him be your Minister, even as
the son of man came not to be ministered unto but to minister. And
according to this course, when he sent them to preach into the world after
his assention, he made no one chief of them, to answer his place of
Prerogative over the rest, but reserving that romth to himself, saying:
behold, Mat. 28.20.
saying: behold, I am with you to the end of the world, he gave to them one
equal commission and place, go ye, and preach ye the Gospel, Mat.
28.19.20.
baptize ye, and do you teach them, to observe all that I have commanded
you. But good christians, mark well that I shall say, and I trust you will say
with me, ye neither Peter, nor Pope can be Christ's successor to have his whole
aucthoritye sole over all. The Bishop of Rome does say that by the aucthoritye
of Christ, he is Peter's successor the Prymat^ of the world. But aga^ne I
ask^ by what right? If he say by the scriptures, why did not Peter then
practice it? or why did all the Bishops of Rome, until the supposed donation
by Constantine, not once dream of it? And what reason then has his own Law,
to shut under hard censure, such as shall presume this title unto them? For the
decree (reporting it from Chrysostom) says: Quicunque desiderauerit primatu^
in terra, inuenerit confusionem in co^lo. Dust. 4. c. multi and qui cunque.
Whosoever shall hunger after primacie in earth, shall find confusion in
heaven. Neither shall he be numbered among the servants of Christ, which
contendeth for supremacy.

Again, the Bishop of the first or chief seat shall not be called, either the
prince of Priests, or the high or chief Priest, or any such like name: but
only the bishop of Rome himself be called universal. And surely if the holy
scriptures had given such pre-eminence to Peter, and his successors, both the
first Church, and Councels, as well Nyce as Constantino^le, of Ephesus as
Calcedon, had been very injurious to the holy Apostle, and his successors, and
further not to the posterity in the Church only, but also to their own
deserved credites: all which time and councels (as knowing no such matter) did
give prerogative to every Bishop in his own sea only, Council. Nicen. p. 315.
c. 6. Brut Full. 153. Ephesians. Synod. an. 431. c. vltimo. Council. Calced. au. 450.
and to every Patriarch in his own province alone, and made equal the other
Patriarchs with the Patriarch of Rome. And if they have it by succession, I
ask, whether of doctrine, or place, or person, or one, or al? For doctrine I
am sure there is as great difference between Peter's doctrine and the Popes,
for many years past, as is betwixt truth and falsehood. As for example: Thou
shall not kill, but honor the king, was Peter's doctrine: but the Popes is,
Thou shall not honor, but kill the Queen Elizabeth if so thou can, as the
Cardinals letter to that traitor Pary is most apparaunt. But if he succeed not
in doctrine his other succession is of no value: yet what other succession can
he have? By the cyuill law it appears, that there be 3. sorts of
succession: L. vlt. d. de exe^ot rei rend L. 1. c. in locum.
vz. Successores Iuri^ Rei. muneris personalis.

The first sort are called successors universal, and these be as heirs. D.
quod legate. l. 7 ^^. de iure in^and. l. priuilegio 27. c. de decut. l. 10.


The second sort are, of matters or goods acquyred or given by Legatorie
means, and these be called successors in part, or particular.

The third sort are of personal gifts, and these be called successors in
function.

They now which be successors of the first, or second sort, have their right
and authority of those, whose successors they be, L. qui in Ius. ^^2 c. ^^ reg
(...).
whether they be universal or singular. But the thi^^e sort have not their
succession in r^^ht of their antecess^rs, but of those of whom they are
chosen, and are so placed in their antecessors Rooms, whether it be the
succession of Magistrates, Tutors, Churchmen, or such like. For the office and
place is personal, which is supplied with watchfulnes of the soul. Now I
demand of the Lord Pope by what kind of succession he is Christ's successor,
or Peter's before him? Christ's heir Peter cannot be, L. 1. d. de Herod. vend
because his Lord Christ lives for ever, and does not resign his right to
him, ^anie other, neither can he suffer to have companions in his dignity.
Heb. 7.24.


Wherefore Leo the Pope has shamefully said this blasphemy, that Christ has
given to Peter, Sermon 3. de Anix. ass. 10. Heb. 7.24.
a wonderful fellowship of his power. Much less can the Pope be either his
successor, or Peter's, in universal, or in particular, since Christ never gave
to him that prerogative, but ambition has begot him that name, which first
began at Constantinople, after took root at Rome. And the Council of
Calcedon does freely affirm, Conc. Calcedon. An. 451. rent. c. 28.
that the Bishop of Rome had his honor not from Peter, but from the imperial
seat, saying, because Rome then reigned over all: therefore the Fathers gave
her Church the greatest honor, and first place, but now persuaded by the same
rule, we give (say they) to the new Rome in Constantinople, equal degree in
honor and place, with the ancient Rome in Italy.

As for the third sort of succession, the Pope has naught to do therewith, for
he cannot be universal successor to him, that has no successor at all, but
doc^ supply the office him^^l^^ (...) extinguished, but remains ever present
by his power and spirit, Hebr. 13.20.21.
the chief shepherd of his Church, and uses men, his Apostles and Bishops
vz. preachers of his word, but as the hands by whom he solie governs over
all. The Apostles went and preached, Mar. 16.20.
but Christ wroght with them, and confirmed the word with signs and wonders.
Behold (beloved) the presence of Christ, with the labor of his Apostles. And
to Peter, the Pope can be no successor: For it is a function personal, and
takes succession from the election and giver, which is not Christ, but
supposed Constantine: wherefore the Romish Bishop is not Peter's successor, but
the Emperors, who extinguishing that power in himself, endowed the wicked
Pope therewith. But when Christ sent his Apostles to preach the word, and to
govern his Church he did not set over them one dumb Arch-messenger, or
Arch-apostle, Esaias. 56.10.
which should rest snorting in his chair (...) home, and command all others,
to (...) ^ome the faithful laborers, as vas^ (...) render an account, for
such a dumb creature is unworthy the name or dignity of an Apostle,
Patriarch, Archbishop, Bishop, or Minister. Trait. 12. 4. in Joan.
And touching the promise, (tibi dabo) Saint Augustine does discharge the Pope
of that pre-eminence, and declares Peter to signify there the universal
Church, which is founded v^on Christ. Wherefore he says: Non ecl^s^abo me
super te. I will not build my bo^ie my Church upon thee Pete, but I will
build thee upon me. So then the kepes by S. Augustines judgment, are not given
to Peter, as to him only or in chief, but with him, to the whole Church of
Christ. But this is that Sathanicall pride of Rome, which that old Father
Barnard, so long since saw, and reproved in their Bishops, saying: In times
past ye were (contrary to Peter's doctrine) Lords over Gods heritage, Barnare.
epist. 230.
and against his Coapostle Paul his doctrine, ye bear the swaye over the
faith of the world, but now ye^ have added attempt, usurping mo^^ tyranny
against (...) ^^ligio^ of Christ And what (...) ye transcend the heavens, and
presume to bear rule over the Angels.

And whereas they boast of Constantine the Emperor, that he gave the^ this
prerogative, to be over the Bishops and priests of the earth, as the king is
over his Judges and to have the temporal dominion over his people. Note I pray
you, that by this challenge they secretly confess, that they ^aue no such
power for their Pope by Christ, but by ye grant rather of Con^tantine the
Emperor. And who can be ignorant ye every privilege is a bar against the
universal law. If ye Pope then have but now this privilege to be head, etc
then it sufficiently appears, yt before this grant the Bishop of Rome had no
more right, then by ye common cons^^t of the councels and Church, other
Patriarchs had in their places. Which common consent was, y^ each patriarch
should be the governor of his own Province, and not to thrust himself in^^
another territory. And here observe (...) me, yt if Constantine could by right
(...) this universal Church power from (...), it is certain, that at the time
of this gift, the said Emperor was Lord of that he gave, and before this, ^^d
this pre-eminence in himself. For Constantine could not properly give that
which was not his to bestow. And this Objection Marsilius Patauinus laid to
the Popes pride 200. year ago, Defens. pa^is. cap. 11.
In decretis reperitur priuilegium, etc. In the decree (says he) it is said,
that Constantine gave to Syluester jurisdiction upon all the Churches in the
world, etc. Brut. Full.
Seeing (says he) that the Pope and his clergy does hold this for certain
and sound, it is by consequence certain to be granted, that the same
Constantine, before this grant, had in his power and person, the prerogative
and jurisdiction over the Pope, and all his clergy.

And thus you see by the holy Scriptures, the Popes Canons, their own
confession of grant, natural reason, and search into t^^ (...) ^^ter of
challenge, (...) neither Pete^ (...) Pope has (...) God, (...) ^ther pow^ (...)
alone wic^ (...) which is enough to his condemnation, except he better could
use it. And you see that Christian kings have power in them to compel and
govern by the laws of GOD, as well Priests as others, within their allotted
kingdoms, and that from God, neither can they be discharged thereof, though
they commit the same to others.

Then let us conclude thus, that we in this kingdom of England, being no
part of the Romish Bishops territory, are not within the compass of his
commission, and therefore he cannot, or may excommunicate the lowest subject
of this Land, much less can he, or ought to dare, to excommunicate the
highest sovereign therein under God, our Elizabeth, the Lords anointed
Queen. Then look to this you bewitched Cath^likes, for as ye are borne, so
(...) majesty, (...) you from (...) you, (...) maie^ (...) For excommunication
does neither depose a Prince of his Crown, or yet his Subjects of their
loyalty. Then where is your warraunt for her murder?

Christ Jesus speaking of excommunication, says thus of it: Let such a one
whom the Church rightlye, Math. 18.17.
casts out, be to thee as an heathen or as a publicane. But it is evident,
that both the heathens and Publicans, were admitted their possessions,
continued their offices, and were obeyed by the Church. And Christ Jesus spirit
was fo far off from killing such, that he gave many of them eternal life,
and chose a chief of them into his Apostleshippe. But was not Caesar an
Heathen prince? What was Nero? but the same, and for 300. years after Christ,
the rulers were no better, (...) ^raye you what is the (...) ^^en man shu^
(...) and t^ (...) Ch^ (...) ^maundeth Math ^^
to him all sorting duty. And Paul knowing the rebellious nature of his
brethren the Jews, does next to faith join the doctrine of obedience, Romans 13.
thereby teaching dutiful submission to the Roman powers, which they most
deadly hated, and crowns those with godly power, that yet were
excommunicate from the Church of God. He exhorts to pray for such,
notwithstanding they are cut from the Church, and may not with their heathen
profession, be admitted into Christian fellowship. And also he teaches that
they may well exercise authority over the people of God, and the same ought to
yield them willing submission. So teaches Peter also: 1. Pet. 2.
Submit your selves, etc. he prophesies not of Christian princes to come, but
commands submission to these now being, w^ (...) seek in mali^ (...) Church
of (...). But (...) Ca^^^likes, (...) ^elf, (...) I think they will say yes.
Then I will offer them one instant of a Prince excommunicated by the Lord
himself, and yet therefore, neither was he deposed his kingdom, by Priest or
people, or was it lawful to cease to do him service: Saul I mean the king
of Israel. Samuel denounced the Lords excommunication, saying: The Lord has
cast thee out from being king, 1. Sam. 15.23
and the Lord has rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and has
given it to thy neighbor, Psalm. 28.
that is better then thou. Here is, if ye note it, a famous excommunication by
the Lord decreed, and denounced by the Prophet Samuel, against Saul. Yet for
all this, God neither commanded Samuel, or yet Samuel the Subjects of Saul,
to ^^ll back their subjection from (...) l^wfull king. For (...) life the^
(...) And t^ (...) the (...) pretended his death, as do our present Catholics.

This assertion is confirmed most surely by the holy anointed David
himself, and that by his oath to Abner the Counceller of Saul, and Captain of
his band, most sharply reproouing him for his shameful sleep in the
dangerous Camp, saying: Abner hear thou not? 1. Sam. 26.14
And art thou a man? And who is like thee in Israel (so trusted of the king, or
put in such authority?) Wherefore then have thou not kept thy Lord the
King? Note (that he confesses Saul, notwithstanding his excommunication,
still yet to be Abner his Lord and king also:) For there came one to destroy
the King thy Lord. This is not well done of thee. As the Lord live (...)
worthy to dye, becau^^ (...) your May^^ (...).

(...) D^^id the (...) ^^yth (...) his servant? Behold beloved, by how many
repetitions, David confirms Saules authority over his servants in Court,
his Subjects in Camp, yea, and over David himself, though he be the heir
apparaunt to the Crown, and the successor to Saul, even by the Lords
commandment, so anointed.

To Abner he says: Saul is thy Lord, he says not he was before he was cast
out, and before my day of annointment, but Saul is still thy LORD and king.

Secondly, he says to the whole servants and subjects of Saul: As the
Lord lives, 1. Sam. 26.16
ye are guiltye of death, for your unfaithfulness to your present Prince and
Lord, even for this, that ye have not done him more faithful service, that
ye have not kept his life better to who (...) this present yee^ (...) ^^ce, and
lo^ (...) of yo^ (...) bo^ (...) (...) ^ding place) he is (says David) your
Master, your King, and still the Lords anointed.

Wherefore your fealty in faithfulness is still his, give Caesar therefore
his own. And though he does me great wrong, and seeks my life, and though
I have in my band Abishay and his fellows, 1. Sam. 26.8.
which as men deuoide of godliness, and bounden duty, in hope of help by me
their future Prince, do hunger the death, and offer to kill the Lords
present anointed, yet neither will I suffer mine to do so wickedly, or yet
my self to work his woe, neither can I with good conscience do it: For he
is my Lord, my master, and my King.

I will therefore seek to pacify his fury^ (...) petition, if so I may, but
(...) my peace, (...), with the (...) slaughter, against my (...) Lords
anointed.

(...) Psalm. 19.
I beseech thee, hear the words of his servant. If the Lord have stirred
thee up against me, let him smell the savor of a sacrifice, but if the
children of men have done it, cursed be they, etc. And as we see David's
conclusion for the still continuant dignity, of the excommunicated Saul, so I
pray you, let us observe the have and hate of Abishay, who made no bones to
shed ye blood of the Lords present anointed, in color of duty and love to
the future prince, as more fit to reign, and lawfully elected. But let us with
holy David, set the staff of our rest in this his stay, and defend the state
and life of our present Prince, and that so much the more, for that our
Elizabeth is blessed of God, as by his myraculous hand for her wonderful
deliverance, he does assure us against the batte^ (...) ^orde of the curs^ (...)

And (...) Ab^ (...)

Deliver us Lord and save our gracious Elizabeth for thy holy names sake.
Finally note this besotted, it is not very difficulte to discern Abyshaye,
whose course is to counterfeite obedience, in civil sort to the present David,
but in the mean, he suddenly sells his former profession, and having an
eye to after help, and present favor, he sorteth his show with other such,
and (that of the sudden) as every way bend their affection, to the religion,
and disposition of their long hoped future Prince. If any therefore thus far
seduced, do feather their winge against the present wind, and suddenly shoot
with Romish shaft, though not with cried aim, at the proffering prick,
refusing our shot, or once more to shoot with us, that daily hitte the mark:
Doubt not to deem them parti^^^^^ (...) ^^st, of the future side, if ou^ (...)
to measure for (...) for thy (...) Abyshay, (...), and (...) ^ut of (...)
loyalty, their heart is firmly set to wait ye time and opportunity, that their
hands may shoot, and occasion their crewe to shoute, if they shall deadly hit,
that most precious But, their long desired mark. But Lord give them quaking
hands, fearful hearts, starting bows, broken shaftes, and dreadful breasts,
yea all the sort of the^, which purpose deadly shot, at the bosom of our
gracious Elizabeth. And further now dear brethren, let us call this Quare,
once again into question, so shall we see as before is said, to our great
comfort, how unable our papists be, to perfect their proud attempt. Quare? Why
do you says David that so proudely, which never can of your parts be
achieved? your tumultes must be ouerturned, your meditations for murder,
shall be of no moment, your banding shall sod^inel^ (...) your consult, or (...)
^sion, and (...) our (...) christ (...) whom the God of strength has set up,
and decreed to maintain? He will therefore laugh at your destruction, will speak
to you, by his anger, and vex you in his sore displeasure, he will destroy
all you and yours, which sought his overthrow in his anointed, and break you
into yeeces as ye potter does his brittle and fiery clay. Wherefore be wise ye
Princes etc. Eue^ thus does ye Lord still speak, and always has against
traitors hand, for his anointed. The conclusion of your conspiracy (ye
papists) is as these traitors of old. Come let us break their bands asunder,
and cast their coards from us. But your practice, is proud, your presumption is
perilous but ridiculous for your purpose by endeavor appears to be no less,
the to bereave our David Elizabeth ye Lords anointed of her life our church of
(...) his blessed gospel, (...) possessed (...) ^mpiety and (...) more (...) it
(...) Let us break their bands, let us cast their coards.

David, Psalm. 20.
Some put their trust in horses, and some in Chariots, but our trust is in the
name (the power and strength) of our God.

Let us break etc.

they fight against the Lord, in stryuing with his anointed.

This woman shall not reign over us, Luc 19.14. Mat. 21.18.
this is the last heir, come let us kill her, and take away her inheritance.
Come let us rowse up England, and make a breach in it for us, let us set up
a king (or Queen rather) even the son of Tabeall, Esaias. 7.
or that Idolatrous daughter. And who shall do all this? Forsooth our English
Catholics, and these greedy green youths must begin that attempt, that all
the great, and more grave, yet silent confederates may follow^ (...) they
stir up, and enco^ (...)* Come on, (...) ^lmost no (...) ^noe, is (...)
form. Let us. Let you? Why? seely wretches: what are you? What are we? We are
the princes Pereles of the earth, we are the Catholic confederates of the
holy Church, we are the sufficient banded powers, able to eat up all the
heretics in the land. Alas seely Caytiues, Parturiunt montes exit ridiculus
mus. And do you not know, that your triumph is before the victory? Do you
not see that your rejoice does repose his rest, in the strength far short of
helping heaven? and will you be confidently blind, and not behold ye end of
your unnatural subjects, in their treasonable practices? does not the psalmist
say of such, They are fallen, but we stand upright, Psalm 20. etc.
for we trust not in Charyots nor in horses, or in the strength of men, but in
(...) But if ye think (...) against (...) heart^ (...) the (...) wheel and
compass of the heavens, which with glorious power, does day by night (and yt for
us) encompasse ye same. And though ye be, the powers of ye whole earth, Esaias.
40.6.7.8.
and the flowers thereof, yet are ye but grass* and ye little creatures therein,
yet of base reputation, when ye Lord of hoasts, shall arm them to his battle,
for us his beloved Church, they shall beat you to ye earth, and wither you as
heye. For when he has set the season and day he will then speak to you in his
displeasure, and with the weakest of these creatures, he can and will, as with an
iron rod, break al your popish power, into penistone pieces: yea ye very gates
of hell, cannot prevail against him. Joel. 8.4.
The caterpiller (so easy to be crushed) ye palmer worm, ye grasshopper, the
fly, Amos. S. 6.17.24. Chro. 10.13.
the frogge, the louse, and matters of less moment will he arm with his power,
and then I sa^ (...) of ye Lord, shall (...) Catho^ (...) ^s. But (...) syrs?
(...) Lord of Hoasts. Psalm. 24.
Ye are kings, yet not properly for the Lord is the king of the universal
earth, Dan. 4.14.
and he gives, and takes away kings, and kingdoms at his pleasure, and
gives them to whom he will, even to very abiects, if so he see it good. Let
you, you: the Armies of Antichrist, let you crest up your Crests, against the
Lord Jesus Christ. In good truth sirs, though ye be strong by subtle slight to
deceive sundry his seely servant in his Church, yet shall you see yt if ye
Captain Ioab (the^ sure our sovereign Jesus, for his David) will drive Abner
and his Antichrist Ishboseth quite out of ye field. 2. Sam. 2.14. Psalm. 8.9.
Apoc. 12.
But let you? The Dragon, and his Angels of hell in earth, bend your battle
against Christ, our Michaell, and his anointed Prince, and heavenly powers in
this his C^ ^f England. Well go^ (...) ye Gia^^ (...) you she (...) (as (...)
Psalm. 7.10.1^ 12.13.14.^
cannot be stayed, rise up and spare not, begin to play: For the Lord has
whet his sword, and bent his bow, 2. Sam. 2 14. Psalm. 7.10.11 12.
and means to make a speedy dispatch of his persecutours, and he has
established our David's throne, because she puts her trust in him. Therefore
we rest assured, in humble hearts, that he will deliver her, And armeth us
against you, Psalm. 22.
with safetye of his good quarrel, encourages us by his heroical spirit,
144.1.
and makes our fingers nimble for the battle Axe. Wherefore our true English
hearts, do not fear at all your Roman force. Go to then Abner thou
Abington, and all the brood of Satan, for our God for his David Elizabeth, is
encamped against thee, and watches for the further protection, 127.1.
of our English Israel, whose holy name be blessed for ever, and ever Amen.

Let (...) purpose, even an utter subuersio^ of this present state, the
religion of Christ, the Crown, dignity, and life of our most gracious Queen
Elizabeth, al which under these Metaphors coardes, and bonds, phrases
metonimicall, the scriptures give to us, and are before sufficiently discerned.
But oh miserable Papists, ye cannot break the bo^ds and staff of liberty,
which god in his great mercy has made, with this his beloved Church. It is
not in your power, that appertains unto God alone, to break his league of
love with us, Zach. 11.8.14.15.
our bands of Amitye and Christian peace, to cast out our shepherd, scatter
the flock, destroy the fruitful pasture, and all at once. It is not you, it
is not you, except the Lord for our unthankfulness do enbattle you against us,
neither can you break the least coard of this Church or regiment, except you
could bere^^^ (...) Majesty of her natural (...) whom, God defend (...) ^his
(...) spirit, (...) ba^ (...) And we with sorrowful sighs knowe-that her
dolerous death is your chief desire. But how wicked is your attempt, or how
unable for Popish reach, ye nothing yet consider. Wicked it is to determine the
slaughter of her Majesty as Gods Scriptures would tell you, could ye believe
them, and your own tre^bling hearts and feebled hands, in so prodigious a
sacrilege by you attempted does bewray you to strive herin, against your
accusing consciences. To. 2.
For have we not this command in general given to al flesh? Thou shall not
kill? Exodus 20.
And is not the Princes person, guarded with this special Prouiso? Psalm. 105.15.
Touch not mine anointed nor do my Prophets no harm: Does not God in
Justice threaten to require blood for blood, at the hand of every murderer?
Genesis 9.7.6.
And if men shed the blood of men, does he not promise, that by men shall
their blood be shed again? Yea wicked Caine though cursed and excommunic^ted
from God, is marked ^f the (...) c^ulde slaye (...) God is there (...), though
(...) ^msel^^ (...) not from his church in earth alone, but from his favor and
love, whose brothers blood does call for vengeance up to heaven, yet that man
that kills Caine, shall be punished seven fold for that murder, Genesis 4.15.
although it be done upon so cursed a wretch. But for Princes, as they are ye
Lords anointed, so are they in a sort incorporate into the shadow of Gods most
sacred person, and maiestically bear ye name of Gods. Ego dixi dij estis, and
are so mightily guarded by the Lord, Psalm. 82.
That not only his heavenly Angels are made their soldiers, 2. Reg. 19. 2.
Chr. 32.35
against all their earthy and infernal enemies, but also the Sun and Moon,
shall be obedient to their command. Ios. 10.
Yea the thundering Air shall drive a terror to their camped enemies, 2. K. 7.6.
as if Chariot wheels did scour the Coasts, and earth and sea shall send the^
succor. Yea the birds of the Air shall bewray, Eccle. 10.80.
the smallest word sou^ding to their dishonor, and the most secret thought
within the closet of our secre^ (...) against our (...) ^losed. (...) Majesty,
conspiring hurt, to his anointed king. Draw David's heart into thy bosom, and
set his lore be a law to thee, if thou will rightly fear ye Lord who when he
had his soueraign in his hand (a man cast of from God, and excommunicate by ye
Lord from being king) and David now anointed as in his place to enjoy ye
kingly Crown and dignity, yet he would not, because he could not (and be
guiltles) lay violent hands upon Saul, as yet ye Lords anointed. Nay when
David might have slain him or his servant, which were more then willing
thereto, he only in ye Cave cut a piece of his garment, the which his face
(when he more deeply had considered) did mightily wound his soul as ye story
reports. But to use violence to ye body of Saul, 1. Sam. 24.6.
no man could persuade David because he was his Master, his king, and
soueraign, and now yt Lords anointed. For truly whosoever shall strike ye
body, of his soueraign, king (...) Queen ^oth the (...) even wound to (...)
Christ Ie^ (...) ^istes co^^ Mat. 25.34.
(...) accounted of Christ Jesus to be done to himself, how much more shall
yt divine Majesty on hie, for such horrible bloodshed though only done to his
peculiar Image, his king on earth (ye Lord exhibitng by him his own right arm
to us) account I say, ye same as done unto him self. The consideration hereof,
caused holy David to say (being the next heir to Saul his Crown, and whose
servants also hungered greatly Saules death in favor of David their future king)
The Lord keep me, 1. Sam. 26.9.
says he, from doing that thing unto my master the Lords anointed, so David
overcame his servants says ye place. A lesson concerning such future hopes,
upon whom, wickedly many do depend, had they good right, yet ought they not to
hearken to their false fauning parasites to both their overthrows, but to
discountenaunce as traitors speeches against the present David, for the hope of
a counterfeit Ish^boseth, al such (...), so sho^^ they disco^ (...) deadly
(...) call (...) (...) ^^cond time when Saul was cast into a dead sleep and
all his Camp, and ye David with his hungry Abyshay, entered ye kings pauilion, and
took away his spear from his beds head, Abner and the host lying on sleep
about him (look to thy watch more faithfully Abner) God has closed thine
enimye (says Abyshay to David) into thy hands this day therefore I pray thee
let me smite him once with a spear, and I will not smite him, again (his meaning
was he would kill him at ye first blow) to Abyshay David said, destroy him
not. His reason why is, 1. Sam. 26.9
for who can say his hand on ye Lords anointed and be giltles? No, neither
Samuel can command it, nor David the future anointed may do it, much less
ambitious Abyshay, can attempt, or any other person, to bereue with private hand
the Lords anointed of his life, and be without danger, nay comdemnation of
the deepest treason, and savage slaughter that possibly can be committed ^oth
in (...) of God and of natural (...) and sure I (...) with (...) ^his the
king. Oh yt our Catholic Traitors would think yt David had as much holiness,
and Samuel, and yt Apostles had as great aucthoritye, and more, then any
Bishop can have, and yet these never did or durst, leave ye people to their
liberty, but brought them under ye bands and (coardes^ of Princely government)
yea and unto heathen Princes, and were so fart from commanding or procuring
violent hands upon such ye Lords Christ's, as on ye contrary, they called all
christians into due obedience to the^, and to most willing submissio^, teaching
and threatening gods heavy judgment, to all the transgressors. And now though I
have tried long your patience in this profitable discourse, yet I see (me
thinks) a willing mind in you, to hear ye last breach of this our labor,
yt is to show by proof, how vain it is for the unnatural subject to rise to
the ruin of his liege and natural king, and how unable they be to bring their
shameful endeavor to (...) ^^rowful^ end. chiefly aim at the heart of our
Elizabeth. But the event does prove, that as God for David, so our king Christ
for his holy anointed, does take this Catholic treason as done unto
himself, and therefore in vain is all your toil in treasonable affairs.

To our singular comfort, let us remember these words of our text, Why do
ye murmur, etc. In vain, in vain, yea, and that in a double vanity, do our
Papists conspire and rage. For neither shall they be able to hurt our gracious
Queen Elizabeth, nor yet be able to avoid Gods heavy displeasure by the hand
of her authority. They shall never prevail in their attempt, Psalm. 2.2.9.
for these reasons following: First, whosoever set themselves against an
absolute power, armed of God, must needs be overcome, but the Catholic
traitors do so, as before is said: Ergo, etc.

Again when the purposes of earthly (...) the decree of the (...) ^ust needs
(...) ^ses of (...) ^en, Psalm. 2.7.8.
(...) are so bent: Ergo, etc.

The eternal decree is set down in this Psalm. First, for the Lord Christ
in his Church, that he shall reign over the kings of the earth for ever, and
next, for his anointed Princes, that they shall reign in his Syon, under him
their Lord and king, maugre their enemies, during his time limited for them.

Therefore neither Resyn, nor his partner Romelia, nor yet the purposed son
of Tabeall, can prevail against Jerusalem, Esaias. 7.
nor his David. For Gods decree has said (It shall not be) how cunning,
mighty, or Catholic soever he the conspiracy: for earthly council cannot
prevail against the Lord. So as to our singular comfortes, and Gods eternal
praise (beloved in Christ) we may safely apply this saying of our most loving
GOD, to our Church, and kingdom, because through his great mercy, Gal. 4.
we are a s^ (...) universal (...) to who^ (...) net^ (...) All thy Children
shall be taught of GOD, Esaias. 54.13.14, etc.
and much peace shall be to thy Children. In righteousness shall thou be
established, and be free from oppression and from fear: For it shall not come
near thee, behold the enemy shall gather himself, but without me. Whosoever
shall gather himself in thee against me, shall fall: Behold, I have created
the Smyth that blows the coals in the fire, and him that brings forth an
Instrument for his work, and I have created the destroyer to destroy, but
all the weapons that are made against thee shall not prosper, and every tongue
that shall rise against thee, thou ^halt condemn. This is the heritage of the
Lords servants, and the righteousness is of me says the Lord This is the
staff of our stay, and the strength of our arm, even the Lor^^ i^iolable
decree for his an^ (...) us still to (...) fully nur^ (...) ^de, she (...) as
(...) many strangers, as hunger the Lords milk without guile, in this his
English Nurcerie. In vain therefore shall be your treacherous attemptes
against her Majesty, this Church, and kingdom, though hell be come to your
help. And therefore O Lord, we offer unto thee the Calves of our lips,
^ose. 14.2. ^eb. 13.15
and ever magnify thy holy name. This decree being for us, how can the
Papists or their Treasons be unrevenged. God says, respecting their proper
nature, the enemies shall rise, but he says straightway they shall fall. Their
tongues shall rail, but we by truth in God shall condemn them. They shall
gather themselves, but shall not find us alone, for the Lord reigns in Syon,
^sal. 99.1.
be the people never so impatient: He will arise, and his enemies shall be
scattered, and as smoke in the wind, sal. 68.1.2.
and wax against the Sun, so shall they melte and fly before him.

Examples (...) ^finite: for (...) Lord (...) ha^ (...) Princes, when they
stood in need of him? When men shall be required, his 300. for his Gedeon,
shall put to flight his Medianites, Judge. 7
that are exceeding number. His haile-stones shall beat to death such enemies,
as with-stande his Joshua. Joshua. 10.
And the ayrie wind shall russle trees, whereon God does walk before David to
his battle, 2. Sam. 5.24.
to yield him victory. Architophel shall slaye himself, as did Bellamie, and
Gods vengeance cannot suffer the graceless Abs^lon to die a common death. The
trees therefore shall execute his pride, his shagged hair and this Spanyels
cut) shall be his halter. And to omit the Scriptures testimony for David, if
we look upon Gods present judgments in this our nation from time to time,
against all traitorous assay, in all sorts and callings, we shall be compelled
to conclude, that all in vain is their attempt, when they without God, gather
^^^^selues against their So^ (...) will afford (...) ^here^ (...) the Osbert of
London and his 50. thousand Traitors, An. 1196. Rich. 2.
against king Richard 2. were speedily ouerthrown, and he their chief, executed
at the Elmes, it may be the place of the last execution.

Peter Spalding betrayed Barwicke to the Scotts, and was by the king of Scots
caused to be hanged, because of his treason against his natural king Edward
the second.

Roger Mortimer conspyring the death of king Edw. 3. his Father, An. 1317.
was hanged at the foresaid Elmes.

And that notable rabble of Rakehels, Jack Straw, and Wat Tyler, that spoiled
London, and slew the Counsel, bearing bloody hand against all authority and
learning (so that upon whom soever a pen and yncke was found, he dyed in
their tyrannous Treason) had yet their deserts: For W. Walworth the Mayor of
this noble City of London* arrested him with the mace of death (...)

The hon^ (...) conti^ (...) che^^ (...)

The perilous treasons by them purposed, joined just with the present
Catholic attemptes, as Jack Straw confessed at his death.

They meant to have slain as well the king as his Counsel, the Lords and
Gentlemen of account, the Bishops and Preachers of the Land, all Judges and
common Lawyers, only the begging Friars (ancestors of our present Jesuits)
should have been the Curates of the Country. And kings should have been
raised from the Tilekil for Wat Tyler was decreed the king of Kent, and so in
every shire such another. And because they were miserable beggars, their
purpose was to have burned the City of London, at the four corners thereof,
and so to have easilye gathered her wealth unto themselves. But thanks be unto
God, as the purposes of these former Papists with these our present
Catholics, (...) ^lone in effect, and very resem^ (...) Lords lot, (...) ^idge
has (...) go (...) and spend the day in like examples. As in Hen. 4. time,
how his unnatural Nobility, with their traitorous Priest Madeline (for it is a
strange treason, where neither the Pope nor his Chaplains be partakers) by
the good service of his Subjects of Circester, were taken the most of them, and
put to death. And though the Rebels set fire on the town, supposing that
way to withdraw their service, yet in love to their loyalty, and service to
their Lord and king, they did persiste to prosecute the traiterous Rebels, and
their attendantes, to their deserved death. But to let al other Princes pass
us, would God our Papists could behold his mighty hand for our Elizabeth.

What conspiracies have they had against her majesty, which Gods majesty has
not revealed to her, that the wheel of Justice might reward them. Plometry
the priest, 1570..
and (...) ^erats at Durham (...) thumb^ (...) (...) Doctor Story, with Haunce
that foolish priest, and table gamester (such was his profession and common
practice) Campion and his fellow champions, Arden, Someruile, Throgmorton, and
the rest, with their traiterous Printer, all which in wonderful wise the Lord
has laid open to the world, and by perfect trials, as by their own
confessions, were found deeply dyed in most deadly Treasons, and as most
wicked weeds, were justly cast out of our Christian garden.

So likewise (beloved) this most odious and execrable purpose, by Savage, and
other Sathanicall seed, so secretly devised, and being Imps of very green
youth, and some of them as sprouts spread into her majesty's Court, were
therefore for the most part, least suspected of many, which threatened this
Nation more imminent danger: Yet our everlasting watchman, the Lord Jehovah,
from the (...) did so ryng a still (...) to her Maie^ (...) ^atter, Psalm. 127.1.
and (...) their (...) to Gods great glory, her majesty's still preservation,
the Churches peace, and Englands tranquillity, they were in ye way (as David
says) and the godly wisdom of the Prince, Psalm. 2.
by the censure of equity, has for the peace of her Subjects, and her
bounden duty unto God, cropped some of these bitter branches from the tree of
this common wealth, whose endeavor was (might they have attained their intent)
to have pulsed up the same by the very roots.

Oh savage cruelty, an ill devised recompense, for so long suffering and
princely clemency extended from her meek majesty amongst you. And whereas
the rest apprehended, remain here and else where: so I beseech God in mercy,
if it be his good will, to convert their souls, yt they seeing the valor of
their infernal sins, may speedily repent them, with tears and words fit
for repentance, to the comfort o^ (...) i^ (...) ^uauncement (...) ^techrist,
the (...) ^rour (...) cut from the City of the Lord, and that the bryar and
bramble bush of Rome and Popery (the field and forest of treaso^s) against
Christian kings and kingdoms, may be discerned and despised by the Cedars
of our Libanus, Judge. 9.8.14
so as in ye most honorable assemblye of our best chosen plants, even with
whole consent, her Majesty's sword may be fully set in edge, and her
gracious arm, by their godly strength, so yet further armed, that she may
vow, and sing to God with the former David: Betimes I will destroy all the
wicked in the land, Psalm. 101.8.
that I may cut off all the workers of iniquity from the City of the Lord.
And before the meetings of this most honorable Court (brethren) let us give
the Lord no rest, until he have mercy, and surely set in safety, our
Jerusalem, Esaias. 62.7
the praise of the world. And that in our days Darius statute be revived:
namely, that Gods hol^ (...) may be more and more richly (...) ^ease, Esra. 6.
his ser^ (...) ^cere godli^ (...) ^^stiti^ (...) to God by her good Subjects,
for her prosperous Reign, increasing Peace, Regal Throne, honor to her
sacred person and joy to her sanctified soul. And that her old days may
grow in health, and godliness, to double the number of her graces years, to
the fulness of good christians comfort in Christ our Lord, if it may stand
with his blessed will and good pleasure. So shall our murmuring Papists at
home, and their banded confederates abroad, mourn and houle, because the Lord
does meet them in the field, and their attemptes, by his great strength, are
brought to be but vain. Be wise therefore ye kings and be learned ye mighty
wights of the world, see and consider, and serve the Lord in fear, and
rejoice in him, and not in his aduersarye at Rome. And you common Catholics
and resolute traitors, seek no longer to crushe, but kiss the son of God
(decreed (...) ^uer his universal (...) love, honor (...) annoint^ (...)
(...) in your inventions, for the Lord will have her to partake of David's
solace over you Gentiles, saying with mighty conquest, Moab is my washpot,
Psalm. 60.8.
over Edome will I cast out my shoe, upon Philistia will I triumph. He will use
his liberty over them, in his victory, and put them to vile servitude, and then
tossed and troubled England, repose thy confidence in Christ, and embrace not
his grace in vain, so shall he make thee the praise of the world, and thy
Elizabeth the beauty of Christian Princes, for the glory of his name, to whom
with God the father and the holy Ghost, be all praise, power dominion, and
immortal thanks thoroughout all generations. Amen.

FINIS.

