A DYALL Of daily Contemplacion, or divine exercise of the mind: instructing us
to live unto GOD, and to dye unto the world. First colected and published in
Latin, at the request of a godly Bishop, and Reverent Father, RICHARD, sometime
Bishop of Dirham, and Lord Privy Seal. Now newly Translated into English,
by Richard Robinson, Citizen of London.

Seen, and allowed.

MATTHEW. 24. Estote and vos ideo parati, quia qua hora non putatis filius
hominis venturus est. RECORDARE ET READ Simplicitate and Synceritate.

ANNO. 1578.

CLARISSIMO DOCTRINA, ET Pietate viro, D. Alexandro Nowello, Paulinae Ecclesiae
Cathedralis dignissimo Decano, Patrono suo singulari. R. Robinsonus
Londinensis, Gratiam and Benedictionem A Domino Deo sempiternam.
ALVMNVS Salutis nostrae munificentissimus JESUS CHRISTVS, (Reuerendissime
Patron) VT DIVI PAVLI AD EPHESI. CAP. 2. LEGIMVS, (VOLENS MORTALES Q VOSLIBET
PER PECCATA MORTVOS, GRATIA DIVINA VIVIFICARE SVA) variis quasi modis nostram
per semetipsum restitutam felicitatem demonstrans, nos sic sibi conseruatos: ad
recordationem hinc inde debiti nostri, tanquam optimus Pater filios, Pastor
egregius oues, nec non dux vigilans, and Consolator validus commilitones suos
maximopere instimulare visus ^st. Quo quidem exemplo, si mundi nationes
quaecunque, integrum Corpus Ecclesie suae fidelis incorporatum, hodierna luce
inter se probationem verissimam adimplere queant: Si vel quae nam earum dudum
longinquae, ^am vero propinquae, gratiae promissioni diuinae presentis, aut
iminentis factae sint: Inter easdem, nimirum Angliae huic nostrae, praeluxit
etiam admirabilis gratiae salutiferae splendour. IVSTICIA SCILICET, CVM ET PAX
SVA APVD NOS PER ANNOS IAM MVLTOS DEOSCVLATAE SVNT INVICEM, MISERICORDIA
PARITER ET VERITAS NON SOLVM SIBI OBVIAVERVNT VERVMETIAM NOS OMNES TVTISSIME
CIRCVMVNIVERVNT. Adeo vt Patria hec nostra a priore lapsu ad presentem
stabilitatem, a defectione ad perfectionem a periculo ad felicitatem, a
seruitute ad libertatem, a tenebris ad lucem, a morte denique ad vitam,
restituta, visitata, and in hunc modum viuicata, non mediocre habet vnde
congratuletur his verbis: A DOMINO FACTVM EST ISTVD, ET EST MIRABILE IN OCVLIS
NOSTRIS. Itaque tanta prouidentia ex ultans diuina, Quanto magis de se erga
saluatorem hunc suum mentem sanam in corpore sano, de tempore in tempus
omnimodo prebere debeat, etiam orbis totius saciei liquido constat. Prefertim
iam instantibus nouissimis diebus quae (vt scriptum est Actibus Apostolorum.
cap. 2.) Pater iste Celestis sua constituit potestate, non nostrum sit nosce
tempora nouissima, nec temporu^ articulos. Eo libentius accipiamus, igitur
interea virtutem, quam Spiritus Sanctus attulerit nobis: Prebeamus que
nosmetipsos non solum cum HIERVSOLEMIS, VNIVERSA IVDEA, atque SAMARIA, PRIORE
MVNDI AETAE^ Verumetiam toto cum Ecclesiae suae fidelis corpore incorporato
apud hoc seculum vbicunque disperso sua in seruitute seruos vigilantissimos, vt
simus ei testes acceptabiles etiam vsque ad vltimum terrae. Mundum quinimo
facinerosum, Demonem Maliciosum, Carnemque procliuam ad malum a nobis exuentes:
Corpus autem lucidum, armaque lucis nobis induentes, accurate inuigilemus,
fideliter oremus, nosmetipsos denique nostras lampades oleo repletas iugiter
preparemus, Summum, Celestemque sponsum, agnum illum immaculatum in throno suo
regnantem, gaudio and letitia summa vt conueniamus. Ad haec gratissima
(REVERENDE IN CHRISTO PATER) Quocies cunquae nos non hospites and incoles, sed
and conciues sanctorum and domestici. Dei, ad nuptias Agni inuitatos, oleoquae
letitiae comuniter vnctos Contemplor, Architectureque diuinae quasi structuram
ornatissimam templi sancti sui, tum temporalis in hac vita, tum spiritualis in
futura preordinatam et vocatam: Iterum atque iterum animi mei intimis
affectibus inter alios exoptans feliciter stabiliri pacem ISRAELIS nostrae
(Tametsi, dicto, facto, etiam vel cogitatione infimus minimusque essem
expectationi cuilibet optimae corespondere) Tamen quoquo modo beneuolentiam
adhibens optimam, meo memet metiens pede protenus in stuporem redactus: Dum
dudum hac ex part proprio Colluctarier studio. Tandem proposito fauens meo.
Ecce, ENDYMIONIS (si ita dicam) SOMNIVM CVIVSDAM IGNOTI, occurrebat,
beneuolentiae pariter et imperfectioni suppeditaturum meae. VT POTE. DE VITA
CONTEMPLATIVA, (quae sit vita non secundum hominem, communem, vt apud
Aristotilem, lib. Ethicorum. 10. sed et vita diuina eaque optima imitanda) ab
Authore ignoto, iussu vero REVERENDI CVIVSDAM RICARDI DVNELMENSIS EPISCOPI in
septenam quotidianamque excercitationem, commemoratiuam digestum, ex sacris
Scripturis, Doctorum Primitiuae Ecclesie, aeque ac posteriorum auctoritatibus
desiunptum in Latinis primum divulgatum verbis, per annos ab hinc septuaginta
et octo elapsos obdormitans, Hoc iam denuo tam tenui industria mea elaboratum,
a somno, ad vigilantiam, a morte ad vitam, extra obliuionis sepultura ad
memorabilem famae sculpturam, postremo e Latino sermon in maternam linguam
nostram qualecunque manibus euadit completum meis, Publicae tantum vtilitati
commendaturum, omni conamine in lucem emittere statuebam. Explorato deinceps
MOYSE vel AARAONE quodam pastore obseruantissimo, cuius satis perspectae vitae
integritati (nempe vt professioni ita et probationi, vox ipsa populi tanquam
vox dei in patronum eligendum applauderet conse^tanea) Inter alios tum
doctrinae, tum pietatis fyncerae prestantissimos nostra aetate MAECENATES.
Maxima equidem animo meo de Paternitatis tuae dignitate sese inuoluebat
beneuolentia, cum optimis quibusque de Patrocinio, benemerita. Cuius quidem
Paterno fauori, Iuditio non tam docto quam approbato, praefulgidoque vitae
sanctimonio, velut examplari condigno, fausto nunc demum omine, SVB TITVLO
HOROLOGII CONTEMPLATIVIQ VOTIDIANI, velut novellum quoddam Anni iam inseque^tis
omni cum humilitate pariter et reuerentia debita, a me consecratum,
dedicatumque, Si modo gratum et acceptabile fuerit visum: Ceteri omnes non
dubitauero domestici fidei, inde in optimam acceptantes partem, quod (AD RECTE
VIVENDVM DEO, MORIENDVMqVE MVNDO SPECTAT) non solum consequi possint,
Verumetiam tam Simplicem quam Synceram Beneuolentiam erga omes meam facilime
contemplentur et complectentur promptissimam. DEVS OPTIMVS MAXIMUS, sua immensa
clementia, et bonitate ineffabili dignetur, cum de Caelesti tribunalique throno
suo Iudex supremus, sedere sit venturus, Nos omnes vnius suae fidei
contemplatiuam Ecclesiam, pari opera vigilantes, vinculoque simili, spei,
pacis, et dilectionis, obtemperantes suae, Ditione eternali cohereditari secum
preseruaret conseruaretque beatissima sua* Ad quam et in qua Deitasvna in
trinitate et trinitas vna in Deitate absolutissima potentia PATRIS FILII ET
SPIRITVS SANCTI, sua semper gratia et benedictione, tuam paternitatem
cogitaciones tu^s, simul et actiones omnes diuinas, beat, regat, dirigat,
Protegatque, ad nominis sui gloriam propagandam, Ecclesiae, sanctae suae, nec
non congregationis christianae vtilitatem. Denique ad animae tuae ipsius,
consolationem in Christo IESV Perhennem. Amen.

Londini ex Domicilio meo, in Perochia Sancti Iohannis Euangelistae nuncupata.
Primo die Mensis IANVAR 11. ANNO salutis humanae. 1578. Tuae Dignitatis
humilimus Studiosissimusque Orator, Ricardus Robinsonus. Londinensis.

The Auctors Epistle, or Preface to this work. SAPIENCIAE. CAP. 2. Exiguum,
and cum tedio, Est tempus vitae nostrae.
SYTHEN that by natural course, the date of man's life is short, and as
experience shows, the Process of the same is full of perilles, both of soul
and body. And moreover, our mortal complexion is yet subject to many corporal
infirmities, passions, and inordinate affections of the spirit. And so we
pass away our days by continual enterchange: as then sick, now, in health,
then tich, now poor: then in hope, now in despair: and now in discomfort,
then in consolacion. Therefore JOB, making familier comparison, likeneth the
beginning, the mids, and the end of man's life, unto a flower.

For right as a flower in the first appearance or rising is tender and feoble,
and soon overthrown, oppressed, and consumed and all be it that in the
process of growyng, it springs and ryseth pleasantly, yet by alteracion of
Night and Day, mutabilitie of wind and weather, misty Clouds, and tempestious
air. This foresaid flower is in continual enterchange, and stands never
stable in one flourishing state any long time, but finally fades away,
returnyng to very earth and powder.

Right so a man in the tender state of his innocence, is unable to help him
self, and to nourishe him self, in the necessity of Nature he has no
suffisaunce. Then growyng up to Childhood, he is both feeble of corporal
strength, and weak in wit: and by casual chance of any int^mperancie,
excess, or surffet, he is soon quayled and brought to his end. Then
flourishing and springing up to the ripenes (that is) unto years of discretion,
portlines of stature, and perfection of manly strength: he is apt to be
possessed with many sundry perils both spiritual and corporal, and under the
change of many fortunate chances.

And so concludingly, in decrepit aige he must need suffer the impotencie
thereof, and the misery of many sore languors: and finally be sequestered from
this life and worldly vanities thereof. And thus he never stands fyrme in one
stay.

JOB. 44. Homo natus est de muliere breui viuens tempore, repletur multis
miserijs: Qui, quasi flos egreditur, and eonteritur, and fugit velut vmbra, and
nunquam in eodem statu permanet. etc.

And thus our time reuoluing by continual alteration, (to conclude and finishe
our perilous pilgrimage in this veil of tears) succeeds dollorus Death:
the which no man by natural course can eschew. And of the time, the place, the
manner, or the kind of his death, is no man that naturally knows: and then
according to his deserving he shall have his dome.

Therefore, sythen our time is but short and uncertain, and by reason of
diverse impedimentes right daungerus, it should be the rather more profitably
spent: For as Saint Bernard says, There is nothing committed to the
disposition of Man, more precious then time. All be it, many worldly men labor
and turmoyle them selves with weariness in worldly travels, wastyng their
days in meare vanity. And carnal Creatures, blinded with sensual appetites,
lothsomely consume their precious time, wherein they might attain unto
knowledge and souls health, making no more account of lost time (which is
unrecoverable) then as it were but of vile price, and of no value.

BERNAR. Nihil preciosius tempore: heu, nihil hodie vilius computatur.
Transeunt dies salutis, and nemo sibi diem vnquam causatur rediturum.

And though for the profitable employment of our time most requisite it be for
all estates and conditions what so ever, to be exercised in readyng or hearing
diverse woorckes and compiled matters, wherein might be contained noble
histories, moral documentes, and royal examples of personages renoumed for
their virtuous life and conversation: which when we duly read and regard,
may fructify and bring profit to us in our lives and manners of living, for
the advancement of virtue, and the ahollishing of vice. Yet is there no
exercise or labor taken in hand, nor time better spent, then in reading the
sacred volumes of the Scriptures. For the knowledge of Scripture, by many
reasons, strengthens our Patience, and gives us consolation in all
adversity. Wherefore, the understanding of it to every estate higher or
lower, is both honorable, pleasant, and profitable, as Cassianus says.

Non aliqua in mundo potest esse fortuna, quam literarum non auget gloriosa
notitia. Yet notwithstanding, holy Scripture has a special prerogative
beyond all other doctrine, or profane compiled matters. VVhetefore Saint
Jerome compared holy Scripture to a Mirror, or a Glass, saying.

Scriptura enim speculum est, feda ostendens, and corrigere docens. GREGO.
Sacra enim scriptura, est quasi Speculum quod oculis mentis opponitur: Ibi enim
sentimus, Quantum proficimus, and quantum a profectu long distamus.

For like as a Glass shows a man the spots, deformities, and faults of his
face, the which by the sight of his eye, he can not discern: so the
declaration of holy Scripture lightneth a man's reason, and makes him more
profoundly to know the goodness of God, his own unthankfulness, the danger of
sin, the vallure of virtue, the vicious vanity of this world, the short
process of our life, the endless torment of hell ordained for sinners, and the
perpetual pleasures of heaven, prepared for just and godly persons. And though
by the judgment: of natural reason, men may indiffe^ently have a gross
conceit between vice and virtue, good and evil, some discernyng clearly,
some darckly, according to the measure of ingenious wit and capacity in him
that so deemeth and judges: yet notwithstanding, holy Scripture clears a
man's conscience and conceit, yea and helps reason perfectly to understand in
what state he stands: and whether in the ways of virtue or vice he furdereth
or failleth. Therefore, David the Prince of Propphetes, said.

Declaratio sermonum tuorum illuminat, and intellectum dat paruulis And by a
gross comparison, though all mertalles be good in their use, yet is there
great distinction of degrees among them, and diversity of value: as Brass is
more of price then Iron, Tynne, better then Lead, and Copper exceeds Tynne*
and one penny of silver, is worth ten of Copper: and one penny of gold, is
vvorth seven of silver. Even so is it among Treatises, Lucubracions, and
matters composed and compiled: for they have their diversity and difference
both in matter and manner of saying. And diverse degrees of goodness may be
found in the same, As good, better, and all the best. Wherefore in beholding
well this persuasion, I intend neither to disprayse, nor yet to attribute*
singular praise superfluus to any form of compilacion or travel in special.
But by this digression, I purpose by Gods grace, to commend unto devout and
godly disposed Readers, this memorial: that for as much as our time is
precious, short, and full of Impedimentes: that by their knowledge, they
should choose the best matter for rheir spiritual and gohstly nourishment of
the soul: as they would do in meat and drink, clothinges, and necessaries
for the sustentation of their body, and take their special and frequent
recourse in the exercise of readyng such books, as shall make best for their
consolacion and profit spiritual. Thus in as much as holy Scripture, and the
fruits thereof well understood and duly executed, is a very guide to
eternal life, as is said.

JOHN. 5. Scrutamini Scripturas, quia vos putatis, in ipsis vitam eternam
habere.

And because now a days men are best delighted to hear or read such
works as are compendious, pleasant, and profitable, short in sentence, and
large in sense. Although for lack of cunnyng, and others sundry impedimentes,
I am insufficient to compile such a piece of work, yet nevertheless, by the
grace of GOD, I entend to accomplish my best endeavor, according to my
sclender talent, in setting forth a compendius Treatis, to the honor and
praise of God, and spiritual profit of such as shall take any pleasure in
readyng thereof, which may be called, the Contemplacion of sinners. And by a
similitude, for so much as even as a man delighted in the diversity of meats
and drinckes, and apparel for the body (for alteration or change thereof,
renueth appetite and affection) So likevvyse the spirit of man rejoices and
takes comfortable refreshing of the enterchaunge and diversity of divine
matters, which is the food and furnirure of the soul. I purpose to divide
this Treatis in seven parts, according to the seven days of the week: so
that for every day a man may find in readyng, a several delectacion, and
remember a nevve excercitacion. And to make this compilacion more autentike, I
purpose not to insert nor allege any sentence thereof in the Latin tongue:
but either that which is probable by holy Scripture, pronounced by our
Savior Christ him self, the four Evangelists, or that which his Apostles
have left us, or that which the ancient Fathers of the Primative Church have
written for ou^ ^omfort, or sometimes the moral mixtions of Philosophers
addicted to virtue has revealed unto us, either else such good and godly
aduertisementes, as the good and godly vvryters of the latter times have
offered me, incident to the consummation and finishing hereof in good and
decent order: although our gross native language (and specially in composing
of meeter is such) that it can not in all points agree with the perfection of
the Latin tongue, has made me to write the matter it self in Latin, and to
comprise my own private opinion under the same in english verse: supposing
that some light is rather thereby made into the work, then any obscurity by
my doing.

And to conclude, beseeching every man that shall hear or read this aforesaid
Treatice: that they judge not, ne backbite my doings, before they have read,
and sufficiently digested the same: I submit my poor and insufficint capacity
to the discreet correction of every reasonable Reader.

THE AVCTHORS Commemoration for MONDAY.
Behold this worldly wretchedness,
Of evils which ever us possess.
The Translators Application.
First when Thalmighty providence did heaven and earth create,
An universal darkness did them both obtenebrate:
Then likte the Lord to make a light divided from darkness,
The darkness should night signify, the light should day express.
This day therefore darkness mundame,
Eschevve and walk in light oh man.
PAVLE ad Romans CAP. 15. Whatsoever things are written, for our learning and
instructon are written, that by patience, and consolacion of the Scriptures, we
might have hope.

BERNARDVS super Cantica. IT behooves a man to know, in what order, with what
affection, with what intent, and what things they are which he ought to know:
That is, in what order, That he do first learn thoroughly that which is most
in season, or fit for time, tendyng unto welfare. With what affection, That
he learn such matter as is more fervent and more vehement to make him in love
with knowledge. To what intent, That a man not for vain glory, neither for
curiosity, or any such like, do take any thing in hand to know or make
known, but only to the end that God may thereby be glorified him self, and
his neighbors edified.

HVGO de Sancto victore. THere is nothing in this life perceived, or felt more
sweeter, there is nothing taken more greedely, there is nothing which so
sequestreth a man's mind from the love of the world, nothing so strengthens
and fortifieth the mind against temptations, nothing so encourages a man, and
furdereth to the accomplishing of every work and of every travel, more then
the study and zeal of, and unto the sacred scripture.

PROVERBIORVM. CAP. I. A Wise man that hears wisdom, shall become thereby
more wyser then he was.

This volume brief of sclender quantity,
Called, of sinners the contemplation.
Accords well for each state and degree,
Guiding by grace and due direction.
Our Soul to sease in sure salvation,
Therefore this title profoundly knowing:
Which of thy conscience may cause correction,
In heart emprint, with matter following.
CHRISOSTOMVS super Matthe. THere is known to be in the Sea a confused noise,
a continual fear to such as sail there, an infatigable beating together one
wave with an other, an inconstancy continual: and even so fares it with the
world.

PSALMORVM. 77. THY way and thy paths are in the seas in many waters.

AMBROSIVS. THis life of ours is replenished with such evils, that in the
comparison thereof, even death it self is thought to be a remedy, and not a
punishment unto us.

ESAI. CAP. 45. de impijs. THey are all confused and ashamed, all the woorkers
of wickedness are together gone to confusion.

IEREMI. CAP. VI. THey being confusedly scattered, are not confounded, and are
nothing ashamed of their wickedness.

BERNARDVS. THE small number of souls that live well, tries the danger of
this world, and so does the multitude of them that persist and go through
the same.

AMBROSIVS in sermon. IN the troublesome sea of this world (says he) we must
greatly fear, least that either the sturdy violence of the tempest do carry
away our ship, or that the flowing stream do sincke and swallowe it up,
either else lest that some cruel Pirate, or Rouer do seize upon it as his
prize, and so lead it away with him into perpetual thraldom.

These sentences before resemble by figure,
The world as it were set in the salt See:
Whose perilous passage as in portrature,
Explaneth mearely cares and calamitee.
Whereunto is subject, each state and degree,
For as the Sea is ever in commotion:
With raging storm, and perilous perplexitee.
So is this world wallowyng in confusion.
JOEL Proph. CAP. 3. THE Sun and the Moon are deprived of their light, and
the stars of the Firmament have withdrawn their glittering hue.

PSALM. 14. THey have all gone out of the way, and are altogether become
unprofitable.

SAPIENCIA. CAP. 17. FOR with one chain and bond of darkness, were they all
bound together.

AVGVSTINVS. I Have slyded away into temporal and worldly matters, which are
vain and transitory, and see, I was beset with darkness.

BEDA. HE that reaches after the cup wherein is poison, does as it were
sippe upon the brimme of the cup for the Honey sake: because he would feel
how sweet it is, and not because he fears how deadly an end it brings.

TRENO. 4. HOw dim of color is the gold become, the best color thereof is
faded and changed: the chief stones of the Sanctuary are dispersed in the
upper end of the streets.

MATH. CAP. 15. de impijs. THey are blind them selves, and the guiders of such
as are blind.

Each sentence here of foresaid Scripture,
Shows Sun, Moon, and Stars to our sight.
To have been environed with clouds obscure,
Dimmed with darkness, which sometime blased bright.
So in the world some estates lack the light,
Of grace, in manner of life and religion:
The day of Virtue turnyng into night,
So blinded in wicked worldly abusion.
AVGVSTINVS. THE prosperous and happy things counted in this world, have with
them a certain unfeigned bitter taste, a deceitful pleasantness, a sure and
certain heaviness or sorrow to trust unto, and an uncertain pleasure to be
delighted withal.

BOE^IVS de consolatione. FOR sure (I suppose) that adversity does more
profit men, then prosperity.

ARISTOTLE Ethico^um primo. Virtue shines clearly, when man is in adversity.

OVID. FOrtune distributeth all things as pleases her, and takes away the
same again at her pleasure: he is suddenly made a lanke and sclender person,
which even now was a graunde paunche.

BERNARDVS. LET a man desire the temporal goods of this transitory world,
and he shall evermore be vexed and disquieted with the desire thereof.

Idem. EVen as those thorns, are not thorns in deed which prick not, so
are those riches no riches worldly, which do not disquiet the mind of man.

DAMACIVS. YT is not at all to be doubted, but greater is the vexation of mind
unto that covetous man which enjoys all things at will, then of the poor
man which almost has nothing at all.

JOB. CAP. 30. THE children of the unwise, and of base degree, did suppose and
deem, that pleasures were hidden under thorns.

O wicked world wrapped in wretchedness,
Fie on thy fraud and fickle felicity:
Fie on thy balefull blundred business,
Thy blandeshing blindness in prosperity.
Hedged with Hawthorne, care, and calamity,
With dread, dolor, and double disease:
Thy pleasant poison slayth soul and body,
So rewardest thou such as seek thee to please.
GENES. 18. Therefore is the crying of the Sodomites and Gomorrheans increased,
and their sin is too too much grievous in the sight of the Lord.

BERNARDVS. THE life of sin profereth unto such as enter in thereto, the
Honey mixed with bitterness to such as go forwards therein, gall and vinegar,
and unto them that pass out of the same life, the poison of Adders incurable.

APOCAL. 2. c. I Know where thy dwelling place is, where also thy seat is
Sathanas.

ESAI. 24. Fear and trembling, a deep pit, and a lake is over thee which
inhabitest on the earth.

4. REGVM. 24. NAbuchodonozor carried away Ioachim and the kings Wives, the
kings Eunuchs, and Judges of the land, the strong Men, the Artificers, and
warriers out of Jerusalem, into the land of Babylon. So now in like manner by
the suggestion of the Devil, many Christians are miserably carried captives from
the state of grace, into bondage of sin.

O polisant grave and donghill clad with snawe,
Thou sister to Sodom, and seat to Sathanas,
Thy likyng lusts last but for a thrawe,
Thou tyrant treasonable, and german to Judas.
Whom thou can kiss, salute, and embrace,
By honor, riches, delight, and dignity:
As Judas betrayed Christ with flattering face,
His soul thou seazest in endless captivity.
ECCLESI. primo. I Ecclesiastes, was the king of Jerusalem, and purposed in my
mind wisely to seek and search out, as touching al things that are done
under the Sun.

CAP. 2. I Have exalted and magnified my works, I have heaped together unto
me silver and gold, and the substance of kings and provinces, I made to be
ordained me singers, and singing women, and all the delites fit for the
sons of men: and all things which my eyes desired, have I not denied nor
forbidden them from my heart, but that it should enjoy all manner pleasure. And
when I had turned me again unto al those works which my hands had made, and
unto those labors wherein I had vainly toiled, I then saw, that in them all
there was vanit^e, and disquietnesse of mind, and that there was nothing of
durance under the Sun, and I saw that wisdom differed so much from
foolishness, as the light does from darkness.

3. REGVM. 11. HE had to wives, which were al queens, seven hundred, and three
hundred Concubines. And when he now waxed aged, his heart was so depraved by
women, that he followed after strange gods.

3. REGVM. 4. THE bread of Solomon was daily.xxx. quarters of meal, ten
stalled Oxen, and twenty out of the pastures, and an hundred Sheep, besides
Hearts, Buckes, and wild Gotes, and Capons. And Judah and Israel dwelt without
fear, every man under his Vine, and under his Fig tree, from Dan to
Beerseba, all the days of Solomon.

That prudent prince, and wise king Solomon,
Preferred his pleasance in such proved plentee:
For honor, riches, delites, and renoune,
He had no pear, so surpassed he.
Reigning in all most royal felicity,
Natheles his state, he said, for conclusion:
Was of no force, but meare vanity,
Through corporal toil, and spiritual affliction.
BERNARDVS ad Eugenium. WHether do these wicked accursed exercises draw thee,
if notwithstanding thou persevere and go forwards so to addict and give thy
self to them, that thou leauest thee nothing of that which is thine own.
Thou dooest but lose time in those things wherein there restes nothing but
labor, vain disquietnesse, and vexation of the spirit: for what is the
fruits thereof else, but the webbes of Spiders. One day utters an others
brablinges, and one night adiudgeth the malice of an other.

ESAI. CAP. 59. THey have conceived labor and travel, and have brought forth
iniquity, they have hatched the Eggs of Adders, and have wouen the webbes of
Spiders, their works are unprofitable, spoil and repentance are in the ways
of them, and the way of peace have they not known.

THAALES Philosophus. WHEN on a time this man (being one of the seven Sages)
was demanded, what thing was hard: he answered, A man to know him self.

HVGO de Sancto victore. Descend, and return unto consideration of thine own
heart, and wisely discuss of thy self, and consider from whence thou come,
whither thou go, how thou framest thy life, how much thou dooest daily
profit, or how much thou dooest disprofite.

Some are so choked with worldly business,
Both Spiritual and Temporal, as time does often show
They have but small care of Hell or heauenlinesse,
To save them selves they are vvoonderous slovve.
Such study not how their concience for to knavv,
As a Spider fights to catch a Flee:
Making her net, which fails with a flavve,
Such sell their souls for vain prosperitee.
EZECHIEL. CAP. 2. THOU son of man, there are unbelieving people, and
subuerters of the truth with thee, and with Scorpions dooest thou inhabit.

HIERONIMVS. A Man of rare diversity, is either made good or bad, only by
means of keeping company with others.

ECCLESIASTES. CAP. 7. DEpart thou from the company of the unjust man, and that
which is evil shall depart from thee.

BERNARDVS. THE world is there conversant, where as is much malice, and small
wisdom, where as all things are slammy like Bird lyme, all things frail
and brittle, al things covered with darkness, besette with snares, where
souls are put in ieopardy, and bodies destroyed, whereas also is vanity, and
vexation of the spirit.

OZEA. CAP. 4. THERE is no truth, there is no mercy, and there is no
knowledge of GOD upon earth, but cursing and lying, manslaughter, and theft:
yea, and unto adultery have they overwhelmed them selves, and blood has
meddled with blood: for this cause shall the earth mourn, and all flesh shall be
brought low that inhabiteth the same.

SENECA. ROugh prosperity has borne me away perforce from beholding the
wholesome life.

O strong tyrant, traitor right treasonable,
Convent of all contagious company:
Thy faded flourishing is Fantasy fayleable,
Thou grave of guile, school of cupidity.
Father of falsehood, nurse of iniquity,
The changeable chance of thy foolish renown:
Oppressing the just, placing evil men on hie,
Makes many to loose an incorruptible crown.
SAPIENCIA. CAP. 6. Unto you, O ye kings therefore, do these my words
appertain, that you may learn wisdom, and not walk out of this prescribed
bounds.

PSALM. 2. Now ye kings be wise and learned, ye that judge the earth, serve
the Lord in fear, and rejoice before him with trembling. Lay hold upon
discipline in time, least that the Lord be angry at any time, and then you
perish out of the right way.

PLVTARCHVS Philosophus Used daily to admonish and instruct his scholar
TRAIANE the Emperor, in four several things. The first, to fear GOD, and
honor him duly. The second, in discipline of necessary duty toward each
degree. The third, that he should make much of them that were in authority
under him. And the fourth, that he should protect and defend his subjects from
all violence and injuries: for thou (says he) shall handle all things
woonderous well, if thou dooest not digress from thy self: if thou first
frame thy self to a decent life, and if thou disposest all that is in thee
unto virtue, all things shall prosper well with thee.

ARISTOTLE. 5. Polit. A Prince ought to be a woorshipper of GOD, because men
do less fear that the Prince can away with that which is evil, if they
think he be a man that fears God.

PLATO. HE that can not govern or guide his own soul, which is but one only,
how shall he govern and guide a multitude of souls.

ARISTOTLE de Regimine Principum. A Chief point of wisdom in a King, is to
govern him self.

PSALM. 101. THERE shall not dwell any within my house, which shall do after
the manner of pride, or arrogancy: my eyes are upon the faithful in the land,
that they may sit with me. And he that walks in the undefiled way, shall
minister unto me, or serve me.

2. PARALIPO. CAP. 19. IEHV the Prophet said unto Iosaphat the king of Judah,
Thou geuest help unto the wicked man, and ioynest amity with them that have
hated the Lord, and therefore truly have thou deserved the displeasure of the
Lord.

SOLON Philosophus. THIS man being one of the seven Sages of Greece, said, It
behooves him that bears sovereign rule, to be gentle and courteous, that his
subjects may rather have him in reverence and honor for his clemency, then
fear him for his cruelty.

M. Tullius Cicero. THERE is no defense of armed men to be counted safe and
without danger in respect: but it rather ought to be environed with charity
and good will of the Citezins, and not with armor.

That moral man, and famous Philosopher,
Four things commends befitting a king:
To his disciple Traiane the Emperor,
First dread and love God above all thing.
Next of his person have discreet gouernyng,
Then see that his officers be true and diligent,
Lastly his subjects ever defendyng.
Shall win their love, as conquest congruent.
EXODUS. CAP. 18. IETHRO said unto Moses, (Who was the Ruler, graund captain,
and judge of six hundred thousand men?) Why sit thou all alone, and all
the people committed to thy charge, looks for thy presence, from the morning,
until the night. Thou shall be consumed and vanquished with this thy foolish
labor, yea, both thou and this people which is with thee. Thou have more to
deal withal, then thy ability can well dispose withal, and thou being but
one man, can not bear this heavy burden: but hear my words, and the
counsel I shall give thee. Do thou choose out of every tribe, men of
wisdom, and such as fear GOD, in whom truth remains, and which shall
detest covetousness. And then let ordeyne certain of them to serve as
Tribunes, or generalles, and Rulers over a certain number, and Rulers of
fyfties. And let be also ordained Deacons, which shall sit in judgment seat
over the people at all times convenient: and what so ever shall be of weyghtier
importance, that let them refer unto thy dealyng therewith, and let them
selves have judgment of less matters: And if thou do this thing, thou shall
perform the Lords kingdom. And Moses did as he was thus wylled.

SOLON Philosophus. THIS man, one of the seven Sages, being demanded by what
means Cities, or their Kings might be governed, made this answer. If the
Elders and Rulers of the same, framed their lives according to their laws.

APOCALIP. CAP 2. I WILL reward every one of you according to your works.

In weyghty matters give personal presence,
In smaller actions geuyng commission,
To men of faith, good name, and sapience,
Justice to keep without exception.
As they will answer to God and your crown,
And take inquest how justly they proceed,
Without feed or favor, or cloked correction,
Then grant them dome according to deed.
PSALM. GEVE unto them according as their works have deserved, and according
to the iniquity of their inventions, reward them oh Lord.

SAPIENCE. CAP 3. FOR the wicked are become cruel in that thing which they
have fynnished.

ECCLESIASTES. CAP. 3. DO not thou grudge to see the glory and wealth of the
ungodly: for in deed thou know not what manner subuertion is coming upon
them.

Valerius Maximus, libro. 6. FOR Cambyses was of a strange severity in
judgment, which caused the skin of a certain wicked Judge to be flayne of
from the body, and commanded the Judges own son to descend in judgment
sitting thereuppon: for this barbarous king ordained that cruel and new kind
of punishment upon this judge, least that any other afterward should in like
manner offend.

PROVERBIORVM. CAP. 16. THose are abominable unto the King which do
wickedly: because in justice shall his throne be established.

EZECHIEL. CAP. 7. I Will do unto them according to their ways, and according
as they give judgment, so will I judge them.

So did Cambises, which of Persia was king,
Giving asray to officers of iustry,
Upon a Judge he made such punishing,
Because he handled his office untruly.
Causd his skin to be rent from the body,
And on the seat where he gave sentment,
Made stretch it forth for lastyng memory,
Placing his son to sit in judgment.
ARISTOT. 5. Ethicorum. THE administration of the office of a Prince shows
what manner of person him self is: even as he is to be accounted woorst, which
not only uses the isntrumental mean of malice toward him self, but also
toward others. So that Prince is to be reputed a good prince, which not only
toward him self procures the use of goodness and virtue, but also which
manefesteth the same unto others.

Idem. 9. Ethicorum. Each man becomes freende unto his equal, and therefore
a good man can not favor an evil man.

DAVID Psalmista. 139. I Have not set before mine eyes the thing that is
unrighteous, I have hated such as have done wickedly, and him have I
persecuted, which has slaundred his next neighbor.

VERSVS. Opto placere bonis prauis odiosus haberi.

ARISTOTLE. 10. Ethicorum. WE must excite and provoke, or rather encourage
such as we would have to do virtuously, by promising and perfourming of
rewards: but altogether must we denounce and determinate the punishment
without redemption, upon such as are of them selves evil disposed.

BRIXEN. IT stands with the office and duty of a King, to keep down and
repress evil persons, and to exalt and promote them that are good.

3. q. 5. c. Regum. Hester. 16. FOR by ancient histories is it approved, how
and by what means of the evil suggestions (which certain persons have
practiced) the cares and enterprises of Kings, might be deprived of good
success.

Were in a king such disposition kend,
That he would just men promote and cherishe,
And from his Court and Counsel suspend,
Such as are known corrupters of justice.
And open malefactors suffer in no wise,
That should stablishe justice, policy, and peace,
Causing good order into the Realm to rise,
And make evil men soon from their sin to cease.
IERONIMVS super Esaiam. AS in the ordinances made by the evil Magistrate,
that man is reputed partaker of the offenses which are committed by means of
the same ordinances so by him made. So as touching the ordinances made by the
elect and holy ones of GOD, he that has ordained that which is good, is a
partaker of the righteousness thereof.

DANIEL. CAP. 14. Says Daniel to Cyrus King of Persia, O King, be not
deceived, covet to be instructed in the history it self, and not in the gloss
thereof.

AVGVSTINVS in sermon. THE charge in gouernyng a ship, ought not to be
committed unto him which knows not how to hold the stern.

ARISTOTLE 6. Politicorum. IT is not the best way to make evil men Lords and
Rulers in a Kingdom, because them selves had more need of others to ouersee
them, then they to ouersee others.

ARISTOTLE in Yconomi. IT is a matter impossible that evil and negligent
persons in authority, should be diligent servants.

BERNARDVS. THE Clergy ought every where to have regard in every age and
degree, as well those that are learned, as that are unlearned (so far as
stands with the Ecclesiastical charge) that in such sort they live, as
though a man might without cares discharge his duty, when he shall come to
take charge upon him over them.

GREGORIVS. THERE is nothing that more offends, or trespasseth unto the
Church of GOD, then that unworthy persons should atteyne unto the charge of
cure over souls.

PSALM. de impiis. 79. O GOD the Gentiles are come into thy heritage, they have
spoiled thy holy temple, they have. etc.

GENES. 41. PHARAO exalted and preferred Joseph, because of the goodness and
wisdom which was in him. And so did Nabuchodonozor prefer Daniel, although
these twain were their bondmen, and very strangers of other countries.

Now then would Princes to Churchly promotion,
Advance none other, but men of suffisance,
Which truly should keep their state and profession,
Seeking souls health without dissimulance.
Gracious and godly in their gouernace,
So might Princes in fame and meede increase,
Causyng the Clergy keep good observance,
should bridle many from hurtful blindness.
2. PARALIPO. CAP. 19. IOsaphat dwelt in Jerusalem, and on a time going out of
the City unto the people of Barsaba, even until the mount of Ephraim, he
called them again unto the consideracion of their Lord God and King: and did
let ordeyne Judges of the land to be placed in every city within the land of
Judah in every circute, and gave the same Judges in charge, thus. Take good
heed (says he) to your matters that ye have to deal in: and neither shall
you do and execute the judgment of men, but of God: and what so ever you
shall adiudge and determine, shall redound unto you, and upon your own heads.
Let the fear of the Lord remain with you, and do you all things with
diligence: for truly there is none iniquity with our Lord GOD, neither
accepting of any person in judgment, nor coveting after bribes or rewards.
And he also constituted Levites and Priests in Jerusalem, and Rulers over the
housholdes of Israel: to the end they should handle the judgment, and cause
of the inhabitants there. And he moreover charged them, saying, Do you so
behave your selves faithfully in the fear of God, in a perfect and upright
heart, declare the law unto the people, that they do not transgress and sin
against the Lord: and least that his wrath come upon you, and upon your
brethren. Be you therefore of good comfort, and handle your duties with
diligence, and the Lord shall be with you. etc.

And as a Prince has chief correction,
On spiritual state, so may his high prudence,
Into the Church cause reformation,
By favorable means of princely excellence.
For all his Realm to him geues attendance,
so did Iosaphat which was king of Jury,
His whole empire by his great diligence,
He causd to keep the law of God duly.
1. REGVM. CAP. 2. WHO so ever honors me, I will honor him, and they also
that do despise me, shall be brought low.

ARISTO. Politi. libro primo. AS that man which observes the law, is the best
living creature: so is he the woorst of all creatures living, which lives
without order of law, and digresseth from justice.

2. PARALIPO. CAP. 24. IOiada made a league between all the people and the
king, that they should become the servants of God.

ESAI. CAP. 32. THERE shall be a reverence unto justice, even of those which
are laid a sleep, and a safety unto them for ever.

ARISTOT. Politi. 2. IT is best for a City to live in unity and concord,
after the rules of amity and frendshippe.

Idem Politicorum. 3. WIthout justice, it is impossible for men to dwell
together.

2. q. 7. c. THAT man can not be faithful toward men, which shows him self
unfaithful to GOD.

ECCLESIASTICI. CAP. 6. THERE is no comparison to be made unto a faithful
friend.

1. PARALI. 13. c. FOR David, and all the whole house of Israel, delighted in
GOD with all virtue and godliness.

Then should God in each state honored be,
Hereby might men both grace and glory obtain,
Justice should reign with peace and policee,
And troth return with triumph home again.
Which is exilde, and almost forlore clean,
Thus might men live in great security,
And love their God, which does each state sustain,
Were Virtue captain of their cheualry.
IT is better to be governed by a good king, then by a good law.

ARISTO. in Epistola ad Alexandrum. EVEN as the captain is the defender of the
host, so reason with skill and knowledge, is the guide of humane life.

ARISTOT. de Regimine Princi. MEN were wont to fear their king, when they
saw that he feared GOD.

Ibidem. THE cheifest point in a King of wisdom, is that he be able to
govern him self.

3. REGVM. CAP. 1. MY Lord and King, upon thee are the eyes of all Israel
wholly bent, to behold thee. The Queen of Saba says unto Solomon as it is
written.

3. REGVM. CAP. 10. FOR that cause that the Lord has loved Israel for ever,
therefore has he anointed thee to be king over them, to the end thou
should execute judgment and justice.

PSALM. 63. BUT the King shall rejoice in GOD, and the daughter of Sion shall
rejoice in their King.

IEREMI. CAP. 23. THE King shall reign, and he shall be endued with wisdom,
and shall execute judgment and justice upon earth.

1. TIMOTHEI. 2. YOU shall pray for all men, first and specially for all
Kings, and for all such as are appointed to bear chief rule under them.

Doctor Nicolaus Lyra. EVEN as there are ordained over us both Princes and
Prelates, for whom we ought specially to pray, (for of, and by their good
disposition and well government, depends the common wealth of each estate)
so is it of good right, that we incline our selves to live quietly and
peaceably under their government in all godliness and chastity. And not only
ought we thus to pray, for Christian Princes, but also for the Infidels under
whom Christians remain captiued.

2. ESDREA. CAP. 6. THERE shall be offered sacrifices of thankesgeuing unto the
mighty GOD for the King and his children, and the people shall pray for their
lives. etc.

Each Subject should ay,
For his Sovereign pray
Thus sythen in earth amongst men mortal,
The weal and woe of every region,
Dependes upon the King most principal,
Therefore we should with true intention,
Beseech Christ Jesus with devotion,
All mortal sin that he may put aside,
And efte in heaven, as with his benediction,
So eake on earth would each good prince guide.
ARISTOTLE. lib. 5. Polit. THE Prince ought to be a woorshipper of GOD, because
men do less fear that the Prince can away with that which is evil, if they
think he be a man that fears GOD.

Lactancius Firmianus. THE first duty of Justice, is to be joined with the
ordinance of GOD, the second, is to be joined with the law of man. Let the
Judge therefore so execute justice, that he do not offend GOD, and injury his
neighbor.

SENECA ad Lucillum. AND wylt thou have all things subject unto thee, do thou
then submit and yield thy self to reason: for even reason shall govern many
Kings, and thee also.

AMBROSIVS. HE shall have to judge of an other man's offense, which has not in
him self that he may condemn by equity: least when he judges an other man,
he give sentence upon him self also.

GREGORIVS. IT happens for the most part, that he sits in seat of
judgment, whose life is least agreeable unto the woorthynesse ^f that place,
and it oftentimes comes to pass with him, that he condemns the guiltles, and
saves those that are guilty.

PROVERBES. THE King which in truth judges the poor, shall have his throne
established for ever.

MICHEAS. CAP. 3. HEAR, O ye Princes and Rulers of Jacob, and you Captains of
the house of Israel: is it not your part to know what judgment and justice
is, which do hate that that is good, and love that which is evil.

But where some Princes and leaders of the law,
Break faith to God by lost allegiance,
Their civil justice must suffer ouerthrawe,
This virtue Justice is made intemperance.
Whom grace not guiding, keeps none observance,
What Prince to Poor keeps Justice without lesing
Hearing complaint with good deliverance,
In Heaven and Earth he shall be floreshing*
ARISTOTLE. 5. Politicorum. THE greatest policies are dissolved and violated,
by reason of the transgression and offense committed in doing justice.

M. Tullius Cicero: Justice is the Lady and Mistress of all things, and the
Queen of Virtues.

CIPRIANVS. THE justice of the King, is the peace of his people, the sauegard
and defense of his country, the joy of men, the solace of poor men, the
inheritance of children, and unto him self this justice, is the very hope of
blessedness in time to come.

M. Tullius Cicero. THE law is nothing else but a straight and perfect reason,
which proceeds from the clear light of the day, commanding such things as
are honest, and prohibiting such things as are contrary. Therefore we ought
(as Virgil says) to observe the fidelity or faithfulness in the laws
prescribed.

AVGVSTINVS. TAKE away Justice, and what else are Kingdoms but great spoils of
robberies.

ESAI. CAP. 32. PEace shall be the work of Justice, and there shall be a
reverence unto Justice, even of them which are laid to sleep, and they shall
dwell in safety for ever.

ECCLESIASTICVS. 10. THE Kingdom shall be translated from one nation unto an
other, by reason of their iniust dealinges and injuries, and by means of their
reproaches, and because of the diverse deceiptes which they practice.

As Justice is cause of peace and policy,
And Well of welfare in every Region,
So without Justice Kingdoms feel contrary,
For robbery, theft, poverty, and oppression,
Murmr, discord, and desolation,
Confiskes many a Kingdom ane huge Impery,
From their late former good condition,
For want of Justice through iniquity.
ESAI. CAP. 59. THEY have wrested judgment backwardes, and Justice has stood
a far of, because truth has fallen down in the streets, and equity
could not enter there, and truth was made a guste of forgotten freendship,
and the man that departed from doing evil, felt the smart of a prized spoil.

IEREMI. CAP. 21. Behold, I deliver before you the way of life, and the way of
death: do your judgment in due time, and bring the oppressed soul out of
violence, least that my displeasure and wrath, do happily depart from me,
toward you, as a consuming fire, and so burn you, that there ve none to
quench the same, by reason of the malice of your inventions.

ISIDOR. WIcked Judges, even after the manner of Woolues, do raven and make
havoc of all things.

IEREMI. CAP. 51. NAbuchodonozor eats me up, and greedely does as it were
devour me.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 20. BRibes and rewards do blind the eyes of Judges, and as
a gift in the mouth does stop their reprehencions.

In England then, truth show thy stately style,
And Justice thou thy Baner broad display,
All leagerdy maynes from hence quite exile,
Grant God that good meaning maintained be may
All subtle shifts to convince and bewray,
Wherewith the covetous encombred be,
Least that the great flee the small eating always,
Do the same devour by lawles libertee,
MICHEA prophet. CAP. 3. HEAR this, ye Princes and Rulers of the house of
Jacob, and you Judges of the house of Israel, which have abhorred to do
justice in judgment, and do pervert all things that are good: because you
build up Sion with bloodshed, and Jerusalem with iniquity, their Princes
shall give judgment for rewards: for this cause shall Sion be furrowed upon,
even as a feelde.

ISIDOR. THE simple people are more grievously torn in pieces of the evil
Judges, then of their most cruel enemies: For there is no robber so greedy of
other men's goods, as a wicked Judge is amongst those whom he has authority
of.

AVGVSTINVS. IN so much as the mischief of covetousness waxes now so ripe,
that even of custom the very laws are bought and sold, judgments are
corrupted, the very sentence it self is set to sale for money, and there can be
no cause without care and vexation tried.

ESAI. CAP. 5. WOO be unto you which justify the wicked for bribes and
rewards, and do wrest the just man's cause from him.

Far from us, O God, expel corrupt justice,
With covetousness and false affection.
That goodness of each cause may full suffice,
To try it self clear in the action,
Of evil buddes let no bitter abusion,
Make crooked causes cloked to be,
In Consistory Court, or Civil Session,
But grant, O GOD, to truth the victory.
ESAI. CAP. 49. HEAR me, O ye of hard hearts, which have sequestered your selves
far from Justice.

Expositio Matthew. 22. YOU have forsaken those two most grave respects of the
law, that is, the one judgment, the other mercy.

PATRONIVS. FOR now Justice is made none other thing, but a common merchandise.

PSALM. 2. NOW, O ye Kings be wise and learned, you that judge the earth.

ECCLESIASTICVS. CAP. 47 IT is the office and duty of kings, to keep under
those that are evil, and advance such as are good subjects.

1. MACHABES. CAP. 15. ANtiochus said, I will be revenged upon them which
have corrupted the land. etc.

AVGVSTINVS. IN this point do Kings serve God, if in their kingdoms they
command and establishe that which is good, and forbid that which is evil, not
in matters only parteyning to humane society, but as concerning divine
religion: for neither live they at ease free from cares of mind, and travels of
the body: but bestow their time in great disquietnesse and labor, until such
time as they have accomplished their functions and duties to all perfections.

SAPIENCIA. 6. THE hardest judgment shall be ministered unto them which bear
authority over others.

To King without color that list to keep Justice,
The nearest way most honorable and easy,
Is corrupt men to suffer in no wise,
By false affection or parcialitie,
To execute the office of Justice duly,
And if in this point a Prince be negligent,
His mind persuaded may be fully,
He shall incur Gods dreedfull judgment.
ECCLESIASTES. CAP. 10. BLessed is that land, whose King is of noble race.

ARISTOTLE primo Politico. Virtue and malice do determine and handle matters
between bondmen and freemen, between noble men, and those of base degree.

Idem. 5. Politicorum. Nobility and Virtue, are in few persons to be found
remaining togeathee.

PSALM. 101. MY song shall be of mercy and judgment, to thee, oh Lord. Idem. I
have done indifferent justice, and executed judgment, I have hated the works
of iniquity. etc.

JOB. CAP. 29. I Have clothed me with Justice, and with my judgment have I
apparrelled me as it were with a garment, and Dyadem of honor, I have been in
stead of an eye to the blind man, and as a foot to help the lame: A father
have I also been of the poor, and such cause as I was utterly ignorant in,
have I diligently searched for the certain truth thereof: I have destroyed
the labors of the unjust man, and out of his Jaws have I taken the spoil.

MATTHEA. 5. BLessed are they which hunger and thyrst after righteousness,
because theirs is the kingdom of Heaven.

AVCTHOR. FOR as from day to day there is a continual thirst and hunger
renewed in our stomachs after meats and drinks corporal: so ought there
appear in us a fresh and new appetite, or affection inseparable after
justice, in correcting of offenses committed.

Now Princes, Lords, and Nobles of renown,
Whom it pleases to use Justice with mercy,
Take Job and David examples to your crown,
When to the poor they had a piteous eye,
And of mighty offenders punished peruersitee,
Whom Gods good grace has remunerate
With blessings more then may expressed be,
In lasting fame ay to be Lawreate.
SEleucus Prince of Locria, on a time being in the chief City thereof which
he had, established and protected with most wholesome and profitable laws, when
as his son was condemned for adultery, according to the laws which he him
self had ordained, that such offender should be deprived of both his eyes: and
that the whole City for the honor of their Country, did for a certain space
withstand and gaynesay to dispense with necessity of punishment in this
respect. The father being thoroughly overcome with the instant requests of the
people: because he would do some moderation of justice, and borowe the law in
some part, executing it at full in an other, first causing one of his own eyes
to be quite plucked out, and then afterward one of his sons eyes, left unto
them both but two eyes to see with. So far did he perform a due measure of
punishment, with a wonderful temperature, as the equity of the law might
require, making him self partaker in the punishment wholly due unto his son,
performed him self a merciful father, and just distributer of the law in
this manner.

Ad Titum. 2. LET us live soberly, justly, and godly in this world, looking for
the blessed hope and glory of the mighty God.

PSALM. 40. BLessed is the man which has the name of the Lord for his hope,
and has not beheld nor looked after vanities and mischeuous falshoodes.

Idem. BEhold the man which has not taken God for his helper, but has trusted
in the multitude of his riches, and prevailed in his vanity, the hope of the
ungodly shall perish.

Our hope, our hap, we set in worldlines,
And men with men defraude in white and black,
Corrupting conscience, all daring in darkness,
In our conceiptes as we should aye hold svvack,
Our crazed Cables all at a cast will crack,
If God so please his storms but once to steare,
Wherefore in time for our miss, mendes lets make,
And stand we fast, else perish we in fear.
BERNARDVS. WHat madness is this where men do desire to forsake plain and
simple dealinges, for double double dealinges. Where is the covetous man, where
is the lecherous person, where is the ambicious and vain glorious, where is
the unthankful person that whineth at the fe^icitie of this world: because
how much the more God has bestowed his benefits upon such one, so much the
less fears he to offend him, and reputyng not him self beholding in duty
for the benefits of God received, does rather more impugn and withstand him.

DEVTERONO. 32. WHOM the Lord has loved, is puffed up with fatness, and has
spurned against the Lord his maker.

PSALM. 119. THEY are troubled and moved unto mischief as a drunken man.

AVGVSTINVS. THE thing that thou desire to enjoy, is like unto a Mouse
trappe, whiles thou seek to catch thy desire, thou thy self art snared:
whiles thou hold that which is an other man's, thou art holden caytiue of the
devil.

BERNARDVS. WHAT does GOD punish, or what does he hate, but a man's self
will in sinfulness. Let self will in sinfulness cease, and there shall be no
hell ordained for thee. etc.

There is no reason our misrule can arrest,
This vvretched word so far vvakes our vvitte,
Inward to vvysedome our vvyls we do not wrest,
For Couetis has us in his chain so knitte,
And wicked examples of sinners can us tvvit,
What rests more, we shrink not to trespass,
From this guilefull world, as we should never flitt,
But our vvylles we work, till out run be our glass.
1. CORINT. CAP. 3. THE foolishness of this world, is counted wisdom before
God.

GALATHE. 3. YOU foolish dotyng Galathians, who has bewitched you, that you
will not obey the truth.

ESAI. 19. de Impiis. WHERE are now become thy wise men, the Princes of Zoan
are become fools, the Princes of Noph are deceived: even they that were
reputed the chief stay thereof, have deceived Egypt: in the midst of it has
the Lord powered the spirit of wickedness, yea they have deceived Egypt in
every work thereof, even as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit.

TERENCIVS. EVen seeing it with my eyes, my self wittingly and willingly do
perish, and am undone.

AVGVSTINVS in confess. O You lovers of the world, for what cause do you go to
wars with your selves: Can your hope be greater in the world, then that you
become friends unto the world? what other thing else can you find there, but
a frail and brittell vessel full of dangers. All these things let them
perish, let us give over these vain things, and let us go another way to
the wood, to the searching forth of those things which have none end.

AMBROSIVS. HE that is poor in the purse, and ritche in good conscience,
sleeps more soundly in the Cottage, the^ the ritche man that enjoys gold
and purple at pleasure.

AVGVSTINVS. THE world passes away, and the concupiscence thereof. Whether
had thou leauer love temporal things, and with them pass away in time, or
love Christ, and with him live for ever.

AMBROSIVS. WHO was he at any time so mindful of the world, that has been
mindful of Christ as he should be.

Ephesians. pri. Petri. CAP. 2. I Beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims, that you
absteyne your selves from carnal desires, which fight against the soul.

SENECA ad Lucillum. STrangers and Pilgrims do harbor them selves in many and
diverse Innes, but they find no freendship by their soiournyng at all.

Therefore I counsel each christian creature,
In vvorldly vvayes his mind to modefy,
To live in rrueth justly, and not to iniure,
Yea and with glad patience to vvelcome adversity,
With dread and temperance using prosperity,
Thinking this world a throughfare of vvo,
What ever God send, bless him ay gladly,
As we were Pilgrims passing to and fro.
FINIS Of the Contemplacion for MONDAY.
THE AVCTORS Commemoration for TVESDAY.
The state of innocence hear,
Continually in mind lets bear.
The Translators Application.
The second day a Firmament, the Lord God did ordeyne,
Waters above, as well as under, to divide in twain,
The upper Firmament Heaven called, the neathermost Earth is,
The Morning and the Euennnng clear, he let be made with this.
The state of innocence clear,
In mind and manners let appear.
PSALM. 25. THE innocent and just men have taken part with me.

JOB. CAP. 27. Until I dye will I not depart from my innocence.

ECCLESIASTES. 15. HAVE thou no delight in wicked children, if they shall be
multiplied upon the earth: for one child that fears GOD, is better then a
thousand of the ungodly, and it were better to die without issue, then to leave
wicked children behind thee.

JOB. CAP. 22. THE innocent shall be saved. Idem CAP. 3. What innocent person did
ever yet perish at any time.

ECCLESIAST. GAP. 15. A Man is known and discerned in his children.

PROVERBES. CAP. 23. WIthdraw not discipline from thy child, for if thou beat
him with the rod, he shall not dye.

AMBROSIVS. THE dissolute or loose life of the children, is referred unto the
negligence of the parents.

The Aucthor figured here by the portrature,
Of Adam and Eve our parents innocence,
When they a time in God his grace stood sure,
Before their fall, he geues intelligence,
How we should frame our lives with diligence,
To the recovery of our lost heritage,
To God and Man eschewing all offense,
By life innocent of each estate and age.
SENECA. IT is needful that virtues have a master and teacher of them: but as
for vices, they are learned of us without any teacher, because virtue is a
thing wherein difficulty consists.

SENECA. THE bringing up of children, and the discipline, or awe of correction
wherein they stand, do confirm their manners and conversation, and every
child has a taste and perseverance of that which he has learned.

1. CORINT. 16. THE door is set open for us, but there is a manifest danger
before our eyes, and we have many aduersaries^

NONE shall be crowned with the garland of victory, but he that has fought it
out to the uttermost.

IERONIMVS. I Do arrogate and callenge unto my self a most foolish victory,
if I do not fight, and I claim a crown without victory.

PLATO. 2. Ethicorum. TO do evil, is an easy matter, but to do well, it is
hard for us.

AVGVSTINVS. THE beginning of virtue in a man, yea the chief virtue self, is
to embrace virtue. etc.

Right as white paper is ready to the print,
Of black and blew fair and foul Imagery,
So is the soul of man convenient,
To good and evil addict undoubtedly,
But sythen Virtue has such difficulty,
Men learn the sooner to be vicious.
In lack of labor we flow in folly,
For slothful sottes can not be virtuous.
GALATHIANS. CAP. 6. BE not you deceived in your own doings, God is not mocked
withal: what so ever a man sows, the same also shall he reap.

PROVERBES. CAP. 22. WHO so sows iniquities, shall reap to him self that
which is evil.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 25. IF thou have not geathered together some store in thy
youth, how shall thou find wherewith in thy aged years to help thee.

PROVERBES. CAP. 20. A Child is known by his studyes and trauelles.

AVGVSTINVS. FOR innocence is the defencible armor of God, which if thou
have, thou and all thine shall be in sauety.

BERNARDVS. IT lies in us to get the victory, if we will endeavor our selves
thereunto, and out of this battle or conflict, none of us against our wylles
shall be dejected.

IERONIMVS. AS thou growest in years, so let grace increase with thee more and
more: let justice increase, as the number of thy years increases, and how
much the elder thou art, so much the more perfect let thy faith appear in thee.

SENECA. THERE is no greater virtue can remain in man, then to bridle and came
vices.

PROVERBES. CAP. 24. I Passed by the feelde of the slothful man, and there
grew up thorns which covered his woorkemanship.

What seed men sow, such corn they must sheare,
As we often see by proved experience,
Even so in youth, who likes to forbear,
The seeds of sin, of slothe, and negligence,
And sow the seeds of virtue and sapience,
So with small labor in great security,
With mede honor and inward compacience,
Theit age shall florishe in fair felicity.
PSALM. 126. HE that sows in tears, shall reap in joy.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 3. GLorious is the fruit of good labors.

SENECA. THere is nothing vyler, then he which toyleth, and will have all
things that he does to be counted good, and yet he him self labors not to
be reputed a good man.

PROVERBES. CAP. 20. THE slothful man would not plowe because of the cold
weather, he shall therefore go a begging in the summer, and no man shall
relieve him.

GREGORIVS. EXcept a man do with all endeavor try out the mastry to the
uttermost, there is no superfluous triumph of victory to be had.

BERNARDVS. O True pronounced safe battle in Christ's cause, and for Christ's
love is that conflict wherein neither is a man wounded, cast under foot, nor
stricken down, neither yet being slain a thousand times (if it were so
possible) shall he be frustrated and deceived of the victory: so that he stand
to it manfully, and start not away.

The time of sowing is called tedious,
But of the reaping svveete is the seasoune,
So of good life beginning is laborous,
Then follows fruit of honor and renoune,
Everlasting life, and eke an heavenly crown,
Therefore, O youth, in these thy years green,
Fight fervently with hearty affection,
And tire not that triumph eternal to obtain.
JOB. CAP. 2. HIS bones shall be filled with the vices of his youth, and with
him shall they sleep in the dust.

IERONIMVS. THE continual custom of transgressing and offendyng, has made
the way of virtue unpleasant and sharp unto us.

IEREMI. 13. IF the black a More may change the color of his skin, or the
Leopard her speckled hear, even so is it possible with man to do well, when
he has learned already to do evil.

BERNARDVS. THere is nothing more precious then time: alack there is nothing
at this day deemed more vile. The days of man's lusty and healthful time pass
away, and no man thinks of the well bestowing thereof: for even as there
shall not perish one hear of the just man's head, so neither shall there
escape him one minute of time vncounted upon. All the time that on thee is
bestowed, shall be required at thy hands, in what manner thou have spent the
same.

PROVERBES. 27. BEtter are the stripes of him that loves thee tenderly, then
the deceitful kysses of him that hates thee.

But now alack youthy years and innocence,
To vice and virtue which is indifferent,
So soked is in sin and insolence,
Through evil examples, and liberty verament,
That of youthy years time is misspent.
Though meet it be, that lost life be refound,
Evil usage makes so great impediment,
It will not be but Gods grace more abound.
PROVERBES. CAP. 22. THE young man shall walk in the way that I have
prescribed him, and when he waxes old, he shall not depart therefrom.

CASIODORVS. THE beauty and deformity of man's mind, is prescribed in the
quality, either of the virtues, or of the vices thereof.

BERNARDVS. IT is a hard thing to be brought to pass, nay it is a thing
altogether impossible for divine virtue, where once the yoke of sin is taken
upon us, to shake it of from our shoulders: because he that commits sin,
is the servant and bondsman of sin.

IO. 8. Amos. 5. HE has fallen, and has not taken hold whereupon he might
arise up again.

AMBROSIVS. I Have more easily found out who they be that have observed
innocence of baptism, then which repented their sinful lives as they ought
to have done.

GREGORIVS. THAT man recouereth up with much a do, whom the massy weight of
evil custom keeps under.

ISIDORVS. Custom and countenance in manner of living, confyrmeth the manners
of life, and the use of the yoke, is as the inclination of nature.

SENECA. THAT best order or rule of life is to be chosen, whom custom shall
make pleasant and sweet unto us.

EZECHIEL. 18. BE you converted, and repent you of all your iniquities, and
your iniquities shall not be the cause of your destruction.

ECCLESIASTI. 5. MAKE no tarriance to turn unto the Lord, and defer not of
from day to day: for suddenly shall his wrath come, and in his wrath he shall
destroy thee.

ISIDORE de summo bono. AN evil cogitation brings forth a noughty
delectation: the delectation, a consent: the consent, a deed: the deed, a
custom: the custom, an evil necessity.

Reuolue further yet if any thou knew,
Spending their youth in sins criminal,
Which with difficulty could their manners renew,
Therefore dread God, and for his grace do call,
For to preserve thine innocence from fall,
And if that state be lost with abusance,
Sleep never with sollace in bondage of Belyall,
But turn and take in time the plaster repentance.
Bernardus 5. sermon de Ascentione. HOW comes it to pass, that certain have
the penury and scarcity of spiritual grace, when others have the plentiful
abundance. Undoubtedly he that is the distributer and bestower thereof, is
neither covetous to keep it to him self, nor bare and needy to such as he
thinks worthy of the bestowing thereof: But where as empty vessels for the
purpose are wanting, there must the oil want her use. The love of the world
showueth her self in to every corner with her consolations, nay rather
desolations, she keeps and observes the manner of her coming to a man, she
rusheth in at the wyndowes of the mind, she possesses the mind of man, but
not his mind that has said, My soul has not refused to be comforted, I have been mindful of GOD, and I am delighted in him: for surely the sacred delight
forsakes and declineth from the mind that is exercised in worldly desires:
neither can things true, be mixed with things that are vain: neither things
eternal, with things frail and transitory: neither yet corporal things with
spiritual things. It is thus to be concluded for principal, that a man ought
to be wise in things that are above, as well as in things upon earth.

The soul of man so noble is of nature,
And made to joy so high an heritage,
Without delight it can not long endure,
Therefore men should in their tender age,
With virtue and devotion have usage,
Which without lothsomnesse brings delight,
Increasing ever her valiant courage,
For of taste, ay she renueth appetyte.
GREGORIVS. IT seems there is this difference between the delights of the
body and of the mind, as, the corporal pleasures, when they are not enjoyed,
do kindle a grievous desire toward them selves, and being enjoyed, they turn
all things to destruction. And on the other part, the delights of the soul
are quite contrary: because how muth the more the taste of them is sauoured,
so much the more the same is esteemed, to the end they may be believed with
more auidity or greater desire: and therefore not being enjoyed, they can not
be embraced or beloved, because the taste of them is not known or approved.

PSALM. 34. TAste and see how sweet the Lord is, and this he means (as
who would say) you have no perceauerance of the Lord, except you taste and
feel the goodness of him.

PSALM. 107. THeir soul has abhorred all meats, and they have drawn near
unto the gates of death.

NVMERI. 11. OUR soul perprabraketh upon the receipte of this light meat.

Though corporal food have that quality,
The greater abstinence, the greater appetite,
And the more taste, the more tediosity,
Yea now we loathe, where we late did delight,
From spiritual food which differs quite,
The more we absteyne, the less we desire,
The goodness of the taste no man can endite,
Which had augmented celestial fervent fire.
AVGVSTINVS. THERE is no torment greater then the torment or vexation of the
conscience. And wylt thou then never be sad or molested, live well. A man's
mind that is secure, does easily sustain and away with sadness: A good life
has ever joy among.

PROVERBES. CAP. 9. JOY shall be mixed with sorrow, and there is ever mourning
follows extreme joys.

AVGVSTINVS in confess. THOU Lord have commanded, and it comes so to pass,
that there is a torment due unto every inordinate mind that can not measure it
self.

BERNARDVS. SVrely there is no man which ought, or may think, that there
aryseth greater felicity of the mind, in, or by the use of vices, then there
does in and by the exercise of virtue.

HEBRE. 11. THE holy and elect children of GOD, have conquered kingdoms by
faith, have wrought equity and justice, and have adopted them new promises of
saving health.

GREGORIVS. IF humane mind, with a strong and fyrme desire be directed
toward God: she esteems every bitter thing to be sweet, and thinks every
thing to be as it were a quiet rest, which does molest her. And moreover, she
earnestly desires to pass over this life by death, to the end she may the
more fully obtain life.

GREGORIVS. IT stands most with equity, that we do love him above all
things, which has loved us above all things.

More sweetness it is unto sound conscience,
And virtuous life with delectation,
Then any pleasant carnal complacence,
Or fadyng gladness of worldly abusion,
To please God ever in conclusion,
With virtuous life, whose solace is most dear,
Full recompenst with hyre of heavenly crown.
As of Gods saints examples witness bear.
Actum Apostolorum. CAP. 9. WHEN he had received meat, he was comforted.

MATTHEW. CAP. 4. MAN does not live by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of GOD.

PSALM. 63. MY Soul is replenished as it were with marowe and with fatness.

2. REGVM. CAP. 2. LET your hands receive comfort, and be you the children of
valiant and courageous minds.

AVGVSTINVS. PRayer is a sauegard of the Soul, a solace and consolation to the
good angel, a scourge unto the Devil, and an acceptable obsequy or sacrifice
of man unto God.

GREGORIVS lib. 28. moral. THE fortitude or courage of the reprobate in this
world, is inclined to the love of transitory things, and never stinteth that
affect: but without reason (not knowing what she does) hardneth her self
against the scourge of the maker of this world. The fortitude or courage of
good and godly persons, is bent to overcome the flesh, and to go against her
own pleasure: to extinquish the delectations of this present life, to embrace
the sharp and bitter storms of this world, for and in consideration of the
everlasting remuneracions: to contemn the flatteryng allurementes of
prosperity, and manfully to vanquishe in the heart all fear of adversity.

For right as mem enfeobled with labor,
Or which in battle have bestowed their blood,
Through sustenance recover vital power,
Resuming to them force and courage good,
So by resemblance and similitude,
In spiritual toil and conflict tossed they,
To virtue having devout consuetude,
Restore them selves to firm estate soon may.
AVGVSTINVS. EXcept thy conscience be pure and clean from sins, thou shall
not be heard of God: then make clean the chamber of thy heart only, and thou
shall find him within that will hear thee at full.

Ricardus de sancto victore. How many are there which enter into the house of
God to pray unto God, how few are there heard of him, how many are there
which call God their father, as in their prayer, (Our Father. etc.) which are
not his children, but the fathers children of whom it is written: You are of
the father the Devil, because they are not the children of GOD, which have
lost his grace and favor, but are rather the Devils children, who has
begotten them in malice, and nourisht them in mischefe.

BERNARDVS. EVen as fire and water can not be both together in one substance
at once, so neither can the delites of the body and of the soul abide to dwell
together.

HVGO 2. de Anima. A Good conscience is the title and sign of religion, the
Temple of Solomon, the feelde of blessing, the breeder of delites, the golden
reclaiming mean of a transgressor, the joy of Angels, the Court of God, the
habitackle or dwelling place of the holy ghost, the book opened and shut,
which shall be manifested in the day of judgment.

CASSIODORVS. WHAT is there thought may be obtained, where as a good conscience
is lost.

GREGORIVS. THere is no man more corrupt in life, then he that seems to him
self to be clear and sound in life.

SENECA ad Lucillum. Look upon the mind, scanne upon the manners, mark and
be mindful of thy doings, for ever in them, and by or of them, shall thou
know what thou art.

CICERO. IT is a point of foolishness properly for a man to prye and look
near into other men's faults, and to forgeat his own.

God grant al states to keep with diligence,
In conscience good the most assured stay,
Of treasures heavenly highest in excellence,
Which may our minds cheerful make always,
That life from learning do not go astray,
Ne yet with shifts of cloked collusion,
Our selves and our friends corrupt we may,
To turn unto our own confusion.
ZACHE. CAP. 13. I Will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep of the flock
shall be scattered one from an other: the integrity of them that bear rule, is
the health of the Subjects.

ECLESIAST. CAP. 8. IT falls out now and then, that one man has power over
an other to his own hinderance.

PROVERBES. CAP. 11. THE City shall rejoice in the wealth of just and upright
Rulers, and there shall be joy over the destruction of the wicked.

BERNARDVS. MAN is never in state of honor without dolor and sorrow: in
pleasure without pain, in authority without vanity.

ESAI. CAP. 3. I Will give them children for their princes, and such as are of
womanish minds, shall bear authority over them, and the people shall
perish.

BERNARDVS ad Impios. THY Shepheardes are changed into fleesers of their
flock, thy Lambs into Woolues, thy defenders, into dispersers of the flock,
and they that should be sober, are daily given to drunkenness: they that
should be chaste, are vicious livers: for godly Prelates, thou shall have
wicked Pilates: and they that ought to be god^y inducers and teachers of thee,
shall be seducers, and fetchers of thee from the right way.

Each Communalty then stands in good state,
When as their princes ruled are by reason,
But be they vicious and infatuate,
Then falls all to foul confusion,
We have to mark then what abusion,
Other Realms do on them selves ay bring,
By their misrule, way our condition,
In happier state God knows florishng.
AVGVSTINVS. DAVID, the second King of Israel, does surely shine in mankind,
as it were a certain brightness that would dazell our eyes. In what man at
any time were there found together these two things: that is to say, so great
authority conceived with so great humility, so great courage, so great
clemency, so great a care as he contained toward the disposing of his
worldly affairs, so pure and devout contemplacion, or meditating of
spiritual matters: to kill so many men, and to shed tears of repentance: to
fall into so great offenses as he did, and to perform so good repentance.

PSALM. 119. I Am delighted in the way of thy testimonies, as in all the riches
and worldly wealth which I have.

Idem. DElight thou thy self in the Lord, and he shall reward thee even to
the desires of thy own heart.

Idem. WEre it not but that my meditation is in thy law, I should then
perhaps have perished in my own humility. Lord, my heart is not puffed up,
neither are my eyes lifted up, neither have I walked in great things, nor in
wonderful things above my reach. Lord remember David, and all his mercy.

August. in Epist. ad commit charis. WIth exhorting thee (good brother) I
beseech thee, that unto every servant of thy household, from the greatest
unto the least, thou would be a messenger of love and sweetenes toward the
obteyning of that heavenly kingdom, and denounce unto them the horror and
trembling that is in the infernal pit of hell: and that thou be wise thy self
for their welfare, and be as a watch man unto them: because for every servant
which is within thy house, thou shall render an account.

PSALM. 101. DEpart ye wicked from me, and I will search forth the
commandments of my God.

Who ever yet conjoined in one person,
So profound meekenes with high excellence,
Such temporal trouble with hearts devotion,
So great slaughter, so prteous penitence,
Severe justice mixed with compacience,
As had King David, lo appears well,
To God and man his watchful diligence,
At this day Princes many does excel.
SAPIENCE. CAP. 15. FOR the lovers of evil men are worthy of death.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 7. GO away from the wicked man, and there shall no evil
come near thee.

1. Corinthians. CAP. 5. I Have written unto you, that you should not entermingle
your selves with fornicators, with offenders, specially which have committed
fornication against God. And this did I unto that end, that either they might
be confounded, or amended.

MATTHEW. CAP. 7. HEarken not you unto the false prophets, which may come unto
you in Sheep clothing.

CHRISOST. super Matthew. IN nature of worldly things (says he) thus falls it
out: that so often as the evil man is a companion unto the good man, the evil
man is not made better by the good man, but by the evil man, the good man is
made worse.

HIERONIMVS. THERE is nothing so much hurts a man, as does evil company. I
think it a thing more then possible, that that man can any longer continue in
doing well, which is daily conversant with evil men.

PSALM. 1. BLessed is the man which has not walked in the counsel of the
wicked, and has not stand in the way of the ungodly, nor has not sit in the
chair of pestilence, but has reposed his will and desire in the law of the
Lord.

PSALM. 18. WIth the holy, thou shall be holy, and with the froward, thou
shall learn frowardness.

In two points depends principally,
The key of honest conversation,
Into wise counsel and good company,
Wherefore as Princes with due discretion,
Know every counselors disposition,
For better sauety in good government,
Semblably each baser state and condition,
By company and counsel are ruled verament.
HESTER. CAP. 18. Which matter is proved by ancient histories, and by such
persons as they are accomplished daily, how by the evil suggestions of
certain which are in authority about some princes of the world, the travels
and affairs of those Princes are brought to ill pass.

2. PARALIPOM. CAP. 24. IOAS the King of Judah did that which was acceptable in
the sight of the Lord, so long as Ioiada the high Priest lived: but of truth
when Ioiada dyed, the P^inces of Judah entered into the favor of Ioas the King,
and did honor the King as a God: who being overcome with their flattering
services, gave ear unto them, and both the King and his Counsel then forsook
the Church of the Lord, and did woorship unto the stars of the Firmament,
and graven Images, and the wrath of the Lord was moved upon Judah and
Jerusalem for this offense.

PROVERBES. I Wisdom have my dwelling in the counsels of men.

3. REGVM. CAP. 12. ROboam the King, forsook the counsel of the Elders of the
kingdom: whereupon it came to pass, that of twelve tribes which ruled in
Israel, he lost ten of them.

PROVERBES. CAP. 12. THE counsels of the ungodly are meare deceiptfull snares
unto them selves.

VERSVS. Regnum stat sanum, per consilium veteranum,
Where ancient heads do counsel give,
The kingdom there does safely live.
Regnum decressit, vbi consilium iuuenescit.
That kingdom must of needs decay,
Where counselors young do bear ye sway.
Et proprium lucrum crescit, Liuorque patescit.
And each man's private gains increase,
And malice from mischief does not cease.
PSALM. 26. I Have hated the unjust livers, and I am abhorred of them.

Good company is of so great virtue,
It causes sinners to become gracious,
When they endeavor them selves to rescew,
From their folly and faults defamous,
And eke evil company is so contagious,
That it corrupts good inclination,
It is so vigorus, violent, and venomous,
It puts even princes to great perdicion.
PSALM. 112. THERE is risen up a light in place of darkness, to such as are
of a true heart.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 17. FOR with one chain or band, were they all linckt.

ESAI. CAP. 56. THVS says the Lord, Keep equity, and do right: for my
saving health shall come shortly, and my righteousness shall be opened.

SENECA ad Lucillum. PVT thou no confidence in fortune of this world, for in a
moment is the Sea altered and changed.

GREGORIVS. THE great surges of temporal things, carries with them the
judgment of eternal damnation.

HIERONIMVS. IT is not possible for a man to enjoy both the present felicities
of this life, and of the life to come: and here to fill his belly, and there to
satisfy his mind, and from pleasures to pleasures to pass his appointed
course, that he may be both happy and blessed in heaven and earth together.

GREGORIVS. IF we will seek for the sweet, it is requisite that we do
suffer and tolerate the sower.

VERSVS. Dulcia non meruit, qui non gustauit amara.
The sweet to have deserves not he,
That has not tasted the sour tree.
SOPHONI. CAP. 1. THEY shall walk as the blind do, because they have sinned
against the Lord.

EXODUS. CAP. 10. AND Moses lifted up his hands unto Heaven, and there was
made horrible darkness for the space of three days, upon the whole land of
Egypt, so that no man kn^we his own brother, neither knew he in what place
him self was: but contrarywyse* where so ever the children of Israel had their
abiding, there appeared light unto them.

JOHN. CAP. 10. THE light shines in the darkness, but the darkness
comprehends it not.

ESAI. CAP. 9. THE people that walks in the darkness, have seen a great
light appeared vato them: there is light arysen up unto them that dwell in the
shadow of death.

LVKE. CAP. 1. TO lighten those that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of
death.

Actum Apostolorum. CAP. 9. A Light from Heaven compassed him, shining round
about him: and when he opened his eyes, he saw nothing.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 2. FOR their own malice has blinded them selves.

Among the plagues of Egypt most horrible,
One was of darkness three days enduring,
Which was a token troublesome and terrible,
To all the Egyptians: but there abiding,
The people of Israel had large light shining,
So though this world be blinded by abusance,
Yet amongst all some be in grace growyng,
To innocent life, through fruitful repentance.
ECCLESIAST. CAP. 40. THERE is great labor and travel ordained for all men,
and a yoke of grievous painfulness, which shall be laid upon the sons of
Adam from their birth day, until they shall return unto the Earth their
grave, the mother of all things: even from the degree of him which bears the
scepter, and wears the Diadem or Crown, unto that low degree of him that is
clothed in sackecloth: fury, zeal, hurlyburly, trembling, and the fear of
death burning in irefull indignation and contencion, shall molest him, and when
he would take his rest in his bed, the dream of the night passed, shall take
away his understanding.

JOB. CAP. 14. MAN which is borne of a woman, has but a short time here to
live, and is filled with many miseries, with heat, cold, and hunger, and
never remains in one estate, because he is now in good health, straightway
sick. etc.

All mortal creatures conceived in sin,
VVretchedly borne, living in variaunce,
Are like fragrant flowers in a Garden,
With fading florishe ever changing the chance,
The new to old succeeds by ordinance,
So in his kind goes humane succession,
Now sick, now sound, now glad, now in greeuaunce,
Never stands in one estate by condition.
BERNARDVS. HOO ritche Lord art thou in mercy, how mighty in justice, how
bountiful in grace: O Lord our GOD, there is none like unto thee.

PSALM. 34. BUT those that seek forth the Lord, shall not be put to
confusion in every good enterprise: whereupon says Cassiodorus, When we love
the Lord, we find al things in him, he is one only to be sought for: but he
is that one wherein all things are contained. Oh wonderful gain, oh
singular sallary, or steepend for our pains: why then do we weary our selves
by diverse means: but let us with one unity of mind make haste unto him, who
being had, let us seek for none other felicities besides him, but let us hold
him with fixed faith.

GENESIS. CAP. 31. THOU had very little before that I came unto thee, and
now thou art made rich by me, and God has blessed thee at my entrance unto
thee.

THOME. CAP. 2. AT all times and seasons do thou give praises, and pray unto
God, and desire of him that he would direct thy ways, according to his will.

Wherefore our God, meekely to thee we call,
Grant us thy grace for most surest suffisance,
To set aside all sins sensual,
And be our guide with all good governance.
In mysty darkness of worldly variance,
Grant wylling minds thy will to execute,
That we may so serve thee without dissimulance,
So as of thy grace we be never destitute.
IERONIMVS. THERE is nothing more like unto the works of the Devils, then to
be continually at strife and debate one man with an other.

CASSIODRVS. SEe that you have unity in the bond of peace, because there is
not a more liuelier shape and form of Angelical conversation, then is
brotherly unity of one man with an other.

AVGVSTINVS. GOD loves the bond of concord and unity.

GREGORIVS. THERE is nothing more precious with God, then the virtue of love:
there is nothing that the devil desires, more then the extinguishing of
charity and love.

IERONIMVS. THERE is nothing hard or difficult unto those that do love, there
is no tedious travel in love. Let us therefore love Christ, and what so ever
thing is hard of it self unto us, we shall think it very easyly to be
atcheeued of us.

MARO Poeta. THE labors and trauelles of lovers can not by any means be
tedious and burdenous unto them, but even them selves are delighted therein, as
they that have a delight either in hunting, fowling, or fisshing.

BERNARDVS. WHAT man so ever he be that shall perfectly discern the burden of
sin, and the wound of his soul or conscience, shall either very little or
nothing at all feel the pain, or vexation of his body, neither shall he
think much of the labor bestowed, wherein he shall understand how to deface
and wype away his sins done and past, and learn to take heed how he commit
any more such offenses in time to come. etc.

As nothing more makes resemblance,
To feendish fears then strife and debate,
So humane kind by charitable acquaintance,
To heavenly Angels is associate.
This laudable love makes man laureate,
Love makes our labor light in comparison,
Love is a virtue of valor inuiolate,
And changes care to consolation.
AVGVSTINVS. BEtter is that medicine preserueatiue, then that which is curatiue.

AVGVSTINVS. ALL heinous offenses and horrible, which man does by custom
commit, are either thought by him to be but small, or none at all: so as not
only they are not to be cloked and covered, but also do require to be
published and openly detected.

Philippus in Prolog. 3. Phil. Certain persons there have been so accustomed
to feed upon very poison, that they have taken it for their only meat.

SENECA de vita and moribus. GOod custom ought to shake out and reject those
things, which the evil custom has put in ure, and trained in man.

ARISTOT. 7. lib. Ethicorum. IT is a hard thing for man to resist and withstand
custom, because she is made so like nature in her proper use: yet
notwithstanding it is an easier thing for us to alter and change custom, then
natural inclination.

PSALM. 42. ONE depthe calls upon an other, they have prolonged their
iniquity.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 37. O Most wicked presumption, from whence art thou
descended?

Thy corporal health from sickness to conserve,
Is more of prise then any medecin,
So then thy soul may rather deserve,
Of deadly wound all sin for to decline.
Then for to taste the venomous propine
Of sin, and after seek the salve of repentance,
Presumption ryseth of the old serpentine,
Which doubtless does prove a perilous pestelance.
BERNARDVS. O Thou my soul, which art the badge of a Christian, made noble
after the image of God, decored with equal form, spoused unto him in faith,
endowed with the spirit, redeemed with his blood, made heir with angels,
receauer of blessedness, the child of grace, and partaker of reason, what have
thou with thee, as touching thy frail flesh what may be said, have thou not
found it an unsavory and noisome dounghil?

Idem BERNARDVS. O Clear white unspotted Lilly, oh thou tender and delicate
flower, there are unbelieving people abidyng with thee, and such as seek thy
subuertion, and with Scorpions have thou thy dwelling. Take heed, and see that
thou walk warely amongst the thorns, because the world is full of thorns:
they breed on the earth, they are in the air, and they are in thy flesh. To
be therefore conversant amongst these, and by them not to be hurt, consists
in the power divine to withstand, and not in any virtue that thou have.

AVGVSTINVS. O How is that Soul unhappy, which is sequestered from the chief
felicity, and over whom the devil has sway, she is made void of light, and
environed with darkness, she is consumed with pleasure, and made drunk with
bitter waters, she loses life, and fyndeth death. etc.

Of our souls Lord we make record with ruthe,
As flowers fair, tender, and delicate,
To Christ our spouse wedded with ring of truth,
Though in this life we have daily debate,
Yet grant in faith that we be laureate,
From hurtful sin with sincere conscience,
O Lord to thee let us not live ingrate,
Sith thou with us wolte have thy residence.
FINIS Of the Contemplacion for TVESDAY.
THE AVCTORS Commemoration for VVENSDAY.
The damage due to deadly sin,
To seek to void, let us not linne.
The Translators Application.
The third day this Creator then, the waters here below,
Into ^ne place did geather, and, them in one floodde bestow,
The dry land thence divided he, the Sea those waters named,
The Sea for travel to and fro, the Earth for fruit he framed.
Who lives then in this earthy vale,
Taste fruits of trouble, death, and bale.
PSALM. 51. BEcause I do acknowledge mine iniquity, and my sin is always
against me.

TOBIA. CAP. 12. BUT they that commit sin and iniquity, are enemies to their
own soul.

GREGORIVS. THERE should no adversity or mishap hurt us, if there did no
iniquity condemn and adiudge us worthy thereof.

PSALM. 38. MY iniquities are gone over my head, and as a great burden are
they heavy upon me.

PROVERBES. CAP. 14. Sin makes the people become miserable.

AGVSTINVS. WHAT can be more miserable, then the wretched worldling which has
no compassion of him self.

ESAI. CAP. 13. I Will vizite the lands with diseases, and against the wicked
will I go with their in^quities.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 27. AS the Lion is ever lurking for his pray, so does the
sins of man lie in wait for them that work mischief.

AVGVSTINVS. Sin is defined, to be any thing spoken, or any thing done,
either any desire striving against the law of God.

BERNARDVS. O How wretched is the state of sinners, which esteem of the son
of God, as of a Swineheard.

ESAI. CAP. 59. YOur iniquities have set enimity between you and your God, and
your sins have covered his face from beholding you with mercy, and that he
should not hear you when you pray unto him.

Idem sequitur. Our iniquites are multiplied before him, and our sins have
made answer unto us.

2. REGVM. CAP. 3. DAVID spoke these words touching Ioab, The Lord
recompense the evil man, according to the malice of his mischief.

PSALM. 31. THOU have hated all them that do work wickedness.

To define of sin in sentences short,
No man well may, so full it is of care,
Nevertheless as now I purpose to report,
How in each season sin is most contrare,
To man's weal, supplanting each afare,
Unto his damage where it may prevail,
Enforcing ay of bliss to reave him bare,
In soul, in body, and in goods temporal.
AVGVSTINVS. Sin is the ransacking spoil of the good grace received, and a
corruption naturally grafted in man.

PROVERB. CAP. 4. BUT the wicked and ungodly in the land, shall be destroyed.

PROVERBES. CAP. 4. THE way of the ungodly, is as the darkness, they know
not where they fall.

IEREMI. GAP. 5. OUR sins have debarred and prohibited the good graces of God
from us.

PSALM. 10. IN the works of his own hands, is the sinner snared and taken.

PSALM. 31. MANY plagues are there ordained for sinners, but mercy shall
compass him round about, that puts his trust in the Lord.

BERNARD. BE ashamed (oh my Soul) and blushe at thy folly: thou have changed
thy divine shape and form, into a brutish and beastly form.

Idem. THERE is nothing more beastly, then that man which is endewed with
reason, and uses it not.

Idem. HOw much the more a man shall sin, so much the less shall he know
what sin is, and in deed so much the more shall he be delighted therewith.

Robart Grosthed Lincolniens. Sin is the issue, or generation of the devil,
the parent of death, the corruption of nature, and the deformation, or defilyng
of the soul.

GREGORIVS. WHAT greater point of madness can there be in man, then for a very
little pleasure of the flesh, to make him self a bondsman unto everlasting
punishments.

DEVTERONO. CAP. 28. WHAT if thou would desire of God that thou might
hear the voice of this thy Lord and God speaking unto thee, that thou
should observe and accomplish all that he commands. The Lord shall
strike thee with madness, and with blindness, and with fury of the mind, that
thou shall stumble at the noone day, as the blind man is wont to stumble in
the darkness, and thou shall not guide thy footesteppes, but shall always
suffer reproach, and be oppressed with violence, neither shall there be any man
to deliver thee free from his fury.

Sin is the cause of our perdition,
Sin, of the Devil is daughter venemons,
In soul and body sin causes corruption,
Sin is a sickness right contagious,
Sin makes a man foolish and furious,
All in wood rage running without reason,
His days ouerdriuing in state still dangerous,
With confused course of time and season.
PSALM. 14.53. THEY have trembled with fear, where there was no fear at all.

LEVITCVS. CAP. 26. IF so be that you will not hear me, neither do all that I
have commanded you, but shall despise my laws and ordinances, I will set my
face against you, and you shall perish before the face of your enemies, and
you shall be cast under foot of those that have hated you. The King shall put
them in fear, yea, the noise of a leaf blown from the Tree, shall make them
afraid: they shall fall down to the earth, when there is no man to strike them.

PROVER. CAP. 12. THE way of the ungodly, shall deceive them: the deceitful
man shall find none advantage.

APOCAL. CAP. 18. THERE is prepared a dwelling place for all the Devils, and a
place of custody for every unclean spirit.

OZEA. CAP. 9. THEY are become abominable, even as those idols that they have
embraced and had in honor.

PROVERB. CIP. 18. THE belly of the wicked person, is never satisfied.

SOPHONI. CAP. 1. THEY have walked as the blind that saw not, because they
have sinned against the Lord.

JOB. CAP. 18. HIS foot path is hidden in the earth: fear and trembling shall
make him afraid on every side.

JOB. CAP. 20. THE praise of the ungodly shall be but for a small seazon, and
the joy of an hypocrite is like unto the point of a sword: if his pride shall
lift it self up unto the heavens, and that his head do touch the clouds,
yet in the end it shall be destroyed, even as the filthy dounghil, and as a
dream that is vanished, shall it not be found.

The mind of sinners is figured unto hell.
Wherein is fire and feendish cruelty,
Gods laws and manners resisting as rebel,
With loathsome stenche of wylful iniquity,
Committed by the seven sins deadly,
And he that sin into his chain can lincke,
By subtle shifts and shameless impiety,
Tys a special gift, if they twain ever shrincke.
ROMANS. CAP. 6. THE reward of sin, is death.

PSALM. 146. HIS spirit shall go forth, and shall return into his own
land: in that day shall all his cogitations perish.

PROVERBES. CAP. 11. THE wicked man being once dead, there rests no further
hope unto him.

BERNARDVS. O Thou Soul of man, not with precious gold or silver, but with
the blood of the Lamb of GOD redeemed: Why wylt thou deliver thy self into
destruction, seeing Christ (for the love that he bears unto thee) has shed
his most precious blood.

HYLLARIVS. THE Soul that shows not her self nete and clearly shining,
indewed with the garment or robe of holy life: is not the Soul espoused unto
Christ, but the Devils darling.

AVGVSTINVS. HAppy is that Soul which shall so endeavor her self to govern
her life, that she may through Christ deserve to receive and entertain Christ
as her geste and inhabiter within her.

ECLESIAST. CAP. 4. BE sorrowful and heavy for thy Soul.

PSALM. 69. THE zeal of thy house Lord, has even as it were eaten me up.

1. REGVM. CAP. 22. THERE is none that soroweth for my state.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 32. THE wicked are hardly chastized to amendment, and the
number of fools is infinite.

PSALM. 32. BEcause mercy has come upon him, he shall with mercy be
chastized.

AMBROSIVS. THE lewd and dissolute life of the child, shall be imputed the
negligence of the parents.

PSALM. 141. BUT the oil of a sinner shall not hurt my head.

TVLLIVS. FOR every pounishment and correction ought to be without reproach,
neither to the reproach of him which so punishes, or chastizeth any person:
but to be referred only for the commodity and profit of the weal public.

AVGVSTINVS. THE wrath of GOD is then great, when the offender is not by due
chastisement reclaimed: but suffers him self to run in further offense, by
taking a wandering liberty.

Man's soul is a jewel incomperable,
By Christ his bloodshed dearly bought,
Wherefore he will that we be coumptable,
To him in good will for sauety sought.
When to captive us Satan sought,
Bereft of all solace then surely were we,
Till this our champion for us fought.
We deserved the scourge of his equitee.
ECCLESIAST. CAP. 7, REmember thy last days, and thou shall not do amiss for
ever.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 11. IF a man do live many years, and in all this time shall
rejoice and be meery, yet he ought to remember the days of darkness, and the
days of many, which shall then come, shall plainly testify, that the days
past were the days of vanity.

GREGORIVS. THE true and perfect life, is to be med^tating how to dye well.

Idem. HE that considers with him self what manner of person he shall be when
death assayleth him, is evermore fearful in his affairs to offend.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 12. THE Lord shall bring all things to receive judgment,
that are done under the heavens.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 9. REmember the Lord in thy life time, because death
detracteth no time.

HVGO, de sancto victore. WE ought to know, that neither the just man, nor the
unjust, the child, nor the old man, are exempted, but be dissolved by death
the soul from the body, before they be in that state of goodness or evil,
beyond the which, if they should hear live always, they should never pass
further to any felicity. etc.

ECCLESIASST. CAP. 14. OH death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee unto a
wicked man, having peace in his riches.

AVGVSTINVS. OH life, how many have thou deceived, which whiles thou fleest
and passest away, art as nothing: whiles thou art seen of us, thou art as a
shadow: whiles thou art made much of, thou art as a vanishing smoke: sweet art
thou unto fools, and bitter unto wise men: therefore thou art to be shunned,
thou art to be feared, because thou art dangerous. So fares it with man in
this life, even as a man that soiourneth in an other man's house, not knowing
when it shall be said unto him, arise and depart from hence.

Ad Romanos. CAP. 5. BY means of sin, death entered into the world.

AVGVSTINVS. THE true death in deed, which men do fear, is the separation of
the soul from God, who is the life of our souls.

VERSVS.
O happy is mortal kind,
If he always life find,
And fear the eternal good end,
in respect of his virtuous mind.
A mighty medecin, a royal eke remede,
Sin to subdue I find for each degree,
Is to remember that state if he were dead,
When soul all sorrowful departes the body.
Then waying this lives instability,
We shall be sure to receive judgment,
Together both in soul and body,
Of word, and work, of thought, and time misspent*
ECCLESIAST. CAP. 10. WHY art thou proud, O thou Earth and Ashes.

sequitur. A King to day, and to morrow dead: and when a man dies, he shall
become the heir of Serpents, Beasts, and Worms.

GENESIS. CAP. 3. DVst thou art, and into dust shall thou return again.

HIERONIMVS. WE dye daily, and we are changed daily, and yet we think our
selves to be eternal, even this very word that I speak, that I write, when I
eat, when I drink, or what thing else so ever I do, somewhat thereby is my
life time shortened.

PSALM. 44.144. MAn is made like unto vanity, his days do pass away as a
shadow.

VERSVS.

Est homo res fragilis, durans pro tempore parvo,
Hic est, hic non est, quasi flos qui crescit in aruo.
Man is a brickle and frail thing.
That lasts but small time,
Now here, now fades as flower,
In feelde that grows fine.
ECCLESIAST. CAP. 9. MAN does not know his end, but as the fyshes are taken
with the hook, and the birds are caught in the snares, so in the evil days
are men snared, and yet notwithstanding this man knows not whether he deserve
more to be hated or loved, but the uncertainty of things are reserved till a
further time.

EZECHIEL. CAP. 3. THE ungodly and wicked shall die in his sins.

AMBROSIVS. WHAT thing can be more miserable unto us, which are cast forth
into this life as all bare and naked, frail in body, weak in mind, doubtful
and full of disquietnesse, slow to take pains, prone and ready to pleasure.

AVGVSTINVS. IT is a foolish thing for a man to live in that case, wherein a
man dare not adventure to die, and he is of better courage which slumbreth and
rests with one deadly sin, going no further, then he that waigeth battle
with seven enemies.

Think on thy corpse now delicately fed,
Whose food shall be even woormes and scorpion,
Think how with costly clothing thou art cladde,
Which death shall change into corruption.
Yet of our death by natural condition,
No creature knows time when, nor place,
Whether Heaven or Hell for our possession,
Either else joy or sorrow, we shall embrace.
PSALM. 94. Mischief shall fall upon, and ensnare the wicked to his
destruction.

AMBROSIVS. IT is better for sinners that do evil to dye, then that they
should remain still long in sin.

ARISTOT. 3. Ethicorum. OF all fearful things, death is the most fearful.

PSALM. 49. THE grave is their dwelling place and last end, they shall leave
their riches unto others to possess.

PROVERBES. CAP. 11. Riches shall not profit nor prevail them that have
abused them in the last day of revenge, but justice shall deliver a man from
death of hell.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 3. FOR horrible is the death of the unrighteous generation.

GREGORIVS in moribus. EVery man fears the death of the flesh, but few do
fear the death of the soul.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 1. ONE generation passes, and an other comes.

2. REGVM. CAP. 13. BEhold, we all taste of death, and are as it were water
cast upon the earth, which returns not from whence it is sent: so do we fall
away.

ECCLESI. CAP. 1. THERE is no suruiuing memory of them that went before.

PSAME. 9.10. THE memory of them is perished, as it were with a sudden noise.

PSALM. 9.10. I Am yielded up unto oblivion, as a man that is dead from his
own heart.

BARVCK. CAP. 3. WHERE are the Princes of the nations become, which were lords
over the beasts of the feeld, which delighted them selves in the fowls of the
air, which have hoorded up their silver and gold wherein men do put their
trust, and those never linne searching for the same, which do work
thereupon, and are busy therein: their days are ended, and them selves are
gone down into the deep pit.

Death unto the wicked, is terrible evermore,
But unto the godly, a comfort doubtless,
To live well, each man be careful therefore,
And while thou have light, refuse darkness,
Behold the nine nobles of famous woorthynes,
As David, Solomon, Hector, and Alexander,
Julius Caesar, and the rest of noble renown
Whose flickring fame through the world does wander,
Has not death by his dart laid them adowne?
DEVTE. CAP. 32. de impiis. IT is a nation without advise or counsel, and
without wisdom: would God they would once be wise and have understanding, and
would provide for their later days. Which words being more amply discussed
by saint Bernard, he says, Would God they would be wise in three things that
are past, that is to say, In the loss and lack of good things, which are
brought to pass under mortal power, or in doing those things which they
have neglected to do. 2. That they would be wise in not constituting the
wicked in authority, whereof the number is infinite in the world. 3. And
that they would be circumspect and careful in the loss of time, then which
thing there is nothing to be coumpted more precious.

And says saint Bernard, Would God they would understand three things that are
present: that is to say, 1. The shortness of our life: because we have neither
certain day nor hour how long to rest here. 2. The difficulty of our
salvation: because straight is the way that leads thereunto, and few there
are which walk in thereby. 3. And the small number of them that are to be
saved: because there are many called, but few are chosen.

And again he says, Would God men would provide for those three things that
are to come: that is to say, 1. Death, then which nothing is more bitter. 2.
The judgment that shall be general at the last day, then which nothing
shall be more horrible to hear. 3. Eternal punishment ordained for the ungodly,
then the which nothing shall be more sharper.

The memory of the dead, for the living is a president,
How better we shall for our state provide,
While we have grace and space of the Omnipotent,
Print we well in heart what others has betide.
Which have either walked straight, or staggered aside,
At our neighbors fall let us be eke vvare,
Lest we that stand fast, with them do not slide,
Our armor of perceuera^ce, in good life lets prepare.
ECCLESIAST. CAP. 14. BE mindful of death, because when he comes, there is no
stay with him.

IEREMI. CAP. 4. THEY are wise enough to do wickedly, but to do well, they
have no knowledge at all.

ESAI. CAP. 44. I The Lord am he that do transport wise men backwards, and
do make their perseverance to become meare foolishness.

JOB. CAP. 7. MY days are passed away, my cogitations are dispersed,
disquieting my heart, they have changed the night with me into day, and again
yet after darkness, I hope to see light.

BERNARDVS in meditatio. TELL me, where are the lovers of this world become,
which a few years before passed were with us, there is nothing remaining
more of them at this day, but dust and woormes.

Had they not their appointed time to drink with thee, to eat with thee, and
to laugh with thee? And so esteemed they of their days spent in their wealth
and riches, and in the end they are gone down into the neathermost pit.

Their flesh is here in the earth bestowed upon the woormes, and in hell,
there their soul unto the flaming fire, till being again lincked in that
unhappy family, they are tossed in perpetual burning flames.

Without repentaunt turning, we increase each day,
To death and his dome, wherefore with diligence,
Amend we our misdeedes without delay,
To save our souls, show we our sapience,
Eschevving the vice of vvylfull negligence,
That the time redeemed, may render alvvay,
Sound fruits of words, works, and conscience,
To balance account just at the judgment day.
PSALM. 11.34. THERE is ordained a most vile death for sinners.

PROVERBS. CAP. 5. HE shall dye that has not received discipline.

GREGORIVS. FOR the most highest is a pacient rewarder of the wicked, for those
that he has long suffered to sin, to the end that they might be converted
and repent. The same persons not being converted nor repentyng, he does more
grievously adiudge them to the greater damnation.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 4. THE just man, though he be overtaken with death, yet shall
he find rest.

CHRISOSTO. THERE is nothing so much deceaueth man, as the vain hope to live
longer.

SENECA. Uncertain death does prevent and steal upon many amendementes of
mislyfe (that are deferred) or ever they be aware.

PSALM. 49. DEath shall feed the evil men, even as sheep that are thrown
into the lake of hell: they shall desire to dye, but death shall flee from
them. etc,

PSALM. 116^ PRecious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints.

BOETIVS. DEath unto those men is happy and welcome, when she seems not to
plant more pleasure at one time then at an other, and being often called for,
he comes suddenly to the sorrowful.

SENECA. Truly to dye well, is for men to dye wyllingly.

AVGVSTINVS. THere is nothing more withdrawes man from sin, then the often
meditating and thinking of death.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 18. THE Lord has wrought wonderful things in the death
of man.

SENECA. THere is nothing shall profit thee so much unto temperance and
moderacion of all worldly things, nor cause thee so much to contemn them, as
the daily forethincking and meditating of death.

APOCA. CAP. 2. REmember from whence thou art fallen, and be wylling to repent
thee thereof.

ESAI. CAP. 38. DIspose and set in order all things within thine house,
because thou shall dye and not line.

And Ezechias turned away his face unto the wall, and prayed unto the Lord.

Sequitur. And Ezechias wept with bitter tears.

As scriptures truly pronounce in sentence,
Death due to sinners, impenitent which dye,
In this world, damnation is by consequence,
When the sound of Trumpe is hard from on hye,
From death to life, rise then shall the godly,
Wherefore preventing duly the first death,
Repent we in time with purpose earnestly,
To live for ever with Christ by fyrme faith.
FINIS Of the Contemplacion for VVENSDAY.
THE AVCTORS Commemoration for THVRSDAY.
Remember the judgment general,
How for our lives then plead we shall.
The Translators Application.
Thalmighty in the Firmament, made lights for to divide,
The day and night, which lights for signs should serve each time and tide,
A greater light, the Sun to shine by dry, by night, a less,
The Moon and Stars, the self same light does plainly lo express.
VVhyles we have light, lets walk that way.
That gaynes light at the judgment day.
AVGVSTINVS. WE have this experience, because ye mind of man is more familier
and invred with the diverse intisementes of this world, and overcome with the
concupiscences, or lusts thereof: that therefore she refuses to be occupied
in well doing, requires pleasure: and scarcely is she brought to this point,
that she shall be able to exclude and reject from her self, the custom of her
former life. But when she shall once fall in reckoning how necessary it is to
think upon the latter day, and of the efficacy, of the judgment which shall
then be: being stirred up and provoked, either with hope of reward, or with
fear of pounishment, she proclaymeth wylfull wars against her good mocions
and passions which should resist the same, and assaulteth her ancient former
good desires, and forecibly as it were strives with her self to subdude her
self.

PROVERBES. CAP. THE wicked and ungodly men have no mind upon the day of
judgment: but they that seek the Lord, do consider thereof.

IEREMI. CAP. 12. TRuly Lord thou art righteous, notwithstanding in thy
judgments, yea, if I should dispute with thee what the cause is, that the
wicked in their ways do florishe.

JOB. CAP. 22. WHY do the wicked live still upon earth, and are so exalted on
high? they lead their lives in wealth, and yet in the end they go down into
hell.

ECCLESIASTES. 3. THere are some godly persons, before whose faces their own
evils have come to light, as though they had offended with the wicked. And
there are also some ungodly persons which live with such security, and
think them selves so safe, as though they had the works of godly disposed
persons with them. And I have perceived, that af all the works that the Lord
has done, man can not comprehend and find out the reason.

ROMANS. CAP. 2. O The wonderful height of the riches of the wisdom of
GOD, and of his knowledge, how incomprehensible and inscrutable are the
judgments of his way.

The Auctor figuring the general judgment,
Hereby admonishes both just and unjust:
To consider thereof in this life present,
All security then abandon we must,
Yea all licencious living and carnal lust,
Wherein the wicked florishe at will,
For all such as therein do put their trust,
Thalmighty Judge in his wrath shall them spyll.
ECCLESIAST. CAP. O What torments have all the elect of GOD suffered, that
they might safely come unto the obtained victory, ordained for martyrs.

ESAI. CAP. 10. WOe be unto Assure, which is becomr the rod of my fury, and the
staff it self of revenge, in their hands is my heavy displeasure. But
according to the opinion of Saint Augustine: when the father has corrected the
child in mercy and justice, he then casts the rod into the fire.

2. PETER. CAP. 2. THE Lord does know when in due time to take hence those
that are godly: but as for the wicked, he leaves them for the day of
judgment, to pounishe them then according to their deserts.

PSALM. 76. Lord, I have been mindful of thy judgments, and I am comforted.

Were it not but that my meditation is in thy law, then should I perhaps have
perished even in mine own humility. etc.

1. PETER. CAP. 2. Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we
should all follow his steps.

LVKE. CAP. 24. Ought not Christ to have suffered death, and that he should
so enter thereby into his glory?

Ad Hebreos. CAP. 11. THE holy ones and elect of God by faith, have conquered
unto them kingdoms, have wrought the works of equity and righteousness*
and have purchased them selves new promises of sa^yng health: But some others
having tried the scornful dispites and scourges of this world, and mo^eouer
the b^n^es and imprisonment, have been stoned to death, have been d^smembred,
have been tempted, and have been put to death with the sword.

ISIDORVS. Adversities are means to reclayme and remedy the diseases of the
soul. Sickness wounds the flesh, but cures the defect of the mind.

As God suffers the wicked a time to live here,
Though it be for a scourge unto his elect,
So to strengthen their patience when they forbear,
Too to many injuries, yet has he respect,
His chosen quite out of mind not reject,
But for better trial of their fyrme faith,
When he sees time he will detect,
Their foes of mischief with sentence of dearh.
ESAI. CAP. 30. THE Lord looks for us, to the end he would have mercy upon
us.

IVDITH. BUT because the Lord is pacient, even for this purpose let us repent
the more, and let us with tears crave his pardon.

ESAI. CAP. 26. HE had compassion of the obstinate and wicked person, and he
has not learned to fear our righteousness.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 5. SAY not thou with thy self, I have sinned, and what
mishap has chanced unto me, by means of forgiveness of thy sins, be thou
not therefore the more without fear: for mercy and displeasure soon passes
away from him, and his wrath does behold those that sin.

Ad Romanos. CAP. 2. THOU art utterly ignorant, that the great good will of God
brings thee to repentance: but according to the hardness of thy heart, and as
thou art impenitent, thou heapest up wrath unto thee in the day of wrath, and
when the judgment of the just God shall be reauealed, which renders to every
man according to his works.

Idem ad Romanos. AND dooest thou despise the riches of his goodness, of his
patience, and longanimitie? Thou dooest then heap upon thee his wrath against
the day of wrath.

PSALM. 22. FOrsake me not Lord in the day of my tribulation.

Idem. I Will not fear any evil things, because thou Oh Lord art with me.

DEVTERONO CAP. 31. Truly because the Lord was not with me, therefore have
these evils and mischeefes come upon me.

2. PARALIPO. CAP. 15. THE Lord is with you to help you, because you are
abiding with him: if you shall seek him, you shall find him, but if you
forsake him, he shall forsake you.

ROMANS. CAP. 8. IF God be on our side, who shall be against us.

GENES. CAP. 12. MY soul lives, even because of thy loving favor.

PSALM. 84. THE Lord shall give unto his chosen both grace and woorship.

PROVERBES. CAP. 3. HE shall give grace to the humble and lowly in heart.

PROVERBES. CAP. 14. GRace shall remain amongst the just and upright in heart.

Oh mankind, rue on thy miserable estate,
When sleeping in sin of liberty thou live,
A more loathsome life then brute beast create,
The nearer grace is offered thee, the further of thou geuest,
Thy consent with security, and so thou thriuest,
For abusyng Gods grace and offered mercy,
One mischief upon an other thou driuest,
Till all to late it is to repent thy folly.
APOCAL. CAP. 20. THere shall be ordained a judgment of every soul, according
as he has done in this life time.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 38. O Man remember thou my judgment, for even so shall thine
be: with me it was yesterday, and with thee shall it be to morrow.

LEVITICUS. CAP. 14. LET him sprinckle him seven times: that is, to be cleansed
from his offenses, that he may be purged by the law.

Idem. Neither let him enter into the Sanctuary, until such time as the
days of his cleansing shall be fulfilled.

1. Corinthians. CAP. 3. BUT every man shall receive his own reward, according to
his labor and travail.

DEVTERONO. CAP. 25. THere shall be also apyointed a measure of punishment,
according to the measure of the offense and sin committed.

APOCAL. CAP. 14. FOr their works shall follow them when they are gone hence.

PSALM. 28. THou shall render unto every one according to his works.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 11. How becommest thou ignorant what the way of the spirit
is? Dooest thou so not understand the works of God, which is the woorkemaster
of all things?

SAPIENCE. CAP. 11. FOR who is he that can understand the mysteries of God.

ESAI. CAP. 47. THere shall suddenly come a plague upon thee, which thou
know not of.

Actuum Apostolorum. CAP. 15. WE believe to be saved by the grace and favor of
God.

AVGVSTINVS. IF so be that I knew my reward were laid up for me in hell, I
would pray no more for it, then I would do for the devil.

SAPIENCIE. CAP. 2. THere is not any man acknowledged or known to have gone
down into hell, and have returned thence again.

BERNARDVS. Mark and behold always this rule, that after the Lord has long
spared sinners, he does more grievously seek to be avenged of them.

Be it by example of others imitation,
Or by our self will and ignorance we fall,
Or by Satan's subtilty and suggestion,
We commit any offenses here criminal,
So for the same, answer make we shall,
And as we have wrought, so awarded we,
Shall receive at the day of judgment general,
Either Gods indignation, or mild mercy.
ECCLESIAST. CAP. 12. LET the dust of man's corrupt nature return unto ye earth
from whence it came, and let the spirit return again unto God, who has
given the same.

JOB. CAP. 21. SHall any man take upon him to teach the Lord knowledge, which
judges thy higher powers? The strong and lusty men are subject to death, yea
the rich and happy of this world.

Idem sequitur. BUT an other man dies in the bitterness of his soul without
any works of repentance: and yet notwithstanding they shall sleep altogether
in the dust, and the worms shall cover them.

SENECA. THE eternal law of God has ordained nothing better unto man, then
that we have all one kind of entrance given us thereby into this life, and
diverse manners of death.

OZEA. CAP. 6. MY judgments shall pass forth from me, as the light out of
the Firmament.

AIERONIMVS. HOw, many people do live in this world, I know not: but of the
days to come, it is written, That the Lord shall judge the secret dooinges,
and unknown deallinges of men, and shall give light even unto the dungeons of
darkness, and shall disclose the counsels of men's hearts.

TOBIAS. CAP. 3. ALL thy judgments are just, Oh Lord.

PSALM. 119. FOR I have been afraid of thy judgments, Oh Lord.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 28. MAke ready thy righteousness that thou can lay for thy
self, before the judgment of the Lord be summoned.

BERNARDVS. BRethren, let us be enflamed unto repentance, let us examine our
consciences, let us be encouraged to take revenge of our sins by earnest
repentance in Christ's bloodshed, craving his gracious favor to escape the
horrible judgment of the living GOD. etc.

To way the wickedness of corrupt nature,
In balance, with Gods divine justice,
Either our good deeds is absurd and obscure,
Presumptuous were such our enterprise,
From the earth, the dust should then arise,
With Thalmighty creator to dispute,
Submit we therefore in repenrant wise,
Our life and death as he has constitute.
ECCLESIASSTI. CAP. 12. REmember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, and
before the time of affliction shall approach, and the days whereof thou may
have cause to say, these days do not like me.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 7. REmember the wrath of the Lord, because it shall not be
foreslowed.

Idem. REmember the Lords wrath in the day of the end of the world, and
remember the time of poverty, even whiles thou art in thy wealth.

ECCLESIASTI CAP. 28. REmember thou the later days, and cease of to do
mischief: for there is blessedness and death approaching in the prescriptions
thereof.

PSALM. 42. MY soul is in my hands always. etc.

MATTHEW. GAP. 24. But of that day and hour when the Lord shall come to judge
the world, no neither Angel, nor the Son of man knows, but the Father him
self. Take you heed therefore, watch, and pray.

MATTHEW. CAP. 25. Watch therefore, because you know neither the day nor the
hour wherein the son of man will come.

GREGORIVS in Homelia. Do not you love the world, which you see can not abide
for ever, because the great day of the Lord is near.

PSALM. THE day of desolation draws near, and the times of the latter days
do speedely hasten on.

JACOB. CAP. 2. THere shall be judgment given upon him without mercy, because
he has not showed mercy. etc.

As life and death from hence uncertain are,
And our demerites do deserve due dome,
So how soon the Lord will the same prepare,
No spirit can divine that day to come,
Though of signs fyfteene writes saint Jerome,
But if we will credit Christ's words in scripture,
Of signs already perfourming now are some,
That that day is not long to, we may be sure.
HAYMO. ANtechriste shall be borne in Babylon, out of the tribe of Dan, according
to the saying that Jacob mencioneth: Let Dan be made a Snake in the way.

MARCI. 12. ANd those days shall be such, and so troublesome, as the like have
not been from the beginning of the creation of man, until now: neither shall
there be any more such afterward.

And except the Lord had shortened those days for his elect sake, there
should have been no salvation unto frail mankind.

1. TIMOTHI. CAP. 3. ALL those that will live godly in Christ, must suffer
persecution.

MARCI. CAP. 13. BUT who so shall persist constant unto the end, shall be saved.

DANIEL. CAP. 8. IT shall be destroyed (meaning of Babylon) without force of
strength of the hand.

THESSALO. CAP. 2. THen shall that wicked Antechriste be reueyled, which the
Lord Jesus shall destroy with the breath of his mouth.

1. JOHN. CAP. 2. NOw are there many Antechristes come into the world, whereby
we know that we are in the later days.

2. PETER. CAP. 3. THere shall come deceitful woorkers of mischief in the
later days, walking after their own lusts.

ISIDORVS de summo bono. THere have many members of Antechrist gone before us,
and their proper works do well agree with the ryngleader of their mischief,
according to the Apostles saying, which affirms: that they have performed
the works of iniquity, yea before that their chief captain was manifested
to the world.

DANIEL. CAP. 8. ANd in the end of the kingdom, when the wicked are come to
the full of their iniquity: that is to say, In Gluttony, Lechery, and
Covetousness, a king of a fierce countenance and understanding, with hard
sentences shall stand up. etc.

DANIEL. CAP. 1. IN the later days there shall come deceauers, which shall
walk after their own desires in wickedness. These are they which shall
assemble them selves together as living creatures having no Soul in them.
These are Clouds without water, which are carried about with the winds. These
are Trees growing somewhat before Winter, unprofitable, which being twyce
dead, are plucked up by the roots: for whom the mystes of darkness are to be
kept for ever and ever.

PSALM. 50. THere shall go before him a consuming fire, and it shall scortche
his enemies round about him.

Idem. WHyther shall I go from thy spirit? and whyther shall I flee from thy
presence?

DEVTERONO. CAP. 32. THere is a fire kindled in my fury, and it shall burn
even until the very last day in Hell.

AMOS. CAP. 9. THere shall be no time for them to flee away which shall save them.

LVKE. CAP. 21. THere shall be signs in the Sun and in the Moon, and in the
Stars.

MARCI. 13 IN those days after that tribulation, the Sun shall be darkened,
and the Moon shall not give forth her light, and the Stars of Heaven shall
fall from thence, and the virtues or powers of the Heavens shall be changed, and
then shall they see the son of man coming in the Clouds of Heaven with
great power and glory.

When sin, the fire of conflagration,
All men as then which are left on live,
Shall quite of them make consummacion,
In woeful plight, as doctors do discriue,
There Is none by flight which may be fugitive,
Then Sun and Moon obscured with anoyance,
Yea other Planets with beams obumbratiue,
Shall in their kind shevve dolorus countenance.
DEVTERO. CAP. 9. THere shall go before thee a devouring fire, and a consuming
flame.

JOEL. CAP. 2. Blow up the Trumpet in Sion, Rejoice you that dwell upon my
holy hill. Let all the inhabitants of the earth be troubled and disquieted,
because the day of the Lord is at hand, because the day of darkness and of
smoothering heat draws near, the cloudy and troublesome day.

Idem. BEfore his face shall go a devouring fire, and after him shall follow a
burning flame^ for the day of the Lord is a mighty day, and a very fearful
day, and who shall abide the same: neither is there any man which shall escape
it.

Eodem JOEL. BE you therefore converted and turn unto me says the Lord, with
all your whole heart, in fasting, in mournyng, and in bitter tears, and you
shall be saved.

APOCA. CAP. 20. AND the sea gave out from her the dead bodies that were buried
in the bottom thereof: yea death and hell it self sent forth their dead
gohstes, and there was sentence of judgment pronounced upon every one
according to their works.

JOEL. CAP. 3. I Will geather all nations together, and I will bring them into
the vale of Iosaphat, and will dispute with them.

1. Corinthians. CAP. 15. TRuly we shall rise again at the judgment day, but we
shall not all be immutable or unchanged, even in a moment or twinkling of the
eye in the last blast of the Trumpe.

Ricardus super. 4. did. 47. How or in what manner the Lord will give
judgment, is not presently manifested to the world: neither has he woorthely
rewarded every man, neither has he punished them accordingly, but the
accomplishment thereof rests behind in his hands, as touching the body and
the soul, and as touching the desert of praise or punishment.

EPHESI. CHP. 4. Until we shall al run together in one course, with unity
of faith and woorshipping the son of GOD, growing up to one perfect man, in
measure of the fullness of the aige of Christ.

APOCALIPS. 22. ANd I saw as well the great, as small bodies standing openly
before the throne, and the books were opened.

Athanasius in Symbolo. Against whose coming all men shall be warned to arise
with their bodies out of the earth.

MALACHI. CAP. 3. WHO shall be able to consider of the day of his coming? or who
shall endure to behold the sight of his presence?

JOB. CAP. 14. WHO is able to warrant me that thou wylt protect my soul in the
neathermost hell? and hide me until the fury of thy displeasure shall be
passed: and that it will please thee to appoint me a time when thou wylt
remember me. That day is the day of wrath and calamity, yea the great day of
misery very bitter.

HEBREOS. CAP. 10. BUT terrible and fearful is the looking for of the
judgment and fervent heat of the fire, which shall destroy all his enemies.

JOB. CAP. 19. FLee you away from the face of the Lord because the sword is a
revenger of iniquities.

All flesh shall arise from death to live,
In soul and body having resemblance,
Then to receive sentence definitive,
Decreed by Gods divine ordinance,
How ever it be in joy and greeuance,
We shall address us, young, old, ritche, and pore,
Happy or unhappy, as it shall then chance,
To rest in pain or pleasure evermore.
MARCI. CAP. 13. THen shall they see the son of man coming in the Clouds of
Heaven.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 12. WHO shall stand against thy judgment, oh Lord? or who
shall come before thy presence as a revenger upon the wicked ones of this
world.

PROVERBES. CAP. 6. THE Lord will not spare any flesh in the day of
reuengement, neither will he be pacified with the entreaty of any person,
neither will he take great rewards to redeem any soul.

PSALM. 110. BEcause his mercy is enduring for ever.

HIERONIMVS. IF only the law and judgment of mortal creature and frail
flesh, which shall be turned into dust, be with such care ^hroughly trembled at
and feared. With what careful fear ought we to provide for the judgment of
the divine majesty?

PSALM. 110. I Will sing of mercy and judgment unto thee, oh Lord.

Idem. O GOD, give thy judgment unto the King. etc.

PSALM. 36. THY judgment, oh Lord, is as the light of the midday.

APOCA. CAP. 20. AND behold, the dead were called up to be judged (as touching
those things that were written in the books) to receive their reward according
to their works.

NAVM. CAP. 3. Behold (says the Lord God of hosts) I come unto thee, and
will discover thy shamefulnesse, even in thine own face, and will show thy
nakedness unto the nations, and reproach unto other kingdoms, and I will
pour out upon thee thy own abominations, and will smite thee with reproaches.

Then shall our king, which judged was, us judge,
In glorious form of divine humanity,
From whose face there may be then no refuge,
No favor, freendship, revvard, parcialitie,
Nor any respect over high and low degree,
When in two diverse manners he shall administrate,
His judgment to the godly with mylde mercy,
But most severe Justice unto the reprobate.
SAPIENCE. CAP. 5. BUT the righteous shall live for evermore, their reward also
is with the Lord, and the care for them is with the highest.

Chrisostomus super Mattheum. IN that day of the Lords revenge, we shall have
nothing to answer for our selves: for the Heaven, the Earth, the Sun, and
the Moon, the Days, and the Nights, and all the whole World it self shall
stand against us, to bear witness against us of our sins and wickedness.

IACOBI. CAP. 5. YOur riches are become rotten, and consume^: your garments
are eaten with the Moth, your gold and your silver is become rusty, and the
rust thereof shall be a witness against you.

ABACVCK. CAP. 2. THE stone in the Wall shall cry out against you, and the
Timber between the Rooffes of your houses, shall answer against you.

HVGO de sancto victore. THE conscience of man is as a book shut, which
shall be opened in the day of judgment.

MICHEAS. CAP. 3. Hear, O ye Princes of the house of Jacob, and captains over
the house of Israel.

Eiusdem. CAP. 6. LET the high Hills hear the judgment of the Lord.

LVKE. CAP. 16. GEVE a reckonyng of thy Stewardshippe.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 6. THere shall be a most sharp judgment ordained for such as
bear authority over others.

AVGVSTINVS. THE Prelates are worthy to dye so many deaths, as they give
evil examples of death unto their people committed in charge unto them.

ESAI. CAP. 46. Hear me, oh you of hard hearts, which are far of from
doing justice.

IEREMI. CAP. 15. MY people is become a disobedient people, their Sheepheardes
have led them a wrong way.

DANIEL. CAP. 13. Iniquity is gone out from Babylon, even from those that were
the elder Judges, which were seen to bear rule over the people, and they have
turned away their understanding, and have withdrawn their eyes from beholding
the Heaven, neither would they remember the judgments of the just.

This process of judgment is short without tarying,
When for our sins shall serve none excuse.
But our unkindness to Christ our sovereign king,
Our consciences eke vvitnesses shall us accuse,
When we his gracious good favor abuse,
God grant therefore by ages tofore past,
We in this last aige such vvarnyng may take.
That cleaving in fear to this our God fast,
We may avoid the danger of the dreadful lake.
2. Corinthians. CAP. 6. FOR we all must needs be manifested and openly reuailed
before the tribunal seat of Christ, that every man may reap that which he
has done in his body, be it good, or be it bad.

ESAI. CAP. 13. BEhold the day of the Lord shall come, that cruel day and full
of indignation, wrath, and furies, to put the earth in fear, and her sinners
to be overthrown by her: because the Stars of Heaven, and their glit^ering
hue, shall not give forth light unto them.

EZECHIEL. 6. THE end comes, it shall stand up as a watchman against the:
sorrow shall come upon thee which dwell upon the Earth: the time is come,
the day of death is near at hand, and not of the joyful sound of the Hills.
Now even at hand forthwith, will I power out my indignation upon thee, and
will accomplish the desire of my fury upon thee, and will judge thee according
to thy ways, and will lay upon thee as a burden all thy wickedness, and my
eye shall have no compassion upon thee, neither will I show thee any mercy,
but will lay upon thee thine own wicked ways.

MATTHE. 25. THen shall he say to those which shall stand upon his left hand,
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
devil and his angels.

ORIGIN. SInners do lincke them selves in amity with the Devil, as they
which are by the providence of God saved, are made coequals with the holy
angels: So such as perish, are compared unto the angels of the Devil.

Augustinus. 21. de ciuitate dei. HEreby also is it manifest, that the same
fire is given by ordinance for a pounishment unto men and devils.

Gregorius. 33. cap. mora. IT belongs to the justice of a straight Judge,
never to withdraw pounishment from them, which of their own minds in this
life, would never withdraw them selves from sin.

PSALM. 119. Understand this, you that have forgotten God, least that at any
time he take you away by force, and then there be no man to take you out of his
hands. etc.

Then shall Christ thus pronounce for conclusion,
From his leaft hand, when he the wicked shall expel,
Depart ye woeful vvretches with my malediction,
To the perpetual fire, and torments of hell,
In dolorous darkness, with devils there to dvvell,
Without recovery, shall be there your residence,
Fellovved with feendes furious and fell,
And of my person, never more to have presence.
MATTHE. 25. COme you, the blessed of my Father, possess you the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world.

ORIGIN. FOR the holy ones of God, which have wrought the works of
righteousness, have already taken for their hyre, the inheritance on the right
hand of GOD (for their works of righteousness) wherein consistes both rest
and glorious triumph.

AVGVSTINVS. Labor in worldly matters, will discourage thee from coming unto
God: but behold the Heavens which have learned the first commandment, they
fulfill the same.

TOBIA. 6. THE Lord GOD of Heaven shall reward thee with joy and comfort, for
ye werisome travel that thou have endured.

2. Corinthians. 1. FOR this joy and comfort that we have conceived, is a witness
of our conscience within us. etc.

PSALM. 100. BE you glad in the Lord, and be joyful you that are just. etc.
and rejoice you in the Lord. etc.

MATTHEW. CAP. 24. Watch therefore, because you know not the hour when the Lord
will come.

HIERONIMVS. IT was not requisite that ye Apostles should have the day of the
foreknowledged coming of Christ revealed unto them, that by reason of their
earnest looking for of his coming, they not knowing when, yet might always
believe that he would come, whom they knew not how soon he would come.

GREGORIVS. WHat man seems to watch in deed, which to behold the
brightness of the true light, keeps open the eyes of his mind. That man
watches, who observes that order of doing well, which he believes is
acceptable before God. That man watches, which drives from him the darkness
of dolor and negligence.

JOHN. CAP. 3. O Ye generacions of Vipers, who has taught you to flee from the
wrath to ome. Do you therefore show forth worthy fruits of repentance.

PSALM. EVen as the wounded bodies sleeping in their graves: that is to say,
The sinners of whom there is no further memory, and those are repulsed out of
thy hands.

PSALM. 36. DEpart from doing that is evil, and do good.

After the first sentence, the second follow shall,
Full of solace and consolation
Saying unto those on his right hand all,
Come ye children on my benediction,
Which have me loved with true intention,
Receive you the kingdom of lasting blis,
Reserved for you from the worlds creation,
God grannt us thy grace to labor for this.
ESAI. CAP. 46. Return and come again, oh you that have frowardly walked
after your own heart.

GREGORIVS. O How strait shall then be the way for the reprobate: above in the
Heavens, shall sit the Judge full of displeasure: below in Hell, shall be an
horrible confusion: upon the right hand, shall stand our sins to accuse us:
upon the leaft hand, infinite numbers of Devils, which shall draw us to the
tormenting place: within us, the gnawing of our conscience: and without us, the
Wo^ld burning round about. Whyther then shall the sinner flee: To appear to
judgment, shall be intolerable for him: and to hyde him setfe, shall be
impossible.

PSALM. 138. I Have remembered these, and I have powered out mine own soul
before me.

HIERONIMVS. BUT thou discreet Reader, mark and consider, that both the
punishments which are ordained, are eternal: and that the everlasting joyful
life has in it no manner of decay or ruin.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 7. BE mindful of the wrath of the Highest, because he will
not long foreslewe the time.

MATTHEW. CAP. 10. Fear not ye those that have power to slay the body only, but
rather fear you him which is able to destroy both body and soul, even in the
very Hell.

Augustinus de verbis Domi. BUT we see all such as love this present life
temporal, and which is soon ended, so to labor for the same: that when the
passion of death approaches them, they make all the shift they can, that they
not be taken away with death, and by all means seek to prolong their life. If
then men do with such labor and such care endeavor them selves, to the end
they would live a little longer: how and by what means ought they to labor
and be careful for the life everlasting. And if such men be accounted wise,
which try all manner ways how they may defer death, and prolong life for a
short time. How foolish are those which live so, as thereby they lose the life
everlasting: surely such may be called most fools of all other.

Reuolue in mind the great perplexitee,
Of sinners, seeing them selves in such assay,
When rheir just Judge above them they shall see,
And under them Hell, to swalowe them as pray,
All faithful Christians mark this by the way,
If sentence given for Temporal offense,
Deserve here a death, with loss of goods always,
What to offend the highest shall be the sentence?
PSALM. 118. THey are corrupted, and become abominable in their studies: it is
time Lord to besturre thee: they have dispersed and wrested thy law.

JOB. CAP. 5. I Will pray unto the Lord, who reproves the wise men of this
world in their craftiness, and does disperse the counsels of the wicked.

PROVERBES. CAP. 2. HE has forsaken the right way, and walks through the
dark places.

ESAI. CAP. 1. THey give not sentence in favor of the Orphane, and the
complaint of the Wydowe has not come in before them.

JOB. CAP 36. DIssemblers, and lukewarm worldlings, do pro^^re the wrath of
God upon them.

PSALM. 10. THE mouth of them that speak mischeuous things, is stopped. Let
the deceitful lips be come dumb, and not able to utter their speech.

LVKE. CAP. 16. THe children of this world are in their generation wyser, then
the children of light.

Psalmista de impiis. 8. THey are troubled as a drunken man, and all their
wisdom is utterly consumed.

ESAI. CAP. 29. FOR wisdom shall depart and perish from the wise of this
world: that is to say, from such as are reputed wise men, and their
understanding shall be darkened, because it is said:

IEREMI. CAP. 4. THey are wise enough to work wickedness: but to do well,
they have none understanding.

BERNARDVS. SVrely thou have found out wisdom aright, if thou can esteem of
all things as they be, namely of sin and vices, as things that are vile, and
altogether to be shunned: Of ^emporall things, as that which is frail and
transitory, and therefore to be smaly made account of: but of eternal things,
as that which is best, and therefore above all others c^eefely and specially to
be desired and embraced.

Of worldly wit see the furious raige,
How it is dased in wylfull darckenesse,
Where spiritual wisdom, grave, godly, and saige,
Should rest in those that Christ do profess,
Some yet there are, which practice naught less,
But subtilty, the simple to circumuent,
As wyly VVoolues their deeds them express,
Which daily deuoureth the Lambs innocent.
SOPHONI. CAP. 1. THey shall walk as the blind in darkness, because they have
sinned against the lord.

ESAI. CAP. 49. THus says the Lord, In an acceptable time have I heard thee,
and in the day of health, have I helped thee.

2. Corinthians. CAP. 6. WE exhort you brethr^n, that you receive not the grace of
God in vain: for he says, Behold the acceptable time, Behold now the day of
your saving health.

APOCAL. CAP. ^0. ANd he swore by the God that lives for ever, because there
shall not be any longer time.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 39. FOR all things shall be sought for in their time.

DEVTERONO. CAP. 32. de impiis. IT is a nation wanting the counsel, and void
of the wisdom of the highest: Would to God they would once be wise and
geather understanding, and that they would provide for the later days. etc.

PSALM. 2. Hear this al ye nations, mark and give ear, hear this you that
inhabit the world.

SOPHONI, CAP. 1. THe great day of the Lord is at hand, it is very near, and
too too swiftly coming upon us: ye hear tell yt the day of the Lord shall be
bitter: ^hen shall the strong man be troubled. That day shall be the day of
wrath, the day of tribulation and of sorrow, the day of calamity and of
trouble, the day of the Trumpe, and the sound of the Trumpe upon the strong
defended cities, and upon the angels on an hie: and I will vex all flesh, and
they shall walk as the blind do, because they have sinned against the Lord.

Sequitur. But their silver and their gold shall not deliver them in the day of
the wrath of the Lord. All the earth shall be consumed with the fire of his
indignation.

HIERONIMVS super Mattheum. SO often as I consider upon the day of the Lords
judgment, I quake for fear in every part of my body: and whether I eat or
drink, or what thing so ever else I do, me thinks I hear the fearful
Trumpe always sounding in mine ears, Arise up you dead, and come to
judgment. etc.

Such worldly wise make no provision,
For their souls health, that ever shall endure,
But run headlong into the pit of perdition,
VVoorking their wylles at all adventure.
But such as fear God in every condition,
With spiritual wisdom furnished are,
Living in fear and hearty contrition,
Against the last day, them selves to prepare.
PSALM. 47. THOU shall renew the face of the earth, when the sinners shall
perish, thou shall see it.

MATTHEW. CAP. 25. THese shall depart into the perpetual torment.

ESAI. CAP. 3. THE light of the Moon shall shine forth as the Sun does, and
the Sun shall give forth his beams as the light of seven days together: even
upon that day when the Lord shall bind up the wounds of his people, and shall
heal up the scarre of the stripe: and behold, the name of the Lord comes
from a far: whott shall be his wrath and indignation, and grievous to be
sustained.

ECCLESIASTI CAP. 43. THE Heavens shall show forth their beauty, in the day
when the glory of the son of man shall be seen.

APOCALIPS. CAP. 14. Now in deed is the time when the spirit shall say, Let
all flesh rest from their labors.

PETER. CAP. 2. cathol. THE Lord knows best times when to take away and
deliver the godly from the temptations of this world, and to keep the wicked
ones to be tormented at the day of judgment.

PROVERBES. CAP. 16. THe judgments of the Lord are as the balance and the
weightes.

PSALM. 55. Fear an^ trembling have come upon me, and the dark places have
environed me round about.

AVGVSTINVS. FALL to repentance whiles thou art i^ health, and if thou shall so
do, I say unto thee, that thou shall be safe: because thou have repented thee,
whiles otherwise thou might have trespassed: for if thou wylt in time repent
thee when thou shall not have power to sin, sin shall forsake thee before
thou forsake them.

Soon after sentence of general judgment,
The heavens, shall royally be renouate,
Then shall the wicked to Satan be sent,
To make abode with him, for ever exterminate,
Then shall the Heavens be clearly clarificate,
The godly shall enter with triumph victorious
Wherefore repent you wicked, in time else too late,
Recover you the damage of that dome dangerous.
GREGORIVS WHen thou art grievously handled in bodyly sickness, thou can
scarce think upon any other thing, then upon the pain thou feel: for
thither is the cogitation of the mind carried, where as is the force of pain
and perplexity most greeuing a man.

JOHN. CAP. 5. BEhold thou art now made whole and sound, do thou not
henceforth sin any more, lest some other worse evil happen unto thee.

MATTHEW. CAP. 22. THere are many called, but few are chosen.

MATTHEW. CAP. 7. ENter in at the narrow gate, because broad is the gate, and
wide is the way that leads to destruction, and many there are which enter
there aub^ry narrow is the way that i^adeth unto life, and few there are
which find the same.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 1. THE whole fullness and effect of wisdom, is to fear
God.

JACOB. CAP. 3. IN many things we all offend.

SENECA. THE most safest thing for man, is to fear nothing else but God only.

PROVERBES. CAP. 18. BLessed is the man that lives always in the fear of God.

PSALM. 34. Fear the Lord, all his saints: Let all the seed of Israel
fear the Lord. Blessed are all they that fear the Lord.

To conclude, think we each one of this case,
No man shall be judged but deseruingly,
Then in this life, while we have time and space,
Let us in contemplacion and prayer mortify,
Our wicked mocions, so as continually,
We fearing the judgments of the just God above,
Come death, come dome, for him may be ready,
To rest with our redeemer, in peace, joy, and love.
FINIS Of the Contemplacion for THVRSDAY.
THE AVCTORS Commemoration for FRIDAY.
Christ's passion print in mind,
Show not thy self to him unkind.
The Translators Application.
Our Creator commanded than, the waters forth to bring,
Both Fish and Foul for food of man, with sundry other things
And blessing them with sacred mouth, for humane use to be,
He said to them, ye Creatures now, increase and mult^plee.
Gods blessing is woonderous great showed hear,
His passion yet is to us most dear.
BERNARDVS. NOthing enflameth so the heart of man unto love, as the continual
remembered passion and effabilitie of our Redeemer: because he took upon him
thereby to make us a new creature a fresh love, and to have new and
unaccustomed consolations in him, and of consequence, to tas^e by his death and
passion a certain new estate of sweet life, in as much as he seemed to be a
fore runner of the glory predestinate unto him self.

APOCAL. CAP 1. HE has loved and washed us from our sins in his blood.

BERNARDVS. WHere is the safe and fyrme rest for our imperfection to be found,
but in the wounds of our Savior: so much the safer do I there dwell, how
much the more thereby he is of power to save me. The world rages, the flesh
keeps me under, the Devil lies in wait for me, yet fall I not, because I
am established upon the rock: I have sinned, thy conscince is troubled, but
it shall not be tormented, because I have remembered the death and passion of
the Lord.

Bernardus ^uper illud Canticorum, Fasciculus mi^^he dilectus meus. etc. EVen
from my childehood, because of the huge heap of desartes (which I know to be
wantyng in me) I have carefully endeavored this little bundle of Mirh to have
geathered, and laid it ^p in my brostes, which is gathered even of all the
anguishes and smarts of my Lord God. This (said I) should teach me wysedom^,
the perfection of righteousness and fullness of knowledge.

CANTICO. CAP. 8. SET me Lord as a mark or token of remembrance before thy
breast.

HEBREOS. CAP. 12. CAll him again and again unto your minds, who has
suffered such reproach done unto him by the sinful: for you have not as yet
withstood touching his blood shed for you, to fight against sin, and you have
forgotten the comforter which speaks unto you, as unto his children, saying,
Good children, despise not the correction of the Lord, nor be thou aweary at
such time as thou art reprehe^ded: for whom the Lord loves, him chasteneth he.

This lovely leaf as Rose so rubicound
Of Christ repo^^yng the precious passion,
The croppe, the root, the height, and the ground,
The proper price of man's salvation,
Deserves due imprintyng in our cogitation,
Of ghostly comfort most sovereign suffisance,
Bringing with it the true operation,
Of the medcine against sin and all encombrance.
Barnard^s supper. HEB. CAP. 2. YOU shall draw up waters with joy out of the
springes of your Savior: that is to say, all kind of virtues and graces are
to be found in the precious bloodshedding of Christ.

2. PETER. CAP. 2. Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an example to
follow his steps, who has not committed any sin, neither was there any
guyle found in his mouth.

1. PETER. CAP. 4. ANd none of you have suffered as a murderer or robber, for
your evil deeds, and against your wylles.

IEREMI. CAP. 31. IN euerduring good will have I loved thee, therefore have I
drawn thee unto me, taking compassion upon thee.

BERNARDVS. WHAT is there so much helping thee to do well, which is not more
saluing thy sore in the death of Christ.

1. JOHN. CAP. 3. HErein know we that the love of God is in us, because he
has given his life for us. etc.

BERNARDVS. Plentiful redemption is given unto us in the bloodshedding of our
Redeemer: great abundance of sweetenes and grace, or rather fullness and
perfection of virtues.

Sequitur. IN all my adversities I find not any such and so effectual
remedy, as I find in remembering the death and passion of Christ: for out of
these I taste sometimes the potion of healthful bitterness: and again, I
feel how sweet and supple is this oil of consolation. These, between joy
and sadness, administer unto my present life (whyther soever I be tossed) a
safe abidyng and refuge: This is my more profound wisdom, then any other that
I rejoice in, to know Christ, and him crucified. Who ever heard of the like
thing, or who has seen at any time the like of this: he suffered death him
se^f for his enemies, and for the sinful, rather choosing to pass by death
into the Heavens, to the end this sweet friend, wise counselor, and mighty
helper, might also transpasse us into the Heavens.

Here is the fountain of humane felicity,
The way to repentance plain and compendious,
Here is the chief charter of charity,
Surprisyng our minds with motions amorous,
And salve for vvounded concience gracious,
The honey comb of hearty consolation,
The Well of wealth, and storehouse precious,
Left us by Christ's death and passion.
ECCLESIAST. CAP. 29. FOrget not thou the friendship of thy Surety, for he has
pawned his life for thee.

BERNARDVS. SO long as I reposing my confidence in God, do usurp unto my
self that which lacks, by and through the wounds of my Lord Jesus: because
he abounds with mercy toward me, I ought not be void of well deserving, so
long as the Cesterne of his mercies is never empty toward me.

GREGORIVS. ALL the proud people sprung of the linnage of Adam, labored by
all means to atteyne unto the prosperous things of this world. To shonne and
eschew al adversities, flee from reproaches, and follow after pomp and glory.
The Lord came amongst them, choosing to take unto him adversity, fleeing
vain pomp and glory, despising prosperity, and embracing reproaches.

Idem. IF the passion of Christ be called of us rightly into our minds, there
is nothing so grievous unto us, but thereby it shall be tolerated of us with
pacient mind.

PHILLIPIANS CAP. 2. HE showed him self humble and lowly, being obedient to
death, even unto the death of the cross.

Thus the quotidian and fruitful remembrance,
Of Christ's blessed passion so piteous,
Uniting with Christ familier acquayntance,
Makes a vicious man to become virtuous.
And his devotion both sweet and sauerous,
Causing temperance in blind prosperity,
And as a Christian knight Cheualrious,
To have glad patience in great adversity.
GALATH. CAP. 3. I Live now, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.

ESAI. CAP. 5. HE is wounded for our iniquities, and torn in pieces for our
sins: the discipline of our peace is upon him. Lord therefore, take from us
our stony heart, and give us a fleshly heart.

HIERONIMVS. O Good Lord Jesus, oh that the reproaches of those which put thee
to death, had light upon me, that they might have moved my heart unto
compunction and hearty sorrow.

JOHN. CAP. 11. LET us also go and dye with him.

ESAI. CAP. 43. CAll me again to thy memory, and let us be judged together:
Declare thou for thy part what thou can, and then see what thou have to
justify thy self of.

BERNARDVS. O Sweet Jesus, the bitter cup whereof thou dydst taste, has
made me to love thee above all other things: a work performed for our
redemption once for all.

This being oftentimes duly pondered, does easily callenge our love unto it,
nothing more delectably allureth our devotion unto it, more justly perfourmeth
our duty, more deeply binds, nor more vehemently surpriseth our affectes.
He has taken great pains for us, and yet in all the works that ever he
wrought as touching the world, this the aucthour of our life, was never in any
thing so turmoyled: For in that he suffered for us, in stead of saying truth,
he was controlled with gayn^sayinges: for his good deeds, he had those that
looked nearely unto him: when he felt extreme pains, he was scorned of them:
and when he dyed, he suffered the reproach of his enemies.

BERNARDVS. THY passion Lord, is our last refuge that we have to cleave unto,
and our singular remedy.

ESAI. CAP. 3. THERE is none end of the treasures ther^of.

GREGORIVS. THE passion of Christ, being set before our eyes, woorketh all
virtue in us, both for the time present, and to come: and fulfylleth all health
of soul and body.

And when we receive the remembrances of the passion of Christ, streightway
thereby all the devils in Hell are put to flight, and all our deserved
punishments for our offenses are dispensed with, and forgeuen.

BOECIVS. 3. de consolatione. HE had brought such weapons unto thee, which
(had thou not first rejected) might have defended thee with an invincible
strength.

EPHESI. CAP. 6. BE you comforted in the Lord, and put upon you the armor of
God, in the power of his virtue, that you may be able to withstand the
deceiptes of the Devil.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 7. YEa, there is an infinite quantity of treasure hidden for
men, wherein who so ever are possessed, are made partakers of ye freendship of
God.

2. PARALIPO. CAP. 22. MAnifest therefore and openly, express unto him your
hearts and your souls, that you may seek for your Lord God.

2. PARALIPO. CAP. 15. IF you seek for him, you shall find him out: but if you
refuse to seek him, and forsake him, he will forsake you.

Again and again within thy mind reuolue,
How to be thankful for Christ's passion,
Craving of him thy hard heart to resolve.
With inward dolor and outward lamentation,
Power forth thy prayers to find consolation,
In that victorious triumph of virtues abundance,
From Sin, the World, and Satan's suggestion,
Which if thou seek, shall give thee deliverance.
MATTHEW. CAP. 26. MY soul is heavy, even unto death.

AVGVSTINVS. OH how bitter is death, whose only premeditacion caused Christ
to sweat water and blood.

LVKE. CAP. 22. AND his sweat became as the drops of blood running down to
the earth: for his blooddy sweat do express the sorrows of his heart.

MATTHE. 26. WHom so ever I shall kiss, the same is he, hold him fast.

MATTHEW. CAP. 26. THen all the Disciples having forsaken him, fled from him.

PSALM. 84. BEhold thy Christ in his face.

Augustine supper MARC. CAP. 15. HE took up with him, Peter, John, and James,
and fear and tediousness came upon him, in so much as he trauayled with
sorrow, teaching us by example, or as it were figuratively, what manner
companions and disciples a man ought to have with him in such perplexities, as
he that will then pray, is or ought to be like affected: for even as a thief
hearing an outery, presently takes his heels, and therevppon the neighbors
besturre them to remedy the case. Even so by man's fervent prayer, the Devil
flees away, and the holy spirit of God enters with good meditations to
comfort man.

MATTHEW. CAP. 26. O Father, if this cup may not pass me, except I first
drink thereof, thy will be done.

LEODIGARIVS. THis voice of the head, is the health of the whole body: this
voice has instructed all the faithful, has inflamed all the confessors of
Christ, and crowned all the Martyrs of Christ: for what is he that is able to
overcome the hatred of the world, the troubles of temptations, and the terrors
of persecutors, but only that Christ in all, and for all, should say unto his
Father, Thy will be done.

What troubles, terrors, and torments have,
Assailed Christ in any manner wise,
Thou ought in prayer daily of him to crave,
Power to resist thy gohstly enemies,
Who will not let thee suffer injuries,
But at a pinche thy helper will appear,
As he him self suffered smart likewise,
And was comforted, so shall thou be his dear.
MATTHEW. CAP. 26. THen they spitted upon his face, and buffeted him.

CHRISOSTOMVS. THE Evangelist expounds those most reprochefull handlinges, in
this manner. Nothing abashed was he to suffer them: because we might imprint
them in our hearts with continency, and in them rejoice* or take comfort.

BERNARDVS. How much the poorer he made him self by his humility, so much
the ritcher he showed him self in goodness: and how much more base he was in
the sight of the world, so much the more dear beloved is he unto me.

Idem super canti OH humble heart, and yet most high majesty, and oh most
highest and last joy of humane kind: oh reproach of men, and glory of angels:
no man more noble, and yet none more despised: Who could refrain from tears
to hear such wicked handling.

RABANVS. TO con^inue in sin, does increase wickedness.

PSALM. 41. ONE depth calls upon an other.

GREGORIVS. THe sin that is not extinguished by earnest and true repentance,
straightway, with the efficacy thereof, does (...) more sin.

MATTHEW. CAP. 2^. PEter remembered, and thought upon the words of Christ.

CHRISOSTOMVS. NOthing so much heals the sore of sin, as when we
continually think upon the Lord in our minds.

MATTHEW. CAP. 26. HE went out, and wept bitterly. etc.

Freendles among his foes in feoble plight,
He suffered of them this grievous tribulation,
They fyled his face with spitting in despite,
And blinded his eyes in scornful derision,
His patience yet surpassing all imagination,
Peter then fled: wherefore thou sinner,
Cleave to Christ in faith by hearty reformacion,
Forsake not thy Savior that held thee so inteare.
PSALM. 108. WHAT shall I render again unto the Lord, for all that he has
bestowed upon me.

PSALM. 35. THEY have rewarded me evil things for good.

HIERONIMVS. IVdas sinned more in that he dispayred, then in that he betrayed
Christ. Covetousness is the snare of the devil, by means whereof he han^eth
up all covetous persons.

MATTHEW. CAP. 27. THey brought him forth with his hands bound behind him, and
delivered him unto Poncius Pilate the chief Judge.

HIERONIMVS. I Have seen how paynefull the priests have been about
mischief: they have watched all the night long, because they would spill the
blood of the innocent.

MATTHEW. CAP. 27. WHich of these two will you that I let loose unto you:
Barabbas, or Jesus, which is called Christ.

LVKE. CAP. 23. AND all the whole company cried out together, Take this man,
and let Barabbas go at liberty.

BERNARDVS. OH fury of mad men, oh blindness of the Jews: what more peeuishly
could they have done, then to slay him who has raised up the dead from their
graves, and to let go a thief, which after his liberty might do more
mischief.

BEDA. THE Jews earnest request remains until this day a memori^ll (when
they lost the kingdom of Heaven:) because they had lever have a sedicious
Prince to govern them: that is to say, the Devil, then the Lord GOD.

Christ was accused in presence of Pilate.
The Jews, they cried, him to crucify,
A thief was dismissed, O change unfortunate,
And the Son of God scourged most cruelly,
Oh Heavenly flower of our humanity,
Thy feature faded, thy unspotted flesh wext pale,
When plonged thou wast in such perplexity,
Both the Earth and Heavens did rent their vale.
PSALM. 99. BEcause I am prepared for the scourge.

ANCELMVS. THE most lovely young man, elegant and gracious, of more excellent
feature, in respect of the sons of men, was bound to a pi^ler and scourged
with the grievous and sorrowful whippe of most vile persons. That tender flesh
of his most undefiled and fairest flower of all flesh, and of all humane kind
most innocently was grievously scourged, wounded, and torn in pieces of them.

ANCELMVS. IT is small to purpose, that the Jews with their mis^heeuous hands
so crucified thee: but that thy soul before was replenisht, and with gohstly
consolations illuminate. O elect child of GOD, what have thou trespassed,
which deserved such bitterness and confusion: Doubtless nothing at all, I silly
soul that I am, have been the cause of all thy affliction and persecution.

AVGVSTINVS. IF he went not from hence without the scourge, who came into the
world without sin: How do they deserve to be scourged which have offended
even till this day.

Idem. FRom the soul of his foot, even up to the crown of his head, was
there not remaynyng one free spot*

APOCAL. CAP. 1. HE washed us from our sins, by the sheddyng of his blood.

MATTHEW. CAP. 27. AND they making a crown of thorn, put it upon his head, and
gave him a Reed in his right hand: and bowyng their knees before him, laughed
him to scorn, saying, HAYLE KING OF THE JEWS.

As Christ shrincked not his p^tecious blood to shed,
No part of his body without grievous plight,
From the sole of his foot, to the crown of his head,
Neither yet refused any scornful despite,
Oh man so remember what so ever cross,
Or trouble, for the trial of thy true faith,
Happen thee, of temporal things suffering loss,
In Christ's name never shun thou to death.
BERNARDVS. Hear has our Savior powered forth upon us the abundance of all
charity, and plenitude of all his godliness. And here again has he powered
forth, the heavy indignation of his inspeakeable wrath.

LVKE. CAP. 22. Said the Thief. Lord, rememmber me when thou shall come into
thy Kingdom. Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, This day shall thou
be with me in paradyse.

GREGORIVS. O What a faith, and what a perfect conversion or turnyng to the
Lord had this Thief: he had nothing left him at his own liberty but his
heart and his tongue, whereby he declared his inward r^pentance: and (being
inspired with this good motion toward God) obtained no doubt, all that he
found in his own free desire remaining.

BERNARDVS. OH most godly Jesus, what have we trespassed unto thee, and thy
death, and thou have not mourned for it: what have we ben indebted unto thee,
and thou have not thy self paid it: Thy love, and our iniquity, has so made
thee lowly and weak for our sakes.

MATTHEW. CAP. 27. THey led him f^orth to crucify him.

Idem. IF any man will come after me, let him take up his cross and follow me.

AVGVSTINVS. THE Cross of the Lord is not only meant that which was of wood,
whereupon he was crucified: but also the Cross of Christ is called that,
which in all the time of our life is made equal with virtues, suffering all
manner corrections.

LVKE. CAP. 23. FAther, forgive them, for they know not what they do.

BERNARDVS. THE Jews cried, Crucify him. And Christ cried, Forgive them.
Lord, how great is the multitude of thy sweetness, Oh Lord, how shall thou
drink of them in the flood of thy pleasure which delight in thee, and desire
thee: which powrest out so abundantly the oil of thy mercy, to ^utch as hate
thee.

AVGVSTINVS. BEhold the abundance of charity, and wonderful patience in our
Savior: He commaundes us to pray for our enemies, and seeks no revenge: why
then should that little creature the Ante, the Moth of the earth, and woorme:
that is to say, the heart of man, seek reuengement, and defer of to forgive.

Upon his head they put a crown of thorn,
For Dyadem. A Cross he bore of tree,
As king of Jews, they saluted him in scorn,
And twyxt two Thieves deputed him to dye,
Thus through his love, and our iniquity,
He suffered, thou sinnedst, (O man) most freeuolous,
Bear this in mind, and degrade not thy degree,
Though thou be wretched, thy price is precious.
MATTHEW. CAP. 27. ABout the ninth hour, Jesus cried out with a loud voice,
saying, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

AVGVSTINVS. SVrely these were the words, signifiyng what a careful and
troubled spirit he had for us, which are beset with troubles, and in them
expresses a certain tenderness of bitter passion and sorrow, proceeding out
of his so deep sithes, entire lamentation, and bitter plaint: which might
suffice to molefie unto compunction and remorse, a very iron breast might cleave
in sunder, a stony stomach might humble and bow the heart of wood toward
love, and finally moysten a very brazen heart toward contemplacion in this
case. Neither let man marueyle, if he do suffer tribulations: because he is so
comforted in Christ, his head and chief captain.

MATTHE. 27. AND when he had cried again with a loud voice, he gave up the
gohst.

JOHN. CAP. 29. AND bowing the head, he gave up the gohst.

AVGVSTINVS. THE Savior of the world bowed his head at his death, that he
might kiss his well-beloved Mother, and the Disciples then and there present.
And we do so oftentimes kiss him, as we are compunct and thoroughly stirred
up to the hartifull remembrance of his death.

ANCELMVS^ THE Heavens stood astonished at his death, the Earth was amazed:
What dooest thou then, oh Man? Neither is it a thing to be marueyled at: if the
shinyng Sun became perplexed, that thou should be also perplexed: if else
the Earth became sad and pensive, so thou should likewise be sad and
pensive: if the Stones were rent in sender, that thy heart be rent in sonder: if
those that stood by the Cross did weep, thou should weep as well as they.

HIERONIMVS. BEhold, when Christ dyed, every creature had compassion upon him:
but man alone has not had any compassion at al upon him, for whom in deed
Christ dyed.

His spirit commending to his fathers cure*
When that he cried, consummatum est,
Both Heaven and Earth, and liueles creature,
On him compassion took, from most to least,
O wretched man, why art not thou then pressed,
For love of thy Redeemer sweet Jesus,
To plant compassion in the faithful breast,
Suffering for him all harms injurious.
JOHN. CAP. 19. AND they took the body of Jesus, and wrapped it in linen
clothes, and spiced it with Balm and sweet odours.

BERNARDVS. MAry, the mother of Christ, was the example of sorrow and
compassion, unto all those that love Christ.

HVGO, de passione Christi. BEhold, oh man, what I suffer for thy sake: see the
pains and troubles that I endure for thee: see the nails whereunto I am
fastened, and while I endure for thee such outward sorrow: yet notwithstanding
my inward gronyng is more grievous, while I try thee and find thee an
unthankful friend unto me.

HEBREOS, CAP. 6. CRucifiyng again unto them selves the son of God.

Glosa Auctoris. THey crucify Christ, and are found reprochefull unto him,
which contemnyng his grace, do sleep in their sins.

Bernardus in persona anime deuote. I Knew not (says he) that Christ so
loved me, I ought not to be therefore reprochefull unto my self, which so
manifestly see that God was crucified and suffered death for me, which have
been so acceptable unto him, that he chose rather to dye for me, least that I
should otherwise perish.

Idem. OH precious Soul, not with gold nor silver redeemed, but with the blood
of the lamb of God: why wylt thou cast thy self so into perdition, seeing
Christ for thee shed his precious blood, have remorse over thine own soul,
seeking to please God.

Regard (oh man) this woeful disceuerance,
Behold Mary, behold her son Jesus,
If ruthe have room in thy remembrance,
With piteous heart, his passion to pursew,
Through which thou may thine innocence renew,
O elect vessel, know thy felicity,
Of thy misrule, think time it were to rue,
Confound not thy self through thine iniquity.
BERNARDVS. COuld not GOD repare his pretended work of grace in Man any other
way, but by this so great danger of his own life? Yes truly he might
otherwise have remedied this matter: but he had rather work this means,
though it were to the prejudice of his own person: because he would not find
any further hateful vice of ingratitude in man, but that he would make man a
debtor unto him of manifold love that he ought unto his Savior, and hereby
should encourage him to be thankful unto him, whom the felicity of his
creation had made less grateful: when as this our Creator for our sakes but
spoke the word, and al things was done: he commanded it should be, and they
were created.

ANCELMVS. THerefore God was able, being a man also, to satisfy for man: but
yet he was not bound to any man so to do. But man was, and is bounden to
satisfye the will of God, and could not, nor can not: therefore it was
needful that God should be a man: that is to say, because in that he was
Christ, he was able to satisfye as God, and was not bounden as man.

GREGORIVS. HE that made us of nothing, yea if it had pleased him, could have
redeemed us without his death, or passion.

Augustinus de ciuitate dei. THere could not have been any more fitter means
wrought to heal our misery, then that Christ should dye for us.

And though that God by power Omnipotent,
Might us redeemd without such difficulty,
There was no way more just nor congruent,
Then for to take on him our humanity,
Restoryng us thereby to higher dignity,
Man was in thrall, and could him not acquit,
To make amends, of power deuoyde was he,
But God him freed, by favor infinite.
BERNARDVS. WHen I shall ^eepely excogitate whatsoever I am of my self, and
whatsoever I can do of my self: is it not think I with my self, in respect
as a Star to be compared to the Sun: a sparcke of fire, to the heat of a
whole furnace: a drop of wat^r, in comparison of a flood: a little stone, in
respect of a hill: a grain of Corn, to a whole heap: and a handful, to all
the world? Therefore Lord, I have but two small powers in me, nay they are
very little that I have: that is to say, the one my body, the other my soul, or
rather I have but one only little power: that is to say, my good heart and
wyllyng mind, which thou have made and given me. And shall I not bestow it in
recompense of thy good will, who being such a one as thou art, have bestowed so
much for me, and has as it were prevented me at once with so great benefits,
who has in thy self comprised me wholly: or otherwise if I shall retain these
to my self, and not bestow them of thee, with what countenance, with what
eyes, and with what mind or conscience do I go unto the bowels of the mercy
of my God: and I do see that same most strong safeguard or defense of mine, is
altogether gored, whereby Israel is kept: and that his blood, not as drops,
but as flooddes from the five parts of his body, has been shed for the
price of my redemption. etc.

Trenorum primo. O All you that pass by the way, mark well and see, if there
be any sorrow like my sorrow.

BERNARDVS. BEhold, oh man, with the eye of thy mind, in what duetifull debt of
recompense, thou art bound unto the Lord suffering death for thee.

It shall behoue us to consider well,
That this was done for our salvation,
Our unthankfulness let us then expel,
And grateful be for our redemption,
Which to frequent in hearty devotion,
Above all things our mind for to remord,
As mighty medicine and fruitful confection,
Does linck one love with Christ our sovereign lord.
BERNARD. Snpee illud canticorum, Fasciculus Mirrhe. O How showed he mercy,
more then he ought to have done, how thankful and tried love did he express
toward us: what unlooked for woorthynesse bestowed he upon us, what admirable
sweetness, what invincible mildness and humility: in that he being the king
of glory, should give him self to the hands of his enemies, for the most
vylest person of the world to suffer death.

ANCELMVS. THE simple soul of man shall find in the death and passion of
Christ such food and repast, as shall make ye same most healthful and strong.

Idem. AWake thou, oh my soul, and more diligently behold with the eyes of thy
mind this man, as one borne before the time, and so conceived, as though no
man regarded him, and as one in the sight of the world, unworthy, deformed,
and leprous.

Trenorum primo. Hear me, I beseech you all you people, and behold my sorrow
and anguishe.

1. GALATHI. CAP. 6. GOD forbid that I should glory but in the death of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I am crucified
unto the world.

BERNARDVS. HE that loves thee from the heart Lord, is wounded for thy sake,
and is content to suffer langwors, and as it were a dead man from the works
of the world, is made strange unto the world: for thy love is strong as death,
and thy heavy wrath is as the pit of hell.

Wherefore sweet Jesus, our love and sovereign Lord,
Treasure of treasures, which may us most avail,
With ruthful repentance now we record,
Our great vnthanke, and blindness bestiall,
Of pity praying thy power imperial,
To multiply thy mercy so upon us,
That of thy merits with cares inspeciall,
Thankful to thee, we may be studious.
BERNARDVS. WHO is not carried perforce unto hope and confidence of obteyning
his desire, which gives due and attentive regard to the disposing of his body.
And vouchsafe thou, oh Lord, to receive and accept my spirit commended into
thy hands: and so strike my body and pearce my heart with the sword of
charity, and print therein the wounds of thy body, that after the course of
this life, I may freely commend into thy hands my soul, as banished and mere
strange unto the world.

AVGVSTINVS. I Beseech thee good Lord, so pearce and wound this my soul,
with the sharp point of thy accustomed fervent love, for whom thou have
vouchsafe to dye, that with the most mighty weapon of thy love, and with the
staff of thy entyre good will, she being chastized, may more deeply consider
of thy mighty virtue, and plentifully yield forth her flooddes of brynishe
tears both day and night.

Bernardus super verbo, Pater ignoscie. VOuchsafe, oh Lord and heavenly father,
to look down from out of thy Sanctuary, and from thy heavenly habitation:
behold the pledge which thy son our Lord GOD and high Priest Jesus Christ
offers for the sins of his brethren, and be favorable to the multitude of
our wickedness.

Idem. REmember now, oh Man, and although thou know thy self to be created
of nothing, yet notwithstanding thou have to acknowledge, that thou art not
redeemed for or by nothing. The Creator, Redeemer, and Savior, in six days
made all things, and three amongst all things: but in thirty year space:
that is to say, In his live time upon earth did he work thy salvation. Oh
what pains has he endured then for thy sake.

Ponishe not thy people, Lord God in thy greeuance,
Think why thy son Christ suffered his passion,
The crown of thorn, the cross, and Longeus lance
Vouchsafe accept our hearty gratulation,
Rewyng upon our sinful conversation,
Plant in our hearts such reverent regard,
Toward thy good graces, by due consideration,
In suffering for thy sake, may think nothing to hard.
FINIS Of the Contemplacion for FRIDAY.
THE AVCTORS Commemoration for SATVRSDAY.
Here think to eschew the hellishe pain,
For such as in vile sin remain.
The Translators Application.
The same good God now bids the Earth, of creatures in each kind,
To yield increase, as Cattle, VVoorme, and Beasts by him assnde.
Man then after his image made, him rule he gave and sway,
Creating woman a comfort, to him with mutual stay.
Amids these pleasures mortal man,
Shun hellysh pains all that thou can.
IOHM. CAP. 1. ALL things are by him made, and without him, is nothing made.

1. JOHN. CAP. 3. HEareby know we the love of God toward us, because he
has given his life for us.

JOHN. CAP. 13. NO man has greater love in him, then he that would give his
life for his friends.

BERNARDVS. OF truth sweet Jesus, thou have had greater love, which have
given thy life, even for thy persecuting enemies.

1. Corinthians. CAP. 6. FOR you are bought with a great price.

TITUS. CAP. 3. NOT according to the works of righteousness which we have
done, but according to his mercy has he saved us.

APOCALIPS. CAP. 11. THY wrath is come, and the time of the dead to be judged,
and to render a reward as well unto thy servants the prophets, as to thy holy
ones, to those that fear thy name small and great, and to destroy those which
have corrupted thy land.

PSALM. 104. THOU haste made all things in wisdom.

PSALM. 7. GOD is a just Judge, strong and pacient.

MATTHEW. CAP. 15. DEpart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the devil and his angels.

Sequitur. AND they shall go to everlasting pounishment.

JOB. CAP. 7. WHo so shall happen to descend unto hell, shall not ascend unto
the heavens.

AVCTOR Hereupon a certain Gentile, has this sentence.

If I had a hundred tongues, and as many mouths, and a voice as strong as
Iron, I could not comprehend to declare all the kinds of mischeefes, and for
the pounishmentes thereunto due, they are so many, that I might rather seem to
pass the names of them with scilence, then to resite them at full.

DEVTERONO. CAP. 32. I Will heap mischeefes upon their heads: that is to lay,
all kinds of torments: and I will fulfill the number of my arrows of
displeasure upon them.

ECCLESIASTI CAP. 29. Fire, Tempest, Famine, and Death, all these are ordained
for a revenge of the Lord against the ungodly.

PSALM. 11. IT reigns snares upon sinners: Fire, Brimstone, and Tempest.

Aucthour. FOr as the drops of rain are innumerable, so are the
pounishmentes due unto the wicked.

After the sentence of final damnation,
Then Lucifer with all the hellish feendes fell,
And with them sinners without redemption,
All on a heap shall headlong haste to hell,
Where in deadly dolor their dome is to dwell,
Whose perilous pains no speech can expreme,
In heat and cold, yea, and in cares cruel,
So shall they exceed, surpassing extreme.
VINCENTIVS. EVen as the eye of man has not seen, his care has not heard,
neither has it ascended into the heart of man, what God has prepared for them
that love him: So undoubtedly ought we acknowledge, that man's eye has never
seen, neither has the ear of any trauayler heard, neither has it ascended
into the heart of man how many evils there are, which God has prepared for them
which trespass against his divine Majesty.

Idem Vincencius. According to the saying of natural reason: Even as the king
has a fair Hall for his friends, a Kitchen and Stable for his servants and
Cattle, and a place of pounishment for guyltye persons: So God the king of
kings, has prepared Heaven for his friends and the elect, the world for time
seruers and transgressors, and hell it self for those that are dampened.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 5. THEY shall stand in great constancy against those which
have molested them, and which have defrauded them of their labors: They
seeing this, shall be troubled with horrible fear, and shall marvel at them in
the suddennes of an unhoped for health, thus saying amongst them selves,
repenting when it is to late, and mournyng for very anguish of soul, saying,
These are they whom we sometimes despised and disdained to bear rule (who
being out of our wits) esteemed their life to be madness, and their end
without honor. Behold how they are reckoned amongst the sons of God, and
their lot falls among the Saints: therefore have we erred from the way of
truth, and the light of righteousness has not shined unto us, and the son
of understanding has not appeared unto us: we have gone astray in the way of
iniquity and perdition, and have walked difficult ways, but the way of the
Lord have we not known. In our malignitie are we therefore consumed: such
things shall they say in hell which have sinned.

O heart of man most hard and incensible,
Which have no dread of this damnation:
Blind as brutall beast irracionable,
Why fallest thou thus to final confusion,
Have thou no pity of thy perdition,
Be warned in time to eschew Thalmightyes ire,
Pray, and repent thee with true contrition,
To flee the flame of that infernal fire.
PSALM. 72. SInners shall be converted unto hell: that is to say, shall feel
the torments thereof.

JOB. CAP. 23. THE Lord has mollefied my heart, and the Omnipotent has laid
troubles upon me.

PROSPER. LET the vexed mind first behold the punishment due for sin, before
she do offend: and let her set before her eyes the sorrows, in respect of
carnal concupiscences, which were wont to follow the sinner at the hard
heels, and there shall no sin delight her, neither shall any carnal
delectation move her to offend God.

Psalmista de impijs. 2. LET us break the bonds of them in sunder, and cast
from us their yoke.

Idem. LET his sorrow return upon his own head, and let his iniquity light
upon his own pate.

APOCAL. CAP. 2. HE that has ears to hear, let him hear what the spirit
says to the congregations.

MATTHEW. CAP. 22. Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into the uttermost
darkness.

ESAI. CAP. 24. THey shall be geathered together, as in a congregation of one
solemn feast, and shall be shut in perpetual prison.

APOCALIPS. CAP. 12. THey shall be tormented night and day for ever and ever: Oh
how void of perceuerance and blind, are the hearts of sinners, not
considering these things: for sinners shall there say, What has our pride
profited us, or what has our boasting in our wealth brought unto us. They are
all vanished as a shadow, and we are consumed in our own malignitie.

Hell is a place most vile and venemus,
A dongeon darcke for creaturs dampnate:
Perpetual prison for feendes furius,
To whom then sinners shall be associate,
Where pain shall persevere early and late,
With eye of reason now who this does vewe,
Would live in Gods fear, and not be ingrate,
But seek all good means this mischief to eschew
August. 19. de ciuitate dei. ORder is a certain disposition, which
distributeth equality and diuesity unto every thing, equal or unequal.

Ibidem, libro. 5. GOD has set nothing in the world without order, therefore
he appoynteth a convenient place for every thing, according to the measure
thereof: but that which is tedious or burdensome to the body, is delectable,
and embraced in the soul, and in reasonable creatures.

August. 11. de ciuitate dei. THE body is even so carried about with
tediousness, as the soul is with delectation.

HIERONIMVS. THere is nothing hard for them that love, there is no hard or
difficult matter in love. Let us then love Christ, and every thing shall seem
easy unto us, which otherwyze is hard to be atcheeued.

GREGORIVS. THere is nothing more precious unto God then the virtue of love:
and nothing more desirous unto the devil, then the extinguishing of love.

OALATH. CAP. 6. HE that sows in the flesh, shall reap the corruption of the
flesh.

ROMANS. CAP. 8. FOR they that live after the flesh, do savor of those things
which are of the flesh: that is to say, they esteem carnal things to be
better then spiritual things.

All Saints are enthronized in the Heavens hye,
Because of their divine hearty affection.
To heaven more then earth, does soul more the^ body
As their chief comfort and consolation,
And as accords with their good condition,
Because they used such divine temperance,
With Palm of victory they triumph in renoune,
With God and his angels in perpetual plesance.
Sanctus Bonauentura. AS the mercy of God bears her self toward good and
bad, so does his justice likewise bear her self toward the reprobate and
ungodly. Therefore as they are the chosen children of heavenly heritage, which
in their love have preferred heavenly things before earthly things: so are the
reprobate deputed for hell, because they have preferred earthly things before
heavenly things, and things carnal, before things spiritual.

August. 13. lib. confess. MY love is my labor, therewith am I carried whether
so ever I am carried.

GREGORIVS in moribus. THat same burning flame reuengeable, has with it a
certain fiery consuming of vices, but has no light at all: there the fire
casts no light to comfort the tormented fowls: and yet notwithstanding, it
gives light to an other purpose, to the end it might more and more torment the
dampened souls: for the followers thereof are plainly to be perceived
therewith seen in the torment, by means of whose affection they have
trespassed.

IEREMI. CAP. 9. YOU shall serve strange gods, which shall not suffer you to
take any rest night nor day.

SAPIENCE. CAP 4. AND there shall be after these things, seen those that shall
slide away without ^onor, and live in reproaches amongst the ^ead for ever, and
they shall be laid waste, even ^^to the very last man.

GREGORIVS in moribus. THE pounishment is by the ordinance of God
distinguished, according to the mea^^re of the fault committed.

^el is a hole of horrible darkness,
Where light is languorus and nothing delectable,
^Vhich sorrowful sight causes cares to increase,
From feendish figures foul and terrible,
^Vhose tragedy to tell, no tongue may be able,
So restles is the rage thereof most unquiet,
^Vith al mischief abounding, wretched and miserable*
In soul and body, their pains are so complete.
ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 13. THERE is most wicked poverty in the mouth of the
ungodly.

JOB. CAP. 2. HE shall cast up again the wealth and riches that he has
swalowed up and devoured.

PSALM. 99. THey shall leave their riches for strangers to posses.

APOCALIPS. CAP. 18. WIthin one hour are they bereaved of such substance.

PROVERBES. CAP. 11. THeir riches shall not avail the wicked in the day of
vengeance: he that trusts in them shall have a fall.

JOB. CAP. 2. ALL sorrow violently russheth in there upon him.

SENECA. THere is no other man more acceptable unto GOD, then he that
contempneth worldly riches.

BOECIVS. de consolatum OH foolish blessedness happening unto man by brittle
wealth, which when he has gotten he then becomes secure and careless
therein.

JOB. CAP. 2. AND there shall a fire consume them, which shall not cast any
light.

Isidorus de summo bono. THE fire of hell shall both give light unto the
augmentation of the pain for the wretched souls, to the end they may see that
shall be to their sorrow, and also shall not give light to their comfort, because
they shall not see that may be to there joy.

ESAI. CAP. 9. THE people shall be as the food of fire.

Gregorios in Dialogo. THE wicked have death in hell that shall never dye, want
without want, end without end (because death there) is immortal penury never
failing, and the end of their pains infinite.

PSALM. 28. EVilles have compassed me round about, whereof I am not able to
resite the number.

In hell of flaming fire is horrible heat,
Which fire without fail, or distance shall endure,
Grievously tormenting with fury to freate,
Both body and soul in pain passing measure:
O living death, everlasting in languor,
O deadly life of endless mortality,
Sowssed in sadness and sorrow evermore,
Should not man than restrain from all peruersitie?
DEVTERONO. CAP. 28. GOD shall strike thee with need, or penury, sickness,
and cold, with heat and drought, with corrupt air, and with rust of the
earth.

ESAI. CAP. 33. WHich of you shall be able to dwell where the devouring fire has
his force.

PSALM. 94. BUT yet shall thou consider before thine eyes, and shall see the
reward that shall be given sinners: I will remember and bear in mind these
things, and my spirit waxes faint therefore.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 1. MY son, remember thy end, and thou shall not sin for
ever.

PSALM. 90. BEcause a thousand years are before thine eyes as yesterday,
which is passed.

IEREMI. CAP. 17. THou shall be cast out also from the heritage that I gave
thee, and I will subdue thee under the heavy bondage of thine enemies, in a
land that ye know not: for ye have ministered fire to mine indignation which
shall burn evermore.

PROSPERVS. IN this present life, temporal pleasures are counted sweet, and
troubles are coumpted bitter: but who is he that despises not the
voluptuousness of this world, thirsting or longing after the felicity of the
life everlasting: or who would not willingly drink the cup of tribulation for
Christ in this world, fearing the euerduring torment of the fire in hell.

Robertus in quali. IF it be a tedious thing for the healthful man to lie
waltering in his bed all day and all night long, and in the softness thereof
to wallowe him self at will: so unto a young dissolute person, it happens
likewise a thing ircksome to keep company long time with fair Women. These
and such other like, which were wont to be done for sport and pleasure, do
with continual use thereof bring lothsomenes. Alack therefore, why do such
sinners slumber in sin, why rather do they not awake, and why do they not
consider before, that horrible torments in hell are prepared for them which
shall endure a thousand thousand years after, yea for everlasting.

Man in thy mind make a resemblance,
Of furious fire and pains infernal,
Which are enduring without distance,
Forget not the torments thereof eternal:
But deeply print them in thy memorial,
So shall thou eschew all snares of sin,
And inconvenience by vice prejudicial,
Which is more grievous then man may esteem.
HIERONIMVS ad Palma. AND think we then brethren, that the power of God have
foreshewed us these things in sport? or that the Apostl^s have told us of
these things in a laughing m^ode? that the iudg^ment of the divine Majesty is
newly begun and determined without discretion? But these are no sporting
plays, when pains do pass hereupon, if they have suffered pounishment in
midst of their joy, they are yet notwithstanding believed of us to have spoken
these things but in jest, and not in earnest.

ESAIAS. SAra was sawen in pieces, Danyel was thrown amongst the Lions, Paul
was beheaded with the sword, Peter was hanged upon the Cross, after the same
manner that Christ was: and all this tends to that end, that with their
doctrine and good life, they might revoke and withdraw us from our sins.

AVCTOR. WHerefore (says the said Robart) Oh wicked, oh perverse, oh
deceitful, and oh deuelishe cogitation of them, which do esteem and suppose
that there is no hell at all. Oh thou hard and stony molded soul, oh thou
bewitched, oh thou vicious soul: what dooest thou? or whyther wandrest thou?
why dooest thou make such haste to hell wards, whereas thou shall live most
miserable for ever. Now therefore return thou unto the Lord thy God which shall
deliver thee* and grant thee both grace and glory in Heaven.

Think we the Prophets spent their time in sport,
Or the Apostles showing infernal pain,
The people from their sins for to exhort,
Theit wayghty words we should not take in vain:
Which were content of tyrants to be slain,
To obtain Heaven, and hellish pain eschew
Their faith in Christ, so firm was and certain,
By their examples let us our life renew.
ISIDORVS. PO^der well in thy mind, what so ever sorrows or vexations of
torments are ordained for sinners, what so ever pounishmentes of this world, or
else whatsoever bitter gripes of sorrows assail thee: if thou comparest such
like altogether unto the state of hell, all that thou suffer shall seem
light and easy unto thee.

BERNARDVS. Fear to break the appointed feasts, and the solemn feasts of
the soul from sin, and refrain the wicked labors of thy hands: but these
things are thought easy to be done or accomplished, by him that has mind
upon the everlasting fire in hell.

PSALM. 89. WHAT man is he that lives, and shall not taste death, or shall
save his soul from the neathermost hell.

CIRHSOSTOMVS. Does not all the time of this our life* (wherein we seem to
take our pleasures) manifestly appear a mainteyner of pleasure and lust, as
the sleep of one only night, in respect of the felicity in the life eternal.

ANCELMVS. ALL the good things, or evil things which we enjoy in this world,
are entermixed with their contraries, neither have they any fyrme or certain
degree of their perfection, but either may they be increased or diminished:
either else may they be enjoyed or had of us somewhat more or less, as it is
evident in every virtue and vice, and as well in eury good or evil part of the
body, as in every good or evil cogitation or affect of the soul. Neither is
there joy found here without fear, nor sorrow or sadness with consolation:
neither perfect health without diseases, or some hurtful harm: neither yet
valiant courage of body and mind, without debilitie or feeblenes of nature. But
in heaven are all good things, not mixed with contrariety, and those are
certain to trust unto with most perfect consolation: in hell likewise are all
evil things quite contrary.

GREGORIVS CErtaynely there is one only fire of torment in hell, which we
ought to believe is ordained for the wicked, but all shall not be tormented
alike in one manner: for every one, according as the quality of his trespasses
has required, shall there feel the smart of the pounishment due for the same.

And in this torment which has no temperance,
Shall be no manner of relaxation,
Neither shall prevail any prayer of instance,
In any wise to empayre the pains or passion:
Yet though this pain pass all estimation,
The fury thereof ordained by Gods will,
As every sinner deserved hy transgression,
Shall them molest, destroy, consume, and spill.
AVGVSTINVS. THE world passes away, and the concupiscence thereof: oh man,
what would thou have. Whether had thou lever to love temporal things,
and so slide away with time transitory, or love Christ, and with him live for
ever.

Idem. THis world is more dangerous when she flattereth us, then when she
loureth upon us. There can be no greater madness then for momentany pleasures to
loose eternal joys, and to euthrall thy soul unto perpetual torment. Oh how
happy is that man that has not walked after the glory of this world, and the
dissembling madness of the same.

1. Corinthians. CAP. 1. THE wisdom of this world, is counted meare foolishness
before God.

EZECIEL. CAP. 28. IN the multitude of thy worldly affares, when thou art
occupied, the very inward parts of the body are replete with iniquity.

AVGVSTINVS. THE poison against love and charity most pernicious, is the lust
after temporal pleasures.

BERNARDVS. OH my soul, what fear shall then take hold of thee when all these
things have forsaken thee, whose presence are so pleasant unto thee, so
acceptable in sight, and so familier to dwell together. Altogether fearful
and trembling, thou alone shall enter into a strange country, when as those
most vglye and fearful monsters all upon an heap shall run upon thee.

GREGORIVS. THose eyes which the offense has shut up and made to wincke at,
the same shall the due pounishment for such offense, open and make to see
plainly.

JOB. CAP. 17. IF I shall endure this vexation, hell it self is my house
ordained, and in the darcknesse have I made my bed: I have said unto
corruption, thou art my father, and my mother: and to the woormes, thou art my
sister. Where is then my recovery and help become: all that I have in
possession, shall go down into the deep pit of hell. Therefore give me leave
to depart, that I may bewail my sorrow, before I shall go hence, and not
return unto the dark land covered with the heat of death: the land of
misery and darkness, whereas is the shadow of death, and no order of life,
to say everlasting horror inhabiting there.

Oh amazed wit, O soul congeled in sin,
Frozzen through affection of foolish felicity,
Whereunto retchles riot does at no time linne,
To offend thy Creator, thou art so fool hardy:
Thy sight is blinded so with sensuality,
That the love of God causes no correction,
Nor yet of heavenly joy no cupidity,
May make thee leave sin, for dread of damnation.
INNOCENTIVS. HE that fears only for a small time to put his finger in the
fire, why rather fears he not both in soul and body to be tormented. Oh how
great is this madness of man for these frail and transitory things, to suffer
perpetual pounishment both in soul and body.

Chrisostomus dereparacione lapsi. DEclare thou how many, and what ages have
been, or are spent in riot and carn i^ pleasures: what times and seasons passed
in vain delights, which are to be compared unto the everlasting pains of
hell. If thee list, bestow thou an hundred years in such delectacions, yea
add there unto an hundred years more, or rather ten hundred years more, what
shall this or that be in respect of the life everlasting.

EPHESI. CAP. 5. AWake thou that sleep, and rise up from the dead, and
Christ shall lighten thy steps.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 29. FOR all things are had, by seeking for them in their due
time.

DEVTERONO. CAP. 4. Keep thee therefore within thy bonds, and establish thy
soul: stand to thy tackling with a good courage, and thou shall see the help
of God upon thee.

AVGVSTINVS. HE that dies, and does not repent him of his sins ear he
depart out of this life, dies not at all, but lives in eternal torment.

PSALM. 77. MY Soul is always before me.

AVGVSTINVS. HE shall give victory to him that contendeth for victory, who
has emboldned the wrastler.

DEVTERONO. CAP. 32. Would God they once in their days would be wise, and
have understanding, yt they might provide for the last day.

LVKE. CAP. 6. WOe be unto you rich men, which have all your consolation in
your riches here upon earth.

MATTHE. 5. BLessed are they which do mourn after godliness in this life,
because they shall be comforted.

Idem CAP. 16. WHat shall it prevail man if he gain unto him self all the
world, and loose his own soul.

Awake out of thy dream, and speedely addres,
Thee to beware in time, ear thou feel woe,
Though blinded thou live here with thy riches,
Yet think thou shall this life and them forgo*
Where in the end if thou this race run so,
That sin and vice by thee may be subdued,
Thou shall no doubt vanquishe each feendishe so,
And with eternal blessing be endued.
BERNARDVS. Fools do esteem of greatest things, least in value to be cared
for, and have greatest regard unto very small things. They take more care how
to keep and cherishe their diseased corrupt body, then how to foster and
cherish the precious soul. Yea, they are more careful how to batten and
^eede the flesh with fatness and good likyng: but the kirnell of the soul, or
the heart of the spiritual man, they do oftentimes destroy.

Idem super Cantica THey surely that are not diligent in their vocations (as
men ought to be) are partakers of the devils them selves in their trauayles.

HIERONIMVS. THere can be no labor deemed tedious: neither any time seem long
unto us, wherein the everlasting glory is obtained.

AVGVSTINVS. NO doubt, sinners do daily hear the scriptures, promising as
well unto those that love God, the most blessed graces of his good providence:
and contrariwyse they hear the scriptures, which do threaten unto such as
care not for GOD, the plagues and pounishmentes by him for them ordained. And
yet give they no regard thereunto, neither wyllingly do they hear God thus
speaking unto them, when he gently entreats them, nor when he severely
threatens them, but rather do resist him with their evil and wicked dooinges.

PSALM. 49. THE wise man also, as well as the fool, shall go to the grave.

LEOPOLDVS. MEN do more wyllingly toil them selves for the desire they have
unto pleasure, then for the love that they bear to virtue. Most men are
naturally given to be fearful and timerus in pains taking in sustayning
troubles, poverty, and other dangers, wherewith humane kind was wont to be
molested. But if they were wise in deed, and understood the excessive
calamities ordeyne^ for sinners without end, they would then be far more
fearful to offend in this life.

JOB. CAP. 6. THey that fear a frost upon them, shall have a snow come to
them.

Sythen we see in sickness corporal,
Health to recover, and death for to decline.
Men will absteyne from lusts sensual,
And their desires submit to medecin:
All for this frail flesh that runs to ruin,
How much more should each man with busy cure,
Seek for the souls health, repentyng in time,
VVherby he may obtain such joys as shalendure.
1. THESSALO. CAP. 5. WHen they shall say, Peace and security is with us, then
by and by shall a sudden destruction come upon them, as the pange of a woman
trauayling with child, and they shall not escape away.

ECGLESIASTI. CAP. 5. MAke thou no tarying to turn unto the Lord, and prolong
not of from day to day: for sodaynely shall his wrath come, and in time of
revenge he shall destroy thee.

ESAI. CAP. 18. FOr you have said, We have made a league with death, and with
hell we have made a covenant.

GALATH. CAP. 6. BE you not deceived in your own dooinges, God is not mocked
withal: what thing so ever a man shall sow, the same shall he also reap
again.

IEREMI. CAP. 8. THey have rather chosen death then lyfe^

PSALM. 69. THey have drawn near, even unto the gates of death.

Idem. THere is a most vile death ordained for sinners.

ECCLESIASTI. 7. REmember to dye, because death will not tarry long.

BERNARDVS. I Tremble and quake for fear of the jaws of the infernal beast,
yea tyl^ I be delivered from the body of hell, from the roaring feendes
prepared to their meat. Alack, oh my mother, why have thou conceived me the
child of sorrow, the child of bitter bale, indignation, and eu^rlasting
lamentation? Why was I l^lled in thy lap? why was I fostered with thy dugges:
I was borne the meat for woormes, and food of the fire.

JACOB. CAP. 4. YOur laughter shall turn into mournyng and your joy into
sorrow.

APOCAL. CAP. 18. SO much as he has vaunted and rejoiced him self in his
riches: so much torment and mournyng let him have administered unto him.

DEVTERONO. CAP. 25. THere shall be a certain prescribed rate of pounishment,
according to the measure of the offense that every man has done.

BERNARDVS. BReethren, let us be enflamed to repentance, let us examine our
consciences, and let us be encouraged to take revenge of our selus, by
repentance to ye end we may be able to escape ye horrible judgment of y^
living God.

Slombring in sin some dream security,
Without fear or forecast of infernal afliction,
Neglecting repentance in this life transitory,
That they fear nothing the due correction,
Ordained for sin by divine direction,
As those that are not careful harms to eschew.
Such feel the sentence of all malediction,
When repentance come to late their sorrows to rescewe.
IEREMI. CAP. 3. WHY dooest thou cry out so upon the contrition of thy soul:
thy sorrow is incurable, by reason of the multitude of thine iniquities, and
because of thy grievous sins have I done this, says the Lord.

HIERONIMVS. THE moderacion of Gods displeasure, the duty of godliness,
seeks only for our return, and desires that we may be sa^ed by this long
forbearance of his goodness: If we will not be converted, if we be stiff^
necked, and if we continewe still in our syns unlawfully, even till our death.
Let us trust unto it, God will not show mercy unto those that continually
persevere in their sins.

BERNARDVS. I Tremble to think upon the gnawyng woorme, and the death that
never dies. I shiuer and quake every joint of me, to fall into the hands of
that death that endures, and of that l^fe that dies.

GREGORIVS. THE wicked shall dye the death everlasting.

PROSPER. IF at that instant, when a man purposes to sin, he would with
diligent mind consider what pounishment claymeth to be done toward those that
are taken in trappe for their mischeefts: what torment should vex the convict
souls, what fear would shake their members and joints in every part, and what
wanne and pale color would dumpe their hauty countenances: and finally, how
execrable reproach and ignominy it self the sentence denounced unto such
sinners would duly render I know not whether he would take any such delight,
or frame him self unto such vices and wickedness yea or no.

MATTHEW. CAP. 21. Behold, the Bridegroom comes, and they that were prepared
to wait upon the Bridegroom, went in with him unto the wedding.

Vnde Gregorius. IF thou, oh wicked man were wise and did understand what
joy this were, thou would oftentimes consider hereupon, and speedely run to
repentance: neither would thou lose or forgo the acceptable time, and the
days of thy salvation, through thy banqueting, daily riot, and idleness,
without profiting body or soul.

IEREMI. CAP. 9. WHO shall give water unto my head, and a fountain of tears
unto my eyes, that I may weep night and day, when I behold the children of the
people committed to my charge.

IVDITH. CAP. 8. LET us crave his pardon with tears.

AVGVSTINVS. THE justice of the Omnipotent having foreknowledge of things to
come, let ordeyne to be made the fire of hell, even from the first creation of
the world: He which is of his own merciful goodness contrary to this fire,
who is enflamed with love of the heavenly God, he is the fire which is never
extinguished, neither is he with man's love consumed, nor with wood noryshed.

BERNARDVS. WHat is more horrible to think upon, then death: what is more
fearful* then judgment: what more intolerable, then the pai^es of hell fire:
what more joyful, then the glory of Heaven. etc.

With this foresaid action I read right ernestfull,
Repentantly into thy heart imprint,
Lhy state with tears bemone, as most woeful.
With contrite heart, do now thy sins lament,
And wheretofore evil custom by consent,
Of selfewyll, did cause wickedness abound,
Let henceforth grace amend thy life present,
That life to come with joys may thee redound.
FINIS Of the Contemplacion for SATVRSDAY.
THE AVCTORS Commemoration for SUNDAY.
Remember here the joys of Heaven,
The principal blisfull state of seven.
The Translators Application.
Thalmighty woorkeman ended now, hi^ work which he did frame*
Resting from work he blessed this day, and sanctified the same.
As one that greatly did rejoice, to see all things so well,
With glory infinite he restes, where Saints and Angels dwell.
This Sabbothes rest to keeps let us.
To enjoy Heavens joys most precious.
AVGVSTINVS. MAN does not comprehend in faith or believe, what God has
prepared for them that love him: neither is it a thing that can be hoped
sufficient, nor desired as it ought to be, yet may it be obtained: but it can
be sufficiently esteemed, valued, or deemed, according to the due value thereof.

PSALM. 132. HOW dearly beloved thy tabernacles of virtues are: Oh Lord my
soul has desiered to know within thy Courts, and yet has it failed thereof.

MATTHEW. CAP. 25. ENter tho^ into the joy of thy Lord.

AUGUSTINE. EVery man is made blessed in the country of the heavenly kingdom,
as well within doors, as without: within, that is to say, in the contemplac^on
of the divinity of the Creator: without, to say, in the incarnation and
beholding in Heaven his Savior.

PSALM. 84. BLessed are they which dwell in thy house, oh Lord, they shall
praise thee world without end.

PSALM 49. THere are glorius sayings of thee, oh thou City of God.

Idem. O Lord, I have loved the beauty of thy house, and the place of thy
habitation.

THOBIA. CAP. 13. BLessed shall I be, if the rest of my seed might hereafter
see the bright clearenesse of the City Jerusalem. The gates of Jerusalem are
builded of the Saphir and Smaragd stone, and of diverse precious stones: yea, of
precious stones is the compass of the walls thereof.

APOCALIPS. CAP. 21. THe heavenly Jerusalem has the walls thereof in
measure, an hundred and four and forty cubits, after the measure of man,
which is of the angel that measured the same, having twelve foundacions: that
is to say, all beautified with each kind of most precious stones. And the
first fundacion was of Jasper stone: the second, of Sapphire: the third, of
Calcedony: the fourth, of Emerald: the fifth, of Sardonix: the sixth, of
Sardius: the seventh, of Crysolity: the eight, of Berill: the ninth, of Topas:
the tenth, of Crysophrasus: the eleventh, of Iacinth: and the twelfth and last
fundacion, of an Amethist.

Sequitur. AND the streets of the City resembled a golden world, shining
clearly as bright as glass. And the Temple thereof, did I not see: for the
Lord God, even the Almighty, he is the Temple thereof, and the Lamb. And the
City neither wanted Sun nor Moon to give light therein: for the beauty of
the living God has illuminated the same, and the light thereof is the Lamb.
And the gates thereof are not shutt by day time: for there shall no night be
seen there. And thither shall they bring glory and honor out of the Nations.
There shall nothing that is de^owled enter in thereat, neither any thing that
woorcketh abomination, or makes leasings: but such as are written in the book
of the life of the Lamb.

Augusti* in confessi, THere is a joy that is not given unto the wicked ones,
but unto those thankful ones which honor thee, whose joy thou thy self art.

There is perfection and flower of al fairenes,
Where simplest stuff is gold and precious stone,
There is final felicity evermore faultles,
Whose pleasures there surpass all mention:
There Christ our king for the salvation,
Of those that live in his fear and him love,
Caelestiall joys preparde has many a one,
For ay to dure, in glorious Heaven above.
ESAI. CAP. 32. MY people shall rest them in the Tabernacle of faithfulness, in
the beautiful court of peace.

ESAI. CAP. 9. AND there shall be none end of peace.

August. de ciuitate dei. OH heavenly house of Jerusalem, which art full of
light: unto thee breaths my peregrination, that he might possess me in thee,
which has made both thee and me.

AVGVSTINVS. Eternal blessedness consists in two points: to say, in the
necessary absence of all evil, and in the necessary presence of al good. If
we ask what good, there is at all to be found: otherwise it may not be
answered, but what so ever good thing may be, is there to be found, and what so
ever evil there is, or may be in any place, is not at al to be found there.

PSALM. 84. ONE day in thy Courts, is better then a thousand.

Idem. A Thousand years, are in thy sight but as one day.

GREGORIVS. FOR who would love that which he knows not: whereupon the
Psalmist admonishes us, saying, Taste, and see how sweet the Lord is. And if
he manifestly declare his sweetenes, yet you know him not, because you have
not tasted of him.

AUGUSTINE. SVch is the beauty of Justice, so much is the pleasauntnes of
eternal light: that although we had but one day, and no longer limited us to
tarry there, even for this cause only (if there were none other) might
in-numerable years of this life be despised, which are passed full of
delights in the abundance of temporal wealth, and that but of right and with
just cause.

CHRISOSTOMVS. PRosperity, the Stepdame of virtues from the first beginning of
the world, has been proffering unto her guestes sweet things to drink: that
when men have been drunk with the dregs of her wine, she might entermingle
them, her deadly poison therewith.

Who would be careful, with devout diligence,
Digestly to think on the joys celestial,
Might well discern by true intelligence,
That worldly pleasure is of price but small:
Which as deceitful, would naught esteem at all,
When he does behold with great security,
That precious Palace and place imperial,
Ordained for Christ's elect eternally.
SAPIENCE. CAP 3. Unhappy and void is the hope of them, their labors are
without fruit: but glorious is the fruits of the labors of the good men.

AUGUSTINE. WHat madness of souls is that to lose life, and take death to get
wealth, and lose heaven.

CHRYSOSTOM. IT is better to be compared unto the brute Cattle, then
continually to be borne into this world: For naturally to be boyde of reason,
is a thing intolerable, but for a man that should be adorned with reason, to
live without reason, is and may be well counted a trespassing life.

PSALM. 49. MAN being in honor, has none understanding, but is compared unto
the brute beast^s: yea, unto the unwise, and is made like unto them. etc.

GREGORIVS. THE carnal delectation darkeneth and obscureth so that mind which
she does infect, that she can not see the clearenesse of the true light, but
thereupon is more deuilishly delighted, so as thencefoorth she suffers fiery
flame, even ascending upward.

HIERONIMVS. WE all are given to be wary in least matters, and negligent in
greatest things.

Isidorus de summo bono. BEcause thou would be such one, that no earthly
thing delights thee at all: believe me thou shall see even at the same moment
of time, that thing which thou desire.

GREGORIVS. IF we would consider what and how great benefits these be which
are promised us in the heavens, we should think in our minds that all things
are vile and base which we enjoy upon earth: for the earthy substance being
compared unto the heavenly felicity, is a burden heavy for us to bear, and
not a treasure to enjoy. The temporal life, being compared unto the life
eternal, is rather to be called death then life: for that same daily diseaze
of corrupt nature, what other thing else is it, then a certain proloxitie, or
circumstaunce of death.

JOHN. CAP. 6, THere shall no man take away your joy from you.

BERNARDVS. OH thou house of God, the City of the great king: what woonderful
joys are there in thee: how much, and what great gladness, how blessed are
thy inhabitants.

When men to things temporal do bear affection,
They least esteem of euerduring bliss,
Whereupon in nature ryseth such corruption,
That often who on earth most prosperous is:
Of the heavenly beautitude most of all mis,
Their carnal lust a bondage does become,
To them selves, who then would consider of this,
For transitory pleasure should eternal pains shone.
PSALM. 101. I Will sing of mercy and truth unto thee, oh Lord.

PSALM. ^8. FOR what is there for me in heaven, and what would I have of thee
upon earth: I am delighted in the way of thy testimonies, as in all my riches:
my heart has refused to be comforted in worldly things.

Sequitur. I Have been mindful of my God, and I am comforted.

PSALM. 76. THY consolacious, oh Lord, have made my soul glad.

BERNARDVS. FOR unto the image and similitude o^ God, is eu^ry reasonable soul
made. It may be better exercised, then all other creatures: but in very deed
it can not be satisfied at all.

PSALM. 34. I Shall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear.

AVGVSTINVS. THE soul that is entrenched with the flowers of virtues, and with
the deawe of heavenly grace, is called the Paradise of the Lord.

GREGORIVS. THE v^permost trenche possesses the soul, when she is afflitted
with the desire of the heavenly kingdom, even with salt tears: but the
neathermost trenche does she enjoy when she thoroughly fears, by her sorrow
and tears, the torments of the pit of hell.

Secundus Bonauentura. FOR our natural bodies are compa^t of four Elements,
whereupon with four fould qualities shall they be remunerate: for the Earthy
Elament shall be turned to eternal immortality: the Watery Elament, into al
manner of inability in suffering: the Ayrie Elament, into a special agillity
or swiftnes: and the Fyry Elament, into most bright clearenes. And then shall
these shine as the Sun, and as the sparckes out of a flaming Furnace, shall
they disperse them selves abroad, because the Lord shall wipe away all sorrow
from their eyes.

AUGUSTINE. WHere so ever the spirit desires to be then, there altogether
shall the body be also. etc.

We shall in the heavens, of God have inspection,
In soul and body endowred with dignity,
Yea and in this bodyly shape shall we have cognition,
Each one of other, before Gods great majesty:
When as thus glorified in soul and eke in body,
Such joys shall we taste, and endless consolation,
That in the midst, our savior triumphing with victory
We shall shine seven times more dearer then the son.
VINCENCIVS. AND there is a fruition of bliss, which shall endure for ever,
and that in diverse manner: not upon the behalf of every particular soul which
shall enjoy the same, but on the behalf of such as shall posses them souls:
for the bles^ed and elect of God, how much the more perfectly they are
enobled with the light of glory, and by the same il^ustration or nobleness,
the more conformable made: So much the more sharp contemplacion have they of
the divine essence, and in the same contemplacion the more are they delighted.

1. Corinthians. CAP. 15. THere is one light of the Sun, an other light of the
Moon, and an other light of the Stars: but every Star differs in
hrightnesse each from other, and so shall the resurrection of the dead differ
one soul from an other.

AVGVSTINVS. NO inferior, shall envy his superior, even as now, no other angel
inferior, do not envy their superior in heaven: for some one shall have a
larger gift of blessing, and some other a less. So as notwithstanding what so
ever gift, either of them have in the blisfull state of heavenly joy, he shall
hold him self content therewith, and shall not at any time wyshe or desire for
more. etc.

GREGORIVS. LEt therefore the greatness of the rewards* laid up for thee in
heaven, encourage t^y ^oule: but let not the force of the conflict in Christ's
faith terrify thee: for no one man shall be c^owned with the ga^l^nd of
victory, but he that has rightfully ^ought it out to the uttermost.

BERNARDVS. THat is, y^ alone true, and only joy which is not conceived of the
Creature, but of the Creator, which when a man possesses, there is no man
shall take the same away ^ro^ him. Whereunto, if we compare all other
sweetness, the same may be co^mpted to a mindful person: al sweetenes a
sorr^we, every bit^er thing sweet every comely thing filthy: and fina^ly,
whatsoever other may seem to delight us, the same in deed is but grievous and
intolerable.

PAVLVS. I Desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

ORIGIN. ALL my comforters seem unto me ^e^ious and burdensome: They vex^ me,
but comfort me not: I seek for my Creator, and it is grief to me to behold
every Creature.

PSALM. 56. THis is my rest, for ever and ever will I dwell here, because I
have chosen the same.

Nathles in respect of that eternal glory,
All worldly joy is but fond ianglyng,
And beauty brave is but deformity,
Sweet things are sour, mirth, very mournyng,
Or what so ever other delectable thing,
All is re^uted but pain in comparison,
And worldly wealth is very vomentyng,
In respect of heavenly store of graces many one.
AVGVSTINVS. COnsider well, thou faithful soul, what inestimab^e honor it
shall be for thee to be crowned of the chief King of Kings with his own
hands, and to be adurned with the Dyadem of eternal glory, not in the
dounghill of this world, but in the Palace of Heaven, in the sight of
innumerable Ang^ls, and of all the Sainc^es, in your stool of immortality, and
with splendant royal ornaments to be invested.

Vnde Sapi. CAP. 5. LTT them receive the kingdom of honor, and the Dyadem of
dignity, even at the hands of the Lord.

AVGVSTINVS. OH thou my soul, if it be so that we must needs suffer torments
every day: yea, to suffer the very horrible hell it self a long time, so that
we might afterward see Christ our savior in his glory, and with his saints
evermore accompanied: should we not only suffer all sorrow and pain, to be
made partakers of such glory and good graces?

VINCENCIVS. Beloved brethren, in the perplexity of this worldly pilgrimage, we
suffering the sorrows of our exile, as it were with want of all goodness are
defiled, and suffer the disposing of all incombrances, the snares of sins
laid for us in every place, fearing the subtel deceiptes of our enemies: but
not sufficient, watchfully, or diligently preventing them as we ought,
forbearing detrimentes and vexations, and not able to shake from us calamities,
swelling in vices, inclined to vanity in stead of verity, enduring exile for
our country, taste poverty in stead of abundance, vile things for want of
glorious things: and do so love this world with a miserable blindness, or
rather foolish madness, that we are utterly ignorant of that same glory of the
holy ones of God: whereunto lifting the face of our mind and inward man, we then
behold the joys of eternal life, that we might some what surely savor in our
hearts the sweetness thereof.

AUGUST. OH that I knew what I my self am, and what thou art, oh Lord. Oh if
a man knew what him self were, and what GOD were, he would suffer a thousand
deaths if it were. etc.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 3. Behold the perpetual goodness of the reward for such as
fear God.

ECCLESIASTI. vltimo. BEhold with your eies^ forasmuch as I have labored a
little, and I have found great rest unto my self: Let your heart rejoice in his
mercy. Be doing what you can before the time, and he shall give you your
reward in due time.

When humane soul her self so does demene,
That she loves death, and leaves life spiritual,
Both God she then forgets quite and clean,
Virtue dispisde, she flows in sins sensual,
Contemning Christ, obayes to Belyall,
And what her self is, eke forgetting she,
For heavenly joy, feels sorrows infernal,
For life she tastes death then perpetually.
Actum Aposto. CAP. 5. THE Apostles went from out of sight of the people which
gave counsel, because they were coumpted worthy for the name of Christ, or
in his behalf to suffer reproaches.

AVGVSTINVS. WE will rejoice with the elect of God, and we will suffer
tribulations of the world with them: for surely they that would not imitate the
holy ones in this manner, should not attain unto their renown and glory.

1. Corinthians. CAP. 3. FOR every one shall receive his own reward, according to
his labor and travel: but many for the most, not meaning to live well, desire
to dye well, knowing how precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of
his saints.

Is he the God of the Jews only? is he not also of the Gentiles? yes of the
Gentiles also.

CIRHSOSTOMVS. IF any man shall think the way paynefull to live well, such a
one is the excuser of his own sloth and negligence: for if Mariners, and
Seafaring men soppose the raging floods of the Sea to be threatninges of danger
unto them: if the season of Winter be thought a hinderance unto husbandmen: if
wounds and slaughter of Souldyers seem a thing tolerable: and if most
grievous stripes and blows seem things easy to be borne withal of very
champions them selves, for the hope of temporal things and transitory
commodities: much more when heaven is prepared for a reward, of the godly we
ought not once to think any thing of these present calamities, neither ought
a man to look that this way is streyt, but whyther it bringes a man: neither
ought we to seek for any other beeause it is broad, but where the same
finisheth.

LVKE. CAP. 9. AND being bidden to the supper, they begun every man to excuse
them selves.

BERNARDVS. Forgive us Lord, forgive us, we excuse our selves, we work al
against ye grain: so as there is scarce any man which will be made practiced
(as he may w^ll be) in those things which parteyne unto thee. They all savor
earthly things, they seek that which is theirs, and not that which is
parteinyng unto Jesus Christ. They embrace vices, they flee virtues, and they
wax v^le together as the brute beast, through filthynesse of their sins.

MICHEA. CAP. 7. THe godly man perishes upon the earth, and there is not any
one amongst men, that lives aright. etc.

Resume thy strength now as a knight spiritual,
Fight for the heaven, win it with diligence,
The ^ende, the flesh, and vices mundyall,
Quite to subvert, by deuyne sapience,
If weak thou be, crave God for thy defense,
Having good hope by Gods provision,
Through watchful care, and humble patience,
With triumph thou shall win an heavenly crown.
AUGUSTINE. THere shall be the chief securi^ie, the safe tranquillity, the
tranqiul or safe sweetenes, the sweet felicity, the happy eternity, the
eternal blessednesse^

BERNARDVS. OH heavenly City, thou safe M^nsion place, a country fully
c^n^eyning wh^^ so ever may be delightful* a people without murmuring, quiet
inhabitance, men having no need of any thing.

ORIGIN. THE divine bounty of the most highest, shall replenishe all the
receptacle of the soul with all goodness: that is to say, the angry and
irefull soul with power and dignity: the greedy and covetous soul, wi^h
delights: and the reasonable soul, with wisdom, that there may therein
appear power without contradict^on, dignity without comparison.

PROVERBIORVM. CAP. 1. THE fear of the Lord, is the Well of life.

AUGUSTINE. LET the love of this present Wo^lde depart from thee, wherein no
man is so borne that he may not dye, and let the love of the world to come
take place in thee, wherein al men are made living, so as thence forth they
shall not dye, where no adversity shall trouble thee, and no gree^es disquiet
thee, but whereas everlasting joy and gladness reigns for thy perpetual
comfort.

ESAI. CAP. 6. THe^ said I, Lord how lon^, H^ answered, until the Cities be
utterly wasted without inhabitants. etc.

ESAI. CAP. 35. THey shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and
lamenta^ion shall flee from them.

PSALM. 119. OH how good is the God of Israel unto such as are true of heart.

Remember man this solace shall be sure,
Altogether void of worldly variaunce,
It shall without dread or distance ay endure,
But in this life is no continuance:
Riches, poverty, life, and death, are but a trance,
Wherefore in this worldly mutable estate,
Let us seek to live after God his ordinance,
Least of that lasting blis, we make our selves frustrate.
DEVTERONO. CAP. 3. MOSES said unto the children of Israel. Consider, that
this day I have set before thee in thy sight, both life and good: and of the
contrary part, death and evil.

Sequitur. I Take this day, Heaven and Earth to witness, that I have set
before you life, and good, blessing, and cursing: choose you therefore life,
that you may live.

I marueyle, and greatly marueyle, that man (which above others is a creature
endued with reason) does not in any thing follow the iu^gement of reason,
despi^yng wholesome things, and embrasing dangerous things, seeking and
desyring deadly and hurtful things.

OH eternal GOD, what is the cause of such dotyng foudnesse in man: what
reason is there of such foolishness and madness: Why does he desire the
death of the soul with so wicked a heart. etc.

Now Heavens and Earth for witness in I call,
How God disposes for man's direction,
Perpetual pain, and joy celestial,
Virtue, vice, health, and perdition:
Put to our choice by free election,
Wherefore our hearts and eyes lets eleuate,
To God, the geuer of all grace divine,
Of him to crave, that he the fyrme estate,
Of lastyng bliss would grant us all in fine,
FINIS Of the Contemplacion for SUNDAY.
Per Authorem.
Namque huius mundi fallacis gaudia vitae,
Et quibus exuere se debet omnis homo,
Sunt miserand^a ni^^is, vexant mortalia corda*
Virtutum faciunt quemlibet immemorem.
Quos igitur Chricti baptisma sacru^ renouauit,
Librum hunc perlegite, qui facit esse sacros:
Quid Iusto prodest, aut quid peccator egebit,
Si Libet inspicere, vos docet istud opus.
Soli Deo Gloria.
Here ends this work of Contemplacion, first printed in Latin at
Westminster, the year of our Lord God. 1499. and now newly englished and
printed at London, by H^gh Singleton, dwelling in Creed Lane, at the sign of
the gylden Tun. Near unto Ludgate. Anno. 1578.




