Certain Sermons vvherin is contained the Defense of the Gospel now
preached, against such Cauils and false accusations, as are objected both
against the Doctrine it self, and the Preachers and Professors thereof, by the
friends and favorers of the Church of Rome. (***)

Preached of late by Thomas by Gods sufferance Bishop of Lincoln.

Imprinted at London by Ralphe Newbery dwelling in Fleet street. Anno Domini
1580.

To the Godly disposed Reader.
BEhold (loving Reader) the great goodness and providence of God toward thee.
These sweet^ Sermons, (not for the Eleque^ce which this Reverend Father
chale^geth, but for the inestimable comfort to all the Godly) as sweet sounding
Tru^pets and in respect thereof, may well be called 12. friendly Alara^s, to call
and sommo^ thee to the knowledge of thy self and thy state, and to make ready
thy Weapons here sorted out for thee, against the common enimye of all
quietness, the bloody Papist: These sweet warninges I say, had well nigh
slipped thy hands, had not Gods merciful providence provided thee a remedy,
and therefore used the means of certain zealous, and Godly Ministers
earnestlye to crave and beg, that they might be openly known and published
for thy greater benefit, and that they might be as Mithridaticum, or Triacle,
in every man's house, a ready remedy for three sorts of poisoned infections now
abroad. First for the obstinate Papist, never in greater expectation for his
long desired purpose, than eue^ now. Secondly, for the senceles Epicure, or
secure Worldling, drowned in the cogitatio^s of this world, and in a deep and
profou^d sleep of vanity, foreseing no peril, and fearing no danger, but
crying al is well, al is well, peace, peace, and is at war with the^ that tell
of any danger. Lastly, for the counterfeit Gospeller, who bearing the name of a
sheep, is in deed a ravening Wolf, and looks but for opportunity, to ioyn
with thy chief adversary, and to tell thee in vau^ting wise, that he was never
other, but one of Machiuels order, a deep dissembler: but be thou of good
comfort, fear not, stay thy self upon gods providence, and behold here
enclosed a present remedy for thee, take it, use it, embrace it, be
thankful for it, and farevvell in the Lord.

Vale. T. N.

Sermons contained in this Book, and in what leaf to find them.
1 The first Sermon upon the 16. Verse Romans 1. Fol. 1. 2 The second Sermon upon
the same Verse. Fol. 19. 3 The third Sermon upon the same Verse. Fol. 46. 4 The
first Sermon upon the 15. Ver. Math. 7. Fol. 67. 5 The second Sermon upon the
16. Ver. Mat. 7. Fol. 82. 6 The third Sermon upon the 16. Ver. Mat. 7. Fol. 98.
7 The first Sermon upon the 1. Ver. 1. Cor. 10. Fol. 116. 8 The second Sermon
upon the 3. Ver. 1. Cor. 10. Fol. 136. 9 The third Sermon upon the 5. Ver. 1.
Cor. 10. Fo. 159. 10 The first Sermon upon the 3. Ver. Math. 13. Fo. 177. 11
The second Sermon upon the 5. Ver. Mat. 13. Fol. 196. 12 A Sermon upon the 46.
Ver. Ioh. 8. Fol. 207.
Faults escaped in the Printing of this Book.
Faults. Correction. Leaf. Line. Percipitati praecipitati 13 9. captain
captive 15 7. Saniour sauo^^ 33 3. poculus poculum 34 27. For charisima read
charisma 38 3. goly godly 73 5. do ^o 97 15. alio also 122 27. Nasareth
Bethlem. 198 34. with trial without trial 228 15. 7. of Chro. 2. of Chro.
240 25.

In these Folios.

For 16. 19. for 56. 58. for 48. 84. for 192. 194. for 193. 195. for 186. 198.
for 206. 224. for 225. 223.

Three Sermons made upon this Text. Romans 1. 16.
Non me pudet Euangelij, est enim potentia Deiad salutem omni credenti. etc.
That is: I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God
to salvation, to every one that believe. et. c.
THis sentence that I have read (Dearelye beloved) contains few words,
great and ample matter: and is of that sort which Rhetoricians call
Enthemematicae, comprehending both parts of a brief Argument, the Antecedent,
and Conclusion. As if S. Paul had said: The Gospel of Christ is the mighty
power of God. Therefore I am not ashamed of it. And these two parts of this
short Argument, I mean (with Gods assistaunce) at this time to speak of.
First, how the Gospel is the mighty power of God to salvation: and secondly,
that for that cause we should not be ashamed of it, whatsoever carnal wisdom
would otherwise persuade us, either that the wickedness of this world, or of
the Diuill, would entice us, and seduce us.

As touching the former part: In what estimation the world had the Gospel of
Christ in S. Paul his time, himself 1. Cor. 1. 23.
in the first to the Cor. does very well declare, where he How contemptible
Christ and his Gospel were unto the world, in the beginning.
says, that to the Jews it was a great offense, and to the wise and learned
Grecians, very folly and madness. Both parts were offended, not only with the
Doctrine, but with the base estate of Christ's own person: who, as you know in
countenance of the world was but mean and simple, Joseph taken for his Father,
being but a poor Carpenter, himself, scantly having an house to put his head
in, keeping company with the contemned sort of Publicans and sinners, In the
end, being put to most vile and reprocheful death. And therefore, even in the
time of Augustine and Chrysostom: We read, that if a gentleman, or noble
person had Vain opinion of gentilitie may be occasion of the eternal
destruction of those which regard it.
been turned to the Gospel, his kin and aliance would come unto him and say:
What? Tu credis crucifixo? Art thou not ashamed to hope for salvation in him,
that being put to extreme punishment was not able to save himself? And as they
were then offended, in y^ person of Christ, so in y^ doctrine also, they
thought it great folly, y^ learned and wise me^, should believe those things,
that by reason they were not able to conceive: as, y^ one person should be both
God and Considerations concerning Christ which makes man's carnal reason to
contemn him.
man, yt the son of God should die, yt he being man, and dead, should rise
again to life: yt to attain justice before God, they must utterly renounce
their own justice and good works, and acknowledge themselves to be most heinous
sinners: that they must abandon the world and all the pleasures thereof: yt
they must for Christ's sake, for go their wife, their children, their goods and
all that they had: finally yt they should mortify their flesh, take their
cross, and by ignominy, reproach, and persecution follow Christ. This seemed
to them not only a shame, and a folly, but an extreme madness also. And
therefore they had the professors of the Gospel in no estimation, but
accounted them fools, and doting persons.

The greater and more famous that the place and city was, The more excellent
men are in carnal reason only, the more they contemn Christ.
the greater and more grievous, was the contempt of y^ Preachers of the Gospel
in it. Wherefore undoubtedly, this was no small temptation in those days, and
especially in the City of Rome, which then was Lady and Empress of the
world, and stood much upon their estimation of wisdom and honor, and
thought it reproach for them, to admit so base a state of salvation, as
appeared to be in Christ Jesu. But of this very pretily says S. Hilarie de
trinit. 5. O stulta mu^di Hilar. 5. de trinit. what estimation always pertayned
to Christ and his gospel.
sapientia, opprobrium Christi, non intelligens dei virtute^ esse: and
stultitia^ fidei, non sentiens esse dei sapientia^: yt is, O foolishnes of the
wisdom of this world? which sees not, that that which it imagines to be
reproach to Christ, is even the most mighty and excellent power of God: and
which also perceives not, that that which it terms foolishness, in the
belief, which is in Christ, to be even the great wisdom of God. Wherefore S.
Paul armed with the spirit of God, to ye great comfort of al Christians says (as
I have read unto you) I am not ashamed of the Gospel. etc. Whatsoever, you do
esteem it to be, how reproachful soever the world does account it, although
the Epicures do deride it, although y^ wise politic worldlings, do inueigh
agaiust it, although ye Jews be offended, although y^ Atheistes scorn it,
although fantastical hipocrites do detest it: sure I am y^ in it self, it is
ye mighty power of God to salvation, of all y^ believe, and faithfully embrace
it. How y^ mighty power of What power is in the Gospel of Christ and how
it appears two vvayes.
god does show it self, in subduing y^ enemies of our salvation the good
Christian man does perceive: who has learned out of the scriptures, to how
great enemies, man's nature was subject and in thraldom. Sin, Satan, hell,
death and damnation, had us in captivity: from ye tyranie of al which we are
delivered by Christ Jesu crucified. First, he overcame sin, when being y^
son of God in ye shape of reprochful man, as an innocent lamb, deserving no
punishment, and yet suffering most cruel punishment, and bitter death, gave him
self a full and perfect sacrifice for our sin. And when sin was by his
death and passion destroyed, death was in ye same victory disarmed and maimed.
For Sin (as S. Paul says) is 1. Cor. 15. 56.
the sting of death. And when death had lost his sting, and was conquered in
Christ's resurrection from death, Satan also lost his strength and power: which
rested only on the^, which therough sin were in danger to death, for
Stipe^diu^ peccati mors, Romans 6. 23.
The reward of sin, is death Finally because hell only deuoureth them, yt
through sin, and death, are slaves to Satan, it follows, yt when ye other
three were by him so mightily vanquished, hell also with all y^ danger thereof,
was subdued, and we delivered from all their tyranny: as y^ reverend father
Zachary says, Prestitit iusiurandu^ quod iurauit. etc. The Luke 1. 73. 74.
Lord God of Israel has performed the oath, which he swear to our Father
Abraham, that he would give us, that we being delivered etc. Now as by his
death and resurrectie^, he has mightily conquered our enemies: so has he by
his as^^ntio^, gloriously triumphed over the^. And therefore S. Paul says
very well out of the Psalm, Cum ascendisset Ephe. 4. 8. Psa. 68. 18
in altu^, captiuam duxit captiuitate^ etc. When he had ascended up on high, he
led captivity captive: We then may now say triumphantly with S. Paul: Oh
Death, where 1. Cor. 15. 55.
is thy Sting? Oh Hell, where is thy Victory? Though Sin and Death rage
never so like Tyrauntes: though Satan, roar never so like a Lion: though
Hell, gape never so greedily: sure we are, they cannot prevail against us,
that have victory over them in Christ Jesu. It is God Romans 8. 33.
that justifies, who is it then that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea,
or rather which is risen again from death, and sits on the right hand of God
the Father, as our perpetual Intercessour, Who then can hurt us? Who can pull
us from the favor of GOD? not Life, not Death, not Sin, not Hell, not
Satan, not any power or principality: They are all in Christ Jesu
confounded. This is that mighty power of the Gospel, that S. Paul says does
bring Salvation to all believers, and whereof he protests, that he is not
ashamed of it.

But God did show his mighty power to salvation of mankind, 2 The power of
Christ appears both in himself, and also in his word.
not only in the price of our redemption it self, but also in the publishing
and preaching of it, by his Apostles, and Ministers. For to it he annexed such
force of his holy spirit, that it had greater strength and authority, than
all the eloquence, than all the Wisdom, than all the learning, than all the
policy and power of the world. For notwithstanding, that the preaching of the
Gospel was resisted by all these worldly gifts, and powers: yet had it
marvelous success, and did wonderfully increase. Demosthenes, Pericles,
Cicero, for their eloquence: Solon, Aristides, Caro, for their wisdom: Plato,
Socrates, Aristotle, for their learning: Alexander, Pyrrhus, Pompey, for their
manhood: Man in his eccellency of carnal wit, is not able to give any
perpe^ui^ie to his diuice.
were of power, were of great fame, and able to do much in the world. But the
best of all these, had much a do, even a few years, to keep their own
Citizens, their own countrymen, their own subjects in obedience, and to cause
them to give place to good and wholesome counsel, and to obey orders provided
for their own commodity. Yea every one of them (almost) to their own
confusion, proved of how small force, their wisdom, their eloquence, their
power was, and with the end of their lives, left their commonweals well
near utterly decayed and undone: But contrariwise, mark, I pray you in the
Apostles of Christ, and consider the marvelous power of Gods working. For
they having The government and direction by Gods word, prevails more than any
devise of man.
as you know, their beginning of the Jews, nothing commended, or set forth
with any of those gifts and ornaments, that men so greatly do esteem, went
forth into the world, preaching the disdayned Gospel of Christ crucified, and
by the simple doctrine thereof, did in few years, for the state of religion,
change the face of the whole world, Example in the Apostles
notwithstanding, that the Empire of Rome, and other mighty principalities,
did to the uttermost of their power, resist it, and the reformation, that by
the Apostles in this manner was begone, continued, and spread it self mightily,
and maruellously, even against the assaults of most cruel, and tyrannical
persecutions, under Nero, Domitian, Traian, Adrian, Antony, Dioclesian, and
many mo. And until such time, as by the secret judgment of God, the power of
Antechrist began to spread it self against it, as well in Asia, under Mahomet,
as in Europe under the Pope. Never any Empire or Kingdom was so largely
spread, as the Kingdom of the Gospel, never any principality, so mightilye
proceeded and went forward, maugre the malice of all enemies, Tertul co^tra
Jud^os.
as it has done. And so does Tertullian witness against the Jews, speaking
of the Kingdom of Christ, and alleging out of the Psalm, the words of God
the Father, Fortitudines regum disrumpa^, aperiara ante illu^ portas, and
civitates non claudentur illi. Whereby he notes that no power of Prince or
city, should be able to resist the Gospel of Christ, But this conquest of the
Gospel, was always by suffering, and not by force, or resisting, as S.
Augustine says de agone Christi. Cap. 12. Ecclesia catholica per totum orbem
diff^sa magis magisque roborata est non resiste^do sed perfere^do. And Aug. de
agone Christi.
another Father says: Sanguis martiru^ semen Euangelij. The blood of martirs
is the seed of the Gospel. And Hieron ad theoph. says: Patiendo co^tumelias
Christi fundata Ecclefia est, persecutionibus creuit, martyriis coronata est.
By suffering all kind of reproachful dealing which was given forth, and dove
against Christ, the Church of God has had the more great and large
beginninges, by persecutions has it increased, and with martyrdom it is
crowned. In all places have the Apostles and other Preachers of ye Gospel sound
many bitter enemies, which being armed as well with public authority as
private malice, greedily desired, and sought how to destroy them, and to
confound their doctrine. In all places were heard terrible threatninges, and
proclamations of Emperors, the glistering swords of cruel Tormentours, were
always in their eyes: Imprisonmentes, Bonds, Fetters, Rods, Whippes,
Rackes, and a thousand kinds of cruel torments daily prepared and divised
against them. The very name of a Christian, was sufficient to bring them to
punishmente and death. They were accused, that they did against the laws of
the Romans, that they spoke against their God, and old religions, that they
were authors of seditions, rebellion, and all mischief. And commonly the
beginning of all accusations was thus: They which Act. 17. 6.
trouble the whole world are come unto us also. Yet did the teaching of the
Doctrine of our Salvation, by the mighty power of Gods spirit, break through
and overcome all these difficulties: And the Gospel not only conquered and
vanquished all adversary powers, but spread it self in few years through
the whole world. As Saint Augustine says, de Ciuit. dei li. 22. Aug. de
ciuitate dei Lib. 22
Ligabantur, includebantur, c^debantur, torquebantur, and multiplicabantur. i.
They were bound, they were imprisoned, they were whipped, they were tormented
and racked, and yet for all this, they multiplied and increased. The same power
of God even in these latter days, has Example of late and present tones.
wonderfully showed it self, in Furthering his Gospel. For when the heavenly
doctrine of our salvation in Christ Jesu, was so buried in the darkness of
school learning, that no man tasted the sweetness of it: when Gods holy
word lay overwhelmed in dust, and was not read almost of any: when the
comfortable use of the sacraments was defaced with wicked superstition and
Idolatry: when the whole state of religion was turned to an outward show of
gestures, signs, and ceremonies: When Antechrist in all his pomp, sat in the
Church of Christ (as says S. Paul) Auaunting himself above all that was
called God: and 2. The. 2. 4*
made Princes and Emperoures to kiss his feet: when it was even death
(almost) to think of the restoring of Gods trueh, even then, I say, by the
ministerye of one simple man at the first, against the clamoures of monks and
Freers, against the scorning of the bishops, against the power of the Pope,
against the assistance of temporal princes, against al torments by fire, by
faggot, by sword, by imprisonment, God has so published, and spread his Gospel,
as now all countries of Europe are partakers of it.

Wherefore they are dull of sense, and s^antly to be accounted The power of the
gospel does most manifestly appear in these latter days.
good christians, which in these latter days are so offended with the troubles
and dangers that vsuallye follow the Gospel, that they do not in the mean
time see and consider, how the mighty power of God does bear rule, even among
the midst of his enemies, and does work safetye for his church and Gospel,
even in those commonweals, and under those kings and Princes, which are not
only far from the faithful embracing of his truth, but euidentlye The
mighty power of the Gospel is no vvhyt to be discredyted by afflictions
which may follovv it.
show themselves to be the professed adversaries thereof, even to the
vttermoste of their power. If any be of that opinion, that he therefore
think the Gospel to be weak and contemptible, because it is continually
excercised with the cross of affliction, and trouble of the world, in that
his judgment, he is greatly deceived. For therein principally, it appears,
that VV^^^ kind of ground man's policy is to commonweals.
it is preserved by some divine power. Neither is it like the unfortunate state
of worldly kingdoms and principalities, which seem to rest upon the power and
policy of men. For commonly such do fall to ruin and decay, when they appear
to be settled, and in greatest glory. For the truth hereof, consider the
examples of all the Kingdoms and Empyres that ever were: the Asstrians, the
Persians, the Grecians, the Romans. etc. But contrariwise, the Gospel and
Kingdom of Christ does then most prosper and prevail, when all endeavors and
powers of Princes are set against it. The evident proof whereof, I have let
you understand before, as well by example of the primative Church, as of these
latter days. God does then most show his power, How GOD c^^ shevve himself
vvh^n all men's deuyse fails, yea, and against man (also) in his cheifest
power.
when all man's strength and help most fails, as says Tertullian out of the
Psalm, I will break the power of Kings, I will open the gates before him,
and Cities shall not be shut against him. There is no wisdom, there is no
power, there is no counsel, against the Lord. Though people frette and
fume, though Princes rage, though they consult and assemble themselves
together: yet it shall always be true that follows: He that ^itteth in Psalm.
2. 4.
Heaven shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision, and
shall scatter all their devises, and break all their power. For the Gospel is
the mighty power of God to salvation, to all them that believe. etc.

Non me pudet Euangelij. The second part.
I am not ashamed of the Gospel.
THe Gospel has many enemies, many that cavil at it, Diverse sorts of
ennim^es to the Gospel.
and find great faults therewith, to the end that men should be ashamed, either
to profess it, or after profession to stand constantly in it.

First, there are Epicures, and godless persons, that Epicures.
think all this whole matter of Faith and Religion, for certain purposes, to
be devised, and feigned of men, and therefore, they maruayle at us, that we be
so earnest and careful therein, and offer our selves to so great danger for
it. Whatsoever is spoken of God, of the Devil, of Heaven, or of Hell, these
pleasant companyons, deryde and scorn, and think it of no more weight, then a
poetical fable. And therefore they grunte, with the Pigges of Epicures stie,
and say: Let us eat, let us drink, and make good cheer, for shortly we shall
die, and after death, remains no pleasure.

An other sort of the Adversaries of the Gospel, are the wise 2 Politikes.
politic men of the world, and such governors of commonweals, as have not
the true sense of God, and of his providence. For they condemn the doctrine of
the Gospel as sedicious, and dangerous to commonweals, and states of
Princes, neither do they think it, a matter to be suffered, that Preachers
should note, and openly reprove, the faults of Princes, Magistrates, and great
personages. For say they, what other thing is this, then to shake the state of
government, and to sound a Trompet of discord, sedition, and rebellion. These
men, do not acquaynt themselves with the use of Gods providence, who, ever
from time to time, has sent his Prophets, and other Messe^gers, to reprove y^
faults, both of Princes and people, that swerue from his law, and revolt from
his true worship.

The third sort of Adversaries are Hipocrites, Monks, 3 Hypocrites.
Freers, and such as put salvation, in the outward observations of men's
devises, and devised holiness, beside the word of God: for they cry, that the
doctrine of the Gospel does overthrow the laws of God: The holy ordinances of
Fathers, does hinder good works, and take away all deuoti^n. To answer all
the forged cauils and slanderous objections, that all these men devise, to
make us ashamed of the Gospel, were a matter at this time impossible. But I
will touch such as cheefely they stand upon, and most are though te to shake
the consciences of them that have any sense of god. The first sort are
hipocrits, and iusticiaries, which Six Objections made against the Gospel, to
bring it into dyscr^d it, and the answers to them.
being puffed up with confidence in their own strength think either whallye,
or in a great part by their own Virtues and good works, to obtain Gods
favor, and everlasting life. Such in times paste, were the Phariseyes among
the Jews, and such in these days are Monks, Freers, and others in the
Church of Room, which pretend misliking of the Gospel, because it teaches
that al men naturally are sinners and the children of wrath, and that they have
grace and free remissyon of sins by faith only, condemning in it self, all
man's justice and worthiness, and declaring that we have no justice, but
that we have in Christ Jesu. These men because they stand much in their
own lykinges, and greatly seek their own glory, are passinglye much
grieved, to have that Doctrine published, whereby their strength and powers are
diminished, their wisdom defaced, their justice before God condemned, and
grace and forgiveness taught to be attained, by Gods free mercy, without any
respect of worthiness, or deserte, in our selves. This Doctrine (say they) is
an ennimie to 2. Objection against the Gospel: that it does not further, but
hinder good co(...)on
all good life: This Doctrine discourageth from endeavor of honesty and
godliness: This Doctrine opens a wide gappe to all Dishonestie, and
Dissoluteness. For wh^e will bend himself to Godliness, when he is taught
that he is not hable to do any thing? Who will not tumble headlonge into
Vice, when he understands forgiveness to be so ready? Who will bridle his
affections, and punish himself by fasting, praying. and other godly
excercises, when he sees there is so easy, and light a way to Heaven, by
Grace and Faith only? Therefore, (say they) no maruayle though we be ashamed
of this gospel, and mislyke the Professoures of it. But (dearly beloved) this
is no new reproach and slander, Answer.
Fathered upon the gospel, and Heavenly Doctrine of our Salvation. You
know, these proud and selfeliking Pharisees, vpbrayded even Christ himself,
that he preached Gods free grace, to Publicanes, and Sinners. You know that
they said to Saint Paul, Romans 6. ^.
setting forth the same Doctrine: Why? then let us do ill, that grace may
abound: seeing Gods grace is so ready, let us still wallow in naughtiness,
that it may show it self more plentifully. Wherefore against this
temptation, Christian men should arm themselves at this day: and not think
that we teach any new Doctrine, but the same that Chr^ste and S. Paul has
laid out before us. For when we utterly condemn manne in himself, and
pronounce him to be the child of wrath and damnation, what other thing do
we, then that Saint Paul, in the first part of his Epistle to the Romans
at large declares, while he wrappeth all men, as well Jews as Gentiles, in
the guilte of sin, and in the indignation of GOD, And in general words
concludes: Omnes peccauerunt Romans 3. 23. 24.
and destituuntur gloria Dei, iustificantur autem gratis per illius gratiam,
per redemptionem, que est in Christo. All have sinned, and are deprived of the
glory of God, and are justified freelye by grace, through the redemption that
is in Christ Jesus. And again, Conclusit deus omnia sub peccato vt omnium
miseretur. God has concluded al things under sin that he might have mercy
upon all. And this means he, not only of the gross outward acts, but
of the very inward gilte and corruption of their nature, as in many other
places he shows. Romans 5. 12. 14.
Vt per vnum homine^ peccatu^ intra^it in mundu^, and per peccatu^ mors, and it
a in o^nes homines mors peruasit, quia omnes peccauimus. Regnauit mors ab adam
vsque a^ Mosen, etiam in eos, qui non peccauerunt, ad similitudinem,
transgressionis Adam. As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and so death went over al men: for so much as al men have sinned. But
Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them also that sinned not after
the like manner of transgression of Adam. And to the Cor. 15. 22.
Cor. In Adam omnes moriuntur, In Adam all dye.

In these places he speaks not only of y^ death of y^ body, but of y^ death
of the soul. Eramus natura, filij irae, quemadmodum Ephesians. 2. 3.
et ce^eri, We were by nature the children of wrath as well as other. Whereby it
appears, that all men in themselves are the Children of wrath and damnation,
shut from the Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore Christ in John 3 chapt. says:
unless a man be borne Ioh. 3. 3.
again from above, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. In which words it is
evident that our first birth in Adam, is utterly corrupt, and subject to
sin. So Job. 14. 4.
lamenteth Job also: Who can make that clean, which is conceived of unclean
seed? So lamenteth David his own corruption: Behold I was borne in
iniquity, Psa. 51. 5.
and in sin, has my mother conceived me. Upon which words says Ambrose,
Merito David flebiliter deplorauit ipsa inquinamenta naturae, quod pri^s
incipit in homine macula qua^ vita. Upon just cause did David with tears
bewail the imperfections that we have in nature, for because corruption does
first begin in us, before that we have life. Seeing then our nature is so
corrupted, Genesis 6. 5.
seeing (as God himself says) our heart is bent only to ill, even from our
youth, how can any goodness proceed from us, as of our selves? how can we
challenge power to fulfill Gods law, and by our good doings to be reconciled
unto him? Without me (says Christ) you can Ioh. 15. 5. 2. Cor. 3. 5.
do nothing. And, I am not able, says Paul, to think a good thought as of
my self, but all my sufficiency is of GOD. If Saint Paul does so humblye
acknowledge his weakness, why should we stand so proudly in our own
conceits? Liberum arbitrium, (says August.
Saint Augustine) ad diligenda dei precepta primi peccati granditate
perdidimus. i. We lost free will, to love and embrace the commandments of God,
through the gretnesse Aug. ser. 2. de verbis.
of the sin of our first Father Adam. And, De verbis Apost. ser. 2. Sunt
homines ingrati grati^ dei* multu^ tribuen^^^ inopi sauciaeque naturae. Verum
est, magnas arbitrij vires, homo cum conderetur, accepit, sed peccando amisit.
i. Men are unthankful, Opinion of freewill is unthankfulness.
or unkind unto the grace of God, attributing much unto needy and wounded
nature: It is true, man when he was made, received great power of frewill, but
he lost it again, when he sinned. And Epist. 107. August.
Primus homo sic factus est, vt nihil voluntati eius resisteret: postquam an^em
libera voluntate peccauit, nos in necessitatem percipitati sumus, quicunque ab
eius stirpe descendimus: that is: The first man (Adam) was so made, that
nothing How we had freewill* And how we have it not.
resisted his will, but after through freewill he sinned, We, as many as
descend from his stock, are cast down headlong into necessity of sinning.

If in the fall of Adam we lost freewill, to love and imimbrace the
commandment of GOD, if we show our selves ungracious to Gods grace, by
attributing so much to our maimed and corrupt Nature: If by Adams How
profitable the doctrine is which is against freewill.
offense, we be cast into a necessity of sinning. Let us, as the Gospel
teaches, cast away this confydence of our own powers, let us shake of
this self lyking Hipocricie, let us submit our selves under the mighty
hand of God, and acknowledge our own infyrmitie, let us not kick at that
Doctrine of the Gospel, that lays before us our own weakness, and
teaches how great need we have of the saving grace of God in Christ Jesu.

As touching that they pretend, the Gospel, in Preaching free grace by faith
only, does discourage men from well doing, and set open a wide Wyndowe to
looseness and naughtiness: It is a very false and wicked slander, not
bearing any countinaunce or lykelihoode The doctrine of justification by faith
only, does procure good works and no^ hinder them.
of truth in it. For the same Spirit that is the Spirit of faith, and
persuades our consciences to believe the great goodness and free mercies of
GOD toward us in Christ Jesu, is also the spirit of love, and does inflambe
our hearts earnestlye, to love so bountiful and so merciful a God, that did
vouchsafe when we were yet his enemies, to give his dearly beloved Son to
death for us. Now then, if by the motion of one spirit, we do by faith
assuredly know Gods goodness toward us, and by the knowledge, and true sense
thereof, do love him for the same, needs must there follow obedience, to his
law, and perpetual study to please him. Faith then of necessity breeds
love of God, and love brings forth obedience to his will. Qui diligit me
(says Ioh. 14. 2^
Christ) Sermonem meum seruat. j. He that loves me keeps my sayings. This
love then should lead us to obedience, This love should be the root of all
good doings, and not a proud hope to merit Gods favor, and deserve
everlasting life by our works: For when Luke 17. 10
we have done all we can do, as Christ witnesses, We have yet not done so
much as of duty we should do. Even so then as nothing can keep good
children, so much in obedience, as to know their Parents goodness toward
them: so nothing can more pithylie move Christian men, to the true service of
God, and keeping of his law, then by the Gospel to learn his unspeakable
goodness toward us.

Moreover the same Gospel that teaches by Christ's blood only to attain
remission of sin, does teach us also, that the end, and cause of this our
free redemption, is to live in the service of God, and no more to be subject
to sin. Apparuit gratia Dei Saluatoris nostri omnibus ^it. 2. 11. 12
hominibus vt abnegata impietate and mundanis concupisentijs pie, sobrie and
cast vi^amus in hoc seculo. Ipsius sumus opus conditj in Christo Jesus ad opera
bona quae praeparauit deus, vt in illis ambularemus: that is to say, The grace
of God has appeared, that we denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, should
live soberly, righteously, and Ephe. 2. 10.
godly in this world. We are (says S. Paul) his workemanshippe, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works which God ordained, that we should walk in them.
Zachary says, He has performed the oath Lu^. 1. 73. 74. 75.
which he swear to our forefather Abraham, that he would give us, that we
being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without
fear in holiness and righteousness. etc. No man raunsometh a Captain, to
this end, that he should continue to serve his enemy. God by Christ, has
delivered us from sin, and Satan, and therefore must we now, forsake them,
and live in obedience of him, that has so mercifully and freely redeemed us.
For this cause do Romans 6. 4.
we profess in our Baptism, that we forsake the Devil and all his works,
and as Saint Paul (says) bind our selves, to rise with Christ in newness
of life. Ephesians. 6. 5. etc. Romans 13. 12.
That seeing we be now made by him the children of life, we have no more to
do, with the works of darkness. This is the true doctrine of the Gospel:
wherefore no good man, has cause to be ashamed of it. ^an needs not by the
G^spell think himself so debased that he should thereby be any whit
disco^^aged from good works for he is also thereby maruellously exalted by gods
goodness toward him. 1. Pet. 3. ^. Ioh. 15. 4. 5.


It is an impudent cavil, and no true crime, when the adversary pretends a
shame and misliking of the Gospel, because in preaching free grace, it debaseth
man's dignity, discourageth from study of godlynes, and gives occasion to
continue in sin and wickedness. Although it teach you, that of your selves,
you are the children of wrath, and damnation: yet it tells you (also) that by
Christ, you are the heirs of everlasting life and salvation. Though it teach
you, that of your selves you can do nothing: yet it tells you also, that by
the spirit of God in Christ Jesu, you may do all things. Though it teach you
that by your good works, you cannot merit Gods favor an^ remission of
sins: yet it tells you also, that God by faith in Christ's blood only,
has so taken away your Romans 3. ^5.
sins, and restored you to his favor again, that you yet to show your
selves thankful unto him, are ^ounde to walk in holiness and
righteousness, before him all the days of your life. You may therefore,
safely and boldly say with S. Paul, notwithstanding this shameless cauile,
That you are not ashamed of the Gospel, for that it is the power of God. etc.

An other sort there is that are ashamed of the Gospel clean contrary to
these that before I spoke of, that is the loose and sensual Epicure, given to
the pleasures of the flesh and of the world. For, as the other sort found
fault that The second objection against the Gospel that it does make this life
less pleasant to us, then it should be.
we make too casie a way to Heaven, so, these accuse the straightness of the
Gospel, and are offended to hear the Preachers to reprove, not only their
outward evil works, but also to require, that man should utterly forsake
himself, die unto sin, mortify the flesh together with the lusts thereof,
and so wholly to be given and addicted to Christ, and his holy will, that we
should not so much as keep company with the wicked and ungodly. Oh say they,
you clean take away all courtesy, and pleasant life, and bring into the
world a Monkish and Stoicall severity, and solitariness, contrary to all
civil fashion and humanity.

Wherefore when we tell the jolly Gentlemen, and lusty The answer is anne^ed
to every particular part of the objection
Courtiours, that their gorgeous apparel, is but a lewd wasting of their
thrift, and a loose vanity, that their idle swearing is horrible blasphemy:
that their Dicing, Dau^sing, and dalieng, is wicked spending of time, and
practices of impiety: they mislike this doctrine, they are ashamed of this
Gospel, and in their outrage, deprave the Preachers, and speak ill of them.
When we tell the fine Ladies Esaias. 3. 16. ^c.
and Gentlewomen, that their painted coats with gazing colors, their fri^^ed
hear, and imbrodered hattes, their ^itle Cappes and light Feathers, are but
instruments of wantonness, snares of sin, and open tokens of lightness,
they are displeased with us. In their bravery they scoff at us, they think
it a shame, for them to be taught out of the Gospel, to go like grave Ladies,
and sober or sad Matrons. When we tell the covetous rich men, that they
should not here, lay up the treasures of the world, Mat. 6. 19. 20.
but seek after everlasting riches, that no rust can consume. When we tell
them, that they brought nothing 1. Tim. 6. 7
into the world, and as assuredly, shall carry nothing out of the world:
when we bid them give the one half of their goods unto the poor, and restore
again those that Luc. 19. 8.
they have ill gotten as Zacheus did: They mislyke our doctrine, they are
ashamed of the Gospel, they go with heavy hearts from the Sermon, as the
young rich man Mat. 19. 22.
went from Christ. When with Saint Paul, we tell the riotous gluttons, that
they should walk soberly, as in the day time, and not pamper up their flesh
to vice and wantonness, by feastyng, by banqueting, by riotous feedyng and
drunkenness, but that they should put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and not
follow the flesh by Romans 13. 13
satisfying the lust thereof: they think it an hard doctrine, they think the
sweet of their life taken from them, and therefore are ashamed in that, to
follow the Gospel.

But they that be the true people of God consider, that Joh. 15. 19.
as Christ says, He has chosen his out of the world: so he requires that
they should forsake the world, abandon the pleasures of the flesh, and
vanity of this life, die unto sin, and by the seed of his holy Gospel be
borne again to a newness of life. His Apostles also soundyng upon the same
string, tell us that we should 1. Pet. 2. 9.
be separated from this naughty generation, that we may rise in Christ, to a
newness of life, as an holy nation, and set forth his goodness, that has
delivered us, from darkness, to light inestimable. The same Apostles cry unto
us, and by Proclamation (as it were) exclude out of the Kingdom of heaven,
Whooremaisters, 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10.
Adulteres, covetous men, nyce and wanton persons, drunkards, backbiters*
contenders, brawlers, idolaters, thieves and extorcioners.

Wherefore we may not change the laws of the City of God, and make these
things, to hang on the pleasures (...) of the answer.
and affections of men: that Christ and his Apostles, have so straightly, and
severely forbidden. Therefore, never let the pleasures of the world, nor the
masters, and maintainers of them, pull you from the profession of the Gospel,
but still say with Saint Paul, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ. etc.

Now are we come to another quarrel, that they make against the Gospel, but
as for this and other quarrels that they make against the Gospel, they shall
afterward be entreated of.

The second Sermon.
Non me pudet Euangelij. j. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for.
etc.
THe greatest defense that the The third objection against the Gospel. ^^.
adversaries of the Gospel have at this day for themselves, and against us, is
the title and authority of the Church: with that do they grievously assault
and trouble men's consciences, and seek to make them ashamed of the Gospel.
Oh, say That we the pretended professors of it, are not of the catholic
Church.
they, the professors of the pretensed Gospel at this day, are but
Schismatikes and Heretics, they are departed from the true and Catholic
Church of Christ, that has continued these 1500. years, and is confirmed by
Universality, Antiquity, and General consent. This Church ought to be taken
of al Christian men, as the pillar and stay of al truth, This Church by
Christ's own promise can never err, This Church is the house of God, This
Church is the only spouse of Christ. Beside this pillar, there stands no
sound truth, Out of this house there is no salvation, They are not the sons
of God, which are not the children of the Church. Non est dignus deo patre, qui
non habet Ecclesiam matrem, i. He is not worthy to have God for his Father,
which has not the Church for his mother. This is a grievous assault, this is
a sore battery, unto minds not yet confirmed: this undoubtedly has and
does shake many a weak conscience at this day. For who will not be afearde
to be out of the Church of Christ, to be out of the house of GOD, to be
out of the Ark of Noah? and so most certain to be overwhelmed with the
water of desperation and condemnation: But be you strong in the Lord, and by
the power of his holy word, confirm and fortify your consciences.

And first that you be not in this point astonished, and troubled Answer.
with a false alarume, learn you out of the holy scriptures, what the True
Church of God is, and what are the True marks of it, whereby it must be known:
And then confer the same, with the Church of Rome, that gives you this
assault, and see whether you are departed from The invisible church consisting
of the elect. Col. 1. 24.
the Church of Christ, or from the state of Antichrist, and synagoge of
Satan. The Church sometime in the Scripture, is taken for the whole number of
the elect of God, that are and have been from the beginning of the world, in
all places and all ages, even to this day. And this is that Church, that is
the pyller of truth, This is that Church, that never can abide in error,
This is that Church, that by imputation of Gods mercy, is the immaculate and
undefiled spouse of Christ, but this Church is not always seen. This is the
invisible Romans 11. 4. 1. Cor. 2. 11.
Church that is known to God alone, and is never certaynely, and truly, and
for the whole, opened to man's eyes. For they by Hypocrisy may seem members
of this Church, which in deed are no partakers of it, as appears by the
example of Judas. And contrariwyse, they to man's judgment may seem, not to
be of this Church, which yet in Gods appointment, are the certain members of
it, as evidently was showed in the example of S. Paul.

But the visible Church, that is discerned of man, The visible church
and by outward tokens, is known to the world, may in this manner be
described to you. It is the The description of the church.
multitude of all them, be they few, or many, which being upon the face
of the earth, and called by the word of the Gospel, protest to believe in
our Savior Christ, looking for sanctification and salvation by him, and
worshipping him according to his holy word. That it is the whole multitude of
all believers, it is evident Mat. 28. 19. Mar. 16. 15.
when Christ himself says: Ite, predicate Euangelium omni creaturae. i. Go ye
and preach the Gospel to all creatures. He excepteth none, and therefore the
grace of The church of Christ is tied to no one place.
God, and benefits of his Church, are not tied to any one place: as to Rome,
to Jerusalem, to Constantinople, to Antioche, or any other place.

That the number of this Church, may be as well small The number of the church
may be small. Luc. 12. 32. Mat* 18. 20.
as great, Christ himself teaches, saying: Grex meus pusillus est. i. My
Flock is very small. And where two or three be gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them. Hereby may you learn, that the argument of
Multitude or great number, is not always strong. For by it the Doctrine of the
Prophets, the Doctrine of Christ, and of the Apostles, might be rejected:
which undoubtedly were but few in comparison of them, that misliked and
reproved it. That this multitude must None are openly of the Church but such as
are called theris by the word of God. Io. 10. 17. 15.
be called by the word of the gospel, S. Paul affirms, Romans 10. Fides ex
auditu, auditus per verbum Dei: Et quomodo predicabunt nisi missifuerint? that
is: Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: And how shall
they preach, unless they be sent? And therefore Christ did send his
Apostles, to preach the Gospel, that thereby they might by brought, to the
belief of the Church. The members of the Church be graffed into it Faith does
in graffe us into the Church. Act. 37.
by professing the belief and salvation in Christ. In the 8. chapt. of the
Acts. When the Eunuche desired Baptism Phillip answered. If thou believe with
all thy heart, thou may: he answered, I believe that Jesus Christ is the
son of God.

By this branche of the description, the Jews and Turks are excluded, and as
many as seek other means of salvation then by Christ Jesus, though yt they
pretend to be christians, and though that they pretend to be the church. This
church is known by certain marks and tokens. The marks of the church*
Now, what they are let us consider. The Gentiles for the state of their
Religion, allege Pindarus, and other Poets. The Jews their Talmud: The
Turks their Alcorane, and all sorts do ground their religion upon some
authority. But God in Esaias to his people says this, Ego Esa. 59. ^1.
ineo cum his quiresipuerint in Jacob hoc meu^ foedu^, vt Spirit us meus qui
est super te, and verba mea quae posui in ore tu^, non recedant ab ore tuo,
neque ab ore seminis tui, amodo and vsque in saeculum* i. I will make this my
covenant with them, that turn from iniquity in Jacob: My spirit that is
upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, from henceforth even for ever.

Here you see that God wills his church to stick unto his word. And in the
10 of John, Qui ex deo est, verbu^ Dei Ioh. 8. 47.
audit. He which is of God, hears Gods word. And, Oues meae vocem meam
a^diunt. etc. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: A
stranger they will not follow. etc. True doctrine (then) according Io. 10. 27.
The first mark is Gods word.
to the word of God, is one infallible token of the right church of Christ.
For god by his Prophet, and by his son, witnesses, that it is his word, and
that it is his voice, that his people do stay upon. This mark S. August.
acknowledges in his Book Contra litteras Petil. I have August. contra
litteras petil.
the manifest voice of my shepherd (says he) without all circumstaunces,
declaring, which is his Church, My sheep hear my voice, and they follow me.
Behold, we hear his plain and evident voice. For how dares he call himself
christ's sheep, that does not vouchsafe to follow christ? Let no man say
unto me, what said Donate? what said Petilian? or Pontius? for we must not
consent to catholic Bishops, if they be in any point deceived, and judge
contrary to the canonical scriptures. etc. And again: If thou cry out, and
recite unto me any other thing, understand then, that after the voice of our
sheapherd uttered evidently unto us, by the mouth of the Prophets, by his own
mouth and by the mouth of the Evangelists: we will not hearken to your voices,
nor give ear to any thing that you shall speak. Whosoever will not wa^der from
his flock, let him hearken to him, let him follow him. Now as Christ y^ true
sheapheard The second mark is the sacraments.
does call his sheep by his voice, and lead them by his word: so does he mark
the^ by his Sacraments. The Gentiles, the Jews, the Turks, have their
ceremonies, but only the church of christ, has the true Sacraments by him
appointed: and distributeth the same orderly, and lawfully unto faithful
people, according to his Justitucion, for by one spirit (says S. Paul) are we
al baptized into one body. 1. Cor. 12. ^^ 1. Cor. 10. 17.
And of y^ Lords supper he says. We being many are one bread, one body:
because we are all partakers of the same bread. By these marks the^ of
baptism, and the Lords supper, Christ does unite his flock together in one
fold, and makes them known to be his. Now let us examine these tokens, how
well they agree to the Church of Room.

Touching the first, how can they have truth of doctrine The Church of Room
has not in it the tokens of the true Church. The written Scriptures only, are
and ought to be sufficient to try all truth. Psalm. 119. 105. Ioh. 5. 39.
which use not that rule of Religion, nor that Touchstone whereby only, all
truth of faith and holiness is tried? Can that Goldsmith always have good and
pure metal, that does not use a right, and true Stone to try it? The right
touchstone, and perfect directory, whereby all truth in doctrine is known, is
The word of God, delivered in his holy scriptures. Therefore says y^ Psalmist:
Thy word is a lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths. And Christ
himself says unto ye Jews: Search the scriptures, for they bear witness of
me. He imputes the gross errors of the Saducies to the ignorance of the
scriptures. The Conuerts of Berrhaea in the Acts to try Paul's doctrine, Act.
17. 11.
did daily search the scriptures, whether all things were so, as Paul
preached. This is it then whereby preachers and teachers, are discerued, This is
it whereby the true church of God is tried. This is it, whereby al truth of
doctrine is examined. So says Chri. The Lord knowing Chrisost.
the confusion of al things, that would be in the latter days, commands
that christians willing to understand the sure ground of faith, should have
recourse to no other thing but to the Scriptures. And again in the same place.
Before time, it was evident by many means, what the true church was, and what
gentillitie, but now after that heresy is grown into the church, there is no
way whereby it may be known, but only by the Scriptures.

Now (Dearly beloved) we shun not this Trial, we desire to be judged
hereby, only we say with Moses, yea Deuteronomy. 4. 2. 31.
with God himself, Nothing is to be added or taken away from his word: We say
with S. John, 20 chapter, So much is written, that if we believe, we shall have
salvation, 2. Tim. 3. 1^.
by the name of Christ. We say with S. Paul: that the scriptures can make us
wise to salvation. We say with S. Paul again: that the scriptures written
Verse. 16.
by the inspiration of the holy ghost, are profitable to teach, to reprove, to
correct, to instruct in Justice, and to make a man perfect in all good works.
Finally we say with S. Ambrose: Noua omnia quae Christus non docuit, Ambrose
iure damnamus: quia fidelibus, vita Christus est. i. All new Doctrine which
christ has not taught, we rightly condemn, because that christ, is life to
all the believers. Contrariwise the adversaries of the Gospel, will not abide
Papists refuse trial by the Scriptures. Three points shevving that Papists
use not, neither esteem the scriptures as they ought, if they were the true
church, The first point.
this trial of their Doctrine, but seek by all means they can, to avoid it.
I will not in this place discribe their whole practice herein, but I will note
unto you three points. First, the keeping of the scriptures in an unknown
tongue from the common people, and to make it little less then Heresy to have
it in their mother tongue. Have not many good men partly lost their living, and
borue fagots, partly been burned, for no other cause? Many yet alive know it
to be true. But they did not only find this means, to keep it from the
common people of GOD, but brought to pass, that it was almost out of use, even
with the learned sort: of which very few did read the Text of the Bible,
you had almost ten that wrotte upon the master of the sentences. The great
heaps of schoolewriters declare this to be true.

Secondly, they do marueilously disgrace and discredit The second point.
the Scriptures, as insufficient to salvation, and not containing all necessary
truth, but that there are many Articles of necessity to be believed, which
are not contained in the Scriptures. So says Lindan. lib. 1. Cap. 10. The
Apostles, says he, Would not commit certain principal points of our
Faith, to paper and ynke, thereby to perish and be forgotten, but they
committed them to the faithful hearts of Christians. As though those things
remained more sure, which be committed to the frail memory of seeble men in
this sinful world, then those things, that by the spirit of God, are put in
writing. Do you not see how this malicious Matters of faith may better be
preserved by means of writing, then when they are only left to the bare
memory of man.
and reuolting Adversary, does overthwart the gracious and ordinary providence
of God, in preserving the truth of his doctrine and holy will? When God saw
that the law written in the heart of man, was in continuance of time, by
corruption of the world greatly blemished, and almost clear forgotten, then
that it might be renewed, and remain more surely in the memoryes of men, did
he not by Moses, put the same in writing? But this is the manner of the old
Heretics, as Irenaeus says, The learned Aduersarye refuses to be tried by
the Scriptures, because they do manifestlye confound all such.
When they are confuted by the Scriptures, they fall to blame and accuse the
scriptures, as though they were not in good case, and of sufficient Authority,
and because they may be diuersely interpreted: or as though the truth could not
be known by them, without the knowledge of Traditions. For, say they, the
truth was not delivered by them, but by the lively voice of the speaker.
Hitherto Irenaeus.

This was the gappe whereby almost all Heresies, were drawn into the Church,
that either they de^ied the Scriptures, or else depraved them, as insufficient,
without private traditions, and revelations. And so the Why Papists do refuse
trial by the Scriptures.
adversaries at these days, strine to keep the same gappe open, as well for
the maynteinaunce of their tradicious, as for that they see, they are not by
them hable to maintain the most of their Doctrines. What shall I say of them,
which, are not contented by these means to accuse and discredit the Scriptures,
as the old Heretics did, but give unto the sacred written word of God,
contemptible and blasphemous titles of reproach, as to call it, A dead
Blasphemies of the Papists agunst the scriptures.
writing: A dumb master, doubtful, and uncertain: A black Gospel, Dead
ynke: Ynkie Divinity: A Nose of wax: A leaden Rule: etc. But the eternal and
ever living God, whose immortal word, and scede of life, they so revile,
sits in heaven, and sees their wicked blasphemy howsoever conningly, they
will seem to cloak their doings. The third point.
Thirdly, they say the scriptures take authority of the church, and therefore
that the Church is above ye scriptures, and her authority the greater. Sine
authoritate ecclesi^, The authority of the word of God is from it self, and
not from the Church principally.
says Friar Soto, Scriptura sacra non habet authoritatem, hoc certissime
fatemur. i. Without the authority of the Church, the holy scripture has no
authority: This we confess most certainly. As though the majesty of Gods
wisdom, and the truth contained in the scriptures, depended upon the
authority of man. For though the Church be never so holy, yet it consists of
men, which may, and often times do err, when they lean not to the word of
God. Oh (say they) how know you that the Scriptures came from God, but by the
church? I grant (dearly beloved) that the true church, that is, the faithful
people of God, have the spirit of discretion, to discern what writings are
according to the law and Prophets, and which are not. And therefore the Godly
Fathers in the primative church, partly in the time of the Apostles, partlye
after, rejected many counterfeyted writings, fathered by Heretics, upon
some of the Apostles, because they agreede not with the law, and the Prophets,
nor were agreeable to the Analogy of faith and truth of Doctrine contained in
them: and so by their witness, they justified the truth of those canonical
scriptures, and that no other ought to be Judges over them, or in any part of
doctrine in them, or to have authority above them, or without them. When a
Prince sends a commission, How the Church may judge or use the Scriptures
concerning their truth.
to certain ^ounsaylers, they may by their skill in the laws in the realm,
and practice of gouernmente, consult whether it be a right and true commission,
or other wise, but when they have by their judgment determined, that it is a
true commission under the Princes hand and seal, they take not to them
Authority over it, yea, they submit themselves in all things to be ruled
by it, They may not be so bold to ad, to diminish, to change, or to interpret
it, further then authority does warrant the^. So How the Church of Christ
must preserve Gods word and deluer the meaning of it.
is it with the church of Christ, it must submit it self to be directed by the
word of God, it must not add, diminish, alter, or change, or otherwise by
wrested interpretation, draw it to another meaning, then the Analogy of our
faith, and the conference of one place with another place of it, in it self,
may warrant. And therefore it is strangely written of Hossius, that if a man
have the Interpretation of the Sea of Room, upon any place of the
Scriptures, though he know not, nor cannot understand how it can possibly
agree with the words of Scripture, yet is it (says he) the most certain
word of GOD. Yea they say that the interpretation of the scripture Varyeth,
with the practice of the Church: so that as that changes, the interpretation
of the Scripture changes also.

Of this Usurpation of authority over the word of Grievous Faults in the
Church of Kome, which have come by their taking of authority over the
Scriptures.
GOD, and of this discrediting of the scriptures, it comes not only, that
they make in many places, Interpretations repugnant to the Text, as when they
interpret, Datur for Offertur, and Facite for Sacrificate: But also that the
most part of their Doctrines, are contrary to the express words of GOD,
and the Analogy of our faith. As by example of a few, you shall take the
measure of the residue. As for interpretations: Manifest false interpretations
of papists.
when Christ says in the matter of the Sacrament, This is my body, that is,
say they, this is Transubstantiated, or has the substance of it, turned into
my Body: contrary 1 Mat. 26. 26.
to all writers, and the nature of al tongues, expounding est, the Verb
substantive, is, by Transubstantiatur. Let them show either any ancient
Father, yea, or any latin writer, that ever did the like, and let them take
the victory. Again, where Christ says, This is my body, 2 Luc. 22. 19. 20.
that is Given for you, that is say they, that is Offered for you. So that,
that which he me^t to be given to death upon the cross, (as al good christians
understand the place) they (to maintain their Sacrifice of the Mass) draw it
to this: that Christ then presently, in the time of the Ministration, offered
his body to God the Father, in way of a Sacrifice. And so for to maintain a
devise of their own, they do rob the people of God, of that sweet promise,
and comfortable legacy, wherein, Christ in his last will assures them, that
his body should be given to Death, for their redemtion. In like manner when
christ says, Do this in remembrance of me, that is, say they: Sacrifice 3 1.
Cor. 11. ^4.
this in my remembrance. Wherein, with as great absurdity as before, they do
peruerte the meaning of Christ. For where his purpose was, to give a warrante
to all christian people,, to use and celebrate this Sacrament, in remembrance
of his death, they bring it to be spoken to Priests only, wringing them
utterly contrary to that exposition of Christ's words, which S. Paul 1. Cor.
11. 26.
makes, 1. Cor 11. saying: So often as you eat this bread, and drink this
Cup, you show the Lords death until he come.

Now, as touching their Doctrines, repugnaunte to Doctrines of papists
against the scriptures i^^^^ ^a^^i ^ule^^.
Gods word, you shall ^^te these few examples in steed of many mo. The
Scripture teaches, that we have redemption and justification, by faith in
Christ's blood only, without the help of our own Virtues and good works.
For S. Paul says: Therefore we gather that a man is Romans 3. 28.
justified by faith without the deeds of the law. And verse. 8. 9.
to the Ephe. 2. Ye are justified by grace, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God: not of works, least any 1 Papisticall justification by works.
man should boast. And yet if we believe not that our works do help us, to
our justification and remission of sins, the Church of Rome will condemn us
as Heretics. Heb. 10. 14
The scriptures teach us that Christ By once offering 2 Papisticall daily
sacrifice propitiatory.
himself on the Cross, made perfect all them, that are sanctified. For so
says S. Paul to the Hebr. And yet by the Church of Rome are they horrible
heretics, that say there is not daily sacrifice propitiatory for our sins
in their Mass. The scriptures teach us yt Christ Col. 3. 1.
is ascended into heaven and sits on the right hand 3 Papisticall presence
of Christ on earth.
of God the Father, and from thence and no place else, he shall come to judge
the quick and the dead: yet contrary to this article of our faith, and
contrary to the nature of Christ's humanity, if we believe not that Christ
even in 4 Papisticall keeping away of the cup of the Lord. Mat. 26. 27.
his flesh is still in earth with us, yea and that in a. 1000. places at once,
we must be pronounced detestable heretics. The scripture says in the use of
the Lords Supper, Bibite ex hoc omnes, Drink ye all of this. The Church of
Rome says it is heresy, to affirm that ye lay people should drink of the
Lords Cup. The scriptures say, Thou 5 Papisticall ungodliness in
worshipping saints. Exo. 20. 4.
shall make thee no graven image, nor thou shalt not bow down to worship it.
The Church of Rome says it is godly to have the church full of Images, to
kneel down before them, to set up candels to them, and with incense to honor
them. The scripture says, In the Church 6 Papisticall abuse of the scripture
in a tongue unknown. 1. Cor. 14. 19.
it is better to speak five words understood, to edify, than to speak
ten thousand, in a tongue not understood: yet you know the church of
Rome has defined it, that it is more fruitful and godly, to have all the
divine service, in a strange and unknown tongue. Wherefore how truly, they
can claim to have this first mark of Christ's church, I doubt not, but
those consciences, that have the fear of God, can easily perceive.

As for the sacraments, it is not only sufficient to have Papists cannot be
known to be of the true church by their sacraments.
them, but to have those that Christ appointed, and to use them according to
his institution. Saint Ambrose says very notablye, Qui aliter presumunt
accipere, quam Christus instituit, deuotus esse non potest. i. He that
presumes to receive it (he means the sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ) after another sort, then Christ has ordained, can not be accounted to
be truly devout. But how they have altered the Sacraments, both in number,
and in the right use of them, no man almost can be ignorant. Where the
Scriptures mention but two, they have Papisticall number of sacraments.
appointed seven. I will not now stand upon the number of sacraments, I will
speak only of those which both parts agree, to be sacraments, Baptism, and
the Lords Supper, First, as touching Baptism we teach not only, as some
falsely father upon us, that it is signum Initiale, a Sign Fruitful
doctrines of the protestants concerning Baptism. v^. 5.
whereby we be first consecrated Christians, but we add also, that we by
faith, and the operation of the holy Ghost, do put on Christ as a garment,
that is, that we have him so fastened and appropriated to us, that he is ours,
and we his, and that he hydeth and covers our nakedness, according as S.
Paul says: As many as are Baptized, Gal. 3. 27.
have put on Christ. We believe and teach that Baptism is to Christians the
Fountain of life, whereby our sins are washed away. So says S. Peter,
Baptizet^r Act. 2. 38.
vnusquisque vestrum in nomine Jesu, in remissionem peccatoru^. i. Let every
one of you be Baptized in the name of Jesus, for the remission of sins. And
Ananias unto S. Paul, Act. 22. 16.
Arise, and be Baptized, and wash away thy sins. Yet do we not attribute
the operation hereof, to the water or outward element, but to the might of Gods
word, and ye power of ye holy Ghost, working by faith as S. Aug. says, Quomodo
fit quod aqua corpus tangat, and cor abluat, nisi faciente verbo, no^ quia
dicitur, sed quia creditur. i. How comes August.
it to pass, that water touches the body, and washes the soul, but by the
working of the word, not because it is spoken, but because it is believed* Where
it is to be noted, yt it is not y^ sound of ye words, uttered in yt way of a
charm by ye minister, but the words believed in y^ hearts of y^ faithful, yt
makes y^ promise of Christ and effect of ye Sacrament, to be fruitful to y^
receiver. We believe moreover and teach, yt the sacrament of Baptism is, as it
were ye womb of ye church of Christ, where we are new borne, and become of y^
children of wrath, ye children of God, and are prepared by this our second
birth, to enter into the kingdom of God. Unless you Joh. 3. 5.
be borne again (says Christ) by water and the holy ghost, you ca^ not enter
into the kingdom of God. And saint Paul says, Not by the works of
righteousness, that we Tit. 3. 5.
did, but according to his mercy has he saved us, thorough the fountain of
regeneration, and innovation of the holy ghost. We believe also and teach as
touching this sacrament, yt not only we, but our seed also, has by it, the
benefit of salvation, and therefore do we defend y^ Baptizing of our children,
against ye wicked heresy of the Anabaptists. They which consider these things
simply, and with a charitable christian mind, I trust will clear us of yt
odious report, wherewith our adversaries slanderously do burden us, as though
we contemned ye sacraments, and slightly taught the fruits and benefits of
them. Now on y^ contrary part, let us consider how corruptly the Church of
Rome teaches, as touching this sacrament, and how horribly they have abused
Papisticall untruths and abuses concerning Baptism. v^. 3.
it. First, they teach, that Baptism does confer grace and wash away our
sins, Ex opere operaeto, that is, Even by the very washing only of the
water* though there be no good motion of faith or belief, in the heart of
him that is Baptized. This is the common op^^^^^ of all the Scholemen. And
Gabriel Biel says: Si^ quod pr^ter exhibitionem signi foris exhibiti, non
requiritur ^o^^^ motus interior, ex suscipiente. i. So that beside the giving
of the outward sign, there is no good motion inwardly required of him, which
receives it.

What shall I say of the profane and wicked abusing of Christ's sacrament to
the baptizing of Bells, the curing of sickness, and the driving away of
spirits and Devils, with the water thereof. This I may not omit, that in
using this one outward sacrament of Christ by water, they practiced five or
six, of their own ordinance, without any warrant of Gods word at al:
blasphemously attributing unto them, the like effects, that in truth are
given to Christ's institution, and to no other. First they add Papisticall
sacraments of their own devise.
salt with this interpretation, Vt sapientia conditus, foetore iniquitatis
careat, and vltra non putrescat, vermibus vitiorum. i. That he being seasoned
with salt, may not have the filthy sent of iniquity, nor any more by
rottenness, abound with worms of vice and wickedness. Next is Breathing, Vt
exuffletur and pellatur malignus Spiritus. ^. That the wicked spirit may be
blown and thrust out of the party. Thirdly the sacrament of Spittle, Vt tactu
supernae sapientia and aures aperiantur, ad verbum dei audiendum, and naris ad
discernendum odore^ vita, That both the ears, may be opened to hear the word
of God, and the nose, to sent the savor of life. Moreover Anointing of the
Thres sorts of Papistical anointing.
breast: Vt muniatur aduersus hostem, ne noxia persuadere possit: that he may
be fenced from the enemy, that he may no more persuade him to do those things
that be hurtful. Also Anointing of the shoulders, that he may receive
strength and might, to bear the burden of the Lord. Likewise Anointing on
the crown of the head, that by having his portion of the spirit of God, he may
worthily be called a Christian, and be made the heir of eternal life by holy
vnctio^. etc. What christian heart can hear these things without great grief
and horror? Who can suffer, y^ the effectual graces of Christ's word, and
sacraments, and the operation of the holy Ghost in the hearts of the
receauers, shall with horrible blasphemies, be attributed to the vain
ordinance of man, without any promise, or assurance of Gods word and To take
from us the rottermesse of sin, to expel out of us the wicked spirit, to
open our ears fruitfully, to hear Gods word, to give us sense of the Savior
of life, to defend us from the wicked assaults of Satan, to strengthen us in
bearing the burden of the Lord, to make us the heirs of eternal life: are
the myghtie and most gracious works of the holy Ghost, through the merit of
Christ our savior, and not of Salt, not of Breathing, not of Spittle, not of
Annoynting, etc. And they are to be given, and applied to us, either by the
word of GOD, or by those Sacraments by him ordained, and not by the Devises
of men.

I will now pass to the next Sacrament: As touching Fruitful actions and
doctrines of the protestants, concerning the Lords supper. vz. 5. 1. Cor. 11.
23.
the Lords Supper, I say with S. Paul, That we have received of the Lord,
that do we deliver to the people of God. We use Christ's single Institution,
without any addition, diminutio^, or alteration: We use it as a feast, or
supper, as it is termed in the Scripture: We take bread, we take the cup, we
drink, we set forth the beathe of Christ, the use and effect of the Sacrament
we declare, to be this. And I desire all good Christians, to observe and note
our doctrine, that they may well understand, that we teach not so slightly,
or contemptibly of this Sacrament, as our adversaries would have men to
believe, that we do. For in deed we teach and believe, that it is one of the
sweetest and most excellent comfortes, that Christ at his departure, left
unto his people. Yea, I dare say, that, that Christian which with a single and
charitable heart, shall understand our doctrine, will conceive more fruit
thereof, than ever he did, while the doctrine of the Church of Rome prevailed
in his heart. First, we teach, that it is a reverent, and blessed memorial
of the death of Christ, in celebrating whereof, we show our selves thankful
for his great, and inestimable benefytes toward us, according to these
words, Do this in remembrance of me. Secondlye, we teach 1. Cor. 11. 25.
it, to be a cognizaunce or badge of our Religion, whereby, we be separated
and distinct from Turks, Jews, and all other Miscreantes, and by the use
thereof confess before God; and the world, that we are of the number of
them, that look to be saved by the death of Christ. And therefore says
Saint Paul: Ye cannot drink 1. Cor. 10. 21.
of the Cup of the Lord, and of the cup of devils. Thirdlye, we teach it
to he a Seal, added to the last will of Christ, to assure us, of all those
legacies, that in the same he has bequeathed unto us, and principally, that
his body was given to death for us, and his blood shed for the remission of
our sins. Fourthlye, we teach that it is a link of unity among our
selves, and a spiritual ingraffing of us, into the mystical body of Christ:
so that as the branches have life, and mayntenaunce from their root and
stock, so have we from Christ. Lastly, we teach, that it is a spiritual
and heavenly Feast and banquet^, wherein the son of God Christ Jesu, offers
to the faithful hearts of Christians, the heavenly food of his most precious
body and blood, and they therein, receive the same effectuallye, truly, and
indeed, Christ his body and not sign only of his body is receaned. 1. Cor.
10. 16.
and not in sign only: for we do from our hearts detest that opinion,
that Christ's body and blood is received in the Sacrament only figuratively.
For S, Paul says, Panis que^ fra^gimus nonne comunicatio est corporis Christi?
and poculus benedictionis cui benedicimus, nonne comunicatio sanguinis eius
est? i. The bread which we break, is it not the partakyng of the body of
Christ? and the cup of blefsing, which we bless, is it not the partaking
of the blood of Christ? We believe therefore, and teach, that the faithful
Christians, are made partakers of the body and blood of Christ indeed, and of
all the benefits, procured unto mankind by the same. And yet we mean not,
this carnally, and grossly, so that the Real, and natural body of Christ,
under the shape of The receuing of Christ in the sacraments is not carnallye to
be understood. Jo. 6. 53.
a round piece of bread, or his blood under the form of Wine, enters into
our mouth, and descends into the natural parts of our body. God forbid. As
we say with Christ, He that eats not his body, nor drinks his blood, has
no life in him: So we say with Cyprian, Non acuimus dentes ad mordendum, sed
panem sanctum, fide syncera frangimus. i. We sharpen not the teeth to byte,
but we break the holy bread, with sincere faith. And with August. we say.
Quid paras dentcm and ventrem, creed, and manducasti. i. Why preparest thou thy
teeth, and thy belly? Believe, and thou have eaten. Faith then, is y^ mouth
whereby we receive Christ, and so, digest him into y^ stomach of our souls.
That which Christ did (generally) upon the cross, to y^ whole world, y^ do we
think, to every man perticularly, with no less good effect through faith, to
be applied in the Lords Supper. So far be we from teaching it, to be a
sign or figure only. Let us now continue Papisticall untruths and abuses
concerning the Lords Supper. vz. 5.
in the comparison, and consider how the church of Rome does use this
sacrament. But Lord God, what a sea should I enter into, if I should take upon
me, fully to declare their abuse of this reverend Mystery. I will not, I
cannot, this time will not serve for it, yea, diverse sermons will not serve to
deliver it. Who knows not, y^ this only matter, has occupied the tongnes
and pens, of all the learned of Europe. I will therefore rehearse unto you,
only the titles of the abuses, reseruyng the full discourse, to some other
times. Christ instituted a Supper or holy Feast, they make it a private repast.
In a feast, there is both the Feast maker and the guestes, but in their private
Mass, one supplyeth the person, both of the Feast maker, and of the guest.
Christ Instituted a Sacrament of thankesgeuyng, as he says, Do this in
remembrance of me: They make it a Sacrifice propitiatory, for the quick and
for the dead, having not one syllable of Gods word for it. Christ gave bread,
they say there is no bread. Christ gave Wine, they say the substance of Wine
is clean vanished away. Christ said, Drink ye all of this: nay say they,
none but Priests, may drink of it. Christ said, when he gave bread, This
is my body, and when he gave Wine, This is my blood: They say, when the aue,
or the other is given, that it is both the body and blood. I omit that they
Note.
mixed diverse corrupt doctrines, and unfruitful and dangerous Ceremonies. I
omit that they made it a common Merchandise; to buy souls out of Purgatory.
Finally, I omit that they have made of this heavenly mystery, a perpetual
matter of Idolatry, by leading the people in their Eleuations to worship the
creature, in steed of the Creator. If I should enter to declare, how they
have wrested, and wroong the words of Christ's Institution, it might seem to
all men that have the fear of God, very marvelous: but this that I have
spoken, may suffice. Seeing therefore, they have not the right use of the
Sacraments, according to the Institution of Christ, they cannot challenge unto
them the second Note, or mark, of the true Church of God: but that the same
remains rather with us, then with them. Yea, will Papists obiecte Succession
as a note whereby to prove themselves the true church
some say, but they have one token, whereupon the old learned Fathers, did
seem more to stay their consciences, than al y^ residue that you have spoken
of, and that is, Continual succession of Bishops, for y^ space of. 1500.
years. Irenaeus, Tertullian, Augustine. etc. and other, when truth was in
controversy, and heretics challenged the name of y^ Church, did fly to this,
as a principal anchor, whereby to stay them, and their doctrine. I grant
(dearly beloved) that it is true, in same respect, they did so. But I pray
you, who were they, against whom they so reasoned? Forsooth Marcion,
Valentinian, and other like Heretics, which did refuse and reject, almost the
whole Scriptures, both of y^ old and new Testament. And such few books, as
they admitted, they had corrupted by adding, changing, and by pulling out,
that these learned Fathers were there by forced, to appeal to the Succession
of the Apostolical Churches, as well for the trial of the auctenticall
Scriptures, always from the Apostles age left among them: as also for the
justifying of that doctrine, which they taught out of the Scriptures, and had
been always observed in the same. That it was thus, Tertul. himself witnesses.
Ista haeresis De prescrip. Heret.
(says he) non recipit quasdam scripturas, and si quas recipit adiectionibus
and detractionibus, ad dispositionem instituti sui interuertit: and si recipit,
non recipit integras. etc. i. This Heresy, does not admit certain
Scriptures, and those that it receives by additions, and detractions, it
wresteth to her purpose: and as it receives certain, so it receueth them not
wholly. etc. And yet does Irenaeus confute the same Heretics, by those books of
holy Scriptures, which they themselves allowed.

Now as it was necessary in this case, for those fathers, How the argument of
Succession has been used by the fathers.
for trial of truth, to resort to the Succession of the Apostolical churches,
that the scriptures in them reserved from the Apostles time, might be of more
authority among them, that believed not the scriptures: So it is not
necessary, so to deal against them, which willingly and gladly, submit
themselves to all the parts of the Canonical scriptures. Neither do those
Fathers stay upon these churches, because of their ordinary Succession, as the
patrones of the church of Room now do: but because in that ordinarye
Succession, the Doctrine of the Fathers was still kept inviolable, according to
the word of God. Which thing if the Church of Room were able to prove, we
would willingly yield unto it.

That those learned Fathers did this, it shall evidently appear Lib. 4. ca. 43.
unto you, by the very same places, which they allege for their purpose.
Irenaeus says, Presbyteris obaudire oportet. qui successionem babent ab
Apostolis. i. We must hear, or give ear to the ministers, which have their
suc cessyon from the Apostles. But he says not so only, but immediately
adds: Et cum Episcopatus Successione, charisima veritatis certum, secundum
placitum patris acceperunt. i. And together with the Succession in their Bisho.
prick have received also, the certain grace of true Doctrine, according to
the will of the Father. And in the very next Chapter again, after he had given
certain Marks of ill teachers, much agreeing to the course of the Church of
Room at these days, he adds: Of all such Succession is nothing without the
doctrine of the Apostls.
persons we must beware, and cleave to them, which, as I have said before,
both keep the Doctrine of the Apostles, and together with the order of
Priesthood, show wholesome and true teaching, with honest conversation of life.
Neither does Irenaeus only, thus replye upon the Doctrine of the Apostles, but
the residue also of those Fathers, whom they allege for the authority of
Succession. Tertul. says, as he is alleged by them: Let De prescrip.
them show the beginninges of their Churches. Let the Heretics devise some
such Succession. etc. But mark I pray you, what immediately follows: For
their Doctrine. being compared with the doctrine of the Apostles, by the
diversity and contrariety thereof, will evidently show it self, to be the
doctrine neither of any Apostle, nor any Apostolical man. Does he not in
plain words show, y^ Succession without the Doctrine of the Apostles is
nothing worth? S. Augusti. likewise, against the Epist. Aug. ca. 4
Fu^damentum. etc. when he has reckoned up those things, which moved him to
remain in the church, among which Succession, is but one, He adds: No such
thing is with you, where is only a promise of persons, teaching the truth,
which truth if it were so evidently declared, that we might not justly doubt of
it, it were to be preferred before all those things, with which I am kept in
the Church. etc. What can be more evident, then that S. Aug. The true Church
better proved by Doctrine then Succession and never without doctrine.
does attribute more to truth of doctrine, manifestly proved by the word of
God, then to Succession, or any other token that can be alleged? Succession,
with continuance of Apostolical Doctrine, ought to be of great authority, but
without it, nothing. It is notable that Tertullian has in the Book before
alleged: How comes it, says he, that Heretics are strangers and ennimies
to the Apostles, but only by the diversity of their Doctrine, which they what
Church is most likely to have fall interpretations
devise of their own brayn, against the Apostles. Wherefore the corruption of
scriptures, and the exposition thereof, is to be thought to be among the^,
where diversity of Doctrine contrary to the Apostles, is found. This is a
notable witness against the church of Room, whose Doctrines be so diverse,
from the doctrine of y^ primative church. The sons of Aaron, had more
allowable Succession from Aaron, than the Bishops of Rome have from Peter, and
yet because they brought strange Fire into the Temple of God, they were
rejected, and perished. Even so, says Cyprian. Those which in the Church of
De simplic. Prael.
God do imitate them, and contemning the truth delivered by God, desire strange
doctrines, and bring into the church the instruction of humain ordinance, them
Christ sharply rebukes in the Gospel, saying: You cast away the commandment
of God, that you may place your own devises. etc. Annas and Cayphas had full
Succession from Aaron, yet were it hard, thereupon to conclude, that they had
the right of the true Church, and Christ and his Disciples, to be
Seismaticks.

Though they pretend, to have the ordinary Succession of Bishops in their
Seas, sure we are, that we have the Succession of the sincere Doctrine of our
salvation, which they have not. For if their Doctrine be compared with the
Doctrine of the Apostles, by the diuersitye and contrariety thereof, it will
appear that it is the Doctrine, neither of the Apostles, nor of any
Apostolical men. The Doctrine of the Apostles is, that Christ is not only
GOD Eternal with the Father, but that he is Manne also, taking flesh of the
blessed Virgin, in all things like unto us; sin only excepted, and that in
his Phil. 2. 7. Heb. 2. 17. Act. 1. 11.
humanity, he is now ascended into Heaven, and sits perpetually at the
right hand of the father. But the Doctrine of the Church of Room tells us,
that the humanity of Christ, and his very natural body and blood, are really
and carnally not in heaven alone, but in ten thousand places also on the
earth, at one instante, the which propertye is peculier to God alone. For
nothing but God, can be in more places but one, at once: As the whole scriptures
declare.

The Doctrine of the Apostles is, that Christ is by God Romans 3. 25. ^. Joh. 2.
1. Col. 1. 20.
appointed, to be our only Mediator, Reconciler, Advocate, and intercessoure,
to make attonemente between God and us, so often as our sin shall sever us
from him, and that to that end, he sits now at the right hand of God, that
he may appear before him for us. But the doctrine of the Church of Room,
putting Christ out of office, teaches us that beside Christ, we have an
infinite number of Mediators, and Intercessours, to procure us favor, and to
make reconciliation between God and us, that is, the whole number of the
Angels and Saints in Heaven.

The Doctrine of the Apostles is, that Christ is our only Act. 10. 43. Jer. 31.
34. Romans 3. 25. Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14.
Redeemer and sauyoure, and by the price of his blood has purchased for us,
full and perfect remission of sin. But the Doctrine of Room is, that we have
remission of sins not only by Christ, but by the merits, and prayers of
saints, by our own good works, by Masses, by Pardons, by Purgatory, by holy
water, and a number of other things: so that not without note of blasphemye,
they match the vain devises of men, for the remission of our sins, with the
Blood of the son of God, the most excellent price of our Redemption. The
Doctrine of the Apostles is, that Christ is our only Priest for ever,
according to the Order of Melchizadech, that with once offering of himself,
has Heb..10. 1. 10
for ever made perfect them, that be sanctified. But the Church of Room
tells us, that Christ has a state of Priesthood succeeding him, which must
daily and continually, offer the very natural body and blood of Christ, to God
the Father, for the remission of the sins of ye quick and the dead. The
Doctrine of the Apostles is, that Christ Joh. 3. 2. Joh. 14. 26 Joh. 16. 13.
is the only Master and teacher of his church, and in his holy word, has
delivered unto it al truth: But the Church of Room teaches us, that Christ
has not delivered unto us all truth, but that there be many things,
necessary to be believed, which are not contained in the Scriptures, and
hereupon do they ground al their unwritten verities, and vain tradicions of
men, saying, that they are to be received with the like Reverence, that the
written word 1. Cor. 11. 3. Ephesians. 5. 23.
of GOD is. The Doctrine of the Apostles is, that Christ is the only Head of
his Church, and the Ruler and governor of the same: but the Church of Rome
would persuade us, that the Pope and his successors, are the heads of the
universal church of Christ.

The doctrine of the Apostles is, that Christ is the only Foundation and ground
of his Church, wherevpo^ it rests and is stayed: for S. Paul says, that No
man can lay 1. Cor. 3. 11.
any other foundation, then that is laid, Christ Jesus. But the church of Rome
teaches us, that S. Peter, and his successors be the foundation of the
Church, and that Hell gates shall never prevail against that church, that is
builded upon that foundation. This may you see very evidently, how well the
doctrine of the Church of Room agrees with the doctrine of ye Apostles. And
therefore though they have personal Succession, never so much: yet because
they have not Succession of this true doctrine, that may not justly, be taken
for the right Church of Christ.

Now if they will continue to ask of us where our Succession is? We answer,
that wheresoever since the coming of Christ, there has been any persons upon
the the face of the earth, that have confessed this sincere truth and doctrine:
We say, that they are our predecessors, and we are their Successors, and with
them members of the true Church. Therefore our church is not so new a Church,
as they would make it, but as ancient as the Doctrine is, which is the most
ancient Doctrine, yt ever was upon the face of the earth. But if this, their
personal Succession, be Personal Succession is no sure proof for the Romish
church that it is the true church.
the greatest proof of their Church, What will they say of the Grecians? Who,
have had Succession of Bishops, for as long continuance as they have, and
yet did never acknowledge the Supremacy of Rome, nor that it was the only
Catholic church but a member of it only, as others were. Oh, will they say,
The Grecyans were It is against the papists that they say the Gretians are
Scismatikes.
Scismatickes: yea, but they have continual succession of Bishops professing
Christ. And by what authority prove they that? forsooth because they separate
themselves, from the Apostolical Sea. And is that sufficient? Why? if the
Grecians are to be counted Scismatyckes, because they forsake the sea of
Room, how much more is Room it self to be counted no true Church, which
has swarued from Christ himself, as before I have declared, both in
Doctrine, and in the right use of the Sacraments? Wherefore their alleging
of the name and Title ot the Church is even a like shyft, as the Jews used
against Jeremy, and the other Prophets of God, in old time, saying: Templum
Domini, Templum Domini. i. The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord.
Whereas the Lord did acknowledge nothing among them to be his. So do they now
cry, we are the catholic church, We are the catholic Church, and God has
promised, Papists obiecte the visible state of their church to prove it to be
the true church.
that he will never forsake it, but always assiste it with his holy spirit,
and therefore has it prospered so many years: Or if the Church of Room be
not the true Church, there has been no church at all for certain hundred
years.

For where was your church scene within these forty years before Luther
began? What token was there of your Doctrine? had christ no church at al? yes
truly had he: God forbid that Christ at any time should not have his Gods true
church may be, and yet not appears generally visible.
true church. But (good people) it is not always necessary, that the church of
GOD should be Notable, or flourishe in the outward face of the World, by
continual Succession of Bishops. GOD, and the world, be contrary, and
therefore often times, the Church is more notable by contempt of the world,
and persecution, then by great Number, or Power. Yea, sometime, they which
That may seame to be the true Church which is not.
in the outward show of the World, and by certain external Signs, might
seem to be the Church, and have taken upon them, the name of the Church,
and people of GOD, have been persecutors, and to their power, the Oppressors
of the true Church of God, as it appears toward the Prophets, toward
Christ himself, and toward his Apostles. Wherefore, though the heads and
governors of the church, with the assistance of the greater number, do forsake
the true word, and worshipping of God, do make new laws, repugnante to gods
word, do bring new Rites and ceremonies into the church, and utterly corrupt
and deface the right Sacraments, and true marks of the Church: yet GOD
reserueth to himself his true church, sending from time to time, Doctors,
and Teachers, to lead them, although the same be not allowed by them, that
will be counted the Ordinary gouernoures of the church, but esteem them as
Scismatiks, as Heretics, as disturbers of the people of God. So were the
Prophets used, so was Christ himself, and his Apostles served by the Jews,
that would be counted the true church of of GOD. But this I Examples proving
a Church and yet not visible as the papists require it. In the time of the
prophets. Noe.
will declare unto you, by particular Examples.

Noe had preached (as some write) six score years, but to how small effect,
it did afterward appear, when that in the Deluge, eyghte persons only of
his Familye were saved. Consider then, what countenance the Church of GOD had
in the World, before the Deluge, when it consisted only in eighte Persons,
and they not the best esteemed, in the time of Abraham, Isaac, and the
Patriarchs. In how few and small families, were they dispersed upon the face
of the Earth, in whom the dignity of the Church consisted? Achas King Achas.
of Judah, ( Vria the high Bishop, and the other Priests not resisting him) shut
up the Temple of GOD, and took away 2. Chro. 28. 24.
the Chair, so that undoubtedly the ordinary Sacrifice, and Teaching of Gods
Law did cease: and yet was there an holy and true Church in the Kingdom of
Judah, where Esaias and other good men did Teach, but extraordinarily. Esaias.
Manasses. 2. Chro. 33. 1. etc. 2. Chro. 34. 1. etc. Jeroboam. 3. Reg. 12. 31.
Under Manasses, the true Doctrine and celebration of the Sacraments ceased,
and so this Defection continued, until it was reformed by the good King
Josias: yet notwithstanding, in that time, GOD did send his Prophets, and
there was a true Church of God in Judah. In the Kingdom of Israel, Jeroboam
deposed the true Teachers of the Law, and placed other profane and unlearned
Priests in their rooms, yea, he made Temples with Caluish Idols, new Alters,
and wholly a new worshipping of God, so that in Israel, appeared no external
token, of the church of God. And yet certainly, it cannot be denied, but God,
even then had his Church in Israel, which to repair and maintain, he did at
sundry times, send his Prophets and Preachers, but how they were used and
esteemed, the scriptures do well declare. Achab the most wicked Achab. 2. Reg.
16. 33.
of al other, who, to the wickedness of Jeroboam, added the detestable
idolatry of Baal, and so clean defaced the true worshipping, that Elias that
good Prophet, began now to loath that people, in whom appeared no token of Gods
true worshippinge, and therefore fled into a Cave. And when GOD asked him
what he did there? Oh Iorde (said he) thy people have forsaken thy
covenant, 1. Reg. 19. 10.
they have pulled down thine Aulters, they have killed thy Prophets, so that I
only am left, and yet they seek to have my soul also.

What show had the Church of God then, when Elias thought there had been no
more but him self? And yet God answered, that he had left unto him, even in
Israel, a populous Church of. 7000. that never bowed their knee to the Image of
Baal. This may be a full answer to them, that fear, if we should not
acknowledge the Church of Rome to be the true Catholic Church, that Christ
should have no Church at all. Yes undoubtedly in the greatest tyranny, and
corruption of the Church of Rome, God reserved to himself, a great and
populous Church, and company of good people, that never were distained, with
the wickedness of that Sea, and sought to worship God truly, according to his
holy word, although in some final errors, they were carried away, with the
blindness of the time. And this could I confirm by very Notable examples, yet
remaining in histories, if the time would serve. As I have said of the time of
the Prophets, so may I say of Christ's time, and his Apostles. The Jews were
Also in the time of Christ and his Apostls.
then esteemed the people of God, they had among them the law of God, they
used sacrifices appointed by God, yet did they put Christ to death, yet did
they persecute his Apostles, yet did they endeavor, to extinguish both the name
of Christ, and also his religion. Wherefore look what Defense, or what
comfort of conscience, the Prophets of GOD in old time had, Christ himself
at his coming, and his Apostles afterward might have, against the Bishops,
and Priests of the Jews, alleging that The iu^isible state of the Church
since the Apostles does not prove the Church to be no true Church.
they were the Church of GOD, that they had the temple of God, that at their
mouths, should be fette the interpretation of the law of God. The same
defense I say, the same comfort and strength of conscience, may We have against
those at these days, that assault our consciences with the Title of y^ church of
Rome: saying that they are y^ Catholic church, that they have the true
doctrine of God, yt they have authority to interpret the scriptures, and word
of God: and thereby seek to make us ashamed of the Gospel, now preached, etc.

The end of the second Sermon.
The third Sermon.
Non me pudet Euangelij. j. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for.
etc.
I Will now come to those Romans 1. 16.
that seek to make me^ ashamed The. 4. obicetion against the Gospel.
of y^ Gospel, by saying that y^ professors thereof, are in life, dissolute,
and licentious, y^ they are, in commonweals troublesome, and seditious, y^
they are in their doctrine disagreeing and contentious, with such other
quarrels rising of malice rather then any good truth. As touching the first
point, I will be the shorter, becanse Answer. Dissolutsnesse of protestants
lives does not make their doctrine error, or to be hated.
I have so much spoken of y^ thing before, as, y^ whatsoever by frailty
happens among y^ protestants, sure I am, our greatest adversaries cannot
justly say or surmise, that our doctrine in it self, maintains any such
dissolutenes of life. I confess unto them, y^ there be diverse, yt turn the
grace, and liberty of y^ Gospel, to a licentiousnes of life, and by their
examples, cause men to suspect yt our doctrine, as hurtful to good manners, and
an enemy to virtuous living. This is so plain, I will not deny it, It is so
evil, I can not defend it: It is so grievous, I may not dissemble it. Yea, I
grant furthermore, y^ among the best professors of y^ Gospel, I see not that
perfectnes, that should be, but sometimes evil, and hurtful examples, our
fault (I confess) is the greater, and with heavy hearts, we may acknowledge
it to be true. But what of all this? Is that, cause sufficient to fear me^
from our Doctrine? is that enough, to cause men to be ashamed of y^ Gospel?
God forbid. The like undoubtedly were in Christ's time, the like were in the
Apostles time, Yea, among the.xii. there was one wicked Judas: and yet, though
some were evil, all were not so. Mat. 11. 19. Jo. 8. 48. Act. 21. 28. Act. 24.
5.
Christ himself, was reproved as a drunkarde, or glutton, the Apostles were
called seditious: the fathers, were noted to disagree among themselves. What
mean those vehement exhortations yt S. Paul used, to move men to purity and
innocence of life? What means y^ terrible threatenings, against wicked and
vicious livers? Do they not evidently declare, that godlynes and innocence,
was more contemned, wickedness and naughtines more embraced, then did become y^
true professors of y^ Gospel? And yet could not me^ at yt time, take just
cause, to be ashamed of the Gospel. But this is not a little to be maruailed
at, y^ the same persons, that pretend themselves to be so greatly offended,
either with the licentiousness of the false Gospellers, or with the frailty of
them that truly profess it, can wink with both eyes, and without offense,
suffer in the Clergy of Rome, shamlesse Simonie, inco^tinence, druukennes,
Diceplaying, Dissolutnesse and wickedness of life has been more in the
church of Rome then amongst the protestants.
hunting, Nicromancie, ambition, vriberie, cruelty, covetousness, extortion,
and open injury? I know comparison is odious, and by example of other I
learn, that to make offers in this place is dangerous. Yet notwtstanding,
this offer will I make, that if all the adversaries of the Gospel. be hable
upon any credible proof, more than their own sclaunderous libells, to show
so many horrible examples of all kind of wicked vices, in the professors of
the Gospel, that have been since God restored to the world, the truth of his
word, as I will show them, by testimony of their own Histories, and other
probable writers, to have been in the sea of Rome it self, and that among
their most holy Fathers, and heads of their church, then, I say, I will openly
confess, that their life and doctrine, is better then ours. But if they
cannot, shame it is for them, any longer to pretend that cause, to be
ashamed of the Gospel. I would the time would now suffer me, to give you a
taste, of that I have now spoken: I should then note unto you, the exceeding
contention, ambition, and briberie, that a many of them used, about the year
of our Lord. 900. and after, of whom Platina in the life of Benet. 4. says
thus: Vbi, cum ipsis opibus, lasciuire That the popedom was to begotten by
ambition and briberie.
caepit Ecclesia, nullo principe coercente clericorum flagitia, ipsa pecca^ds
licentia, haec monstra peperit, a quibus, illa fedes per ambitionem and
largitionem occupata est. i. When as the Church, through riches, began to wax
wanton, and that no Prince then, corrected the great offenses of the clergy:
even then did liberty to sin, bring forth these monsters, who now by
Ambition, and Briberie do hold that Sea.

And again, in the life of Siluester. 2. Eo tum pontificatus Virtue and
learning not regarded in choice of popes. And yet worse then so to. etc.
deuenerat, vt qui largitione and ambitione, non dico vitae sanctitate and
doctrina plus possit, is tantummodo, bonis reiectis, dignitatis gradum
obtineret: quem morem, vtmam nostra tempora non retinerent, sed hoc parum est,
peiora (nisi Deus auertat) visuri sumus. i. To that state then, had the
Popedom come, that he which by briberie and ambition (I do not say holiness
of life and sound doctrine) might do most, He only obtained that place of
dignity, those which were good being then rejected: which manner and custom,
I would to God, that our times did not continue still. Yet this is but a small
matter, and worse things then this shall we see, if God turn them not away.

I shouldem oreouer describe unto you, the outrageous Of horrible cruelties in
popes.
cruelty of them, that could not be contented to Depose their adversaries: But
to cut of their noses, to put out their eyes, to take the^ out of their graves,
and the^ to cut off their heads and fingers, to cast them as dogs, without
burial, into y^ river Tyber, To famishe them to death, to hang them up an
whole day by the hear of their heads, with such other A cruel tormentor.
practices more like y^ successors of Phalaris, then of Peter. For testimony
of these things, look Platina in the life of Stephane. 6. Sergius. 3. John.
14. Boniface. 7. Calixte 2. And beside Platina, Carsulanus, Vincentius and
Stella Venetus, who among other of that time, writes thus: Onis Time when in
state of the popish clergy, virtue seemed to be utterly decayed.
virtus tam in capite, quam in membris, ex hominum ignauia consumpta est. i.
All kind of virtue as well in the head, as in the other members, is by men's
great slothfulness and security, utterly consumed and gone. I should beside
this set out unto you y^ wicked and detestable Sorcerie, Nicromancie Popes
Sorcerers, Nicromancers, Coniurers, Poisoners.
and poisoning, practiced about the year of our Lord. 1000. and long after by
Siluester. 2. and a meany of his scholars, and successors, set forth by Benno
a Cardinal, in the life of Hilde Brand, after called Gregory. 7. Which
treatise he that will read, shall see such horrible matter, as, I am sure no
Profane History, mentions of any Heathen, or Pagan, that ever was. I
should declare Popes did great injuries even to Emperors.
unto you the monstrous and unspeakable Injuries wrought unto most worthy
and Noble Emperors by Gregory the seventh, Adrian the fourth, Gregory the.
9. Clement the sixth, and diverse other, which are so descriued and painted
forth by the Abbot of Vrsperge, living about that time, and by Hier. Marius, as
it would cause their Of covetousness, and extortions in Popes.
own friends, to detest them. Last of all, I should lay open unto you, such
a bottomless gulf of covetousness, and Extortion, as all the wealth and
treasure of Christendom, could never to this day satisfy and content. Of
which the Abbot of Vrsperge in his Chronicle says thus, Gaude matter nostra
Roma, quoniam aperiuntur tibi cataracta thesauroru^ in terra, vt ad te
confluant riui and aggeres nu^morum in magna copia. Jocundare super adiutrice
tua discordia, qua erupit de puteo infernalis Abyssi, vt accumulentur tibi
multa pecuniarum praemia. Habes quod sitisti, decanta canticum, quia per
malitia^ hominu^, non per`piam religionem orbem vicisti. Be glad our mother
Rome, because all the Thesauries of the earth are opened vvyde unto thee, that
to the may come streams, and heaps of money, in great and large abundance.
Sport thou thy self with thy fellow helper discord, which has broken forth
out of the bottomless pit of Hell, that there might be heaped up unto thee
many rewards of money. Now have thou that thou did thirst for, sing thou
out a loud, for by the wickedness of men, and not by any good Religion,
haste thou overcome all the whole world. But the time that is appointed for
me, would not be sufficient in this manner, only to reckon up their
mysdoinges, much less, at the full, to set forth the examples of them. And
yet forsooth, it is those men, and their mayntayners, that at this day, do
find so great fault with the lives of them, that profess the Gospel, and
would for that cause, have men to be ashamed of it. Much like is the quarrel
of them, Protestants not to be hated of papists as seditious persons, which is
part of the answer to the 4. objection.
that say the doctrine of the Gospel does disquiet commonweals, and cause
Sedition and civil wars. This is the complaynte of them commonly that would
incite Princes, and Noble personages, and Magistrates, to hate the Gospel, and
to perfecute the Preachers of it. And this their complaynt, do they amplifye
and make lykely, by the example of those stirs, that have been of late
years in Germany, in France, in Scotland, in Flaunders, in England. As
though (forsoothe) there Wars were in time of papistrie more then fr^^ce.
had never been rebellion, and stir, before the late preaching of the
Gospel. As though, commonweals had never been turmoiled, and troubled,
before this day. But this Realm of England, may be a very good example of the
contrary, wherein, scantly one king, has passed his raygne without rebellion,
made by one or other. What a troublous Realm was this, in the time of king
Henry the second, when the Wife (after other trouble) did set up the Son,
against the father? What horrible, and grievous rebellions were their in Henry
the thirds reign, when after the Slaughter of many thousands, the king
himself was taken prisoner, and forced to yield to the decrees of his
subjects? What shall I say, of Edward. 2. when by Spensers.
the pride of the Spensers, the Qneeue her self warred against her husband?
And that I may not continue altogether in examples of rebellion, by Noble
persons: This City of London, and the Majors thereof, can be good witnesses,
what trouble there was raised in this Realm, in the time of Kichard the
second, by Jack Straw, Tom Millarde, Watte Tyler, and such other jolly
persons. I pass over Henry the fourth, and the pitiful raygne of Henry the
sixth. And even in the quiet time of Henry. 7. how many attemptes of
Rebellion were there, by the counterfaited Son of the Duke of Clarence, by
Perkin Warbecke and other. Even in our remembrance, what rebellions were
there, under the Noble Prince king Henry the eyghte, and yet if you consider
the quarrel, nothing at all by the professors of the Gospel. I could say the
like of France, Spain, Flaunders, and Scotland, but that no man that has
once looked into Histories, can be ignorant of it. But if I should declare
unto you, the manifold Popes raisers of war.
rebellions, and horrible wars, that have been raised by the Princes of
Papistrie, (the Bishops of Rome themselves) in Italy under the names of
Gwelfes and Gibilines, in Sicile, Naples, and Arragon, for Titles of those
kingdoms in France and Germany, for the appoynting of Emperors in all
places of Christendom, continually for trifling quarrelles: I doubt not but I
should cause, even the greatest fautors of the Sea of Rome, and the veriest
enemies of the Gospel, to confess, that notwithstanding those troubles that
we have seen, yet in comparison, GOD in these days has not only blessed
this Realm with maruailous quietness, but also suffered other Countries, to
be less troubled then before time they have been. This I can not let pass,
that Vrbane the sixth, and Clemente the seuenthe, two contentious Popes and
their successors, for the space of fortye years, cursyng and banning each the
other, did raise wars, and set all Christendom Popes by their strife and
cur^ing one the other set all christendom by the eats.
together by the ears. Germany, Hungary, Italy, England and Pannonie held
with Vrbane and were called Vrbanistes. Spain, France, and Cacelome held with
Clement, and were called Clementines. Do you not know that it is one part of
their doctrine, that their clergy must be exempt from all Princes authority?
Do you not know thai they have brought it to pass in all Christendom, to have
it so? Do you not know, that the Prelates of Rome were never quiet, until
they had made all Princes subject to them? Until they had caused Emperors to
go at their styrropes, To kiss their shoes, To put their neck under their
feet. Do you not know, that under the person of Boniface. 8. they made (as
it were) open proclamation, that they had the full power, of both swords, and
that all Princes of the earth, have their authority of them, and they
immediately of God? Now, when they had made all states of the earth to be
subject to them, and their clergy, to whom then should they show
obedience? Means for Magistrates to judge what cebellious subtectes Papists
are.
This only thing, if Magistrates and Princes, will not be willyngly blind,
may well make proof unto them, that all is not Gold that glistereth, that all
be not quiet subjects, that greatly will pretend so to be. But as for the
doctrine of the Gospel, that it does not maintain, either discord in commonweals, or contempt The Religion of protestants maintains no ^^^^ultes. etc
Romans 13. 1.
of Magistrates, it is most evident. For we teach continually with S. Paul,
That all persons whatsoever they be, must be subject to higher powers. We
teach that kings and Princes have their authority, immediately of God, and by
him, are armed with the sword, and therefore, if we resist them, that we
resist God himself, that ordained them. Yea, and that we must obey them, not
for fear, least they be revenged upon our stubbornness, and contumacie, but
least we run into the anger and wrath of God, by disturbing that order,
that by him is appointed.

It is false therefore to say that the Gospel is cause of rebellion. It may
perhaps sometime come to pass, The stir following the Gospel, is not to be
imputed to the Gospel.
that upon preaching of the Gospel, stir and trouble does arise, but it
cannot be more justly imputed to the Gospel, then the wickedness of them that
I spoke of before, which convert the liberty of the Gospel to a
licenciousnesse of the flesh. Of whom S. Paul says: Eorum damnatio Romans 3.
8. How stirs do come in the time of the Gospel.
iusta est. i. Their damnation is just. Trouble and sedition is commonly raised
by them, that pass not if y^ Gospel were clean confounded, and overthrown:
either because they fear the hinderaunce of their own gain, (as Demetrius
the Usurer did) or else because their Act. 19. 24.
Superstitions cannot be otherwise maintained, then with the sword.

Some again on the other side, be so puffed up, with the spirit of Ambition,
that under the pretense of Religion, they will make great stir and alteration
in commonweals, to the end that the lawful Princes and Magistrates being
deposed, they may be advanced and set up in their Places.

Other some perchance, are sediciously moved, upon hope of immunitie, and
private gain, and therefore will cause rebellion, that they may be eased of
payments, seasinges and tributes, which not only by man's Law, but by Gods
commandment are due to Princes. But to impute these faults of corrupt time,
and evil persons, to the Doctrine of the Gospel, is very unjust and partial
dealing. In like sort, did the Princes charge the Apostles, Papisticall
slander of Protestants to be sedicious etc. is no new thing.
Preachers, and Fathers of the primative Church, as I could at large declare
unto you, by the Apologies of Iustine, Tertullian, Arnobius, and diverse other
godly men. All the Plagues that God sent among them, all the wars and troubles
that were raised, they imputed to Christianity. In so much that Orosius, by
the advice of Saint Jerome and other, did write an History purposely to declare
that the like had been at all times before, yea, and that more grievous then in
those days: and therefore shows that they falsely charged the Gospel with
it.

Wherefore in like manner, when you hear these false and vain Crimes fathered
upon the Professoures of the Gospel, and teachers of Gods holy word: Let
them not dismay you, but stoutly say with S. Paul. Non me pudet Euangelij. I
am not ashamed of the Gospel. etc.

I come now to that with which of all other things The. 5. objection against
the gospel. us.
they do most vpbrayde us, and most greeuouslye amplify and exaggerate to the
defaming of the Gospel. Oh say they, they agree not among themselves: So many
heads, so many Opinions and Doctrines. Some are That the professors of it
agree not in opinion.
Lutherians, some Zwinglians, some Caluinists, some Libertines, some
Anabaptists, some Stenkfeldians, so yt they have filled all the world with
Sects and divisions.

But (dearly beloved in our Savior Christ) against the envious cauils, and
wicked reports blown abroad, by the enemies of Gods truth, you have this
comfort, that it is no new thing, to have the Teachers, and Professoures of
Gods word, to be thus odiouslye slaundered.

Thus, their forefathers used the Apostles: thus they Objection of dissension
is no new thing.
used the Godly, Fathers, and Christians also of the Primative Church. Clemens
Alexand. Srom. lib. 7. says, with like false and odious report, the Jews and
Gentiles were wont to triumph upon the christians, in those days. Oh, said
they, you Christians have many sects and factio^s and although you will be al
called christians, yet you impugn, detest, and hate one another: Wherefore your
religion, is not true, neither comes of God. For if it were of God, you would
agree among your selves. There were at that time, above twenty sundry Heresies,
the ignominy and reproach of all which, they laid to ye true Christians, to
discredit them: not considering, as Christ himself says, that when the good
Husbandman has sowed in his Land, pure and good seed, the enemy comes Mat.
13. ^5.
in the night, and sows among it Cockell and Darnell: And yet is not the
Husbandman to be blamed, for that which the malice of the enemy has
wroughte.

Even so now in this time, when GOD has restored Protestants at not to be
blamed for the sects that happen in the time of the gospel.
the true and pure Seed of his Word, and cast it into the world by his
Preachers, the Devil has raised up diverse sects, and wicked Heresies, of
purpose to discredit the truth: and yet is neither GOD nor his Ministers to be
blamed for it.

If any of them of that sort have professed the Gospel, we may comfort our
selves as Saint John did in the like matter, A nobis says he, Exicrunt, sed
non erant ex nobis, si enim 1. Jo. 2. 19.
fuissent ex nobis, permansissent vtique nobiscum. That is, They went out from
us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they had undoubtedly
remained with us.

Happily some of these came from us, but they were not Sectaries.
of us: they be departed from our Church: they do more hate us, than the
Papists. All the fautors of the sea of Room, have not written half so much to
impugn the wicked Doctrine of the Anabaptists, Libertines, Stenkefeldians,
Osiandrists, and such other, as the Protestants have done. Yea, if a man
look thorowlye, into those Sects, he shall see the^ far better to agree with
the Sects do more agree to papists then protestants. Objection: ^ convince
protestants for dissension in opinions.
church of Rome, then with us. Wherefore, how justly they do vpbraid us, and
defame the Gospel with y^ reproach of their names, let the Godly consciences be
Judge. But happily they will say, that even we that challenge most of all to
have the Gospel, and truth of Gods word, do foullye disagree among our selves.
For I pray you has not the controversy of the Sacrament, a long time, with
bitter conteution, distracted the two churches of Wittenberge, and Tigure? Does
not the same contention at this day remain among us here in England? Do we
not even now strive for the matter of Apparel? I would to GOD (if it were
his holy will) I might in this point say, as I have before, that it were
not so.

I would I might say, that all were false, and that they do therein slander
us. But it is true, I confess it, and with sorrowful heart I do confess it.
But yet nevertheless, (God be thanked) there is no just cause, why either I,
or other should be greatly dismayed at it, or for that cause, to be ashamed of
the Gospel. It is still the power of God to salvation, though by this little
spotte, in countenance of the world, it may seem to be somewhat blemished.

As for the controversy of the Sacrament among us, it is not great, the parties
of the one side are but few, and yet I confess they are to many. But where
the contention is greatest, the matter is not so heinous, nor the dissencion so
diverse, as Staphilus and such other, of very malice, The dissencion of the
protestants for the sacrament, is no such great matter as papists make it.
would have it seem to be. Both parties in the right use of the Sacraments
do well agree: both parts grant that they be Seals to confirm in our hearts
the promises of God, and benefit of our salvation by Christ Jesu: both parts
grant that they be Testimonies and Pleadges, of his Divine grace and favor:
both parts grant, that they be badges and Cognizaunces of Christian
society, to erecte and confyrme our Faith, and to bind us to the study of
honesty, charity, and concord: both parts grant that the body of Christ,
is present, yea and that truly, and in deed, so yt they be not bare signs,
but such as effectualy do bring, to the faithful heart, the very things that
are signified: both parts grant that the chief effect, and benefit of a
Sacrament, is taken by the spiritual eating, so yt the bodily eating without
yt, is nothing. Only the contention, is about the Manner of y^ presence, and
eating, while ye one part affirms with the Church of Rome, that it is Real,
and Carnal: the other to be only Spiritual, and by Faith. How this
controversy may be agreede, and of what force this carnal presence and eating
is, for which only they contend, if I should now stand to declare, I
should make to large a digression from my purpose, and hold you to long. This
only I trust (for this time) you may see, that the matter is not so grievous,
as it is pretended to be.

As for the controversy of Apparel, as there is in it some The dissension
among Protestants for apparel, is no such great matter as Papists make it.
diversity of Judgementes, so is there no separation of christian faith and
charity. For sure I am y^ neither they that do refuse the appointed apparel,
do condemn us that wear it: (I speak of them that be learned) neither we yt
at y^ Princes order receive it, do hate the^ that of conscience for certain
consideracions think they may not safely use it. Although in this matter we
wish that they would do as we do. As for all other p^intes of Doctrine, I will
protest my conscience for my self, and as many other as I know, I think very
well of them, and judge that for their singular gifts, there may some of them
be very good instruments in the church, and we are persuaded they think even so
of us. Wherefore although there be some misliking of judgments in these
trisles, and that it pleases the Magistrates, and rulers for certain causes
by their authority, rather to justify the opinion of the one, than of the
other: yet assure your selves, the jar in the matter it self, is not so
great, as the enemies of the truth would have it seem to be.

But be it that the jar were great, has not God, I God suffers diversity
of opinions even in his true Church.
pray you, in the most pure state of his Church, for causes to his wisdom
known, suffered such misliking and diversity of judgments, among his holy and
blessed Apostles, and Preachers? perhaps to this end, that they might thereby
learn to remember, and know their own infirmity. What controversy was between
Peter and Paul, for the eating, or not eating, Gal. 2. 11.
in the company of the Gentiles? wherein, albeit Peter were a chief Apostle,
yet God suffered him to be so carried away with error, y^ Paul openly blamed
him as not rightly pr^^eding in the Gospel. Was there not much misliking
between Paul and Barnabas for the company of Mark, that Act. 15. 39.
they in displeasure parted companies? Were there not, so great sects and
contenti^ns among the Cor. that the Lords 1. Cor. 11. 18. ^^.
supper ^^^ by the^ very ^ull abused through the same, and yet (...) n^^ their
whole doctrine, for that, be condemned. Did not the Emulation between the
Jews and the Gentiles, Act. 17. 5. Act. 21. 27. Act. 15. 6.
a great while trouble the primative church? Did it not cause a counsel to be
gathered of the Apostles, for quieting of the same? Immediately after the
Apostles time, it is evident in Eusebius, and other histories, that the
controversy Diversity of opinion, which was in the East and Weste Church for
Easter.
for the observation of Easter day, did cause great styr between the East and
West Church? And yet both of them pretended the example of the Apostles:
Policrates, and the East church following Saint John, Victor Bishop of Room,
and the West Church, alleging the authority of Saint Peter. Did not this
matter fall out so bitterly, that the one part did excommunicate the other?
What shall I say of the Scismes, and grievous contencions in the East church,
between Paulinus and Flauianus, Other Scismes in the East church, which were
Christians.
Lucifer and Eusebius, the Meletians and Eustathians, all good Christians: and
yet did they with great troubles eschew one the others Communion, as you may
read in Epiph. li. 2 Tom. 2. Theodo. lib. 1. ca. 8. etc. Soc. li. 1. cap* 23.
30 Sozom. 2. ca. 18. the space of 80 years or above. What shall I say of the
great strife between Chri. Chrisost.
on the one part, and Theophilus, Cyrill, and Epipha. on the other, for y^
burning of Origins books? They were al godly and learned Bishops, and we do
worthily reverence their names, and yet fell this matter so foul out between
them that because chrisost. would not consent to the burning of Origines
books, Theophilus and Cyrill would scantly ever acknowledge him to be a
lawful Bishop: and Epiph. in bitter chiding, fell out to such cholar, as he
said yt he hoped he should never die Bishop. To whom Chriso. answered, as
angerly again, that he trusted, he should never return alive into his
country of Cypres. Which chiding words were not so bitter in sound, as after
they proved true in deed. For both Epiph. died before he came home to Cypres
and Chrisost. being put out of his Bishopric, ended his life in banishment. I
omit the contentious between August. Other Scismes of others.
and Hierome: between Hierome, Vigila^tius, Ruffinus and other, between
Tertul and the priests of Rome, between Ciprian and cornelius as well for other
things, as for rebaptizing of Heretics, which things I here recite not, to the
discrediting of so worthy and learned men, as all christendom does justly
reverence their memory, but to declare that god oftentimes, for such causes as
he thinks good, does suffer the best sort of his preachers, to have not only
diversity of judgments, but also contention and strife among themselves. But
who I pray you are they that thus Papists com^^e without their own shame
object scismes to protestants. Of multitude of dissentions amongst papists.
find fault with our dissension, and diversity of opinirns? forsooth even they
whose whole religion, if it be well considered, is nothing but a Chaos and
confuse heap of sects, scismes, and seperations of minds, and judgments. And
God is my witness, I speak not this of stomach to aggrauate y^ matter, but of
very conscience, finding y^ thing to be so, am forced to speak it, as a most
plain and certain truth. And first for proof of this, I pray you consider with
me, whether among the fautors of the sea of Rome, every country, City,
parish, and Of their diversity of helpers.
house have not a peculiar patron, in whom he trusts, every man his peculiar
Saint, y^ especially he worshippeth, every disease, a peculiar helper and
Mediator to cure it. England has S. George, France, S. Jews, Scotland, S.
Andrew, freland, S. Patrike, and likewise of other. In Room, S. Peter, in
Milain, S. Ambrose, in Vienne, S. Stephane, in Coline, y^ iii. Kings are
worshipped. S. Appoline for y^ teeth S. Roche, for the plague, S. Swithine for
the lost key, is cheefely sought unto, every person, and every thing, had his
peculier God. This sort would go to heaven by S. Francis Of their diversity of
orders and professions whereby to go to heaven.
rule, yt sort by S. Benedicts, the third by S. Dominikes, the fourth by S.
Augustines. Some would be S. clares disciples, other would be S. Bridgets, And
hereof came their manifold swarms and sects of religious persons, of which some
were called Fra^ciscanes, some Dominickes, some Augustines, some cleme^tines,
some Ioha^nites, some Jesuits, some Scapucin^s, and I can not tell what: so
that they would be called, all things, rather then Christians.

What other thing is this, then that Christ prophesied, should come to pass in
the latter days? Lo here is christ Mar. 13. 21.
Lo there is Christ: So that al forsake him, the Lord and only Christ, and
in every corner, and Monastery, follow their own peculier Sauieur, and Christ.
S Paul was grieved with the Corinthians, for that they were so distracted in
factions, that some would say, we are Apollos scholars other, we are Cephases:
other, we are Paul's. When they call themselves Dominikes, Benedictines. etc.
might we not say to them, as Paul said to the Cor. Is christ 1. Cor. 1. 12.
divided? Was Dominike crucified for you? was Francis or Benet crucified for
you? that you choose rather factiously to bear their names, then with all other
yt name of christ? I will not stand to recite the Repugnancie, and
concrarietie, Repugnancie even in the decres of popes.
^^t the decrees of the Bishops of Room, seeing that Platina their own
historiographer writes, that their co^tinal manner was, that one Bishop
disanulled the decrees of the other. His words are these: Magnafuit haec
controuersia and pessimi exe^pli, cu^ post, se^per seruata sit haec consuetudo,
vt acta prioru^ pontificu^, sequentes, aut infringere^t, aut omnino tollere^t.
i. Great was this controversy, and unto very ill example when as always
after, this custom is continued, that those Popes which follow, do ever
either break, either utterly disanul the deeds of their predecessors. The
like he writes in the life of Romanus of the disse^tio^ between the Popes.
Look Exasmus in his annotations, The Scholemen are full of diversity of
opinions.
upon the 7 Cor. Who is able to reckon up the infinite disagreinges of the
Scholemen, both against y^ master of the Sentences, and among themselves, and
that in matter of no small wayght. Do not all the scholars, almost in sundry
points swerue from their maystor, with this clause? Hic Magister non tenetur.
Hear, is not our Master to be holden, and maintained.

The master of y^ Sentences touching Original sin, says ye Lib. 2. di. 25.
For original Sin.
man's nature is by it so corrupted, that by the power of nature they ca^ do no
goodness toward god: contrariwise Scot^, Occa^ and other a^^^rme y^ natural man's
strength, is yet indifferent, and may apply, and prepare it self to Grace. The
Master of the Sentences, in the use of the Sacraments Li. 4. di. 4.
rejects Opus operatum, i. The deed of receiving, that it in it self,
should have virtue to give grace, and requires Panitentiam and fidem. Faith
and repentance, to be also in the Receauer, that shall have benefit by the
sacrament. The other Scholeme^, do erpressely, For the virtue of the
Sacraments.
and plainly teach, that the Sacraments, have power to sanctify, Ex opere
operato, etiam sine bono motu vtentis. i. Even by their being received, and
that without any good inward motion of the Receauer. But they do not only
thus run, from their Master Lomberde, but are foul fallen out also between
themselves, while some will be called Terminales, some Reales, some Nominales,
Diversity of titles challenged of Papisticall Scholemen.
some Formales, some Thomistes, some Scotistes, some Occamistes, and so forth a
many more. This diversity of professions, could not be without great
repugnancie, in opinions. If I should stay in Examples, they be infinite, and
I should hold you too long. A witness or two of approved authority, for
this, may serve. Roffensis against Luther: This (says he) I speak for the
Fathers, whose judgment I had rather follow, then the Schoolemens, for that
in this point, they be repugnant one to the other: Erasmus in his Enchiridion
says, Si Turcis, vt Papisticall Scholemen which divided themselves to sects
and how hurtful that is to christianity. The bitterness of the coutention
amongst the Scholemen papists.
Christum amplectantur Occamos, Durandos, Scotos, Gabrieles, aut Aluaros,
proposuerimus, quid cogitabunt? quid sentient? vbi audierint spinosas illas
argutias de instantibus de formal tatibus, de quidditatibus? etc. Praesertim
vbi viderint eos, de his adeo non conuenire, vt frequenter vsque ad pallorem,
vsque ad conuitia, vsque ad Sputa, nonnunquam, vsque ad pugnos in^ucem
digladientur. If we to win the Turks, to embrace Christ, shall offer or
allege unto them, Durande, Scotus, Gabriel, Aluarus or any their followers,
what will they think? What will they gather, when they shall hear those
Sophistical and contentious subtilties, De instantibus, de formalitatibus, de
quidditatibus, etc. (Which are altogether frivolous contentions, rather for
words then matter?) But especially when they shall see these men, in such
sort to disagree for these things, that often they strive, even till they be
pale withal, even till they fall to chiding, even till they spit one at an
other, even til they fall to blows together. The like repugnancie, is
between. Thomas and sundry other Divines. For the University of Paris,
condemns Thomas, in diverse articles, as manifestly erring, in the faith, as
it may appear in certain additions, set to the end, of the master of the
sentences. I omit the contrariety of Counsels, by manifest decrees Counselles
to disagree and differ in opinion.
impugning one another. I omit the grievous conte^tion between the Council of
Basil, and the Popes, struggeling, which of them should have the chief
authority in the Church. I omit the repugnant opinions of Gerson, and sundry
other Divines, touching the same. I will not speak of the great stir that
was between the University of Paris, Diversity of opinion betw^^t the
university and the Friars.
and the Freers, for the whole state of their religion, and continued many
years, until the Popes highness, took the Freers into his tuition, against
a great number of learned Divines, that disputed, preached and wrate sharply
against them. I will not speak either of the disagreeing between the
Canonistes, and Scholemen, for sundry matters, as between the Monks and
Freers for the conception of our Lady. Ouely I will in a word or two, put you
in mind, of some of their chief champions, that even in this age, even in our
days, even in our remembrance, have not only differed, in some small
points, but in chief and great articles, one writing against another. Yea,
and I will note unto you, the Fathers of one only counsel of Tridente, that
thereby you may take taste, what agreement is between the residue, if their
doings should be sifted. Of late dissentions in opinion among papists.
Does not Catharinus Archbishop of Compsane one of the Popes legates, and great
Cardinals, in rigor and fierce manner, impugn the judgment of Dominicus a
Soto ^ Spanishe Friar, of great credit, and one of the Emperors 1
confessors? and the same Soto, as sharply write against Catharinus? and that
in no such small: controversies, (as in a trifle, touching apparel:) but De
Fiducia hominis Christiani, of the hope of a Christian, Of predestination, of
original sin of free will, etc. and belike each part had his assistances. For
one of their books, was printed in Rome, with the alowance of the Bishop and
Cardinals, the other were printed at Antwerp Came priuilegio Imperatoris, and
the allowance of of the Schools of Louaine, Colone, and the prelates of
Flaunders. The same Catharinus, writes as vehemently against 2
Cardinal Caietanus, of famous memory, and a great patron of the Popes, to
his dying day: but in his works Katharinus, notes, 200, points of doctrine,
erroneous, and (as he says) heretical. That book came forth after Caietanus
was dead, or else, like it is, that he would have done as much for Catharine
as that comes to. Like contention 3
was between Catharinus, and Franciscus Torrensis, for ye single life of
Priests, and the residence of Bishops: which thing Francis said, were
appointed by Gods law, but Catharine earnestly defends the contrary. Who is
of greater 4
credit, in ye Church of Rome, the^ Albertus Pighius? who has more stoutely,
or with more countenance of learning, defended that side? And yet in the weighty
articles of Original sin, Justification, and Free Grace, beside diverse
other, Ruardus Tapper, Deane of Coleyne, in his. 2. Tome, does namely and
expressly write against him, and say, that he was deceived. Because the time
does now cut me so short, I will here end this matter, as having given you, a
sufficient trial, how the Patrones of the Sea of Rome, agree among themselves.
And yet forsoothe, these are they, that find so great fault, with lack of
agreement between the Preachers of the Gospel, in these days, and upon
every diverse word, in the interpretation of a sentence, will devise the name
of a sect among us, only of malice, only to defame our doctrine, as Doctor
Staphilus deals with us in. etc.

Wherefore when we hear these lying and sclaunderous repartes, that the
Teachers of the Gospel are licentious, seditious, and disagreing among
themselves: let us consider, that these are the blastes of malicious enemies,
ten times more offending, in the same things themselves. Let us remember,
that the Gospel of Christ, is y^ true Rule of perfect life, the pattern of
obedience, and the assured bond of vintie, peace, and concord, and therefore
still say, with S. Paul, I am not ashamed of the Gospel.

Last of all, they which depend wholly upon the judgment Romans 1. 16.
of men, and estimation of the world, and are ashamed of the The. ^. obicetion
against the gospel. vz.
Gospel, because of the Multitude, the power, the authority, and noble estate
of them, that mislike the Gospel: They see not only loss of estimation, and
contempt of the world, That igno^^ and persecution does follow it.
but commonly persecution also, either partly annexed, or always imminent and at
hand, to the preaching of the Gospel, As it is well written, Crux est comes
Euangely. i. The Cross and persecution, is the companion of the Gospel: so it
is as truly proved on the other part, that Sensus carnis crucem execratur and
fugit. i. The understanding of the flesh, detesteth and flies from the
Cross. Wherefore worldly men because they see, that the greater part do hate
the Gospel, That few Nobles, or great estates, do soundly favor it, That
they are disdayned, and had in contempt, that puerly do teach it, that there
is continual erpectation of the Cross of persecution, to light upon it: for
this cause, I say, many do shun it, few do embrace it, all men, every
hour, stand looking, what mutabilitie of time, will bring unto it. This
causes, that in the Universities, The cause of few divines in universities of
the best sort of wits.
many excellent, and goodly wits, that might be singular ornaments ^^ the
Church, turn their studies, to Law, to Phisiche, and to other purposes, and
will hardly, be brought to the studde of Divinity, but in no wise to follow
the Ministry. But I will not tarry longer in this matter, although I have
good matter, to utter in it. The time does abridge me, I will return to my
purpose. They that are ashamed of the Gospel, in respect of Answer to the ^
objection.
worldly disdayue, and trouble, do not sufficiently consider, that Christ in
the midst of his own persecution, and affliction, said, that his kingdom
was not of this world. yea, he said the world hated him, because he detected
the wickedness of the world. They therefore that will be true followers of
Christ, may not look, to have better intertainment in the world, than Christ
had himself. If the Ioh. 15. 18.
world hate you (says Christ) you know that it hated me before you. If ye
were of the world, the world would surely love, that is his own. Because you
are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore does
the world hate you. The servant is not above the master, If they persecuted
me, they will persecute you also. And all these things shall they do for How
god has blessed England enen in this late time of the gospel.
my names sake. And although we be sure by Christ's promise, that the world
shall thus use us: Yet consider, how graciously and mercifully, he has in
these days dealt with his scattered flock. Though Antichrist grenne and gnashe
his teeth at us, Though the greatest powers of Europe, be bent against us: yet,
as he promised by his Prophet Esaias: He has given Kings, to be nursing Fathers,
and Queens, to be nursing mothers. He has raised to us, our most gracious
sovereign, under whose protection (praise be to his name for it) we do
safely, and quietly, enjoy the preaching of y^ Gospel: yea notwtstanding ye
threatenings, and endeavors of mighty adversaries abroad, and some great enemies
at home. And yet still does the say, as I pray God she may long, and ever from
her heart say, Non me pudet Euangelij. etc. I am not ashamed of the Gospel. If
any That princes do resist the gospel, that is no cause of discredit unto it.
be so affected, that they think, the kingdom of Christ, and his Gospel, is
but weak, and worthy contempt, because it is commonly tossed in danger, and
trouble of the world, and has Princes more commonly against it, then with it,
they are in that point much deceived. For thereby, it may appear, that it is
preserved, and kept, by the mighty power of God, and not by the uncertain,
and brittle Favor of Princes, and worldly puisance: which then commonly
falls most suddenly, when it seems to men, to florishe most The gospel
often florisheth, when it is most resrifted.
gloriously, and to be in most high estate and dignity. Look in all the
kingdoms of the earth, if it has not been so. But for the Church of God, and
Professors of his truth, what a notable example is it of Divine protection,
that when the God his good providence is such to his, that they may hope well,
against any force whatsoever.
whole world perished with the Deluge, yet God in y^ midst of the waters, by
the benefit of the Arc, preserved his chosen sort of the house of Noah, from
all danger. Likewise afterward, Abraham and his posterity, was safe even in
the midst of the Caananites their enemies. In Egypt, Gods people, although
for the time oppressed, yet afterward myraculously were delivered, to the
terror of all Princes, y^ bend their power against God. The same people, were
afterward fed from heaven in the Desert, when they despaired of food, and
nourishment, were planted in the land of Promise, in despite of al their
Enimyes, preserved from extreme Ruin in great Chaunges, Troubles, and
Banishments, that the Relictes might remain, whereof the Savior of the world
Christ Jesu should come. etc. ()

Certain Sermons upon this Text of the Evangelist.
Beware of false Prophets, that come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly
be ravening Wolves, By their fruits you shall know them. Mat. 7. 15.
AS we have nothing (deerelye beloved,) more precious in this world, then the
blessed Word of God, and his heavenly Doctrine taken out of it: so have we not
any kind of persons, more worthy to be loved and had in estimation, than
those whom God sends to impart the same unto us. Again on the other side, as
nothing is more perilous and pernicious to Gods people, than false and corrupt
Doctrine, contrary to Gods holy will revealed in the scriptures: so is there
no sort of men more to be shunned and taken heed of, than false teachers, whom
Satan thrusts into y^ church of God, to corrupt that precious Treasure and
mean of our Mat. 5. 1. etc.
salvation. Wherefore our Lord and Savior Christ, after that he had made that
notable Sermon in the Mount to his Disciples, and had set forth the true
interpretation of the Law of God, given by Moses, and discovered the false
Doctrine and hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees, and had rightly
instructed his hearers, in the true exercise of Alms, Prayer, Fasting, trust
in God, and other works of charity, not contented herewith, but knowing the
malice of the Devil, that would leave nothing undone, whereby all his Disciples
might be seduced, from the truth of his doctrine: In this place he carefully
gives them this forewarning, that they should take heed of false Prophets,
that should come to deceive them, and as ravening Wolves to devour their
Souls. And first he describes them, what they be, that they may the better
take heed of them. Secondly he gives a note, rule or mark, whereby they may
more easily be known. There was never time in which, this warning was more
necessary, then in these our days, when so many diverse doctrines are spread,
and defended, and the one repugnant unto the other. The patrons of the Church
of Rome say, that we be schismatikes, heretics and false teachers, and
therefore, do they will the people to beware of us. Again the professors of
the Gospel charge them with the like, and say they are those false prophets,
of whom Christ gives warning. Let us first therefore examine Description of
false Prophets examined.
the description, and afterward come to the rule whereby they may be known:
that all men may understand to whether party, both those things can be more
justly, and aptly applied. They shall come to you (says Christ) in Mat. 7. 15.
sheep clothing, but inwardly, they are ravening Wolves. This description, is
more largly declared by S. Paul. Such false Apostles (says he) are deceitful
workers, and 2. Cor. 11. ^3. etc.
transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ, and no marvel, for Satan
himself is transformed into an Angel of light: and therefore it is no great
thing, though his ministers transform themselves, as though, they were the
ministers of righteousness. etc. And to the Thessa. The coming of Antichrist
is by working of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. etc.
with all power and signs, and lying wonders, and in all deceauablenes of
righteousness. That which Christ utters by a figurative speech, (That they
should come in sheep clothing) that Saint Paul expounds, to be their
transformyng of themselves, into the likeness of Gods true ministers, in
countenance of holiness, and miraculous working, and great show of
godliness, and yet in deed be hypocrites and ravening Wolves. But at this
time it is necessary, more particularly to lay down what those sheep
skins are, wherwt these ravening Wolves do cover themselves, to deceive the
people of God.

S. Aug. writing upon this Sermon of Christ, does diligently and carefully give
warning, that men in any wise should Distinction to be made, betwixt the
Cloathinge and the fruits of false prophets.
learn to distinguishe the sheep clothing, from those fruits that Christ
hear speaks of, Least, says he, the sheep clothing be taken for the
fruits, and so men be deceived: for many account as fruits those things that
in deed do appertain to the sheep clothing. And among sheep clothing,
he there reckons fasting, The first Sheep clothing where with Wolves are
cladde.
praying, alms deeds, and outward holiness of life. For when such things
are done sincerely by Gods true Ministers, then are they the right clothing of
his sheep: But when false teachers do put on the same, they are counterfayte
clokes to deceive the Simple. Whreby you may Outward holiness, no sure token
of true teachers.
perceive, that outward holiness of life, is no sure token of true teachers.
For if false teachers might not use the same to win the estimation of the
people, Christ a little before would never have blamed the Pharisees, for
declaring their Fasting, their Praying, their Alms deeds, and other
Righteousness before men, that they might Mat. 6. 2.
be seen of them, and therefore he says, they have their reward. But what
shall we say? Because false teachers and the wicked servants of Satan do use
this outward show of holiness, and godly excercises, to induce men to their
corrupt Doctrine, shall the true Ministers of Christ and preachers of his
Gospel cast away the same? and show in their life a dissolute and loose
behauioure? God forbid.

Sheep you know, do not hate their skins, nor will cast them of, because
Wolves and Lions sometime are wrapped in the like: but they will for that cause
be more warye and take better heed, that by the show and resemblaunce of
their skins, they be not deceived, and offer themselves to be devoured of
the Wolves, that be covered with them.

Even so the true Ministers of Gods holy word, will not therefore deteste or
cast from them, honest conversation of life, and holy Christian excercises,
because false Prophets abuse the same to deceive men, and lead them into
error, but rather, they will take the more heed themselves, and call upon
other to do the like, that they be not miscaryed to any false Doctrine, with
the fair countenance of their severe and holy life. Although the Ministers of
Gods word, and Preachers of his Gospel, being the chief and principal
sheep of his fold, ought always to have on them the right clothing of honest
and Godly conversation: yet that is no certain or sure Token to prove either
the Doctrine to be good, or the Preachers to be true messengers of Christ,
seeing that the false Prophets and Teachers most commonly make greater show
thereof in the face of the World, then the true Preachers do. For Christ says
of the Pharisees, (which were Wolves in sheep Skins,) They do all that
they Mat. 6. 16.
may be seen and praised of men. Albeit a Wolf be wrapped in a Lambs
skin, yet if a man look circumspectly upon him, he shall easily perceive
him to be a Counterfeyte.

There is a proverb in y^ Latin tongue, y^ makes much ^ Wolf in a sheep
skin is discried by his claws.
to this purpose, Ex vnguibus Leone^. i. By the claws, you shall epsy a Lion,
what garment soever he have upon him: So these spiritual Wolves that Christ
hear speaks of though they be covered with the clothing of Christ's true
sheep: yet if you look upon their claws, you shall quickly espy them what
they are.

One of their claws is Confidence, and Trust in the holiness The first claw
where by a Wolf is known, is trust in holiness of life.
of their life: so that they do thereby not only advance themselves, as just
before God and the world, but also in comparison of themselves contemn all
other. Such a claw had the Pharisie that Christ speaks of, Luke. 18. Who in
disdain of the poor sinful, but yet repentante Publicane, makes his vaunte
in this manner. I thank thee O Lord, that I am not as other men are,
extorcioners, Luc. 18. 21.
unjust, adulterers, nor as this Publicane is. etc. Such be those holy
religious men, which in these days make their vauntes, that they are not
only able, so far to fulfill the Law of God, that they may be accounted
righteous themselves: but also that they moreover have works of Supererogation,
and merits, which may be sold and applied to the benefit of other. This is
known to be the common Doctrine of the Church of Rome at this day. But
contrariwise the right Preacher that has in deed the clothing of the true
sheep of God, has ever humbleness before God and the world joined withal,
and is so far from disdaigne of other, that he charitablye considers
their weakenenesse and infirmity. John the Baptist, a right and Mat. 3. 4.
a true preacher, led a more Godly and severe life, than any of the Pharisees:
and yet was he so far from their confident and proud Spirit, that he
esteemed himself not worthy, to unloose the Latchet of Christ's shoe, and with
his Finger poynted to the Lamb, that takes away the sin of the world.
Another Clawe of these counterfayted The second Claw to know the Wolf by, is
the holiness consisting in observation of men's traditions. Mat. 15. 3.
Woolues, is a certain peculier Holiness, consisting in the observation of
men's Traditions, of which commonly they make greater accoumpte, then they do
of the Commaundments of God. Such they were whom Christ sharply reproves Mat.
15. saying: You cast aside the commandment of God, to establish your own
ordinances, as he in the same place, largely proves against them.

Such they are, which accoumpt themselves ^^lier then other, and above all
other take to themselves, the goodly cloak of Religious me^, because they live
after the rule of Benedict, Francis, Dominick, Brigit, etc. or because they
wear this or that fashion of Apparel, abstain from this or that kind of
meats, observing the choice of days, vow of single life, and a thousand other
like Traditions of men, The third claw is, the respect that the wolves have
more to their own bellyes then to the glory of god.
in comparison whereof, Gods commaundments are finally amongst them esteemed.

The third Claw, whereby these spiritual Wolves may be known, howsoever they be
covered with goodly show of holy life, is the End thereof, that is, that they
do not exercise the same to the glory of God, but to procure their own
benefit, to fill their own bellies, and to devour the souls and goods of
Gods people.

And of this devouring, are they by Christ justly called, ravening Wolves. Of
this does Christ speak: Woe Mat 23. 14. Luke 20. 47.
be to you scribes and Pharisees Hipocrites, that devour widows howses, and
that under the pretense of long prayers. For this, shall you be the more
grievously punished. Such claws of false Prophets are largelye described by
the prophet Ezec. Of the same speaks Saint Ezec. 13. 2. Ezec. 34. 2. 2. Pet.
2. 3. 1.
Peter. There shall be, says he, false Teachers among you, which privily
shall bring in damnable heresies etc. and through covetousness, shall they with
fained words, make merchandise of your souls. etc. The same is noted also by
S. Paul, in way of Prophecy, (as S. Peter does,) that such should come in the
latter days in great number: For of this sort, says he, are they which crepe
2. Tim. 3. 6
into men's houses, and lead captive simple women laden with sin, and lead
with diverse lusts. Who sees not in these Testimonies of the holy Scripture,
those religious Wolves described, which in swarms have overwhelmed the face
of the earth, and with great show and pretense of holiness, and long prayer,
have sought (not the glory of God,) but their own inestimable wealth of the
world? For by selling their Merits, their Prayers, their Masses* their Pardons,
by Pilgrimages, by Purgatory, by absolutions, by dispensations, and a number of
other devises, they have not only devoured an infinite number of Christian
souls, but crepte into men's Testamentes, and from wife and children, and
kinsfolk, got into their claws the Wealth and Riches of the world.

I would to God, this were not so notoriouslye known, that it needed no
further declaration or proof. Wherefore when you see this Angelical, or
Seraphicall show of heavenly life, in these enclosed Wolves, have not by and by
their Doctrine in admiracion, but look carefullye unto their claws, least
they crepe within you, ere you be ware. The second Sheep clothing where with
Wolves do^ use to cover themselves.
The second shepes clothing, under which false Prophets do hide themselves, is
Ordinary power and authority, Long Succession, and lawful calling to the
Ministry. And as I said before, of honest conversation and Goly life, so I
must say of this, that it is and ought to be, one of the bewtifull Ornaments
of Christ's true sheep, which they ought not to make light accoumpt of, nor
without it, to thruste themselves into the Mynisterye of Gods true Doctrine, as
the Anabaptists, and other phanatical spirits do. For S. Paul faith, How shall
they preach To. 10. 15. Heb. 5. 4.
unless they be sent. And again. No man usurps this honor, unless he be
called thereunto of God, as Aaron was. If it should be lawful for every man,
to come into the office of preaching or ministering without ordinary caling,
there would be brought into the Church, a marvelous confusion of all things,
together with infinite Sects and Erroures. But under this fair Title and
bewtifull Garment, have many Wolves and wicked Heretics crept into the church,
as after you shall perceive.

And Christ's warning in this place, principallye toutheth such: for he
directs his speech against the Scribes, Pharisees, and high Priests, that
then were in ordinary Succession, calling, and authority. And likewise does
the spirit of God, in all the course of the scriptures, both of the old and new
Testament. Moses says, If Deuteronomy. 13. 1.
there shall rise among you a Prophet or a Dreamer: In medio tui, says he,
even among you, or in the midst of you, He says not a stranger or Forrener,
coming from some other place, but among you. And Esaias: His watchmen Esaias. 56.
10.
are blind and know nothing. And a little after: Behold, their Sheapheards are
void of understanding, They are all gone, every man after his own way. And in
Hieremie: In the Prophets of Jerusalem, I saw, abhominacion. Jere. 23. 14. 15.
etc. Filthiness and uncleanness, is proceeded from the Prophets of Jerusalem,
over the whole earth. And again, My people is become a lost flock, their
Jer. 50. 6.
Sheapheards have deceived the^, and made the^ to wander in the mountains. And
Ezec. Her Priests have perverted Eze. 22. 26.
my law unadvisedly, and have profaned my Mal. 2. 8.
Sanctuary. You, says Malachi, to the Priests, have gone out of the way, and
have caused many to fall by the law. Nothing can be more plain, then that
which Paul speaks to the Ministers of Ephesus. etc. I know Act. 20. 29.
this, says he, That after my departure, shall grievous Wolves enter in among
you, not sparing the flock. Of your own selves shall men arise, speaking peruers
things, to draw disciples after them. And Saint John, From among 1. Jo. 2. 19.
us they came, but they were not of us. Yea, S. Paul says, that Antechrist
should sit, not among 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
Heathen persons, or Infidels, but in Templo Dei, in the Church of God.
Wherefore you may not marvel, though we say that false prophets, and grievous
wolves are his under this fair shepes clothing of ordinary Authority,
succession, and calling, for the spirit of God has told us, that it has so
been, and should so be to the worlds end. You may not therefore think
that Ordinary authority Ordinary authority is no just proof^ of true
doctrine.
and calling, is a full and just proof of good Doctrine or of true preachers.
Wolves have devoured the Flock, under that clothing: yea, such they have
been that have most cruellye persecuted Gods good prophers, and the doctrine
that they have taught. Who persecuted Hieremie, and the other Prophets? were
they not those that said Templu^ domini, Templu^ domini. i. The Temple of the
Lord, Jer. 7. 4.
The Temple of the Lord? And Nu^quid veritas discedet a Sacerdotibus. i. Jer.
18. 18.
Shall the truth depart from the Priests? Were it not they yt stroke Micheas,
and caused Hieremie to be 3. Reg. 22. 24. Jer. 32. 3.
cast into prison? Who were they that put Christ to death, and persecuted his
Apostles? Do not the Evangelists, and Acts of the Apostles evidently declare
it? Does not Christ give his Disciples warning, that it should be so? These
things (says he) have I spoken unto you, that you Joh. 1^. 1.
may not be offended, They shall excommunicate you out of their synagoges, and
al for my names sake. Were it not they that had ordinary Calling and Succession
that had Authority to excommunicate? Seeing then by testimony of the
Scriptures we learn, yt it has always been so among the people of god, and the
Scriptures witness in way of Prophecy, that in the latter days it should be
so: Why may not the faithful people of God greatelye fear, that now also in
our age, the false Prophettes be hid under the cloak of Ordinary calling, and
Succession? True prophers extraordinarily set up by God, to reprove the abusers
of their ordinary calling.
For this Cause, did God extraordinarily raise, and set up his true Prophets,
which might sharply blame and reprove those false Masters and Teachers, yt
did abuse this countenance of ordinary Succession and Authority, to deceive
Gods people, and carry the^ from the law of god to superstition and Idolatry.
Which prophets of god, not wtstanding yt ordinary calling and succession of the
other, in many places do term them, Dumb Dogs, Idle sheapheards, deceauers,
Lions, Esaias. 5^. 10. etc.
Wolves, Foxes, Murderers. etc. And for so doing, they which were in ordinary
authority, did esteem the^ as factious, seditious, stubborn, obstinate and
deceauers of yt people. It has pleased the merciful providence of God,
likewise in these latter days, extraordinarily to raise up, and mightily to
defend* certain learned men, and Godly preachers, which might reveal unto ye
world, and earnestly reprove and confound the great and horrible corruption,
both of doctrine and ma^ners, y^ have now these many years, ben brought into
y^ church, and with faggot and fire maintained by the^, yt challenge to themselves
ordinary power and authority, which preachers have had the very same
intertainme^t at their hands, y^ the ancient Prophets had of y^ false prophets,
priests, and Princes of y^ people. We must not therefore believe, yt he is a true
minister of god and a deliverer of sound Doctrine, yt is furnished with ordinary
authority, and challenges y^ co^mendacion of succession and lawful calling:
for the wolves often times be covered, with that clothing. And I will note unto
you in this place, one claw, whereby you shall not lightly fail, to Discearne
the Under the clothing of ordinary caling, the Wolf is descried by his Claw
of cruelty and sucking of blood.
greedy and grievous Wolf, that is, Tyranny, cruelty, and blood: for the
false Prophets are always cruel and bloody. Take Example of the old false
Prophets, in the time of Esaias, Jeremy, Micheas, Zachary and other, and
Christ himself does note that Mark in them, in sundry places of the
Gospel. How blooddye and cruel Eusebius, and the other Arians, and false
Teachers were, toward Athanasius and other Godly, and catholic Bishops of that
time, the ecclesiastical Histories do largely declare, and might be laid
down in this place, if time would serve. But never was showed more notable
examples hereof, the^ in these our days by the Popes and their Prelates,
which, to extinguish y^ Gospel, and the true preachers, and professors
thereof, have been Trompets to move Princes to war and murder, and by sword and
fire have imbrued the whole earth, with the blood of Gods saints and blessed
martirs. But contrariwise, the spirit of truth in the right preachers of God,
is always charitable, mild, and merciful: and so much as possible may be, with
the safety of the church of Christ, detesting cruelty and blood. Let example
be taken hereof The mercy of the Prefessoures of the Gospel, Compared with
the cruelty of the Church of Room. The third Sheep Skin, wherein the
Wolf is wrapped.
by the practice of all the primative church, for the space of six hundred
years, and of all the professoures of the gospel in these latter days, in
comparison of the contrary part. The third Lambs clothing, wherewith false
prophets seek to cover and hyde themselves, is the goodlye name and title of
ye Holy, Apostolical, and Catholic church, wherewith they seem gloriously to
advance and set forward themselves: as though that all their Doctrines,
Traditions, and devises of new worship, proceeded not from themselves, but were
established by the perpetual consent of y^ church, and allowed by the sentence
and interpretacion of the holy counsels, and ancient learned fathers, and
Doctors, and yet when it shall be rightly and truly examined, it is nothing so.
In deed, consent of y^ church to true and godly Preachers, is not only a
goodlye and bewtifull Garment, but a most necessary Ornament, that men may
not faigne and devise Doctrines, opinions and Fantasies of their own heads:
but profess, believe and teach, the consent of the true Catholic Church in
that doctrine, that was first planted in Paradise by God him self, and after
renewed and continued by the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and so published into
the whole world, by Christ himself and his Apostles. The sum whereof, is
briefly contained in the articles of our faith, teaching us the inestimable
goodness of Almighty God toward us, as well in making of the world, as in
redeeming mankind by the Incarnation and death of his Son. etc. This faith
and belief ought to be established and conserved, by the consent of the
Catholic Church from the beginning. But it is of all Christian hearts to be
lamented, that most wicked and ravening Wolves, under this cloak of the
Churches Consent, do abuse the people of God, bring into the Church, and
maintain strange worshipping of God, and what soever they The name of the
church abused by the wolves.
have newly devised of themselves, without just warrant of the holy Scriptures:
and contrary to the manifest doctrine of the Prophets, Apostles, and ancient
Fathers of the Primitive Church. And by the authority of this Title of the
Church, do persecute and fear men, from embracing the reformation of the
Gospel, and strive still, by violence to keep them in the blindness of
ignorance, and error. But for so much as I have sufficiently, and at large in
another place, spoken against this Lambs clothing, and have taught men how by
certain Tokens to epsy the same, I will not stand longer upon it at this
time, but will refer the reader hereof to the second Sermon, made upon this
Text, the brief some whereof was recited in this place.

The last Lambs clothing, that I mean to note unto The last clothing wherein
the wolves do lurk.
you at this time, is their Vaunting of miracles and wondrous works, that
have been done for the confirmation, of their doctrines and Ceremonies, which
they have brought into the Church. For as Christ by miracles did confirm the
true doctrine of the Gospel: so do the Scriptures False Miracles wrought by
false prophets to deceive gods people withal.
witness, that wicked teachers, and members of Antichrists school, should
use the countenance of the same, to lead men into error. For the Devil does
often, turn himself into an Angel of light, and will seem to imitate the
divine power of God. That false Prophets do sometimes use this clothing, to
commend themselves and their profession: it is evident in many places of the
Scriptures. Iannes and lambres by this means resisted Moses, and Exodus 7. 8.
9.
did harden the hearts of Pharao and the Egyptians, against the messengers,
and people of God. Simon Magus, and Elymas the Sorcerer, by such strange
working seduced Act. 13. 8.
many. Moses gives warning of such, and wylleth the people of God to take
heed of them, saying: If there Deu. 13. 1. etc.
arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams and gives thee a sign or
wonder, and the sign or wonder that he has told thee come to pass, saying,
Let us go after other Gods. etc. Thou shall not harken to the words of that
Prophet, for the Lord your God does prove you, to know whether you love him,
with all your heart. etc. Christ himself shows, that they be not all by and
by true Prophets and right teachers, that have power to work Miracles: Many
will say unto me Mat. 7. 22.
in that day, Lord, Lord, have not we in thy name prophesied? have we not
cast out Devils in thy name? and by thy name have done many great works? But
it follows. Then I will profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from
me all ye that work iniquity. Here we see, that with wickedness and
corrupt doctrine, may be joined working of Miracles, and strange doyngs. And
again, our Savior Prophesying of ye latter days, Mat. 24. 2^.
says: Then if one say unto you, behold here is Christ, or there is
Christ, believe him not: for there shall arise false Christ's and false
Prophets, and shall show great Signs and wonders, in so much (that if it
were possible) the very elect of God should be seduced, Behold I have given
you warning before. And Saint Paul in like manner, giuyng us warning of
Antichrist and his false Prophets, says. Whose coming 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. etc.
is after the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders,
and in all deceaueablenesse of unrighteousness, among them that perish,
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, And
therefore God shall send them strong delusions to believe lies, etc. This
warnyng principally touches us, upon whom the latter ends of the world
has lyghted, that we should carefullye take heed, that by Wonders and
Miracles and Apparition of Spirits, we be not Seduced, either to believe
error, or to refuse the truth of the Gospel offered unto us. Christ gives
us a special charge^ Beware, says Mat. 24. 25.
he, I have told you of it before hand. Therefore if you do not harken unto
him, but yield your selves by such means to be carried into Superstition,
Error and Idolatry, the danger shall be the greater. And Saint Paul adds
a terrible threatening: Because they received not the love of truth, God shall
2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
send them strong delusions, that they may believe lies, that all they might
be damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. Let them look therefore carefully to themselves, which, by
such Miracles, are Induced or confyrmed to believe the corrupt errors, of
Pilgrimages and worshypping of Images, of praying to Saints departed, of
Purgatory, of Masses and Trentalles, of praying and offering for the sins of
the Dead, and such other infinite errors, as has been brought into the
Church by Monks, Friars, and other false Teachers of the Church of Rome.

It is a wonder to see the Heaps of such Miracles as of late years, have
been put in writing by Vincentius, and a number of other like authors, so that
to such as fear God, there is scant any greater Token, that Antichrist is
come, and has set a long time in the Church, then this is: That their
doctrines are altogether confirmed, rather by such Miracles and Apparition of
spirits, then by the scriptures and word of God. When the rich glutton, (as
it is mentioned in the Evangelist,) desired of Abraham, that one might rise
from death to life, and warn his brethren, that they came not to that place of
torment, where he was: Abraham answered, They have Moses and the Prophets,
Luc. 16. 29.
if they will not believe them, they will not believe, though one rise from
death to life. Whereby the ^^lye Ghost does Signify, that after the true
doctrine of Christ's Gospel first published, was thoroughly confirmed, and b^yng
generally received, was put in writing, and so remains as a perfect
Testimony of the work of our redemption: that the providence of God, toward
the latter ^^y god ^^^^ not now show such ^^acles as of ^ld he di^, but ^latly
^e^^raineth us to the written word.
end of the world would use no more Miracles, least he should thereby seem,
rather to Discredit the truth of his written word, than by such means
conserve them. For whosoever will not believe the doctrine of truth, confirmed
by the express and evident word of God, will not believe yt same, though they
saw a. 1000. miracles. Take example hereof by y^ Jews, who continually called
for Signs and Wonders, but when they had seen many, they never the sooner
Believed, but sclaunded the doings of Christ, and said, that he and his
Apostles wrought by the power of Beelzebub, etc. Christians therefore must
learn some Mat. 12. 14.
Rule, whereby they may judge false and deceitefull Miracles, done by the power
of the Devil, from them that be done directly by the Word of God in his
Saints. And this rule is the end, whereunto miracles do tend. Godly The end
whereunto godly miracles do tend.
miracles be always showed by God, to confirm the Divine nature and office
of Christ, in the work of our redemption, and that he is the true and only
Messiah and Savior, or to justify and prove the doctrine of the Gospel to be
good. According as Christ says, in the last of S. Mark: Go ye into the
whole world, and preach Mar. 16. 15. etc.
the Gospel to every creature, he that shall believe and be Baptized shall
be saved, but he that will not believe, shall be damned: and these tokens
shall follow them that believe, In my name they shall cast out Devils, and
shall speak with new tongues, and shall take away Serpents, and if they
drink any evil thing, it shall never hurt them, they shall lay their hand
upon the sick, and they shall recover. etc. Those Miracles then that be done
to this end, to direct the people to acknowledge Christ to be the only, full,
and perfect redeemer of mankind, and to embrace the doctrine of the Gospel,
by the holy Scriptures confirmyng the same, are good, and godly, and to be
esteemed true Miracles. But contrariwyse if they lead men from Christ, and
direct them to put their trust of Salvation, and remission of sins, Act. 4.
^^.
in any other name under Heaven, then Christ Jesu, or to believe any other
doctrine, than that which by Gods word is evidently confirmed, or to accept any
other worship of God, than by himself is appointed, are false Miracles, and
delusions of the Devil, wrought to deceive men. Let us therefore beware of
these things, and look into these miserable delusions, wherewith the Devil
and his Ministers have bewitched the world, now these many years, by
Spirits, Ghostes, Goblines, and many vain Apparitions and faygned Miracles.
etc. ()

The second Sermon upon this part of the Text.
Exfructibus eorum cognoscetis eos. By their fruits shall ye know them.
IN this place we have diligently to observe the great difference, yt Christ
our Savior in this loving and Fatherly admonition, does make between the
clothing, and the fruits, By their fruits you shall Mat. 7. 20.
know them, he says not by their garments, or outward clothing: for with that
y^ false Prophets use to color and countenance, all their crafts and deceiptes
of corrupt doctrine. Now what these fruits be, whereby they are known, let us
consider by yt similitude, or parable, yt Christ here uses, Do they, Verse. 16.
says he, gather Grapes of Thorns, or figs of Thistles? Every kind of tree
has fruit, by which it is known to be good or bad. The Apple tree by the
Apple, the Plumtree by the Plumme, etc. so every trade, occupation, or state
of life has certain proper and peculiar works, by which it is discerned
either to be good or bad in it self, or differing from other. The Carpenter by
right squaring and framing of his Timber, the Mason by his buylding, etc. the
Lawyer, by his Counsel, the Physician by his cure, is judged skillful or
ignorant: even so is the Preacher or Prophet known by his doctrine, that
proceeds from him, which is the peculiar work and sruite of his trade and
occupation. In all the old Testament, God does accuse the false Prophets to
be evil, because they delivered unto his people false doctrine, and corrupt
worship, contrary to his holy will and word. Hear not, says God by Jeremy,
the words Ier. 23. 16.
of the Prophets that prophecy unto you and teach you vanity, They speak the
vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord. And again,
How Verse. 26.
long do the Prophets delight to prophecy lies, even prophesying the deceit
of their own heart. And immedately after: Therefore behold, I will come against
the prophets that steal my word privily, every one from his neighbor: behold
I will come against those Prophets, that have sweet tongues, and say, The Lord
has said it: I will come against the^, that prophecy false dreams, and tell
the^ out, and cause my people to err by their lies, and by their flatteries,
and I sent the^ not, nor commanded the^, like testimonies have Ezech. Hoseas,
Malachi, and other. But the places be manifold, wherein the spirit of God in yt
scriptures teaches us yt lying, false doctrine and perverting of yt word of
God, are the fruits of false prophets, whereby they may be known. Satan
himself the father and founder of all lying, and false teaching, used yt same
course in Paradise. For when God had said unto Ada^ our first father: In what
Genesis 2. 17.
hour soever thou shall eat of the fruit of this tree, thou shall die the
death, The old crafty Serpent seeking to seduce man from God, said: Nay, you
shall not die the Genesis 3. 4.
death, but you shall be like unto God. By which glofe and false interpretation
of Gods word, he pulled them clean from the obedience of Gods holy will and
commandment, to their own utter overthrow and heavy judgment. By yt like
falsehood he tempted Christ, to make him conceive over great confidence of yt
providence of God toward him, Oh, said he, it is Mat. 4. 6. Psalm. 91. 11. 12.
written, that he has given his Angels charge over thee, that with their
hands they may save thee, least at any time, thou should dash thy foot
against a stone. By like craft of lying, and by false Sense perverting yt words
of God, he from time, to time instructs his messengers and false Prophets, to
abuse and deceive the Simple people of God, that be not well taught by his
holy spirit, how to withstand them. But I will come near unto my purpose,
and by some particular example show, how the world in these latter days has been, and in a great part yet, is deceived by false Prophets, and how the same
may be known, examined, and shunned. S. Ioh. in his first Epistle, shows us
a certain How false prophets are discerned by their fruits, and chefly by
their doctrine. 1. Ioh. 2. 22.
rule, how we may know these fruits of false Prophets, and in a manner
distinctly tells us, what they are, and likewise the fruits of true
Prophets: Who is a lier, says he, but he that denies Jesus to be Christ? he
is Antichrist that denies the father and the son. Whosoever denies the
Son, has not the Father. And again, Dearly beloved, believe not every
spirit, but try the 1. Ioh. 4. 1. etc.
spirits, whether they be of God or no. For many false Prophets are gone out
into the world. By this you shall know the spirit of god. Every spirit that
confesses Jesus Christ to have come in the flesh is of God. And enerie
spirit, that denies Jesus christ to have come in the flesh, is not of God, and
this is that (spirit) of Antichrist, of which you have heard, that he should
come, and now already is he in the world, By these words and some other, that
S. Three points of doctrine, by false teaching whereof, the teachers of the
church of Rome, are found to be false pro^h^^es.
John in the same Epistle uses, I observe three sundry points of doctrine,
touching the very ground of our salvation, by which he teaches us, to discern
true or false teachers. The first is, what Christ is in Person and Office, and
what it is truly to confess or deny Christ. The second why Christ came into
the world, what benefits mankind has by it, and who it is that does confess
the same, or deny it. The third how, or by what means we are made partakers
of those benefits, and how the fruit of the same is applied to us. These
branches are not devised by me, They are laid down distinctly, by Saint
John in this place, and they contain, as I have said, the whole mystery of
our redemption and salvation by Christ, that you may not think, I purpose to
rest upon trifles, or matters of small moment, in trial of true Doctors and
teachers. The first point containing what knowledge of Christ we ought to
have, and how we must confess him. Iac. 2. 19. Mat. 16. 16.
As touching the first, we may not think, that a sleighte knowledge and
confession of Christ the son of God, and savior of the World, is
sufficient: For the Devils (says S James) do believe, know, and tremble,
yea Mahomet and the Turks, after a sort, do acknowledge Christ. We must so
know and confess Christ, as S. Peter did, saying: Thou art that christ, the
son of the living GOD. We must deeply pearce, or enter into yt whole course
of yt scripture, and earnestly consider by what titles Christ is called, and
in deed what he is, both in person and Office. To confess that Jesus is
Christ the son of God, is as much as if you should say, I know, confess,
and believe that Jesus borne of the blessed Virgin, is the blessed Sede, and
the true Messiah promised by God, by the mouth of all his Prophets, and the
eternal and only begotten son of God, that is, according to his person,
very God, and very man, and by his office the true Christ, anointed of the
Holy Ghost, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the High Bishop, and
principal Sheapheard of our souls, our Savior, Redeemer, Mediator, and
Intercessour, the head Governor, Ruler, Patron, and Defe^dour of the Church.
And we may not think yt the eternal providence and wisdom of God, would
prepare so precious, high, and inestimable a Means, as to se^d down his son, to
take the form of a servant upon him, in this vale of misery, to work only some
part of our salvation, and so but in part, to execute the office of a savior.
Wherefore we must assuredly Christ only is all in all unto salvation. Act. 4.
12.
know and confess, yt Christ is al yt is before spoken, wholly, and only,
without any part attributed to other. For as Peter says: There is no other
name given under heaven, whereby we shall be saved, We must therefore believe, that
Christ is our only Redeemer, Mediator, and Intercessour, y^ only head, ruler,
governor and defe^der of his church, ye only high Bishop, chief sheapherd,
master and techer of his flock. They that believe, confess, and teach this, be
true preachers, and are of God: they yt do not believe, confess, and teach
this howsoever they do countenance and set forth themselves, are false
Prophets, and of the Devil. For so says S. John, Who is a liar, but he that
denies Jesus to be christ, he is ^. Ioh. 2. 22
that Antechrist etc. Now yt professors and teachers of yt gospel in these
latter days, as well in this church of England, as other parts of yt world, do
confess, teach and preach in this manner: therefore they are true Preachers, and
of God. Let all our doctrines be examined, and see whether they tend not to
this end, yt Christ is our only, full, and perfect Redemer, Mediator, and
Intercessour, yt he is the only Head, Guide, and general governor of his
church: yt he is yt only high Bishop, master, and teacher of his flock, and yt
in these offices, none can without blasphemy be joined with him. And I doubt
not but our very Adversaries will say that this is true in us, or at the
least, they have no likely pretense in truth, to say the contrary. On the
contrary part, the Doctrines of the Church of Room, are either manifestlye
repugnaunte to this confession, in sunderye things, or greatly imparing or
disgracing the same.

Therefore their Preachers are false Prophets, and not False prophets are they,
that either ^^ flatt words deny Jesus to be Christ, or by indirect means, do
go about to teach it; such are the teachers of the church of Rome. Ioh. 14, 6.
of God, for not only does he deny Jesus to be Christ, that grosely, in flat
words so says, or he that plainly denies christ to be the son of God, as
Cerinthius and other ancient heretics did: but he also that covertly, and
indirectly by false doctrines works the same, and by teaching other men to
seek other Sauiors, Mediators, Intercessors, masters, and directours to
salvation, beside him that says, I am the way, the truth and the life, or
which by instructing them otherwise in Christ's Sacraments and other ordinances,
the^ he himself has comanded and appointed. For proof yt the church of Room
does this, first let this Doctrine be examined, whereby they teach that the
very Real, and Natural body of Christ, is in a thousand places at once, that
is, in so many places as there are Ostes consecrated.

This Doctrine impeacheth the principal Article of our faith, that christ of
y^ blessed Virgin took flesh, and had a very true and natural body as we
have, Sin only excepted. It is the property of God only, to be in many
places at once. As Christ's body is now after his asse^tion glorified, and is
transformed to a greater bewty and brightness, so yet it remains a very true
and substantial body. And to teach that the body of Christ is in many
places, or every where, as his Deity is, does make an open gappe to the
Heresy of Abbot Eutiches, which taught yt Christ his humanity, was swallowed
up with yt Majesty of his Godhead, and so became a divine thing. Furthermore
for yt proof of their errors in this Article, let their doctrine be examined
of the Popes Su^remacie, whereby it is taught, that he is the universal Bishop,
and general Lord, Master, and Governor of the whole catholic church, that
he has authority to pardon sins, to deliver Souls out of Purgatory, to
destribute the merits of Christ and of his Saints, to dispense with the
ordinances of Christ, to alter yt institucio^ and use of his instruments, to
coin new Articles of our Faith, of necessity to be believed, clean without
any Authority of Gods word, all which things are only in duetye and in truth
to be attributed to Christ, and to none other, as before I have declared.

The second Article of doctrine is why Christ came in The second point of
doctrine by which fal^^ prophets are discearned from true teachers.
flesh, and what benefit mankind has by it. When as Gods just wrath against
sin, committed by our first parents was so grievous, that no Creature in
Heaven or in earth, was able in any part to appease the same, by the
vnestymable goodness of GOD, his only and dearly beloved son became a
sacrifice to appease his wrath, and displeasure, and to reconcile us to his
Father, and by his death, passion, and resurrection procured for us
reco^ciliatio^ with his father, remission of sin, righteousness before god,
and eternal life in heaven. These be the Fruits, and benefits that we have
by Christ's coming in flesh.

Here again, we have to call to our remembrance, the note that is before
spoken of, touching the highness and exellencie of the mean of our salvation.
For if the same, in part or in all, could have been wrought by any other
creatures, in Heaven or earth, the wisdom of God, would never have given his
son to death, to procure the same benefits for us.

But that he might declare how odious, and displeasaunt Sin was to God, he
let us by this means understand, that the offense thereof could not be taken
away, nor mankind to him be reconciled, but only by the blood of the
immaculate Lamb, Christ Jesus his son. Good Christians must then assuredly
persuade themselves, that they have reconciliation with God, remission of
sin, justification before God, sanctification of the holy Ghost, and the
heritage of eternal life, by the excellencye and fullness of Christ his death,
and passion only, only (I say,) and by nothing else. For as I have said,
Christ is the only full, and perfect mean of our salvation, as the whole
course of the Scripture teaches us. Esaias the Prophet, many years before
Christ came in flesh, signified thus much, and cries to all them that hunger
and thyrst after salvation, that they should come and receive it plentifully,
and freelye of the mercy of God in Christ, and blames them for seeking for
salvation, and the satisfying of their hungry and thirsty souls, by any other
means, then y^, O (says he) all ye that thyrst, come to the waters, and ye
that have no silver, Esa. 55. 1.
come, buy and eat, come, I say, bie Wine and Milk, without money. Wherefore
do you lay out your silver, for that that is no bread, and bestow your labor
for that which does not satisfye you, hearken dilligently unto me, and eat
that which is good, and let your souls delight in fatness, incline your
ears, and come unto me, hear, and your soul shall live. etc. By these words
I have said, the Prophet calls us, to receive the comfortable water, and
sustenaunce of the Gospel, which offers full salvation, and satisfying of
our hungry souls, freelye by Christ, and sharply rebukes them, that leaving
christ, seek after other means, by which in deed their hungry desire of
Remission, and Salvation, in any part cannot be satisfied: and for that cause
he says, Their Silver is bestowed, and their Labor spente in vain.

Christ himself, may seem to expound this prophecye, and apply unto himself
in plain words, that, which the prophet hear, speaks in a figurative and
borrowed speech, for he says, Whosoever thirsts, let him come to me Joh. 7.
37. Mot. 11. 28*
and drink. And again, Al ye that travail and be heavy laden, come unto me,
and I will refreshe you. The Apostles do fully in their doctrine, iustifye y^
same. Peter Act. 4. 12.
says, There is no salvation in any other. etc. Neither is there any other
name given under heaven, whereby Col. 1. 19.
you shall be saved. etc. And S. Paul. It pleased the Father, that in him should
all fullness dwell, and by him to reconcile all things to himself, and to set
at peace through the blood of his Cross, both the things in earth, and the
things in Heaven.

And again, in the same Epist. In whom are hid all Col. 2. 3. etc.
the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge. etc. in him dwells all the fullness
of the Godhead bodily, and you are complete in him, which is the head of all
pricipalitie. Note.
Mark that he says, We are complete in him, and therefore need we no other
means of salvation. And this our sweet Apostles S. John, who teaches us this
trial of spirits says: The blood of Christ Jesus the son of 1. Joh. 1. 7.
God, does cleanse us from all sin.

The same Apostle may seem not only to have written his Epistle, but his
whale Gospel also, to this end only and principallye, that Christyans should
understand that Christ only, and no other thing or person, is the means to
bring to the people of God remissyon of sin, Justification, Redemption, and
all the Benefits and parts of our salvation. For in that gospel Christ is
declared to be, the Lamb of god that takes away the sin Jo. 1. 29. Col. 2.
9. Jo. 3. 14. Jo. 4. 14.
of the world, The fulness of Gods grace, of whose fullness all we take part,
The brazen Serpent that only heals the sting of the old Serpent Satan, The
Fountain of living water, of which he that drinks shall never thyrste, The
bred of life, which he that eats, shall never die, The Jo. 6. 51.
true food and drink of our souls, of which he y^ eats and drinks, shall
be sure to have eternal life, The Light of Jo. 8. 12.
the world, which only scatters and disperceth the clouds of ignorance and
error, and makes us to see the truth of God, Jo. 10. 11. Jo. 10. 9.
and right way of Salvation, The good Sheapheard, that gives his life, for the
benefit of his Sheep, The only Doare whereby we enter into the Church of
GOD, and so into eternal Life, The very Way, Truth, and Life, Jo. 14. 6.
without which Way, there is no walking to Heaven, but wa^dring by wrong
paths unto the Devil, without which Truth, there is nothing but falsehood and
error: without which Life, there is nothing but death eternal, The true Vine,
by which only as branches we suck the sweet, and Jo. 15. 1.
living juice of Gods holy spirit, and without which, we are hable to do
nothing, The only giver of the blessed Jo. 16. 7.
comforter, that does work the peace of our Consciences, and direct us into
all truth. etc. What good christian heart waying these things, does not thereof
conceive inestimable comfort, and more quietness of conscience, then in all
the heaps of men's devises, which they have imagined to purchase us the favor
of GOD, and remission of sin? Yea what faithful mind after the
understanding and embracing of this sweet Doctrine, does not deteste, as
blasphemous and wicked, all such as direct us to any other mean of
Salvation, then the blood of Christ, only? Wherefore the people of GOD must
be well assured by this second rule of Saint John, that not only they are
false Prophets, Wolves, and of the spirit of Antechrist, that in gross terms
deny Christ to have come in flesh, but they also which will seem
constantlye to confess this Article to be most true, and yet in very deed
colourably, and as it were, under sheep clothing deny, impugn, and
disgrace the causes, Fruit, Profit, and effects thereof, by attributyng the
same to other things, than unto the Death and merits of Christ only.

Now whether the Teachers of the Church of Room The doctrine of the church of
Rome concerning the office and coming of christ in the fleash, is contrary to
the doctrine of S. John, and therefore the teachers thereof are found to be
false prophets. Blasphemus derogation to the merits of Christ. Tho. de
Venerab. Sac. altar.
do this or no, let such as have the fear of god, and care of their salvation
unfeignedly consider. They teach that Christ is not our only Mediator and
intercessoure unto GOD, or (if they say so in words) in effect they deny it,
when they affirm that we have infinite other, that is, all the Saints in
heaven, that be our Mediators and Intercessoures for us to direct our prayers
to the^, or by them. They teach that Christ's death is not a full satisfaction
for the whole sins of the World or if in words they will say so, in Truth
they deny it, when they affirm that Christ his body was offered upon the
Cross, for the debte of Original Sin only, and that for our other daily
Offenses, it is offered in the Sacrifice of the Mass. Or when they affirm as
Gabriell Biell does, That although Christ his Passion be the principal
Merit, for which grace is given, and the Kingdom of Heaven is opened, yet it
is never the only and whole meritorious cause thereof, because there ever
concurreth with the merit of Christ some work or merit of him that
receives the grace. They teach that we have not remission of sins, and the
favor of god only by christ, but partly by the merits of Saints, partly by our
fasting, Alms deeedes, and other good works: partly by pardons, by
Pilgrimages, by Masses, by building of churches, erecting of chaunteries, by
holy water, and such other things.

Wherefore I may conclude even by this rule, by which S. John. directs us to
try y^ spirits of preachers, whether they be of God or no, yt the teachers and
maintainers of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, are not such as Christian
men ought to believe, and give credit unto, but rather to beware of them, and
take heed that they be not seduced by them.

The third point of Doctrine is, how we may be partakers The third point o^
doctrine, to try the teachers whether they be true or false prophets.
of Christ coming in flesh, and how the benefits thereof, are truly and
rightly applied unto us. A doctrine surely no less needeful then the two
former, for in vain and to no purpose in respect of us does Christ come in
flesh, and suffer death, if the benefits thereof be not applied to us, and we
made partakers of the same. Now what this Mean is, S. Ioh. in the same Epist.
does evidently declare unto us, saying: Let that remain in you, that you have
herd from ^. Ioh. 2. 24.
the beginning. For if that remain in you, that you have heard at the beginning,
you also shall abide in the son, and in the father. What it is to abide in
that, which they heard in the beginning, he afterward plainly expounds, that
is, constantly and with sure faith, to believe y^ premises of God in his
Gospel, assuring us of Salvation in Christ's Son. For this he writes: Every
one that is 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
borne of God overcomes the world, and this is the victory that overcomes
the world, eue^ our faith. Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that
believes, that Jesus Christ is the son of god. And after. He that believes in
the son of god, has the witness in himself, he that believes not god has made
him a liar, because he believed not in the witness of God, which he testified of
his son. And this is the record, that God has given unto us, eternal life, and
this life is in his son. In these words, we have first that salvation and
eternal life is ye gift of How we are to apply the benefits of Christ's coming
in flesh every man unto him self.
God, and not a thing of us deserved. Secondly y^ God the Father by his witness
and promise, does assure us, that we shall be partakers thereof, for the merit
of Christ his Son only. This life says he is in his Son. Lastly, that
the means to be made partakers hereof, is assuredlye to believe the truth of
GOD, promissing this in his son: or else by infidelity we make God a liar,
and leese out parts of his promise. Christ himself also bears witness of
the same Means to apprehend our salvation. So Ioh. 3. 16.
God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son: that whosoever
does believe in him should not perish, but have eternal life. etc. And
again, He that believes in him is not condemned, but he that believes not,
is condemned already, because he does not believe in the name of the son of
God. And in the 6. Chapter. This is the will of my Father that sent me, Ioh.
6. 40.
that he that sees the Son, and believes in him, should have eternal life.
The full consent of the Prophets does justify this Mean of our salvation. For
as Peter says, To Act. 10. 43
this all the Prophets bear witness, that through his name, all they which
believe in him, shall receive remission of sins. The whole Church of Christ
bears witness to this, which in all her general counsels, does teach
every true Christian to say, I believe that Jesus Christ descended from heaven
for us, and for our salvation, that he was made man, borne, suffered, died,
rose again, and was received into Heaven, etc. And all to this end, that by
this Savior we might have remission of sin, Resurrection of the flesh, and
everlasting life. All these things does yt Evangelist, S. John affirm in one
little sentence: These things are written that you may believe, Ioh. 20. 31.
that Jesus Christ is the son of God, and that in believing, ye might have
life through his name. By these words we are taught, why the Gospel is
written and preached to men, that is, that they should believe, and justify
God in his promise to be true. Secondly that by believing, they should have the
fruits of Christ's coming in the flesh, and therefore faith and belief is
the Means, to apply Christ and his benefits unto us. Thirdly, that we have
life and salvation, only by the mere mercy of God in Christ, and not by any
merit of ourselves, or other me^, or by the dignity and worthiness of our
selves, or our doings whatsoever, going before or coming after. This benefit
therefore to apply Christ's merits and fruits of his Passion unto us, can
not in any wise be imputed to any other works or virtues, be they never so
excellent, but to faith only: and that not for the dignitye of faith neither,
but for this cause only, for that faith resperteth no other thing, but does
rest and stay it self, upon the sure and infallible promise of God, grounded
and founded on the grace and merit of Christ. This promise does faith
apprehende, as I have said, and does assure himself to be partaker of it,
because God is true, and can not deceive. And though our faith sometime be
weak, and not so strong as it should be, yet we may not despair for this
our weakness and infirmity, but we must comfort our selves with this
sweet promise, that he which paydr the price of our salvation, as the Prophet
witnesses, Does not break Esaias. 42. 3.
the bruised reed, nor extinguishe smookyng Flax. Only let us say with him
in the Gospel, I believe, Mar. 9. 24
but O Lord help mine unbelief. And with the Apostles: O Lord increase our
Faith. For as, Christ says, Luc. 17. 5.
If we have faith, no more than a grain of mustarde Mat. 17. 20
seed, we shall by it work great things. This doctrine of apprehending the
benefits of our salvation, and applying The Church of Rome impugueth the
doctrine of apprehending and applying the benefit of Christ his merits by
faith: and therefore is seen to harbor false teachers.
the fruits of Christ's Incarnation, death and passion, by faith only, The
patrons and teachers of the Church of Rome, have most impugued. Their voices
thereof ring in every man's cares, their books and writings against the same,
lie open to all men's eyes, so that no man can doubt of it, wherein, their
obstinate blindness does more than in all other things, too plainly appear.
For whereas they be great braggers of the general consent of the Universal
Church, and by countenance of it, will seem to maintain their other errors,
and corrupt doctrine, yet they reject this doctrine, that is witnessed by God
the Father, confirmed by the Son, established in the hearts of the faithful,
by the holy Ghost, testified by all the Prophets and Apostles, and
acknowledged by the general Consent of the whole Church in their belief, and
ratified by the subscription of a great number of the ancient Fathers, and
Catholic writers: yet, I say, they of the Church of Rome do impugn it, and
speak altogether most reprochefully of faith, and wrongfully challeng the
Preachers of the Gospel, that by this doctrine of our Justification and
saluatition, by faith only in the merit of Christ's Passion, they do
disprove good works, and leave open a gappe to wickedness and Looseness of
life. Which comes to pass because they will not understand what true
Christian faith is, nor why faith is said to justify us before God, that is,
because it apprehends the mercy of God in his promise, assuring us that we
shall have remission of sin, salvation and eternal life, through the merit
of Christ's Passion only. I need not therefore to put you in mind what
conclusion may be inferred upon the premises, against the teachers of the
Church of Rome, that is, that not the Preachers and professors of the Gospel,
which teach this Article to the full, but they rather of the Church of Rome,
are the false Prophets that are covered with sheep clothing, because the
fruits of their doctrine do plainly prove them to be such. By this that I
have hitherto spoken, you may Conclusion.
perceive that we do not strive with the Church of Rome, nor separate our
selves from it, for trifles and toys of no weight and value, but for matters
of great importance, touching the principal Articles of Christian faith, and
the true means of our Salvation. For although Satan in these days does not
so commonly raise up his Instruments to impugn the Trinity, the two natures
of Christ, or the Divinity of the holy Ghost, as he did in the Primitive
Church: yet he is not Idle, but craftily turnyng himself into an Angel of
light, by such as not only profess themselves to be Christians, but take
upon them to be the principal patrones and directors of Christian faith, he
disgraceth, and extenuateth the dignity, and perfection of Christ's merit and
passion. he peruerteth the office of the holy Ghost, he abuses the name and
authority of the Catholic Church, and sets up an other Church, he alters
the principal doctrine of our belief touching faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,
and transferreth and almost brings to nothing, the truth of our
justification, and the end of our faith. He changes the Sacraments, and
bringing in a new sacrifycing worship, alters the Institutions and
ordinances of Christ, f^a^ly and plainly laid down in his word. Wherefore,
(dearly beloved) I earnestly require all such, as have care of their
salvation, to remember Christ's admonition that he gives in this place, when
he says: Beware of false Prophets, that come to you in sheep clothing. etc.
Mat. 7. 15.
The first way to beware of them, is with earnest and hearty Prayer to call
upon God, that by his gracious benefit, 1
and lyghtning of our hearts by his spirit, we may know the false Prophets,
and by his providence he will preserve us from them, and send out into his
harvest faithful and true laborers, and that he will by his goodness
defend, strengthen, and maintain the same, against all assaults, that they
may to his glory perform their work, whereto he has appointed them. For so
our Savior Christ wills us, to call upon the Lord of the Harvest, that he
would Mat. 9. 38. Luc. 10. 2.
send forth plentiful store of laborers, to bring in his Harvest. The second
way to beware of false Prophets, is a 2
diligent, and continual reading of the Scriptures of God, which as I have said
before, is y^ rule of true knowledge, and right doctrine. Hereunto Christ
exhorts, when he says: Search the Scriptures, for in them you think ye Ioh.
5. 39.
have eternal life. And they are they that testify of me. And the
Thessalonians, that did hear Paul at Berrhaea, daily Act. 17. 11.
searched the Scriptures: whether things were so as Paul preached or no. S.
Augustine also does exhort us to Aug.
the same by a very apt similitude: Even as a Prince or governor in time of
peace, makes provision for armor, munition, and all warlike furniture, that
when he is assaulted by his enemies, he may not be found unprovided: so, says
he, is it necessary that al good Christians should diligently read, and
carefully hearken to the teaching of the word of God, and out of that
storehouse, to furnish the^ felues with all spiritual furniture, against the
assaults of Satan, and his instruments, whether it be in matter of faith and
Religion, or behavior of life. For of all the spiritual armor yt S. Paul
describes, above all things he warns Ephesians. 6. 16
to have yt Target of faith, and the sword of gods holy word, By yt weapon
only, you know yt christ our savior drove back Mat. 4. 6. etc.
yt Devil, when he endeavored to seduce him by perverting yt scriptures of God.
They therefore yt forbid the people to read yt scriptures, and do hearken to
gods word, are to be esteemed no better tha^ traitors, yt take from the people
of God their chief defense, and to leave the^ open to yt danger of their
enemies. Or if men be not able to read yt scriptures themselves, in any wise
as they have care of their souls, let the^ learn to understand yt general
principles of Christian Religion in their Catechism, that is the.x.
Commandments, the articles of their belief, yt right use of the Sacraments,
and the Lords Prayer. And this must they learn, not as Parrets, to sound the
words, but to understand the truth of the matter. And then surely with gods
assistance, may they be easily able to discern the spirits of the Preacher,
and tollerably to judge of his doctrine: as I could by some particular examples
declare unto you, if the time would serve. But if men will be take themselves
to the Colliars faith, that believed generally as the Church believed, and
knew not one word what the church did believe, or ought to believe, they shall
by such wilful ignorance, lay themselves open to false teachers, that shall
come unto them in sheep clothing, and seek nothing, but as ravening Wolves,
to devour their souls. etc.

The third Sermon upon this part of the Text.
By their fruits shall ye know them. Mat. 7. 16.
THE Church of Rome, and the writers thereof do interpret these words, not
of the fruits of doctrine, as I have done, but of the fruits of godly and
honest life, and withal challenge to themselves a singular holiness above the
Preachers of the Gospel in these days. Who, as they say, discourage men from
virtuous exercises of godly life, and in their own behavior show a
dissoluteness and looseness of life, fo that vice and wickedness, ever since
the rising of this new Gospel (as they call it,) has increased among men.
And for this cause will they have us noted, to be the false Prophets, that
Christ wills men here to take heed of, and say that we are known by our
evil fruits. Wherefore I think it most necessary at this time, to pull this
Lambs clothing from them, that the world, or at least such as be not too
much affectionate to them, may see how The corrupt lives and foul vices of
the fathers of the church of Rome de^e^ted, in way of answer to those that
object the preaching of the gospel to breed corrupt mannets in the hea^^^s of
the same.
little help they have by this color, either for themselves, or against us.
Neither do I think, that there is any fitter means to do this, than to let
men understand by the course of their own histories, and other credible
writers, how great corruption of life, and how foul vices have been usually
practiced, not among common persons of the meanest sort, but among the most
holy and reverend fathers of the Church of Rome, the Popes themselves, that
thereby you may gheasse, what state of Religion has most prevailed with them.
For it can not be, that that place can be the seat of true Religion and
holiness, which has been always a sink of most horrible and foul vices. And
here I protest unto you, that I will not speak or allege any thing of
stomach to aggrauate the matter, but as I find it in truth laid down, in
very credible histories. And first to begin with the most notable root of
the corruption and Simoniacall ambition, in aspiring to that exceedyng power,
which this many years they have usurped. About the year of our Lord. 600.
John, Patriarch of Constantinople, because that City was the Royal seat of
the East Empire, obtained of Mauritius the Emperor, with intolerable pride to
be universal Bishop, Gregory. i. pope condemns the name of universal
Bishop.
the head, and ruler of al other. Against whom Gregory. 1. at yt time Bishop
of Rome, did write very earnestly, and reproves sharply his exceeding
ambition, saying, yt whosoever does so aspire, does show himself to be the
forerunner of Antichrist. And he calls yt name of universal Bishop, a new, a
perverse, a superstitious, a profane, a foolish, a proud, and a wicked name,
a name of error, a name of singularity, a name of vanity, a name of
Hypocrisy, a name of blasphemy. Notwithstanding Boniface. 3. y^ next Pope of
Rome, Ambition in pope Boniface succeeding Gregory next save one.
saving one, with great suite obtained of yt wicked and traitorous Emperor
Phocas, yt he and his successors might have that name and Title of universal
Bishop and head of the whole Church. This was the first open step of their
monstrous and exceeding pride and ambition, which afterward by corruption and
briberie, they continually followed, still heaping on wicked practizes every
day more and more, as their own histories do witness. What shall I say of
Constantius yt. 2. who being a lay man, by exceeding ambition, and with great
broile and stir obtained y^ Popedom, and was after deprived, cast in prison,
and had his eyes pulled out? What shall I say of Formosus yt. 1. which by
manifest briberie came to the Bishopric? I will come to yt time, wherein their
own secretaries Platina and Stella Venetus openly cry out on them, yt is about
the time of Benet the. 4. 900. years after Christ. Of which time Stella
Venetus says, Omnis virtus, tam in capite quam in membris, ex hominu^ ignauia
consumpta est. i. All virtue as well in the head as in the members, by men's
slothfulness was utterly decayed. And Platina in the life of the same Bishop
says, Vbicum ipsis opibus lasciui^e caepit Ecclesia, nullo principe clericoru^
flagitia co^rce^te, peccandi mox licentia, nobis haec monstra ac portenta
peperit, a quibus ambitione and largitione haec seeds occupata est. After that
the Church, in their great wealth, began to wax lascivious and wanton, no
Prince, no Magistrate repressing the enormities of the Clergy, straight way
this liberty of sinning brought forth these prodigious, Monsters, who, through
ambition and briberie, possessed this seat and dignity. What stir was among
them at that time for the Bishoprike, it may appear by this, that within. 9.
years well near, were. 9. Bishops. Boniface the. 6. 25. days. Stephan the.
6. one year, Romanus. 3. months, Theodorus 20. days, John the 10. 2.
years, Benedict yt 4. 3. years, Leo the. 5. 40. days, Christopher. 7.
months, and at the length Sergius. 7 years. The charity of these The popes
charity showed to his predecessor.
Bishops was as notable as their integrity. Stephan the 6. so deadly hated his
predecessor Formosus, that he abrogated all his acts, took up his body,
spoiled him of al Bishoplike ornaments, and cutting off his two forefingers,
caused him to be bur^e^ in a lay man's burial. Romanus that followed disanalled
the doings of Stephan, and confirmed all the Acts of Formosus. Likewise did
John the 10. But Sergius that not long after followed, caused the body of
Formosus again to be taken up, after it had been 8. years buried, and setting
it in the Bishops Stall cut of his head, and three fingers of his right hand,
that Stephan had left, and cast his body into Tiber. This is witnessed by
Platina in y^ life of Sergius. 3. and in Luitprande de gestis Imp. lib. 3. cap.
12. I omit John. 11. Benedict the. 5. John the. 14. and diverse other yt were
about the same time. But perhaps some will think that at other times there
were all good Bishops: I will pass therefore, to y^ time of Siluester the 2. and
his successors, unto Gregory the 7. after y^ year of our Lord 1000. The most of
which number, for the space of 80 years, came unto the Bishopric, either by
Nicromancie, or by poisoning Nicromancy and poison, stepps to tha popedom.
their predecessoures, as Benno a Cardinal, yt wrote Hildebrande, (called
Gregory the seventh, his life, does witness. Which Creatise, he that will
read, shall find such monstrous and wicked dealing, as is not read of Hethens
or Pagans, in any profane Histories. Of Gilbert called Syluester the second,
and his Successors, this he says: Post infoelice^ obitum Gilberti, certamen
erat inter ipsius discipulos, dum quisque anhelaret, ad rapiendum Papatum sibi.
Sedit post ^um octauus decimus Johannes, and quinto mense Veneno suffocatus
dicitur a suis. Huic successit nonus decimus Johannes, and vix annum peregit,
cui successit Sergius and sedit tribus annis. i. After the unfortunate death of
Gilbert, there was strife among his scollers, so that every one of them
greedily labored, to get the Popedom to himself. For after him sat John
the eighteen, and in the f^^t month, it is reported, he was poisoned by his
own companions. After him sat John 19. and he lived scarce a year, After
John, succeeded Sergius, and sat three years.

Of Gregory the 7. he says, that he by his means, had poisoned sire or eight,
to prepare the way for himself to be Bishop. Of whose wicked dealing toward
the Emperor, you shall hear more anon: but this at this present, The popes
treason against the Emperor.
I cannot omit, that he suborned one to stand in the roof of the church,
directly over the place where the Emperor used to say his Prayers, and from
thence to cast down a stone of great bigness upon the Emperor. But God
preserved his Magistrate, and turned the plague upon the worker of it: for he
that should have cast down the stone, was borne down with the weight thereof,
and bruised to death.

By what ambition and bribery John the 18. came to that Sea, it is evident in
Platina, who, for the same, and his other naughty doings, calls him Furem
and Latronem, These and Robber. Syluester the 3. by like means of bribery and
sorcery, was made Bishop, in whose life Platina says this: Eo tu^ po^tificatus
deuenerat, vt qui plus largitione and ambitione, no^ dico sanctitate vitae and
doctrina valeret, is ta^tu^modo dignitat is gradu^, bonis reiectis, obtineret,
que^ more^ vtina^ nostra te^pora non retinuissent, Sed hoc parum est, peiora,
ni Deus auertat, visuri sumus. The Bishopric then was at that point, that he
only which cold do most by bribery and ambition, I do not say in holiness of
life and learning, (good men being cast of) attained to the degree of dignity:
which custom, I would to God were not to be seen in our time. But this is a
small thing, we shall see worse dealings hereafter, unless God turn it away.
Otho Frisingensis and Godfridus viterbiensis, in this manner write, of the
tragical stir and trouble of those days. While Benedict, say they, the 9 was
bishop, Syluester the 3 The church of Rome, a monster haning 3. heads at once.
and Gregory the 6. invaded the same seat, and the 7 year of the reign of
Henry the 3, three Bishops occupied three several seas in Rome, whereof ro^e
an horrible scisme, and each of them endeavored, that he might not be inferior
to other in sedition, mischeiefe and wickedness. Benedict had his sea in yt
palaice of Laterane, the one of the other at S. Peter's, the other at S. Maryes
the greater. I am compelled with multitude to let pass the notable stir
between Cadolus and Alexander yt 2. which in a full battle fought The popes
try it by the eats, who shall be head.
out yt matter, in a place by Rome called Prata Neronis, with diverse other more
notable broiles the^ yt. I will pass to two notable scismes y^ were caused by
yt ambition of Popes, one about y^ year of our Lord 1159, and continued well
near 20 years after, yt other about yt year of our Lord 1378. and continued
39 years afterward. The former was between yt proud tyrant Alexander the 3,
and Victor, Paschale, Clement, and Innocent, yt successively were set up
against him. The later between Vrbane the 6, and Clement the 7. and those that
succeeded each of them, as I have said, by the space of 39. years, at which time
the church of Rome might well be called a monster with two heads. For the one
of these Bishops had his Sea in Room, the other at Auignion in France, and
each of these, of their Adherents were accounted heads of the church. Germany,
Hungary, England, and Christendom torn by popish S^^lines.
Pannonia held with Vrbane, and were called Vrbanists: France, Spain, and
Cacelome followed Clement, and were named Cleme^tines, the one of these blessed
Bishops cursed and banned the other, calling him and his adherents Heretics,
schismatikes, and rebels. This you see yt not only the ecclesiastical state,
but also all the Realms of Christendom, beside, by the ambition of these Bishops
were brought to hatred, dissension, and horrible wars.

Never was there like canuassing and stir, for yt attaining of any
principallity, either one or other, as has been for the sea of Rome, as in
part you now may perceive, and I could far more amply declare unto you,
but that I fear I should weary you with hearing (as I am now with rehearsing)
examples to the proof of the same. If any man think I speak of affection more
then truth is, let him examine the Histories, and he shall find, I have not
said so much by a great deal, as justly I may affirm.

But what? was this only, the Vice that reigned in that holy Sea of Room?
no truly, their Pride Cruelty, Covetousness, and unjust dealing, was much
more horrible. I will not offend the chaste ears of many, The popes whordome
passed over.
with some other Vices, only I will touch a few Examples of these things I
have named. Was not this think you uncharitable, and cruel dealing among
Prelates of the Church, not only by violence and arms, to depose their
enemies, but to cast them in prison, to put out their eyes, to pull of their
noses, to famish the^ to death, The c^ue^^ie of popes taxed.
and to cut of their heads and fingers? as they served Constantinus the 2,
Formosus the 1. Leo the 5. and diverse other. Such Tyrants were Stephane ye 6.
John the 13. Sergius the 3. John the 14. Boniface the 7. and a number more.

Of John the 14. Platina writes, that when the Emperor had subdued an ennimie
of the Bishops one Peter a notable man, and committed the same unto his hand,
to use him as he thought good: This charitable Bishop, stripped him stark
naked, and hung him up a whole day, by the hear of the head. Afterward he
set him on an Ass with his face backwarde, and the tail of the Ass in his
hand, and so led him through the City, and they whipped him, and cast him
into banishment. Calixt the second, used like cruelty toward Gregory, that
was chosen Bishop against him, and in like despite brought him into Rome on
a Camels back, with his face toward the tail, as Carsellanus, Platina, Stella,
and Vincentius, do write. Might not these heads of the Church, have learned
charity and mercy of the Paga^ Licurgus, who as Plutarche writes, was
contented gently to remitte and pardon him, that in a seditious stir, had put
out his eye. Yea, might not Caligula, Nero, and Phalaris himself have the
commendation of gentleness, seeing the Prelates of Religion, the heads of the
Church, and the Vicars of Christ, do pass them in cruelty? But they used not
this only among themselves, or toward mean ennimies: but toward Kings and
Princes, toward the head rulers of the earth, and those to whom by Gods law,
they ought most humble obedience, I mean the most worthy and noble Emperoures.
After there had been hatred a long time, between the Emperor Henry the
fourth, and Pope Gregory the seventh, and that wicked Tyrant (as Benno says)
most unjustly by sundry means, had wrought him much trouble: at the last,
the The popes pride touched. Carnusium.
good Emperor, for sparing of Christian blood, willing to yield, and seek
means of Concord, in a cold and sharp winter, and most dangerous passage,
came with his wife and Children, to Carnusium, where the Bishop was, and there
being wullwarde, and bare footed, came to the gates of the City, and by the
Bishops commaundment was kept out three days, in most sharp cold weather,
ere he could be admitted, and then, at the entreaty of a Lady called
Mathildis, the fourth day after was let into the City, and had his Pardon,
but not before he had sworn Obedience to the Sea of Rome, and maynteynance of
the same, as Platina writes. And yet all would not serve in the end, for the
wicked Bishop did set up 3. Rebels against him, Rodulphe, Harman, and
Egberte, all which by the just judgment of god, came to foul end. Rodulphe in
battle had his right arm cut of, and thereof died, crying out upon the
Bishops, that had incited him. Herman was slain by a woman, casting down a
great stone, from a Castle that he besteged. Egberte flying into a Mill, was
taken and slain.

Thus God preserved the good Emperor, maugre the malicious heart of the cruel
Bishop. Of this Gregory the 7. Abbas Vrspergens in his Chronicle writes thus,
Constat. Hildebrandum non a Deo electum, sed a se ipso fraud and pecunia
intrusum, qui ecclesiasticum subvert it ordine^, Christiani imperij turbauit
regnum, pacifico regi intendit morte^, periuros defendit, lites seuit,
discordias seminauit, and quicquid inter pie viuentes recte stare videbatur,
concussit. i. It is manifest that Hildebra^d was not chosen of God, but by
himself intruded, through deceit and money. Who did overthrow ecclesiastical
order, troubled the kingdom of the Christian Empire, practiced the death of
the peaceable king, defended perjured persons, planted strife, sowed discord,
and overthrew all, whatsoever seemed to be well established, among those that
led a godly life.

How cruelly and unjustly Alexander the 3. used the Noble Emperor Friderike,
it is wonderful to read in Nauclerus, and Funcius. By misfortune being taken
prisoner of the Venetians, this Emperor for safety of his Life, was fayn to
yield, and came to Venice, where the Bishop was, but could not obtain pardon,
before he came to S. Marks church, and did prostrate himself on the ground
before the Bishop, at which time with exceeding pride, he set his foot on the
Emperors neck, and caused this Verse of the Psalter to be song, Super aspidem
and Basiliscum ambulabis. etc. Thou shall walk upon the Lion and the Adder,
the young Lion and the Dragon, shall thou tread under thy feet. That verse yt
the spirit of god, meant of our Savior christ, this proud Antechrist turned, to
the advancing of his own glory, and repressing of Gods chief minister, to whom
he had given by lawful means, y^ thief gouernme^nt of y^ earth. I need not put
you in mind, that they admittted Kings and Emperors, to go at their styrrapes
as footmen. So did Charles the great, King Jews of France, and King Henry
of England, both at one time. Yea, Adrian the fowerth, blamed Friderike the
Emperor, that coming on foot to meet him, he did stay the styrrop on the
wrong side, when he lighted from his Horse. And at another time impudentlye
blamed the s^^ne Emperor, because in the Title of his Letters that he did
send, he did set his own name before the Popes.

The time will not suffer me, to declare unto you the intolerable pride and
cruelty of Gregory the 9. and Clement the 6. The one of yt which after most
despightful and cruel injuries, would not be reconciled to Friderike the 2.
before he had paid in way of penance one hundred and twenty thousand ^20000.
The popes covetousness noted.
ownces of Gold, so dear is the friendship of these holy fathers. The other
proposed to Jews the Emperor such conditions, as no bondslaue-would have been
contented to admit, that is, yt he should come unto him within three days,
forsake the title of yt Empire, yield into his hands himself, his wife, his
children, and al his goods, never to receive any of them again, but at his
pleasure. Look Abbas Vrsperge^s. and Hiero, Marius, and you shall see those
things so set forth, as it would cause any reasonable heart to abhor the^. I
should hold you to long, if I should at large set forth, their vuiust
dealing, in altering and trausposing Kingdoms, and continual endeavor to make
all princes subject to them. First, as touching the Empire, where the Emperor
of Constantinople, had always his Deputy in Italy, for the rule of the West
part, the Bishops of Room, by the aid of the French Kings, wreasted out
the Emperoures Deputies, and turned that whole power to themselves. Afterward
about the year of our Lord 800. contrary to all right, Leo made Charles the
great, his great Benefactour, Emperor of the weast: and gave occasyon of
most deadly wars, between the Emperoures of the East and of the Weast.

About y^ year of our Lord 920 they again transferred the Empire of the Weast
from the French Kings, among whom it had a good time remained, unto the
Germans, where, at this day it yet continues. But they used not this only
in the Empire, but well near in all the Principallities of Christendom. Did
not Zachary most injuriously without any reasonable pretense, transfer the
Kingdom of France from Childerike and the stock of Clodouei, wherein it had
from the beginning continued, unto Pipine that had no right unto it, and
without any quarrel, discharged the French men of their oath of allegiance,
sworn to their King Childrike being then alive? Did not Adrian the first,
unmercifully deliver Bercha the widow of Charlemaine, and her two sons,
heirs of the Kingdom, in captivity to Charles, the younger brother, yt had no
right unto it, only because he would not displease Charles, but win him to
be his friend, as his Father Pipine had been? How they set up, and pulled
down Emperoures at their pleasure, how they altered the Title and right of
the Kingdom of Arragon, of Naples, of Sicilie, of England, Hystories do
largely declare.

Whenever they did for any quarrel excommunicate a realm, their penance in
absolution was ever, to pay a great sum of money to the Sea of Rome, and to
make the kingdom feodable unto the Bishop, wherein they sought to make all
Realms and Princes Vassals and slaves unto them. Which was so fully brought to
pass, in the time of Boniface the eight, that he openly vaunted, that he had
the full power of both Swords, and all Kings to have their principallitie at
his hands, and he immediatelye of God, and this doctrine has been taught
ever since by the mainteiners of y^ sea. The time cutteth me of from matter, y^
I have to say in this point, I will gather therefore to a conclusion of this
part. Seeing the Popes themselves whom Conclusion upon al these histories of the
popes proceedings.
they count y^ pillars of their religion, y^ heads of y^ church, y^ Vicars of
Christ, that are lead (as they say) by the Holy Ghost, that cannot err, that
have knowledge of truth, and interpretation of scripture in their hearts, seeing
I say, they are found and proved by their own histories, to be in ambition so
outrageous, in unjust and wicked dealing so horible, in pride and cruelty so
detestable (I leave their covetousness, for that time does exclude me) what
shall we think of the inferior sort? shall we think that they did their
duty, when the other nothing minded it? Such as the spring and Fountain is,
such is the Water of the Stream, Such as the root is, such is the Tree and
branches, Such as the master is, such are his Scholars, Such as the head is,
such are the members. If the Spring be corrupt, the Root putrifyed, the
Master wicked, the head grievously diseased: we must needs have naughtye
streams, putrifyed Branches, miching Scholars, and sick members of the body.

The holiest of that sort, were men that were covered under the Lamb skins
of Fasting, praying, and forsaking of the world, and yet Under these Titles had
they got them the riches of the world, and their lives were so notable, that
in the common voice of men, there was no ill tale, but a Freere, or a Religious
manne, was at the one end of it.

Now as touching that the adversaries, object against us looseness of manners
and dissolute life, and with eger spirits erie, that since our doctrine has
begun in the world, nothing has increased but falsehood, craft, deceit,
perjury, hatred, malice, strife, contention, sedition, war, and murder:
lechery, wantonness, uncleanness,, sects, divisions, and all mischief,
and trouble. Oh, (dearly beloved) this is a grievous and heavy accusation,
that whereas by Gods singular benefit, the doctrine of repentance, remission
of sins, and newness of life is taught among us, more distinctly, more
truly and sincerely, than ever it was before, yet that godliness of life, and
honest conversation should not follow. This surely should be an heavy corsie
to our hearts, if we be true Christians, and in deed favor Not the gospel,
but out corrupt nature is the cause, why our fruits at these dais are no
better.
the Gospel. For although this sclau^derous accusation has ever followed the
Gospel, even in Christ's own time, and at this day (God be praised) is not
so just and true, as our adversaries would have it seem to be: Yet we must
confess before the face of God and his Angels, and before all the Saints and
Creatures of God, both in heaven and earth, that the doctrine of the Gospel,
has not brought forth such fruits of godly conversation as it should have
done, and that the blessed seed of his heavenly word, through the barraine
ground of our corrupt hearts, has not so prospered, as our duties require,
that it should have done. For in deed the most part (we confess) remain in
deep security, over whelmed with the corruption of this life and pleasures of
the world. Neither can we deny, that with many, this wholesome doctrine has
not only, not brought forth convenient fruits: but is used as a cloak of
licentiousness and dissolute liberty, and as a means to Spoil the goods and
patrimony of the Church, which they seek wholly to employ, to the pampering
of their own The gospel evil spoken of, because of such as ^^lely profess
and do not li^^ after it.
pleasures, and not to the furtherance of Gods service. Wherefore in the fear
of God I exhort you, that you will continually, and earnestly call upon him in
your hearty prayers, that by the grace of his holy spirit, he will mollify
men's hearts, and make them good ground, and beat into their remembrance,
that whatsoever color they cast upon them selves, by profession of the
Gospel, yet by the testimony of their own consciences, they are convinced
within them selves, and by their fruits declare unto the world openly, that
they are not good trees, but such as shall be cut down and cast into the
fire: That by the just judgment of GOD, if they repent not, they heap unto
themselves, the just wrath and displeasure of GOD, not only by plagues and
punishments in this life, but also eternally in hell, with the Devil and his
Angels: That by their wicked example they offend other, and either lead them
into like evil doing, or so cause them to be greened in conscience with the
sight of their evil life, that for the fame they mislyke the Gospel, and
reuolte from it, and therefore that God will require the blood of such at
their hands, and in the day of judgment will make it more tolerable for
Sodom and Gomorrha then for them. Finallye that by this means they open the
mouths of the enimyes to blaspheme the Gospel, so that the word of gods
truth is by them ill spoken of among the Gentiles. As this admonition
touches all states of men, so principally and most nyghly it touches Noble
men and Gentlemen, and such as be in high estate, because their doings are
most seen, and of most men followed. Yea Satan will be more diligent, and
has more means to assault them, than any other, because he knows the fall
and over throw of one such by example and imitation, does draw down a
great number of other. For the inferiors think that lawful and well done,
that they see practiced of their superiors and betters. The great personages
therefore offend dubble, first in the ill it self, and secondlye in the ill
example, wherewith they corrupt other. Wherefore (dearly beloved) let both
them and us, carefully consider these things followyng, that GOD has performed
the Luc. 1. 73.
oath of our deliverance, and by the blood of his son raunsomed us from our
sins, not that we should continue in The preachers of the gospel exhort to
holy life and godliness, as well in works as profession. Ephesians. 2. 10.
the same, but that we should serve him, in holiness and right ousnesse all
the days of our life. That in our Baptism we bound our selves, and
conenaunted with God to forsake the Devil, and all his works: That we be the
work of God, framed in Christ Jesu to these good works, that he has prepared
for us to walk in^ That we are by Christ made the children of God, and
therefore that we should be Ma. 5. 48. 1. Pet. 1. 16. Luc. 1. 75. Leu. 11. 44.
Ephesians. 5. 8. Ephesians. 2. 19.
perfect in all goodness, as our father in heaven is perfect, and holy as he
is holy, that has called us: That we be the children of light, and therefore
should detest the works of darkness: That we are of the household of God, and
Citizens together with his Saints, and therefore that our conversation should
be heavenly, and in heaven, as S. Paul says, Conuersatio nostra in caelis
est. i. Our conversation is Phi. 3. 20. Mat. 5. 14. 1. These. 5. 5. 1. Joh. 2.
9. etc. Mat. 5. 16.
in heaven. That we be now the light of the world, and therefore our virtues
and good works, should shine before men, that they seeing the same may
glorifye GOD our Father that is in Heaven: That we are the Soldiers of
Christ, and therefore ought to stand valiauntlye against all the assaults of
the Devil, the world, and the flesh, to the end that when we have manfully
ended our life, we may receive that immortal crown of glory, which he has
laid up, not for us only, but for all them 2. Tim. 4. 8.
that love his coming. These things (dearly beloved) should sufficiently
move us y^ profess the Gospel, to remember our duties toward God in honest
conversation, and be as sharp spurs unto us, to prick us forward to
repentance: especially such, as hither to by wanting of their duty, have been
stumblyng blocks to other. But although the blessed doctrine of the Gospel be
despised of many, which, making show thereof have brought forth, either very
small fruits or none at al, but have to their own conde^natio^, and The
preaching of the gospel not altogether fruitless.
heavy judgment wared worse the^ before: yet y^ same heaven and earth, before
who^ we confess and acknowledge our faults, can testify, that there be many
godly hearts, in whom it has wrought very good and plentiful fruits, and of
drimkardes made very sober persons, of dissolute Lecherers, chaste and godly
spouses, of covetous cormorantes, liberal distributers to the poor, of
blasphemous swearers, reverent rememberers of the name of God, of ruffinlye
worldlings, diligent servants in the house of God. Finally of such as have
been given over, to the lust of the world and the flesh, it has made persons
so utterly mortified, as for Christ and his Gospel, they contemn friendship,
goods, lands, life, and all that this world gives, though it seem to the
judgment of men never so precious. Therefore the word of God, among us has
not wanted his fruits, although not so plentiful as good hearts has wished,
and yet I doubt not, but that there be many, that the world has not commonly
seen, nor is able to judge of. For he that in the corrupt state of the
Israelites, was able to reserve unto himself, 7000. that never bowed their
knee to 3. Reg. 19. 18.
the Image of Baal: has in these days given just fruits to the preaching of
the Gospel, though the multitude of the wicked do over shadow them, that in
the judgment of men they be not seen. As the Rain comes down, says Esai.
55. 10
God in Esaias, and the Snow from heaven, and returns not again, but waters
the earth, and makes it to bring forth and budde, that it may give seed to
the sower, and bread to him that eats, so shall my word be, that goes out
of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but shall accomplish that
which is my will, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I have sent it.
Though y^ adversaries of the truth, bitterly and virulently The godliness of
the preachers of the gospel, compared with that of the prelates of Rome.
accuse our doctrine and life, yet (in the fear of God I speak it, and to his
name be praise for it) all the adversaries that we have, beside their own
sclaunderous and infamous libels, will never be able, by any just testimony to
prove, the fourtieth part of those wicked vices to be found, among the chief
Preachers, and professors of the Gospel, that the whole world sees, and
witnesses to be in themselves. These fruits I dare justify, has followed
the Gospel, since the first preaching thereof, in these latter What fruits
have followed the preaching of the gospel.
days: That the Scriptures and holy word of GOD, has been made known to the
people, in their mother tongue, whereby they might the better understand, their
duty toward God and their neighbor, which before wickedlye, and ungodly,
and to the great danger of infinite Souls, with fear and tyranny was kept
from them. That the principles of Christian faith, are far more diligently
taught then before time they were, so that very Babes have some sense of GOD,
and are able tollerablye in most places, to yield an account of their faith,
which before heard of nothing, but of Guy of Warwick, Beuis of Hampton, and
such other vain fables. That Schools are better looked unto, then they have
been, and y^ thereby the knowledge of the tongues, and all other good
literature, has more flourished, than ever they did these many hundred years,
and by that means it is come to pass, that the Text of the Scriptures is
now better understood, than ever it was in any age. That sundry points of
doctrine be reformed, without which, men can not possiblye have any true
sense of Christianity: as the doctrine of Original Sin, of the Law and
the Gospel, of Repentance, of Faith, of Hope and Charity, which before
were maruaylouslye corrupted, and wrapped in darkness and error,
Principally, the wholesome doctrine of the grace and merit of Christ, of
Remission of Sins, of eternal life, received by faith in Christ, and Sealed
and confirmed by his Sacraments, does in these days bring inestimable
comfort to troubled consciences, as well at all other times, as chiefly at
the hour of death, when Satan most seeks to shake men's consciences with
desperation. The sense hereof the godless Epicures and secure Hypocrites have
not, but such as fear God, and have any touch of conscience, conceive
exceeding comfort thereby. Men in these days also are better instructed to
pray, and call upon the name of God, and indeed do the same more sincerely,
because they understand what they speak, whereas before, when they were
taught to pray in a strange tongue, it could not possibly be, that their
hearts and lyppes could go together, which of al other, was a most miserable
seducing of the people, and as it were a mocking of God and his service, and a
singular instrument of the Devil, to keep the people in error and blindness.

Lastly (as I have fayde) reformation of manners and life, in very many* has
been wrought, and I doubt not but a great deal of evil, in these miserable
and corrupt latter days, restrained by the sincere Preaching of the Gospel,
and earnest calling of men to repentance, which otherwise surely, according
to the infection of this time, would have broken out to greates corruption of
man's life. These fruits, and a number such like, although the aduersary^^
will not acknowledge, I trust such as fear GOD, and will but indifferently
judge of things, can not choose but perceive, and with comfort confess to
be true. Thus have you heard, that external show of honest life, ordinary
calling and succession, the Title and Name of the Catholic Church, the use
and workyng of Miracles, be in deed the clothing of Christ's true sheep, but
yet, that ravening Wolves oftentimes hyde themselves under them, to deceive
Gods people. You have heard that the fruits, whereby false Prophets are
discerned and known, is corruption of doctrine, and teaching of errors and
lies. And you have heard it euidentlye proved, as well by the testimony of
Saint John, as other parts of the Scripture, that those fruits have been in
the Church of Rome, and not among us, which submit all our doctrines to the
touchstone of Gods holy word. Lastly, you have heard by comparison, that the
good fruits of godly life and detesting of sin, has more prospered among
the professors of the Gospel, than among the patrones of the Church of Rome.
The Lord grant us the grace of his holy spirit, that to his glory, vice
and wickedness may daily be more repressed, and virtue and honesty more
advanced. ()

Amen.
Certain Sermons made upon this Text. 1. Cor. 10. 1. etc.
Moreover brethren I would not, that you should be ignorant, that al our
fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all
Baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the Sea, and did all eat of the same
spiritual meat, and all drunk of the same spiritual drink, for they drank
of the spiritual Rock, that followed them, and the Rock was Christ. But with
many of them God was not pleased, etc.
SAint Paul (dearly beloved) from the beginning of this Epistle, blamed the
Corinthians, for sundry faults, and corruptions among them: As that they had
factions and dissentions, one part against another, that they more esteemed in
their Preachers, eloquence of speech, then the simplicity of Christ
crucified, that they made small account of him, in comparison of some other
corrupt teachers, that they suffered incest among them unpunished: that they
resorted to Idolatrous feasts with the heathen, and did eat of those things
that were offered to Devils, contrary to the sincerity of true Christians. Now
because men are very prone, to flatter their own minds by vain pretenses,
and to feed Objection that the Co^^^thes might use ^^^ented.
themselves in evil doing, he preuenteth an objection or excuse, y^ happily
they might make for themselves. For they might have said: Sir, we bear y^ name
of Christ, and be Christians, we have his Gospel among us, and use his
Sacraments, whereby his merit is sealed in us. Therefore we are sure, that
we are in the favor of God, and that his displeasure and plague, shall not
light upon us. etc. To this S. Paul answers, that this trust and secure
confidence in the profession of Christianity, and use of the Sacraments, is
but vain, unless they approve and make good their faith, and outward
profession of Christ, with the exercise of honest life, and Godly conversation.
This he confyrmeth by comparison of the Israelites. The people of Israel,
(says S. Paul,) were the chosen people of God, they had his law and
Ceremonies among them: yea, they had promise of salvation, by the same blessed
sede that we have, they did use in effect the same Sacraments that we do,
they were baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea, they did eat of the same
spiritual meat that we do, they did drink of the same spiritual drink,
that we drink of, for the Rock that they drank of, was Christ. And yet many
of them, by Gods heavy hand, perished in the Wilderness. And if you look into
the cause, you shall find it to be nothing else, but for y^ they were
inclinable and proane to the corruption of Idolatry, that they were given to
fornication and uncleanness, that they tempted Christ, and munnured against
God, and committed other like naughtiness against the will of God etc.

Seeing it is so, you may be sure that God is no changeling, but will deal in
the same manner with you now, as he did with his people before time. Now for
so much as S. Paul's reason does principally stand upon the use of the
Sacraments, and that the people in those days, were more skillful and better
taught the effect, nature, and strength of a Sacrament, the^ in this time
they be (through slacknesse of teaching, and way wardnesse in learning) before
I come to that, which S. Paul principallye respects in this place, I think
it necessary for your better instruction, first to speak generally of
Sacraments, and to show what a Sacrament is, of what parts it stands, for
what causes they are ordained, and what fruit may be taken of them. Secondly
because he says. The Rock was Christ, and that they did eat and drink of
the same Christ, I will declare what manner of speethe this is, and show why
Chist and his blood is called meat and drink, and how he is to be eaten and
drunken in the sacrament truly, and in deed. And lastly I will let you
understand, that the bare professyon of Christianity, the external use of the
sacraments, and outward exercise of praying, and other ^the things, are not
sufficient, without the inward worshipping in spirit and truth, and christian
obedience to the will and law of God.

A sacrament is a reverend and holy mystery ordained What a Sacrament is.
of God, wherein he by his holy word and promise, does both stir up and
practice the faith of his people, and by y^ operation of the holy ghost
increase his grace in them, and besto^ his benefits and blessings upon them,
and we on the other part, testifye our obedience toward him, and unity of
faith among our selves. The author and ordainer of sacraments God the only
author of Sacraments.
is none but God himself. No Patriarche, nor prophet, nor Apostle, nor Father,
nor the whole church has autho^^^^ to ordain a sacrament. Who is author of
Sacraments Li. 4. de Sacramen.
(says Ambrose,) but the Lord Jesus. These Sacraments came from Heaven. etc.

A sacrament is a part of Gods worship, but no creature can ordain any part of
Gods worship, but himself, according to that saying of the Prophet: In vain
they worship Esaias. 29. 13
me, teaching the traditions of men. In the old Testament, if a man had offered
any sacrifice not appointed by God, it was esteemed little better then
Idolatry. It is known what happened to the sons of Aaron, for that Leuit.
10. 1.
they brought strange sire to the Alter of God: much less may any appoint
strange sacraments, not ordained by the express word of God in his
scriptures.

Sacraments be seals that confyrme Gods promises, and look what a
counterfeyted seal is to a man's writing or deed, that is a sacrament in
the Church, not ordained by GOD. If this be true, as in deed it is most
true, what shall we say of the Church of Room, which has presumed not, only
to alter those Sacraments that Christ appointed, but also to ordayn sundry
other sacraments, without any just warrant of gods word, only upon forced
interpretacio^s, devised of themselves? Penance, Orders, and Matrimony (corrupt
Doctrine being taken from the^) be good things, and to be exercised in y^
church, and so likewise are prayer, fasting, and alms deeds, and yet I see n^
cause, why they should be called sacraments. There is a great difference between
a sacrament, and an other godly exercise commanded in y^ church, as herafter
you shall better understand. Seeing therefore christ is author of sacraments, and
none other, you may not think the^ to be trifles, vain Ceremonies, and men's
devises, y^ you may use or not use at your pleasures, as you list, but you
ought to reuere^^^ the^, as y^ ordinance of God, and to receive the^, even as
at Christ's own hand. For as when gods word is taught you, by the ministry of
men, you must not receive it as man's word, but as the word of 1 These. 2. 13
Esaias. 1. 20. 40. 5. 59. 14.
God, as it is in deed, and therefore the Prophet said, the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it: even so the Sacraments, when you receive them at the hands of a
frail and mortal, yea and sometime a sinful man, you must look to the
Author, and in your faith see the hand of God offering The wickedness of the
minister does not derogate any thing from the effect of the Sacrament, to the
faithful receauer.
the same unto you. The sacraments take not their excellencye and worthiness
of him that Ministers them, though he be never so holy, neither. be they
disgraced, or weakened, though the Minister be wicked and evil.

And therefore the error of y^ Donatistes, Anabaptists, and some other is
sharpelye to be reproved, that think the sacraments of Christ to be of
leesse value, if they be ministered by an evil or sinful man. In deed the
haud of the receiver, being without Faith, makes the sacraments, that of
themselves be good, to be unto him of no Force, because of his unbelief: But
a wicked Minister cannot in any wise make frustrate, or deceive the Faith of
the Godly Receauer. Judas was a wicked and false Traytoure, and a Covetous
naughtys person, all the time that he followed Christ, and yet I doubt not but
that the baptism, that he ministered, was as auailable to the faithful
receiver, as the baptism of Peter was, Co^tra Petilianu^.
or of any other of the Apostles. S. August. uses the same example. Whereas
(faith he) there was great difference between Peter and Judas, yet was there
no difference, between the baptism ministered by Peter, and that was ministered
by Judas, that was all one, but of the parties, one was a member of Christ,
another a member of the Devil. And again he says, Such are the Sacraments,
Lib. 2 con Lit. Petil. The faith of the receauer, not the life of the ministrer
does help or ^^^der, in the effect of the Sacrament.
as they are, that come unto them. Whereby one may profitablely receive the
Sacrament of an ill minister, so he himself be good. This is a great comfort
to the godly, that in receiving the Sacrament, they need not to look into the
life of the Minister, but to examine their own hearts.

Now as touching the parts of a Sacrament, you shall understand it consists
of three parts. The first is the Sacraments consist of three parts.
external sign, as the Lamb in the Passover, the cutting of the fore skin
in Circumcision, water in Baptism, ^ The outward signs and what they signify.
bread and wine in the Lords supper. Because of these outward ^ignes, a
Sacrament is called a sign, a Seal, a Visible word, so that it were a
Monster, to have a sacrament without an external sign or elemente, to the
outewarde substance of it.

Water in Baptism signifies, that as water naturally has a property, to
wash and cleanse the filth from the body: so does the grace of God through
Christ his blood, wash away the gilt and filthiness of our souls. As bread
and wine by natural effect nourishes our bodies, and strengthens and
comfort our spirits: so does the heavenly food of Christ's body and
blood, broken and shead for us upon the Cross, nourish our souls, and quicken
our Spirits to eternal life with God. As the bread is made of many graynes
kneaded into one loaf, and the Wine pressed out of many Grapes into one cup:
so the multitude of Christians communicating at the Lords Table, though many
in number are ingrafted into Christ, and made members of his mystical body,
and joined in mutual love one with the other, so that now they live by the
spirit of Christ, as the members of a natural body live, and have sense by
that Spirit that comes from the heart, and from the head. This proportion
and similitude between the signs and the spiritual effects of the
sacrament, S. Cyprian acknowledges. As this common b^ead says he De coena
Domini.
being changed into flesh and blood breeds life to to our bodies: so by the
accustomed nature of things, the weakness of our faith being helped, is
taught in sensible argument, that in visible Sacraments are the effect of
eternal life. These godly instructions and ^we^e comfortes, the Church of Room
weakeneth and ^aketh The abs^^^^tie of transubstancia^ion.
away, by their monstrous doctrine of Transubsta^ciation* Wherein they teach
that the substance of Bread and wine, is clean vanished and consumed away,
so that there remains no Bread, nor Wine in the Sacrament, and that is in
effect to make it no sacrament. For as I have told you before, there can
be no Sacrament, without an external Elemente, to be the outewarde sign
thereof. But what external sign can there be, when ^^^y without
substance, and accidents, and qualities, nourishe the substance of our
bodies?

Or if they cannot, how may they represente unto us, that as they nourishe
our bodies, so Christ his blood nourishes our souls? yea rather they teach
the contrary, that as qualities do^ not nourishe the substance of our^ body,
so does not Christ's body nourish our souls. Wherefore al good Christians, have
to deteste that blasphemous Doctrine, brought in by the Church of Rome, which,
as I have said, takes away the right nature and proportion of a sacrament.

By this that I have said already, you may perceive that there is some further
end, then the use of the signs in the Sacraments, and that the External
Elements The second part whereof Sacraments do consist, is the spiritual or
inward thing.
are not orday^ed for themselves, but for some ^ther purpose. In the old time
the sacraments and Ceremonies were profitable for the bodilye nourishmente, as
the water gushing ou^e of the Rock, Manna, and the Paschall Lamb: but in our
sacraments God smallye consydereth our bodies, but principallye and whollye
the ^eleefe, ease, and comfort of our souls. Therefore as in the old
Testament, so now much more in the sacraments, is to be considered some
spiritual and internal thing, to the understanding whereof, the likeness of
the external signs Wh^^ the internal part of Sacraments is.
do lead us: as in baptism, our regeneration and new birth, and the washing
away of our sins, by the death and p^ssion of Christ, In the Lords supper the
heavenly food of our souls, with the body that was broken, and his blood
that was shead upon the Cross. Wherefore good christians in receiving y^
sacrament, must not have so much regard to the sign, as to the spiritual
thing it self, for which y^ outward token was o^dayned. So does the Council
of Nice exhort us: Let us not bend our cogitation ba^ely to Bread and Wine
laid before us, but lifting up our mind through faith, let us behold the Lamb
of god taking away the sins of the world, to be on that table. etc. And
Chrisost. hom. 7. 1. ad Cor. The heathen person Chrysostom. ho^. 7 ^. ad Cor.
when he hea^eth of baptism persuades himself that it is water only, but I
do not simply see that I do see, but also the cleansing of my soul, by the
spirit of God. He thinks my body only to be washed, but I believe that my
soul is cleansed and made holy. And Sermon. ad Infant.
Aug. That which you see is bread, and the cup, as your eyes declare unto
you, but as touching that wherewith your faith is to be instructed, the bread is
to you the body of Christ, and the wine his blood. Wherefore the especial and
principal part of the sacrament is the spiritual and internal thing, as in
baptism (as I have said) regeneration and sanctification, and in the Lords
supper y^ body and blood of Christ. And here (dear^lye beloved) I must put you
in mind, that they which teach this, do not say that the sacraments are
bare signs and tokens, as the adversaries of the Gospel do slander us. Our
doctrine of the Sacraments, is far more fruitful and comfortable then theirs
is. For we teach and believe that, these spiritual effects are as certainly
wrought, by the holy ghost in the sacraments, as we see that the external
elements Sacramen^^ are seals, whereby the letters patentes of ou^ Salvation
^^ Christ, are confir^^^ unto us.
have their operation in the course of nature. For the sacraments are as the
deeds and Seals of almighty god, whereby he does in deed and verily, not
only by signification, but effectually conueighe unto us, the possession of his
spiritual blessings, and yet do^ we not maynetayne the carnal and Real
presence of Christ his body and blood, within the compass of the Sacrament,
so that it should enter into the ^oundnesse of the mouth, and descend into
the natural parts of our body.

That gross opinyon I leave to the schole of Room, (...) (...) I f^^d it not
in Christ's institution, nor in the s^hole of the holy Ghost, that is, the
Scripture of God. As a prince in his letters patentes under his great Seal,
gives to a man happily a thousand pound Land by the year, so that the
party having that deed, may assure himself that he has full right and
possessyon thereof, and as surely as it were possible, he have the L^^de i^
s^^f in his ^^^de: yet can he not be so senseless and foolish, to think that
he has the very substance of the Land in the Bo^e wherein the deed is. So
does Christ in the Sacrament lovingly (...) to the faithful heart, the
possession of his body and blood with all the benefits by the same procured to
mankind, that he may iu^^lye say^, that the^ be his, and by the ^^liueth, and
is nourished to eternal life, yet he may not be so foolish, to think that he
has not the fruit of it, unless it go reallye and Carnallye into his body.

For Christ's body and blood are meat and drink for our soul, and not for our
body, to be nourished by, as it is by bread and Wine. (...). The third part
of the sacrament, is that The third part wherein Sacraments consist, is the
word of Christ's institution and promise.
which gives strength and effect to the residue, that is to say, the word of
Christ's institution and promise, which is as it were the soul and life of the
sacrament. For whereto serves a seal to a blanke, wherein nothing is
written, by which we may claim any Benefyte? whereto serves an external
sign, if we have not a promise to attain a spiritual thing? And no man's
hand or writing will serve to make perfect this deed: It must be Gods
only. For he has only the giving of such things, wherefore it must be Gods
word, that must assure us hereof. Well (said Aug.) Let the word come to the
element, August.
and it makes the Sacrament* And again: How comes it to pass, that water
touches the body, and clenfeth the heart (...)t by the power of the word, and
that not because it is spoken, but because it is believed? And how can a man
believe that which he ^ea^etl^ not, nor understands. ^ereby ^^^ may consider
^how (...) yo^ have been deceived by them, which have (...)ed the sacraments
unto you in a strange and unknown tongue that you understood not. These
comfortable words (...) Lords cup, This is my blood which is shead for you,
Mat. 26. 28. Mar. 14. 24. Luc. 22. 20.
and for ma^y for ^^^^ssion of ^^^nes, with playn^ Sa^^^^ege have they kept
from you, and (...) you not only of the pro^^se contained in the words, but
also of one part of the sacrament, for they inims^red it unto you of the
lay^ie, always under one kyn^e, y^ ^^* as they say* under y^ form of bread
only, which great (...) to after both the words ^^^ parts of the
Sacraments* is (...) entelye to be noted in them, and greatly to be (...).
When we speak therefore of the sacrament, we must speak as it is in it self,
by the force of Gods word, consisting of all three parts, and not as the
baldness of men, or the weakness and imperfection of our faith may make it
^^w us.

Now let us consider the causes and ends, for which Why Sacraments were
ordained.
Christ's pleasure was, to ordain Sacraments in his Church, that we may
thereby also in part learn what fruit and benefit we take by them. The first
cause is, partly Our infirmity, the first cause why Sacraments were ordained.
our own infirmity and weakness, being dull and slow in the understanding
of heavenly things: partly the great goodness and love of God, that would
vouchsafe to attemper himself to our simple capacity, and seek means by
outward things to ease and help the same. For this cause, in the Scripture
does he so often use parables and similitudes of those things, that are within
the compass of our understanding, by those the sooner to induce us to the
knowledge of his heavenly doctrines. This cause the ancient and learned
Fathers did acknowledge in their writings. The Lord (says Chrysostom) gives
us not any thing, that Homil. in Math. 830.
is sensible, but insensible things* The outward things are sensible, but all
things are to be understood in the mind. In Baptism, water is sensible,
but our regeneration and renewing, is perceived in the mind. For if thou were
spiritual and without a body, he would have given all these things to thee
naked and bare, but because with thy mind there is joined a gross body, in
things sensible he declares unto thee things, by thy mind to be understood.
Like words almost has Dionysius in Caelost. Hier. Because of carnal persons
(says Augustine) Lib. 3. quest. Vet. and noui.
visible Sacraments were instituted, to the end that by things, that be seen
with your eyes, your mind may be transformed, to those things that be
understood. Our understanding is weak and dull, our memory is frail and
fickle, and soon forgets the benefit of God. Both these our unperfections,
God by his Sacraments helps, our understanding is ^ed by the similitude, and
likeness of the external signs, as before I have noted. Our Seuces also are
by the erercise of the Sacraments stirred up, to be instruments to help one
mind and weak faith. Our remembrance also, by the same (...) is
marueilously^ strengthened. And therefore a second cause or end of a The
second cause why Sacraments were instituted, is our ^^ ^rcise in the
rememberance of Christ's benefits. Luc. 22. 19. 1. Cor. 11. 26.
Sacrament is, that it may be to us a blessed exercise, whereby we call to
remembrance, the benefit of our redemption in Christ, and yield to him most
hearty thanks, and praise for the same, according as Christ teaches us, in
the institution of his last Supper: Do this in remembrance of me. And Saint
Paul, so often as you eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, you shall
set forth the death of the Lord, until his coming, etc. They therefore
which come to receive the Sacrament, and never think of this, nor call to
their remembrance to praise God for this inestimable benefit, but think that
the outward use of the Sacrament is sufficient, are among the number of them
that receive unworthily, and make little account of Christ's benefit procured
for us. A third The third and whereunto Sacraments were appointed.
cause and end of a Sacrament is, that we by the practice and use thereof,
might be traded to the obedieuce of Gods holy will and commandments,
though the things seem to our selves never so simple and mean^: and also
that thereby we might openly before God and the world, protest and
acknowledge that we are his people, and of the number of them* that look to be
saved, preserved and defended by the benefit of Christ only. So that the open
use of the sacraments is a part of that confession, whereunto S. Paul
attributes salvation, when he says, If thou confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and believe in thy ^o^. 10. 9.
heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, for by the heart
we believe to righteousness, and by the mouth confession is made to
salvation. In the use of the sacraments, we confess both by mouth an^
testimony of all the parts of our body, that Christ Jesus is our Lord and
savior. A fourth cause and end The. 4. cause why Sacraments were ordained.
of the Sacraments is, that they might be as bands and linkes of love,
unity, and concord among our selves. Therefore Saint Paul when he exhorted
to unity and love, among other things a(...)th. We have one faith, Ephesians. 4. 5.
one Baptism. And again in another place: We are 1. Cor. 10. 17.
one body as many as be partakers of one lofe. For this cause, does Saint
Augustine call the Sacrament of August.
the Supper, Sacramentum vnitatis. i. A Sacrament of unity, and teaches us
(as before I have said,) that as a loaf of bread is made of many graynes,
and a Cup of Wine of many Grapes: so we, though many in number, are made
members of one mystical body of Christ Jesus. A foul thing it is to see the
servants of one Master, that wear one cognizaunce or liuerie, to fall out
among themselves, it can not be without some reproach of their Master. All
Christian men wear one cognizaunce and badge: for the Sacraments are the marks
of Christ's sheep. Therefore not to love and agree together, is a reproach
wrought to our Lord and Master. Whereby in a manner we protest to the world,
that we be not servant of his family, For in this (says he) shall men
know you to be my Ioh. 13. 35.
Disciples, if you love one another, as I have loved you. Hereof does the right
use and understanding of the Sacrameutes, very notably put us in remembrance.
For it teaches us, that in Baptune we are all new borne, children of God,
and graffed into one body, and in the Lords supper fed and nourished, with
one heavenly food of the body and blood of Christ, and therefore that we
should with faithful and unfeigned love hartelie embrace one the other, as the
children of one father, the members of one body, and the servants of one
Master, fed at one table, and nourished with one food to eternal life. Let
them therefore look, with what consciences they come unto the Sacraments, y^
reserve bitter rancour and malice in their hearts, let them consider what heavy
testimony, they give against themselves before God and his Angels. The last
cause and end of a sacrament The last ca^^ why Sacraments were appointed.
y^ I mean now to speak of, is that by those, as by blessed instruments of
the holy Ghostes working, he might imparte unto us, and bestow upon us his
inestimable Graces, and benefytes together with all the fruits of our
redemption in Christ Jesu. For as his word is, so are his Sacraments,
instruments and Means by the working of his holy spirit, to bring unto us
the whole benefit of our salvation. And here again because of our
sclau^derous adversaries, I must put you in remembrance, that we which teach
thus, teach not as it is fathered upon us, that the Sacraments are but bare
signs. For you The faithful together with the outward sign receive the
inward thing.
hear us teach, and as you love the saluatie^ of your souls, require you to
believe, that they be signs and figures in deed, but such, as most assuredly
bring unto the faithful heart, verily and in truth the self same things, that
they signify: so that the faithful Christian receauer, may assure himself,
that as truly as God is God, so truly he receaueth those things, which the
outward Sacrament does signify. We ought therefore (dearly beloved,) with
humble hearts to give immortal thanks to the eternal God, in our Savior
Christ Jesus, that he has vouchedsafe so graciously, and so mercifully, to
have consideration of our infirmity, to help our frailty, and as it were to
lead us like children by the hand, and appoint us whether to go, and what to
do: and to give us those exercises to trade us to the obedience of his will,
and confession of his name, to mark us with his badges and cognizances, that
we may be known to be his, to fasten us together with these linkes of unity
and Christian concord, and finally to prepare for us such and so blessed
instruments, to bring unto us his heavenly blessings. Herein also we may
behold his great wisdom, that he would not lay forth unto us his spiritual
mysteries and promises in words only, least they might slip away and be
forgotten, but confirms and establishes the same by his deed and seal
also, as I have declared, that we might the more assuredly embrace them. We
read in Histories, and see by experience, that when men make any Covenant or
bargayne, they either shake hands, or use some other like ceremony or
solemnity to confirm it. In old time among the heathen, they used to kill a
hogg^ or a pigge, etc. and to use at the same certain protestatious and
curses, if they stood not to their covenant and league. And every matter of
conueighance we see passes by deed and seal. The Lord when he made his
promise to Abraham, Genesis 15. 9.
willed a Bullock, a Goat, and a Weather to be killed, and the Lord in
form of a burning light passed between them, by that solemnity assuring him,
that whatsoever he had promised, should in truth be performed. The outward
Circumcision, the Paschall Lamb, and all the multitude of Sacrifices of the
old law, were nothing but seals to confirm the truth of Gods promise of
salvation, in the true sacrifice that should come. Even so deals Christ with
us in his Sacraments, Those he has ordained as his deeds, and instruments,
as before I have mentioned, to assure us of his promyses. And so much are his
deeds more sure, and his promyses more certain and infallible, than any man's
can be: as his will is more just, to stand to that he has said, and his
ability to perform it greater.

Now for so much as S. Paul in this place makes comparison between the
Sacraments of the old Law, and of the Gospel, and says that the Israelites
were Baptized in the cloud, and in the sea, and in Manna did eat the same
spiritual meat, and in the Rock drink of the same spiritual drink that
we do: I think it necessary somewhat What difference is to be observed
betwixt the Sacraments of the old Jews and the Sacraments of Christians. The
old Jews vndes the law had the same hope of Salvation by Christ, that we now
have.
to note, what difference is between their Church and ours, and their
sacraments and ours. And principally I do this, because many through
ignorance are of that opinion, that the salvation of mankind by Christ was
never heard of in the world, before Christ came in flesh, and that the Jews
had some other mean of salvation than by him, and therefore that their
sacraments and ours are nothing like. But this error takes away from all
Christians a passing great comfort, that is, that Christian Religion, and that
Means of salvation, is no new thing, but has continued ever since the
beginning of the world, according as it is said of Christ, Agnus qui dccifus
est ab origin mundi. i. That he Apoc. 13. 8
is the Lamb which was slain, from the beginning of the world.

First therefore you must understand, and the whole course of the Scriptures
teaches us, that there is but one eternal and immutable GOD of both those
Churches, I mean of the Jews before Christ, and of christians now, whom
they both, did worship in spirit and in truth. For Christians must be
far from that dinelish, and wicked heresy of Marcion, Valentinian, and
other, which taught, that there were two Gods, one of the Jews, another of
the Christians, a good God, and a badde, a GOD that created the world, and a
good God that was Father of Christ Jesus. But this detestable heresy has been
justly condemned, and cast out of the Church many hundred years since.
Secondlye, both those Churches have but one manner of salvation proposed to
them in the promyses of GOD, that is, by the death of Christ, the Messiah and
son of God. This manner of salvation was first devised by the wisdom of God,
and laid up in the secret closet of his divine providence, before the world
was made. So says Saint Paul, Blessed be God the Father of our Ephesians. 1. 3.
Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with all spiritual blessing in
heavenly things in Christ, as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of
the world. This manner of salvation God himself first uttered and publyshed
in Paradise, saying to the Serpent after sin committed, I will set enmity
between thee and the woman, Genesis 3. 15.
and between thy seed and her seed, and thy seed shall break his head,
etc. Here is promised that one should come of the seed of the woman that
should break the serpents head, that is, utterly destroy the power of the
Devil, and deliver mankind from his tyranny. The same promise was confirmed
to Abraham, and ratified to all the Patriarchs in these words: In thy seed
all the Genesis 26. 4.
nations of the earth shall be blessed. This promise so much moved faithful
Abraham, that, as Christ says, he greatly longed in spirit, to see the day of
Christ, and he saw it, and Ioh. 8. 56.
exceedingly rejoiced: and undoubtedly so did the other Patriarchs and
Prophets as S. Peter bears witness hereof. All the Prophets from Samuel,
and thenceforth, as Act. 3. 24.
many as have spoken, have borne witness of these days. What shall I say of
the whole manner of the law, ceremonies and Sacraments? but that they were
Preachings of that redemption, that should be in Christ Jesus? It were infinite
to give you examples in all, I will note unto you only two or three. What can
be more evident than the Sacrament of the Passover? That as a Lamb without
spot was killed: so the immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus, should be sacrificed for
our deliverance, out of the spiritual Egypt of the Devils kingdom: where
under the heavy burdens of sinful works, we were holden thrall and in
bondage. And as the blood of the Lamb sprinkled upon the post, was a token
for the Angel of Gods wrath to pass that house: so as many as by faith have
the door posts of their hearts sprinkled with the blood of Christ, the true
Lamb, that takes away the sins of the world, shall be sure to be saved
from that wrath of God, wherein the wicked and unbelievers shall be wrapped.
And because S. Paul speaks here of Manna, do you not see it a marvelous
Image of Christ? Manna came from heaven, so did Christ, Manna was delivered to
all in like measure: so is Christ an indifferent and full salvation to all men.
Manna, was white of color, and pure of substance: so is Christ pure and
unspotted of sin and infirmities. Manna, that it might be nourishment, was
beaten and bruised in a mortar: so Christ that he might be the food of life
was broken and bruised on the cross. Manna was the only substance whereby the
Israelites lived in the wilderness: so is, Christ the only food whereby the
true Israelites and children of Abraham live in the desert and wilderness of
this wicked world.

This similitude undoubtedly, and many such other in the residue of their
sacraments, the faithful Jews before the coming of Christ did see, although
not so plainly as we do now in the time of the Gospel. And so S. Paul
signifies in this place, when he says: That they did eat the 1. Cor. 10. 3
same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, which they could
not possibly have done, if in Manna, and in the Rock, they had not
understood Christ, for Christ was Manna, and Christ was the Rock. For we
may not think that they judged Manna or the Rock, or any of their
Sacraments to be of that price and worthynesse, that for the use of them they
should be saved, and in the favor of God. For God by his Prophets sundry
times tells them the contrary. Therefore it is not to be doubted, that in
their sacrifices and sacraments they saw the true Messiah and Savior, and
understood that those things were but Sermons and Preachings to direct them to
the belief thereof. Thirdly, we must consider that both the people of the
Jews before Christ, and we now since Christ, have but one means to
apprehende this way of salvation, and to apply the same unto them, that is by
faith in the promyses of God. For as we believe to be saved now by Christ that
is come, so they believed to be saved by Messiah that should come. As we be
sure of salvation by faith in Christ, that has redeemed us, so they were sure
of salvation by the same Messiah that should work their redemption. For it is
not our own dignity in any respect, but the assured trust of Gods mercy
through Christ, that saves us. Wherefore as the faithful now after their
departure out of this life, pass to most assured joy and comfort, so the
faithful departing then in like manner passed to joy and felicity. Therefore
the Papisticall doctrine is A place imagined where the dead did ^est before the
coming of Christ.
false and wicked, that teaches either Lymbum Patrum, or else that Christ
delivered the Fathers out of hell at his descendyng thither. Seeing they had
the same means of salvation, that we have, seeing then there is but out God
of both these people truly to be worshipped, one manner of salvation in Christ
proposed to them both, one means to apprehende and apply that salvation unto
them, one Church, one spiritual baptism, one spiritual meat and drink, as
Saint Paul here witnesses: I see not by what authority of Gods word, our
Sacraments can have any other difference from theirs, then in the external
signs and respect of time: as that their Sacraments The difference that is
betwixt the Jews Sacraments and ours, consists in the external signs, and
respect of time.
led them to believe that a Messyas and Savior should come, by whom they
should be delivered from the bondage of sin: and ours lead us to
understand, that this Savior is come, and has ransommed and delivered us,
and makes us partakers of the benefit thereof. I know what difference the
Church of Room puts between the Jews Sacraments and ours, that is, that
the Sacraments of the old law, do but signify and promise grace and salvation:
and ours give, and exhibit the same: Which I think they gathered of some
sentences of S. Aug. and other Fathers not rightlye understood. The
Sacraments In Ps. 73.
(says Aug.) of the new law, be more wholesome and happy, then those that were
in the old law: for they promise, and these give. But the same father, in
other places Co^. Faust. lib. 19. cap 14.
expounds himself, as when he says, The Sacraments of the old law,
signify before hand: and our sacraments declare that is done. And again, The
sacraments of the old law, were promises of things that should be
fulfilled: and ours are notes of things that are fulfilled. I grant, Aug. and
other fathers have said our sacraments are more happy, and of more excellent
grace and virtue, meaning thereby only, that they were more full and perfect,
more evident and plain. In many places Augustine notes De doct. Christ. in
Jo. in. psalm.
this difference, that our sacraments are fewer, easyer, more bewtifull, more
plain and evident, and so truly they are. The same August. expounding this
very place of Paul, says in this manner: All do eat the same spiritual
meat, It might seem sufficient to have said: All did eat spiritual meat,
but he adds ( the same) I find not how to understand it, but the same that
we also do eat. But some will say unto me, Is Manna the same thing that I
do now eat, than nothing is now come, if the same were before, and Christ his
passion is void? how then, says he the same, but that he adds ( spiritual)
for they that did eat it as meat only to feed their Note.
Bodies, did not eat the same meat that we do. etc. Breefely therefore I
say, whosoever in Manna did understand Christ, did eat the same spiritual
meat that we do. etc. so likewise the same spiritual drink that we do, for
the Rock was Christ: for there was not one Christ then, and another now, for
the^ christ was to come, Now he is come. To come and is come, are diverse words,
but one Christ. In the 26 Tract. upon John, he has a like August. Tract. in
Joh. 26.
discourse to the very same purpose, touching y^ same place of Paul. Where he
shows, that as many did eat Manna, ( and mortui sunt. i.) and are dead: so
diverse did eat it, ( and mortui non sunt. i.) and are not dead. Moises, Aaron,
Phinees did eat it, and died not, because they did understand the visible
meat spirituallye, to the end they might spiritually be satisfied with it.
etc. And it follows, This bred Manna did signify this bread the Table of the
Lord does now signify. They were Sacraments in signs diverse, in the things
that are signified, the self same. Hear what the Apostle says, I would not
have you ignorante my brethren, that they did eat the same spiritual meat,
for their bodily meat was not the same, they did eat Manna, we eat another
thing, but they did eat the same spiritual meat. etc. And so they did drink
the same spiritual drink. They one thing, and we another, as touching the
visible kind, which yet in spiritual virtue signified the self same thing.
By these words of S. Aug. that I have hear laid down, and by many other
like, that I might allege, I trust all such as fear God, and will judge
indifferently, may perceive, that this is no new doctrine, which at this time I
taught, touching The faithful Jews did eat and drink spiritually the body
and blood of Christ, before his real coming in the flesh: and so do we,
that are borne and believe, since his incarnation, and the conclsion thereupon.
the likeness of the Jews religion and Sacraments to ours now in time of the
Gospel, Hereunto I must add this note by the way. If the Israelites under the
old law, did in their sacraments eat y^ same spiritual meat, and drink y^ same
spiritual drink y^ we do in ours, that is Christ, and that effecally and to
salvation, before Christ's natural body and blood were borne, and come really
into the world: it may euydently lead us also to understand, what manner of
eating and drinking it is, that we also should use in our sacraments to
salvation, that is, a spiritual eating and drinking of Christ, and not such a
gross, carnal, and real eating as the Church of Rome now strives for. But
of this I have to speak in the next part. Therefore here I will make an end.
etc.

The second Sermon upon this part of the Text. 1. Cor. 10. 3. etc.
All did eat of the same spiritual meat, and all did drink of the same
spiritual drink, (For they drank of the spiritual Rock) and the Rock was
Christ.
NOt only S. Paul in this place, Christ the food of our souls.
but the spirit of God in sunderye other Places of the Scriptures teaches us,
that Christ only is the blessed and Heavenly food of our souls, wherewith
we are fed and nourished, to eternal life. Of this meat and drink Esaias
prophesied many years before Christ came in flesh, Oh (said he) come Esaias.
55. 1.
all ye that be thirsty, come to the waters, and ye that have no silver, come
buy and eat, come I say, bye wine and milk without money, wherefore do you lay
out silver, for that which is no fode, and bestow your labor for that which
cannot satisfye you, harken dilligently unto me, and eat that which is good.
etc. In which words he caled the hungry and thirsty consciences of gods
people, to that heavenly food of Christ, which in his gospel is laid before
the faithful, by it to be fed to eternal life, and reproves them for
seeking other food beside Christ, because indeed there is none that can
satisfy them, but only he. This does Christ himself seem to expound, in
this manner in the gospel, when he says, If any man thirst, let him come to
Joh. 7. 37.
me and drink. But most evident in John the sixte, he declares himself to
be the only food of our souls, of which we must feed unto salvation. For
upon the occasyon Io. 6. 26. etc.
of the Jews following him with a carnal affection to have their bodies fed
by miracle, as before he had done, he sharply reproves that affection in them,
and wills the^ to labor and trauatle, not for the meat that perishes, but
for the meat yt should endure to everlasting life, which the son of man
should give unto them. And after, Moises Ioh. 6. 32. etc.
gave you not bread from heaven, but my father gives you the true bread from
heaven. For the bread of God is he who comes down from heaven, to give life
unto the world. And after a few words, he says plainly, I am Ioh. 6. 35.
the bread of life, he that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that believes
in me shall never thirst. And again, I am the bread of life, your fathers did
eat Manna Ioh. 6. 48. etc.
in the wilderness and are dead. This is the bread of life, which comes
down from heaven, of which he that eats should not die, I am the living
bread, that came down from heaven, if any man eat of this bread, he shall
live for ever, and the bread which I will give, is my flesh, which I will give
for the life of the world. etc. Except ye eat of the flesh of the son of
man, and drink Io. 6. 53. and^
his, blood, you have no life in you. Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks
my blood, has eternal life, etc I will raise him up at the last day. For my
flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed. etc. Seeing then it is
very evident that Christ is the meat and drink of all true Christians, it
behooves us next to learn, why Christ is called meat and drink, for we may
not groselye understand it as y^ Capernaites did, that it is a Meat wherewith
our bodies are to be nourished, as with other natural food, God forbid. For
Christ himself a little after says. The words that I have spoken are spirit
and life: Gyuing Ioh. 6. 63.
us thereby to vuderstande, that he is our spiritual meat, and his words
spiritually to be understood.

This speech then that Christ is meat an drink unto How the body and blood of
Christ are said to hes meat and drink.
Christians, is not a natural and proper kind of speaking, but metaphorical
and figurative, transferred from the body to the soul, from a worldly
meaning, to a spiritual Seuce.

Which the better to perceive, you must remember that man consists not of
body only, but of soul also. And as yt body, Acomparison betwixt the body and
the soul.
has his life and death, so the soul has her life and death. And as the body
has certain means to keep of death, and for the time to maintain life, so
has the soul means to preserve the life thereof, and to put away death. The
lif of the body is the joining of the soul and the body together, and the
death thereof is the separation of the soul from the body. The means to
preserve the life of the body, that is, to continue the body and soul
together, is food and sustenaunce, meat and drink, for we daily and
howerly do consume, and the substance of our bodies wastes by the pores of
our skin, so that when Nature feels want of Substance to supplye the
wasting of the body, then it is said in proper speech to hunger, or to
thirst, that is, to desire and couette that thing whereby the waute of natural
Substance and moisture may be supplied, least the Instruments of the soul
should be made feeble, and so the soul depart, and the body dye. Now look
what the soul is to the hedye, What the soul is to the body, that is God to
the soul.
that is GOD unto the soul. As the life of the body is the joining of the
soul to the body (for without the Soul there is no life) so the life of the
Soul, is the joining of GOD and the Soul together, and the death of the
Soul is the separation of GOD from the soul, for without GOD, the soul has
no life.

And yet you may not think that the Soul dies, after that sort that the
body does, by ceassyng to have a being, or a continuance, but it dreth a
spiritual death by separation of God from it, so that the time that it is, and
has a being without God, is nothing but a most horrible tormente, and more
grievous then a thousand bodilye deaths. Now further as the body has a
certain means by food and Sustenaunce to preserve life, that is the soul
and body together: so has the soul a means by food and sustenaunce, to
continue GOD and the soul together, and so to preserve life, and put away
the death thereof. The body when it wants this sustenaunce is said to
hunger and to thirst, so the Soul when it feels lack of that Heavenly and
Spiritual food, whereby the life thereof is continued, it is not in proper
speech but Figuratiuelye said to hunger and to thyrste, that is, earnestly to
long and desire to be made partaker of that Food, by the Virtue whereof
only, God and it is joined and preserved together. This blessed food is
Christ himself and none other, either thing or person, for by him only are
we reconciled unto GOD, and kept in unity with him unto eternal life: and
without him, we by sin remain separated from GOD, and so in Death eternal,
unless Christ do join us unto him. He that has the Son of GOD, (says
John) has life, he that has 1. Io. 5. 12.
not the son of GOD has not life. By this comparison, I trust you may see
why Christ is called the meat and drink of Christians, that is, of the
likeness that he has with bodily food and sustenaunce, that keeps in
life, and preserves the Soul and the body together. We have now further
to consider, not only How Christ was prepared to be the food of our* souls.
Io. 6. 35.
that Christ is the food of our Souls, and why he is so called: but also
how he is made the Food of our soul. I am (says Christ) that bread of
Life that came from Heaven, that is, had he not been GOD as well as Manne,
he could not have been the Meat of our Souls. We must ascend higher
therefore, then to the humanity of Christ, or to his Natural body and
blood, and conceive that it is the body and blood of the Son of God, and he
too God eternal with the Father, or else he could not have wrought the
Mysterye of our Redemption.

There be certain necessary causes very profitable and comfortable to
remember, why Christ must be both god and man.

First, it was necessary he should be GOD, that he Why Christ of necessity
was to be both god and man, and first why he should be god. 1. Jo. 5. 20.
might know the will of God, and reveal the same unto us For we of our selves
cannot see God and his will, but we know, as S. John says, That the son of
God came, to give us a mind to know him that is true. Another cause is, that
the price of our redemption might be equivalent and of like worthiness, as
the offense was in the sight of GOD, which could not have been, unless that
person that was the son of God, had dyed for us. For neither Gold nor
Silver, nor any other precious thing could redeem us, but the blood of the
immaculate and undefiled Lamb, Christ Jesus. Furthermore if he had not been
God, he could not have overcome Death, and y^ Devil, under whose captivity
we were holden, and there fore, The Son of GOD appeared, that he might
dissolve 1. Jo. 3. 5.
the Works of the Devil. Unless he had been very God, he could not
have given us power to be Joh. 1. 12. Heb. 7. To. 8. 34.
made the Sons of God, and Heirs of eternal life. He could not have been
Our eternal Bishop, and perpetually sit on the right hand of God, to be
intercessoure for us. He could not have been present at all times, and in all
places, to gather his church, to direct the hearts of the faithful, to hear
their prayers, and to remitte their sin. He could not have rayned the dead to
life, abolishe Death, exercise judgment, and give eternal life unto the
Faithful Why Christ world necessarily be man.
that love his coming. There be reasons also why Christ must be very manne,
and as he came from Heaven as GOD, so in Earth to take flesh of the Blessed
Virgin, like unto ours, Sin only excepted. First that the Justice of GOD
required, that as Manne offended, and brake his Law and Commandment, so
manne also should satisfye fullye for the same, that his righteousness might
iustlye be imputed to other. Secoulye, that the appointed Messiah, and Savior
might fustaine that punishment, which by gods sentence was due for sin, that
is death, but god alone could not have dyed.

Thirdly, that we might have the surer comfort and confidence in our
necessity, to appeal to the throne of his Majesty, seeing he being our high
Bishop was very man as we are, and partaker of our infirmities. Fourthlye,
that we might more certainly be assured of our Resurrection, as also that we
both in soul and body, should enjoy eternal life in heaven, seeing Christ our
savior having the same flesh that we have, has raised it from death, and
carried it with him into heaven, there as our head keeping possession for us,
until the time that we as members of his mystical body, shall be joined to
him. For where the head is, there the members must be, as Christ himself
says, Where I Joh. 12. 26.
am, there my Ministers shall be. Furthermore it was necessary that Christ
should be man, that we might have the more confidence by him in our necessity,
to appeal to the throne of Gods mercy, knowing, that we have such an high Heb.
4. 15.
Bishop, as being in manhood like unto us, has sense of our infirmity, and
has been tempted, even as we are. For the humanity of Christ is, as it were,
the Conduite pipe, by which only the living waters of Gods mercy, flows
unto us. Lastly, Christ was man that we might be the more assured of our
Resurrection from the dead, and possession of eternal life, not in soul only
but in body also, seeing this our savior having the like flesh unto ours in
all things, Sin only excepted, has raised up the same flesh from death,
and carried it with him to heaven, there to keep possession of that eternal
kingdom for us. Especially considering that he by the price of his blood, has
taken away the guilt of sin, from our mortal bodies. Thus in part you
understand how Christ became the true and lively food of Christian people,
that is, because by the inestimable wisdom and mercy of God, he was prepared
to be in person God and man. All kind of nourishment has some proportion of
likeness with that body, which it nourishes, and so Christ the natural
son of God became man also, that by that likeness he might be apt and fit
nourishment, to prefer us to eternal life. But this meat, must be yet
further prepared, or else it would not serve our turn in feeding of us.
Christ therefore was prepared and made apt meat for us to eat, upon the
Altar of the Cross, where his body was broken, and his blood shed, and he
offered himself to God the father, a full and perfect sacrifice for our sin,
and afterward raised the same his body from death to life, y^ it might be very
true sustenaunce to everlasting life, aptly, and truly in all respects
prepared to that end.

For So Much as you have now heard yt Christ is the only Now Christ his body and
blood is truly and rightlye to be eaten and drunken as well in the Sacraments
as without them.
food of life, why he is so called, and how he was prepared so to be, we must
next consider how this blessed meat is truly and rightly eaten, both in the
sacraments, and without the use of of Sacraments. This question has vexed all
Christendom, now for the space of certain years, and has exercised the
pens and tongues almost of all learned men of this age, with great vehemency
on each side. But surely if they would with single minds, without heat of
contention truly consider, how the fruit and benefit of this heavenly food
is received, this controversy might be easily ended, and many a troubled
conscience quieted, which now almost only are by this means stayed, from
embracing the truth of the Gospel. They do not so greatly mislike the other
parts of our doctrine, but this sticks in their consciences, that we deny
the body and blood of Christ, really and carnally eaten and drunken in the
Sacrament. Wherefore I heartily desire al such, for the time to lay aside that
settled persuasion, wherewith their minds hitherto has been so holden, that
they could not abide to hear any thing of the contrary, and with indifferent
and charitable minds carefully to consider, that which in part I have, and
now hereafter shall speak touching this matter. First, therefore Against the
carnal eating and drinking of Christ's body and blood.
you must call to your remembrance, that Christ's body, is not carnal meat
and drink for our bodies, but spiritual meat and drink for our souls, and
for that cause S. Paul in this place so calls it, saying, That the old
Fathers did eat of the same spiritual meat, and drink of the same spiritual
drink. And yet I must needs confess that this spiritual meat is
profitable, not to the soul only, but to the body also. For Christ dyed for
preservation both of soul and body. But this benefit of nourishment, is not
first received of the body, and through it passes to the soul, for that
were monstrous, but being first received of the soul, it profits the body.
For as Christ says, That which enters into the bodily mouth defyleth Mat. 15.
11
not the man, but that comes out of the mouth from the corrupt heart and
mind. So contrariwyse not that good thing, that enters by the body does
profit the soul, but that which entered first by the soul, and is received
by it, profyteth also the body. For the body and blood of Christ, being in
deed the true food of life, when it is spiritually eaten by the soul,
through the operation of the holy Ghost, makes us apt to Resurrection, and
in due time transformeth our mortal bodies, to the likeness of his glorious
body. If the spirit of Romans 8. 11.
him that raised Christ from death dwell in us, he that raised Christ from the
dead, shall also quicken our mortal bodies, because that his spirit, through
Christ, dwells in us. The better to understand what it is to eat this
spiritual food, and how it is truly and effectually received to eternal
life: I must put you in mind of the comparison that before I used between the
body and the soul. As the body is said to eat when it receaueth that
sustenaunce, wherewith the hunger thereof is stayed and satisfied, and as it is
said to drink, when it receaueth that liquour, wherewith the thirst is
quenched: even so our soul is said to eat and to drink, when it receaueth
that heavenly and blessed food of Christ Jesus crncifyed, wherewith the
hungry, and thirsty appetite thereof, that is, the vehement desire of the
favor of God and salvation, is fully satisfied, and appeased.

As there comes no benefit to the body, of meat and drink, unless it be
eaten and drunken: so the body and blood of Christ crucified, does not help
us any thing, if it be not worthily and truly received. The body receaueth
his food, by the mouth of the body, the soul receaueth hirs, by the mouth of
the soul. As it is not sufficient to hunger and thirst, nor to receive
sustenaunce, unless there be a natural strength in our bodies to receive,
concoct, and digest the same: so there must be in our souls that strength,
that may surely receive Christ, and wrappe him or embrace him in the bowels of
our heart, that he may thereby, as it were, be turned into us, and we into
him, but that strength is not in our selves, but is given of God. We must
therefore have it from him, from whom all good gifts proceed, that is, From
the father of lyghtes. And this gift wherewith Iac. 1. 17.
Christ is truly and effectually received, is nothing but faith. For by faith
we receive Christ, and assure our selves in our hearts, that we are partakers
of that redemption, which by his death he has procured for us, and with that
firm persuasion, lay him up in the bowels of our hearts, that in all our
temptations and troubles, we may feed upon him, and gather strength and
comfort, in the assuraunee of Gods favor purchazed by him: so that so often as
our hearts be shaken with mistrust and fear, this faith does comfort and
relieve us again. Now that faith is the Faith, the mouth of the soul,
whereby Christ is eaten.
mouth and means, whereby only, we receive and eat Christ to salvation: I
will let you understand it both by Christ's own words in S. John, and by the
judgment of diverse learned, and ancient Fathers. For Christ uses these
words indifferently, and as of one force and signification, To believe in him,
To eat him, To drink him, To Ioh. 6. 29. 33. 35.
come unto him, and does attribute to each of these, y^ same effects. To
believe in Christ is the proper word, to eat What to eat Christ is, and what
to drink his blood is.
Christ or to come unto him are Metaphores and figurative speeches, but all of
one force. I am the bread of life (says Christ) he that comes to me shall
not hunger, and he that believes in me, shall never thirst. Mark diligently
(dearly beloved) what Christ says, He that comes to me shall not hunger,
therefore to come unto Christ, is to eat Christ. And again he says: He that
believes in me, shall never thirst, therefore to believe in Christ, is to
drink Christ. To eat and to drink are means to take away hunger and thirst,
but to come unto Christ, and to believe in him, as Christ himself says, does
take away hunger and thirst: therefore to come unto him, and to believe in him,
is to eat him, and to drink him. An other out of the same place is this,
Christ attributes the same effects and fruits to them which believe in him,
that he does to them that eat his body and drink his blood: therefore by
eating and drinking, he means nothing but believing. His words be these
John. 6. verse. 54. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has
eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Note the effects that
he gives to eating his flesh and drinking his blood, that is, to have
everlasting life, and be raised at the last day. In the. 40. verse of the
same Chapter he says: This is the will of my father that sent me, that
every one that sees the son, and believes on him, should have eternal
life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Who sees not here that Christ
attributes the same force to believing, that in the other verse he did to
eating and drinking, and therefore uses y^ words indifferently, as being of
one meaning. I might stay upon many other places, wherein the holy Ghost
witnesses that we have eternal life by believing in Christ, as in the same
place, He that trusts in me has eternal life, Ver. 4^.
but the matter is needelesse, and the time will not suffer me. Therefore by
Christ's own words to believe in Christ is to eat Christ. That you may not
think this is a new devise proceeding from my self, or from the Preachers of
this time, hearken you what S. Augustine says: This is the Tract. in Ioh. 26.
bread, that came from heaven, that if any do eat of it he should not die,
but that stretches to the Virtue of the Sacrament, and not to the visible
Sacrament. He that eats within, not he that eats without, he that eats
with the heart, and not he that presses it with his teeth. Mark I pray you, y^
he attributes the true and effectual eating, not to the pressing with the
teeth and bodyly mouth, but to the inward eating with the heart, and what is
that but by faith and believing, spiritually to eat him, and so he expounds
himself in an other place. This it is therefore, Trast. 25
fayeth he, to eat that food that perishes not, but remains to eternal
life. What preparest thou thy tooth and thy belly, believe and thou have eaten.
And again, To believe in him, that is it, to eat the bread of life. Cyprian
also to the same purpose writes, These things so De coenae Domini.
often as we do, we sharpen not our teeth to byte, but with sincere faith,
we break and divide that holy bread. Some happily think that this
spiritual eating by faith, is but a ^leight matter, and of no great weight,
and so the teachers of the Church of Rome would persuade men, but they
consider not the great virtue, power and strength of Faith. By Faith we know
Christ, and the The force of faith.
true mean of our salvation by him. By Faith we be graffed into Christ, as
branches into the root and stock, so that we live now by him and by his
spirit, as the branches do by the Juice, that comes from the body of the
tree. By Faith we be so united unto Christ, that we may justly say
whatsoever is his, is ours also: by faith we are made the children of God, and
heirs of eternal life. By faith we have peace with God, and are assured of
his favor in the myddest of all our troubles: by faith we dare boldly
approach to the throne of Gods mercy. This might and strength of faith they
feel not, that think it so simple a matter to eat Christ by faith. Christ
witnesses, That Ioh. 6. 54.
by eating him by faith and belief, we have salvation and eternal life, and
that he will raise us at the last day. Wherefore I would know of them what
other eating there is beside this, whereby we may assure our selves of
Salvation. Truly the Scriptures mention none. And that carnal eating, for
which the Church of Rome strives, is such as they themselves confess, that
Judas and all wicked persons may use, and be damned. Now I appeal to the
consciences of them that fear GOD, and will not willyngly run into error,
whether we or they deal with the people of God more sincerely. They without
any evident proof of the Scriptures contend, as I have said, for that real
and bodily eating with which damnation may be joined: we endeavor to
persuade men that manner of spiritual eating by faith, through which, by the
testimony of the whole Scriptures, we shall be assured of eternal life, and
with which, damnation can not be joined. Some perchance will say unto The
eating of Christ by faith, is no derogation to the dignity of the Sacrament,
and profit the^ of.
me, or will think with themselves in their mind: If this doctrine be true,
then are Sacraments needelesse. For we may eat Christ by faith, spiritually,
in such sort as you have said, without any use of the Lords supper, and
therefore it may seem superfluous. God forbydde that the most perfect
Christians and of strongest faith, should once think Sacraments to be
superfluous and needelesse. They be the blessed and holy ordinances of
Christ, by his mercy and goodness appointed for our great help and benefit,
as I have in the former Sermon declared. And yet I must confess to the great
comfort of many godly persons, that the faithful Christian may, and does
often feed upon Christ to salvation, beside the use of the Sacrament. For the
spiritual grace and benefits, which as I have said before is the principal
part of a Sacrament, is not of necessity always so tied to the outward
signs, that without them God can not, or does not sometime bestow the same. I
doubt not but the Thief upon the Luc. 23. 4^
Cross without use of the Sacrament, did eat the body and blood of Christ in
such sort, that he was the same day with him in Paradise. We see in the Acts of
the Apostles, that Acts. 10.
Cornelius and his company was sealed with the spirit of GOD, before the
receiving of the outward Sacrament, in such sort, that if he had then
immediately departed out of this life, he should have gone to heaven, which
could not be, unless he had spiritually by faith eaten the true food of
everlasting life, that is Christ Jesus crucified, which he fed upon most
assuredly, while he heard Saint Peter preach Christ. There were in time of the
Primitive Church, great numbers of godly Martyrs saved, which never outwardly
received the Sacrament of the Lords supper, and yet fruitfully and effectually
did eat Christ by faith: And so do many at this day, which either by
sickness, or by imprisonment, or by any other like cause of necessity, are
tied from the outward use of the Sacraments. Yet, as I have fayde, God forbid
that we should think the Sacrament of the Lords supper superfluous, but
rather exceeding profitable. In the use of yt Sacrament there is a double
eating, of which one helps the other. As manne consists of two parts,
body and soul: so the body feeds upon the outward In the use of the
Sacrament, is a double eating to be noted. Our senses in the use of the
Sacrament are helpers to our better receiving of the same. Hearing. Ma. 26. 26
To. 10. 17.
elements of bread and wife, but the soul feeds in deed and truly upon
Jesus Christ crucified. The outward eating by y^ instruments of our body,
causes al our senses, our hearing, our seeing, our feeling, our tasting to
help our inward eating by faith, and by the same quickens, stirs,
strengthens, and increases our faith, yt we may eat yt body and blood of
Christ more effectually and fruitfully. For when the faithful christian,
hears the words of Christ's institution sound in his ears, This is my body
that is given for you, and this is my blood that is shed for the remission of
your sins, it stirs up his faith (for faith is by hearing) to lay strong
howfast upon this promise, and in his heart does assure himself that Christ
dyed and shed his blood, not only for the redemption of the whole world
generally, but for his also particularly, and that he undoubtedly is partaker
of that blessed work of our redemption. When we hear these words, Do this
in remembrance Luc. 22. 19.
of me, our faith is assured, yt it is Christ's commandment, that we should
use this Sacrament, to call to our remembrance the benefit of our faluation
by the death of Christ, and in heart and mind at al times, but then especially,
to show our selves truly thankful to him for the same. When our sight
beholds upon the Table, the Seeing.
bread and wine by Christ's ordinance broken and powered out for us to use, the
Faith is moved this to think: As surely and truly as my bodily eyes behold
upon the table of the Lord the Creatures of bread and wine, as the outward
part of his sacrament, and see the same broken, and poured out for me: so
assuredly do I with the eye of my faith, behold the body and blood of Christ,
broken and shead for me, upon the Alter of the Cross, and the same my Savior
sitting now on the right hand of god the father, with the same body and blood
now gloryfyed, wherewith upon the Cross, he paid the price of my redemption.
When we see the Minister offering to us the bread and the cup, Feeling.
and we receive the same in our hand, and by our sense feel them: inwardly
in our hearts our faith is mooned to have this cogitacion: As truly as our
Savior Christ upon the Cross by his body broken, and his blood sheade
wrought our redemption, and offered the benefit thereof, to all that would
believe generally: so truly am I assured that now in the use of this holy
Sacrament, by his minister he offers the same to me, particularly to be
applied to my self. And as surely as my hand receaueth the outward
creatures, so surely by my faith, do I receive Christ himself, and in my
heart feel him, and with my spiritual arms embrace him, as the only price
and means of my salvation.

When we eat of the holy bread, and drink of the reverend Tasting.
cup, and by our cast have sense of the sweetness of them, and feel them
pass down into our stomache there to rest, that they may be according to
their nature, means to nourishe and strengthen our body to continue it in
life, the faith is stirred up by these senses thus to think: Even as certainly
as my taste feels the sweetness of Bread and wine, and thereby perceive in
deed, that their operacion is to nourish and strengthen my body, and to
quicken my natural spirits, which without such nourishmente would perish:
even so the taste of my faith, and sense of my heart does feel the sweetness
of Christ his body and blood, broken and shead for me and all mankind upon
the Cross, and perceive it thereby to be the only food of my soul, without
which I should perish both soul and body Eternallye. And as certainlye as I
feel with bodilye sense, that the Bread and Wine passes into my Stomache,
and there according to their proportion, feed, strengthen, and quicken my
Natural body and Spirits: so assuredlye do I, with my inward and
Spiritual sense, perceive the body and blood of Christ, and the whole
benefit of his death and passion, to pass into the stomache of my soul, and
bosom of my heart, there, through the strength of a true Christian faith to be
laid up, wrought and digested, as that only nourishmente that keeps the
life of the soul, and preserves me both soul and body to eternal life.
They that will Christianlye and charitablely, and in the fear of GOD weighe
and consider these things, I trust will not think either that we make
light accoumpte of the External Sacrament, or in our Doctrine teach a
syngle and sleighte manner of eating of Christ by faith, as the favorers of
the church of Rome do charge us.

And I appeal to the Consciences of all them that follow their Doctrine,
whether ever they were taught to take such sweet instruction and comfort, in
the use of that blessed Sacrament, or no.

These good Fruits of that Sacrament are much furthered and increased by
sunderye other Godly cogitations, Sacraments are badges by which we Christians
are known from idolaters.
which the Scriptures teach true Christians to use in the administration of
it. The word of GOD teaches that the use of the external Sacraments, is a
manner of confession, whereby men acknowledge themselves before GOD and the
World, that they are Christians. Therefore the faithful receauer, when he
comes to the Sacrament, thinks this with himself: I by coming to this
place proteste before GOD, and his Angels, and before all the Creatures of
Heaven and earth, that in my heart I deteste the Religion of Jews, Turks,
Infidels, Heretics, and all other that deny salvation to come by the death
of Christ: and I acknowledge my self vnfaygnedlye, to be of the number of
them, that hope to have the favor of GOD, and to be saved by the merit and
passion of Christ only. The word Sacraments are the seals whereby gods
promises are confirmed unto us.
of GOD teaches that Sacraments are, as it were Seals to confyrme the truth
of Gods promises, and to strength our faith. Therefore by this seal of the
Lords Supper, we assure our selves that we are partakers of all that
Legacy, which Christ our Savior in his last will bequeathed to us, that is,
that his body was broken upon the Cross for our redemption, and his blood
sheadde for the remission of our Sins. The Scriptures Sacraments unite us to
Christ.
teach that in the use of the sacraments through Faith, we be united unto
Christ, and ingraffed into his Mystical body, so that we live now only by
him, and whatsoever is his, by the truth of his promise, is ours also.

The word of God teaches, that the Sacrament of the Sacraments are to link
us together in brotherly unity.
Lords supper is a link of unity, that knitteth us together as members of
one Mystical body, and therefore that we ought to be joined in mutual
love and charity among our selves, and that it is a foul reproach both to
Christ our head, and to the whole body, if we hate, hurt or hinder one
another. For by the use thereof, we confess y^ we are all members of one body,
all Servants of one Master, all Children of one Father, all Subjects under
one Lord and King, all Partakers of one redemption, all Heirs of one
Heritage, and Gift of Eternal Life. And in so many L^^^es of Unity to be at
discord among ourselves, is in Gods judgment an heavy testimouie against us
in the day of his wrath. Finally the word of God teaches us that the Sacrament
of the Lords supper, is our heavenly Feast, in which the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world, is offered unto us, spiritually to feed
upon in our faith, that by him, as I have before declared, we may be
nourished, strengthened, and preserved to eternal life, and therefore that we
ought to be very careful so coprepare oureselues; that we may be worthy
Guestes for that blessed table. Wherefore I think it necessary in a word or
two to teach you how Christians should prepare themselves, as worthy guestes,
to come to this holy Table. But before I come to that, I will first answer
an evil and perverse Doctrine brought into the Church, by the Sea of Room,
and the Preachers and teachers thereof, directlye both against Christ's own
words, and against the doctrine of the ancient fathers, that is, that very
wicked me^, and horrible sinners, as Judas and other, do eat in the
sacrament, the very Real and natural body of Christ, as fully as Peter, or
any other Saint of God, or other faithful Christian has done, or does. This
Doctrine, as it is Blasphemus doctriue, of wicked men's eating of the body of
christ ^efelled. Joh. 6. 56.
reprochefull to the body and blood of Christ, so it is plainly against yt
which Christ himself teaches in John. For there Christ says thus: He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him. As the
living Father sent me, and I live by the Father, so he that eats me, shall
live by me. I add, But the wicked and naugty persons abide not in christ, nor
live by him, therefore sinful, and wicked faythlesse persons do not eat
Christ, nor drink his blod. In the same place Christ says further. Whosoever
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, Joh. 6. 54.
has eternal life. etc. I add here likewise. But the wicked have not
eternal life by christ, nor shall be raised to life, but to eternal
damnation: therefore it is a false and a wicked Doctrine, that Judas and such
other naughty persons do eat the very true, real, and Natural body of
christ, for if they did, they should the^ be partakers of those benefits, which
christ (truth it self) promises to the^ yt eat him. Though this their
doctrine, to any godly man may seem absurd in it self, and Christ his words
against it be plain enough, and will not easylye admit any gloss, yet if the
aunciente Fathers also teach not herein, as we do, let us be thought to
devise it of our selves. Origin says this: These things have I spoken of
the typical and fyguratiue body. Much also may be spoken of the word himself,
which became flesh, whom, whosoever shall eat, shall surely live for ever,
(and he adds) Whom no evil man can eat. For if it could be that he which
continues evil, did eat the word that became flesh, seeing that he is the
word and bread of life: it would never have been written, whosoever eats the
bread shall live for ever. Hitherto Orig. And S. Aug. He that discordeth from
In Mat. 15. De Trini. lib. 4. Tract. 59. Pane^ dn^^ Pane^. dn^i. Tract. 26.
Christ, eats not his flesh, nor drinks his blood, but he receaueth the
Sacrament of so holy a thing, to the judgment of damnation against himself.
And y^ same father upon S. Joh. The Apostles, says he, did eat the bred that
was the Lord, but Judas did eat the bread of the Lord, against the Lord. But
most plainly he says in an other place, The sacrament of the unity of the body
and blod of Christ, is received at the Lords table, of some to life, of some to
destruction. But the thing it self whereof it is a sacrament, is life to every
man and death to none, whosoever shall be partaker of it. And in the same
place. To eat that meat, and to drink that drink is to dwell in Christ, and
to have christ dwelling in him. And by that it follows, that he which
dwells not in Christ, nor has christ dwelling in him, undoubtedly does not
spiritually eat his flesh, nor drink his blood, although carnally and visibly
he press with his teeth, the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, etc.
Although I might allege a number of other places to yt same purpose, yet
because these fathers undoubtedly did know the faith and Doctrine of the church
in their time, this may be sufficient to such, as have not a mind willingly to
abide in error. Seeing none be partakers of that heavenly food, laid forth at
that holy table, but such as worthily come to receive the same, it behooves all
good Christians, as before I have said, to learn how to prepare themselves to
the worthy receiving thereof. And how that may be done. S. Paul in general
How we ought to prepare our selves to the worthy receiving of the lords supper.
1. Co. 11. 18.
words brecfely shows. Let a man (says he) prove himself, and so let him
eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup. The means therefore to come
worthilye, is to prove and try our selves, whether those things be in us,
which the worthy Guestes of that Table should have. First therefore we must
look unfeignedly into our selves whether we have an appetite or desire to eat
of yt blessed food. For a loathing stomache never perfectly digesteth any
meat, yt it receaueth, but turns it to the hurt of the body. This Appetite or
desire cannot be in us, unless it be wrought by the sharp sauce of severe
repentance for our sins, which we shall the better prepare, if we examine
How we are to make trial of our selves before we come to the lords table. Deuteronomy.
6. 5.
our selves, by the perfect rule of Gods justice in his law, and consider how
far we are from the same, and what danger hangs over our heads for the
want thereof. God says in his law. Thou shall love the Lord thy god with all
thy heart, with all thy foul, with all thy mind, with all thy strength, and
thy Neighbor as thy self. That is, we should love, we should hate, we should
fear, we should hope for nothing but in God, and to his glory: we should think
or muse upon nothing in our mind and understanding, but that may make to the
honor and glory of god. We should imploye all the powers of our body, and of
our worldelye gifts to the same end: we should do nothing to any other
man, which we would not willinglye be contented should be tone unto us. If
we examine our selves by this rule, we shall see we be so far from that we
should be, that ^^nos^ we have not one branche thereof in us, which will more
evidently appear, if we will try our selves by every particular
commandment rightely and truly understood. Seeing then we be so far from
the justice of Gods law, the curse thereof must needs be due unto us, for God
says, Cursed is he, whosoever keeps not all Deu. 27. 26
things written in the book of his law. In this manner if we examine our
selves sincerely, we shall thoroughly know what we are in the sight of God, as
well by the corruption of our nature, as by the course of our evil and
naughty life, we shall have sense of our own sin, we shall hate and detest
it, we shall from the bottom of our hearts be sorry for it, with trembling
minds we shall fear the heavy judgment of God against us, and so will there
be stirred up in us that Godly appetite, and greedye desire to eat of that
spiritual meat, which only can satisfye our troubled conscience, and cure
our repentaunt and broken hattes. etc. But though the appetite and desire be
never so great, in vain he comes to any table, that has no mouth to eat,
nor strength of stomache to digeste. A true and strong Christian faith, is the
mouth of the soul, and the power wherewith we do receive and digeste Christ
Jesus crucified, as the food of our salvation. We 1
must look therefore to our selves, first whether we know and understand the
mystery of our redemption, that is, that the unspeakable mercy of God sent
down the second person in Trinity, to take flesh of the blessed Virgin, to
line in the shape of a most contemptible man in this world, and in the end to
have suffered cruel death for the redemption of mankind.

Secondlye whether we feel in our hearts a strong persuasion, 2
that we also through the merciful promises of god, are partakers of the same
work of our redemption. For a true Christian must not only have a general
knowledge, but also by a fyrme faith, he must have ^ particular application of
the same to himself. Furthermore, as it is 3
necessary to have both a desire to eat, styrred by a sense and feeling of
true repentance, and also an assured faith to receive and digest this wholesome
and comfortable medicine of our soul: so because God bestows not his mercy
by his son Christ in vain, or to the end we should still continue in sin,
we must further try our selves, whether we feel an unfeigned desire to rise to
a newness of life, and an earnest study hereafter to amend our former faults,
and to strayn our selves to a Godly and honest conversation, that God in us
may be glorified, and the mouths of his Ennemies stopped. Lastly, we must
examine our consciences, whether we have a feruente and great desire, to call
to our remembrance, the inestimable Benefyte of our Redemption, made by the
price of his body and blood, and to acknowledge and confess the same
vnfaignedlye before GOD, and the World, and to yield unto him most hartye
thanks for the same, and the residue of his benefytes, not at this present
time only, but ever hereafter, until the time of his coming.

This is the Godly and Christian trial of our selves, which if we use, by the
grace of Gods Spirit working in us, we shall becomme either worthy Guestes,
or much more fytte then other ways we should be. etc.

Happylye some will think that this Admonition is Objection.
a Terroure and tormente to their consciences, to fear men from coming to
this blessed Sacrament, rather than an Exhortation or Incouragemente unto it.
For if the Danger be in it self so great, as the unworthy Receauer eats
Damnation to himself, and the preparation and trial so streighte as you have
made it, it were better never to come to it. For what one is there among a
thousand, that does in this manner try his conscience? or if he do, he must
needs feel so great want and imperfection, either in sorrow for his sins,
or in sense of Gods wrath, or in weakness of his Faith, or in the study of
new life, or in the Coldenesse of his charity, or in the feebleness to give
thinks and set forth the glory of God, or in all these things, that he must
needs be overwhelmed in conscience, and feared to make himself partaker of
these holy mysteries. But (dearly beloved) let Answer.
not this fear, shake your consciences, nor drive you back from this blessed
table. This e^amination and trial must be within the bounds of human
frailty, and God in this, as in all other doings, for Christ's sake will use
his mercy and clemency. For he knows our corruptions and Psalm. 103. 14.
imperfections, and will have regard of our infirmities. Only let us not be
secure, slack and negligent, but feeling by this trial great want in our
selves, with lowelye, humble, and confessing hearts, let us acknowledge the
same and say unto God: I am sorry O Lord for my sins, but A breife prayer
for communicants.
not as the greeuousnesse of them requires, Augment O Lord, by thy spirit the
sense of thy wrath in me. I believe and know with other christians that thy
son has shed his blood for me, but increase my faith, O God, and help my
unbelief, I desire to live according to the calling of a christian, but the
flesh and the world makes this study cold in me: therefore do thou
strengthen me with thy blessed spirit. I know it is my bounden duty to yield
unto thee immortal thanks, as well for all other thy benefits, as
principally for the whole work of our redemption by the death of thy dearly
beloved son: but I feel this zeal to be so faint and feeble, that it is
nothing according to my duty, and for that cause I lift up mine eyes to the
throne of thy mercy, and humbly desire thee to pardon all my imperfections and
to heal all my infirmities. The sense and knowledge of my weakness may not
fear me from this holy cable. For this heavenly feast is a medicine for them
that be sick, a comfort to them that be penitent sinners, a free and liberal
gift to such as be poor and have nothing of themselves. Christ in this feast
is given as meat, without which we know we must of necessity perish. And he
is given as life unto us, and therefore without him we can have nothing but
death. The best worthiness that we can bring to these reverend and holy
mysteries, is, that we confess our own unworthiness, to the end thy mercy
may make us worthy: that we despair in ou^ selves, to the end thy grace may
comfort us, that we humble our selves, to the end thy goodness may raise us
up: that we ac^use our selves, to the end thy son by his merit may justify
us. For though of our selves we are able to do nothing, yet by him we shall
be able to do all things* etc. These or like cogitations if we have, in
preparing our selves to that blessed nourishment of our ^oules, he that
breaks no^ a bruised ^eede, nor puts out smoking flax, will no^ cast aside
our infirmity, but mercifully receive us. The sorrowful Father which with
care for his son ^ryed unto Christ, I believe Lord, but help thou Mar. 9. 24
mine unbelief, though his faith, as it might appear, was very weak, yet
obtained his purpose at Christ's han^ to have his son by miracle healed. If
our faith he but as a grain of Mustarde seed, yet it will much prevail
with Gods mercy.

The Apostles of Christ which were admitted to his last Supper were
notwithstanding weak, and touched with many infirmites, although they were
not altogether wicked and faythlesse, as Judas was. They believed in Christ,
they loved Christ, and they loved one an other, and yet at the very table of
the Lord they showed their weakness. Peter not without some reproach of the
residue, preferred himself before them all, Though all other, (says he) be
offended Ma. 26. 33.
by thee, yet will not I be offended by thee. They ambitiously contended among
themselves, which of them should Mar. 9. 33.
be the greater. I will not mention, that immediately after Supper they
through timorous^esse fled from Christ, and for the time forsook him, which
was an evident token of the weakness of their faith, after the knowledge of
his doctrine and experience of many and wonderful Miracles. Yet it pleased the
great mercy of our Savior favorably to accept them, and to admit them as
singular instruments of his grace. We may not therefore for our weakness
and imperfection despair, and refuse the comfort of that heavenly Table. etc.

The third Sermon upon this part of the Text. 1. Cor. 10. 5. etc.
But with many of them God was not pleased. For he overthrew them in the
wilderness. Now these are examples to us. etc.
NOw Saint Paul in these words utters the second proposition of his reason
against the Corinthians. Which was this, Our forefathers the people Israel
were the chosen people of God, and bare his name. They had the Law of God
among them, they used in effect the same Sacraments that we do^. And yet,
says he now, God had no lyking in many of them, because they showed not
themselves in their conversation, as the people of GOD should have done. Where
upon follows Saint Paul's conclusion, that it was not sufficient for the
Corinthians, nor any other Christians to profess Christ, and to use his
Sacraments and service, unless by the fruits of true faith, that is, godly
conversation of life, they ratifye and confirm their calling, and outward
profession of Christ and his Religion, For Christians may not ly^e as Heathens
do, they are called to an holy calling, to be the sons of GOD, the
children of light, Citizens and subjects of the kingdom of Christ, and
household servants of the family of God* Our life therefore should express
the holiness of our heavenly Father, the obedience to the Laws of Christ's
kingdom, the orders and statutes of the household of God. Christians therefore
should be such, as they are, to whose s^cretie by their calling they are
joined. They are come. Heb. 1^. 22.
(says the Apostle,) to the City of the living God, the celestial
Jerusalem, to the company of innumerable Angels, to the congregation of the
first borne, which are written in heaven, to God the judge of all, and the
spirits of the just and perfect men, and Jesus himself the mediator of the
new Testament etc. This so blessed and high state of calling should be of
Christians duly considered, that they may s^^^i^ with a^ godly i^deuour, to
frame themselves proportionably thereunto, and to shun al those things,
whereby the honorable state of Christianity may be blemished.

In these words of S. Paul here recited* I note these two things: first that
outward profession of Christianity and v^e of Sacraments, and externa^
service is not sufficient. And secondly when God punishes and plagueth evil
Christians for their wickedness, that it is not only done for them, whom God
specially touches, but for example and instruction of all other that do the
like. As touching the Mat. 7. 21. It is not sufficient to salvation, to be idle
professors of god, but also doers of godly deeds.
first our Savior Christ says, Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father
that is in Heaven: Many shall say unto me in those days, Lord, Lord, have we
not prophesied in thy name? and have we not ^ast out Devils by thy name? and by
thy name done great Miracles? Then will I protest unto them: I never knew you,
depart from me all you that work wickedness. Mark these words I pray you,
and consider that Christ's meaning can be no other but this, that outward
profession of his name, and the use of e^ternall things, can not be sufficient
to keep the plague of Gods just punishm^t from us: but that we must als^ in
life and beede follow Christ and his holy wi^, and the prescript rule of gods
word. Where are then the voices and cogitations of them, that among Christians
and professors of the Gospel, flatter themselves in this manner, when the
Preachers threaten that Gods just plagues, will come upon them for their
unthankfulness, in slaundering the Gospel with their wicked life? Oh, say
they, we are Baptized in y^ name of Christ, we eat and drink at his holy table
in the Communion: we bear the name of the true Church of God. We receive the
Gospel, it is preached in our Churches: it is read in our private houses, it
ringeth in every man's ears, it is confirmed with public authority. Will not
Christ therefore know us, who mercifully receaueth all? will he cast us of,
and make place again for Antichrist, or for the Turk? etc. Against this
hypocrisy and vain ostentation of Christianity, nothing can be more plain
the^ y^ S. James says: Be doers of Iam. 1. 22. etc.
the word, says he, and not hearers only deceauing your selves. They deceive
them selves says S. James, y^ flatter their own fantasies with such outward
shows, and have not the substance thereof in their hearts, nor declare it with
the proof of their doings, and this he declares by a ^erie fit s^nilitude. He
that hears the word, and does it not, is like unto one that beholds his
natural face in a glass, and forgets immediately what manner of man he was.
But who so looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein,
being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, shall be blessed in his
deed. Christians must not learn to know only, or to speak, but they must
learn to do yt, which they know. For Christianity consists not in
speculation only, but in practice and doing, and in constant abiding therein.
And therefore says Christ, Blessed is he that hears the word of God, and
keeps Luc. 11. 28.
it. This doctrine Christ confirms by sundry parables, and chiefly by this,
Mat. 7. Whosoever hears these words, Mat. 7. 24.
and does the same, I will like^ him to a wise man, that builds his house on a
rock, and the rain fell, and the floods came, and the wind blew, and beat
upon the house, and it fell not, because it was builded upon a rock. But
whosoever hears my words and does them not, shall be likened to a foolish
man, that has builded his house upon the sands. etc By which parable we are
taught, y^ true christians should lay the foundation of their profession upon
the rock Christ Jesus, not slightly heard, and coldly conceived, but deeply
placed, and settled in the bottom of their hearts, and then shall stand
constantly against all tempe^ts and storms of temptation, that y^ Devil or the
world can work against them: because they have the testimony of a good
conscience, bearing them witness, yt they follow Christ, not in words only,
but in i^^tation of life also. And contrariwise does it fall out to them that
be idle professors, and no godly doers, and most of all to them that beside
idle and vain show of professions, scl^under Gods word by their naugh^ie and
wicked life, and cause it among the adversaries, to be evil spoken of. We must
therefore carefully look and diligently study, that we be not, in the
Vineyard of God, unfruitful Man. 11. 13.
^^ggetrees, making show of Christianity, with the fair green leaves of
hearing Gods word, coming to the Church, using of the Sacraments, talking
oftentimes of the Scriptures, etc. But the sound and true fruits of godly
conversation we show not. For if we remain such unprofitable trees, we shall
be cut down, cast into the fire, and have our parts with hypocrites, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, etc.

The next note of this text is, that when God punishes Wicked m^n are plagued
of god, for their own sins to our ^^^ngle.
and plagueth wicked and naughty men, for doing contrary to his will, it is
not done only for them upon whom the particular punishments light, but for
the example of other also, in all ages and times. These things, says S. Paul,
are examples for us, etc. And afterward, All these things came to them as
ensamples, and were written to admonish v^, upon whom the ends of the world
are come. The better to understand this, I will first declare unto you two
points, the one, that all things that come to man, come not by fortune, by
chance, or by natural course only, but by y^ certain providence and
appointment of God, and secondly for what causes, God most commonly sends
such plagues upon men. And then will I add y^ conclusion, y^ Christians must
make application of such examples to themselves, and how y^ is to be done. As
God of his inestimable goodness made Nothing be^ ^ideth man by fortune, but al
things by gods direction.
the world and all that therein is, for the benefit and commodity of man,
that he might use all the inferior creatures to Gods glory: so does the same
Lord and maker, by his almighty power and infinite wisdom, continue and
preserve y^ same. My father yet still works (faieth Christ) and I work. Joh.
5. 17. Act. 17. 28. Psalm. 104. 29.
By him only we move, live, and have our being, as Saint Paul says, and as
David in sundry Psalms wit^esseth, when thou hidest thy face they are
troubled, when thou take away their breath they die, and are turned into their
dust. when thou let thy breath go fo^th they shall be made, and thou shall
renew the face of the earth. That we call Nature what it is.
and esteem nature, is nothing but the very ^inger of God working in his
creatures, much more the alteration of natural courses and things done
extraordinarily. As god made clouds at y^ beginning to water y^ earth, so does
he preserve them, and by his mighty power holds them houering in y^ air, y^
they fall not down immoderatly to drown y^ earth, but shed themselves
temperatly by drops, and sweet showers to season y^ same. Wherefore when rain
falls excessiuely to hurt y^ earth, or hinder mankind, as it did in the time
of Noah, or when the clouds be clean dried up that there is no Genesis 7. 3. Reg.
17.
rain at al, as it fell out in y^ time of Achab, it is most evident to be y^
work of God, according to his justice punishing y^ breaking of his law, and
unthankfulness of his people. So likewise as God made y^ air, so it is he y^
for like causes keeps it in seasonable manner, sometime moist, sometime dry,
sometime weate, sometime cold, sometime wholesome, sometime infectious and
dangerous, whereupon follows sickness and death of men, and murrens of cattle,
etc. In like manner I might speak of y^ earth, y^ water, y^ Son, y^ Moon,
and residue of the stars and planets. In all and every of which, as it is
the finger of God, that keeps the^ in their natural order, so it is his power
y^ does alter and change the same, and for causes to his wisdom known,
brings out such effects as be hurtful rather then beneficial unto man.
Therefore when we see infections, sicknesses, disseases, deaths, murraines,
loss of corn or hay, destruction of cattle, great fluds, burnings, blastings,
and a number of such like, we must look further then into y^ course of nature,
and understand y^ there is a God, and an ouerruler of nature, y^ does those
things. This is not true only in these things y^ appertain to nature, but in
those also y^ be done by the will of man, or as we say profanely, by chance
or fortune. For in deed there is no chance or fortune. And therefore y^ good
father Aug. does renounce Retract.
those heathenish names, and repented that ever he used the^. That which we
call fortune, is nothing but y^ hand of Fortune what it is.
God, working by causes, and for causes, that we know not. Chance or fortune
are gods devised by man, and made by our ignorance of y^ true, almighty, and
everlasting God. Are not Mat. 10. 29
two sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of them falls not to the ground
without your father, yea all the heirs of your head are nu^bred, fear you not
therefore, you are more worth then many sparrowes, The sense of these words is,
y^ the providence of God erte^deth it self to al creatures, so y^ there is
nothing so base or simple, either without man or wtin him, which he neglects or
is ignorant of. Of those things that be without man, nothing almost is of less
value, or less esteemed, than a poor silly sparrow, and yet one of them
falls not to the ground, without our heavenly Father. Of such things as
appertain to man, nothing is of less price than a hear, and yet one of the^
perishes not, but by Gods providence. This doctrine makes greatly to the
advancement of the true knowledge of God. For it teaches us, as I have said
before, not only God the Creator, disposer, and preserner of all.
that he is y^ maker of heaven and earth, and of all y^ creatures in them
contained, but also that he does govern and dispose them all, and preserve
them that they may continue so long, as to his blessed will shall seem
convenient.

The scriptures in sundry places witness the same, both in the course of his
doing in sundry Histories of Joseph, of Job, of Saul, of David, and in
particular testimonles of sundry Godly men, and holy Prophets, but noue more
evidently and zealously, than David in many Psalms, but principally in the
104. 107. Unto which places I refer the Godly hearer, for this time would not
serve, if I sholh but meanly declare unto you the wholesome instructions, and
assured comfortes that are to be gathered, both by the The absurd opinion of
the^ confuted that imagined god to govern great things and matters only
without providing any whitt for things of leave value.
examples and particular testimonies. Christ in the words before recited,
extends the careful providence of God to Sparrowes, and to the hears of
our heads, to the end no man should think or imagine, that it is only a
general providence, as many do in these days, which as they dare not deny,
that the world is governed by the wisdom and power of God, so they think it
an absurd thing to teach, that God is occupied about all particular Creatures,
and specially them that be of the meanest sort. Therefore they expound chose
words that Christ uses here, or the scripture in other places, to be spoken
by Hiperbole, that is, a manner of fyguratiue speech, passing all truth,
thereby to signify a mean truth. But I would learn of these me^, what it is,
that saving the nature of his Godhead, may in this kind of thing be spoken of
him more then truth, seeing he is Omnipotent, of infinite knowledge, and is
present in all places. So much as they shall exempt from Gods disposition in his
Creatures, so much shall they with dishonor of God, pull from his Almighty
power and infinite wisdom. We may not think it is any disgracing of y^ maiesly
of god, to draw the same his prouydence to the preservation and direction even
of his meanest creatures. For he works not as men do with labor and grief,
or torment of mind. His very beck, will, and countenance is enough to do, or
alter all things, even to shake Heaven and earth, as the blind Heathen Poet
Homere could say. Yea this is the greatest proof that can be of his exceeding
maieftie, that he sees all things, that he dispofeth and works al things,
that he directs all his Creatures to that end, for which in the beginning he
made them. If this be so, some will say unto me, why then, as God is to be
praised and thanked, for all that is good, so whatsoever is evil also, is to
be imputed unto him, and no man or other creature, no nor the Devil himself
to be blamed for any hurt that is done, because it is Gods will and disposition
it should be, and against that, who is able to stand? And so GOD shall God
is not the author of sin.
be accounted the Authoure of sin, which is a wicked, and horrible
assertion. These dangerous cogitations are by Satan thrust into the minds of
Christians, purposely to make them to murmr against God and his providence.
And as I am very loath in this Auditory, to enter into the search of Gods
secret Judgementes, so may I not clean omit to take away the offense of this
ungodly cogitation. And yet mean I not to do that deepelye, and with
intricate and hard reasons, but such, as the meanest person not void of
natural understanding, may sufficientlye conceive. Who knows not that the
end whereunto any Every act is to be measured good or bad, by the intent of
the actor.
thing is done, makes one and the same thing either good or badde, just or
vnuiste? A Magistrate puts a man to death, not for hatred of the person, not
for particular reueugement, nor to have benefit by his goods, and in this he
does well, being the Minister of God, by him appointed so to die. A Ruffyan or
a Thief, kills a man to be revenged on him, to have his goods, or to the end
he may avoid some danger thereby, and in this he sins grievously. And yet
to kill a man, or to put him to death is all one act, just and good in the one,
wicked and naughty in the other. So GOD by his providence, may dispose those
things to be done which wicked persons, as his Instruments do perform,
and the same just in God, in them sinful and naught. For God in those things
respects his own glory, or the punishmente of vice and wickedness, without
any corrupt affection at all.

The naughty men whom the wisdom of God uses as instruments herein, have
not the said ends, but with all endeavor seek to satisfye their own ambition,
cruelty, covetousness, pride, or other sinful passion of the mind, and have
no regard to the justice of God, and fulfilling of his holy will, I will use
but one example, notwithstanding the scriptures minister to me a great number.

God had often times by his Prophets, called his people the Jews to leave
their Superstition and Idolatry, to leave their wickedness and naughty life,
and to return to him by repentance, and yet they would not: I rose up Jer. 7.
13.
early, says God by the mouth of Jeremy) and sent unto you all my Prophets,
and you have not heard me, nor have not in cliued your ear unto me, but have
done worse then your forefathers. etc. Therefore he was resolved according to
their deserving justly to punish them. And who can deny, but this resolution
in God was most just. For his Instrumente he used the King of Assiria, a
Esai. 10. 5.
proud, a cruel, and a wicked Prince, who came upon the Jews and showed
toward them all cruelty, and extremity, in no part respecting the satisfying
of Gods Justice, or the punishing of his naughty people, but the fulfilling of
his own ambitions and eruell affection, wherewith he thought to enlarge his
Empire, and so set forth his own glory. And who can deny but that this
doonig was in the King stafull and naught, and therefore was this enill mind
in him, not long after punished by GOD himself. And this makes very greatly
to the setting forth of Gods wisdom, that he can use naughty
Instruments, God uses naughty instruments to the working of good.
to punish naughtye men, and turn the minds and indeuoures of wicked persons
to his glory, and to the satisfying of his justice, though they in no part
regard the same. But I see a desire to answer the perverse cogications of
evil minds, has drawn me somewhat from my purpose.

Let us now therefore come to the second note, that is, What the causes ate,
that move god to plague men.
with what causes God is usually moved, to work such plagues and evils to
men, and those generally are two. The first is, the punishment of sin, and
the transgression of his The punishment of sin. Leu. 26. 40
commandments, as infinite Examples, and almost the whole course of the
scriptures teach us. For their own sins, says Moses, and for the sins
of their fathers, shall they be plagued to confess their iniquities. etc. And
again, If you shall leave the Lord your God, and Jos. 24. 20.
shall serve strange Gods, he will turn himself and punish you. But of al other
places most plainly, Deuteronomy. 21. Leuit. Deutro. 21.
26. ver. 14. Where after god has signified what worldly blessings should come
unto them, if they did observe and keep his laws, he adds: But if thou
will not obey Leu. 26. 14. etc.
me, nor do all these commandments. etc. then will I also do this unto
you, I will bring upon you fearfulness, a consumption, a burning, and the
burning* ague to consume the eyes, and make the heart heavy, and you shall
sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it, and I will set my face
against you, and you shall fall before your enemies, and they that hate you shall
reign over you. I will break the pride of your power, and make your Heaven as
iron, and your Earth as Brass, your strength shall be spent in vain, neither
shall thee Trees of the Land give their fruits, I will send wild beasts
upon you, which shall spoil you and destroy your Cattle, and make you few in
number, for your high ways shall be desolate: I will send a sword among you
and when you be gathered in your Cities, I will send the pestilence upon you,
and ye shall be delivered into the hand of the ennemie. And so continues God
to reckon up all these miseries and calamities that any ways may come to man,
and that he will send them. Whereby we are by the mouth of God instructed, as
well that such plagues and miseries come (as before I have said) by the
providence and appointment of God, as also that they are usually cast upon men
for sin and wickedness, and for reuolting from his holy will and true
worship unto superstition and Idolatry. But here we must have in mind yt which
S. Paul means in this place, that God shows not his particular
punishments only because of them whose persons they touch, but by their
example call other home also, that be gone astray. And in deed happy is he,
that came punishmenes sent from god for exam^ples sake.
learn to take heed by other men's peril, before y^ scourge light upon
himself. Our corrupt nature understanding that God is a just God, and will
punish sin, when we see any notable plague or misery sent to a man, by and
by with great rigor we condemn him as a uery evil man, though in deed, we
never knew evil by him. And because God does not in like manner touch us, we
flatter our selves, and persuade our own minds that God favors us, and is
delighted in our manner of life, though it be happily far worse tha^ the
other, and so do we feed our selves in vanity, and continue in wickedness. But
S. Paul in this place, and Christ ^(...) Lake teaches us another manner of
Lesson. Whe^n certain told Christ of them, whose blood Pilate had mixed with
their sacrifice: Why (says Christ) Luc. 13. 2.
think you that these Galileans, above all other were greatest sinners,
because they suffered such punishment? Nay, I say unto you, unless you all
repent, you shall in like manner perish. Or think you that those 18. that
perished by fall of the Tower of Siloah, were of all other in Jerusalem, the
greatest sinners? Nay, I say unto you, unless ye repent, ye shall al in like
manner perish. Here first we are taught that not only they, upon whom the
external punishment lights are sinners, but all other, even y^ very child
that is this day borne, if Gods justice consider him in himself: much more
such, as in continuance of their life, have heaped on sin daily, by wicked
thoughts, naughty words, and e^ill doings, and therefore if God should deal
with all according to his justice, it should fall to all other, as well as to
them.

This did good and godly men understand, as David when he said. Enter not into
judgment with thy servant O Psalm. 543. 2.
Lord, for if thou observe our iniquities, who shall be able to abide it? And
therefore Christ our savior teaches us daily to say, Forgive us our
trespasses, etc. There is no man but he trespasseth, and deserves Gods
punishment, which thing, if christians would according to duty consider,
undoubtedly they should be moved both more fauourablye to ^^ge of other me^,
and when they see their punishments, to be afraid also of themselves. For this
they should certainly in godly meditation think with themselves: Seeing that al
me^ are sinners, if God did not mean by example of such punishments to stir up
other, he would secretly punish the^, and not to openly show his wrath.
Therefore by sight of such examples, we must not only be moved to praise God,
and to extolle his justice for punishing iniquity, but euter depely into our
selves also, and search our own consciences, lives, and doings; whether there
be not as great, or greate^ cause in us to pull the just wrath and plague of god
upon our (...), if we in time repent not, and turn to him for mercy. ^lms
must we learn to apply to our instruction, not only such exam^ples of Gods
justice, as in our life time we see against wicked and notorious sinners,
but other also yt are recorded in y^ holy scriptures. For whatsoever things are
written they are written for our instruction, y^ they may be examples for us,
upon wh^^ y^ lattes ends of the world are fallen. It is written. Number. 11. That
the children of Israel whom god by Moises delivered out of Egypt, lusted
wickedly against GOD, saying: Who shall give us flesh to eat, we remember ^um.
11. 4.
the fish that we did eat in Aegipt, the Cucu^bers and Popons, the Leekes,
the Oynons, and the Garlike, but now our soul is dried away, we can see
nothing, but this Ma^ua, They did not only luthe gods good blessing toward
them, but also longed and lusted, after their own gross feeding in Aegipt.
Therefore God satisfied their desire, and fed them with Duailes, a whole Month
together, but their own lust was their destruction, and white the meat was yet
in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them, and destroyed a great
number of them.

This should be one Example for us, that we do not in like manner loathe the
sweet and dayntye Food of the Gospel and Doctrine of our Salvation by
Christ, which God myraculouslye has restored unto us, that with murmuring
hearts, lust lewdoly after Oyni^^s, garlike, and other stuicking and gross
feeding, wherewith we were fedd in Aegipt under Antechrist: I mean Masses,
Pardons; Purgatory, Pilgrimages, and such like corrupt food of our souls,
that may make us to savor ill in the fight of the Lord. For if we do, God will
deal with us, as he did with them: he win make our ownt ^^st to he our
confusion, and the means to pull his just wrath upon us. It may be, that he
will satisfye our unthankful desire, but it will be in such sort, that they
which long most greedily for it, will soonest, be weary of it, and feel the
punishment thereof most bitterlye. It is written Number. 25. That the people
defyles Number. 25. ^^
themselves with wkoredom, with the daughters of Moab. and y^ for the same
wicked offense, 24000. were slain, and because the chief Ringleaders of that
lewdenesse, y^ gave example to the other, were Nohle persons, and the heads
and Peers of the people: god commanded Moises for the more terroure of other,
to hang them up against the S^^. And shall we think in these days, when
Adulterye and whoredom ouerwhelnieth the earth, and is of all sorts almost
esteemed a small offense, or none at all, that god will suffer the same
unpunished? No surely, though his long sufferaunte to allure us to
repenta^^ce, bears of for the time the execution of his present wrath, when
it comes it will be the greater. It is written Nume. 16. That Corah, Dathan,
Abyram, with their confederates murmured against Moses and Aaron the Magistrate
and Minister, by gods special providence appointed to deliver his people, and
to guide the^ through the wilderness, and they said: Ye take to much upon you,
why do you lift your selves Number. 16. 3.
above the congregation? is it a small thing, that thou have brought us out of
a Land, flowing with Milk and Honey, to kill us in the Wilderness? except
thou make thy self Lord and Gouernoure over us also? etc. But God declared how
grievous and unpleasant a thing it is in his sight, for people to rebel or
murmr against their samfull Magistrate, and took the reproach thereof unto
himself. And therefore caused the earth to swallow up, the chief ring leaders
of that mischief, and destroyed of the residue 14700. Hereby they may learn
what is due unto them, and what will come upon them, which not only in their
hearts secretly, but openly in their assemblies, when they dare murmr at our
gracious Governor, whom God has appointed to deliver us out of Aegipt, and
by the Gospel of his son Christ, to bring us into the Land of promise, and
cause their patrones and defenders in their flaunderous Libels and books
openly published, like traitoures to disgrace her magestie with titles of an
Usurper, a scismatike, a feducer of the people from the Church of God, and
they that be at home give out the same things, in their secret speeches. And
all as truly and justly, as Dathan and Abyram charged Moses with usurping
authority over them, and with leading of the people purposely to destroy them
in the Wilderness. But I doubt not, the God of truth wist (as hither to be
has done) take upon him the defense, and preservation of his lawful
Magistrate and Governor, against these traitorous murmurers, and mutterers,
and in the end, unless they repent, will send them their just reward. In the
mean time we ought in our prayers earnestly to call upon God, that he will
hold his merciful hand over us, and that he will move the minds of our
Prince and Counsel, to have a more careful eye to these murmurers, which
openly show themselves by forbearing our communion in Prayers and
Sacraments, and in the mean time with greedy mynds lust and long for that
^ay, in which they may pour out their traitorous malice toward God and their
Prince. Moreover, it is written in Esaias: That even in the time of that good
Esai. 36. and 37.
king Ezechias, who had cast out superstition and idolatry, and very exactly
reformed Gods true Religion, according to his: law, yet that the ^^uell Tyran^^
Sennacherib and the Assyrians entered Jewrie spoiled the country, destroyed all
their great Cities, and beseeged the City H^^^^^alem; and the king himself in
it, then which calamity, the people of God had scantly at any time felt a
greater or more grievous. And what I pray you might be the cause hereof?
undoubtedly because the people did unthankfully receive y^ godly and happy
reformation of Religion. Some murmured at it, and kept their monuments of
idolatry for a day, some received it holowly and coldly: either to please the
Prince, and to have some benefit or countenance by it, or else to keep
themselves from the penalty and danger of the Law. The most that did
soundlye embrace it, did not conform themselves in life accordingly, but with
little or no amendme^t, continued their old corruption. Some notable faults
were also in yt king himself, though otherwise a blessed Prince. Therefore God
used that sharp scourge, as well instly to punish the obstinate, as also to
bring the repentaunt home to his mercy and reformation of life. By this we are
taught, that ^lb^it it has pleased God by our Prince, to cast out superstition
and idolatry, to drive away the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome, to
restore true religion, and the right use of the Sacraments, and by law and
authority to confirm y^ same: yet we may not herein flatter our selves, as
though we were safe from Gods displeasure, or greatly in his favor. For if we
do not thankefully receive this his inestimable benefit, and in life and godly
conversation conform our selves unto it, that his name may be glorified in us:
we must assure our selves, that this will fall to our great judgment, and that
in the time of our Ezechia, he will plague us, as he did the Jews by
Sennacherib, in time of their good king. Thus have I noted unto you, three or
four examples, that by them you may know how to apply the res^ue. Now least by
rashness and ignorance, men uncharitably condemn the (...) and good man,
because he sees him touched with affliction and trouble: I must let you
Afflictions are laid upon the righteous to try them withal.
understand that beside the just punishment of the open and notorious (...)
whereof hitherto I have spoken, there is also an other cause wherewith God is
moved, to se^^^ among men myself, trouble, affliction, and griefs of this
world, that is to try and prove such as be good and godly; that their
virtues may more shine among men, to the honor and glory of God. The furnace
(says Jesus Eccl. 27. 5.
Syrache) tries the Potters vessel, and affliction tries the just and godly.
And Solomon, As ^iluer and Prou. 17. 3.
Gold is tried by fire, so does God prove and try the hearts of men. Your
Fathers (says Judith) were Judi. 8. 21.
tempted that they might be tried and proved, whether they truly from their
heart worshipped God. In this ma^^^r GOD tempted and proved his faithful
servants, Abraham, Joseph, and Job, that by the trial of their constancy,
their faith might he the more notable and famous, and both themselves more in
faith confyrmed, and GOD, as I have said, by them more glorified. When God
cast upon Job all those myseries, which the Scriptures mention, his unnatural
wife and unkind friends, with rash and uncharitable judgment, would needs
persuade him that it was the anger of GOD, and just punishment for his sins,
that brought all those things upon him. But he stayed upon the testimony of
a good conscience, and the constancy of his faith, assured himself of the
good will and favor of GOD, and therefore he took all patiently, saying. The
Lord gave it, and the Lord has Job. 1. 21.
taken it away, even as the Lord will, so be it. In which words we have to
learn the exceedyng comfort, which the godly take in the myddest of their
troubles, by the doctrine of the providence of God: whereof I spoke before. For
because nothing is done without him, by his only sufferaunce Tyrauntes
persetute, they spoil men of their goods, they cast them into banishment, into
prison and bonds, they kill them, and exercise all kind of cruelty against
them. It is his will also that men be afflicted with sickness, with
poverty, with hunger, with cold, with sclaunder and reproach, with loss of
children and goods, and with all myseries that may fall in the life of man.
But because the same Lord and God, which as a just judge sends all these
things, is also a most merciful, tender, and kind father: undoubtedly he
will not suffer any thing to happen to us, but that shall be profitable, and a
furtheraunce to our salvation. Wherefore in all troubles, and myseries, seem
they at the beginning never so greenous and intolerable), the godly receive
them, and adyde in them, not only with patience, but with joy and gladness*
They are persuaded, as the truth is, That God chas^ise^h every son that he
Heb. 12. 6.
receaueth, and therefore with cheerful hearts, Romans 5. 3.
They glory in their afflictions knowing that tribulation brings patience,
patience experience, experience hope, and hope confounds not, nor makes
ashamed. This comfort it was that made Job so patiently to abide loss of
goods, the spoil of his lands and houses, and the miserable destruction of
his children. The same comfort caused Joseph, with like patience to endure
bondage, imprisonment, sclaunder, reproach, and danger of his life. For he was
assuredly persuaded that nothing was done, without the certain providence of
his loving and merciful Lord and God, and therefore was assured, that it
would fall out to the best in the end. This if we soundly and truly
consider, we shall neither rashely condemn other, whose sins be not
notoriouslye known, and when any evil happens to our selves, by this
comfort, we shall sustain it patiently.

Now have I briefly declared unto you, as you have heard, first that outward
profession and external service, 1
and use of Sacraments, is not sufficient for Christians, but that to the
glory of God, they must confirm their calling, with the practice of a
virtuous and godly life. Secondly 2
whenever misery or plague happens to man, it comes not by chance or
fortune, or by a course of nature, as vain worldly men imagine, but by the
assured providence of God, that sees, knows, and works all things.
Thirdly, 3
that God is moved with two causes, to cast such miseries and afflictions upon
men, sometime by just punishment of sin, for transgression of his holy law,
and secondly to try the faithful and godly. And lastly, I have told you, 4
what good instructions are to be taken of true Christians, in both those
ways. It remains that we pray unto God most heartily, that this doctrine may
be so imprinted in our harte^, as it may bring forth due fruits to his glory:
to whom be honor and glory forever and ever. So ^^ it.

Certain Sermons upon this Text. Mat. 13. 3.
The seed sower went out to sow his seed, and some fell by the high ways
side, and the fowls of the air came and devoured it up, some fell on stony
ground, where it had not much earth, and anon it sprung up because it had no
deepenesse of earth: but when the Sun rose, it was burned, and because it had
no root it withered, etc.
THe holy ghost in the scriptures, sundry times resembles God, to a
husbandman. And as there be sundry kinds of husbandry, so does he, in diverse
respects, Christ compares the church to husbandry especially in pasturing,
vintage, and tillage. Psalm. 23. 1^
compare the Church and people of God, to the parts thereof. Ancient
writers, make three parts of husbandry, Pasturing, Vintage, and Tillage. To al
these do the scriptures compare the Church of God. The Lord is my sheepard
(says David) therefore ca^ I lack nothing, He shall lead me forth in a green
Pasture. etc. And again, We are the people of his pasture and the sheep Psalm.
95. ^ Joh. 10. 11
of his hands. And Christ himself says, I am the good Sheepard, etc, and my
sheep hear my voice. As touching Vintage, Christ says, I am the true Vine,
and my father Joh. 15. 1. Esa. 5. 1. etc.
is the Husbandman. In Esaias God makes a long discourse, declaring his Church
and people to be his chosen Vineyard, planted in a very fertile ground. To
which parable Christ also alludeth in S. Matthew. To Tillage he compares Mat.
21. 33 Joh. 4. 35.
his Church, in S. Joh. Do not you say, there are four months and then
Harvest comes? Behold, I say unto you, lift up your eyes, and look upon the
countries round about you, because they are white and ready to Harvest, and he
that reapeth shall have his reward, that he may gather in fruits to
everlasting life. And in S. Mat. There is a large harvest, and few workmen:
desire Mat. 9. 37
the Lord of the harvest, that he will thrust forth laborers into his harvest.
But in no place more plainly, than in this parable of the seed sower, which
now I have recited unto you. This ye spirit of God does of purpose, by these
Why the Spirit of god does compare the church to husbandry as beforesaide.
familiar similitudes to set before our eyes, and to impresse more deeply in
our min^^s, partly the great goodness and singular care of god toward us, partly
to teach us our duty toward him. As the husbandman trauaileth, and has great
care of his pasture, his Vineyarde, and Tillage, and leaves nothing undone,
whereby he may further them, so ought they to answer his expectation and to
yield fruit accordingly. But as touching this parable of the seed
Interpretation of this parable of the seed sower.
sower, ye have to note these parts. God is the husbandman, the Preachers of
the word are the seed sowers, the seed is the word of God, the ground is
the hearts of men, the duiersitie of the grou^nde, notes the diversity of
men's dispositions in hearing the word of God. If preachers Preachers are
authori^ed by god in their calling. 1. Cor. 4. 1.
be the seed sowers, then have they authority from God, as doing his
service, and as coming in his message: and therefore says Paul, Let man so
esteem us as the servant of Christ, and bestowers of the secrets of God.
They must be heard therefore as the messengers What ^^^mat^^^ ought to be had
of prechers.
of GOD, they must be esteemed as his servants that come to sow the seed of
salvation in the hearts of men. It is the word of God that they utter, and
ought to have the Majesty of his person, though it be uttered by the mouth
of a mortal and frail man. The Prophets say thus: Thus says the Lord. The
mouth of the Lord has spoken, and yet were they men that delivered the
message. So God honors his messenger, that though he be covered with frail
flesh, and sometime also stained with sin: yet he makes him, his mouth, to
open his will unto his people. When you received the word of me, 1. The. 2. 13.
you received it not, as the word of man, but as it was in deed, the word of
God. And to the Galathians, Gal. 4. 14.
You refused not my infirmity in flesh, but you received me, as the Angel
of God, yea even as Christ Jesus. And again to the Thessalonians, He that
rejects 2. The. 4. 8
us, rejects not us, but God, who has given his holy spirit unto us. And
for that cause says Christ, He that hears you, hears me, and he that
rejects Luc. 10. 16.
you, rejects me. And God in his Prophets, always takes as to himself,
that contempt, or that reproach, that was shown to his Ministers, whom he sent
unto his people, and threatens for the same, most grievous punishments. This
should they consider, which in these days make so small account of Preachers,
and Preaching of gods word, that they esteem neither any thing of less price,
nor any How those are to be thought of who lightly regard-either preachinge or
preachers.
persons of less credit. But therein they show, both how little regard they
have of their own salvation, and how lightly they esteem the glory and
Majesty of God, who offers that benefit unto them by his Preachers.

The word of God by Christ's own exposition, is the 1. Pet. 1. 23. That the
word of god is resembled to seed, and why. Esa. 40. 6.
seed: and so says S. Peter also, You are newborn, not of mortal but of
immortal seed, through the word of God, that lives and abides forever. All
flesh is grass and all the glory thereof as the flower of grass, grass
withers, and the flower falls, but the word of God abides for ever, and
this is the word which by the Gospel is brought unto you. Very fitly and
ap^lye is the word of God resembled to seed, as well of diverse other
properties, as principally, that seed, is in appearaunce, a small and
contemptible thing, but very profitable, and of great strength and virtue, so
as without it, all kinds of things would perish. Of a little seed, you see
a very fair and beautiful flower* of a small kar^ell, a large and a fruitful
tree, of a mean Acorne, a huge and main Oak. If you make a seed of most
precious and rich metal, it can not have this strength, and grace with it.

Even so the word of God, in estimation of the world is simple, The power of
the words of god in it self, and in the estimation of the world. Romans 1. 16.
What gods word woorketh in the hear^^s.
base, and contemptible, but in virtue, power and strength, exceeding great and
maruailous. I am not ashamed of the Gospel (says Paul) for it is the mighty
power of God to salvation, of all them that believe. By secret power y^ the
spirit of God gives it, it alters the minds of men, it lyghteneth their
hearts, it engenders a new will, it brings forth godly and holy doings as
due fruits thereof, it changes not only particular men but whole Empires,
kingdoms and countries, it works y^ which in no wise can be wrought by the
counsels, wit, wisdom, cunning, policy, or strength of man. This strength
and power of Gods word does S. Paul speak of. We preach Christ crucified, 1.
Cor. 1. 23.
to the Jews a stumbling stock, to the Grecians foolishness, but to them
both being called, we preach Christ the power and wisdom of God, etc. God
has Verse. 27.
chose^ those things, which are foolish in the world to co^fou^d the wise, God
has chosen the weak things of the world to co^fou^d the mighty. The effect of
this, appeared immediately after the Apostles in themselves contemptible, and
yet unblemished, who with the despised and loathed doctrine of Christ crucified
prevailed, and prospered through How gods word prevails even against man's
wisdom and cunning.
out y^ world, notwtstanding the wisdom, ye learning, ye policy, the power
of the world did set it self against it: and as a little Muster seed, the
Church of God by the power of the Gospel prospered, and grew to great
largeness, so that the poor fowls of the air, that were chased out of the
woods, by tyranny and persecution, did rest in Example of the Apostles time.
it, and with quietness of conscience, though with trouble of the world,
settled themselves, and builded their neastes therein, The like has been,
even of late years, wherein, it has pleased our merciful God, to renew his
Gospel, Example of later, and of these present times.
and to send it into the world, so that the godly with great comfort see,
and the whole world may perceive ye myghtie power of God, in prospering his
Gospel. What conspiracies, what edicts, what cruel Massakers and murders, have
been to suppress the Gospel; all men do know, and those that fear God, with
pi^ief^^^ hearts lament it. Eue^ now are wrought those things, of which David
prophesied P^^^. ^. ^.
many hundred years before, Eue^ now the nations fret and fume, even now the
enemies of God, have their vain wicked and Diuilish devises: even now the
Princes of Antechristes band, conspyre and lay their heads together against
Christ, and agaynsts his word. Let us The imaginations, pra^tises, and
means of the wicked to withstand gods word.
break their bands asunder, say they, let us cast of their yoke, let us by
all means we can, seek the confusyon of those Princes, countries, Noble men,
and other, which in any place maintain this new preached Gospel. Let it be
wrought by policy, by perjury, by craft and dissimulation, by violence, by
cruelty, by mischief, by murder, by any means that may be. Let us root from
the face of the earth these Protestants, these Hugonotes, these Hererikes,
which at this day trouble the whole world. If we cannot work it by force,
let us by policy, and under color and pretense of great friendship, bring
them into our snare, or at the least, with making fair offers, let us dally
with the^, until we may work that, y^ we would do. Sed qui Psalm. 2. 4.
habitat in Coelis deridebit eos, and dominus subsa^nabit eos* i. He sits in
Heaven that shall deride and frustrate all their counsels, with a Rod of
iron, he shall break and seatter their purposes: unto Godly Princes and
Magistrates which he has rapsed, as Nourses and Fosterers of his Gospel, he
shall (I doubt not) as often times he has done, bewray their dissimulation,
display their policies, sparcle their conspiracies, and confound their denises,
in such sort as his holy word and Gospel, shall remain to the comfort of his
Children. Though by all cruelty, to their further condemnation, and to the
heaping of greater wrath in the day of Gods wrath, they sley and kill great
numbers of his people* yet of the very ashes of the same, and of their blood,
he will raise up other to his glory, which maugre their malice, shall freely
teach and preach his word. A Tempest of (...), may blow down a (...) of
(...), The increase of the church by Mart^rdom (...)d in a similitude.
but in blowing do^ne one* Stalk, it shall ^ast out ^n hundred Seeds,
which after shall grow and prosper. Even so by extremity of tempestuous
persecution, some Preachers and professoures may be murdered, but of their
blood other will spring. Number Sanguis Martyrum se^^^^ Euangelij. i. For the
Blood of Martyrs, is the Seed of What increase, only co^^^^eth by Mar^^^dom.
the Gospel. Yet am I not of that mind, that the Gospel* in the World shall
^^ prosper, that it shall have a setteledde quietness. For undoubtedly,
Antichriste shall not be utterly overthrown before the last day, but
continually, between this time and that, shall make war against the Saints
of God* and travail to suppress this happy ^eede of Christ his Gospel,
wherewith he his so grievously wounded, and his Kingdom shaken. 2. The. 2. 8.
But he shall never be able utterly in extinguish it. S. Paul says that he
shall be deadly wounded with the Spirit of Gods mouth, that is, his holy
word: but he shall be taken away by the brightness of his coming. The
Justice of God, for the unthankfulness of people, may suffer his Gospel to be
oppressed in some one Country, as England, or some other place, but in other
yet, it shall prosper and increase, norwithstanding all the endeavors of
Antichrist to the contrary.

Next is, that we have to speak of the ground and the diuersitye thereof.
And here I may not let pass^ a very profitable instruction, to be taken out
of this parable, against ye malicious interpretation of many in these days, and
I doubt not but there was the like in Christ's time, and ministered to him the
occasyon to ^^ter this Parable. When many An objection made against the credit
of the gospel and the preachers of it because it is likened to seed
see the Doctrine of the Gospel so much preached, and beaten into men's ^^res;
and consider how small frui^e comes of it, being so many that reject and
contemn it, and so few that frame themselves according unto it, but y^ ^ice
and wickedness rather daily increases: by and by with very corrupt
judgment, they either (...) the Doctrine it self, or the perf^^s that be the
Minister^ and teach^^s thereof. Oh, say they, if this were Gous ^ra^ word* and
his right doctrine of the Gospel, as it is pretended: undoubtedly, it would
work in men's ha^tes, alter their minds, and bring forth fruit accordingly*
^^r as the Propher says: As the sweet Esa. 55. 10.
d^^ and ^hower ^^raine returns not ba^ke in vain, ^^^ ^^y^^eneth and
seasoneth^ the earth: so gods true word returns not in vay^e^ but
effectually does that for which it was sent. Or, if this be the true gospel,
and right word of God, surely the fault is in the Ministers, that be not
such persons, nor do not deliver it so zealously and so sincerely as they
should do* and therefore their preaching preuayleth not in the hearts of men. And
through this persuasion, their grows in them, an odyous and vnchristyan
contempt, and despising of Ministers and Preachers, so that forgetting
themselves, they cast fault of all evil in these Days, upon the Ministers
and Preachers. But Answer.
with as good right might they condemn, and contemn the Prophets, Christ
himself, and his Apostles. Esaias preached among the people of God above 60
years, or (...) some accoumpte 80. Jeremy taught 41 years, and other Prophets
proportionabl^ly, and I trust they will not say, that either Some preachers had
but barren success and yet was their doctrine ^^^^he.
their doctrine was not right or good, or else that they were evil men. Yet
with how final fruit they preached, in comparison of the multitud^ of evil,
the whole course of their writings, and their lamentable complaints declares,
and y^ event of Gods just judgment in punishing the Jews, evidently proves.
For that only cause that they contemned his word, and returned not to him by
repentance, he brought upon them the King of Babylon, who in the ninth year
of Zedechia, King of Juda, came and all his Host against Jerusalem, and
Beseeged it, And in the leuenth year of Zedechiah, in the 4 month took it,
and ransacked the City. And al y^ Princes of the King of Babilo^ came in, and
sat in the middle gate, the chief gate of the City, even N^^egall, Sar^ser,
^amga^n^^^, Sars^^him, Rabsari^, Rab^^ag, with all the resi^^^ of the Princes
of the King of (...) God thus plaguing the profane contempt of his word,
when after so long Preaching no fruit would follow. And yet was not leremie
in fault, nor the true Prophets of God for the iu^^sion of those strangers,
for the overthrow of this noble Ci^e, or for the grievous captivity of this
woeful people * Nay, the looseness of their own lives, the secure contempt of
Gods holy word brought all those plagues justly upon them, that they like
flocks of sheep were, after great burly burly in their own country, carried
away captives into their enemies Laud. And this success (through their own
ingratitude and other intolerable vices) had the preaching of the Prophets,
among the people of the Jews in those ^^yes.

In like manner I might say of Christ, and his Apostles The like to be said of
Christ and his Apostles.
and Disciples, which preached among the Jews a good time, and in deed with
small fruits, in consideration of the puritye of the Doctrine, the excellency
of the Teachers, and the wonderful works and miracles, that were by Gods
power wrought for the confyrmation of the Gospel.

But in this answer I compare not the Persons, which I cannot do without
intolerable pride and blasphemy, but I compare the causes, which are al one
with them and The cause of barren success, is all one to the present
preachers, as was to the prophets, and Christ and* his apostles and yet is not
their success the less.
with us. The Gospel and Doctrine that we preach, is the same y^ Christ, the
Prophets. and the Apostles taught before us, and have left unto us, although
we, in comparison of their worthiness, are silly and sinful worms of the
earth. And yet (in the fear of God and himblenesse of heart, I speak it) I
doubt not, but we are farte from that wickedness, and foul blemishes, that
partlye open adversaries, partly politic and worldly professoures, would
have to be noted in many preachers of these days. They are not able to speak
or devise worse of us, then the Jews did think and speak of Christ
himself, of his blessed Apostles, and of the holy Prophets of God. Happylyeby
our infyrmities, they may have greater likelihoode, but that in those days
was and now is, nothing but a color, and pretense of reprobate minds, to
feed themselves in the wicked contempt of Gods word, or to excuse and
flatter themselves, in not co^forming their lives accordinglye. I How grievous
it is for preachers to offend.
defend not the wickedness of ministers, God forbid. It were better a
millstone were hanged about our necks, and we cast into the sea, rather then
our life or evil dealinge, should be an offense to any, or hinder but one
man, from Why preachers offenses are not to be made more grievous then they are.
the true embracing of the Gospel. But my meaning is to take from obstinate
and ungodly minds, such excuses and pretenses, as they make to noosell
themselves in wickedness. Christ by this parable, teaches them to judge
otherwise, and to look into their own bosoomes, and to examine themselves of
the cause, why his word takes not place in them. Though the seed sower be
never so honest a The true cause why the word preached does not allway bring
forth fruit.
man, never so skillful and cunning in his trade, though he have made good
choice of his seed, and purged it never so clean: yet if the ground be
barrayne and naught, his labor is lost, and the seed prospers not. And
on the contrary part, if the sower be an evil man, and unskillful in sowing,
and that he does it negligentlye, and have small desire it should prosper: yet
if thee seed be clean, and the ground good, the good Seed will prosper, and
come to some good fruit. Yea, we see seed salling by chance, into good and
batteling ground, to spring up and grow. As the word of God is the seed, so
is the ground the hearts of them that hear it. Wherefore let not men
flatter themselves, and with the cloak of other men's faults and blemishes, The
godly do always take pro(...) of the preaching of the word.
hide their own evil nature and dispositio^s. The good mind, though by chance
only it hear the word of God, or though he hear it red but of a child, or
any other person, it does him good, it sinketh into his heart, and works to
good effect. The godless heart, though he hear never so good a man preach,
though an Angel from Heaven do speak unto him, though Christ himself should
teach him, he would be never y^ better, or at y^ least, the sede would not unto
good fruit, prosper in him. But this, christ most evidently declares, by y^
harietie of ye ground, which next follows to be spoken of: Some (says
Christ) fell upon the high way. The high way resembles the minds of such as be
continually occupied, with the tra^pling of wicked cogitations, and perpetual
use of evil doing, so yt they war hard and have no sense of repentance, nor
remorse of conscience, whatsoever they hear The first kind of ground.
or whatsoever is spoken unto the^. Therefore y^ sede of gods holy word when it
is preached unto the^, it lies in ye top, and as it were, swimmeth in ye ear,
but it sincketh not into ye heart, nor can take any root of godly persuasion:
and therefore it lies open to fowls of the air to take it away, and to
devour it. The fowls that eat up the seed of gods word in Three sorts of
fowls which do eat up the seed of gods word in the heigh ^vaies.
the high way, are the Devil and his Impes, and Ministers of his own begetting
and breding, which be in number infinite, but I will speak only of two or
three, which I may justly compare to the ravenous and filthy Harpies, which y^
Poets speak of: The first is, Worldly Security, the second, godless
Gentilitie, the third; Obstinate Papistrie. Worldly Security, lulleth men
asleep in the delights and cogitatio^s Of worldly security.
of worldly pleasure, so yt they cannot fruitfully hear either yt sweet
songs of Gods merciful providence, alluring the^ to repentance, or the
dreadful threatninges of his judgments fearing them from evil doing. But
still they lie, as it were be(...)ed and senceles, in a dull and heavy
slumber, much like unto the^ yt be taken with ye drousie sickness called
Lethargus: Speak and cry unto them as loud as you will, they hear nothing,
nor will show any toke^ that they are alive, if you prick them with a pin,
they will open their eyes, and look sternely a little while, but by and by
they are aslecpe again, and lie as they weredead. Even so they, whose hearts
be over whelmed with Security, if a man preach Gods word unto them, be it
never so godly or earnestly done, it nothing moves them, but if you prick them
a little, or pearse them to the quick in any matter, perticularly touching
themselves, they will look up somewhat stearnelye for the time, as though they
were angry with you, but by and by, they are asleep again, and show no sense
of any good counsel that you have given them. If we cry generally, to all
that profess Christianity, and The inconvenience of pre achingi^ generality.
principally to this Realm of England, that God of his exceeding goodness,
in these latter perilous days, has beyond all our expectations almost
myraculouslye restored to us, the truth of his Gospel, not that we should
continue in sin and wickedness, to the defacing of his glory: but that we
being lightened with the brightness thereof, should learn that Christ Jesus
our savior, has paid the price of our redemption, and delivered us from the
captivity of sin, satan, death, and hell, that We might walk before Luc. 1.
74. 75.
him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life: If we tell
them, yt by their baptism they couenanted with God to forsake the Devil and al
his works, and that they Romans 6. 3.
are baptized into the death of Christ, yt as they be partakers of his death,
so also should they be partakers of his cosurrectio^, to the end that as
Christ is risen from death, so also we should rise from y^ death of siun, to
newnes of life: If we preach unto the^ never so often, yt by the benefit of
Christ 1. Pet. 3. 7. Romans 8. 17.
his Passion, we are made the heirs of God with him, and the children of light,
and therefore yt we should walk, as is worthy our vocation, and not to be
partakers of y^ works of darkness, and pass our time in surfeting, in
banqueting, in dronkennes, in cha^bring and wantonness, in ^o^tention, strife,
and Emulation, but yt we should put on Christ Jesus, and not satisfye y^ lusts
of the flesh, to the lyking thereof: If we say, yt we are by our profession,
Citizens of heaven, and of the household of Ephesians. 2. 19.
God, and for that cause that our conversation should be Heavenly, with manifest
declaration of y^ contempt of this miserable world, and the transitory vanities
thereof, yet I say, though we preach this often, though we still call upon the^,
Security so lulleth the^ on sleep, that they cannot hear these sweet and
Godly exhorta^^^s. Ye^ though we change out copye, and ringe in their ears the
terrible threatninges of God, and declare, that this lamentable
unthankfulness, in receiving the Doctrine, and light of his truth, must
needs provoke Gods justice most grievously to plague us: when we in this
manner cry out unto them, it will not waken them. We tell them often, that God
must be the same God toward us, as he was toward his people of the Jews, that
he must show the same Justice to England, that he did to Jerusalem. Unto
Jerusalem Christ with lamentable mind said: Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which
killest the Prophets, Mat. 23. 37
and stonest the^ to death, which are sent to thee, how often would I have
gathered thy Children under my wings, as the Hen gathers her Chickens, and
ye would not. Behold, your habitation shall be left unto you desolate, And
to England he now says: O England, How god calls Engto repentance and
without repentance what is like to befall it.
England, how often times have I called thee? how sundry ways have I
provoked thee? how aboundantlye have I powered out my benefits and blessings
upon thee? how earnestlye have I by the mouth of my Preachers, clocked and
cried to thee, as an Hen does to her Chickens, that thou might awake out
of thy security, and by repentance, return under the shadow of my wings,
there to be safe from all the gredy Kites and Eagles, that houer ready to pray
upon thee, and yet thou will not: therefore thy house shall come to confusion* I
will take the light of my Gospel from thee, and give it to a people, that
shall show the fruits thereof. Thy eninimies, yea thy ancient enemies, shall
reign over thee, and keep thee in subjection: The glory and renown of thy
kingdom* shall fall and decay, and thy people shall come to desolation, and al
because thou will not know the merciful day of thy visitation, so often and so
sundery times offered unto thee.

These words might shake stony Rocks, and cause them to tremble, and yet
they will not move English hearts, nor wake them out of their Security, ^o,
although GOD let them see with their eyes, yt the worldly hope of their
Security, hangs by a twine thread, I mean y^ frail life of a tender Lady,
after which, they themselves, ca^ look for nothing, but heaps of mischief
and misery: and so much the sooner, for that by Gods just judgment, they
nourishe in their own boosoms the instrument of their confusion. The Lord open
our eyes, and mollify our hearts, yt we may in time see, and feel his mercy
affected toward us, and chase out of our minds this foul Harpie, Security,
that deuoureth the seed of Gods blessed word, and will not suffer it to bring
forth fruit among us.

Another bird, is as ougly and loathsome as this, and does Of heathenish
Gentilitie and the mischiffe by it.
as much harm, which is Heathenish Gentilitie, which reigns in the hearts of
godless persons, Atheistes, and Epicures, which pass neither for heaven, nor
hell, nor for God nor the Devil, but think those things to be no better,
than Poetical fables, or (at the least) Bugges, by policy devised to fear
Babes. Therefore they jest and scoff at all Religion, and make themselves
merry, with talk of Preachers. For they pass not which end go forward, or
whether Christ or Antichrist prevail, so that they may singe with the Pigges
of Epicures stie: Edamus bibamus. etc. ^. Let us eat, let us drink and be
merry, for to morrow we shall die, and after death is no pleasure nor pain.
Mark I pray you how wisdom utters their cogitations, and makes them to
speak in this wise: Our Sap. 2. 5. etc.
time is as a shadow that passes away, and after our end there is no
returning, come therefore and let us enjoy the pleasures that are present, and
let us fill our selves with costly wine, and ointments, and let us cheerfully
use the d^eatures as in youth, and let not the flower of life pass by us. Let
us all be partakers of our wantonness, let us lean some token of our pleasure
in every place. For that is our portion, and this is our lot. Let us oppress
the poor that is righteous, oh let us not spare the widow, nor reverence the
white hears of the aged. Let our strength be the law of unrighteousness. Let us
defraude the righteous and godly, for he is not for our profit, he is contrary
to our doings, he checketh us for offending against the law, and blames us as
transgressors of discipline. Out of this school they came that How they are to
be accounted of that deride preachers.
jest at Preachers, and be angry with them, for inueighing against the
vanities of this life, and putting them in mind of God, and of heaven: for
they think, that to be a bitter saying to their pleasant life. For there is
none so heathenish, but God sometime sends to his mind, a gnawing corsie,
and remorse of conscience to trouble him. Out of this schole came those
scorners, which S. Peter prophesied should 2. Pet. 3. 1. etc.
rise in the latter days, and live after their own lust, and when they should
be taught by Preachers, that y^ world should have an end, and they be
brought before the judgment seat of God, to answer for their wickedness,
would with derision and mocking, say, Oh where is the promise of the Lords
coming to judgment, and of the end of the world? for since the fathers died,
all things continue a like, from the beginning of the creation. Of the same
sort are they, that Esaias speaks of: When they be told that God will punish
and plague them, not in the world to come but in this world also, with some
notable examples of his justice, as he did to Sodom and Gomorra and others.
etc, Oh, say they in derision, Let God make speed, let him haste^ Moc^es
against god and his judgments.
his work, that we may see it, and let the counsel of the holy one of Israel
draw near and come, that we may know it. Or at least they speak, as they
do in Jeremy, that deny the Lord God, and say, Tushe it is not he, Ier. 5.
1^.
those plagues of sword and famine, shall not come upon us: It is vain that
the Preachers teach, these myseries and plagues shall fall upon themselves. I
would to God there were not too many of this sort in England. whose like
contempteous voice, did ring in many men's ears, beside the great number of
them, that secretly say in their heart, There is no God, and openly show the
same How to try crulye who do beleau^ there is a god, and who not. Contempt of
godliness of life, can nor stand with the acknowledging of a god.
in the whole course of their life. For if they believed there were a God, they
would never so reprochfully, and so obstinately, reject and cast aside, the
word of the eternal and ever living God. I ask these godless Epicures,
whether they think, there is a God or no? If they will say. Yea, why then,
the same must be a just God, for without justice, there can be no Godhead, and
if he be a just god then he must detest, and hate sin, and accordingly
punish it. For it is the part of justice to give to every one that he
deserves, reward to the good, and punishment to the wicked: and by this can
they not in justice, escape his punishment due to their lewdness. If they will
say with their Master Epicure, We cannot acknowledge a god, but that with all
he must punish^ sin.
that there is a God, but he regards not the affairs of the world, and the
doings of me^: that, must then be, either because he cannot, or because he will
not. By the one he shows himself an impotent God, and therefore no God, by
the other a negligent or a malicious God, and for that also no God. For such
passions and imperfections, can not light into the nature of a Deity, or
Godhead. If they will flatly Against those that deny god altogether. Romans 1.
20.
think or say: There is no God, I must speak unto them as. S. Paul does to
like heathenish hearts and minds, and I must will them* to open their blind
eyes and behold the goodly, beautiful, and maruailous frame, and workmanship
of the world, the Su^^e, the Moon, the Stars Means to make those
acknowledge a god which ^^ altogethe^ deny him.
the Planets, the goodly order, the constant course, y^ wonderful effects,
the notable variety of times, and seasons, to the benefit of man's life. I
must bid them look into the air, and consider what it is, that holds up
that huge heap of Clouds houering without any proppe or stay, and in
convenient time, so sweetly sheeding down themselves, to moist and season the
earth, which if they should fall down at once, would ouerwhelme and drown
the whole earth*

I must further wist the^ to consider, yt since the natural place of water, is
to be above the earth, as very reason and their own heathenish Philosophers
teach: who or what it is, that holds the Sea within a bank of sand, that
it does not break over, to surrounde the earth and occupy his own place? Or
what it is, that causeh the dead and dirtie earth, to bring for the so
beautiful flowers, so fair green grass, so *exceedyng variety of Beasts,
Herbs, Trees, Fruits, Metalls, and all other things, either breeding in the
bowels of the earth, or showing themselves upon the utter face thereof? Who
it is that created them, or gave them a beginning, that preserves and
continues them in their kinds, that makes them at The saying of the Heathens
that al things stand according to the course of Nature is to be understood of
god, and how it is so. Seneca.
some seasons of the year to die, at another to spring and grow again? Thou will say happily, all these things be by a certain course of nature, and the
ordinary effects thereof. Why? and what is that which thou call nature? Is
she a goddess, or is she a Creature? Has she a beginning of her self, or
has she her beginning of an other? Seneca an Heathen Philosopher could say,
Nature is nothing but God, working in these things that we call natural. But
if thou be worthy the name of a man, look The way to acknowledge god in man.
into thine own body, which is called Microcosmos, A little world, because of
marvelous workmanship thereof, weigh how it comes to pass, that in thy
mothers womb two or three drops of licour, should frame it self to skin,
to flesh, to bones, to sinews, ^o veins, to arteties, to the principal
parts of thy living body, the brain, the heart, the stomach, the liver, the
spleen, the guts, and others: how the spirits be engendered in the brain,
the heart, the liver, which be the instruments whereby thy soul works life,
and moving, ^^rishing and increasing and growing, sense, will, and
understanding.

Consider the other outward parts of thy body, and the proper necessary use
of them all, the fleakes of flesh, called muscles, the bones, and the great
variety, and the marvelous fashion and joining of them together, the
wonderful course of the Veins, the Arteries, the sinews disperkling
themselves to notable uses into all parts of the body, both inward and
outward. I will not put thee in mind of the Who so can not acknowledge god in
him self, can not be said to be a man. Properties which can not but be known
in god if we do^ acknowledge him but only in his creatures.
substance, the nature, the power and strength of thy soul, which in deed
far passes all the other. For if by consideration of thy body, thou can
not learn, that there is a God, which in such wonderful sort, did frame it:
thou show thy self not to have the common understanding of a man's soul,
but art more dull than a brute beast. By these things which I have hitherto
spoken, a natural man may understand, that there is a certain divine and
spiritual power, that gave beginning to all these things, and therefore, is of
himself Eternal. And because he wrought them of nothing, that he is also
Eternal.
Omnipotent and Almighty: and because they are framed in so goodly order, and
exceeding variety, Omnipotent.
that he is of Infinite Wisdom. And for wise infinitely.
so much as he made them in the beginning, and to this day preserves them to
the benefit of mankind, that he is Exceeding Good exceedingly and liberal and
loving.
good and bountiful and a lover of man. And because he suffers, even
unworthy persons, to enjoy the benefit of his creatures, that he is with all
very Merciful. Merciful.
And because with want of these his creatures, he punishes and plagueth the
wicked, he shows himself Just also. Just.
Now this divine and spiritual power, that is eternal, almighty, Who or what
that God is which is taught to be believed.
wise, good, merciful and just, is that God which we speak of, whom these
Godless persons should learn, though they had no other book but this, of
the frame of the world. But seeing they have Gods book of his holy Scriptures
besides this, they shall be inexcusable, and heap unto themselves wrath, in
the day of wrath, if they repent not, and shake those wicked cogitations out of
their hearts, that the seed of Gods word may prosper with them. The third
evil bird, and cruel Harpie, that deuoureth the Of obstinate PaPistrie in
three sorts
seed of Gods word, is Obstinate Papistrie. And of this bird, are three
kinds, The open Papist which dwells among us, and forsakes our Communion in
prayer, and use of the Sacraments, manifestly protesting that we be departed
from the Catholic Church, and therefore that they may not in conscience join
with us. The second sort are fleeing Papists, which fling over the sea and
return again, secretly bringing with them pardons, reconciliations,
sclaunderous and seditious books and libels, with other like things, wherewith
they endeavor, not only to feed other Papists in their obstinacy, but with
traitorous meaning, as much as they can, to steal away the hearts of the
subjects from the Prince and Magistrate, and prepare England in most
dangerous perils by papists.
the way to rebellion, and alteration of the state: so that this Realm has
not in the world, so deadly and perilous enimyes, as these are to y^ uttermost
of their power. Their continual travail is to beat into the hearts of
English men, that our doctrine, our Church, our Prince, our law, our whole
state is schismatic, and heretical, and that they ought not to obey, either
the Church in doctrine, or the Prince and state in government, but if they
rebel, ^^they do God good service. To repress or chase away those The
means to remedy some kinds of papists.
two kinds of Romish Harpyes, for so much as they will neither read writing,
nor hear Preaching, there is none other way, but to claim aid of the
Magistrate, that they will use more severe and sharp execution of the laws,
and devise some streighter means, than hitherto has been. For the lenity of
these days has caused the multitude of these birds, exceedyngly to increase,
with the peril both of Prince and state, which if in time they take not heed
of, I fear it will be too late. The third kind of these sort of Harpyes, is
the Cunning Papist, which can hyde himself under the color of loyalty, and
obedience to y^ laws, and will needs be accounted a faithful, true, and good
subject, and yet carries in his boosome in effect, the same persuasion that the
other do, and for fear of danger, or discredit, they are contented to obey
the law, and in y^ mean time, are perilous instruments, to let the other
understand the secrets of all things that be done or purposed, and with
friendship and money, to help them, when any kind of danger is at hand.
These men, as they can not by law C^use of care in what places of credit
papists are put.
be corrected, so surely have the governors, very great cause to have a
careful eye unto them, and to take heed that they be not brought into place
of credit. But for so much as all these three sorts of Romish Harpyes, not
only devour the seed of Gods word, and pull it out of those minds that
hear it, but also by distainyng the same, with their foul dung of
sclaunderous reports, make it to savor ill, in the senses of many: it
behooves such as fear God, to be well armed, with sufficient answer to y^
same. Namely when they say, that the doctrine that we preach, is a new
doctrine, and that they will believe, as their fathers have done before them:
that they are the true Catholic Church, and we are schismatikes and
heretics, that we disagree among our selves, and they consent in unity, all
which their pretenses with diverse other like you shall find sufficiently
answered, in the Sermons upon this Text, Non me pudet Euangelij, I am not
ashamed of the Gospel, etc. Thus have you heard me declare unto you, what
those three principal birds are, which Satan in these days, has bred in
England, to hinder and devour the seed of Gods word, which falls on the high
way. Now it remains to speak of the other diversities of ground. etc.

The second Sermon upon this part of the Text. Mat. 13. 5.
Some fell upon stony ground, where it had not much earth, and by and by it
sprang up, because it lacked deepenesse of earth, but when the Sun rose, it
was burned away.
BEfore, whrist did speak of them, which all, (...) hear and receive y^ ^ede
of Gods holy word, yet their hearts be so hardened, that it sinketh not into
their minds, and therefore ye Devil does quickly, by his birds, devour it,
that it neither comes to good effect, nor gives any show, or token of
likelihood, to prove well. Now in these that follow, he describes them that
receive, and admit the word of God in such sort, as they give great token at
the beginning, that it will prosper and do good in their hearts, but shortly
after, some impediment growing, the seed fails, and brings forth no
fruit at all. And first he speaks of them, whom he resembles Who those be
which are the stony ground.
unto stony ground, that is, such hearts and minds of men, which because
they be of disposition vehement and hoate, they by and by receive the word,
and show themselves to be delighted therewith, and break out to earnest which
is the 2. kind of ill ground.
praises thereof, and show them selves with such cheerfulness to embrace the
doctrine of Gods truth, as they move great hope to all men, that it will take
success to great benefit. But in the end, if any vehement temptation, either
of worldly trouble, or otherwise happen to them, they wax faynte and begin to
change, and lastly clean reuolte and utterly forsake that truth, which
with great hope in the beginning, they had received.

And of these many afterward become enemies, and persecutoures How it comes
to pass that many seame first to be glad of the gospel and yet afterward hate
it and help to punish the professors of it.
of the Gospel. And what, I pray you, may be the cause hereof? Surely this:
They lacked Earth and moisture, to feed the seed, that is, they had not the
true knowledge of Christ, nor of his Kingdom, nor a right and Christian faith
^reo in them, by the spirit of God, but on(...)e opinyon conceived in their
own minds, which (...)e were possessed with a carnal delighte of worldelye
pompes and pleasures, and therefore when the Doctrine of the free mercy of God
by faith in Christ only, pardoning and forgiving our sins, is preached, and
when they hear superstition in fasting, praying, and other such things,
sharply reproved, and men exhorted to Christian liberty, they embrace this
Doctrine very greedily, and all because they think under pretense of Christian
liberty, to shake of the yoke of Discipline, and obedience in Christian
exercises, and to use the cloak of Gods mercy to cover a loose and licencious
life, in the mean time, studying nothing but how they may use the countenance
of the Gospel, to get Riches, honor, friendship, and worldly peace and
quietness. But as I have before said, when the storms of adversity and heat
of persecution rises, whereof they must be partakers, if they will be
constante in the Gospel: and when they hear their wicked and ungodly
doings, by Preachers sharply reproved, and begin to understand that neither
The cause why many of the Jews which seemed to like of christ well, did
afterward cry crucify him crucify him.
christian liberty can be any warrant of licentiousnes, nor Gods mercy a
Cloak to continue in wickedness, they fly from the word of GOD, and betake
themselves wholly to the world. Such receauers of ye word, were many of the
Jews, which dreamed that Christ came as an earthly Prince, or Conqueror,
that should deliver them from the tyram^y of the Romans, and make them Lords
of the world. And therefore at the beginning, they flocked to him in great
number, and showed such liking of him and his doctrine, that the Pharisees and
high Priests, were afraid to deal with him, as otherwise they would have done.
But when they saw him once taken, and in the hands of his enemies, they
revolted, and showed themselves to mislike with him, and in the end cried
Crucifige as frankely as y^ residue, and were co^te^ted to have Barrabas let
go, and christ to be put to unjust and cruel death. I would to God there were
not to many of Of some which now profess the gospel, which peradventure may
dislike it hereafter, and those also that do preach it.
this sort in England at this day, which now show themselves, to be hot and
eger gospellers, either because they hope to have some part of y^ spoil of
Bishops lands, or ecclesiastical livings, or for some such other worldly
respect, but when the heat of affliction shall come (for our unthankfulness
continually cries for it, before the seat of Gods justice) then, I say, I
pray god they show but half that constancy, and good liking of the gospel,
y^ becomes a true Christian. And yt which makes me, and other to fear the^
is, that with this earnest pretended zeal, I see little amendment of life, or
none at all joined. The remedy against this mischief, and the Means to
remedy the professors last spoken of.
means to amend this stony ground, and to breed more melow earth in their
hearts, is truly and sincerely to learn, what the kingdom of Christ is, and
what they must look for, by ye profession thereof in the world. For so shall
they easily put away, that worldly persuasion yt makes them to revolt from the
Gospel. Christ himself confesses y^ his kingdom is not Of the kingdom of
christ, and what is by it to be looked for. Genesis 3. 15.
of this world, yea, ye world and Christ, are clean contrary, for ye prince of
this world is enemy to Christ. The enmity was proclaimed by god himself in
Paradise: I will set enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and hers, and her seed shall break thy head, and thou shall bruise his
heel. Therefore so soon as Christ the seed of y^ woman, had once put his head
into y^ world, and was born of y^ blessed virgin at Nazareth, the Devil
raised his seed, y^ wicked tyrant Herod, to persecute christ, and to seek
his death: And so has he continued ever since, in all times and seasons, to
persecute Christ in his members. This, Christ did not hide from his Disciples
and true followers but sundry times told the^ thereof before hand, yt when it
came to pas they might not be offended. Behold, says he, I send you as sheep
Mat. 10. 16.
among the midst of Wolves: be wise therefore as serpents and simple as Doves.
etc. And a little after, You shall be hated of al men for my names sake. Here you
may understand, Of worldly inconveniences which commonly follow the professors
of the gospel and why. Joh. 15. 18.
what intertainment true Christians must look for, in this world, that is,
hatred, disdain, cruelty, and such curtesy as sheep find among Wolves. The
cause hereof he sets forth more largely in S. Ioh. If the world, says
christ, hate you, you know it hated me, before you: If you were of the world,
the world would love that is his own, but because you are not of the world, but
I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. Remember the
word that I said unto you, the servant is not greater the^ his master, if they
have persecuted me, they will persecute you also. Christ in another place,
rese^bleth his Mat. 7. 24.
people to a House builded upon a Rock, and the rain fell, and the floods
came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not because it
was builded upon a Rock. By ye rain, y^ floods, and y^ winds beating upon y^
house, is meant ye storms of affliction, trouble, and persecution, and other
vehement ^e^tacio^s, y^ ye devil, and ye world, raises to assault y^
co^scie^ces of christians. But their hearts are not shaken there with, but stand
Why true professors of the gospel cannot by any afflictions be driven from i^.
What the kingdom of god is. In what forte true professors of christ, must
cleave to christ. and for him renounce al things else.
constantly in y^ truth, because yt fou^datio^ of their conscience, is
sincerely grounded upon y^ Rock christ Jesus. By this it may appear yt y^
kingdom of christ, is not earthly, but a spiritual kingdom, by y^ power of y^
holy ghost reigning and flourishing in y^ hearts of me^, and setting it self
against y^ works of y^ devil, and of y^ world, and for yt cause looks for none
other thing at y^ worlds hand, the^ misery and trouble. Wherefore the first
point of a true professor of Christ and his gospel is, so far as ma^s frailty
ca^ suffer, to renounce ye world, and all y^ affections and pleasures thereof,
and with y^ comfort of Gods mercy in christ Jesu, to arm himself with patience,
against al mischeifes yt the Devil, or the world can raise against him. A
good Christian according to the counsel of our Savior, makes this account
before hand, and looks for none other, and because he knows the life of a
Christian, is a warfare upon the earth, he understands also, that Christ's
Souldyers, which will profess to fight under his Banner, may not in this life
look for wealth, prosperity and quietness, especially when he sees y^
Devil, the world, and the flesh, in arms against him, and continuallye ready
to overthrow Such as do but a little close with the world are and s^and in
danger of treason to Christ.
him, and bring him to confusion. Whosoever therefore dallieth with the world,
shows himself more then half a Traitor against Christ, much more they
that for the world revolt from Christ. The Godly when the heat of persecution
rises, that they may not forsake their Lord and Captain, use to sheilter
themselves under these shadows following.

First, they persuade themselves, as truth is in deed, How the godly do stay
themselves in afflictions so that they may not fall from Christ by 2.
considerations. The first cause of stay. Met. 10. 29.
that affliction comes not to them, by chance or fortune, or by the malice
of men, but by the certain knowledge and providence of that God, which is by
Christ, their Heavenly and merciful father, who neither can do it for any
evil unto them, uor suffer them to be further tempted, tha^ by his grace they
shall be able to bear. If a poor silly sparow, as Christ assures them, falls
not to ground, without their Father that is in Heaven, they are persuaded that
they are far more precious in the sight of God, than all the Sparowes in the
world, and therefore that an hear shall not fall from their head, but by his
will and pleasure, Nihil Satan^ in seruos dei viui licebit, (says Tertullian)
nif^ Tertul.
permiserit dominus. The Devil can do nothing against the servants of the
living God, unless the Lord shall suffer it. The example hereof evidently
appears in Job, and in the Apostles of Christ. The Devil could not vex Job,
until it Job. 1. 10. and e. Luc. 22. 32.
was granted him by God. Satan desired to ^ifte the Apostles, as men use to
^ifte Corn, but Christ prayed for them, that their faith might not fail. Yea
a Legion of Devils were not able to hurt a heard of Hogs, but by the
permission of Christ. Therefore very pretily says Tertul. Possum dicere
p^rcorum setas apud deum numeratas, non tantum sanctorum capillos. etc. I may
say, that not only the hears of Saints, but the bristles of Hogs, are in a
certain accoumpt before God. This comfort never fails, and when the godly
betake themselves to this sheilter, they may be truly said, to rest under the
shadow of the wings of y^ most highest. Origin upon Job, in zealous manner,
breaks out to the admiration of this comfort. O bonitas Of gods special
providence for every thing.
tua Rex. etc. Oh thy exceeding goodness, thou mighty King, oh thy power and
magnificence, thou eternal god, how great comfort give thou to them, that
fly unto thee? and hope for assured consta^cy at thy hand, that is, that our
Adversary has no power either over man, or beast, or Creature without life,
but by thy permission.

The second sheilter, and shadow of comfort, is the ample The second cause of
stay.
reward that Christ promises, to them that constantly suffer persecution for
his names sake. Blessed are they, who Mat. 5. 10.
suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theires is the Kingdom of
Heaven: Blessed are ye, when men revile you, and persecute you, and speak al
evil against you, for my sake, rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward
in Heaven, And again he says. Whosoever shall Mat. 19. 29.
forsake houses or brethren, or Systers, or Father, or mother, or wife or
Children, or Lands for my sake, he shall receive an hundred fold more, and
shall inherit everlasting life. Blessed are you that weep now, for Luc. 6.
21. etc.
ye shall laugh, and your heaviness shall be turned into joy. They which
refuse persecution offered for Christ his Ioh. 16.
sake, cannot be his true Disciples, but show themselves Mat. 10. 37.
to have been Hipocrites and Dissemblers. He that loves his Father or Mother
more than me, (says Christ) is not worthy of me, and he that takes not
his Cross and follows me, is not fit for me. For whosoever denies Christ
before men, shall be denied of him, before our Father which is in heaven. He
that has soundly learned Christ, and his kingdom in this manner will not easily
forsake him, and revolt from him in the heat of persecution, whenever it
shall arise etc.

The third kind of evil ground is the bushie, and thornye The third kind of
ground.
ground, that is, the hearts of them whose affections, are overcome with yt
greedy desire of Riches, and worldly pleasures. And very aptly are riches and
worldly pleasures Why riches and pleasures a^e resembled to thorns.
resembled to Thorns, for as Thorns have fair green leaves, and bewtifull
blossoms and flowers, that may allure a man to reach at them, so if he take
hold of them hastilye, he shall be sure to be pricked, and shrewdlye hurt. So
there seems a certain beauty and sweetness to be in riches, thereby to
purchase worldelye pomp and pleasures, but if a man with greedye desire,
reach at them, they will wound him, and pearse him to the heart. For riches
and worldly pleasures prick in How riches ^o hurt. ^^.
getting, they prick in keeping, and they prick in departing. And commonly
they wound a man so greeuouslye, that without repentance, they kill him for
ever. In getting, they prick a man with lying, with perjury, with In getting.
craft and subtel^ie, with stealing, with pic^ing, with extorcion, and
oppressions, and many other like ways. In keeping, In keeping.
possessing and using, beside the fear of care to see^e them, they prick with
confidence and trust in them, with pride, arrogancye and contempt of other,
with oppression of right, and equity, and with looseness of life procured by
the^. For wealth, feeds riot and wantonness. In loosing, they In loosing.
prick with anguish and sorrow, with weping and lamenting, with cursing and
ba^^ing, with murmuring* against God, with fury and desperacion, so yt many
thereby, fall mad, many dispatch themselves out of life. etc. Rightly therefore
are they ^hy it is so h^^d for a rich man to ^^ saved.
resembled to pricking and dangerous thorns, yea, there is nothing that does so
fully possess the mind of man, nor so mightily pull it from God, and the care
of salvation, as the study of riches, and worldly pleasures do.

Wherefore Christ says, That it was as easy for a Came^ Mat. 19. 24.
to pa^se through the eye of a needle, as for one, whose heart was possessed with
desire of riches, to enter into y^ kingdom of God. The same thing in effect,
Christ teaches in the parable of y^ rich man, y^ made a feast for the Marriage
of his son, and sent his messengers, to bide the guess, and they refused to
come, pretending sundry excuses: One said, I Mat. 22. ^. etc. Luc. 14. 16.
have bought five yoke of Oxen, and must needs go to try the^, I pray thee
have me excused: Another said: I have bought a farm, and must go se it, I pray
thee have me excused, The third said: I have married a wife, I cannot come. By
this feast is meant the Communion of the gospel, Interpre^^^^on of the parable
of the guestes bidden unto a feast which came not.
and benefit of our salvation purchaced by Christ. To this feast, men are
called by Gods messengers, yt is, his Preachers and ministers of his word. The
excuses made, show what causes commonly they are, yt wthold men's minds from
obeying the word of God, and coming to the gospel, y^ is, the The causes that
with hold men from obedience to gods word.
cares of the world, the study of riches and the pleasure and pomp of this
life, noted by these iii. kind of things whereof Christ there speaks. I would
to God these impedime^ts had choked the word of God, and hindered the hearing
of the Gospel in Christ's time only, and were not of greater force in the
hearts of men, at this day in England. If a The negligence of ^^^ days in
hea^inge the word.
Preacher come into a Town upon a workingdaye* it is a rare place, wherein
he shall have a tolerable Auditorye. But if there be a fair or a marke^,
though there be 5000 in the streates, ye shall scarcely find 50 in the church.
Yea they will murmr, that the Preacher has chosen such a time to trouble
them, and to hinder their market, though it be of a Sabbath day, or other
usual day appointed for prayer.

And what can be the cause hereof? but the care of the world, and love of
riches, which makes them to have no regard of the word of God, nor of their
own salvation. Justly therefore say^h Saint Paul. They that will be rich fall 1.
Tim. 6. ^
into tentations and snares, and into many folish and noisome lusts which
drown men utterly, in perdition and destruction. For the desire of money, is
the root of all evil, which while men lusted after, they have erred from the
faith, and perced themselves through with many sorrows. Seeing therefore these
bushes and thorns are so dangerous, that they utterly choke up the Seed of
Gods holy word cast into the ground of men's hearts: it is necessary that
there be prepared some Tools and Instruments, so much as possibly may be,
to grubbe them out, that the ground may be made more commendable, and
fruitful. Such Instruments Christ himself has prepared Two means to
vvithstand the mischifes of Riches and vvorldlye cares. Mat. 6. 19. There is no
assurance to be had of worldly Riches.
in S. Mathewes Gospel. The first is, the earnest consideration of the
vanity and uncertainty of riches, and worldly wealth and pleasure, which
pass from us suddenly by many occasions. It is uttered in these words: Lay
not up for your selves treasures upon the earth, where the mothe and canker
corrupt, and where Thieves dig through and steal: but lay up treasure for your
selves in Heaven, where neither mothe nor canker corrupt, nor Thief breaks
through to steal. etc. By the corrupting of ^anker and moath, and by the
stealing of Thieves, Christ notes all those means, whereby the brickle and
frail wealth and pomp of this world, upon the sudden passes from us, so
that we can have no assurance of them. Therefore Christ justly in those words
admonishes us, that we should not set our minds upon so vayn things, and for
them to forsake the eternal riches in heaven, yt never shall fail us. Salomo^,
who above all other had good trial of these things Eciesiastes 2. 4. etc.
evidently declares what vanity is in them: I have (says he) builded me
houses, I have planted vyneyards, I have gotten servants, and maids, and have
had children borne in the house, also I had great possessions of Beeues, and
sheep, above all that were before me in Jerusalem, I have gathered unto me
silver and Gold, and the chief treasure of Kings and Provinces. etc. And after
it follows Then I looked on all my works that my hands had made, and on the
travail that I had labored in, and behold all is extreme vanity, and
vexation of spirit, neither is there any profit under the Sun. Lo this is
Salomons The estimation that is to be had of all earthly things. Esaias. 40. 6.
judgment, that under the Sun, all things are vain and unprofitable. All
flesh (says the Prophet) is as grass, and all the glory thereof like the
flower of grass, the grass is cut down and withers, and the Hour falls
and fades away. Whereby we are taught, that as man's life it self is frail
and transitory, so are all those things wherein it glories, and takes
delyght: Honor, Dignity, Friendship, Riches, Health, Stength, Beauty and
such like, which all may be had, and lost in an hour. Why we ought rather to
estee me the gospel then al earth: ly things.
And therefore a great vanity it were, for these so vain, frail, and brickle
things, to sorsake the doctrine of eternal salvation, and the inestimable
treasures of the kingdom of God. An other instrument that Christ in the same
place, has framed to grubb up the cares of the world is, That we must rest
upon gods providence in our desiring things of this life. Mat. 6. 25.
confidence and trust in the providence of God, whereupon only, we ought to
depend, for all things pertaining to this life, and therefore to bend al our
care and study to seek the kingdom of God, and the glory thereof. Be not
careful, (says he) for your life, what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink,
or for your bodies what apparel ye shall use, etc. But first of all seek the
kingdom of God, and all things shall be abundantly given unto you. This
instrument Four reasons Why for things of this life, we should ever content
our selves in and with Gods providence.
is strengthened, with sundry reasons as it were bonds to fasten the same in
our hearts. The first is, that he which gives us the greater things, and of
more price, will provide for us, and bestow upon us those things that be of
less value. God has given a life, and a body, which in deed are precious
gifts, therefore he will not fail, to provide meat, drink and cloth,
sufficient to maintain the same, if we call upon him, and repose our trust in
him for the same. The second reason, is the example of most contemptible
creatures, if they be compared, to the worthynesse of mankind, fouies of the
air, Ravens, and Spar^^^es, and flowers of the field, which God feeds,
maintains, and preserves without any carke, care, or labor of theirs: for
they neither sow nor reap, nor spinne, nor card. And shall not the same
good, and merciful Lord, provide for his most excellent creatures, his own
people, that depend upon him, and put their trust in him? The third reason, is,
the insufficiency of our labor, carke, and care in these things, if God give
not good success thereunto. For what man with all his care and diligence can
add one cubite unto his heigh? etc. The husbandman with great trouble, and
toil, may till the earth, and sow his seed, but he is not able to make fair
weather, and to give seasonable showers, to temper the ground, without which
his labor is nothing worth: much less is he able, to give that strength, and
power, to the seed to grow in the earth, for that is the only finger, and
mighty power of God, yt works Ordinary course of things, makes us not to
regard Gods wonderful work in them.
in his creatures. Those things that we esteem to be ordinary works of
nature, are in deed wonderful and myraculous works of Gods almighty power,
daily showed among us, and because they be daily done, we make small account
of them. The last reason, is, that God our heavenly father, knows that we
have need of those things, and therefore, for the tender and fatherly care
that he has over us his children, he will not suffer us to want so much as
shall be necessary, and convenient for us. Wherefore we ought to bend our
whole study, to seek the kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, and leave
the cares of this world, and the immoderate desire of earthly riches, least the
same pull from us and extinguish in us, the happy desire of hearing the word,
and so through the deceiptfulnesse of Riches, the word of God be utterly
choked in us, and we of fair blossoms become unfruitful hearers, and unfit
members for the kingdom of heaven, etc.

A Sermon made upon this text, John. 8. 46.
Quis ex vobis arguit me de peccato, Si veritatem dico vobis quare non creditis
mihi? Which of you can rebuke me of sin, and if I say the truth why do ye
not believe me?
WHen I was assigned to this place, and perused the Text of the Gospel for
this day, seeing the first verse thereof to be these words which now I have
recited unto you, I could not but think it, to be some part of Gods gracious
providence, there-by, to put me in mind, and give me full occasion, to
speak The occasion and circumstances of this text preached upon.
of those things, which in conscience, I think most necessary at this time,
and in this place, to be uttered. These words (dearly beloved) are a part
of that notable conference, which was between our Savior Christ, and the
Jews Ioh 8. Wherein both of them, are so earnest in defense of their part, as
hardly the like is to be found, in the whole history of the Evangelists. The
Jews in defense of their Synagogue, deny Christ to be the light of the
world, that should open the true way of salvation to men, but affirm, that he
was an a^bitious, and vain glorious man, bearing witness of himself, for his
own credites sake: yea they say, he is a Samaritane, a worker with devils, a
blasphemer of God, and therefore (lastly) take up stones, and drove him by
violence out of the place: A very right pattern of the enemies of Christ and
his Church. On the other part, Christ in deed moved with the true zeal of
Gods house, after he had declared, that he was the light of the world,
which, he that followed, should not walk in darkness, but see the truth of
euerla* sting life, he evidently proves, that the Jews were not, as they
pretended to be, the right seed of Abraham, for* then they would do the
works of Abraham, nor the children of God, for then, they would have received
him, who was sent unto them from God, but earnestly affirms, that they are of
the seed, and offspring of Satan, the father of lying, and vntrothe, and
therefore even by very corruption of nature, they could not abide the truth.
Then Christ's knowing, that they would object against him, that they denied
not his doctrine, because it was the truth, as he charged them, but because he
was an evil man, and a seducer of the people, and not like a person that
should deliver the truth unto the people of God. Therefore Christ to prevent
this objection, wherewith they went about to deface, and discredit his
doctrine, speaks in such sort as ye have heard. Quis ex vobis, etc. Which of
you can rebuke me of sin, etc. In which words you see Christ does two
things. First, he stands to the integrity of his The special purpose of
Christ in this text here preached upon.
cause, even as well in the upright dealing in his office, as in Innocence of
life. Secondly, he justifies the truth of his doctrine, and therefore
requires them, to believe it, if they will show themselves to be of God in
deed. This What Ministers should be able to do when their doctrine is
discredited by their lives.
dealing of Christ, all Christians generally, but especially, Bishops,
Preachers, and all such as are called to the ministry of the word, ought to
set before their eyes, as a right pattern of their doyngs, if they will be the
true Ministers of Jesus Christ. And these two things, I mean with Gods
assistaunce to speak of at this time, and in this order. First, The division
of this Sermon.
I will declare what the office of a Preacher, or Minister is, by his calling,
and what danger hangs over them, if they do it not. Secondly, because men
may deal with good consciences, and yet be subject to great infamy, and
sclaunders, for even Christ in this place, notwithstanding his integrity,
heard of his adversaries, Nonne been dicimus quod Samaritanus es, and daemonium
habes? etc. i. Say we not well that thou art a Samaritaine and have the
Devil? Therefore I will let you understand, what blame they deserve, and what
danger they are in, that falsely and uncharitably, defame the Ministers, and
Preachers of Gods word, and truth, of purpose to discredit their doctrine.
Thirdly, I will prove that the doctrine of the Gospel, which we have preached
in this land, these. 20. years and more, and which under her Majesty's
gracious protection, and authority of her laws, has been established, is the
truth, and no truth of doctrine but that, and therefore yt it ought to be
believed, received, and without exception, to be confirmed, of all them that
be of God.

As touching the first, S. Paul says, Sic nos aestimet homo. 1. Cor. 4. 1.
etc. Let a man so esteem us, as the Ministers of Christ, and the bestowers of
his mysteries. The mysteries of God are the true doctrine of salvation in
Christ Jesu, and all the other benefits, and commodities of his holy word,
mentioned by S. Paul to Timothy. A good Bishop therefore, and 2. Tim. 3. 16.
17. The specialties of a preachers duty.
a right Preacher, must out of y^ holy scriptures, teach true doctrine
sincerely, he must confute error, superstition and idolatry zealously, he must
exhort to virtue earnestly, he must without respect of persons, reprove vice
and wickedness boldly and freely, he must comfort the afflicted conscience
sweetly, and graciously. This is the charge, that God lays upon us in his
word, very earnestly, with grievous danger, if we do it not. In Esaias* God
speaks in this Esaias. 40. 9
wise, Get thee up into the high mountain, thou that teach in Syon, thou
that preachest the Gospel in Jerusalem, lift up thy voice with strength,
lift up thy voice, I say, and fear not, tell the Cities, that the Lord
their God comes. You hear that we are commanded, to tell the Cities, that
is, the particular Churches of Christ, that the Lord their God comes to
visit them either in mercy, offering them his word, and calling them to
repentance: or in justice, to punish them, Preachers in delivering gods will,
must do it openly, without fear or negligence.
for the contempt of his word, and want of repentance. And this we must do,
not in secret corners, but in the face of the world, for we must stand
upon the top of the Mountain, that we may be seen, and show our selves
not ashamed of the Gospel. We must not do it slackly, but zealously, lifting
up our voice with strength, we must not do it coldly, but boldly, fearing no
authority of man, to Preach Jesus Christ crucified. Again, in the same
Prophet, Cry and cease not, lift up thy voice, as Esaias. 58. 1.
a Trumpet, tell my people their iniquity, and the house of Jacob their
sins. So that with like earnest boldness, are we in this place, willed to
cry out against sin, and wickedness, and to tell men plainly, of their
iniquity. In Ezechiell we are compared unto watchmen, Ezec. 3. 17.
that should always stand in the watch tower of the Church of God, and if we
epsy either corrupt doctrine, or false worshipping of God, or wickedness of
life by any means, either openly, or colourably to thrust themselves into the
Church of God, that we presently, ring out the alarm, Ezec. 33. 6^
and sound the Trumpet, to give warning to the inhabitants of the City of God,
the celestial Jerusalem, that they take heed, and beware of themselves,
otherwise, the blood of other that perish without warning, will be required at
our hands. And that men may not think, that this charge belongs to the
Prophets alone, S. Paul to Timothy, and by him, of all other requires the
same. Preach the 2. Tim. 4. 2.
word. But how? Be earnest in season, and out of season: for no time is
inconvenient to Preach true doctrine. And he adds, Reprove, entreat, rebuke
with all patience and doctrine, so that if men's obstinacy be such that they
will not amend, we must leave it to God, and take it patiently. For we are
but planters and waterers, God must give the success and increase. Now if our
charge be thus earnestlye required of us, as we are greatly to blame if we
do it not, so they that be of God can not mislike with us, when we do it,
though (happily) their own persons be touched therewith. But we must not teach
only: but we must live also accordingly. We must be Exemplaria ^ Pet. 5. 3.
gregis. Be thou, says Paul to Timothy, an example 1. Tim. 4. 12 Tit. 2. 7.
Preachers must give good example of life answerable to their doctrine.
to the faithful in word, in conversation, in charity, in faith. And to Titus,
Above all things be thou an example of good works, with vncorrupt doctrine,
with gravity, with integrity. And Chrisost. God (says he) will not have a
Christian to be contented with himself, but to edify other also, and that not
in doctrine only, but in life also. For men look not only what is spoken,
but what is done. As there was never time more captious, perilous, and
dangerous, then these days are, so was circumspect walking, never more
necessary, yt our enemies take not a pretense, by our blemishes, to quarrel
against our doctrine. This if we do, we shall be good Ministers of Christ, we
shall walk in the house of God, with good conscience, we shall be able for any
just cause, to stop y^ enimyes mouths, and force them to praise God in the
day of visitation: we shall be able for man's judgment, to say with Christ, Quis
ex vobis, etc. Which of you ca^ rebuke me of sin? But if we do not this, our
conscience must needs be heavily burdened, Gods judgments (as he threatens
by his Prophets) will be grievous against us, he will raze us out of the
book of Israel, he will set himself against us, he will feed us with worm
wood, and give us water with gaul to drink: yea he will cry out, Woe and curse
against us, as he does in Jeremie and Ezechiel. Woe (says he) Jer. 23. 1.
Ezec. 34. 2. Jer. 25. 34.
to these pastors that hurt and destroy my flock. And in Jeremie. 25. Howl
ye sheepards and cry, and wallow your selves in the ashes, ye principal of
the flock, for your days of slaughter are accomplished, the flight shall
fail from the sheepardes, the principal of the flock shall not escape, etc.
In which words, although the Prophet chiefly does speak of Princes,
Magistrates, and gouernous of the people of GOD, yet he comprehends also
those. that he has appointed to direct them, in doctrine and teaching.

What the Bishops and Preachers, and y^ Ecclesiastical state of this Realm,
have deserved, I know not, but what the world speaks of them, and how men
open their mouths against them, I know, and with grief of my What is to be
though of Ministers if they live offensiuely and how they are to be spoken of,
and dealt with. Mat. 18. 6.
heart, I know it, and hear it. If we be such horrible offenses to the
Churches of God, as the common voice of men does make us (as before I have
said in this place) Better it were that Milstones were tied about our necks,
and we cast headlong into the Sea, as Christ speaks of them, that give
offense to yt meanest of his church. If we be so retchlesse, and negligent,
that when we be made Bishops, and have gotten the Rochet on our back, we
forget how to Preach, if we be so given over to the world, as we have
either little, or no care at all of our duty and calling, (as men say to our
faces) our fault must needs be great, neither can any excuse be made. But
if we be so, we live under a Prince and laws, There is more means amongst
protestants to reform the ministry then among papists.
under Magistrates and governors, neither do we challenge any exemption, as
the anointed of Rome did, but let our causes and crimes be tried, with such
indifferency, as other States would be contented to be judged by, and then
let every man carye his own burden, according to the weight of his deserts.
I desire na favor, either for other, or for my self, although I know more
faults by my self, then I do by other. Only this I require, that gnats, be
not turned into Elephantes, and moulehilles be made Mountains, that is, small
blemishes, no faults in other, horrible and great crimes in us, only of
affection to deface our calling, It is an ordinary way of Satan to discredit
true doctrine by the life of the ^^eachers.
and to discredit the Gospel which we Preach. Satan knows right well
(and I fear his cunnyng be too well learned) that there is no way so fit,
to deface any kind of doctrine, as by all means that may be, to bring the
Ministers and Preachers thereof in discredit, hatred, and contempt.

There is in the Ecclesiastical historye, a notable example A very commendable
example of concealing Ministers falts.
of that noble Emperor Constantine the great, who after that he had assembled
the great Council of Nice, for the suppressing of the Heresy of Arrius, and
there were assembled to the number of 318 Bishops, whereof the greatest number,
were men of notable fame, as well for life as learning, yet by humayne
frayltie, forgetting themselves, and the principal cause that they came for,
they began to offer to the Emperor, Libels, and Bills of complaynt, one against
another, blazing every man the others infirmities, which thing the Emperor
greatly misliking, and foreseing the great inconvenience that might come
thereby, to the Christian faith, which lately before, he had excepted into
his Empire, he would not so much as once look into the Bills of complayntes,
but wrapped them up together and in their sight cast them into the fire,
with reuerente words exhorting them to forget those quarrels, and to bend
themselves wholye to that matter, for which principallye they came. So that
the Godly Emperor did rather endeavor with Sem and Iaphet, to cover the
nakedness of Genesis 9. 23.
those reverend men, then with Cham to blaze their infyrmities, to the
discredit of that religion, which they taught and professed. And yet is it a
wonderful thing to see, how A good example admonishing princes to beware of
secreat dealers against Ministers.
that same wise, noble, and Godly Emperor, was shortly after abused by
certain pernicious flatterers, and conning workers about him, in his Court,
(which were infected with y^ heresy of Arrius) For they made such suggestion
against that reverend and great learned Father Athanasius, that he sent for
him, and not only condemned him, as an obstinate and stiffenecked man, that
would yield to no conformity, for quietness of the Church, but also cast
him into banishment into France, where he remained all the time of his Empire
afterward, unto the very great hinderaunce of true Christian faith, and to the
aduauncing and spreading abroad, of that wicked and detestable Heresy of
Arrius.

A very not able Example for all Princes to take heed, how by secret
Suggestions, they be carried to think evil, of the Ministers and Preachers of
Gods truth. Surely I must confess, that the State of the Ministerye of the
Church of England, is not so perfect, by much, as it ought to be, and yet
I must needs say this, and in the fear of GOD, tell it you playnelye, that
since England did bear the name of a Christyan Church, there were never so
many in it, so well furnished with Gods Gifts, nor so well able out of the
holy Scriptures to deliver the true way of Salvation unto his people, as
there are at this day, and I pray GOD make this Land thankful for it,
otherwise, it will fall out to their heavy judgment. Nevertheless, I
confess that there be some that are to be lamented, some that are to be
prayde for, and some for whom, men are bound in Conscience to give GOD* great
thanks for. And therefore great uncharitableness is it, to wrappe All
Ministers a^ not to be ill spoken of, because some deserve it, and yet though
they shall be so ill dealt with, they have to be patient.
them all in one Sentence of Condemnation, and contempt. But the best can
look for no better intertaynemente, in these miserable latter days, then
before them the Prophets, the Apostles, and the Reverend Fathers of the
Primative Church, had in their time, which doing their duetyes
faythfullye, and Godly, were notwithstanding, burdened with most heinous, and
cruel crimes: Yea that immaculate lamb of GOD 1. Pet. 1. 19.
Christ our Savior, who in this place did and might iustlye say. Quis ex
vobis arguit me de peccato? etc. Which of you can rebuke me of Sin? yet
escaped not, and was among men contemned as a Drunkarde, as a Glutton, as a
Friend and favorer of Publicanes, and Sinners, as a Coniuror, and worker with
Devils, as a seducer of the people, as a Samaritane and Enimye to his Country,
as a Traitor and Adversary to the Prince, for, Si hunc dimittis* non esamicus
Caesaris: If you let this Joh. 1^. 12.
man go, you are not Cesars friend.

Therefore if they did this to the Master of the household, the poor silly
servants of the Family, may not disdain, if they have no better curtesye.
And yet the fault of them, that so abuse them, must needs be very great,
whereof I have now next to speak. That is, what blame they deserve, which
either maliciouslye, or vntruelye, or upon any other si^ister affection, by
false reports, seek to discredit the Preachers of Gods word.

And herein I will only note unto you two or three points, wherewith they
unjustly and maliciously burden Bishops, and other Preachers in these days,
to the discredit of the Gospel. As for private and every several men's faults,
I will not meddle withal. If they be true, they must needs be great burdens
to our Consciences: if they be false, for my part, I smallye esteem them,
and so would I wish the other to do. Only I will touch those things,
wherewith the Doctrine is more blemished, then we our selves discredited. The
first thing is, that The first faul^ objected against preachers and the
answer.
they blame us for that, which ought to be our greatest commendation. For if
in our Sermons we deliver the truth of Doctrine unto the people of God, and
entering into any controversy of Religion, somewhat zealouslye reprove the
erroures, superstition and Idolatrye, of late used in the Church: Oh, say
some, in some places, (and happilye in this place too) What need this
vehemence, in these matters? these things be banished by Law, and by
Authority of the Prince. No man dare auowe them, no man thinks now, of
the Supremacye of Room, of praying to Saints, of praying for the dead, of
Pardones, of Purgatory, of Images, they are clean out of men's minds: I
pray you Sy^ exhort to Virtue, and deter from Vice, so Preach that you
may make us the better lyuers* Now GOD for his mercy sake, give us that
grace, and pour into our hearts that might of his Spirit, that now yet at
the length after so many years, our words may work in their hearts, to
that effect. I pray God also, that such speeches, Godliness may be by some
preten ded who loath true doctrine.
as they use in this case, proceed not rather of a loathing to hear true
Doctrine caught, then of a longing to learn better life. For sure I am there
were never Preachers in any age, that either more directly, or soundly
according to the rules of Gods word, have exhorted to virtue, never more
terribly and boldly thundered against vice and wickedness, then (God be
thanked) a number have done in this Church, for the space of this 20 years.
And yet I must tell you plainly, I see as little fruit of that, as I do of
Doctrine, and less too. For in Doctrine they make some pretense, in amendment
of life, none at all. And therefore seeing both zeal of true doctrine decays,
and study of Godly life nothing increases, no maruayle though God, ear it be
long, show his heavy judgments against us. And this I must say farther to
them, that desire virtue only to None can have good conversation which at not
sound in doctrine. Heb. 11. 6.
be preached of, and no doctrine, that they shall never have that virtuous and
honest life, that shall be acceptable in the sight of God, until the persuasion
of true faith, and right religion be placed in their hearts. For, Without
faith, it is impossible to please GOD, and whatsoever is not Romans 14. 23
of Faith, is sin, though it seem never so goodly, in the sight of men.
Neither is there any other true faith, Faith follows doctrine.
then that which is grounded upon true doctrine, out of the word of God. For,
Fides ex auditu, auditus per verbum Dei, To. 10. 17.
Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, But happily these
loathers of Doctrine, and lovers of virtue, be of this opinyon, that if a man
live well, he shall No man can be saved for any good life when he has not
true faith.
be saved, how soever he believe, whether he be Jewe, Turk, Sarasin, or
Papiste (for some there be that think so) Quorum damnatio iusta est, Whose
damnation is just. For if that should be so, the wisdom of Romans 3. 8.
God has greatly over reached it self, the son of God took flesh and dyed
in vayn, the scriptures are false, our religion is void, and our faith is
frustrate. But surely these be those days, that S. Paul prophesied of. The
2. Tim. 4. 3 Contemners of doctrine were foretold of to come.
time shall come, faith he, when men shall not abide sound doctrine, but having
itching ears, shall frame unto the^ selves preachers according to their own
phantasyes, and shall turn their ears from the truth, For if we do, as these
men would have us to do, leave doctrine, and preach of manners, so that it be
done in generality, with some show of eloquence, and enterlacing of fine short
senteuces, it is tollerablye thought of, and used somewhat like, as GOD
speaks of to Ezechiell, As a jest and song of a Eze. 33. 32. How little their
own method would profit them of teachinge manners without doctrine. How the
enemies of truth dislike particular reprehension.
pleasant Musician. But so soon as the sweet tune, and note of the
eloquence, is out of their ears, the Dittie and matter is clean forgotten,
and they remain the same persons, that they were before, be the thing never
so good that was spoken. But if we speak of any matter particularlye, and
come so nigh them that they feel their consciences nipped and touched, then
are they grieved with this disease, Noli me tangere, Touch me not. Then the
Preacher rayleth, he wants wisdom, he has need to go to a School of
Discretion: he medleth with those matters that he should not.

In deed I would not wish, either Preachers, or any other Subjects to enter
into Council Chambers, and openly to deal in the consultation of Princes, or
controuersyes of the State, so long as they be consultations, but if any
matter break out in fact, contrary to the Law of God, either in the first
or second Table, which touches either religion, and the true worshipping of
god, or the order of justice and charity among Christians, I see not, but that
every good Preacher may, and in duetye ought to speak against them, and to
denounce the peril thereof, even to the face of the offendoures, unless we
will be contented, that the blood of them that perish without warning, should
be required at our hands, which is too heavy for any mortal creature to bear.

Therefore seeing the mind of men in these days be so ouerthwarte, and
waywarde, we whom GOD The means now left to the ministers to redress the
curiosity and objection, of hearers, for preaching either of doctrine or
manners.
has placed for the Ministerye of his word, have great cause to pray unto
him, that he will assiste us, not only with that spirit of integrity, as
well in office as life, whereof Christ here speaks, that with confidence of
conscience, we may be able to say (for the judgments of men) Quis ex
vobis. etc. Which of you can rebuke me of sin? But also that he will indue us
with that spiritual strength, which in like case, he promises to his Prophets
Jeremy. and Ezechiell, that is, that he will make us Ier. 1. 18.
strong cities, iron pillars, and brazen walls, against them that oppugn in
us God and his truth: and if they do make stiff their necks, and harden their
faces as stones against Eze. 3. 8.
the Lord, and his preaching to repentance, that he will make us also, to have
faces of flinte or Adamante, that may not blush or be abashed, to let them
understand it. For ^urteous talking and shame fast speaking will not serve.

Another crime, that they lay against us, and that with The second crime
objected against preachers to discredit their doctrine and the answer to it.
great danger is, that we are seditious and contentious men in commonweals,
dangerous to States and Principalities, never contented, but still seeking
alterations, and studying to bring al states to y^ Swizers common weal, and
here with charge they not only us that be Preachers, but also all those y^ be
true and sincere professors of the Gaspell. What the Swizers common weal is, I
partly understand, but I never yet heard, nor read, of any man that was of
this opinion, that all principalities ought to be brought either to the form
thereof, or any one other. Or if there be any such, out of my knowledge I must
say unto him Anathema, if he were an Angel in Heaven. For the All commonweals are not to be tied to one form of government.
Doctrine of GOD teaches no such thing, but that all Christian Subjects
should content themselves with that form of government, under which God has
placed them, and by prayer, and all other honest, and Godly means of
obedience, study to preserve and maintain the same. Therefore they that lay
this to our charge, do desire maliciously, to deface the word of God, and his
truth. But this To be dis^^^ bers of commonweals etc. is no new slander no^
now first objected against gods true ministers. 1. Reg. 18. 1. Reg. 22. 8. Jer.
38. 4.
is the old means where with the Serpent Satan, by his politic
Instruments, has always endeavored, to make odious to Princes and
Magistrates, the Prophets, preachers, and Ministers of Gods word. So was it
said of Helias, and Micheas, That they troubled Israel, that they were
enemies to the King, and never spoke any thing that was pleasant to him. So
was it said of Hieremias, That he was a Traitor to his Country, that he had
conspired with the Babilonians, and bare no good heart to the Prince. So was it
said of Amos, That the earth Amos. 7. 10
might not abide the words, that he had spoken to King Jeroboam. So was it
said of the Apostles and Fathers of the Primative Church, in so much, that
the name of a Christyan in those days, was in that state, as now in some
Countries, the name of a Protestante or Gospeller is. That, is a sufficient
cause, to draw men in danger of goods, Lands, life, and all that he has,
though there be no other matter in the world to charge them. And these men
study to make their accusation probable, by those sturres, that of late years
have fallen out in Germany, Flaunders, France, Scotland, and (as they say)
here in England too. But it is a wonderful thing to see, how affection
blinds men, that either they cannot, or will not see Contention and wars
have been in other nations before the renewing of the gospel.
the truth. Were there never sturres, rebellions, or undutiful dealinges
toward Princes, in Flaunders, France, and Scotland, before these late years
of the re^^ing of the Gospel? If they think so, they know nothing, and err
of ignorance, and by ignorance seek to misleade other: but if they know it
to be otherwise (as needs they must, if they have read any thing) then err
they of malice, and purposely seek to deface God his Ministers, and England
has ever been so far from contentions and wars, as since it has ^^^^ased
the late renewing of the gospel and the wars that have been, have not been by
protestants.
his truth. As for the Realm of England all men know, that for the spare of
these fyftie years, or more, there has scante been two Princes so happy, as
to escape with one Rebellion in their time. To let pass other, and to speak
of those things, that are in our rememberaunce. Were they Protestants that
rebelled in the time of king Henry? Were they all Protestants that rebelled
in the time of that blessed Babe, King Edward the sixte? Were they
Protestants that rebelled in the Queens Majesty's time, that now is? They
cannot, nor (I think) they will not, say it for shame. The Messengers and
seditious Fyrebrandes, that inflamed that stir, are well known to be
English Romanistes, and Louanistes, as even now they do endeavor the like.
Is it unknown to any A principle of papistrie against principalities, and
which can not but occasion wars.
man, that it is a principle of their Doctrine, that if a Prince be not a
friend to the Sea of Room, be his Title otherwise never so good, yet he is an
usurper, or if any man be ignorant thereof, let him look into Saunders
Monarchy, and there beside shameful, and detestable treason toward her
Majesty's person and state, he shall find good ground of that opinyon laid,
and yet forsooth Protestants Papists and not protestants alter titles of
principalities.
must be the daungerousts Subjects unto Princes. I pray you of what profession
are they, that have altered the title of all the principalities almost in
Europe? of Arragon? of Na^are? of Italy? of Naples? of Sicyly? of France? of
Germany? of the Empire both of the Weaste and of the East? And what the Pope
challenges at this day for the principality of England, and Ireland ever
since King John his time, every man that has read the English Chronicles
knows. Of what professyon are they that say they have all temporal Papists
and not protestants challenge all temporal power due to princes.
power immediatelye of God, and all Princes to hold the same as feodaryes unto
them? And therefore have they exempted their anointed Clergy, from all
secular power and authority, and have so tied Christian Princes, that they
may not draw their own Sword of Justice, Most unnatural and undutiful
wars lawful by papists doctrine.
nor do any thing in their own Dominions, but at the beck and appointment
of the Sea of Room, and then might the Father draw the Sword against the
son, and the son against the Father, and Brother against brother, and
finally, all subjects against their Prince. Yea in all Countries they did set
shackles and fetters upon How papists do unlawfully ouerrule and abuse princes.
Princes to bridle them, that they might do nothing, but that was liking to
them, I mean, they set some of their own Court, in every region, (as it
were) to keep under the Prince, and to see even into his secret dealings,
such as Thomas Becket and Stephen Lancton, were in The full right of authority
is only by protestants granted to princes* and by them also (only) restored,
being taken away by papists.
this land. Which I doubt not but godly and wise Princes, and counselors will
consider, and specially, call to remembrance, that the honorable state,
dignity, and Majesty of Princes, was continually trodden under foot, until
it was within this 40. or 50. years, that it pleased God, to restore into the
world, the light of his Gospel, and by the Preachers thereof, out of his holy
word, did let the Princes understand, the right, and authority of their
dignity, which before was kept from them. Therefore great injury do they in
these days whosoever they be, that seek to persuade Princes, that the
Preachers and professors of the Gospel, be the most dangerous subjects, and
the Papists (or at least the good indifferent men, which pass not which way
religion goes, but keep themselves safe for all chau^ges,) to be the best,
most quiet, and assured faithful subjects. But the event will teach godly
Princes, and wise counselors, the contrary. But whatsoever others shall do,
I doubt not but that mighty, and merciful God, that raised our gracious
Sovereign out of the dust of death, and pulled her out of the Lions deune, and
out of y^ jaws of her greedy enemies, gaping for her destruction, and to our
inestimable comfort, and benefit, set her in the Royal throne of this land,
to the end that she might be a noursing mother, unto the church of God; and
this land a noursery, for the Gospel of Christ, and a place of refuge, for the
afflicted saints of God in these miserable days, and for that end, and
purpose, has myraculously defended, preserved, and maintained her, against all
the devises, and policies of our enimyes, and not only s^, but has made her,
being but a woman, dreadful to her mightiest enemies, and the especial
worldly comfort, that the Saints of God, and the true professors of his
Gospel, have in these days, against all the dangerous enimyes (then which
things, greater honor could never be done unto Prince.) And therefore I say,
I doubt not, but that the same God will also at this time, lighten her mind,
and direct, and strengthen her heart, that by no color of cunning, or
flattering counsel, she shall be carried away, either to forsake 3. Reg. 11.
her gracious Lord God, as Solomon did, or conceive heavy displeasure against
the Ministers of Gods truth, as 2. Chro. 24. Good subjects have to pray in
this sort for her Majesty.
unkind Joas did. And that this may be so, we have all great cause, most
earnestly to desire it of God, in our continual prayers.

A third matter wherewith Preachers be unjustly burdened in these days, is, y^
they are charged, not only with their The third matter objected against
Preachers, and the answer thereof.
own sins, and offenses (which god knows are too many) but with the
slacknesse and wickedness of al other. For upon us only they lay all the whole
fault, of the small fruit y^ the doctrine of the Gospel, has taken here in
this land, now for the space of this twenty years. Oh, say they, if we had
good and zealous Bishops, and godly Preachers, such as the Apostles were,
undoubtedly, this doctrine of the Gospel, would have had better success, and
more would have prevailed in men's hearts: For they are not zealous, nor seem
themselves to be moved with the spirit of God, therefore it cannot be, that
they should move other. O (dearly beloved) though this reason seems
plausible to some, yet I aduertice all them, that have any spark of Gods
people do never make the want of godliness in the preacher, to be the cause
that good doctrine should not fructify in the heaters.
Gods fear in their hearts, that they take heed of it, and beware that they
be not carried away with it. For I never read, that the people of God among
whom true doctrine has ^in preached (as the Lord be thanked it has bin with
us) did ever use such allegation, for their own defense, It has been always
the pretense of the reprobate, and wicked, to excuse, and color their own
obstinacy, and contempt of Gods word, when they were offered the light of the
Gospel, and called to repentance. But that these men may not flatter, nor
deceive themselves, I let them understand, that the Scriptures do in no place
teach them, that the offenses, and faults of the Ministers, and Preachers, are
always, the only cause, why the word of God, does not take place in men's
hearts. It is more commonly, and What the Scriptures show to be the cause most
commonly, why true doctrine does not fru^tifie.
almost always imputed unto the waywardnes, unthankfulness, and obstinacy of
the people that hear it. Therefore it were good for all sorts of men, of what
calling soever, to look into their own ^oosomes, and carefully to consider,
whether the fault thereof, be not in themselves, for they know, the Master
may be learned and diligent, The same showed by similitudes.
and yet the scholar, not thrive, by reason of his own dullness. The
Physician, may be honest, and skillful, and the obstinate patient, make light
of his wholesome Counsel. The seed may be good, and the seed sower a painful
and honest person, and yet the fruit not to be aunswerable, to his travail,
because of the naughtines, and barrennes of yt ground. This our savior Christ
teaches us in the parable of the seedesower Matthew. 13. The sower (says he)
went out to Verse. 3.
sow the seed, and some fell in the high way, that is, into the hearts of
them, that were continually trampled with wicked and naughty cogitations, so
yt the seed, could not sink into their hearts, but by those birds of ye
Devil, was carried away without fruit. Some fell in stony ground, that is, into
such hearts as wanted the good juice, and moisture of gods holy spirit, and
therefore when the heat of persecution arises, their zeal is withered, and
they revolt from the truth. Some fell into bushie ground, that is, into the
minds of them, yt were troubled with the ears of this world, with the love of
riches, and with ye pleasures of this life, which wholly chaked up ye good
seed of ye Gospel of Christ, so yt it could not in any wise prosper, and
bring forth fruit. Here you may Truth may be preached, and yet three to one,
take no fruit by it.
perceive, that for one fourth part of good ground, that yeldeth fruit of y^
doctrine of God, there are three greater parts of evil ground, wherein, it
nothing at al prospers* I would to God there were less store of these evil
grounds in this land, and then undoubtedly should we see greater success of
the Gospel, and more ample fruit of our Preaching. It were good for men, to
look that these quarrellings at other men's lives, be not one of those cords of
vanity that Esaias speaks of in the. 5. Chap. Woe be to them, says Verse. 18.
God by Esaias, that draw on iniquity with cords of vanity, Of coloring
wickedness with other men's faltes.
and sin, as it were with a Cartrope. That is: Woe be to them that imagine
excuses and colors to nousle, and maintain themselnes, in contempt of Gods
word, and want of repentance.

Let men take heed of such dealing, that such cords of What a man's flattering
of him self in wickedness may come unto. Esaias. 5. 19.
vanity, pull not on iniquity, so fast, that it draw men to utter contempt,
and derision of god, and his truth. For so it follows, even in the same place
immediately, which say in this manner in derison of the Preaching of ye
Prophets, Let God make speed, let him hasten his work, that we may see it,
and let the counsel of the holy one of Israel draw near, and come, that we
may know it. And in like manner say the wicked, and unrepentant people of the
Jews Iere. 5. They have denied the Lord, and Verse. 12
said, it is not he, tushe, the sword, and the plague, shall not come upon us,
neither shall we see it. The threatenings of the Prophets, are but wind, and
the true word of God, is not in them, they utter their own fantasies, and
these things shall come to themselves, and we shall live here lively, bravely,
and gallantly, as we have before time. Even with like contempt and derision
many at these days abuse y^ Preachers of Gods word. If we exhort Princes,
Magistrates, and Rulers to frame their purposes and devises according to the
word of God, and in Gods causes to lay aside human policy, (because
unless God build the house, in vain he labors that Psalm. 127.
builds it, and if the Lord keep not the City, the watchman waketh but in
vain.) Oh, say some of them, these Preachers lack experience and discretion,
they are fools, they are unskillful, they know not what pertains to the
policy of government. It is sufficient for Princes and rulers to show
themselves Religious, although in deed they be not. For so howled that
Monster Machiuell, the poison of Princes Courts, and noble houses. If to
confirm me^ in the defense of Gods truth, we lay before them the assured
promises of Gods assistaunce, that he will not suffer a hear of their heads
to perish, that for their safety, he will cause his Angels to camp about
them, yea though they were in the valley of the shadow of death, yet they
should not need to fear, because the Lord is with them, though people
frette and fume, though Princes of great power consulte and lay their heads
together against the Lord, and against his anointed, yet he that sits in
heaven will defeat their purposes, and laughe them to scorn (for there is no
power, there is no wisdom, there is no Counsel against the Lord:) these
say they be the sweet dreams of doting Preachers, wherewyth they nusle
Princes in idleness and security, and by vain confidence in the providence
of God, cause them to lay themselves open to the danger of their enymyes, as
though even in these days we did not see the defenders of this their
Religion to have sustained great overthrows and slaughters, at their
adversaries hands. When we lay before men terrible threatenings of Gods
wrath and indignation, if they reuolte from the truth of the Gospel, or
suffer the same to be betrayed into the hands of the enimye, saying, that GOD
will forsake them, that he will take his defense from them, that he will
set his face against them, that he will bring strangers upon them to
destroy their Country, and possess their great lands and goodlye
buyldynges: Many cry, that the Preachers be peeuishe, and for fear of their
own state rave in follye. For they think if Religion be altered, that they
shall first go to wrack, but they have small care and prospect, how to
maintain the state of their Country in safety. Thus do they continuallye
knitte Cords of vanity, to draw them selves into iniquity and contempt of
GOD, and all this comes to pass (as I said before) because they look so
much upon other men's doings, that they clean forget their own. They
shall do well to follow Christ's Council, that they first Take the beam out
of their own eyes, and then shall Math. 7. 3.
they better see to take the moate out of their brothers.

They may not think that God is the God of the Ecclesiastical Others must
live well, howsoever Ministers do live.
state only, or that the Scriptures of GOD, do prescribe only their
duties, with grievous threatening if they perform it not: Nay, he is the God
of the whole people, and of all the states, and conditions thereof. Of Parents
and Children, of Masters and Servants, of Husbands and Wives, of Lawyers and
Counselors, of Merchants and all other Occupiers, yea he is the GOD of
Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, of Lords and Ladies, of Princes, Magistrates,
Rulers, and Governors, and all their duties in his holy word he
prescribes, and against all them he speaks, and with terrible threats in
his Prophets, he thundreth, as much or more, then he does against evil
Ministers, and Preachers. And more oftentimes, he notes their vices, and
faults, to be the cause of those great plagues, and utter desolations which
he threatens to bring upon his people. Read the. 1. 3. 5. 30. Chapters of
Esaias. Read the, 5. 8. 21. 22. 25. of leremie, and almost all the parts of the
Prophets, and you shall perceive this to be most true. I would stay upon some
examples, but that I might be thought, to touch some things too nyghly.
Therefore all these sorts of people*, as well as the Ministers of Gods word
for their vocations, ought to be able to say, with What perfection should be
in the life of every one. and of the application of the text therein.
Christ in this place, Quis ex vobis arguit me de peccato? Which of you can
rebuke me of Sin? Which of you is able to accuse us, that we live loosely,
in chambering and wantonness, or riotouslye, in banqueting and drunkenness,
or contentiously, in striefe and envy, or maliciously, seeking to supplant one
an other? Which of you is able to accuse us, that we pull down Towns, and
enclose whole fields, to feed wild beasts, and famish a number of Christian
people? or that we join house to house, land to land, with oppression of the
poor, as though we would live alone upon the face of the earth. Which of
you is able to The means whereby the wealth of England is wasted.
say, that we wast the treasure of the land, in feedyng three Cankers,
riotously to consume the same, I mean, Monstrous Vanity in Apparel,
Needelesse pomp in Sumptuous building, and Excessive charge in dainty
feeding? Which of you, is able to say, that in all our doings, we set not the
fear of God before our faces, and make not his holy word the direction of all
our devises? Which of you, I say, is able to accuse us, in any of all these
things? If all men, in all states and conditions, be able with good conscience
thus to say: Surely this land is blessed. But Heaven and earth sees, and the
Lord knows, that it is not so in a number, yet God forbid, for that number,
that we should condemn all. God has his, in every state and condition of man.

Now come I to the third part, contained in the second sentence of my
Theme. Si veritatem dico vobis, quare non creditis mihi? If I say the truth
why do you not believe me? Wherein I promised, to let you understand, that
the doctrine of the Gospel, which we have Preached in this land by the space
of this. 20. years, and that has been confirmed, and established, by the
authority of the Prince, and laws of this Realm, is the only truth, and
that there is no truth of doctrine but it, and therefore, yt you ought both
faithfully without exception to embrace it, and constantly, without reuolting
to abide in it. But me thinks I hear some say: Sir, if you could resolve
us, that it is the truth which you Preach, we would easilye receive it, but
we may justly doubt of it. For ye are but men, and such men, as carry their
blemishes openly in the sight of the world, ye may be deceived, and deceive
others. As good Clerks as you, and as honest men, for any thing we see,
teach us the contrary, and say their doctrine is the truth, or at the
leastwyse, we may justly think, that those great contentions, that you make
against yt Church of Rome, are but for trifling ceremonies, and matters of
small weight and importance, and therefore, that Christian Princes, might do
ver^e well, to see some order for those matters, and to force you to agree, for
the residue, whether you will or no, that you may no longer trouble the world,
as you have done, these many years, with these needelesse controversies.
Surely, that they will not receive our doctrine with trial, I can not mislike
it, for S. John in his 1. Epist. 4. cap. gives them the same Counsel, Dearly
Verse. 1. Doctrine is to be received upon trial.
beloved (says he) believe not every spirit that speaks to you, but try the
spirits whether they be of God or not, for many false Prophets are come into
the world. Therefore I would to God all sorts of men, but chiefly, Princes,
Counselors, and Magistrates, would try our doctrine, by the true touchstone
of Gods word, as those noble Conuerts of Berrhaea did, mentioned in y^ Act. 17*
which Verse. 17.
came to hear Paul's Sermons, not of custom, and fashion only, But daily
searched the Scriptures, whether those things were true, that Paul spoke, or
no. If God How to perceive protestants to have truth, and of what weight the
matters are wherein they differ from papists.
would move them, so to do, they should easily understand, not only, that our
doctrine were the truth, but also that the controversy between us, and the
Church of Rome, is not for trifling Ceremonies (as they say) or matters of
small weight, but for the very substance of our faith, and ground of all
Christian Religion, and that there can be made no more agreement between our
doctrine and theirs, then between light and darkness, truth and error, God
and Beliall, Christ and Antichrist, which thing, it behooves all Christians,
and professors of the Gospel, deeply to consider. For as before time often, I
have said in this place, so now think I, the time draws nigh, that Godds
justice, for our unthankfulness, will pull us to the trial of our faith, and
therefore it behooves us to understand, that we contend not for trifles, but
for matters of principal importance, as I mean now to declare unto you. And if
some persons shall think these points needelesse to be spoken of in this
place, I humbly crave leave, that for the confyrmation of mine own faith, I may
declare unto you y^ grounds of my conscience, that if ever I live to be
tempted, to forsake my Lord God, and his truth, that this my protestation made
in this place, may be a bond unto my conscience.

The rule that I will use to prove, that our Doctrine is the truth, and not
that which comes from Rome, shall be the same, that the Scripture of God
lays down by S. 1. Ioh. 4. 1.
John, in the place before mentioned, where after he has, as you have heard,
admonished men to try the Spirits, whether they be of God or no, he adds
these means of trial. Every Spirit that confesses Christ to have come 1.
Ioh. 4. 2. etc.
in flesh, is of God, and every spirit, that denies Christ to have come in
flesh, is not of God, but is the Spirit of Antichrist, of whom you have heard
how he should come, and now already is he in the world. Now that you may
understand, I go not about to deceive you with show of eloquence, and
Rhethoricall amplifications, and with motions of affections, to lead you into
error, ear^ you be ware, I will lay open mine argument unto you, nakedly,
and barely that you may see every joint thereof, and with your selves consider
of what force it ought to be in any christian conscience. And this I say every
spirit that confesses Christ to have come in flesh, is of God, and teaches
you the truth. And every spirit that denies Jesus to have come in flesh, is
not of God, but leads you into error, and is that spirit of Antichrist: But
we, and the Preachers of the Gospel, in all Godly sense confess Christ to
have come in flesh, and our Adversaries of Room do not, therefore we, and
not they, have brought the truth unto you. The 2. proposition. I know will be
denied, for both yt parts thereof, which I will prove unto you, by this means.
First I will let you understand the causes why christ came in flesh, and what
benefits he procured to mankind by the same. Secondly I will show unto you
what it is to deny Christ to have come in flesh. The first of these two
shall confirm our truth: The second shall confound their error. As touching
the cause why christ came in flesh.

When sin had made separation between God and man, and the exceeding great
mercy of God, was not willing The causes why Christ came in the flesh.
utterly to cast away man, and to ras^ him from the face of the earth, of his
infinite goodness, and wisdom, he devised the son of God, the second
person in Trinity should descend from Heaven, and take flesh of the blessed
virgin, that so being in one person, both very God, and very man, he might be
a most fit Mediator to work reco^ciliatio^ between God and man. The cause
therefore why Christ came in flesh, was to work the salvation of mankind.
For so says The general cause. 1. Tim. 1. ^^
S. Paul, It is a sure saying and worthy of all men to be believed, that
Christ came into the world to save sinners, And Christ himself says: that he
came to save that Luc. 19. 10
which was lost.

The general work of our redemption, has certain principal branches,
which are chief Articles of our Faith and grounds of all Christian
religion. First, that he might be the reconciler, and atonement maker
between The particular causes. Verse. 18.
God and us, as S. Paul witnesses, 2. Cor. 5. All things are of God which
reconciled us unto himself in Christ Jesus. And immediately, God was in Christ
reco^ciling Verse. 1^. Col. 1. 20.
the world to himself. And to the Colos^. It pleased him to reconcile all
things, unto himself by Christ, appeasing by the blood of his Cross, all
things which are either in heaven or in earth. God therefore appointed him
for ever to be our high Bishop, our Mediator, our Advocate, our Intercessor
which should co^tinualy appear before the face of God for us, and make him
favorable to Heb. 2. 4. 7. 9. cap. 1. Romans 8. 37.
sinners, that we might have access to God by him, and by his intercession and
merit, obtain mercy and grace in our necessities, these be the words of the
scripture. And he is Christ only ^^ our advocate and mediatoure. 1. Tim. 2. 5.
1. Ioh. 2. 1. and. 2.
not only our Mediator and Advocate, but Our only Mediator and Advocate,
One God, and one Mediator of God and man, the man Christ Jesus. We have an
Advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. It is he that ascended up to heaven, and sits
at the right hand of God the Father, Vt interpellat pro nobis, That he may be
an Intercessour Romans 8. 34
for us. The 2. cause of Christ's coming into flesh, is, that he might be our
redeemer from the tyranny of the Devil, and the purchazer of remission of
sins. The 1. Ioh. ^. 8.
Son of god appeared to this end, to dissolve the works of the Devil. And
again: Ye are redeemed, 1. Pet. 1. 18.
not with gold and silver, but with the blood of the immaculate Lamb Christ
Jesus. And again: Behold the Ioh. 1. 29.
La^be of god, that takes away the sins of the world, And S. Paul: In whom
we have redemption, and by Ephesians. 1. 7.
his blood remission of our sins. We must not only believe that he is our
Redeemer, but our Only Redeemer, Christ only is our redeemer. Act. 4. 1^.
and the Only Purchazer of the full remission of our sins. For, Non est aliud
nomen. etc. That is, There is no other name under Heave, wherein we should be
saved, but only by the name of Christ Jesus, And S. John. The blood of 1. Ioh.
1. verse. 7.
christ has washed us from al sin. And S. Paul. He gave himself for us.
that he might redeem us from all iniquity. The 3. cause of Christ's
incarnation, and y^ 2. office of his eternal Priesthood, is, to offer a full and
perfect sacrifice to appease y^ wrath of God, and to satisfy his justice, and
yt not according to y^ order of Aaron, which by imperfection did need a
Succession, but according to y^ order of Melchizedek, and y^ for ever. Thou art
a Priest, says God, for ever, according to the Heb. 6. 20.
order of Melchizedek. Therefore it cannot be borne ^^ christian religion,
that Christ should have any succession in Priesthood, to sacrifyce after him.
For by one oblation Christ only is our priest to sacrifice for us which he has
done once for all. Heb. 10. 14. Heb. 9. 28. Heb. 10. 12.
he made perfect all that be sanctified. And again: Christ was once offered
for the extinguishing of the sins of many, And again: Having offered one
Sacrifice for sin, he sits perpetually at the right hand of God. And
sundry times else where, the Epistle to the Hebrews affirms, Christ Semel,
That is to say, once, to have sacrificed himself.

The fourth cause of his Incarnation, and the third office of his eternal
Priesthood is, that he might be the only Prophet, Master, Teacher, and
instructor of his people, fully to open to them the knowledge of God, and the
true way of Salvation: God, says Moses, shall raise from Deu. 18. 15.
among you, a Prophet like unto me, him do you hear, according to all things
that he shall say unto you. And God the father himself, at the baptizing of
Christ, did with the visible presence of the holy Ghost, consecrate him Master
and teacher of his church, which only was to be heard. This is my dearly
beloved Son, in whom I am well Mat. 3. 17. Mat. 17. 5.
pleased, him do you hear. The same Consecration was confyrmed in the Mount,
at the transfiguration of Christ. And Esaias the Prophet in the 55. chapter, or
rather Verse. 4.
God by Esaias says: I have given him as a witness unto people: and preceptorem
Gentibus, And a Master and instructour Christ is our only Instructour.
of all nations. And therefore Christ himself forbids his Apostles to be
called Masters, for says he: Ye have but one Master which is Christ.

The fyfte cause of Christ his coming in flesh, is that he might be the Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings, the only head, ruler, governor, and defender
of his universal Church, over all the parts of the world according to the
Prophecy of David Psalm. 2. Yet have I anointed my Verse. 6. etc.
King, upon my holy hill of Syon, to whom for his inheritance, he gave all the
Nations of y^ world, and for his possession, the uttermost bounds of the earth.
And the Angel at his Conception, said: He shall reign in the house of Luc.
1. 33.
Jacob for ever, and there shall be none end of his kingdom. And Ephesians 1.
He has put all things under Verse. 22.
his feet, and has appointed him above al things head of his Church. And
Coloss. 1. He is the head of his body Verse. 18.
the Church, which is the beginning, the first of them that rise from death, Vt
sit in omnibus primas tenens. i. That in all things he might have the
pre-eminence. And Ephe. 5. The Husband is the head of the wife, as Verse. 23.
Christ is head of the Church: But the wife may have no Christ is the only head
of the church.
more heads but her husband, unless she will be a wedlock breake^, and so the
Church can have no other head But Christ, unless she do in the face of the
whole world forsake her own Spouse, who has betrothed her to him alone. He is
the only Son, which alone governs the house of GOD his father, In all
these Branches, I add this word (Only) because Christ only, is alone that
that he is: our only Mediator, our only redeemer, and purchazer of
remission of Sins, our only high Priest, to sacrifice for us, our only
Master and Teacher that instrueteth us, our only head and governor that
guides and defends us. And hereunto I am moved, not only with express
words of the scriptures, but also with consideration of the high and most
excellent means of our salvation, devised by the wisdom, and unspeakable
mercy of God. For it should greatly impeache the wisdom of God, if he
should send down his son, the second person in Trinity, into the vale of
miserye, here to take Flesh, and in the form of a Servant, and abiecte man,
to suffer most vile and reproachful Death, to be a party redeemer, or a
party Savior, and to yield a great part of the Christ has no partakers in
any of his offices.
honor and glory thereof to other. No, no, he is GOD he gives not his glory
to other: He only (only I say he) is our full and perfect reconciler, and
Redemer, and all the residue that I have spoken of before. This is the Doctrine
which we teach, this is the Gospel which we preach, and this is no new
Doctrine, but that which was conceived in the bosom of the wisdom of GOD
Protestants doctrine of Salvation is the doctrine of the Scripture. Ephesians. 1. 4.
before the beginning of the World. For we were chosen (says Sayncte Paul)
in Christ, Antequam iacerentur Fundamenta Mundi. i. Before the Foundations of
the World were laid. This is that Gospel, that GOD himself opened in
Paradise, to our first Fathers, I will set enmity, says he, to the Woman,
between Genesis 15. 3.
thy seed and his seed: and thy seed, That is, one that shall come of a
woman, shall break the Serpents head, That is: overthrow the whole power of
the Devil, and deliver mankind from sime. This is that Gospel that was renewed
to Abraham, and all the Patriarchs: In thy Seed, shall all the Nations of the
Genesis 22. 18.
earth be blessed. This is that Gospel, that was fygured to the Jews, by the
Paschall Lamb, by Manna, by the Rock, by all the Sacrifices, and Ceremonial
services of the Law. This is that Gospel, Where unto all the Prophets bear
witness, As Saint Act. 3. 21. Act. 4. 12.
Peter says, in the Acts: That all they that believe in him, shall have
remission of sins by his name. This is that Gospel, that Saint John the
Forerunner poynted unto, Behold the Lamb of God. etc. This Ioh. 1. 29.
is the Gospel that Christ himself preached and delivered to his Apostles,
and they to the whole World. So GOD loved the World, that he gave his only
Ioh. 3. 16.
begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him, should be saved. Therefore as
I have said: Our doctrine The general end of the protestants doctrine, and
what doctrine only they mislike.
is no new Doctrine, but the most aunciente Doctrine, that ever was upon the
face of the Earth, neither do we teach any other Doctrine then this, and
those that do of necessity depend upon this, or be grounded upon this.
Neither do we impugn any Doctrines in other, but such as are repugnaunte
to this Faith, and either directlye or indirectlye impeache the same. For I
protest before GOD and his Angels and in the presence of this honorable
Audience, for my self and as many professoures of the Gospel as I know, that
whatsoever Doctrine is agreeable to this, we do gladly receive it, and with
both arms embrace it, though it come from the Church of Room. And whatsoever
Doctrine is repugnant to this, and will not stand with it, we do reiecte it,
though it come from an Angel in Heaven. Seeing then we have now this 20.
years taught you this infallible truth, Why do you not believe us? etc.

Now as touching the second branche, what it is to What it is to deny christ to
have come in flesh* and that in two. sorts.
deny Christ to have come in Flesh, and who they are that deny it, you
shall understand that there be two ways to deny Christ to have come in
flesh. The one flatlye and groselye, and in plain words, as Ebion, Erinthus,
Marcion, Valentinian, Arrius, and a number such other, in the Primative
Church, which denied either the Deity, or Humanity of Christ. But in them
Satan showed himself in his own Colors, like a black Devil, and
therefore the Heresies being so gross, were soon confuted, and confounded in
the Church of GOD. There is another way more subtle, and perilous, indirectly
to deny Christ to have come in flesh, in which Satan tourneth himself into
an Angel of light, and as Cyprian says, Under the name of Christ,
confounding the Religion of christ. That is, While in words they confess the
Incarnation of Christ, by perverse Doctrynes in effect they deny it, by
denying those causes, for which the Son of GOD was Incarnate, attributing the
effect of our Salvation, to other things. And after this Popistes and not
protestants do deny Christ to have come in the flesh and how.
sort, the Teachers of the Church of Room, very plainlye and perilouslye
deny Christ to have come in flesh, as I will particularly let you
understand by the Branches of our salvation before recyted. As touching the
first cause of Christ his Incarnation, that Christ is the only reconciler,
mediatoure and atonement maker, between God and us, and for that cause
sits at the right hand of Prayer to Saints is against christ his
mediatourship and aduocatship.
God, perpetualy to appear before his face for us: Against this Article they
teach blasphemous Doctrine of Invocation of Saints, that they are our
mediators and reconcilers, that by their merits and prayers, we have access
unto God, and are for their sakes, heard, received and accepted into the favor
of God again, evidently displacing the son of God, from the chief office of
his eternal priesthood, and setting his creatures in his place and dignity,
and yt with out any warrant of scripture, either by word, or by example. Prayer
to Saints contains besides it self, two other wicked things.
This Doctrine is joined with two other foul erroures: First, that they
conceive of Christ, as of a dreadful God, and terrible judge, and not as of a
merciful Mediator, and therefore that we have needs of other spokesmen, to
make the way to him for us, though he himself most graciously, and mercifully
cries unto us, Come all ye that travail, Mat. 11. 28.
and be heavy laden, and I will refresh you. And in sundry places commands
us to pray unto God the father in his name, assuring us, that whatsoever we
desire, it shall Ioh. 16. 23.
be granted us. And therefore do they show them selves to mistrust, the
Credit of Christ.

Secondly in this praying to the Saints, not without great danger of
Idolatry, they attribute unto them divine power. For in their praying to them,
they imagine of them, that they be of Universal knowledge, and understanding,
not only what men speak, but also what they think in their hearts. Again
they attribute unto them Almighty power, as being able to work and bring to
pass whatsoever is desired of them. And lastly, they show themselves to
believe, that they are More merciful, and ready to hear sinners, then Christ
himself, which is flat Blasphemy. As touching the second cause of christ his
Incarnation, that he is our only redeemer and purchazer of remission of our
sins: This ground of our faith they weaken, by a number of corrupt Doctrines.

As first, that in part we have salvation and remission of sins, by the
Merits of Saints, for thus they pray:

Tuper Thomae sanguine^ quem pro te impendit,
Fac nos Christ scandere quo Thomas ascendit.
Grant us O Christ by the blood of Thomas which he shed for thee, thither to
go whether he is ascended. And to Saint George they pray thus, Hie nos saluet
a peccatis, vt in coelo cum beatis possimus q^iescere. Let him save us from our
sins, that we may rest with the blessed in heaven. And touching Saint Anne,
they say thus, Deus qui beatam Annam, matrem tuae genetricis fieri voluisti,
praesta quaesumus, vt meritis vtriusque matris and filiae, regna caelestia
consequamur. O God, thou which would Saint Anne to become the mother of thy
mother, grant we beseech thee, that by the merits of the mother and the
daughter, we may obtain thy heavenly kingdom. In this you hear three
Saviors beside Christ, and in like manner do they acknowledge a thousand more.
Secondly, they The papists will have Christ to be a de^nie Savior.
say, we have remission of sins and salvation, in part by our own Merits
and good doings. For this writes Gabriel Biel: That the Passion of Christ may
be the first and principal cause, of attaining grace and opening the way to
heaven, Sed nunquam est totalis causa, quia semper cum merito Christi,
concurrit aliquod meritum recipientis gratiam, that is to say, But it is never
the whole cause, for that ever there goes with the merit of Christ, some
merit of him that receaueth grace. What shall I say of Pardons, of
Pilgrimages, of Purgatory, of holy Water, and a number of other like
Superstitions and false errors? by which not without blasphemy, they match
transitory things and vain devises of men, with the most excellent price of
our redemption, the blood of Christ Jesus, ye son of God our Savior, exprefly
contrary to the holy ghost, thus writing by Saint Peter: Ye are not redeemed
with 1. Pet. 1. 18.
transitory things, as with Gold or Silver, but with the blood of the
immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus. As touching the third cause of Christ's
Incarnation, that he being our only high Priest according to the order of
Melchizodech, has once for ever offered himself upon the Cross, and purchased
for us eternal redemption, they impugn it with y^ most horrible doctrine of
the propiciatorie sacrifice, daily offered in the Mass, wherein they teach,
that mortal and sinful men in a state of Priesthood succeed Christ, and
continually offer the very real and natural body of Christ to God the father,
for the remission of daily sins, not only of the^ that Communicate, but of
them that look on, and receive not, yea, and of them that be absent, and
procure the same to be made either for money or otherwise, as well for
themselves as other, which is directly contrary to the doctrine of the holy
Ghost, in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Where at large he proves, that neither
the Priesthood of Christ can have any succession, nor his sacrifice any
repetitio^, without evident note of imperfection.

As concerning the fourth cause of Christ's Incarnation, that he is the only
Master and teacher of his Church, and has revealed unto us the perfect will
of God, and true way of Salvation, so that now after him, we should receive
no doctrine, but that is uttered by the voice of our high Sheeparde in his
holy word. Yes, says the Church of Rome, there be many weyghtie matters,
of necessity of salvation to be believed, which Christ in his written word
has not delivered unto us, and the same to be received with like reverence,
that the written word of God is.

Last of all, the fifte cause of Christ's Incarnation, that he came to be the
only Head, Ruler, Governor, and Directour of his Church, the Patrones of the
Church of Rome manifestly deny, saying: that Christ is in deed the only
head for salvation, but not for government, because the Pope is the
Ministerial head and governor, and directour of the universal Church,
wherein they manifestly alter the nature of Christ's kingdom. For whereas the
kingdom of Christ is not of this world, but a spiritual kingdom, wherein by
the word of God, and the power of his holy spirit, he rules and raygneth in
the hearts of true Christians, the Pope has transferred it to an earthly
kingdom and Empire, by which, as the Vicar of Christ he challenges a
universal government, not only over the Ecclesiastical state, but also over
all Princes and governors of the earth. This opposition and contrariety of
the doctrines of the Church of Rome, to the doctrine of y^ Gospel, if you
diligently mark and observe, you shall evidently see in them the spirit of
Antichrist, although not grossly and plainly, yet indirectly and colourablye
denying Christ, to have come in flesh. What shall I say, that the doctrine of
that Church does not only disgrace the office of Christ, in the work of our
redemption, but his person also, by brynging his humanity and the truth of
his body in doubt, while they teach, that the very natural body of Christ
is really in all places, or in ten thousand places at once, that is, in
every host consecrated through out the whole world? And what Christian
knows not, that it is the property of of God alone, and of no creature, be
it never so holy, to be in many places at once? Finallye I add, that the
Church of Rome teaches corruptlye, as touching Original Sin, freewill, and
the grace of GOD, Faith and Justification, good works and the merits of them,
the use of the Sacraments, and almost of all doctrines touching Christian
Religion. Therefore, I trust you now perceive both the parts of my second
proposition evidently proved, that is, that we sincerely confess and teach in
all true sense, that Christ is come in flesh, and they do not, therefore
according to the words of my Theme, I say unto you, If we teach you the
truth, why do you not believe us? If it be the only right way of salvation,
why is it not favorably received and embraced? If it be the glad tidings of
the Gospel sent by God unto you, why are the Messengers thereof disdayned and
contemned? People that do fear God, hear the word of God with reverence,
and not only hear it with the ears, but faithfully believe it in the heart,
and not only believe it, but constantly abide in it, and not only themselves
to abide in it, but by all means they can to labor to draw other to it, and
to repress all such as either reuolte from it themselves, or seek to disgrace
or discredit it in others. God is not more displeased with any thing, than
with the contempt of his word and Ministers. Thus says the Lord by Jeremy in
yt 6. chap. reproving the obstinacy of his people, Stand in the ways Jer. 6.
16.
and behold, and ask for the old way, which is the good way, and walk
therein, and there you shall find rest for your souls, but they said, we will
not walk therein. Also, I set watchmen over you, which said take heed to the
sound of the Trumpet, but they said, we will not take heed. But consider what
God adds immediately, Hear O earth (says he) behold I will cause a plague
to come Verse. 19.
upon this people, even the fruit of their own imaginations, because they
have not taken heed unto my words, nor unto my law, but have cast it of. And
in the last Chap. of the. 7. of the Chronicles, it is thus written, The Lord
God of their fathers has sent unto them by 2. Chro. 36. 15.
his Messengers, rising up early, and sending, for he had compassion on his
people, and of his habitation, but they mocked the Messengers of God, and
misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord rose against his people,
and till there was no remedy, for he brought upon them the King of the
Chaldees, who slew their young men with the sword. etc. God of his great
goodness, has sundry times sent into this land, his Messengers and Preachers of
his Gospel, and principally these twenty years last past, in which time, the
sound of Gods holy word has continually roong in the ears of men, yet was
the love of the Gospel never so cold, as even at this day, nor the hearts of
English men, so ready to revolt from it. It is lamentable to understand how
in all parts of the Realm, those Papists, which before time appeared to be
somewhat afraid, and sought by all means to hyde themselves, do now openly
show themselves, and desire to be known to be as they are. What their hope or
expectation is, the Lord knows, but surely it is full time, that her
Majesty, and her most Honorable Counsel, as they fear God, and love his
truth, do speedily look unto it, otherwise undoubtedly, the inconvenience
will be greater, than by authority will be easily stayde. The care hereof, I
leave to them, whom God has set in place of Government, only I thought it
my duetye, being appointed a watchman in the Church of God, to sound the
Trumpet in this place, and to give warning, that the blood of them that perish,
be not required at my hand, and withal, most humbly and hartilye pray unto
almighty God, that with the grace of his holy spirit, he will so direct and
strengthen the minds of them, whose principal charge this is, that that may be
done, which most tends to the glory of God, and maintenance of his truth,
and to the good state and preservation of this our natural Country.

Amen.
The special contents of this Book of Sermons, reduced into a necessary
Table of Common places.
A.
Acknowledge.
THe way to acknowledge God in man. Folio 192. Means to make those acknowledge
a God which do altogether deny him. Folio 191 Whosoever can not acknowledge God in
him self can not be said to be a man. Folio 193 Properties which can not but
be known in God if we do acknowledge him but only in his creatures. Folio 193
Afflictions.
That afflictions do no whitte discredit the power of the Gospel. Folio 7
How the godly do stay them selves in afflictions, so that they may not fall
from Christ, etc. Folio 200 Afflictions are laid upon the righteous to try
them withal. Folio 174. 175. 176.

B.
Baptism.
Fruitful doctrines of the Protestants concerning Baptism. Folio 30. 31
Papisticall untruths and abuses concerning Baptism. Folio 31
Benefit.
How we are to apply the benefit of the coming of Christ in the flesh every
man to himself. Folio 92. 93 The Church of Rome impugneth the doctrine of
applying the benefits of Christ's merits by faith. etc. Folio 94. 95. 96

C.
Calling.
Ordinary authority or calling is no just proof of true Doctrine. Folio 74
The Prophets extraordinarily set up by God to reprove the abuses of their
ordinary calling. Folio 75 Under the clothing of ordinary calling the wolf
is descried, and how? Folio 76
Christ.
Christ only is our advocate and mediator. Folio 231 Christ only is our
redeemer. Folio 231 Christ only is our priest to sacrifize for us which he has
done once for all. Folio 232 Christ is our only instructour. Folio 232 Christ
is the only head of the Church. Folio 233 Why Christ of necessity was to be
both God and Man, etc. Folio 140 Why Christ should necessarily be man 140.
Folio 141 Christ has no partakers in any of his offices. Folio 233 Such as
do but a little close with the world, are and stand in danger of treason to
Christ. Folio 200. 201 The Papists will have Christ to be a demi Savior. Folio
237. 238. 239. etc.
Church.
Christ compares the Church to husbandry. Folio 177 Why the Spirit of God
compares the Church to husbandry. Folio 178 The name of the Church abused by
the Wolves. Folio 77 The invisible Church consisting of the elect. Folio 20 Of
the visible Church, and the description of the same. Folio 20 The Church of
Christ is tied to no place. Fol. Folio 21 The number of the Church may be small.
Fol. Folio 21 None are openly of the Church, but such as are called thereto by
Gods word. Fol. Folio 21 The corrupt lives and foul vices of the fathers of
the Church of Rome detected, etc. Folio 98 Faith does ingraffe us into the
Church. Fol. Folio 21 The Church of Rome a Monster having three heads at once.
Folio 102 The Church of Rome has not in it the tokens of the true Church.
Folio 23 What Church is most likely to have false interpretations. Folio 39 The
marks of the Church. Folio 22 23 The increase of the Church by Martyrdom
showed in a similitude. Folio 182 Of dissoluteness of life in the Church of
Rome, etc. Folio 47 The Papists object the visible state of their Church, to
prove it the true Church. Folio 42 Gods true Church may be, and yet not
appear generally visible. Folio 43 That may seem to us the true Church which
is not. Folio 43 Examples proving a Church, and yet not visible, etc. Folio
43. 44. 45 The invisible state of the Church since the Apostles, does not
prove the Church to be no true Church. Folio 45
Coming.
What it is to deny Christ's Coming in the flesh, and that in two sorts.
Folio 235 Papists and not Protestants deny Christ's Coming in the flesh,
and how? Folio 235 The causes of Christ's Coming in the flesh. Folio 230 The
general and particular causes of Christ's Coming in the flesh. Folio 230 The
faithful Jews did eat and drink spiritually the Body and Blood of Christ
before his real Coming in the flesh, etc. ^35 A place ymagined where the dead
did rest before the Coming of Christ. Folio 132
Commonweals.
All Commonweals are not to be tied to one form of government. Folio 218 To
be disturbers of Commonweals, etc. is no new slander, nor now first objected
against gods true ministers. Folio 219
Contempt.
Considerations concerning Christ, which makes man's carnal reason to have him
in Contempt. Folio 2 The more excellent that me^ are in carnal reason only,
the more is theys Contempt of Christ. Folio 2 Contempt of Godliness of life
can not stand with the acknowledging of a God. Folio 191 The Contempt of
Christ and his Gospel in the beginuing of the world. ^

D.
Device.
Man in his excellency of carnal wit is not able to give any perpetuity to
his Device. Folio 4 The gouernemente and direction by Gods word preuayleth more
than any Divide of man. Folio 5 Of man's policy and Device, and what kind of
ground it is to Commonweals. Folio 8 How God can show himself, when all
man's Device fails, etc. Folio 8
Dissension.
Dissension of opinions is no new thing. Fol. Folio 54. 55 Dissension of the
Protestants about the Sacrament, etc. Folio 56 Dissension among Protestants for
apparel, etc. Folio 57 The bitterness of the Dissension amongst the Schoolmen
Papists. Folio 6 Dissension about original sin, and the virtue of
Sacraments. Folio 60. 61 Of the multitude of Dissentions among Papists in
sundry points. Folio 59. 60 Late Dissentions in opinions among Papists. Folio
62
Doctrine.
Protestants Doctrine of salvation is the Doctrine of the Scripture. Folio 234
The general end of the Protestants Doctrine, and what doctrine only they
mislike. Folio 234 Godliness may be pretended by some that loath true
Doctrine. Folio 216 None can have good conversation which are not sound in
Doctrine. Folio 216 Faith follows Doctrine. Folio 216 Contemners of Doctrine
were foretold of to come. Folio 217 How little their own method would profit
the^ of teaching manners without Doctrine. Folio 217 Most unnatural and
undutiful wars lawful by Papists Doctrine. Folio 220 What is the cause that
good Doctrine does not fructify in the hearers. Folio 222 What the Scriptures
show to be most commonly the cause why true Doctrine does not fructify. Folio
223 Doctrine is to be received upon trial. Folio 228 How to perceive
Protestants to have true Doctrine, and of what weight the matters are, wherein
they differ from Papists. Folio 228. 229

F.
Faith.
Faith does ingraffe us into the church. Fol. Folio 21 Faith follows
doctrine. Folio 216 No man can be saved for any good life, when he has not
true Faith. Folio 216 The force and effect of Faith set out at large. Folio
146. 147 Faith the mouth of the soul, whereby Christ is eaten. Folio 144
Matters of Faith may be better perceived by means of writing, than by man's
bare memory. Folio 25 Of the doctrine of justification by Faith only, and what
it procures. Folio 13. 14
Fortune.
A definition or description of Fortune declaring what it is. Folio 164 God the
creator, disposer, and preserver of all, and not blind Fortune. Folio 164
Nothing betideth man by Fortune, but all things by Gods direction. Folio 163
Freewill.
How profitable the doctrine is which is against Freewill. Folio 13 Opinion of
Freewill is unthankfulness. Folio 13 How we have Freewill, and how we have it
not. Folio 13

G.
Gentilitie.
Of the vain opinion of Gentilitie, and the danger of the same, this touches
contempt. Folio 2 Of heathenish Gentilitie, and the mischief by it. Folio 189
God.
Certain notable and excellent titles proper unto God. Folio 193 Who or what
God that is which is taught to be believed. Folio 193 Mocks against God and
his judgments. Folio 190 Against those that deny God altogyther. Folio 191
Means to make those acknowledge a God which do altogether deny him. Folio 191
Gospel.
Why we ought rather to esteem the Gospel than all earthly things. Folio 205
In what sort true professors of Christ and his Gospel must cleave to him and
it. Folio 199 How God has blessed England even in this late time of the
Gospel. Folio 65 That Princes do resist the Gospel, is no cause of discredit
unto it. Folio 65 The Gospel often flourishes when it is most resisted. Folio
66 How it comes to pass, that many seem first to be glad of the Gospel,
and yet afterward hate it, etc. Folio 197 Of some which now profess the
Gospel, which peradventure may dyslike of it hereafter, etc. Folio 198 Of
worldelie inconveniences, which do commonly follow the professors of the
Gospel. Folio 199 Why true professors of the Gospel can not by any means be
driven from it Fol. Folio 199 The mercy of the professors of the Gospel
compared with the cruelty of the Church of Rome. Folio 76 The Gospel evil
spoken of, because of such as ydlely profess and live not after it. Folio 109
The preachers of the Gospel exhort to holiness of life, to godliness, etc.
Folio 111 The preaching of the Gospel is not altogether fruitless. Folio 111
The godliness of the preachers of the Gospel compared with that of the
prelates of Rome, etc. Folio 112 What fruits have followed the preching of the
Gospel. Folio 113 Not the Gospel but our corrupt nature is the cause why our
fruits at these days are no better. Folio 109 Diverse sorts of enemies to the
Gospel. Folio 8. 9 Six objections against the Gospel, to bring it into
dyscredit, etc. Folio 10 A first objection against the Gospel, that it does not
further but hinder good conversation. Folio 10. 11. 12 A second objection
against the Gospel, that it makes this life less pleasant to us than it
should be. Folio 16. 17 18 A third objection against the Gospel, that we the
pretended professors there of are not of the catholic church. Folio 19 A fourth
objection against the Gospel concerning the leude lives of protetestantes,
etc. Folio 46 A fifth objection against the Gospel, that the professors of it
agree not in opinion. Folio 54 A sixth objection against the Gospel, that
ignominy and persecution does follow it. Folio 64 The estimation of Christ
and his Gospel. Folio 2 Of the power of the Gospel of Christ, and how many
ways it appears. Folio 3 Man needs not by the Gospel think himself
debased, etc. Folio 15 Of the power of the Gospel appearing in these latter
days. Folio 7 That the power of the Gospel is no whit to be discredited by
afflictions, etc. Folio 7 Contentions and wars have bin in other Nations
before the renewing of the Gospel. Folio 219 England never in such peace, as
since the embracing of the Gospel. Folio 219. 220 The stir following the
Gospel is not to be imputed to the Gospel. Folio 52. 53 How stirs do come
in the time of the Gospel. Folio 53

H.
Holiness.
Outward Holiness is no sure token of true teachers. Folio 69 The first clawe
whereby a Woolfe is known is trust in Holiness of life. Folio 70 The second
claw to know the Wolf by, is Holiness consisting in the observation of men's
conditions. Folio 71 The preachers of the Gospel exhort to Holiness of life,
etc. Folio 111

K.
Kingdom.
The Kingdom of God, what it is. Folio 199 Of the Kingdom of Christ, and what
is by it to be looked for. Folio 198

M.
Martyrdom.
The increase of the church by Martyrdom. 182 What increase only comes by
Martyrdom. Folio 182
Ministry.
There is more means amongst protestants to reform the Ministry, tha^ among
Papists. Folio 212 What is to be thought of Ministers, if they live offensiuely
etc. Folio 212 Others must live well, how so ever Ministers do live. Folio 226
The means now left to the Ministers, to redress the curiosity and objection
of hearers, for preaching either of doctrine or manners. Folio 218 What
Ministers should be able to do, when their doctrine is discredited by their
lives. Folio 208 A very commendable example of concealing Ministers faults.
Folio 213 A good example admonishing princes to beware of secret dealers
against Ministers. Folio 213 All Ministers are not to be evil spoken of,
because some deserve it etc. Folio 214
Miracles.
False Miracles wroght by false prophets to deceive Gods people. Folio 78. 79
Why God does not show such miracles as of old he did, etc. Folio 80 The end
whereunto godly Miracles do tend. Folio 80. 81

N.
Nature.
The definition or description of Nature declaring what it is. Folio 163 The
saying of the Heathens that all things stand* according to the course of
Nature, etc. Folio 192

O.
Opinions.
God suffers diversity of Opinions, even in his true Church. Folio 57
Diversity of opinions, in the East and West Church for Easter. Folio 58
Objection to convince protestants, for dissension of Opinions. Folio 55 The
Scholemen a^e full of diversity of Opinions. Folio 60 Disagreement in Opinions
amongst councils. Folio 62 Diversity of Opinions betwixt the university and
the Friars. Folio 62 Late dissentions in Opinions amongst Papists. Folio 62.
63 Dissentio^ in opinions is no new thing. Fol. Folio 54 The absurd Opinions of
them confuted, which imagine God to govern great things only, etc. Folio 165

P.
Papists.
The Papists will have Christ to be a demi-sauiour. Folio 237 Of obstinate
papistrie, in three sorts of Papists. Folio 194 England in most dangerous
perils by Papists. Folio 194 The means to remedy some kinds of Papists.
Folio 194 Cause of care in what places of credit Papists are put. Folio 195
Perfection.
What Perfection should be in the life of every one etc. Folio 226. 227
Pope.
Pope Gregory the first condemns the name of universal Bishop. Folio 99
Ambition in Pope Boniface succeeding Gregory next save one. Folio 99
Popes.
The Popes try it by the cares who shall be head. Folio 102 The Popes charity
showed to his predecessor. 100 The Popes treason against the Emperor. Fol.
Folio 101 Repugnancie even in the decrees of Popes. Folio 60 The Popes whordome
passed over. Folio 103 The cruelty of Popes taxed. Folio 103 The Popes pride
touched. Folio 104 The Popes covetousness noted. Folio 105 A conclusion upon
all the Histories of the Popes proceedings. Folio 108 Virtue and learning not
regarded in choice of Popes. Folio 48 Of horrible cruelties in Popes. Folio 48
Popes Sorcerers, Nicromancers, coniurers, poisoners. Folio 49 Popes did great
injuries even to Emperors. Folio 49 Of covetousness and extortions in Popes.
Folio 49 Popes seditious, and raisers of war. Fol. Folio 50. 51. Popes by
their strife and cursing one an other, set all Christendom by the ears. Folio
52
Popedom.
That the Popedom was to be gotten by ambition and bribery. Folio 48
Nicromancie and poison, steps to the Popedom. Folio 101
Prayer.
A brief Prayer for communicants, before they receive the Lords supper. Folio
157 Prayer to Saints is against Christ mediatourship and aduocatship. Folio 236
Prayer to Saints conteyneth besides it self, two other wicked things. Folio
236
Preacher.
Truth may be taught by the Preacher and yet three to one take no fruit by it.
Folio 223 Gods people do never make the wa^^e of godliness in the Preacher,
to be the cause that good doctrine does not fructify in the hearers. ^^^
Preachers.
It is an ordinary way of Satan to discredit true Doctrine by the life of the
Preachers. Folio 212 The first fault objected against Preachers, and the
answer. Folio 215 The second crime objected against Preachers, to discredit
their doctrine. Folio 218 The third matter objected against Preachers, and the
answer thereof. Folio 222 How they are to be accounted of, that deride
Preachers. Folio 190 The specialties of a Preachers duty Folio 209 Preachers
in delivering Gods will, must do it openly, without fear or negligence. Folio
209. 210 Preachers must give good example of life, aunswereable to their
doctrine. Fol. Folio 21^ Preachers are autorized by God in their calling. Folio
178 What estimation ought to be had of Preachers. Folio 178 How those are to
be thought of, who do lightly regard either preaching or Preachers. Folio 179
An objection made against the credit of the Gospel and the Preachers thereof.
etc. Folio 182 Some Preachers had but barren success, and yet was their
doctrine truth. Folio 183 The cause of barren success is all one to the
present Preachers as was to the Prophets, etc. ^84 How grievous it is for
Preachers to offend. Folio 185 Why Preachers offenses are not to be made
more grievous than they are. Fol. Folio 185
Princes.
How Papists do unlawfully ouerrule and abuse Princes. Folio 221 The full
right of authority is only by Protestants granted to Princes, etc. Folio 221
Principalities.
A principle of papistrie against Principalities which cannot but occasion
war. Folio 220 Papists and not Protestants alter titles of Principalities.
Folio 220 Papists and not Protestants challenge all temporal power of
Principalities. Fol. Folio 220.
Prophets.
Description of false Prophets examined. Folio 68 Distinction to be made
betwixt the clothing, and the fruits of false Prophets. Folio 69 How false
Prophets are discerned by their fruits, and chiefly by their Doctrine. Folio
84 Three points of Doctrine concerning false Prophets. Folio 84. 85 A second
point of doctrine, by which false Prophets are discerned from true teachers.
Folio 87. 88. 89. 90 A third point of doctrine to try the teachers whether
they are true or false Prophets. Folio 92 False miracles wrought by false
Prophets to deceive Gods people. Folio 78. 79 The teachers of the doctrine of
Christ's office and coming in the flesh, etc. found to be false Prophets. Folio
91 False Prophets are they that either in flat words deny Jesus to be
Christ, or by indirect means go about to teach it. Folio 86
Providence.
Of Gods special Providence for every thing. Folio 201 That we must rest upon
Gods Providence in our desiring things of this life. Folio 205 Four reasons
why for things of this life we should ever content our selves in and with Gods
Providence. Folio 205
Punishment.
The Punishment of sin. Folio 168 Punishments sent from God for examples
sake. Folio 169. 170. 171. 172. 173

R.
Repentance.
How God calls England to repent, and without Repentance what is like to
befall it. Folio 188
Reprehension.
How the enemies of truth dislike particular Reprehension. Folio 217
Riches.
Why Riches and pleasures are resembled to thorns. Folio 202 How Riches do
hurt, and worldly pleasures harm. Folio 202 Why it is so hard a thing for him
that abounds in Riches too be saved. Fol. Folio 202. 203 Two means to
withstand the mischiefs of Riches and worldly wealth. Folio 204 There is no
assurance to be had of worldly Riches. Folio 204 The estimation that is to be
had of all earthly things, and consequently of Riches. Folio 205

S.
Sacrament.
What a Sacrament is. Folio 118 How the body and blood of Christ are said to
be meat and drink: this concerns the Sacrament. Folio 137. 138 Against the
carnal eating and drinking of Christ body and blood in the Sacrament. Folio
142. 143 What to eat Christ's body, and to drink his blood as in the
Sacrament. Fol. Folio 144. 145. 146 The eating of Christ by faith, is no
derogation to the dignity of the Sacrament, and profit thereof. Folio 147 In
the use of the Sacrament is a double eating to be noted. Folio 148 Our senses
in the use of the Sacrament are helpers to our better receiving of the same.
Folio 148. 149. 150 The dissension of the Protestants for the Sacrament, is no
such great matter as the Papists make it. Folio 56 The wickedness of the
minister does not derogate any thing from the effect of the Sacrament etc.
Folio 119 The faith of the receiver, not the life of the minister does help or
hinder in the effect of the Sacrament. Folio 120 Fruiteful actions and
doctrines concerning the Sacrament of the Lords supper. Folio 33 Christ his
body, etc. received in the Sacrament of the Lords supper. Folio 34 The enemy
of Christ in the Sacrament, is not carnally to be understood. Folio 35
Papisticall untruths and abuses concerning the Sacrament of the Lords supper.
Folio 35 Blasphemous doctrine of wicked men's eating of the body of Christ in
the Sacrament refelled. Folio 152, 153 How we ought to prepare our selves to
the worthy receiving of the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood. Folio 154
How we are to make trial of our selves before we come to receive the Sacrament
of Christ's body and blood. Folio 154. 155. 156. A brief and pithie prayer for
communica^ts to say, before they receive the Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood Fol. Folio 157. 158 The faithful together with the outward sign receive
the inward things in the Sacrament. Folio 128
Sacraments.
The difference betwixt the Jews Sacrament and ours consists in external
signs, and respect of time. Folio 133. 134 Sacraments are badges, by which we
christians are known from Idolaters. Folio 150 Sacraments are the seals
whereby Gods promises are confirmed unto us. Folio 151 How Christ's body and
blood is truly and rightly to be eaten and drunken as well in the Sacraments,
as without them. Folio 142 What the internal part of Sacraments is. Fol. Folio
122 Sacraments are seals whereby the letters patents of our salvation in
Christ are confirmed unto us. Folio 123 Why Sacraments were ordained. Folio 125
Our infirmity the first cause why Sacraments were ordained. Folio 125 The
second cause why Sacraments were instituted is our exercise in the
remembrance of Christ's benefits. Folio 126 The third end whereunto
Sacraments were appointed. Folio 126 Sacraments consist of three parts. Folio
120 The second part whereof Sacraments do consist, is the spiritual or inward
thing Fol. Folio 122 The third part wherein Sacraments consist is the words of
Christ's institution and promise. Folio 124 The fourth cause why Sacraments
were ordained. Folio 126 The last cause why Sacraments were appointed. Folio
127 God the only author of Sacraments. Folio 118 Sacraments unite us unto
Christ. Folio 151 Sacraments are too link us together in brotherly unity.
Folio 151 Papisticall Sacraments of their own devise. Folio 32 Papists cannot
be known to be of the true Church by their Sacraments. Folio 30 Papisticall
number of sacraments. Folio 30 Sacraments marks of Gods Church. Folio 23 What
diffeeence is to be observed betwixt the Sacraments of the old Jews etc.
Folio 129
Salvation.
Christonly is al in all to Salvation. Folio 85. 86 It is not sufficient to
Salvation, to be idle professors of God, but also doers of godly deeds. Folio
160. 161 Blasphemous derogation to the merits of Christ's working our Salvation.
Folio 91 The letters patents and seals of our Salvation what they are. Folio
123 The old Jews under the law, had the same hope of Salvation by Christ,
that we now have. Folio 129. 130. 131 Protestants doctrine of Salvation, is the
doctrine of the Scripture. Folio 234
Scismes.
Christendom torn by Popish Scismes. Fol. Folio 103 Scismes in the East
Church which were Christians. Folio 58 Scismes between diverse of the ancient
fathers. Folio 58. 59 The Papists cannot without their own great shame object
Scismes to Protestants. Folio 59
Scriptures.
The learned adversary refuses to be tried by the Scriptures, and why? Folio
25 Why Papists do refuse trial by the Scriptures. Folio 26 Blasphemy of the
Papists against the Scriptures. Folio 26 The written Scriptures only are and
ought to be sufficient to try all truth. Folio 23 The Papists refuse trial
by the Scriptures. Folio 24 Three points, showing how the Papists esteem the
Scriptures. Folio 24. 25 How the Church may judge or use the Scriptures
concerning their truth. Folio 27 Grievous faults in the Church of Rome, by
taking her authority over the Scriptures. Folio 27. 28 Manifest false
interpretations of Scriptures used by Papists. Folio 28 Doctrines of Papists
against the Scriptures in six perticulars. Folio 28. 29
Sects.
Protestants are not to be blamed for the Sects that happen in the time of
the Gospel. Folio 55 Sects do more agree to Papists than to Protestants.
Folio 55 Papisticall Schoolmen, which divided themselves into Sects, and how
hurtful that is to Christianity. Folio 6
Sin.
God is not the author of Sin. Folio 166 The punishment of Sin, and what
are the causes that move God to plague men. Folio 168 We cannot acknowledge a
God, but that withal he must punish sin. Folio 191 Wicked men are plaged
of God for their own Sins to our example. Folio 162
Soul.
Faith the mouth of the Soul, whereby Christ is eaten. Folio 144 A comparison
betwixt the body and the Soul. Folio 138 What the Soul is to the body, that
is God to the Soul. Folio 138 How Christ was prepared to be the food of our
Souls. Folio 139 Christ the food of our souls. Folio 136. 137
Succession.
Papists object Succession as a true note of their Church. Folio 36 How the
argument of Succession has bin used by the fathers. Folio 37 Succession is
nothing without the doctrine of the Apostles. Folio 38 The true Church better
proved by doctrine than succession, etc. Folio 39 Personal Succession is no
sure proof that the Romish Church is the true Church. Folio 42

T.
Transubstantiation.
The absurdity of Transubstantiation. Fol. Folio 121

V.
Universities.
The cause of few Divines in Universities of the best sort of wits. Folio 64
Diversity of opinions betwixt the Universities and the Friars. Folio 62
Unthankfulness.
Opinion of fre will is Vntha^kefulnesse. Folio 13

W.
Wealth.
The means whereby the Wealth of England is wasted. Folio 227
Wickedness.
Of coloring Wickedness with other men's faults. Folio 224 What a man's
flattering of himself in Wickedness may come unto. Folio 224. 225
Word.
The true cause why the Word preched does not always bring forth fruit. Folio
185 The godly always take profit by the preching of the Word. Folio 185 Three
^o^tes of foul which eat up the seed of Gods Word in the high ways Fol.
Folio 186 The inconvenience of preaching the Word in generality. Folio 187
That the Word of God is resembled to seed, and why? Folio 179 The power of the
Word of god in it self, and in the estimation of the world. Folio 180 What Gods
Word works in the hearers. Folio 180 How gods Word prevails eue^ against
man's wisdom and cunning. Folio 180 The imaginations, practices, and means of
the wicked to withstand GODS Word. Folio 181 The Authority of the Word of
God is from it self, etc. Folio 26 Such are openly of the Church, as are
called thereto by Gods Word. Folio 21 Gods word is a mark of his Church. Folio
22 The causes which hold men from obedience to Gods Word. Folio 203 The
negligence of our days in hearing the Word. Folio 203 Of the power of Christ
appearing in himself and his Word. Folio 4 The government and direction by
gods Word prevails more than any devise of men. Folio 5 How the church of
Christ must preserve Gods Word, and deliver the meaning of it. Folio 27
Works.
Papistical justification by Works. Folio 29 The doctrine of justification by
Faith only does procure good Works etc. Fol. Folio 13. 14 That the Gospel
does not discourage man from good Works, and why? Folio 15

FINIS.

