The Constancy of True Love, OR. An Excellent Relation of the Untimely Death of
Two Faithful Lovers. To the tune of Down by a Forest


IN that fair fragrant month of May,
When earth her curtains does display,
I did by chance my corpse repose
Upon a bank, which Woods did close,
With green and leauy bowres about;
A place to shun the teadious rout
Of Tibs and Toms, for this intent,
This flowrie seat I did frequent.
Nature had strove to show her feate
In the composure of this seat;
For in a U^lley plain was found,
This place by hills incircled round.
Both lofty Beech and C^dars tall
Did shelter this rich Siluan hall.
Here Satires and the Naiades,
Here Siluans and the Driades,
Here rural gods and tripping Nymphs,
Did has their corpse in the pure lymphs,
And crystal streams which made a noise
In compassing this place of joys.
No fairer place nor fountain found
Dian' with golden tresses crowned,
And Lad^^ guarded in this seat,
the wihstling wind cooled summers heat
Here the nine Muses vs^e to dance,
Here the kind graces used in prance;
Here Phaebe his warbling harp did tune,
The lifesome months of May and June.
Here Philomel tuned melody.
Hither the chirping birds did fly,
Here Thrush and blackbird from their throats
strained diverse sundry pleasant notes,
Here the Nymph Echo in bellow ground
Di^ the la^^ (...) resound;
What harbor could the world spare
more trim, more neat, more sweet more tare?
Here as I sat musing alone,
Me thought I heard one grieve and groan,
Ah me poor wretch, this creature said,
Where at my senses grew afraid.
I started looking here and there,
To view the subject of this fear:
A Lady object to mine eyes,
I sound the effect of all these cries;
I hasted to enquire the c^use
Which did her weeping eyes amaze:
Behold, quoth me, my Love (alas)
Whose crimson blood here dies the grass.
The sweetest creature here lies dead,
That famous Europe ever bred;
I have my wronged Lover slain,
His death shall be the death of twain.
I praid her then for to relate,
The cause of his untimely fate;
She then scarce fetching of her breath,
Begins the Story of his death.
Blind Cupid (quoth she) with his dart,
In tender years did wound his heart,
Made subject to the love of me,
An actor of this tragedy.
His heart and mind together tried,
His love and mine together ti'ed,
Our parents sought to cross our will,
But we continued constant still.
Though time the disadvantage gave,
And we no place for love could have,
Yet still we sought to recompense,
Love with true love without offense.
We dwelt in neighboring houses ni^,
And getting conference thereby;
We did appoint under this tree
Is meat but disapointed be.
The second part, To the same tune.


When bright Aurora peeped out,
And Phoebus newly looked about,
I first (according to my vow)
made haste unto this plighted bough:
Here as I stayed for my Love,
Whose coming over-late did prove,
A Lion with inhumane paws,
Came to that well to cool his jaws.
His mouth was all with blood besmeared,
This instrument of Death I feared,
I sted to hide my self for fear,
And left behind my mantle there.
The Lion having sl^k'd his thirst,
Ran where I left my garment first,
But when he saw no place for prey.
He s^u^'d with blood my Liuerie:
And having m^s^ed thus the same,
Thither he went whence first he came:
But I knew not that he was gone,
And therefore stayed I hid alone.
In the mean time (Oh grief) came he,
Who promised ha^ to meet with me,
And under this our plighted bough,
He sought performance of our vow.
He found not me, but found my Coat,
All bloudied by the Lions throat,
Which when he saw with blood belayd,
My absence made him sore afraid:
What should he think, but that some beast,
Upon my carcass made his Feast:
He thought that the grim Lions whelpe,
Devoured me being void of help.
While he these events thus did brook,
The instrument of death he took,
A naked sword, which by his side,
Ready for Combats he had tied:
I have, quoth he, wrought my Loves death,
The end of her shall end my breath,
And thereupon thr^st to the hilt
His sword, and thus his blood he spilt.
That the first Passenger might know,
The dismal events of this woe,
He wrote and pinned a note thereof,
Upon his Hatt to show the proof:
Which I being void of sear at last,
And thinking all the danger past,
Returning from that hideous bed,
Whereto I from the Lion fled,
I found this Copy of his death,
And his dead carcass void of breath:
No sch^ ^o sighs no griefs, no groans,
No trickling tears, no mournful m^^nes,
No ejaculations, no cries,
No doleful Dittie. or Elegies,
Shall serve for to be ^asle his end,
Which for my love his life did spend.
In life his love did me pursue,
But by his death he proved it true:
If he then for my s^k^ ^id die,
As much for him why should not I?
Since death has us denied our right,
Then friendly death shall us unite,
And I will follow him in haste,
Who thought he followed me being past.
These words as soon as she had spoke,
She gave her self a deadly stroke:
She drew the sword out of his breast,
And in her own the same she thrust.
And as in life their hearts were one,
So are their lives together gone,
In spite of parents, time or place,
Fond love will run his wished race.
Thus have you heard a Tragedy
Acted by lovers constancy,
God send such lovers better speed,
Where feruency true Love does breed.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London for Francis Coules and are to be sold at his shop in the
Old-Bayley.


