AN ADMONITION TO THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND: WHEREIN ARE ANSVVERED, NOT ONLY THE
slanderous untruths, reprochfully uttered by Martin the Libeller, but also
many other Crimes by some of his brood, objected generally against all
Bishops, and the chief of the Clergy, purposely to deface and discredit the
present state of the Church.

Detractor and libens auditor, vterque
Diabolum portat in lingua.
Seen and allowed by authority.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1589.

TO THE READER.
I Am not ignorant (Gentle Reader) what danger I draw upon my self, by this
attempt to answer the quarrels and slanders of late time published in
certain Libelles, against the Bishops and other chief of the Clergy of the
Church of England. We see the eagerness and boldness of their spirit that
be the authors of them: we taste already the bitterness of their tongues and
pens. The raging fury of their revenge upon all which they mislike,
themselves dissemble not, but lay it down in words of great threatenings. I
must needs therefore look for any hurt, that venomous, scoffing, and unbridled
tongues can work toward me. And how should I hope to escape that, when the
Saints of God in Heaven do feel it? In the course of their whole Libell, when
they speak of Peter, Paul, or the Blessed Virgin Marie, etc: whom other
justly call Saints, their phrase in derision is, Sir Peter, Sir Paul, Sir
Marie. Surely it had becommed right well the same immodest Spirit, to have
said also Sir Christ, and so thoroughly to have bewrayed himself. Seeing they
have sharpened their tongues and hearts against heaven, we poor creatures on
earth must be content in our weakness to bear them. The darts, I confess,
of deceitefull and slanderous tongues, are very sharp, and the burning of
the wounds made by them, will as hardly in the hearts of many be quenched, as
the coals of Juniper. But I thank God I fear them not, though they bring me
greater harm, either in credit, living or life, then I trust that God that
sees, knows, and defends the truth, will suffer them. Ambrose being in
case somewhat like, says thus, Non tanti est vnius vita, quanti est dignitas
omnium Sacerdotum. If I therefore should hazard the one for the defense of
the other: I trust the godly would judge that I did that duty which I owe
to the Church of God, and to my brethren of the same function and calling.

What is the cause why we be with such spite and malice discredited? Surely,
because as the duty of faithful Subjects does bind us, living in the state
of a Church reformed, we do endeavor to preserve those Laws, which her
Majesty's authority and the whole state of the Realm has allowed and
established, and do not admit a new platform of government, devised, I
know not by whom.

The reasons that move us so to do, are these two. First, we see no proof
brought out of the word of God, that of necessity such form of Government
ought to be: Secondly, that by the placing of the same, it would bring so many
alterations and inconveniences, as in our opinion would be dangerous to the
Prince and to the Realm. Some of those inconveniences I have in this treatise
laid down, and leave them to the consideration of them, whom God has set in
place of government.

It may be some will judge that I am wordly affected, because I show my self
so much grieved with loss of our credit, and hinderance of good name among
the people. In truth, although a godly Minister should have no wordly thing
so dear unto him, as his credit: yet if the hurt went no further then to our
selves, we should make less account of it. But, seeing by our reproach and
infamy, the doctrine which we teach is greatly hindered, we ought by all
lawful means to defend it. Christ himself, in this respect, answered such
reproaches, as the enemies objected against him. As, that he was a friend
unto Publicanes and sinners: Matthew. 9.
That he wrought his miracles by the Matthew. 12. John 8.
power of Beelsebub: That he broke the Sabbath day: That he was a
Samaritane: That he had a devil etc. Saint Paul also to the Corinthians
against his Adversaries shows, that he was not a vain Promiser: That he
was not light and unconstant, and a wavering Teacher: That he did not teach
craftily, or corruptly dispensing the word of God: That he did not teach
ambitiously, as seeking his own glory etc. The like did a number of learned
Fathers of the Primitive Tertul. Justin. Melito. etc.
Church, at large answering those vile and reprochefull Slanders raised
against the Christians in those days. Augustine in a whole work answered
Assertions falsely fathered upon him: and so did many other. We seek not
therein our own praise and commendation. If I do insert particular praises
and commendations, I must say unto the Libellers, as S. Paul said to the
Corinthians, Si insipiens fui in laudando, vos me coegistis. If I have been
foolish in overmuch praising, your immodest reproaches, untruths, and slanders
do drive me to it. In this mine answer, I seek not to fatisfie all kind of
men, but only the moderate and godly. For the malicious Back-biter and Rayler
will never be satisfied: but the more he is answered, the worse he will be. If
my defense may take moderate place with the better sort, I shall be glad: if
not, I may not be excessiuely grieved with sorrow, but I must say with Paul,
Gloria nostra haec est, testimonium conscientiae nostrae. And with Job, Ecce in
caelis testis meus. This witness in heaven, and the witness of our own heart
and conscience, is sufficient to comfort us. And for our further help, we must
pray with David, who was lamentably beaten and bitten with viperous tongues,
Lead us, O Lord, in thy righteousness, because of our enemies: make thy way
plain before us. This God I trust, will deliver us from the danger of evil
tongues, and open their eyes and hearts, that they may see and understand what
hinderance they bring to the Gospel of Christ, which they will seem to
profess so earnestly.

Amen.
T. C.

The Contents of this Treatise.
AN Admonition to beware of the contempt of the Bishops and other Preachers.
Page 1. The end which the enemy of the Church of God respects in woorking
their discredit. page 23. Answers to the vntrucths and slanders uttered in
Martins late Libell. page 33. Against my Lord of Canterbury. page 37. Against
my Lord of London. page 51. Against the Bishop of Rochester, Lincoln, and
Winchester. page 62. 63. etc. The causes why the Bishops desire to maintain
the present state of the government of the Church, and what inconucniences they
fear upon the alteration thereof will come to the state of the Realm. page
79. etc. Answers to certain general Crimes objected to all the Bishops
without exception: as first, The Crime of Simonie and Covetousness. page 66.
The dispensing with Banes for money. page 100. The Sale of Christian liberty
in Marriages. page 103. That they make lewd and unlearned Ministers for money.
page 108. That they maintain an unlearned Ministry, and thereby be occasion of
Reuoltings, and many other mischiefs to the Prince and the Common weal: But it
is declared that there is no such unlearned Ministry as they pretend, and
therefore can not be an occasion of Reuolting, or any other like mischiefs,
but that there be other true and right causes to redress, of which it
behooves them that God has set in place, in time to have special regard, for
fear lest those mischiefs that be pretended, do increase. page 109. etc. The
Crime of mainteyning Pilling and powling Courts. page 135. The Crime of abusing
Ecclesiastical discipline. page 141. The Crime of ambition and griedie seeking
after Livings and promotion. page 144. That Bishops are carnally disposed:
which they show by hoarding up great sums of money, by purchasing Lands for
their wives and children, by furnishing their tables with plate and gilded
Cups, by filling their purses with unreasonable Fines and Incomes. page 148.
That the Prince ought to take away their great Lands and Livings, and set them
to mean Pensions, that in poverty they may be answerable to the Apostles.
page 157. which they take upon them to prove by the whole course of the
Scriptures. page 162. The Law. page 166. The Prophets. page 177. The example
of Christ. page 190. and the doctrine of his Apostles. page 221. Answer to the
prescription of the old Law, with the true meaning thereof. page 166.
Answer to the Allegations out of the Prophets, noting how absurdly and
affectionately they be abused. page 177. etc. Answer to the example of Christ,
and the true doctrine that is to be taken of the same. page 191. etc. Answer
to the doctrine of the Apostles, declating how the same is rightly to be
understood. page 221. A Declaration, how Ministers have been maintained from
the beginning: wherein is shevved, that they have had both Lands, Houses,
Rents, and Revenues. page 231. etc. A Declaration, that the wealthy state of
the Church was not ye chief cause of setting up Antichrist in his Throne, as
it is pretended: but that the Histories of that time do declare other causes of
more importance, which also begin to grow among us, and therefore good heed
to be taken in time. page 238. etc.
AN ADMONITION to the Church and people of England, to take heed of the
contempt of those Bishops and Preachers, which God has sent to them as
messengers to bring unto them the doctrine of their salvation.
WHen I call to my remembrance, the loathsome contempt, hatred, and disdain,
that the most part of men in these days bear, and in the face of the world
declare tovvarde the Ministers of the Church of God, as well Bishops as other
among us here in England: my heart can not but greatly fear and tremble at
the consideration thereof. It has pleased God now a long time most
plentifully to power down upon us his manifold and great benefits of
wealth, riches, peace and quietness, even in the midst of the flames of
discord, dissension and misery round about us, yea, and that more is, by the
space of these thirty years, by the continual preaching of the Gospel has
called us unto him (as before time he called his chose^ people of the Jews by
his Prophets) and yet do we not only not show any sound token, either of our
returning to him that called us, or of our thankful receiving his word which
he has sent us, or of conforming our lives thereunto, as he wills us: but
also evidently to the eyes and ears of all men, show our hatred and misliking
of those reverend persons, whom it has pleased God to use as his messengers
to call us unto him, and as his instruments to bring unto us the glad tidings
of the Gospel, which before with sword and fire was taken from us. For who
sees not in these days, that he who can most bitterly inueigh against
Bishops and Preachers, that can most boldly blaze their discredites, that can
most uncharitably slander their lives and doings, thinks of himself, and is
esteemed of other, as the most zealous and earnest furtherer of the Gospel?
Yea, they think it almost the best way, and most ready, to bring themselves in
credit and estimation with many. A lamentable state of time it is, wherein
such intemperate boldness is permitted without any bridle at all. What man
therefore that fears God, that loves his Church, that has care of his
Prince and country, can remember this thing, and not dread in his heart the
sequel thereof? When the Israelites derided and contemned the Prophets which
God 4. Reg. 17. and 18.
had sent among them, his wrath was so kindled, that he brought the Assyrians
upon them to their confusion. When the tribe of Judah did the like to Jeremy
and other messengers of God, 4. Reg. 24.
they were cast into the captivity of Babylon. When the Jews reprochefully
used Christ, Matthew. 23. Luke 13.
and with wicked slander persecuted his Apostles that brought to them the
light of salvation, their City and Temple was burned, their people slain,
and (as Christ threatened) their country made desolate, and given over to the
spoil. And shall we think that God will not remain the same God tovvard
us? Is his mind changed? is his justice slaked? is his hand shortened, that
either he will not, or cannot revenge, as he has bin wont to do? No (good
Christians) let us never deceive our selves with such vain and godless
cogitations. God remains always one, and is not mutable. His benefits to the
Israelites and Jews were never greater, then they now these many years have
been toward us: they were never more earnestly, either by Gods blessings
allured, or by preaching called to repentance then we have been. And yet our
unthankfulness, in some respects is greater then theirs, and our discourteous
using of his messengers not much inferior: yea, if the wills of many were not
brideled by Gods singular grace, in our Prince and governors, it is to be
feared, it would show it self as outrageous as theirs did. We have just
cause therefore to fear the like plague, which they in like case sustained:
And surely, it cannot be, but that it hasteneth fast upon us.

Objection. But some will say (I know) That I do great injury to the
Prophets, the Apostles, and other messengers of God, to compare them with such
wicked men, such blind guides, such covetous hypocrites, such antichristian
Prelates, such symonicall Preachers, as our Clergy men now are.

Answer. I do not compare them (good Reader) in worthiness of grace and
virtue, but in likeness of office and ministry. These have brought unto this
realm, the same light of the Gospel, the same truth of doctrine, the same
way of salvation, that the Apostles brought to the people of God in their time.
They are the mouth of God whereby he speaks to us and calls us to his
knowledge, as he did his chosen by other in the Primitive Church. And
howsoever by the liberty of this time, it pleases men in the heat of their
spirit to boil out with reproachful choler against them: yet I am sure, they
are not able to use more bitter and discourteous speech, then the like affection
uttered against the Prophets, against Christ himself, and his Apostles, as
after more evidently shall appear. I know, they being but frail and sinful
men in comparison of those blessed Saints of God beforetime, may give more
just cause of reproach, and minister more matter to evil tongues, then they
did: And yet I doubt not but the tenth part of that evil that unthankful
minds utter against them, shall never be found to be true. They that have the
fear of God, will not rashly judge of other, and christian charity will hide
the blemishes and faults of their brethren, and specially of the preachers of
the gospel sincerely teaching Gods truth. Charity would consider, that the
times are dangerous, and that we are lighted into these corrupt and perilous
last days, whereof Christ prophesied in the Evangelists, and therefore may
think our selves thrice happy, if we have tolerable Ministers, though they
be far from that rule that Christian perfection requires.

These days be like the times Nazianzen Apolog.
writes of. When they hear any thing spoken of a Minister or Priest, they by
and by conceive that of all, which is reported of one. And we are become a
Theater, not to Angels and men, (as that Champion Saint Paul says,) But we
are become a Stage to the most vile and abject men at all times, and in all
places, in the Streets, in Shoppes, at Tables, at feasts, at Councels, even to
the very playing scaffoldes, which I speak with tears, and are scoffed at,
even of the vile and contemptible players, etc.

The time was (says Calvin) when no man durst open his mouth against the
Ministers or Preachers of the word: But now there is no speech more
plausible. None of these base persons would speak a word, if they did not see
themselves backed by men of great authority, and receive reward for so
dealing. Such untruths would soon vanish and be forgotten, unless they
were nourished by them for whose pleasure they were devised. It may be hardly
thought, that the true zeal of God, and love of his Gospel is in that heart,
that can easily break out to the discrediting of the ministers and teachers
thereof. They would rather sigh in their hearts and groan in their
consciences, and pray unto God in the spirit of mildenes, to take away such
blemishes from the face of his Church, and to amend the faults thereof, if not
all at once; yet by little and little, as to his gracious providence might seem
best. For surely where hatred and contempt of the ministers is, there all
goodness must needs grow to confusion. And that makes me to fear, that to
our great evil, the ruin of the gospel is at hand among us. For where God is
loved and feared, there his word is embraced, and his ministers reverenced.

This is the cause of all evil (says Chrysostom) that the authority of
spiritual governors is decayed, no In 2. epist. ad Tim. 2. 1.
reverence, no honor, no fear is used toward them. Obey your governors (says
Paul) and be subject to them. But now al things are overthrown and clean
confounded: Neither speak I this for the governors sake, but for your own.
And a little after, He that honors the Priest honors God, and he that
despises the Priest, by little and little falls to this also, that he will
use reproach against God himself. He that receives you (says Christ) receives
me. And in another place, Matt. 10.
says the Scripture, Have his Priests in honor. Hence comes it (says
Cyprian) that the bond of the Lords peace is broken: Hence is it that
brotherly De zelo and liuore.
love is violated: Of this cause is it, that truth is corrupted, unity is
broken, that men lean to Schisms: because Priests are slaundered, Bishops
are envied, and every man, either complains that he is not ordained rather
then another, or else disdaineth to have another above him. etc.

The Jews were esteemed to despise God, because Nom. 16.
they made so small account of his servant Moses. And to Samuel (says the
Lord) They have not despised thee, but me. Yea, if it be an evil Minister,
(says Chrysostom) yet God marketh, that for his sake thou do reverence and
obey him, that is not worthy honor of himself, and therefore will he pay
thee thy reward. If he that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet,
receive the reward of a Prophet, it cannot be that he that reuerenceth and
obeys his ordinary Minister, shall want his reward. Christians should
remember that Bishops and Preachers are the Angels of God, the Ambassadors of
Christ, the Ministers Mal. 2. 2. Cor. 5. Ephesians. 2.
of our salvation, and therefore that they can not be slaundered or abused, but
the reproach must touch God himself. Esaias shows, when Esaias. 57.
the unthankful and disobedient Jews did mock the Prophets, did put out
their lips, and lell out their tongues in disdain of them, that God was
dishonored with the reproach there of. Happily it will be doubted, whether our
Bishops and Preachers be the ministers and messengers of God, or no. Yea, some
dare affirm boldly, that indeed they be not. But (good Christians) beware of
such cogitations, as displeasant and misliking affections may raise in you. If
they be not the ministers and messengers of God, if they be not sent of him,
then it is not the message of God that they have brought us: it is not his
word that they have taught us: they be not Gods Sacraments that they
delivered unto us, and so do a great number of us remain as no Christians.
Though they were such unworthy persons, as the unthankful minds of many do
imagine them, or as the uncharitable tongues and pens of some of late time
have blazed them: yet bringing nothing unto you, but Gods will out of his holy
Scriptures, (for in deed they have not done otherwise, howsoever their
doctrine be defaced) you should assuredly be persuaded, that they are the
instruments of Gods blessing unto you.

Although they that be superiors, says Chrysostom, and Governors, were
evil, and spotted with Chrysostom. in 2. ad Cor.
many faults: yet should not the Disciples withdraw them from their
instruction. For if Christ speaking of the Doctors of the Jews, that because
they sat in Moses Chair, they were worthy to be heard of their Disciples;
although their works were not commendable: what favor are they worthy of,
which contemn and trample under foot (as it were) the Prelates of the
Church, which by Gods goodness live moderately? If it be a foul matter for
one to judge an other, how much more is it unlawful to judge their Masters
and instructers? Baalam was a covetous prophet, and yet by him GOD blessed his
people. Now surely, if you have received at their hands the blessing of Gods
truth, and the light of his holy word, as in deed you have: the cogitation
of this benefit should move your minds more favorably to think of them,
and more charitably to judge of their doings. Or if you do not, look that
you leave not great occasion to men to think of you, that you make light
account of that doctrine of the Gospel, which as well their predecessors as
they, have, and do daily preach unto you: and so that you be not those men
that you would pretend to be. For men will think this: If these persons did
favor the Gospel, they would rather seek means to hide the blemishes and
imperfections of their Prelates and Preachers, then thus odiously to amplify
and paint forth their discredit to their utter shame and reproach in the
world. For, as much as in them lies, through their sides (in the hearts and
minds of many) they give a mortal wound to the doctrine, which by them has
now these many years been taught in this Realm. For will men judge (trow
you) that after so great darkness and ignorance of Gods word, as the
Church of Christ is reported by us to have been wrapped in, that God would
restore and send unto the same the light of his truth, by so wicked and
naughty instruments, as these men be imagined to be? (For they condemn not
only those Bishops and ministers that be now in place, but their predecessors
also, whose place these men occupy, and whose doctrine they confirm.) Men
will think surely, either that that doctrine which we call darkness and
error, was the true light, or that these Preachers can not be so evil
persons, as malice does make them. Christ would not suffer that the devil
should utter any thing to the glory of God, and will he suffer deuillish and
Antichristian persons to be the chief Preachers and restorers of his Gospel?
GOD always has appointed godly men to be the teachers and reuiuers of his
truth, as Abraham with the other Patriarchs, Moses, Aaron, David, the
Prophets, the Apostles. And in our days Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius,
Cranmer, Ridley, Jewel, etc. For God is never destitute of his godly captains
to govern his Church, and to set forth his word.

Objection. Oh, but our Bishops and preachers be covetous: they give not to
the poor: they imbesill the goods of the Church: they be woorkers and
clokers of Simonie: they hinder reformation of the Church, etc.

Answer. But how know you that? It were safe for your consciences first to
try and know the truth, before you rashly, to condemnation, judge your
brother. Common speeches, and coniecturall Chrysostom in 2. ad Timoth.
collections do oftentimes prove false. Do you think that al is true which
is spoken of your selves? I appeal to your own consciences. Surely he must
be a very happy man in these days, of whom some evil is not spoken, which,
in his own conscience, he knows not to be true. Now if this may, and
does happen to most private persons, how is it not likely that it happens
also to Bishops and ecclesiastical Ministers? Yea, of all other it is most
like, that they should feelethe bitterness of false and backbiting speeches:
The Ministers of God have been always subject to that cross. And in these
days, they have to do with so many and diverse kinds of enemies, as it is
not possible for them to escape the danger thereof. On the one side is the
Papist, whose errors they confute, whose obstinacy they punish: On the other
side are the fantastical spirits of Anabaptists, Of the families of the
love, and sundry others of the like sort, whose wickedness and corrupting of
the church, is by our ecclesiastical governors drawn into the light, reproved,
and repressed. Yea, and beside these, there are an infinite number of Epicures,
and Atheistes, which hate the Bishops and speak evil of them, and wish them to
be taken away: partly because they are as bridles to their loose and wicked
life: partly because they stay from them, that spoil and pray, which now
for a few years with great hope they have gaped after, and with much ado is
holden out of their jaws. Moreover, who knows not that they which have the
office of judging, correcting, and reproouing other, be their doings never so
sincere, shall often light into the displeasure and misliking of many, and
thereby get misreport? Therefore seeing Bishops, and other chief of the
Clergy, are besette with so many difficulties, and lie in danger ofso many
adversaries: no marvel though their blemishes be amplified, and (as the
proverb is) of every moul-hill made a great mountain. Yea, no marvel,
though their best doings and sincerest meaninges, by mislikers are depraved,
and with hard and uncharitable interpretations wrested to their reproof.
Wherefore al Christians that have the fear of God, and love his truth, but
principally the chief governors, that have authority to deal with the
Clergy, ought to take great heed, that by such deprauing reports they be not
carried to mislike or discredit them, which never justly deserved so great
reproof. Let them diligently consider what may fall unto themselves also,
being in place subject to like obloquie. What meant Saint Paul, when he said,
Against an elder, receive no accusation under two or 1. Tim. 5.
three witnesses? Surely he did see that the office of teachers and reproouers,
judges and governors, lies in great danger of evil speech and false
accusations, and therefore would not have them rashly condemned, either in
private or public judgment, much less to be defaced and contemned, to be
disobeyed and resisted, yea, though they were more grievous offenders, then
stands with the worthiness of their offices. Aaron had grievously offended,
and greatly distayned Nom. 16.
his calling, when he was the Minister to make the golden Calfe, and to
further the peoples horrible and shameful idolatry. I trust all the enemies
that the Bishops and Clergy men of England have; shall never be able to
prove, that in this time of the Gospel, any one of them did ever commit an
offense either so horrible, and displeasant in the sight of God, or so hurtful
and offensive to the Church. And yet after that, when Corah, Dathan and other
did call him proud Prelate, and said that he, and his brother used tyranny
over the people of God, how grievously God did take it, and how dreadful
punishment came upon them for misusing the Ministers of GOD, the history does
sufficiently declare: yea, though many of the offenders were of the highest
state, birth and lineage, among the people.

Objection. But it is a common Objection, and many think they sufficiently
excuse their contempt, when they say, That our Bishops and Preachers speak
well, and teach other to do well, but they follow not the same themselves,
and therefore men do not believe them, nor be any thing moved with their
preaching.

Answer. But I say unto you, if you follow any doctrine in respect of the
person that speaks it, you do not like good Christians: yea, if Paul speak
any thing of himself, you do not well, if in that respect you believe him:
but you should embrace 1. These. 1.
his doctrine and follow his teaching, because he is the Apostle and messenger
of God sent to deliver his holy will out of the scriptures, and as it were from
the mouth of God himself.

Objection. It will be said that Bishops should be The light of the world, the
salt of the earth, patterns and examples Matthew. 5. 1. Pet. 2.
to the flock of Christ.

Answer. I grant they should be so, and if they be not, the danger is
theirs: but Christ is the judge, whose office thou may not presume without
danger, to take upon thee, in judging his Minister. If they be not such as they
should be, wilt Romans 14.
thou headlong therefore run to thine own perdition, and cast thy self into
the danger of Gods wrath and displeasure, as well by rejecting the truth of his
doctrine, as also by rashly judging and condemning his Minister? Do thou not
remember that Christ says, That men shall make an account of every idle word
that they speak? Matthew. 12.
And shall they not make a straight account, think you, for their discourteous
and unsavory speeches, for their uncharitable and bitter raylings against
them, by whose means they have received the doctrine of salvation? Who can be
worse then a Publicane? And yet the Pharisey is greatly reproved, for that he
spoke so contemptuously of the Publicane, and so arrogantly preferred himself
before him. The Pharisey Chrysostom. in epist ad Romans
(says Chrysostom) by his evil speech did hurt the Publican nothing, but
rather did him good, yea, though the things were true that he spoke of him.
We also draw unto our selves extreme evil, by our evil speeches, even as
the Pharisey (as it were) did thrust a sword into himself, and receiving a
sore wound, departed. Let us therefore rule our untamed tongues, least we
also have a like reward: for if he that spoke evil of a Publican, escaped
not punishment, what defense shall we have, that are wont to rail against our
fathers? If Marie which once blasphemed her brother, was so sore punished, what
hope of health shall we have, which daily ouerwhelme our superiors with railing
speeches and taunts?

They that have the right fear of God, look first into their own bosoms:
they be inquisitiue of their own lives: they sit as judges and examiners of
their own consciences: but now a days (the more it is to be lamented) men
forget themselves: they look not into their own doings: they cast that end
of the wallet behind them, wherein their own faults are wrapped and be
always curiously prying into the lives and doings of other, and specially of
Governors, Bishops, and Ecclesiastical Ministers. In them, if they see never
so light a blemish, if in their face they can find never so small a warte, or
epsy in their eye never so little a moate, they are esteemed by and by
misshapen Bishops, blind guides, Monsters of Antichrist, not meet for any
room in Christ's church, not to be suffered in any christian common weal.
Yea, they loath their doctrine, Counsel and instruction, be it never so true
and good: they will not take any advise at their hands: yea, they say their
teaching can do no man good. Thus do they make those men stumbling stocks
for themselves to perdition, whom God of his singular grace and providence
has sent with his word among them, as Ministers of their salvation.

Think of Bishops and Preachers, how basely and uncharitably soever it shall
please you, they are not only the Surgeons of your souls, but your spiritual
fathers also. A natural child, though he suffer grief and injuries at his
fathers hand, will not be in a rage against him, but will take the hurts
patiently and mildely, so long as any way they may be borne. Although he see
faults in his father, (as that he is evil of sight, or doateth for age, or
that he be weak and staggereth as he goes, yea, and sometime falls to the
ground) he will not therefore undutifully chide his father, but by such means
as he can will help, and with his best endeavor, wipe away the filth, that he
gathers by his often falling: he will be mindful of that good lesson, Noli
gloriari in ignominia Patris Eccle. 3.
tui, neque enim tibi tam gloria quam probrum est. So surely, those good and
kindly children that love God their great father, will use themselves toward
their spiritual fathers in his Church. If Noah happen in his sleep to lie
somewhat uncomely, and leave open his nakedness, they will not follovv the
example of cursed Cham, and with derision fetch not their brethren only, but
their fathers enemies also to behold it, that he may be for ever shamed, and
the adversaries mouths opened against him: They will rather with blessed and
obedient Sem and Iaphet, take the garment of christian charity, and going
backvvarde hide their fathers nakedness, yea, and happily with the rusling of
their feet, or by casting on of the garment, purposely wake him out of his
sleep, that he may understand how uncomely he does lie, in the derision,
not only of their unkind brother, but of other also that seek his reproach,
and by that means be taught to take heed that he do not fall on sleep again
in such uncomely manner.

Chrysostom complains at this unkindness: Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Romans
What could be more happy then they? What more miserable then we? for they
gave their blood, and their life for their Masters, but we will not vouchsafe
to utter so much as a few words for our common fathers, when (...) them
reproched, backebited, slaundered, both of their own and of others: for we
neither reprove or repress such cursed speakers: yea, I would to God we our
selves were not the first accusers. Surely we hear not such opprobrious
rebukes at the mouths of Infidels, as we see powered out against our
superiors, by them that are of the same religion. Thus much have I spoken, and
the longer stood upon this matter (the Lord knows) not so much to help the
credit of them that be blamed, as, if it may be possible, to turn away from
us Englishmen the great danger of our unkindness in abusing them, by whom
God has delivered unto us so great and inestimable benefits.

Objection. Some perchance will ask me, whether I entend by this means to
cloak and hide the corrupt and naughty life of the chief ministers of the
Church, whereby they slander the Gospel, deface their calling, and be an open
offense to a great number of godly.

Answer. I answer, God forbid I should have any such meaning. Their great
offenses I greatly reprove, and think them worthy, upon trial of truth, not
only of blame, but also of more sharp punishment, then any other, for that the
offense given by them is greater. And we have a Prince and Magistrate, who by
Gods law, if there be so just cause, both may, and ought to deal with them,
neither can their authority be refused, they claim not exemption.

But as for their smaller faults, Christian charity forces me to wink at
them, because I know greater matter in my self. And I see they are men, and no
Angels, and they live in a perilous time, and have many occasions to offend,
so that it is harder for them to stand upright, then for some other that are
in private state. He is an Angel that never falls, he is no man. Men are
frail, and in danger to sin, though they have otherwise great graces. If
any of them have fallen with Aaron, to any great and horrible offense, I trust
they are with him also risen by repentance, and with tears, in the mercy of
God, washed away their wickedness: Or, if they have not, I must needs say
with Christ, Better it were that a Millstone were hanged about their necks, and
they cast into the sea, then that by their continuance in evil, they should
be occasion that any should fall from God, or reject his Gospel. As their
virtues are more profitable and beneficial to the Church of God, then the
virtues of other private persons: so are their vices and faults more hurtful
and dangerous. They stand on an high place where all men's eyes are fastened
upon them: their least faults cannot be hid, and the greatest are of all
men abhorred. A wart in the face, and a blemish in a Bishop, is no small
disfiguring of either of them. If other men's faults be seen, the offense is
not accounted great: but if a bishops be espied, it is esteemed, not according
to the greatness of the thing, but according to the dignity of the person. He
that knows the will of his Master and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes.

Sacerdos (says Chrysostom) sipariter cum Subditis In Matt. 8. homil. 27.
peccat, non eadem sed acerbiora patietur. If a Priest shall offend as the
inferior does, he shall suffer not the same punishment, but far greater.

It behooves them therefore in the fear of God, to look more diligently
about them then any other, and specially in these miserable days, wherein all
men's eyes are so curiously set upon them, that they almost clean forget to
look any thing upon themselves, or to find fault with any other, then with
Ecclesiastical persons and officers.

Objection. Here some perchance will take me in mine own turn, and
conclude against all that hitherto I have spoken, yea and against the whole
purpose of my vvriting: That if Bishops offenses be so grievous and hurtful,
more then other men's are, and that our Bishops and Ecclesiastical Ministers,
are seen to commit so soul and heinous faults: that they are worthy of all
that evil that is spoken against them, and that I cannot justly blame these
persons, that with great zeal do reprove these their doings, so hurtful to
the Church of Christ, and so dangerous to the people of God.

Answer. Surely, if all be true that is written and spoken against them, (as
I trust, and in part I know, it is not) I must needs confess, and were
wicked if I vvoulde deny, that they had justly deserved whatsoever evil
could be uttered of them. For sure I am, if, as I say, all were true that is
spoken, that they should be as detestable as any heretics that ever were in
the Church, yea, as the Pope and Antichrist himself, whose pillars and
vpholders, they are called and accounted with many. And yet can I not excuse
them, which in such manner do persecute them with the bitterness of their
tongue and pen, no more then I can excuse Nabuchodonosor, or any other tyrant
that plagued the people of God, offending against his law. For whatsoever
God in his providence respected, they looked only to the satisfying of their
covetous, ambitious, cruel and bloody affection: And so, whatsoever God
regards in chastening his negligent Ministers, or in waking them out of
sleep with the sourre of infamy and reproach: yet by their virulent and
unseasoned speeches that are used, by the scornful and disdainefull
reproaches, by the rash and uncharitable untruths, I fear it may be too
truly gathered, that they which be the instruments thereof, seek to fulfill
their envious, proud and disdainefull appetites, or the working of some other
purpose, which they look to bring to pass, by the discrediting of the
Bishops, and other chief of the Clergy, which be as great blocks and stops
in their way. Qui habet aures ad audiendum, audiat. But let such persons in
time take heed, when God as a merciful father, has chastised his children
sufficiently, and stirred them to remember their duties, that he cast not the
rod into the fire, as before time he has used to do, and bring the reward of
their unchristian dealing upon their own heads. If right zeal, with
conscience and detestation of evil, were the root of these inuectiues, which
so boil in loath some choler and bitter gall against the Bishops and other of
the Clergy: surely, the same spirit would move them to break out into like
vehement lamentations against the evils and vices, which show themselves in a
great number of this Realm: I mean, the deep ignorance and contempt of God
in the midst of the light of the Gospel, the heathenish security in sin and
wickedness, the monstrous pride in apparel, the voluptuous riot and
sensuality, the excessive buildings and needelesse nestes of men's treasures,
which be as cankers consuming the riches of this Realm.

What shall I say of the looseness of whoredom and adultery? the wrongful
wresting by extortion, bribery, and usury? the crafty cosening for private
commodity? the liberty in false swearing and perjury? with the heap almost
of all other vices where with man's life may be distained? so that if some stay
were not by moderat government, and some mean number restrained in conscience,
by the doctrine of the Gospel: it were greatly to be feared, that our
wickedness would grow in haste to such perfection, as it would presently
pull out of heaven Gods wrath against us. But all these things are wrapped up in
deep silence among most of these men, unless it be to vpbraid Bishops as
causes thereof, and the corrupt government, as it is thought, of this Church,
with the rich and wealthy states of Bishops, pretended to be the only cause
of Gods indignation toward us. But this is the wicked working of the devil, to
turn men's eyes from their own sins, that they may not acknowledge them, and
by repentance turn away the displeasure of God and his justice hanging over
us, and, if it be possible, also to destroy the course of the Gospel, that
has been so long with so small fruit among us.

But here I have to advertise the godly, and chiefly the Prince and
Magistrates, that they be not abused and led by the cunning that Satan has
always used, to deface the glory of God, and disturb his Church. When Satan
sees the doctrine of Truth to spring up amongst men, and somewhat to prosper:
when he sees wickedness and vice by diligent preaching to be repressed, and
thereby his kingdom of error and wickedness to decay, and the glory of God
to increase: then he bestirreth him by all means he can. And if by Gods good
providence the Princes and Magistrates be such, as by sword and fire he cannot
either overthrow it, or work some mischief against it: then seeks he by
lying and slander to discredit and deface the messengers that GOD sends with
his word, and instruments that he uses to advance and set forth his
truth, by this means to work hinderance to the truth it self. When Jeremy
preached the will of God earnestly and truly unto the Jews, were there not
false Prophets, and other very near the Prince, which persuaded him and other
rulers, that he was a naughty man, not worthy to live? that he was an
enemy to his Country? that he conspired with the Babylonians, and was with
money or otherwise corrupted by them, to persuade the people of Judah, not to
refuse their subjection? When God by the Jews in captivity, and by the
favor of the Queen Hester, began to spread Hest. 3. and 4.
his knowledge among the Gentiles, so that their heathenish idolatry was
somewhat blemished, the devil raised up a fit instrument by such means as
before is mentioned, to work their confusion. For Haman came to king Assuerus,
and said, There is a people dispersed throughout all the provinces of thine
Empire, not agreeing among themselves, using new laws, and contemning thy
ordinances, and thou know it is not expedient for thy kingdom, that they
should be suffered to wax so insolent. And if it shall please thee to
appoint, that they may be all put to death, I will bring in ten thousand
talents into the kings treasure. It was a shrevvd tale to persuade a Prince.
For he tempered his hateful and slanderous lying with the sweet savvce of
gain and commodity. The subtle Satan did see, that sometime they which
otherwise are good Princes, when hope of great benefit is offered, will be
more easily persuaded to some kind of hard dealing, which otherwise they
themselves would not like. When John Baptist was sent to prepare the way for
the coming of Christ, though he were a man of very austere living, did not
the Pharisees persuade the people and chief rulers, that he was but an
hypocrite? that he was possed with a devil, and therefore that his doctrine
should not be believed? When Matt. 11. John 8.
Christ himself came, a perfect pattern of all temperance and godly virtue,
did they not say, that he was a glutton, and a wine bibber? a Samaritane? a
friend of Publicanes and sinners? a worker with devils? a seducer of the
people? etc. and by this means in the hearts of many wrought the discredit
both of his doctrine, and of his miracles? In like manner dealt Satan with his
instruments against the Apostles and godly professors of Christian religion in
the Primitive Church, as it appears in the Ecclesiastical Histories and
ancient Fathers. For malicious tongues and pens did spread abroad of them,
that they Tertull. Apolog in Epist. Mar. Collec. apud Eusebius.
murdered their children, and did eat them: that usually at their assemblies
they committed incest: that they worshipped the sun: that they worshipped an
ass head: that they were traitors to the Empire: that they were general
enemies of all mankind: with an infinite number of other like false and
slanderous crimes, and by this means the wicked enemies of Christ raised
those grievous and terrible persecutions, wherewith the Church was vexed the
space of three hundred years under the Emperors. Yea, and this craft of the
devil ceased not under the Christian Emperors. For then stirred he up
schisms and factions, errors and heresies, almost in number infinite, and
still by backebiters and slanderous instruments, defaced and brought out of
credit the godly and learned bishops, which were as the pillars of Christian
truth, against the enemies of God and his Church.

Constantine that worthy and godly prince, at the beginning favored and
furthered all those reverend and learned Bishops that did maintain the
doctrine of Nicene Council against the Arians: but after that Eusebius of
Nicomedia, the great patron of that heresy, had procured friends in the
court, and thereby crept in some credit with the Emperor, he, and the residue
of his sort, devised shameful slanders against Athanasius and other, that, in
the end, with great displeasure of the Emperor, he was banished into France,
and there continued all the reign of the said Constantine. His enemies with
great impudency, had Theol. lib. c. 26. Athan. Apol. 2. Socrat lib. 1. cap 30.
Theodor.
charged him with shameful untruths, as that he cruelly and unjustly had
excommunicated diverse persons: that as a covetous extortioner, he had oppressed
the country of Egypt with exactions: that he had committed adultery with a
strumpet, who was brought before his face to avouch it to be true: that he had
murdered Arsenius, and used his arm to work sorcery: that he sent money to
one that went about treason against the Emperor: Socra. lib. 1. cap. 35.
that he had affirmed in threatening words, that he would cause the city of
Alexandria to send no more tribute-corne to Constantinople for the Emperors
provision, as before time it had used to do. As they dealt with Athanasius, so
did they in like manner with Eustathius, Macarius, and al other godly Fathers
which defended the true faith of Christ, and set themselves against the
endeavors of heretics, and other seditious and factious spirits. And in like
manner were other used after that time, as Ambrose, Cyrill, and Chrysostom. It
were a matter almost infinite to recite the examples thereof, and to show how
like they are to the attempts of some in these days.

And although it pleased GOD by strange means at that time to reprove sundry
of those shameful untruths devised against many: yet by stout affirmation
and colorable proof, through friendship, many of them took such effect, that
sundry worthy and good men were put out of their bishoprikes, driven into
banishment, and put to death, to the great trouble of the Church, and exceeding
hinderaunce of christian faith for the space of many years. We read in
histories, that Philip king of Macedony, a subtle and politic prince, who is
thought to have conquered more by craft and cunning, then by force of war and
dint of sword, minding to bring the Graecians under his subjection, in
concluding an agreement with them, conditioned that they should deliver unto
him their Orators as the very firebrands of discord among them, and the only
occasioners of that displeasure and misliking, that was between him and them.
At which time Demosthenes one of the Orators, speaking for himself, admonished
the Athenians to call to their remembrance, the parable between the
shepheardes and the wolves. The wolves pretending desire of agreement between
them and the shepherds, persuaded them, that all the cause of their
displeasure, was the unseasonable barking of the dogs: and promised great
amity, so that they would put away their ill-fauoured curres and mastiues.
But when the dogs were removed, the wolves took their pleasure in spoiling
the flock more cruelly then ever they did before. So (says Demosthenes) this
King Philip, under pretense of friendship, seeking his own benefit, would
have you to deliver up your Orators, which from time to time call upon you, and
give you warning of his subtle and crafty devises, to the end, that when you
have so done, ere you be ware, he may bring you and your city under his
tyranny. And this saying of Demosthenes proved after very true indeed. Even
so (good Christians) the subtle serpent Satan, prince of darkness, seeking
to bring the Church of England under his kingdom again, from which by the
mighty hand of God it has been delivered, indeuoureth cunningly to persuade
the shepheardes, that is, the chief Governors of this realm, to put away
their barking dogs, that is, to put down the state of Bishops, and other
chief of the Clergy, to take away their lands and livings, and set them to
their pensions, the sooner by that means to work his purpose. And here in he
turns himself into an Angel of light, and pretends great holiness, and the
authority of Gods word, and the holy Scriptures. For such a subtle Protheus
he is, that he can turn himself into all manner of shapes, to bring forward
his devise.

The crafty enemy of the Church of GOD, does well know the frailetie and
corruption of men's nature, that they will not of themselves easily bend to
that is good, unless they be allured unto it, by the hope of benefit. He
understands that Honos alit arts, and if he shall by any cunning be able to
pull away the reward of learning, he right well sees that he shall have
far fewer dogs to bark at him, and almost none that shall have teeth to
bite those hell hounds, that he will send to devour and destroy the flock
of Christ. Happily there may be some young Spanielles that will quest lauishly
enough, but he will not fear them, because he knows they will have no
teeth to bite. If the state of the Clergy shall be made contemptible, and
the best reward of learning a mean pension: he foreseeth that neither young
flourishing wits will easily incline themselves to godly learning, neither
will their parents and friends suffer them to make that the end of their
travail. To bring this to pass, he works his devises by sundry kinds of
men: first, by such as be Papists in heart, and yet can clap their hands, and
set forward this purpose, because they see it the next way, either to
overthrow the course of the Gospel, or by great and needelesse alteration, to
hazard and endanger the state of the common weal. The second sort are certain
worldly and godless Epicures, which can pretend religion, and yet pass not
which end thereof go forward, so they may be partakers of that spoil, which
in this alteration is hoped for. The third sort, in some respect the best,
but of all other most dangerous, because they give the opportunity and
countenance to the residue, and make their endeavors seem zealous and godly.

These be such which in doctrine agree with the present state, and show
themselves to have a desire of a perfection in all things, and in some respect,
in deed, have no evil meaning, but through inordinate zeal are so carried,
that they see not how great dangers by such devises they draw into the Church
and state of this Realm. How great perils, even small mutations have brought
to Commonweals, the knowledge of Histories, and the observation of times,
will easily teach us.

Objection. But in this place me thinks I hear some cry out with earnest
affection against me, and say, that I show my self to be a carnal man, and
in this matter of the Church use carnal and fleshly reasons out of human
policy, and do not stay my conscience upon Gods word and the holy Scriptures,
where unto only, in the government of the Church we should cleave, though all
reason, and policy seem contrary.

Answer. If I do stay my self, and ground my conscience upon humane
policy, in any matter of faith and religion, I must needs confess my self
to be worthy great blame: But if in some things perteining to the external
form of government, or the outward state of the Church, I have respect to
Christian policy, not contrary to Gods word, I see no just cause, why I
should be misliked, if, in consideration of the corrupt affection of man's
nature, I wish the state of a Christian Church and common weal to be such,
that young and towardly wits, not yet mortified by Gods spirit, may be
allured with the hope of benefit, to the study of learning, and principally
of the holy Scriptures, leaving the secret direction of their mind to God. I
trust no man can with good reason reprove this my desire, and in the course of
my writing, no man shall justly say, that either I do stay mine own
conscience, or will other men to ground theirs, upon reason and policy only,
without the word of God. For neither will the fear of God suffer me so to
deal, in matter of such weight, neither do I see, that by such means I can
further the cause that I write of.

Many Pamphlets have been of late years partly written, and partly printed,
against the whole government of the Church by Bishops, and those in sundry
sorts, according to the nature and disposition of the Authors, but in all,
great protestation of evident and strong proof out of the Scriptures, and
other writers: But especially there is one which I have seen, the writer
whereof makes this solemn protestation following.

That as he looks to be acceptable to the Lord, at the judgment of the
immaculate lamb, in his accusation that he makes against the Clergy of this
Realm, he will not cleave to his own judgment, nor will follow his own
brain, nor will of himself invent ought, nor untruly blame ought, but will
faithfully and untruly, sincerely and incorruptly, rehearse the holy
Scriptures, and the sentences, acts, and deeds of other learned men, which
determine and agree upon those things, that he lays down against them.

You may well understand therefore, that such an accusation will not be
answered and shifted away with humane reason only. The matter must have more
pith and substance in it. But howsoever that accusation will be answered, I
would the author had performed his protestation as faithfully, as, to carry
some credit and favor, he laid it out solemnly. Then should not his
writing contain so many uncharitable, and contemptuous speeches, so many
slanderous untruths, so many wrested Scriptures, so many false conclusions,
so many impertinent allegations, as he does use.

The purpose to persuade so great and dangerous a mutation in a common weal,
should have carried with it, not only more truth, and comeliness of speech,
but also more weight of matter, and sound substance of proof. But such is the
liberty of this time, and such is the manner of them, that to slander and
deface other, pass not what they speak or write.

I will now come to answer briefly some particular slanders uttered against
some Bishops and other by name.

Against the slanderous Libels of late published under a feigned and fond name
of MARTIN MARPRELATE.
OH my good Brethren and loving Country men, what a lamentable thing is this,
that even now, when the vievve of the mighty Navy of the Spaniards is scant
passed out of our sight: when the terrible sound of their shot ringeth, as it
were, yet in our ears: when the certain purpose of most cruel and bloody
conquest of this Realm is confessed by themselves, and blazed before our eyes:
when our sighs and groans with our fasting and prayers, in shevve of our
repentance, are fresh in memory, and the tears not washed from the eyes of
many good men: when the mighty works of God, and his marvelous mercies in
delivering us, and in scattering and confounding our enemies, is bruted over
all the world, and with humble thanks renowned by all them that love the
Gospel: when our Christian duty requires for joy and thanksgiving, that we
should be seen yet still lifting up our hands and hearts to heaven, and with
thankful minds setting forth the glory of God, and with Moses and the
Israelites singing praises unto his Name, and saying, The Lord has triumphed
gloriously, the horse and the Rider, the Ships and the Sailors, the soldiers
and their Captains he has overthrown in the Sea: the Lord is our strength,
the Lord is become our salvation, etc. That even now (I say) at this present
time, we should see in men's hands and bosoms, commonly slanderous
Pamphlets fresh from the Press, against the best of the Church of England,
and that we should hear at every table, and in Sermons and Lectures, at
private Conuenticles, the voices of many not giving praise to God, but
scoffing, mocking, railing, and deprauing the lives and doings of Bishops,
and other of the Ministry, and contemptuously defacing the state of
Government of this Church, begun in the time of that godly and blessed
Prince, King Edward the sixth, and confirmed and established by our most
gracious Sovereign. What an unthankfulness is this? what a forgetting of our
duty tovvarde God, and tovvarde our brethren? what a reproach to our
profession of the Gospel? what an evident testimony to the Adversary, of
our hypocrisy, and deep malice laid up in the bottom of our breasts, even
in the midst of our troubles, when these Pamphlets were in penning? The
common report goes, and intelligence is sundry ways given, that the Enemies
of this land have rather their malice increased tovvardevs, then sustained a
full overthrow: and therefore by confederacy, are in making provision for a
new invasion, more terrible in threatening, then the other. Which may seem
more easy to them, because they now know their own wants, and our
imperfections: For which undoubtedly, they will prepare most carefully. For
the children of this world, are wiser in their generation, then the children
of God. What then means this intemperate, uncharitable and unchristian
dealings among our selves, at such an unseasonable time? but as it were, to
join hands with the Seminaries, Jesuits, and Massing priests, and other
Messengers of Antichrist, in furthering their devises, by distracting the
minds of the Subjects, and drawing them into parts and factions, in
increasing the number of Mal-contents, and mislikers of the state: which make
no account of religion, but to make their commodity, though it be with spoil
of their own country, if opportunity serve? In pulling away the good and
faithful hearts of many subjects from her Majesty, because she mainteineth
the state of Church-gouernment, which they mislike, and which is protested to
them, to be profane and Antichristian.

There are of late time, even within these few weeks, three or four odious
Libels against the Bishops, and other of the Clergy, printed and spread abroad
almost into all Countries of this Realm, so fraught with untruths,
slanders, reproaches, raylings, reuilings, scoffings, and other intemperate
speeches: as I think the like was never committed to Press or paper, no not
against the vilest sort of men, that have lived upon the earth. Such a
prejudice this is to the honor of this State and Government, as never was
offered in any age. For these things be done with such impudency and
desperate boldness, as if they thought there were neither Prince, nor Law,
nor Magistrate, nor ruler, that durst control them, or seek to repress them.

The author of them calls himself by afained name, Martin Marprelate: a very
fit name undoubtedly. But if this outrageous spirit of boldness be not
stopped speedily, I fear he will prove himself to be, not only Mar-prelate,
but Marprince, Mar-state, Mar-lawe, Mar-magistrate, and all together, until
he bring it to an Anabaptisticall equality and community.

When there is seen in any Common wealth such a loose boldness of speech,
against a settled law or State, it is a certain proof of a loose boldness
of mind. For, Sermo est index animi. that is, Such as the speech is, such is
the mind. Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur. It has also in all Histories been
observed, that loose boldness of mind tovvard the Superiors, is joined
always with contempt: and contemptuous boldness is the very root and spring
of discord, dissension, vprores, civil vvarres, and all desperate attempts,
that may breed trouble and danger in the State. Yea, and if they be hardened
with some continuance of time, and hope of impunitie, and some multitude of
assistance gathering unto them: what may follow, I leave to the wisdom
and discretion of them, that God has set in place of Government.

These Libellers are not contented to lay down great crimes generally, as some
other have done, but with very indecent terms, charge some particular Bishops
with particular faults, with what truth you shall now understand.

They first begin with the most reverend, the Archbishop of Canterbury:
which crimes and reproaches, because they are many, and of no weight or
likelihoode of truth, I take only the chief, and note the pages wherein
they are, setting the answer after, very briefly.

But in those that touch my Lord of London, because they are by lewd tongues
drawn into more common talk, and his person most slanderously inueighed
against and discredited: I thought it necessary the things should be more
fully and amply declared, that the truth of them might be better conceived.

For as much as I have not been curious in all my life to examine the doings of
other, having enough to do with mine own, I have in these matters used the
instruction of them, whom no honest man may in Christian duty suspect of
untruth: and therefore in conscience I think the things to be true as I have
laid them down.

An answer to such things as the most Reverend the Archbishop of Canterbury
is particularly charged withal in the Libell.

His Grace I warrant you, will carry to his grave, the Libel. page 1.
blows etc.

God be thanked, he never felt blow given by him or any other in that cause,
except the blows Answer.
of their despitefull and malicious tongues, which notwithstanding, he
contemns, remembering how true it is that Hierome says, Istae machinae
haereticorum sunt, vt conuicti de perfidia ad maledicta se conferant. When
heretics are convinced of falsehood and untruths, their shift is to flee to
railing and slandering. And again, Detractio vilium satis hominum est, et suam
laudem quaerentium. To backebite is the shift of base men, and such as seek
their own praise.

He did indeed peruse Doctor Bridges book before it went to the Press, and
he knows that the sufficiency there of causes these men thus to storm, as
not being able otherwise to answer it: which makes them so bitterly to
inueigh against his person, and therefore, Si insectari personam deploratae
causae signum est, (as it is indeed) illorum causa est deploratissima.

It is shame for your Grace John of Cant. that Cartwrights Libel. Page 3.
books are not answered.

He never thought them so necessary to be answered, as the factious authors
of the Libel pretend. Answer.
And of that opinion are not a few wise and learned men, that bear good will
unto the party, and with all their hearts wish, that God would direct him to
use his good gifts to the peace and quietness of the Church. There is
sufficient written already to satisfy an indifferent reader. He that with
indifferent mind shall read the answer of the one, and the reply of the
other, shall see great difference in learning between them.

The desire of disputation is but a vain brag: they have been disputed and
conferred with oftener then either the worthiness of their persons or cause did
require. Wherein their inability to defend such a cause has manifestly
appeared, as it is well known to very many, well able to judge. But what brags
are here by the Libeller uttered, which do not agree with the old Heretics
and Schismatikes?

His Grace threatened to send Mistres Lawson to Bridewel, Libel. page 10
because etc.

This is a notorious untruth. For neither did Answer.
he, nor D. Perne ever hear (but of this Libeller) that she spoke any such
words of him. But in truth, asvvell for the immodestie of her tongue,
wherein she excels beyond the seemelinesse of an honest woman, as also for
her unwomanly and skittish gadding up and down to Lambehith, and from thence in
company unfit for her, without her own husband, he threatened to send her to
Bridewell, if she reformed not the same: which he means to perform, if she
continue her lightness. And yet Dame Lawson so notorious, for the vileness of
her tongue, and other unwomanly behavior, is one of Martins canonized Saints:
Quia quod volumus sanctum est, as Augustine said of their predecessors the
Donatists. It is likewise an untruth, which is reported in that page of her
words spoken by M. Shaller. For surely if she had uttered them, he would have
sent her thither without fail. But Dame Lawson glories in her own shame, and
so do her teachers.

That which he calls a Protection, Chard had from the Lords of her Majesty's
privy Counsel, upon charitable and good causes moving their Lordships.

He seems to charge the Archbishop wish infidelity etc. Libel. page 15


This needs no answer, it shows of what spirit they are. Answer.


Touching the Praemunire etc.

The Libeller does but dream, let him and his Libel. page 21.
do what they can. Answer.


The same may be ansvvered to their threatening of fists etc.

That which he speaks of buying a Pardon etc. as it is most untrue, so is it
slanderous to the State. If there were any such matter, it may soon appear
by search: but the impudency of these men is great, and villainous slander
will never long be without just revvard.

He says we favor Recusants rather then Puritans etc.

Herein he does notoriously abuse us: though Libel. page 22
the Recusant for the most part, behaueth himself Answer.
more ciuilly before the Magistrate then does the Puritan: who is commonly
most insolent, and thereby deserves more sharp words and reproves then the
other.

That which he speaks of Recusants threats against Puritan Preachers, has
no sense. For how can the Recusant so threaten the Puritan, when he never
comes to hear his Sermons? But these wicked Martinists account her
Majesty's loving subjects, liking and allowing the orders of the Church, and
procuring the contrary to be reformed by authority, as Papists and Recusants.
By which sinister practice and judgment many are discomforted, and obedience
greatly impeached.

Does your Grace remember what the Jesuit at Newgate Libel page 23
etc.

No truly, for he never heard of any such matter, Answer.
but by this lewd Libeller: neither does he think that there was ever any
such thing spoken. Schismatikes are impudent liars, the world knows what he
has ever been, and what he is: he does disdain to answer such senseless
calumniations.

That which he speaks of Thackwell the Printer, etc. is a matter nothing
pertaining to him. M. Richard Young, was the dealer therein without his
priuitie, who is able to justify his doings in that matter, and to convince
the libeller of a malicious slander. The man is known and living: the
Libeller may talk with him, and know his own wickedness. The mouth that
lies kills the soul. The Lord will destroy lying lips, and the tongue
that speaks proud things.

Waldegraue received justly according to his deserts, having found before that
time, greater favor then he deserved, being a notorions disobedient and
godless person, an unthrifty spender, and consumer of the fruits of his own
labors, one that has violated his faith to his best and dearest friends, and
wittingly brought them into danger, to their undoing. His wife and children
have cause to curse all wicked and ungodly Libellers.

The Calumniation touching the Press and Page 24.
Letters in the Charterhouse (which press Waldgraue himself soulde to one of
the Earl of Arundels men, as it is since confessed) must receive the same
answer with the other of Thackwell: saving that to M. Young must be added
also, some other of greater authority, who can tell Martin, that his spirit is
not the spirit of God, which is the spirit of truth, but the spirit of
Satan, the author of lies. Charge them, O shameless man, with this matter,
who are able to answer thee, and not the Archbishop, whom it touches not,
though it becomes not every common and base person, to demand an account of
the doings of men in authority.

The decree there mentioned, being first perused by the Queens learned
counsel, and allowed by the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable privy
Counsel, had his furtherance in deed, and should have, if it were to do
again. It is but for the maintenance of good orders among the Printers,
approved and allowed by the most, the best, and the wisest of that company,
and for the suppression of inordinate persons, such as Waldegraue is.

He erected no new Printer, contrary to that decree: but used means by way
of persvvasion Page 25.
for that party, commended to him by his neighbors, to be a very honest and
poor man, having married also the widow of a Printer: and he did very well
like and allow of his placing by such as have interest therein. Neither did
he ever hear, (but by this Libeller, who has no conscience in lying) that
he uer printed any such books. This I know of a certainty, that Thomas
Orwin himself has upon his book oath denied, that he ever printed, either
Jesus Psalter, or Our Lady Psalter, or that he ever was any worker about them,
or about any the like books. But the poisoned serpent cares not whom he
stingeth.

Whether Waldgraue have printed any thing against the state, or no, let the
books by him printed, be judges.

I do not think, that either he, or any Martinist ever heard any Papist say,
that there was no great jar between the Papists and the Archbishop in
matters of Religion. It is but the Libellers Calumniation. If they did, what is
that to him? I think Martin him self doubts not of the Archbishops
soundness in such matters of Religion, as are in controversy betwixt the
Papists and us. If he do, the matter is not great.

The University of Cambridge, where he lived above thirty years, and
publicly read the Divinity Lecture above seven years, and other places
where he has since remained, will testify for him therein, and condemn the
Libeller for a mere Sycophant, and me also of folly, for answering so
godless and lewd a person.

It is no disparagement to receive testimony of a man's adversary: and
therefore if Master Reinolds have given that commendation to his book in
comparison of others, it is no impeachment to the truth thereof. I have not
seen Reinolds his book: the Libell is so full of lies, that an honestman
cannot believe any thing contained in it.

My Lord of Canterbury would be sorry from the bottom of his heart, if his
persuasion, and the grounds thereof were not Catholic: he detesteth and
abhors schismatic grounds and persuasions: and thereunto he professes
himself an open enemy, which he would have all Martinists to know.

That of the Spaniardes stealing him away, etc. is foolish and ridiculous. I
would the best Martinist in England durst say it to his face before witness.

He firmly believes that Christ in soul descended into hell. All the
Martinists in Christendom are not able to prove the contrary: and they that
endeavor it, do abuse the scriptures, and fall into many absurdities.

He is likewise persuaded that there ought to be by the word of God a
superiority among the Ministers of the Church, which is sufficiently proved
in his book against T. C. and in D. Bridges book likewise, and he is always
ready to justify it, by the holy Scriptures, and by the testimony of all
antiquity. Epiphanius and August: account them heretics, that hold the
contrary. The Arguments to the contrary, are vain, their answers absurd, the
authorities they use, shamefully abused, and the Scriptures wrested.

He has showed sufficient reason in his book against T. C. why Ministers of
the Gospel, may be called Priests. The ancient fathers so call them. The church
of England imbraceth that name, and that by the authority of the highest court
in England. And why may not Presbyter be called Priest?

In these three points (whereof the last is of the least moment) he does agree
with the holy Scriptures, with the universal Church of God, with all
antiquity, and in some sort with the Church of Rome. But he does disagree
from the Church of Rome that now is in the dregs, which it has added: as,
that Christ should harrow hell: that the Pope should be head of the universal
Church: that he, or any other Priest, should have authority over Kings and
Princes to depose them, to deliver their subjects from the oath of their
obedience. etc. These things have neither the word of God, nor the decrees of
ancient Councels, nor the authority of antiquity to approve them, but
directly the contrary. As for the name of Priest, as they take it, he does
likewise condemn in our Ministers, neither do themselves ascribe it to them.
And therefore the Libeller in these points writes like himself.

Touching Wigginton, etc. Libel, page 26. 27. Answer.


That which he speaks of Wigginton, is like the rest, saving for his saucie
and malapert behavior toward the Archbishop: wherein in truth, he did
bear with him too much. Wigginton is a man well known unto him, and if he
knew himself, he would confess that he had great cause to thank the
Archbishop. As he was a foolish, proud, and vain boy, a laughing stock
for his folly to all the society with whom he lived: so does he retain
the same qualities being a man, saving that his folly, pride, and vanity is
much increased: so that now he is become ridiculous even to his own faction.

The honestest, the most, and the best of his parish did exhibit to the high
Commissioners, articles of very great moment against him: the like whereof have
seldom been seen in that Court. The most and woorst of them are proved by
diverse sufficient witnesses, and some of them confessed by himself, as it
appears in record. For which enormities, and for that he refused to make
condign satisfaction for the same, and to conform himself to the orders of
the Church, by law established: he was by due order of law deposed from his
Ministry, and deprived of his benefice, and so remains, being unfit and
unworthy of either.

The tale of Atkinson is a loud, notorious, and known lie. For neither did he
ever say so to the Archbishop, neither would he have taken it at his hands,
neither was that any cause of Wiggintons deprivation: but vanity and
hypocrisy causes this man to have so small conscience in lying, according to
that saying, Omnis hypocrisis mendacio plena est.

That heathenish untruth uttered diverse times in this book, that the
Archbishop should account preaching of the word of God to be heresy, and
mortally abhor and persecute it, is rather to be pitied then answered. If
man punish not such sycophants, God will do it, to whose just judgment the
revenge of this injury is referred. He does bridle factious and unlearned
Preachers, such as the more part of that sect are, who notwithstanding cry
out for a learned Ministry, themselves being unlearned, and so would be
accounted of all men, if it were not propter studium partium. I say with S.
Hierome, Nunc loquentibus and pronunciantibus plenus est orbis: loquuntur quae
nesciunt, docent quae non didicerunt, magistri sunt cum discipuli ante non
fuerint. The world is full of them that can speak and talk: but they speak
the things they know not: they teach the things they have not learned: they
take upon them to teach before they were scholars to learn. Indeed our
Church is too full of such talkers, rather then sober teachers, whom he
professes himself greatly to mislike. Otherwise he defieth all Martinistes
in England, and does appeal unto the whole State of the learned and
obedient Clergy for his innocence therein.

Touching master Euans, etc. Libel. page 31 Answer.


That of Euans concerning the Vicarage of Warwike, is maliciously reported. He
rejected him for lack of conformity to the orders of the Church. If he have
done him any vvrong thereby, the law is open, he might have had his remedy.
That honorable person mentioned by the Libeller, I am sure, accepted of his
answer. And I know, that according to his honorable disposition, he thinks
himself greatly abused by the libeller in this point. But what cares such a
corner-creeper what he says of any man, be he never so honorable? The rest of
that tale is untrue, not worth answering. And if the relator there of durst
appear and show himself, Martin could not be long unknown. If any of his
men at any time reported, that he should say, he would not be beholding to
never a noble man in this land, etc. he shows himself to be of the
Libellers conditions, that is, a common liar. For he never spoke the words to
any man, neither does he use that familiarity with his men. But the
Libeller cares not what he speaks, either of him, or of his men, so that he
may fill up his libell with untrue slanders.

That which follovveth of the Archbishops words to the knight, that he was the
second person of the land, etc. is of the same kind. The knight I am sure is
living, let him be examined of that matter. True it is, that there was a good
knight with him, an old friend of his about such a suit: but that he ever spoke
any such words unto him, as the Libeller vvoulde make the world believe, is
most false: the Knight lives and can testify the same. But the Libeller
thinks all men to be as proud and malapert as himself and other of his
faction are, whose pride the world sees, and it is intolerable.

He was never D. Perns boy, nor under him at any Page 32.
time, but as fellow of the house where he was master. Neither did he ever
carry his, or any other man's cloak bag: Although if he had so done, it had
bin no disgrace to him. Better men's sons then the Libeller is, have carried
cloakebags. But the lewd man is not ashamed to lie in those things, that are
open to every man's eyes: such is his malice and impudency.

How Dauisons Catechism was allowed, or how Page 34.
long in perusing, I know not: some paultry pamphlet belike it is, like to
that busy and unlearned Scot, now termed to be the author there of. D. Wood is
better able to judge of such matters, then either Dauison, or any Martinist,
that dare be known.

Touching the Apocrypha. etc. Libel. page 37


He gave commandment in deed, and means to see it observed. For who ever
separated this Apocrypha from the rest of the Bible, from the beginning of
Christianity to this day? Or what church in the world, reformed or other,
does yeat at this present? And shall we suffer this singularity in the church
of England, to the advantage of the adversary, offense of the godly, and
contrary to all the world besides? I know there is great difference between
the one and the other: yet all learned men have from the beginning, given to
the Apocrypha authority, next to the Canonical Scriptures. And therefore such
giddy heads, as seek to deface them, are to be bridled. A foul shame it is,
and not to be suffered, that such speeches should be uttered against those
books, as by some has been: enough to cause ignorant people to discredit the
whole Bible.

Touching Doctor Spark, etc. Libel. page 44.


Their Honors that were the^ present, can and will, I am sure, answer for the
bishops to this untruth. Answer.
They made report to diverse in public place, and some to the highest, of that
conference, after an other sort, and to another end, the^ the Libeller does.
That seely Objection God knows, was soon answered in few words, viz. That
the translation read in our Churches, was in that point according to the
Septuagint, and correspondent to the Analogy of faith. For if the word be
understood of the Israelites, then is it true to say, that they were not
obedient to his commandment: but if of the signs and wonders, that Moses and
Aaron did before Pharao, or of Moses and Aaron themselves, then is it on the
other side true, that they were obedient to his commandment. This might have
satisfied any learned and peaceable Divine, and pacified their immoderate
contention against the book of common prayer. This was then, and is now, the
answer to that frivolous objection, and this is the Nonplus that the Libeller
vaunteth of. More modesty might have become both D. Spark, and the reporter,
even conscientia suae imbecillitatis, in that conference.

Touching Patrike, etc.

He never made Patrike Minister, neither intended Libel. page 50 Answer.
to make him, neither was he of his acquaintance at all in Worcester. It is
well known that the Archbishop has not ordained more, then only two
Ministers, since his coming to this Archbishoprike. And therefore this
Calumniation must be placed with the former.

Thus is this godless Libeller ansvvered in few words, touching such matters
wherewith he charge the most reverend father the Archbishop of Cant. whereby
the world may perceive, with what spirit he is possessed. The wise man says,
that destruction shall suddenly come upon the backebiter and Prouer. 24.
calumniator. The Psalmist says, The Lord will destroy Psalm. 55.
lying lips, and the tongue which speaks proud things: and that death shall
suddenly come upon them, and hell shall receive them. S. Ambrose says, that
Detractors are scarcely to be accounted Christians. And Cyprian says, Non qui
audit, sed qui facit conuitium, miser est. Not he that is railed at, but he
that raileth, is the wretched man. The wicked Jews, when they could not
otherwise answer Christ, called him Samaritan, and said he had a devil, and
shortly after took up stones, and cast at him. So the Anabaptists, within our
memory, after slanderous and opprobrious calumniations against the godly
Preachers and magistrates then living, fell to blows and open violence. The
Libeller in this book has performed the one, and threatened the other.

This have I laid down word by word, as I received the same from my Lord of
London: who desires to have the matter heard by indifferent Judges, and will
show the Suggestions to be very untrue.

ANd as to Martins lewd exclamation against the B. of London concerning the
cloth thought to be stolen from the Dyars, this is the truth of the case:
that upon notice given to the said B. that such like cloth was wayued within
his Manor of Fulham, and left in a ditch there, and no owner known, he
presently hoping to take them that brought it thither, or at the least to save
the same from purloyning or miscarying, appointed the same to be watched diverse
nights: and in the end hearing neither of the owners, nor of them that so
waiued it, willed the same to be brought to his house in Fulham, and there to
be kept for him or them which by law ought to have it, were it in respect of
the first property, or of the alteration thereof by means of the liberties.
Whereupon, a good space after, the Dyars indeed came to the Bishop, and claimed
the cloth, and sought by earnest means to have it again, without making any
proof, that the cloth was theirs, or that the same cloth was it, for which the
thieves were executed, or that fresh suit was made after the said thieves for
the same. But upon conference had with learned Lawyers therein, it was
resolved, that the property of this cloth was altered and transferred to the
lyberties: and so it seems the Dyars themselves have found, else would they
by law have sought remedy therefore yer now, it being well nie toward
three years since. Yet nevertheless, so far has the said Bishop been from
exacting the extremity, that offer has been made to the Dyars of a good part
of the cloth, where in the rigor of law they have lost all: And further to
restore all, or to make sufficient recompense therefore, if by law it ought to
be so, upon the examination of the truth of the case. And as for Martins
erroneous judgment, that this is theft, being taken and claymed by right and
law, as aforesay de, because the true owners are defeated (as he says)
surely, he might know if it were matter for his humor, that the Law works
this in other cases, as in strayes proclaimed and kept a year and a day,
according to the law, the property is altered, and transferred to the Lord
from the true owner: so is it for stolen cattle, brought bona fide to the
ouert market: The first owners property is gone, and the buyer has it: And so
is it for waiued goods, as was this cloth. And to show that the said Bishop
had not so great a desire to detain the cloth as the Libeller has presumed,
he often times asked an officer of his, how it happened that the Dyars came
not for it: for he was ever ready, and yet is, to deliver it to them, or the
value thereof, if it prove to be theirs. And thus much is to be ansvvered to
that matter.

The Libeller obiecteth against the Bishop as a great heinous fault, that of
his Porter he made a Minister: which, al things considered, he thinks that
doing to be justifiable and lavvfully done, and not to lack example of many
such that have bin after that sort admitted, both since her Majesty's coming
to the Crown, by many good Bishops, and by sound histories Ecclesiastical,
that where the church by reason of persecution or multitude of Hamlets, and
free Chapels, which have commonly very small stipends for the Minister, honest
godly men, upon the discretion of the Governors of the Church, have and might
be brought in to serve in the want of learned men, in prayer, administration
of Sacraments, good example of life, and in some sort of exhortation. And this
man therefore, when the bishop found him by good and long experience to be one
that feared God, to be conversant in the scriptures, and of very honest life
and conversation: he allowed of him, to serve in a small congregation at
Padington, where commonly for the meannesse of the stipend, no Preacher could
be had, as in many places it comes to pass where the Parsonage is
impropriat, and the provision for the Vicar or Curat is very small. And how this
poor man behaved himself there, time and trial proved him: for he continued
in that place with good liking of the people 8. or 9. years, till he grew dull
of sight for age, and thereby unable for to serve any longer. It is to be
found among the Greek Canons, that in Spain and Africa when the Goathes and
Vandalles had by extreme persecution made havoc of the Church men, those few
that were left there alive, made their moan to the Churches of Rome and Italy,
that their Churches stood empty, because they could get none to serve, no not
such as were unlearned. Whereby it appears, that in the time of necessity,
and such great want, the Church did allow of very mean Clerks, and so did
they in the beginning of her Majesty's reign. But Martin and his accomplices,
having a desire to throw out of the Church, the book of common prayer, would
rather have the Churches served by none, then by such as by prayer and
administration of Sacraments should keep the people together in godly
assemblies. But this Libeller being as a botch in the body, whereunto all bad
humors commonly resort, and few good, was content to take this report of this
poor man, and not at all to make mention, as he might have done, of that
precise and strait order which the Bishop observes in making Ministers.
For most true it is, that the said B. admits none to orders, but such as he
himself does examine in his own person in points of Divinity, and that in the
latin tongue, in the hearing of many: whereby it comes to pass, that none
lightly come at him, but such as be Graduats, and of the universities. But
Martin neither himself nor his cole cariers seek for any thing that is
commendable, but like the spider that gathers all that may turn to poison.

Further, for lack of true matter, M. Maddockes must be brought in by the
Libeller to furnish his railing comedy. It were enough to say of that thus
much, that the most reverent Father the Archbishop of Canterbury examining
that matter between the Bishop and Maddockes, with some other Bishops
assisting him, found the matter to make so sore against the Bishop, that
Maddockes himself was content before them to ask him forgiveness, and to
promise that he would ever after have a reverent regard of his duty toward
the said Bishop, as his Ordinary. For if he should so untruly have played
with the name of Aelmer, by turning it into the name of Mar-elme, he should
have spoken against his conscience, as he himself knows, and all the Court,
and her Majesty her self can testify, that it was a most shameful untruth
blased abroad by one Lichfield a Musicion, which is now departed.

Here might be noted, how Doctor Perne, being at no mean man's table, and
hearing of such slanderous railing of felling of the Elmes at Fulham, he asked
one of the company being an ancient Lawyer, how long the Elmes of Fulham had
bin felled. Said the Lawyer, somehalfe year past. Now truly said D. Perne,
they are marueilously grown in that time: for I assure you I was there
within these four days, and they seem to be two hundred years old. And
master Vicechamberlaine at her Majesty's being at Fulham, told the Bishop that
her Majesty misliked nothing, but that her Highness lodging was kept from
all good prospects by the thickness of the trees. Lo, you may see hereby, that
the Libeller to set out his Pasquil, raketh all things by all reports from all
the Sycophants in the world, and makes no choice of man or matter, so that it
may serve his turn.

And for any Letter written by the master of Requests so iestingly, as the
Libeller reports, Maddockes has deceived him: for there was no such matter,
nor the man for whom the Bishop vvrote, was none of his servant, nor is.

Now comes in Dame Lawson to frumpe the Bishop with impudent and
unwomanly speech, and unfit for that sex, whom Paul utterly forbids to
speak in the congregation. But considering the circumstances of time, place,
and persons, it is to be thought that Dame Lawson came at no time to the
bishop in that bravery: for if she had, the bishop is not so soft, but she
should have felt of Discipline, and of the Queens authority. Surely the
Bishop and such other of the Reverend fathers that are so bitten by this
Libeller, may comfort themselves by the example of Athanasius and others as I
before have said, which were most shamefully accused by the heretics, of
murder, robbery, enchantment, whoredom, and other most detestable crimes, to
deface them to the world, to the end that their heresies might be the better
liked of. But Martin remember that saying, Vae homini per quem scandalum venit,
and that Jude says, that Michael when he disputed with the Devil about the
body of Moses, the Angel gave no railing sentence against him, but said, the
Lord rebuke thee, Satan. And if it pleased you to remember that book that is
fathered upon Ignatius in Greek which attributes so much to the bishops, you
would be good master to bishops, against whom so irreverently you cast out your
stomach.

And for your jesting at the Bishop for bovvling upon the Sabbath, you must
understand that the best expositor of the Sabbath, which is Christ, has
said, that the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath: and man
may have his meat dressed for his health upon the Sabbath, and why may he not
then have some convenient exercise of the body, for the health of the body?

You will take small occasion to rail, before you will hold your tongue. If
you can charge the Bishop that ever he withdrew himself from Sermon or service
by any such exercise, you might be the bolder with him: but contrariwise it is
well known, that he and his whole family does every day in the week twice
say the whole service, calling upon God for them selves, the State, and the
Queens Majesty, praying for her highness by that means devoutly and
heartily many times: I pray God you do the like. But, oration animae maleuolae
non placet Deo: The prayer of a malicious heart never pleases God.

Martin with his bitter style of malicious Momus dipped in the gall of
ungodliness, proceeds in a shameless untruth touching the Bishops answer
to the executors of Allein the Grocer, as though he should flatly deny the
payment of a certain debt, due to the said Allein: which is as true as all
the rest of Martins vvritings is honest and sober. For be it that at the first
demand, the Bishop was somevvhat moved to hear his name to be in the
Merchants books, which he ever so precisely avoided, that commonly he
sends to them whom he has to do with, warning them to deliver nothing in
his name, without his own hand or ready money, used peradventure some sharp
words in a matter that was so sudaine and so strange to him Yet most certain
it is, that though not at that time, yet very shortly after, the debt was
discharged, as shall be proved, long before Martins railing book was heard
of or seen: ten pound excepted, which the said executors for a time respited.
But this fellow will travail far before he will lack matter to furnish a
lie.

Another mountain that he makes of molehils (for such is all his blasphemous
buildings) is, that one Benison a poor man, was kept in the Clincke I cannot
tell how long, unjustly without cause, etc. The truth is this: Benison
coming from Geneua, full fraught with study of Innouations, and utterly
empty of obedience, which Beza that learned Father had or might have taught
him, as by his Epistles appeareah, both to the Queen and the governors of the
Church: set up in London his shop of disobedience, being married in a contrary
order to the book and usage of the Church of England, abusing good M. Fox as
he himself in grief of heart after confessed. After that, the said Benison
gathering conuenticles, and refusing to go to his own parish church, seeking
to set al in combustion with schism in the City, was long before the B. heard
any thing of him, called before Sir Nicholas Woodroofe a grave Citizen, and the
Recorder: who found him in such an humor, that they meant to have sent him to
prison. But because he was of the Clergy, they thought good to commit him to
his Ordinary, who travailing with him most earnestly to bring him to the
Church and become orderly, when he could profit nothing with him, sent him
again to the Sessions to the Lord Mayor and the Judges. After they had dealt
with him, and could find at his hands nothing but railing, they sent him
again to the Bishop, and he finding him in unspeakable disobedience to her
Majesty and her Laws, offered him the oath, which he contemptuously and
spitefully refused. Which being certified according to order, he was sent to
the Queens bench, and was condemned, and thereupon sent to prison. And this is
that wonderful tragedy wherein this fellow so greatly triumphs, wishing
belike (as his whole Libell seems to desire) that no malicious schismatike
should be punished for moving sedition in the land. But to this unbridled
tongue, it may be said as the Psalm says, Quid gloriaris in malitia tua? etc.
Where he courseth the Bishop of London with the lewd lying Epithete of Dumb
John, fetched I cannot tell from what gross conceit, either as willingly
stumbling upon Dumb for Don, or for that he preaches not so often, as he and
other of his crewe babbling in their verbal sermons use to do, or from whence
else I know not, unless it please his wisdom to play with his own
conceit, and minister matter to the Prentises and Women of London, to sport
himself in that pretty devised and new found name. If the Bishop should
answer for himself, I know he might say somevvhat after this sort: Good
charitable Martin, how old are you? how long have you known the man? what
reports in the book of Martyrs, in Master Askams book of his Schoolmaster,
and in some learned men that have written from beyond the Seas, have you heard
of him? Master Fox says of him, that he was one of the five, and now
only alive, that stood in the solemn disputations in the first of Queen
Mary, with a hundred hauberdes about his ears: (the like whereof you threaten
now him and others) in the defense of the Gospel, against all the learned
Papists in England. For the which he was driven into banishment, and there
continued for the space of five or six years, visiting almost all
Universities in Italy and Germany, having great conference with the most and
best learned men (...) the last being stayed at Iany an university erected by
the dukes of Saxony, and should, if he had not come away, had the Hebrewe
lecture, which Snepphinus had, entertained by them to read in their said
university both Greek and Latin, in the company and with the good love and
liking of those famous men, Flaccus Illyricus, Victorius, Strigellus, D.
Snepphinus, called alter Luther, with diverse others, where belike he was not
dumb. And after coming home, was appointed among the famous learned men, to
dispute again with the enemies of the religion, the papisticall bishops, and
like, that if the disputations had continued, to show him not ignorant in all
the three tongues, as he will yet if Martin Malapert provoke him too far, not
to be dumb. Is he dumb because he was the only Preacher in Leicestershire
for a space, as the noble Earl of Huntington can witness? and by their two
means, that shire, God be blessed, was converted and brought to that state
that it is now in? which in true religion is above any other place, because
they retain the Gospel without contention, which few other places do. And
in Lincolneshire did he nothing? did he not first purge the Cathedral Church,
being at that time a nest of unclean birds, and so by preaching and executing
the Commission so prevailed in the country (God blessing his labors) that not
one recusant was left in the country, at his coming away to this sea of
London? Is this to be dumb? how many Sermons has he preached at Paul's
cross? sometime three in a year, yea, sometime two or three together, being
an old man, to supply some younger men's negligence.

It is omitted, that Episcopomastix had a fling at the Bishop of London for
swearing by his faith, wherefore he terms him a Swag. What he means by
that, I will not divine: but as all the rest is lewd, so surely herein he has
a lewd meaning. It is to be thought, that the Bishop will take profit hereby,
being a man that has diligently read Plutarke, De vtilitate capienda ad
inimico. If it be an oath, as this gentleman has censured it, it is not to be
doubted, but that he will amend it: but if it were lawful, as it may be for any
thing Martin can say, to ask his brotherhood, what Amen signifies, or whether
it be an oath: then in his wicked and malicious wishes for the overthrow of the
Clergy, how often is he to be found to say Amen? for in the phrase of our
speech, by my faith signifies no more, but, in very truth, bona fide, in
truth, assuredly, id est, Amen.

It is to be thought, that Martin misliketh to say by his faith, because a
railing and slanderous spirit can have no faith: for where Charity is away
(the soul of all good works) there can be no faith. Read that of Paul,
Charitas non inuidet, non est suspicax, etc. The contraries whereof swell in
Martin as venomous humors in an infectious sore.

Among other their reproaches, they affirm of the Bishop of Rochester, that he
presented him self to a benefice. I do not think it to be true, for that I
know it can not be good in Law. If he has procured a benefice in way of
Commendam (as they call it) it is by law allowed, and has been done by other.

The bishop of Lincoln is known to be learned and zealous in religion. There
are few men toward her Majesty that have preached in the court, either oftener
times, or with more commendation, or better liking, as well before he was
bishop, as since. It is therefore marvel, that none in all this time could
epsy his inclination unto corrupt and Papisticall doctrine, until the
chickens of the scratching kite young Martinists, got wings to flee abroad, and
cric out untruths against every man that displeases them.

If the Bishop of Lincoln had not even of late shevved himself in the
Commission Court, at the examination of some of them, he had now escaped this
scratch of the lewd lying kite Martin Marprelate. What his words were I have
forgotten, and yet I heard them delivered by a learned man that was present.
For I did not then mean to deal in this cause, but they were nothing sou^ding
to that which the Libell lays down. And the person considered at whose
funeral he preached, he could not with comeliness speak less in her
commendation then he did, unless they vvoulde have had him as rash and
furious as themselves, and to enter into Gods secret judgment, and openly to
condemn her as a reprobate. God may work great matters in a moment.

THE bishop of Winchester is charged with certain words uttered in two
Sermons the last Lent: the one in the Queens Chapel, the other at S. Marie
Oueries in Southwarke. The words of the challeng are these, Like a flattering
hypocrite, he protested before God and the congregation, that there was not in
the world at this day, nay, there had not been since the Apostles time such a
flourishing state of a Church, as now we have in England. Surely, if he had
uttered these words for the state of the Church appointed by law and order,
not respecting the faults of particular persons, it might in Christian duty
be well defended. But it was not uttered in this manner, nor for the matter,
nor for the time. The first part of those words he does not acknowledge at
all, for they are purposely inserted to stir envy. Thus in deed it was
delivered: As for the truth of doctrine, according to the word of God, for
the right administration of the Sacraments, for the true worship of God in our
prayer, laid down in the book of service: since the Apostles age, unto this
present age of the restoring of the gospel, there was never Church upon the
face of the earth, so nigh the sincerity of Gods truth, as the Church of
England is at this day. These words with Gods help, he vvil justify to be
true, upon the danger, not of his living only, but of his life also, against
any man that vvil withstand it: and yet therein shall not show him self either
desperate Dicke, or shameless, impudent or wainscot faced Bishop, as it
pleases the Libeller to rail. Neither does he think, that any learned man
that favors the Gospel, though he mislike some things and persons now in
present use, will reprove it. The Papists I know in deed do detest the
Assertion, and think their Synagogue blasphemed by it: No reformed Church can
justly take offense at it. Where the bishop is burdened by this speech to
excuse the multitude of Thieues, Drunkards, Murderers, Adulterers, etc. that
be in our Church: neither did his thought conceive, nor his words include any
such matter. But what does not malice, envy, and spite utter against the most
innocent person that is? The bishop of Winchester has openly more impugned the
vices of this age here in the Church of England, then the whole brood of
them that are of the Anabaptisticall Conuenticles, and the residue of these
Libellers. Woe be to them (says Esaias the Prophet) that speak evil of good,
and good Esaias 5.
of evil, and put light for darkness, and darkness for light, sweet for
sour, and sour for sweet. David had Psalm. 120.
great cause to cry, domine libera animam meam a labijs iniquis, and a lingua
dolosa. And Solomon, cogitatio stulti Pro. 24.
peccatum est, and abominatio hominum Detractor. The devise of a fool is
sin, and all men abhor the backbiter or Slaunderer. If any man will
reprove the Assertion before written, God vvilling he shall be ansvvered, so
that he rail not.

This may be a sufficient answer to the untruth fathered upon the B. of
Winchesters words, and that he is not for the same justly termed Monstrous
and flattering hypocrite, speaking against his own conscience. But I see in
these words the reproach not only of the bishop, but much more amalicious spite
against this Church of England, and that so deeply settled in their hearts,
that their ears cannot, without grief, he are any good spoken of it.
Therefore I think my self in Christian duty bound, somevvhat farther to
follow this matter, and with some signification of thankfulness, to
acknowledge and confess those excellent blessings, which it has pleased God,
of his great mercies, to bestow upon the same, as well in King Edward the
sixts days, as much more in her Majesty's reign that now is: and first, to
begin with that which is the principal, that is, the sincerity of doctrine,
and all branches of true religion received, professed, taught, and established
in this Realm. In which point, I think it very superfluous and needles for me
to recite the particular branches, and to make a new catechism, or to pen a
new confession of the Church of England, seeing they both are so sufficiently
performed, that (without envy be it spoken) there is none better in any
reformed Church in Europe. For a Catechism, I refer them to that which was
made by the learned and godly man Master Nowel, Deane of Paul's, received and
allowed by the Church of England, and very fully grounded and established upon
the word of God. There may you see all the parts of true Religion received,
the difficulties expounded, the truth declared, the corruptions of the Church
of Rome rejected. But this I like not in our Church, that it is lawful to every
man to set forth a nevve Catechism at his pleasure. I read, that in the
Primitive Church, that thing did great harm, and corrupted the minds of many
simple persons, with soul errors and heresies. I see the like at this day:
for thereby many honest meaning hearts are carried away to the misliking of our
manner of prayer, and administration of Sacraments, and other orders: whereby
it is made a principal instrument to maintain and increase discord and
dissension in the Church.

For a sound and true confession acknowledged by this our church, I refer them
to that notable Apology of the English Church, written not many years since,
by that Jewel of England, late Bishop of Sarifburie. Wherein they shall find
all parts of Christian religion confessed and proved, both by the testimony of
the canonical scriptures, and also by the consent of all learned and godly
antiquity for the space of certain hundred years after Christ. For the
integrity and soundnes, for the learning and eloquence showed in the same
Apology, they (that contemn that notable learned man because he was a
Bishop) may have very good testimony in a little Epistle, written by Peter
Martyr unto the said bishop, and now printed, and in the latter edition set
before the same Apology: where they shall find that he speaks not for
himself only, but for many other learned men of the church of Tygure, and
other places. Now, as this learned Bishop does acknowledge and confess for
this Church, all truth of doctrine: so does he reprove, condemn and detest
all corruptions brought into the same, either by the church of Rome, or by any
other ancient or new heretics, whom he there particularly names: yea, and
to the great comfort of all them that are members of the same church, and
acknowledge the same confession, he proves and evidently shows, that the
testimonies of the Scriptures, whereon that confession is grounded, for the
true interpretation of them, have the witness and consent of all the learned
antiquity, as I have said, for certain hundred years. Which I take to be a
very good comfort and confirmation to all honest consciences in these captious
and quarelling days.

That which I mean, I will declare by some particulars. What is more evident,
certain and firm for the article of the person of Christ in his Godhead and
manhood, then those things that the ancient Fathers decreed out of the
canonical scriptures in the Councels of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus,
Chalcedon; and some others against Arius, Samosatenus, Apollinaris, Nestorius,
Eutiches, and those heretics that were termed Monotholetes etc? Therefore
whosoever do teach contrary to the determination of those councels (as some do
in these days) they do not justly hold that principal article and foundation
of Christian religion.

Moreover, as touching the grace and benefit of Christ, the beginning whereof
rises from the eternal love of God toward us, and from the free election to
redemption and eternal salvation: and proceeds to our use and benefit, by
the dispensation of Christ once offered upon the Cross, by effectual calling
wrought by the holy Ghost in preaching of the Gospel, by our justification,
sanctification, and the gift of perseverance and continuance in the faith,
thereby in the end to obtain resurrection and eternal life: touching (I say)
this free grace of God (another principal ground of Christian religion) what
could be, or can be more certainly or abundantly laid down out of the holy
Scriptures, then was determined in the Councels of Carthage, Mileuitane,
Aurasicane etc. against the Pelagians, and other enemies of the free grace of
God in Christ Jesus our Savior? Especially if you add the writings of August.
and other ancient Fathers for defense of the same.

As to that which is necessary to be known touching the true Catholic
Church (a matter of great importance even at this day) what can be more
copiously or with more perspicuitie declared, then is by that learned father
Augustine, as well in other places, as principally in his books against the
Donatists?

Likewise, for the matter of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, (if simple
truth could content men) what is more evident, then that doctrine, which has
been laid down by the ancient Fathers, Iustine, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian,
Augustine, Theodorete, and a number of other? For proof whereof, I refer you
to B. Jewel, in his worthy book, wherein he answers Hardings reply against
his 27. questions, proposed at Paul's Cross, etc. I remember, touching this
matter of the Sacrament, Occolampadius, a man of great reading and godliness,
says of S. August. Is primus mihi vellicauit aurem. He did first put me in
mind of the true understanding of this Sacrament.

These four principal Articles I have laid down for example, that the
Christian Reader may the more easily perceive what comfort it is to any
Church, to have the grounds of their faith and religion so established upon the
holy Scriptures, that for the interpretation of the same, they have the
testimony and consent of the Primitive Church, and the ancient learned
Fathers. From which Consent they should not depart, either in doctrine, or
other matter of weight, unless it so fall out in them, that we be forced
thereto, either by the plain words of the Scriptures, or by evident and
necessary conclusions following upon the same, or the Analogy of our faith.
Which thing if we shall perceive, we ought, and safely may, take that liberty
that themselves, and especially Augustine has used, and requires other to
use. Nec Catholicis Episcopis, etc. We must not consent (says De vnitate
Eccle. cap. 10
Augustine,) so much as to Catholic Bishops, if they be deceived, and be of
opinion contrary to the Canonical Scriptures. Again, I am not tied with the
authority of this Epistle. Contra Crescon. lib. 2. ca. 31.
For I have not the writings of Cyprian in like estimation, as I have the
Canonical Scriptures, but I measure them by the rule of the holy Scriptures.
If I find any thing in his writings agreeing to the Scriptures, I receive it
with commendation and reverence: if otherwise, with his good leave, I refuse
it. The like you have, Epist. 48. 111. and 112. In Prooemio li. 3. de
Trinitate, and many other places. Otherwise, to reject the testimony of the
ancient Fathers rashly, is a token of too much confidence in our own wits. It
was noted as a great fault in Nestorius, and a chief cause of his heresy, that
contemning the Fathers, he rested too much upon his own judgment. The like
confidence drew many learned men, and of great gifts, to be Patrons of sundry
foul and shameful errors. How came it to pass, that after that notable
Council of Nice, so many detestable heresies arose against the Deity and the
Humanity of Christ, against the uniting of both natures, and the distinction
of the properties of them? etc. but only out of this root, that they
contemned the grave sentences, interpretations, and determinations of those
famous Confessors and great learned Fathers, as were in the same assembled, and
had too much liking in their own wits and learning. But woe be unto them
(says Esaias) that are ouerwise in their own conceit. Vigilius in his first
book against Eutyches says thus. These clouds of fond and vain accusations
are powered out by them chiefly, which are diseased either with the sickness
of ignorance, and of a contentious appetite: and while they being puffed up
with confidence of a proud stomach, for this only cause they reject the rules
of faith, laid down by the ancient fathers, that they may thrust into the
Church their own wavering devises, which they have ouerthwartly conceived.
This sentence, I would our uncharitable accusers and troublers of the Church
would well weigh and consider with themselves. Therefore (good reader) I
protest for my self, and for the residue of this church, that we dare not in
conscience, nor think it tolerable, with contempt to reject the testimonies
of antiquity in establishing any matter of weight in the Church. We leave that
to our hasty Divines, that in three years study think themselves able to
control all men, and to have more learning then all the Bishops in England:
And for this cause vvil they give no credit to ancient writers against their
new found equality. For with them, it is a foul fault once in a sermon to name
an ancient father, or to allege any testimony out of his works.

Now (good Christian Reader) seeing by the good blessing of God, we have all
parts of Christian faith and Religion professed and taught in this Church, and
the same grounded upon the canonical Scriptures, with the consent and
exposition of the Primitive Church and ancient Fathers: What a vaunting pride
is it? (as Cyprian speaks) what an unthankfulness to God? what
uncharitable affection toward the Church of their natural Country, that they
cannot abide any good to be spoken of it? pretending nothing but the private
faults and vices of some men, or the disagreeing from them in some orders and
parts of Government, which they will never be able to prove by the word of
GOD to be of necessity. In other reformed Churches, whom they so greatly
extolle, and would make pattern to us, have they not imperfections? Have they
not foul faults, and great vices among all sorts of men, as well Ministers as
others? Surely, their worthiest writers and grauest Preachers do note, that
they have. And if they would deny it, the world does see it, and many good
men among them do bewail it. I will not stay in the other blessings of God,
where with he has adorned this Church. I shall have occasion to speak
somewhat more of it hereafter, and God send us grace, that we may with true
thankfulness acknovvledge it. But this I may not omit without great note
of unthankfulness toward our merciful God, which has not only preserved,
maintained and defended the State, but also appointed this Church to be as a
Sanctuary or place of refuge for the Saints of God, afflicted and persecuted
in other Countries for the profession of the Gospel: for whom I am persuaded
we do fare the better at Gods hand. And I doubt not but in that respect, al
reformed Churches in other places, feeling the blessing of God by us, think
reverently of our State, and pray to God for us, as all good men with us ought
to do for them, that the true link of Christian charity may soundly knitte
us together in one body of right faith and Religion. If some fevve persons
think amiss of our Church, I impute the cause thereof only to the malicious
and untrue reports made by some of our own Countrymen unto them. Which
persons, if they did understand the true State of this our Realm, would
think far otherwise, as diverse of the most grave and learned writers have
already evidently declared. This also is not the least blessing of God, as well
in the time of K. Edward, as in the reign of our gracious Sovereign, that
this Church has had as ample ornaments of learned men, (Rumpantur vt Ilia
Momo,) as the most reformed Churches in Europe, and far more plentifully then
some place, whose state they seek to frame us unto. Only I except those
excellent men, who^ God had prepared in the beginning to be the restorers of
his Truth, and doctrine of the Gospel in those parts: Namely we have had B.
Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Couerdale, Hooper, and diverse other, which were no
Bishops, as M. Bradford, M. Sanders, M. Rogers, M. Philpot, D. Haddon, etc.
Most of which, as they have left good proof of their learning in vvriting: so
did they confirm the same with their blood in the end. The like I may justly
say of them whom God has sent to restore his Truth since the beginning of
her Majesty's reign, (howsoever it pleases the Brood of the Martinists to
deface them) as Bishop Coxe, Pilkington, Grindall, Sands, Horn, Jewel, etc.
which have good testimony of their learning given them by as grave, learned,
and zealous men, as any have lived in this age, among whom for certain
years they lived. A number of other have proceeded out of both our
Universities, which though Martin Momus will say the contrary, deserve
singular comme^dation for their learning, and have declared the same to the
world in answering and confuting the opprobrious writings of the common
Adversaries. In which their answers (without envy and displeasure be it
spoken) there appears as sufficient learning, as does in the most works at
this time published by the vvriters of foreign Countreies. If Englishmen at
this time so greatly dispraysed, were given with like pains to set forth
the exercises of their study and learning, as in other places they do: they
vvoulde dravve as good commendation of learning to their Country, as most
other Churches do. To which number of ours, I add also some of the^, whom
certain occasions have carried away to the misliking of the present state of
this Church: which I know have received of God singular good gifts, which I
pray earnestly they may use to his glory, and the procuring the unity and peace
of the Church, which our Hasty Divines of M. M. his brood, seek to break
and disturb. This testimony, I thought my self bound in conscience to
yield to that Church of my natural Country, in which, and by which,
through the mercy of our gracious God, I am that I am. The godly, I trust,
will interpret all to the best: the residue I look not to please.

The B. of Winchester is further charged in this manner, He said that men might
find fault, if they were disposed to quarrel, as well with the Scriptures, as
with the book of common prayer. Who could hear this comparison without
trembling? Let the Libellers, whatsoever they are, remember, Os quodmentitur,
occidit animam. At that time, in S. Mary Oueries church, in a large discourse,
he did answer the objections that many make at this day, against the book of
common prayer, and toward the end uttered these words, If it could be without
blasphemy, they might pick as many and as great quarrels against the holy
scriptures themselves. For even the best writings are subject to the slanderous
malice of wicked men. This assertion was found fault with all, by a Jesuit or
Massing priest at that time in the Marshalsey, and therefore the B. the next
Sunday following, expounded his meaning, and at large shevved, that that might
be done, which beforetime was done by a great number: and that he was not so
far beside himself, as to compare the book of common prayer with the holy
scriptures in dignity, truth, or majesty: He leaves such blasphemous dealing
to the Papists, the Family of Love, and some other Sectaries: but he compared
them in this, (as it is before said) that the Scriptures themselves were
subject also to slanderous and deprauing tongues, and yet not therefore to be
rejected, whereof he recited sundry examples. Celsus that heathenish Epicure
(against whom Origin writes) in his book Lib. 1. contra Celsum.
called Verax, does power out many railing and slanderous reproaches, not only
against the holy Scriptures, but also against the course of Christian Religion:
as that they received their religion and doctrine of the barbarous Jews, that
is, out of the books of Moses and the Prophets. The like did Porphyrius an
other Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 19.
Philosopher, and in his books reproved the Scriptures in many places: for
he wrote thirty books against Christian religion. That scoffing sophister
Libanius, and his scholar Julian the Apostata, Socr. lib. 1. cap. 9.
used the like blasphemies against the Christian faith, and the Scriptures, out
of which it was proved, as appears in sundry ancient Writers. Who knows
not, that some Heretics rejected the most part of the old Testament, as false
and fabulous? The Valentiniane Heretic, says Tertullian, In Praescript.
Tertul. Eusebius. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 28. Epiphanius. Theodor.
Quaedam legis and Prophetarum improbat, quaedam probat, id est, Omnia
improbat, dum quaedam reprobat. The Marcionists receive only the Gospel of
Matthewe, the other they reject. And likewise they admit but two Epistles of
Saint Paul, that is, to Timothy and Titus, and (as Hierome says) to
Philemon. Tatian also depraueth the Scriptures, rejects the Acts of the
Apostles, and picketh sundry other quarrels against them. There was never any
Heretic, but that to give countenance to his opinion, he would seem to
ground it upon the Scriptures. And what is that but wickedly to father lies
upon the Scriptures? And for this cause you know, the Papists think it no sure
ground to rest upon the scriptures only, affirming blasphemously, that the
Scriptures are dark, imperfect, and doubtful, because they may be wrested
cuery way, like a nose of wax, or like a leaden Rule. Wherefore, Christian
charity and modesty would not thus maliciously and slanderously wrest and
wring the words of the Bishop, tending to a good and godly meaning.

Of like truth it is, that he burtheneth the Bishop of Winchester, to affirm
that it was heresy to say, The preaching of the word was the only ordinary
way to salvation, which he never thought, or spoke, either the^, or at any
other time of his life. But in handling of that controversy, Penrie spoke
things so strangely and obscurely, that he seemed to attribute that effect to
the preaching of the word only, and not otherwise used by reading: And being
urged with that question, by occasion of reading the Scriptures in Churches,
his answer was such, as he evidently showed himself to mean, that that
effect of salvation could not be wrought by hearing the word of God read, with
some other words, giving suspicion of worse matter. And then indeed the B.
rose not out of his place, (as these honest men do carpe) nor spoke in such
cholerike manner, as they pretend: but quietly said, My Lord, this is not far
from heresy. What were the words that Penry used, and especially moved the B.
to speak, he does not at this time remember: but sure he is, they were as
far from that, which is laid down in the Libel, as falshoode can be from
truth. I wonder that me^ which profess God, yea, or that believe there is a
God, can with open mouth so boldly power forth such heaps of untruths.
Detractor abominabilis est Deo. The counsel of the Prophet is good. He that
would gladly see good days, let Psalm. 34.
him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile.
The mouth of a malicious man (says Ambrose) Epist. lib. 7. Epist. 44.
is a deep or bottomless pit. The innocent that is too easy of credit, does
quickly fall, but he rises again. But the backebiting railer is by his own
craft cast down headlong to confusion, in such sort, as he shall never recover
himself again. And Bernard, Let not my soul be in company Super Can^ Sermon.
24.
of backebiting tongues, because God does hate them, when the Apostle says,
Backbiters are odious to God. Every one that backbiteth, shows himself void
of charity. Moreover, what other thing seeks he by deprauing, but that he
whom he backebiteth, may come in hatred and contempt with them among whom he
is depraved? Wherefore the backebiter wounds charity, in all that hear him,
and so much as in him lies, does utterly destroy him whom he strikes with his
tongue.

As for the reproach of want of learning, he will not strive much with them. The
Bishop has not used (God be thanked) to vaunt himself of great learning.
Neither does he disdain to be accounted unlearned of these men, which many
years since contemned Bishop Jewel as a man of no deep learning, and even
of late days could say that Erasmus was no Divine. His prayer is, that the
small measure of knowledge, which it pleased God to give him in the continuance
of fifty years study, may be employed to the glory of God, and the benefit
of his Country. It is known five and forty years since, that he was Master
of Art, and Student of Divinity, and disputed in that faculty: since which
time, he was never drawn from that exercise of good learning. This is his
greatest comfort, that since he was a young man in Magdalene College in Oxford,
he has been brought up in the love of the Gospel, and was reasonably able to
confirm his conscience, and to repress the adversary, not only by the holy
scriptures, but also by the writings of the ancient Fathers, and the best
authors of this age since the renewing of the Gospel, as he has many honest
and learned men witnesses yet alive. M. Trauers, whom they prefere before him,
he knows not what he is. He never saw him to his remembrance, but once, and
that was at my Lord of Canterburies, in the presence of some honorable
persons: at which time the man showed no great learning. Doctor Spark is so
well known to the Bishop of Winchester, and the Bishop to him, that he
cannot be persuaded that Doctor Spark will affirm, that he did put the Bishop
at that time or any other (as they term it) to a non plus. But whatsoever he
will do, if the one or the other, or they both, do make any brag of a
victory then gotten (as I have before said) surely they do greatly forget
themselves, and declare that Lady Philautie did bleare their eyes, and made
that they could not see the right rules of modesty: especially considering,
what the witnesses were, and what report they have made thereof to the best of
this Land, which has not been made unknown to the world. It is true that
Gregory says, Superbia lumen intelligentiae abscondit. Pride Moral. 8. Idem.
12.
daseleth the eyes of a man's understanding. And again, Superbi etc. Proud men
when they think them selves despised, fall by and by to railing. Cyprian, that
Lib. epist. 1. Epist. 3.
reverend and learned father, says notably. An high and swelling heart,
arrogant and proud bragging is not of Christ that teaches humility, but
springs of the spirit of Antichrist. I pray GOD these men may remember these
lessons.

AS touching the Government of the Church of England, now defended by the
bishops, this I say. When God restored the doctrine of the Gospel more
sincerely and more abundantly then ever before, under that good young Prince,
King Edward 6. at which time not the governors only of this Realm under
him, but a number of other Noblemen and Gentlemen, were well known to be
zealous in the favor of the truth: by consent of all the States of this Land,
this manner of government that now is used, was by law confirmed as good and
godly. The bishops and other of the clergy that gave their advise and consent
to the same, were learned and zealous, bishop Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, and
many other, which after sealed their doctrine with their blood, all learned,
grave and wise in comparison of these young Sectaries which greatly please
themselves. M. Couerdale and M. Hooper, never thought to be superstitious or
inclining to Antichristian corruption, were contented to use the office,
authority, and jurisdiction of bishops, the one at Exeter, the other at
Gloucester. Peter Martyr, Bucer, and John de Alasco, grave men, and of great
knowledge and godliness, did live in that state under the Archbishops and
bishops that then were, and vvrote to them most reuerendly, not refusing to
give them those Titles, that now be accounted Antichristian. The like they
did to other of late time. Read the Preface of Peter Martyr, set before his
Dialogues against Vbiquity, and see what honorable testimony he gives to
bishop Jewel, and what titles he affoordeth him. To condemn all these as
Reprobate and Pety Antichrists, were great rashness, and such impudency as
ought not in any Christian Church or common weal to be borne without
punishment. When God had marueilously preserved for us our gracious sovereign
Queen Elizabeth, and set her in her Fathers seat, being brought up from her
tender years, in the instruction of Gods truth, she took advise of her most
honorable Counsel, Nobles, and learned of the Realm, and especially such as
were most forward in religion, and with consent of all the States of this
Realm, by law received, confirmed and established the manner of Government,
and other orders of the Church now observed. The learned men that yielded their
advise and consent to the same, were those reverend and godly persons, that
came lately out of banishment, from the school of affliction, and could not so
soon forget their Lord God, and the zeal of his truth, namely, Master Cox,
Grindall, Sands, Horn, Pilkington, Jewel, Parkhurst, and a number of other,
who were after chosen to be bishops, and executed those offices, without
grudging or repining of any, until about the tenth year of her Majesty's
reign, the curious devises began to be more common. Since which time, by
the countenauncing of some, they have greatly increased in strange assertions,
and now be come almost to the highest. The reproaches therefore that are given
to this State by these Libellers, touch not only the Bishops, but the
Prince, the Counsel, and the honorable; woishipfull, wise, and learned of the
Realm.

As for this question of Church-gouernment, I mean not at this time to stand
much on it. For let them say what they lust, for any thing that has been
written hitherto touching it, it is sufficiently answered. Only this I desire,
That they will lay down out of the word of God some just proofs, and a
direct commandment, that there should be in all ages and states of the Church
of Christ, one only form of outward government. Secondly, that they will note
and name some certain particular Churches, either in the Apostles time, or
afterward, wherein the whole government of the Church was practiced, only by
Doctors, Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, and none other, and that in an
equality; without superiority in one above an other. If this be done soundly
and truly, without any wresting or double understanding of the places of
Scripture: I protest they will shake that opinion that now I have of this
present government of the Church of England. Yet under correction (I will not
say, that I know) but I am surely persuaded, that they will never be able to
do it.

Moreover, I would wish them unfeignedly to declare, whether all the Churches
at this day reformed in Europe, where the light of the Gospel was first
restored, and specially of Saxony and High Almaine, have this government,
which by these men is now required, and none other. If they have, it is a good
prejudice for their cause: if they have not, it is hard, that the example of
two or three Churches should ouerrule all the residue, in which the light of
the Gospel began before them. And it may be well said, Did the Gospel
begin first with you? We may not pull down one Rome and set up an other.
Surely as grave learned me^ as most that have written in this time, evidently
affirm the contrary, and do make good proof of this proposition. That one
form of Church-gouernment is not necessary in all times and places of the
Church, and that their Senate or Segniorie is not convenient under a Christian
Magistrate.

In Denmark they have bishops both in name, and office, as it appears in
certain Epistles of Hemingius written to some of them. In which he says:
They are greatly troubled with continual visitation of their Churches. In
Saxony they have Archbishoppes and bishops in office, but not in name. For
proof hereof, I allege the testimonies of that learned man Zanchius in the
Annotations upon certain parts of his confession. In the Church of the
Protestants (says he) in deed they have bishops and Archbishops, which
changing the good Greek Page 272.
names into ill Latin names, they call Superintendents, and general
Superintendents, etc.

The same Zanchius, in the same his confession, has these words, By the same
reason, those things that were ordained in the church touching Archbishops,
yea, and Page 170.
the four patriarchs before the Counsel of Nice, may be excused and
defended. These words and some other were misliked by one famous learned man,
who wrote to Zanchius of the same. But Zanchius was so far from altering his
judgment, that in the foresaid Annotations he writes a large defense of it
out of Bucer, in Epist. ad Ephesians. which is also found in a little Treatise,
which the same Bucer has written* De vi and vsu Ministerij. And Zanchius in
the same place showed the reason why he is so grounded in that opinion. I
believe (says he) that those things which were concluded and determined by
the Godly Fathers assembled in the name of the Lord, with common consent and
without contradiction to the Scriptures, proceed from the holy spirit of
GOD: and therefore I dare not inconscience improoue them. And what is more
certain by the Histories, Councels and writings of the Fathers, then that
those orders of the Ministers, of which we have spoken, have been received and
allowed by the common consent of Christedome? And I pray, who am I, that I
should reprove those things, which the whole church has allowed? Neither
durst all they that be of our time (he means the learned men of Germany)
reprove the same.

In the foresaid place of his Annotations, when he has spoken of the
government of the churches of Saxony, he adds touching other places, Even
there Page 273.
where they have neither the good Greek names, nor the evil Latin terms:
yet have they certain chief men, in whose hands well near is all
authority. Seeing then we agree in the things, why should we have controversy
about the names and titles?

This man undoubtedly knew the government of all the Churches in Germany. For
he had been a reader and teacher in diverse of them. He had bin in Geneua* he
taught at Argentine eleven yerees: after at Clauenna four years: Again after
that, at Heidelberge ten years: And lastly, by Cassimire appointed at his town
at Newstade, where yet he lives an old man, if God of late has not taken him
out of this world.

Those places of high Almaine, wherein most zealous preachers and learned men
have remained, and with whom in doctrine we most nighly agree, have not one
manner of government, nor forms of Vide Gualterhm in 1* ad (...) Cor. cap.
(...) 5. etc.
Discipline. In Tyg^^e it is well known, they have no Senate of Elders, nor
think it tolerable under a Christian Magistrate: nor the Discipline by
Excommunication, which they more mislike. I think it be not much differing at
Berne (one of the gretest Churches) as I gather by Aretius in sundry places. At
Geneua, and some other places, especially such as have had their beginning from
thence, they have a government not much unlike that platform, which is desired
to be with us, and is now in Scotland. I might say the like for some
ceremonies and outward orders. In Saxony and at Basile they kneel at the Lords
Supper. At Tygure they sit, and it is brought to them: In other places they go
and receive it, for the more expedition, as they pass.

The like liberty and diversity use they in some other external things,
which I am not willing for some causes to lay down in writing. All those
Churches, in which the gospel in these days, after great darkness, was
first renewed, and the learned men whom God sent to instruct them, I doubt not
but have been directed by the spirit of God to retain this liberty, that in
external government, and other outward orders, they might choose such as they
thought in wisdom and godliness to be most convenient for the state of their
Country, and disposition of the people. Why then should this liberty, that
other Countries hauevsed, under any color be wrested from us? I think it
therefore great presumption and boldness, that some of our nation, and those
(whatsoever they think of themselves) not of the greatest wisdom and skill,
should take upon them to control the whole Realm, and to bind both prince
and people, in necessity of conscience, to alter the present state, and to tie
themselves to a certain platform devised by some of our neighbors, which in
the judgment of many wise and godly persons is most unfit for the state of a
kingdom, or to be exercised under a Christian Prince that defends the
Gospel, as in part, experience already has taught in some. I pray God they
look not further, and have not a deeper reach, then good subjects that love
their Prince and country, should have.

Lastly, I would wish them (leaving the long discourses where unto Doctor
Bridges was drawn by some of their strange and intricate assertions) they
would briefly without corruption lay down his arguments and allegations,
touching the supreme authority of the Prince, and the superiority of bishops,
and modestly, and soundly answer the same, not rejecting the testimony of the
ancient Writers and Historiographers, especially such as were within 400.
years after Christ, so far as they may be Testes temporum. For if they
shall otherwise deal, and seek to shift off the matter with reproaches,
scoffs, and slanders: they will discredit their cause, and make good men
think, that the spirit with which they are carried, is not the mild spirit
of Christ, but the spirit of him that is condemned for the father of lying,
murdering and slandering from the beginning.

The reason that moves us not to like of this platform of government, is,
that when we on the one part consider the things that are required to be
redressed, and on the other, the state of our country, people, and common
weal: we see evidently, that to plant those things in the Church, will draw
with it so many, and so great alterations of the State of government, and of
the laws, as the attempting thereof might bring rather the overthrow of the
Gospel among us, then the end that is desired. The particulars hereof in some
few things, in stead of many do here follow, and has been opened to you
before, if reasonable warning would have served.

First, the whole state of the laws of this Realm will be altered. For the
Canon law must be utterly taken away, with all offices to the same belonging:
which to supply with other laws and functions without many inconveniences,
will be very hard. The use and study of the Civil law will be utterly
overthrown: For the Ciuilians in this Realm live not by the use of the Civil
law, but by the offices of the Canon law, and such things as are within the
compass thereof. And if you take those offices and functions away, and those
matters wherewith they deal in the Canon Law: you must needs take away the
hope of reward, and by that means, their whole Study. And matters of Tithes,
Testaments, and Matrimony, judgments also of Adultery, Slander, etc. are in
these men's judgments mere temporal, and therefore to be dealt in by the
temporal Magistrate only: Which, as yet have either none at all, or very few
laws touching those things. Therefore the Temporal and Common law of this
Realm, must by that occasion receive also a very great alteration. For it will
be no small matter to apply these things to the Temporal law, and to appoint
Courts, Officers, and manner of process and proceedings in judgment for the
same.

Beside this, the Judicial law of the Jews, especially for such offenses as
are against the law of God, must be brought into this Common weal. For to
this opinion do they plainly incline. For they say already flatly, that no
Magistrate can save the life of a blasphemer, stubborn Idolater, murderer,
Adulterer, Incestuous person, and such like, which God by his Judicial law
has commanded to be put to death. The same assertion must have like
authority for the contrary, that is, that a Magistrate ought not to punish by
death those offenses that God by his Judicial law has not appointed to be
punished by death, and so may not our laws punish theft by death, nor diverse
other felonies: and so some of them have openly preached. The laws also
mainteining the Queens supremacy in governing of the Church, and her
prerogative in matters Ecclesiastical, as well Elections as others, must be
also abrogated. Those laws likewise must be taken away, whereby
Impropriations and Patronages stand as men's lavvfull possession and heritage.
In these Impropriations and Patronages, as I do confess, there is Lamentable
abuse, and vvish the same by some good Statute to be remedied: so how the
thing it self can without great difficulty and danger be taken away, being
so general as it is in the state of this Realm, I lean to the judgment of
the wise and godly.

The laws of England to this day, have stood by the authority of the three
Estates: which to alter now, by leaving out the one, may happily seem a
matter of more weight, then all men do judge it. If there were no more then
this one thing, which hitherto I have spoken of, that is, the alteration of
the state of all the laws of this Realm: I think there is no wise man but
sees what danger may follow in these perilous times, not only by
fulfilling the thing, but also by offering to do it.

It has been always dangerous, to pick quarrels against laws settled. And I
pray God, that the very rumor hereof, spread by these men's books, have not
already bred more inconvenience, then without hurt will be suppressed: I may
not put all that I think, in writing.

The form of finding of Ministers by Tithes, must with the Canon law be
abolished. For it was not used in the government of the Apostles time, nor a
great many of years after, and therefore may seem Papisticall and
Antichristian. There must be some other order for this devised. Which, with
how great alteration it must be done, and how hard it will be to bring to
good effect, I think there is no man but he sees: For the livings of
bishops and Cathedral Churches, (whereat they carpe) though they were all
that way bestowed, will not serve the third part.

If this government, whereof they speak, be (as they say) necessary in all
places: then must they have of necessity in every particular parish one
Pastor, a company of Seniors, and a Deacon or two at the least, and all those
to be found of the parish, because they must leave these occupations, to attend
upon the matters of the church. But there are a number of parishes in England
not able to find one tolerable minister, much less to find such a company.
The remedy hereof must be, to unite diverse parishes in one, whereof this
inconvenience will follow, that people in the country must come to Church,
three, four, or five miles off: whereas now they that dwell in the same town,
can scarcely be forced by any penalties of Law orderly to come unto the church,
to service or sermons, so that they will grow to barbarism in many places.

Whereas it is required, that the people should choose their Pastors, Elders,
and Deacons: it is greatly to be feared, that it will be matter of schism,
discord and dissension in many places: or that one or two busy heads shall
lead the residue to what purpose they will, to the great disquieting both of
the Church and of the common weal. Examples hereof did commonly appear in
the old Churches, while that manner of Election did continue, as the
ecclesiastical histories in many places do declare. And that inconvenience
caused Princes and bishops so much to intermeddle in that matter. The common
people through affection and want of right judgment, are more easily wroght by
ambitious persons to give their consent to unworthy men, as may appear in all
those offices of gain or dignity, that at this day remain in the choice of
the multitude, yea, though they be learned.

Men do know by experience, that parishes, upon some private respect, do send
their Letters of earnest commendations for very unfit and unable persons:
whereby it may be gathered, what they would do, if the whole choice were in
their hands, especially, being so backwardly affected toward the truth of
religion, as a great part of men are. They will answer (perhaps) that they
shall be ouerseene by the Pastors near about them in a particular Synod,
and forced both to be quiet, and also to make more fit elections. But who
sees not what matter of trouble this vvil be, when upon the occasion almost
of every election, they must have a particular Synod? And if the parish vvil
not be ruled (as surely many vvil not) then must they be excommunicated, and
appeal made unto the Prince and Magistrate. And that which passes now with
quietness, and with a little amendment may be well used, shall be continual
occasion of broile and trouble, whereto this nation is more inclined upon light
causes, then any other.

Moreover, that which is most of all pretended for this manner of common
Election, that they may knovee their minister, and thereby have the better
liking of him, can not possibly be brought to pass, unless they will
imagine, that every parish shall have within it self a School or College,
where those shall be brought up, that shall be preferred to the ministry
among them. But how possible that is to bring to pass among us, let any man
judge. If their ministers shall come unto them from the Universities or other
schools, they shall have as little acquaintance with them, as now they have,
and far greater occasion of partial suits, then now there is. So that
inconveniences by this means shall be increased and not remedied.

That every parish in England may have a learned and discreet minister,
howsoever they dream of perfection, no man is able in these days to devise,
how to bring it to pass, and specially when by this change of the clergy, the
great rewards of learning shall be taken away, and men thereby discouraged to
bring up their children in the study of good Letters. Furthermore, who sees
not how small continuance there shall be in the Universities, to make men of
any profound knowledge, when the very necessity of places, shall draw men away
before they come to any ripeness? the effect whereof, is partly perceived at
this day already, and much more would be, if their devise should take place.

Touching the inconvenience of Discipline by excommunication only, which they
so much cry for, how it will be of most men contemned, and of how small force
it will be to bring to effect any good amendment of life, some learned men of
this age in their works set forth to the world, have at large declared. I
let pass, that experience teaches, that men of stubburnnesse vvil not shun
the company of them that be excommunicated, and then must they be
excommunicated for keeping of company with them, and so will it fall out, that
more will be excommunicated, then in Communion: whereof what deformities and
inconveniences vvil arise, Saint Augustine does reach us. The looseness of
these days requires Discipline of sharper laws by punishment of body and
danger of goods: which they do, and will more fear, then they will
excommunication. And, God be thanked, (if men would be contented with any
moderation) we have a very good manner of discipline by the ecclesiastical
commission, which has done, and does daily much good, and would do more, if
it were more common, and men would take more pains in it. But this is that
which they be most grieved with, because they are not doers in it themselves.

The deciding of matters in controversy by the Pastors and Elders of the
Church, beside that it will interrupt the course of the laws of the realm, it
will be great occasion of partial and affectionate dealing, and thereby of
further strife and discord, and a matter of schisms and divisions, as is to
be perceived abundantly in the Ecclesiastical Writers. For some will incline
to the one part, and the residue shall be wrought to favor the other: which
has been the principal root of al schisms in the Church, yea, and thereby
of many heresies. We must not only look in these corrupt times, how
uprightly men should deal, but consider by present experience of sundry
persons and places, how affectionately they do deal in some like matters, and
thereby gather what they will do, when they have greater authority. This
order was good, where the church was in persecution under tyrants: but where
the assistance may be had of a Christian Prince, or Magistrate, it is neither
necessary, nor so convenient, as it may be otherwise. Surely common election
of ministers, and this deciding of matters in controversy by a multitude, will
breed greater strife and contention, then without danger will be appeased.

Furthermore, their whole drift, as it may seem, is to bring the government
of the Church to a Democracie or Aristocracie. The principles and reasons
whereof, if they be made once by experience familiar in the minds of the
common people, and that they have the sense and feeling of them: It is greatly
to be feared, that they will very easily transfer the same to the
Government o of the common weal. For by the same reasons^ they shall be
induced to think that they have injury, if they have not as much to do in
civil matters, as they have in matters of the Church, seeing they also touch
their commodity and benefit temporally, as the other does spiritually. And
what hereof may follow, I leave to the judgment of other. The way hereof is
already trodden forth unto them by some that have written and spoken in that
matter: Which speeches I would be loath to touch particularly, because I
think diverse of them not to have any meaning to endure that sequel. But men
must consider, not only what they mean presently themselves, but what other
may gather upon them hereafter. Cyprian, Hillarie, and other ancient writers,
did not mean so ill in some things that they left written, as some Heretics
following did father upon them, using their sayings, as the grounds of their
false and erroneous doctrines. The Preachers of the Gospel in Germany, at the
beginning, were far from the meaning to move the people to rebel against
their Governors: but some part of doctrine undiscreetly uttered by diverse of
them, speaking against some abuses, gave a great occasion thereof to the grief
of all good men, in such sort, as they were not able by any persuasion to quiet
them, until it had cost a hundred thousand of them their lives. The looseness
and boldness of this time in many, may justly cause some fear that the like
will happen hereafter among us. Anomber of other like inconveniences I might
lay down in this place, and diverse of them of as great weight as these. By
these few, some taste may be taken of the residue. But I will now return in a
word or two to the Martinist again.

NOw because M. M. is so notable a paynter of bishops visages, and can purtrey
them al with faces of seasoned wainscot: it were good for him in some table to
behold his own ougly shape, that he and his children may learn to be ashamed
of themselves. I saw his figure drawn and set forth in a table when I was a
young man: the paynter was one very nigh of his kin: His name was Lucian. The
figure was this, An ancient man of some authority sat upon the judgment
seat: he was like Mydas that covetous King: for he had long ears like an
Ass, and had sitting on each side of him a woman: the name of the one was
Ignorance, the other was called Ielous Suspicion, which two made him very rash
in credit. Then comes in M. Martin M. otherwise called Calumniator, a false
accuser, trimmed handsomelie for his better credit, and not a wrinckle awrie
in his garment: but seemed somewhat to halte and not to go upright: his eyes
and gesture fierce and fiery. In his left hand, he carried a flaming firebrand
to note his fury. With his right hand he drew by the hair of the head a
young man, his name was Innocence, who lifted up his hands to heaven,
protesting before ood that he was giltlesse in the cause. There followed two or
three, much like to scholars: their names were Dolus, Fraus, Insidiae. These
clapped their Master on the back to encourage him. And because Master Martin
will be a Gentleman, he had a treader before him, an old fellow: his eyes
were fierce, his face thin and withered, his whole countenance much like to
one pined away with melancholy and fretting fury. His name was Liuor, that is,
cankred malice, or envy: A little behind followed doleful Dame repentance in
mourning apparel, and looking back with shame and tears goes to meet Lady
Truth, coming somewhat after. In the top of the Table this sentence was
written, Whosoever slaundereth honest men, shall come to just punishment. In
the lovver part is this, Nothing can be safe from the backbiting tongue.
Round about was this written, Beware thou neither slander nor give ear unto
the back-biter. Flee slaundering both with thine ears, and with thy tongue. He
that gives fair countenance and light ear, encourages a backebiter. If
Martin that delights so much in himself, would discreetly behold this table,
I trust he would diminish some part of his folly. But for that it likes
Martin, not only to be a false accuser, but also a rash and credulous judge
with his long asses ears receiving every untruth that is told him, he may
behold himself in all the parts of the Table. The best advise that I can give
you, is out of Chrysostom. Let discretion and truth sit as judges over your
own Hom. A^. Matthew.
soul and conscience. Bring forth before them, all thine offenses. Lay down
what punishment is due for every of them. Say continually this unto thy self,
How durst thou do this? How durst thou do that? etc. If thy conscience will
refuse this, and pry upon other men's faults, say unto her, Thou sit not
here as judge of other, but to answer for thy self. What matter is it to
thee, if this or that man offend: look to thine own steps, blame thine own
doing, and not others. To the description of a detractor or backebiter, are
these properties. First, he is malicious, and studieth to hurt others, and
sometimes purposely does hurt himself, the sooner to hurt other. Secondly,
his soul and life is lying. Thirdly, he is an hypocrite and a Dissembler, and
pretends a zeal of justice and piety, to color his malice. Lastly, he is a
Serpent biting secretly, and flees knowledge. These properties learn by the
complaints of David in sundry of his Psalms. Deliver me O Lord, from the
naughty, and from the wicked man, which deuiseth evil in his heart. They have
sharpened their tongues like Serpents: the poison of Aspes is under their
lips. The mouth of a backbiter is full of cursed speaking: under his tongue
iss sorrow and grief. He lies in wait in secret places, to destroy the
innocent. He lies lurking as a Lion in his den, to ravish the poor. He
falls down and humbles himself, that the poor may fall into his net.
Read the tenth Psalm, and diverse other. The residue of their malicious and
more then ruffia^ly raylings, togetherwith Histrionical mockes and scoffs, too
immodest for any Vice in a Play, are not meetefor any honest man to meddle
with: and therefore are returned over to the Libellers themselves, as
infallible tokens of that spirit, with which they are led to these
outrageous dealinges. But it is now time to answer those quarrels that are
made generally against all Bishops.

Objection. But let us see what is laid down against the Bishops and chief
of the Clergy. First is, that The objection of the covetousness and Simonie
of Bishops.
they are exceeding covetous, and set to sale the liberty of the Gospel, and
the use and Discipline of the Church, like Simoniakes and Prelates of the
Church of Antichrist: yea, that in Simonie and sale of the Gospel, they are
nothing behind the Bishop of Rome.

Answer. Surely, this is a grievous and an horrible accusation in the ears of
any christian Magistrate: and if it be found true, the offenders not worthy
to live in this Common wealth: Or if it be false and slanderous, the Accuser
not meet to escape unpunished. The example of the slaundering the Ministers of
the Church, is a matter more dangerous, then in these days it is esteemed. But
as touching the thing it self, I am of opinion, that no man of mean learning,
or any experience, having regard of his credit, would undertake to justify
such an accusation in the hearing of any honest man. For, this I dare say, and
upon hazard of that is most dear unto me in this world will prove, that where
the state of this our Church of England does leave to an evil disposed bishop
one occasion of the practice of Simony, and covetous oppression of the people,
that the B. of Rome had forty. For a taste hereof, I refer the meaner
learned to the common places of Muscul. cap. Quare Musc. de minist. verbi Dei.
coniugium ministris ademptum. The better learned, I know, are better able of
themselves, to make further declaration out of their own laws, decrees, and
registers, commonly read of all them that are desirous to know the truth, and
not by ignorance, to exaggerate infamy, by false and unjust reports. Yea, the
very histories of this Realm can witness, that by Simony and covetous
oppression, the bishops of Rome have had yearly out of this Realm more money,
then at that time the reuenevv of the Kings crown did extend unto, or at this
day (as I think) all the bishoprics in England be worth. For Mat. Paris.
vvriteth, Matthew. Paris.
that in the time of king Henry the 3. the Pope had yearly out of this Land
60000 marks: unto which if you do add his like dealing in Germany and other
countries, you shall perceive the value to be inestimable. And surely I am of
that hope, and in my conscience I think it to be most true, that all the
Bishops in this land, by Simoniacal practice and covetous oppression, do not
gain the hundred part thereof. And if it do rise to that value, it is a great
deal too much: yea, if it be one penny, it is wicked, and by no good man ought
to be defended, and much less by them to be practiced. I hope well of all,
although I will not take upon me to excuse all: But for some, I assuredly know,
and in my conscience dare depose, that since they were made Bishops, they have
not wittingly gained that way, one twenty shillings. Therefore in equalling the
bishops of England in the practice of Simonie with the Pope of Rome, there
must needs be great odds in the comparison, and the whole speech may well be
called Hyperbole, that is, an uncharitable amplification, surmounting all
likelihood of honest and Christian truth.

Objection. But somewhat to give countenance to an evil slander, it will be
said, that the Bishop of Rome practiced Simonie by all means that he had, and
our bishops, by as many as they have.

Answer. Oh, a worthy reason. Is this to justify so shameful a slander of
the church of God, under a christian Princes government? Is that Christian
Preacher and Bishop, (if any such be) that uses Simoniacall practice in two or
three points of small importance, and little value in grieuousnesse of offense
before God and the world, to be equalled to the head of Antichrist, and the
principal enemy of the Gospel, practizing the same in a thousand of great
weight and inestimable value? I cannot but wish more charitable hearts to them
that will take upon them the zeal and profession of the Gospel. Let sin be
blamed, even in them that favor the word, and chiefly the Clergy: but yet so,
as truth will bear, and modesty with Christian charity does require, lest
in much amplifying of small offenses, you become instruments not only to
discredit the parties blamed, but also to overthrow the doctrine that they
teach. There ought to be great difference between Christian Preachers and
writers inueighing against Antichrist and his members enemies of the Gospel,
and zealous professors, blaming and reproving the faults of their own Bishop
and Clergy in the estate of a Church by authority settled. The one part is
kindled with an earnest zeal and detestation of the obstinate patrones of
error and idolatry: the other should be moved only with a charitable
sorrow and grief, to see Preachers of the truth not to declare in life that,
which they utter to other in doctrine. They that by humane frailty offend in
blemish of life only, are not with like bitterness to be hated, harried,
rated and defaced, as they that with obstinate and unrepentant hearts, offend
both in life and doctrine, and to the face of the world show themselves
adversaries of the truth. Christ after one manner blames the Scribes and
pharisees, and after another he reprooueth the ignorance, the dullness, the
ambition and carnal affection of his own Disciples that followed him. But I
pray you, let us consider the particular proof of this general accusation,
and odious comparison, Surely they are so trifling, that I am ashamed to stay
upon them, and yet I must needs speak a word or two of them. The Church of
England retains a good and necessary order, that before the celebration of
marriage, the Banes should be asked three several Sabbath days.

Objection. This order (says the adversary and accuser) is by The first
proof of Covetousness. Dispensing with banes.
Dispensation abused, and by our Bishops sold for money.

Answer. The order I think very good and meet to be observed in a Christian
Church, and not without good cause to be altered: and yet does it not bear any
necessity in Religion and holiness, whereby men's consciences should be wrung
or wrested. But I will demand of the accuser, whether there be not some cases,
wherein, the circumstances being considered, this matter may be dispensed
withal among Christians? And if there be (as no reasonable man can deny) then
I ask further, whether there be any law in this Church of England, whereby,
with the authority of the Prince, it is granted, that a Bishop may in such
convenient cases dispense with this order? And if there be such law of the
Church and of the Realm: I marvel, how it can be counted Simonie, or
covetous selling of the liberty of the Gospel, to dispense with it.

Objection. Yea, but if the order be good, why is it not kept vnuiolably? if it
be evil, why is it sold for money?

Answer. The order is good, no man can deny it, or without good cause alter
it: but there is no external order so necessary, but that authority may in
some considerations lawfully dispense therewith. It was a good order and
commandment of God, that none but the Priests should eat of the show bread,
and yet in a case of necessity, Abimelech the hie Priest, did dispense 1. Sam.
21.
with David and his company in eating the same bread. The external observation
of the Sabbath day was a good order, and a commandment straightly given by
God: and yet we read that the Jews in necessity Maccab.
did break it, and fought on the Sabbath day. And Mark 2. Matthew. 12.
Christ himself defended his Disciples, that on that day did bruise Corn and
eat it. Therefore by lawful authority, such orders may be dispensed with,
and not deserve just reproof, much less the crime of Covetousness and
Simonie.

Objection. Yea, but the dispensations are sold for money: for some have for
writing, and other for sealing, and my Lord so granting etc.

Answer. By as good reason may they excuse any Judge, or chief officer in
this Land of extortion and bribery: because his Clearkes and under officers
take money for the writing and dispatch of Processes, Writs, and other like
matters, where of happily some small portion comes to the Judge or chief
officer himself, and the same also warranted, and made good by the laws of
this Realm. If either Ecclesiastical Ministers or other officers and
Magistrates, shall by extortion wrest more, then by order is due: there lies
lawful remedy and sharp punishment for the same. And in all societies and
commonweals that ever have been, as well among Christians as other, it has
been counted lawful, that the Ministers to higher officers, as well
Ecclesiastical as other, should have lawful portions and fees allowed them
for such things where in they travel. Therefore, how this may be imputed to
Bishops as Simonie, and sale of Christian liberty, I see not.

Objection. They will say, Dispensations for Banes, for greediness of money,
are granted more commonly then they should be.

Answer. If that be true, I praise it not, I defend it not, I excuse it not:
and I think the fault more in inferior Officers, then in Bishops themselves.
But in whom soever the fault be, that cannot be so great and heinous, that
Bishops of England may justly be accounted Antichristian Prelates, Petie
Antichrists, Subuice-Antichrists etc. as some in the heat of their zeal, do
term them. But God I trust, in due time, will cool their heat with the
spirit of mildness and gentleness. If many Bishops have gained by this
kind of Dispensatio^, I marvel. Surely I know some, that never received
penny in that consideration, but have given strait charge to their inferior
officers, never to dispense with that matter, but upon great and weighty cause:
and such order is now generally taken. But (good Christians) here is the
grief, that moves all this grudge: that evil persons, when, either to cloak
their whoredom, or to prevent another of his lawful wife, or some other like
purpose, will marry without orderly asking in the Church, they be for the
same conuented and punished by the magistrate: This they be grieved at, and
count it great extremity: for, because they see the lavvfull Magistrate, upon
good considerations sometime to dispense with this order, they think it as
convenient for them without leave, of their own heads to use the same, to
the satisfying of their unlawful lust, or other lewd affection. For such is
now the state of this time, that whatsoever an Officer, specially
Ecclesiastical, may do by lawful authority, the private subject thinks he
may do the same, at his own will and pleasure. And if he be brideled
thereof, why then it is Lordlinesse, Symonie, Covetousness, and Cruelty. And
I pray God, the like boldness grovve not tovvard other Officers and
magistrates of the Common weal also. Surely, we have great cause to fear
it: for the reasons vvhereon they ground their doings, may be applied as well
to the one, as to the other.

Objection. Another Argument of covetousness in bishops The second proof of
covetousness forbidding of Marriage.
is far worse, as it is said, then the former: that they prohibit marriage
at certain times, most contrary to Gods word: that is (say they) a Papistical
practice, to fill the Cleargies purse: yea, it is a doctrine of Antichrist, and
of the devil him self, prohibiting Marriage even in Lay men, contrary to S.
Paul's words, who says, Marriage is honorable Heb. 13.
in all persons.

Answer. Surely, for my part I confess, and before God and the world
protest, that in my conscience I think, that who soever forbids Marriage to
any kind of men, is tainted with the corruption of Antichristian doctrine,
and has his conscience seared with an hot iron, bearing the mark of the beast
spoken of in the Apocalypse: but I am clearly resolved Apoe. 13
that the Bishops of England are free from any touch of that opinion, and
do account it no less then a token of Antichrist noted by Daniel, to
prohibit lavvfull Matrimony. Their doctrine openly taught and preached, and
the practice of their life does shevve it to be so, that no man unless he be
blinded with malice, will impute that error unto them. Who sees not, that by
exercise of marriage in their own persons, they cast themselves into the
displeasure and misliking of a great number, in that only they be married,
contrary to the corruption of the Popish and antichristian Church? Wherefore, I
pray you (good Christian readers) weigh and consider with your selves, what
unchristian and heathenish dealing this is toward the ministers of God, of
purpose only to deface them, and bring them in misliking by sinister
interpretations, to cast upon them the filth and reproach of that corrupt
doctrine of Antichrist, which most of all other they do impugn in their
teaching, and withstand in their doing. Is there fear of God in those hearts
that can do this?

Objection. Why? (they will say) It is evident that Marriage is prohibited by
them at certain times of the year, and thereby occasion given to weak and
frail persons, to fall into whoredom and fornication, or to burn in their
consciences with great danger of their souls.

Answer. Undoubtedly this must needs be thought a captious and rigorous
interpretation, to say that a stay of marriage for certain days and weeks, is
an unchristian forbidding of marriage, and worthy so grievous blame, as is cast
upon bishops for it. For then it is a Popish disorder also, and Antichristian
corruption, to stay marriage for three weeks, until the Banes be asked: for
in that space, light and evil disposed minds, may easily fall to offense. And
yet this order both is, and ought to be accounted of them, a godly and
necessary order in the Church.

Objection. They will answer, that it is Popish and superstitious, to tie the
order of Marriage unto any time or season, more then other. For the thing
being good and lawful by the word of God, why should it be (say they)
assigned to any time or place? There is no place more holy then Paradise was,
nor no time so good as was before Adam fell by his disobedience, etc.

Answer. I answer, if any man appoint Marriage to be used at this or that
time and place, for conscience sake, or for holiness, as though the time or
place could make the thing either more or less holy, surely I must needs
condemn him as superstitious, and cannot think well of the doing, though all
the bishops in England should affirm the contrary. For to make holy, or
unholy, those things that God has left free, and be of them selves
indifferent, is one of the chief grounds of all Papisticall corruption. But I
suspect no bishop in this Realm to be of that judgment, and I dare say there
is not. A thing left by Gods law free and indifferent, may be accounted more
convenient, comely, and decent, at one time and place, then at another: but
more holy it cannot be.

All meats are free at all times by the law of God: for nothing is unclean that
is received with thanksgiving: neither does any thing that goes into the
mouth defile a man. And yet because it is now a Positive law in this common
weal, not for holiness, but for orders sake: it is not so comely and
convenient for an Englishman to eat flesh on Fridayes and Saturdayes, or in
the Lent, as it is at other times.

Objection. Here they will cry and say, that both the one law and the other
is superstitious and naught, and proceeded both out of the Popes mint, and
there were coined, and had their beginning, and therefore that the Bishops do
wickedly, and like to popish Prelates, that so retain in the Church and common
weal, the dregs of Antichristian corruption.

Answer. This is the voice and opinion of them only, which think not any
thing tolerable to be used, that has bin used in the church before time, were
it of it self never so good. These will have no Font, but christen children
in basins. They will wear no caps nor surplices: many of them vvil not use the
old pulpits, but have new made: they will not accept a collect or prayer, be it
never so agreeable to the word of God. I marvel, that they use the Churches
them selves, then which, nothing has bin more profaned with superstition and
idolatry. They should do that Optatus Mileuitanus writes, that the Donatists
were wo^t to do, that is, when they obtained a Church, which before had been
used by Catholics, they vvoulde scrape the walls thereof, and break the
Communion tables and cups. But it may appear, that the learned father August.
was not of that opinion. For in his epistle written to Publicola, a question
was moved unto him, whether in destroying the idols temples, or their groves,
a Christian might use any part of the wood, or water, or any other thing that
did apperteine unto them: His answer was, that men might not take those things
to their private use, least they run into suspicion, to have destroyed such
places for covetousness: but that the same things might be employed in pios and
necessarios vsus. But I recite not this, to defend that law, whereby marriage
for a time is forbidden. For I think it not a matter of such necessity,
neither is it so greatly pressed, as they pretend. I think there is no law
remaining, that is so little executed, as that is.

The other law of forbearing flesh on Fridayes, in Lent, and other days, for
the state of our country I think very convenient, and most necessary to be
used in Christian policy. I would to God those men, that make so small
account of this law, had heard the reasons of the grauest, wisest, and most
expert men of this realm, not only for the maintenance of this Law, but also
for some addition to be made unto it. How God has placed this land, there is
no reasonable man but sees: The Sea are our walls, and if on these walls we
have not some reasonable furniture of ships, we shall tempt God in leaving open
our country to the enemy, and not using those instruments, which God has
appointed. There is no state of men, that does so much furnish this realm
with sufficient numbers of mariners for our navy, as fishers do. And how
shall fishers be maintained, if they have not sufficient utterance for those
things, for which they travel? And how can they have utterance, if every
dainty mouthed man, without infirmity and sickness, shall eat flesh at his
pleasure? They cannot pretend religion, or restraint of Christian liberty,
seeing open protestation is made by the law, that it is not for conscience
sake, but for the defense and safety of the realm. Therefore this crying out
against this law, is not only needelesse, but also indiscreet and factious.

Objection. But there be other matters that more nighlie The crime of making
unlearned Ministers.
touch the quick, and if they be true, can receive no face of defense. They
make lewd and unlearned Ministers for gain: they maintain pouling and
pilling courts: they abuse the Churches discipline, etc.

Answer. As touching the first, if they make lewd Ministers, it is one great
fault: if they do it wittingly, it is far a more heinous offense: if they do
it for gain, it is of all other most wicked and horrible, and indeed should
directly prove deuilish simonie to be in them. That some lewd and unlearned
ministers have been made, it is manifest: I will not seem to defend it: I
would they had had more care herein, that the offense of the godly might have
been less. And yet I know, all their faults in this are not alike, and some
have smally offended herein. And in them all, I see a certain care and
determination, so much as in them lies, to amend the inconvenience that has
risen by it. Which thing, with professors of the Gospel, should cause their
fault to be the more charitably borne, least they seem not so much to have
misliking of the offense, as of the persons themselves, for some other purpose,
then they will be openly known of. But if they should do, as they be (I
trust) unjustly reported of, that is, to make lewd and unlearned Ministers for
lucre and gain: truly, no punishment could be too grievous for them. Which
way that should be gainefull to Bishops, I see not.

The Clarke or Register, I know, has his fee allowed for the writing of
letters of Orders: but that ever Bishop did take any thing in that respect, I
never heard, neither think I, that their greatest enemies be able to prove it
upon many of them. Therefore this may go with the residue of uncharitable
slanders. Or if there has been any one such evil disposed person that has so
utterly forgot his duty and calling, that either this way, or any such like,
in making of Ministers has sought his own gain and commodity: it is hard
dealing, with the reproach thereof to defame the innocent, together with the
guilty, and to distaine the honesty of them that never deserved it. There is
no Magistrate in this land so sincere and upright in his doings, but that by
this means his honesty and good name may be defaced.

Objection. It will be said that all this is but a gloss or color, to hide
and turn from you those great crimes that you are justly charged withal. For
the world sees, and all men cry out against you, that you, to the great hurt
and hinderance of the Church, uphold and maintain an unlearned ministry,
and will not suffer any redress or reformation to be made therein. Hereby
comes it to pass, that the people of God be not taught their duty, either
to God, or to their Prince: but, by their ignorance, are laid forth as a
pray to Satan. For, by that occasion, they be led away to evil with every
light persuasion that is put into their heads, either against God or their
prince, so that it may be justly thought that all those mischiefs that of
late have fallen forth, have sprung out of this only root, as well in them
that have slidde back and revolted from religion, as in those that have
conceived and attempted the wicked murdering of our gracious Prince, and
bringing in of a stranger to sit in her royal seat. You are therefore the
principal causes of all these mischiefs.

Answer. This is surely a grievous accusation: but God, I trust, will judge
more uprightly, and regard the innocence of our hearts, in these horrible
crimes laid to our charge. These accusers, to satisfy their misliking
affection toward our state, not only suffer themselves to be deceived with
false and captious reasons, but dangerously also seek to seduce other.
Logicians, among other deceitful arguments note one principally, A non causa
vt causa, that is, when men, either to praise, or dispraise, do attribute the
effects of either part to some things or persons, as causes thereof, which
indeed are not the true causes. Which false reasoning has done great harm at
all times, both in the Church of God, and in commonweals. After the ascension
of Christ, when God sent his Apostles and other holy men to preach the Gospel
of our salvation in Christ, and the same was among men unthankfully received:
God did cast sundry plagues and punishments upon them, as dearth and scarcity,
famine and hunger, the pestilence, and sundry other diseases, war and tumult,
earthquakes and great deluges in sundry places. The causes of all this, very
sla^derously and blasphemously they imputed to Christian Religion, and thereby
raised those dreadful persecutions, which at that time were exercised against
the Christians.

This error was the cause that Saint Augustine wrote his notable work De
ciuitate Dei, and that Orosius, by the counsel both of Saint Hierome and Saint
Augustine, vvrote his history: wherein he answers this false argument, and
shows that God in all times, had sent the like plagues for the sins and
offenses of mankind, and for the rejecting of his word and truth.

In the forty four Chapter of Jeremy, The Jews deceive themselves with
the like argument, to confirm their conceived superstition and idolatry. But
we will do (say they) whatsoever thing comes out of our own mouth: as to
burn incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to power out drink offerings unto
her as we have done, both we and our Fathers, our Kings and our Princes in the
Cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem: for then had we plenty of
victuals, and were well, and felt no evil. But since we left off to burn
incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to power out drink offerings unto her, we
have had scarceness of all things, and have been consumed by the sword and by
the famine. In these words you see, to the hardening of their own hearts,
they attribute the good gifts of God to their idolatry, and their dearth and
trouble to the preaching of Jeremy and other Prophets, which indeed were not
the true causes thereof. In like manner reason rebellious subjects in common
weals, when they seek to make odious the Princes and governors under whom
they live, unjustly imputing to them the causes of such things, wherewith they
find themselves grieved.

So reasoned the rebels in the time of King Richard Walsingham
the second, against the King, against the Counsel, and chief Nobility of
the Realm, against the Lawyers, and all other States of learning, and
therefore had resolution among them, to have destroyed and overthrown them
all, and to have suffered none other to live in this Realm with them, but the
Gray Friars only.

Seeing therefore this manner of reasoning is so perilous, it behooves all
them that fear God, and love the truth, and will not willingly be carried
into error, to take diligent heed that they be not abused herewith. And so I
pray God they may do, which at this time so earnestly seek to make odious
the state of the Clergy of England, imputing to them the causes of those
things, which they most detest and abhor.

For if they will see the truth, and judge but indifferently, they shall
find that there is no such unlearned Ministry, as they complain of: neither
such want of preaching, as may justly provoke the wrath of God, to send such
plagues and punishments upon us, as they recite. This I dare justify, that
since England had first the name of a Christian Church, there was never so
much preaching of the word of God, never so many in number, never so
sufficient and able persons to teach and set forth the same, as be at this day,
howsoever they be defamed and defaced. There be, I confess, many unlearned
and insufficient Ministers: but yet I take it to be captious and odious, in
respect of them to name the whole Ministry unlearned or ignorant. For the
simplicity and charity of Christian judgment, does give the name of any
Society, according to the better part, and not according to the worse.

There were in the Church of Corinth, many evil persons, as well in corruption
of doctrine, as wickedness of life: and yet Saint Paul notes that Church to
be a reverend and holy congregation. The Church of Christ militant here in
earth, has always a great number of evil mixed with them that be good; and
oftentimes the worse part the greater: yet were it reproachful and slanderous
to call the Church wicked. In like sort may it well be thought uncharitable,
to call the ministry of the Church of England ignorant, when that (thenkes be
to God) there be so many learued and sufficient preachers in this land, as
never were before in any age or time, and the same adorned with Gods excellent
good gifts, and comparable to any other Church reformed in Europe. If men
would cast so curious and captious eyes upon the Ministers of other countries,
and note the blemishes and imperfections in them, as they do in our own: I am
persuaded (under correction) they would not think so meanly of the state of
the Ministry of England, as they do. But this is the general disease of us
Englishmen, to have in admiration the persons and states of other foreine
countries, and loath their own, be they never so commendable or good. I
speak not this, to note with reproach any reformed Church in foreign
countries, or to diminish the commendations of those excellent gifts, which it
has pleased God plentifully to power down upon them, as the first renuers and
restorers of the Gospel in this latter age, to whom, in that respect, we owe
great love and reverence: But yet they see and acknowledge, that they have
imperfections, and cannot have churches in this world without blemishes.
Notwithstanding it is not free among them, no not for the best learned, or of
greatest authority, in public speech or vvriting, to utter those things which
may tend to the general reproach of their Church or common weal, as it is
commonly used with us at this day: Or if they do, they are sharply dealt
vvithall for the same. For, as wise governors, they see, that such doings is
the very seed of dissension, discord, and faction; the very pestilence of all
Churches, common weals, and societies. Wherefore in most Churches, they do
tolerate some imperfections settled by order, at the beginning, least by change
of laws, there should be greater inconvenience.

Objection. Yea but all their Ministers are learned and able to teach.

Answer. Of that I doubt: and in some places, by good testimony I know it not
to be true. That is easy to be had in a free City, that has no more
congregations, but those that be within the City, or within a fevve villages
about, which is not possible, in so great a kingdom as this is, replenished
with so many Villages almost in every place, as scantly you have two miles
without a Town or Village inhabited.

And yet, that men do not conceive evil opinion of the Bishops, for that
which cannot be remedied: it behooves the wise and godly to consider, that
the state of this Church is such, as of necessity there must be some of very
mean ability, in comparison of that perfect rule of a Minister that S. Paul
requires.

It is well known, as it is before recited, that there be a number of parishes
in this Realm, the livings where of are so small, that no man sufficiently
learned, will content himself with them. In some one mean shire there be
above four score Chapels to be served, only by Curates, with very small
stipends. To place able men in them, is impossible: For neither sufficient
number of learned men can be had, nor, if there could, would they be
contented to be to such places appointed. And to leave those parishes and
places unserved of common prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, were an
inconvenience as great on the other part: For it brings men to an heathenish
forgetfulness of God. To ease this matter by combinations and joining of many
parishes together (as some devise) besides other inconveniences, the thing is
not in the Bishops authority, nor possible for him to do, Every parish has a
sundry patron, which will never be brough to agree to that purpose, and to
forgo their patrimony and heritage. Now to attempt the matter, by making a
law for that purpose, would be occasion of so great troubles and alterations,
as would draw with them more inconneniences, then would stand with the safe
state of this common weal, as the wiser sort do see, and were easy for me to
declare, if it were pertinent to this matter here to lay them down in writing.
The only remedy that necessity bears, is, to tolerate some of the meaner
sort of Ministers, having careful consideration, so much as diligence can do,
that the same may be of life and behavior, honest, and godly, and such at the
least, as may be able to instruct the parish in the Catechism. And surely, I
hope, by the care of the Bishops, that they have already undertaken, this
thing will be, either altogether, or in a good part brought to effect ere long
time pass.

Objection. But some will say, that all this is but a cloak of colorable
reason to hide an inexcusable fault. For that no necessity can excuse a man,
to break the law of God: and Gods holy commandment is uttered by Saint Paul,
that among other properties, 1. Tim. 3.
a Minister should be Aptus ad docendum, that is, able to teach, and
therefore no Bishop can be borne with, in making an unlearned Minister. For he
may not do evil that good may come thereof.

Answer. For answer hereunto, it cannot be denied, but the rule which Saint
Paul gives, is an exact rule, 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1.
and such an absolute description of a Minister, as is according to Christian
perfection: and therefore that all Ministers ought to be correspondent to the
same: And so much as they want thereof, they lack of their perfect state. Yea,
and ecclesiastical governors should carefully see, so much as humane
frailty and the miserable state of this world will suffer, that al Ministers
of the Church of God be such. And when they do fail herein, they offend, and
go from that perfection that the word of God requires. But yet I doubt not,
but God of his great mercy in Christ our Savior will graciously consider,
that he has to do with flesh and blood, and that even his best children live
not here in an heavenly state, but in a miserable and wretched world, and
specially when he sees, that they offend not of negligence or malicious
wickedness, but are carried with the necessity of this earthly frailty. For
if GOD should measure all things done in his Church by the perfect rule of his
word, who should be able to stand before him? We may not therefore, either
condemn other, or esteem our selves condemned before God, if through the
frailty of the world, we be not able to frame all things in his Church to
such perfectness, as his holy word appoynteth.

As the description of a Minister, delivered by Saint Paul to Timothy and
Titus is perfect, so does it contain many branches and properties to the
number of (I think) twenty or above: As, that he must be unreprovable, the
husband of one wife, watching, temperat, modest, not froward, not angry, one
that loves goodness, righteous, holy, harberous, apt to teach, holding fast
the wholesome word according to doctrine, able to exhort with wholesome
doctrine, and convince them that say against it, not given to much wine, no
striker, not given to filthy lucre, gentle, no quarreller, not covetous, one
that can rule his own house, keeping his wife and children in honest
obedience, not a young scholar least he be puffed up with self liking, well
reported of, grave, not double tongued, holding the mystery of the faith in a
pure conscience.

If they will admit no Ministers as lawful, but such as shall have fully all
these properties: Surely they will cut from Churches the greatest part, or all
the Ministers that they have. Even that one property which they so greatly
call upon, as of all other most necessary, that is, that he should be apt to
teach: that is, as Saint Paul expounds himself, to be sufficiently able to
teach them that be willing, and to convince the adversary: If it be pressed
to the extremity and rigor thereof, it comprehends so much, as it will
exclude a great many of Ministers and Preachers, which in their measure do
good service in the Church of God.

The best writers that ever I did read upon that, say, That to the performance
of the same, a man must have ready knowledge in the Scriptures, the
understanding of the tongues, the reading of the ancient Fathers, and histories
of antiquity. If a great many of them would look into their own bosoms,
and measure themselves by this rule of sufficiency: they would not judge so
rigorously of other, nor be so rash to condemn them.

We see in the Scriptures, that God sometime bears with breach of his
commandment, falling by Exodus 29.
the necessity of our frail life. God gave in charge, as before is said,
that none should eat of the Shewbread, but the Priests: And yet in
necessity David did eat of it, though he were no Priest. 1. Reg. 21


The Machabies fought on the Sabbath day contrary to this commandment, Thou
shall keep holy the Sabbath day: and yet it is not read, that God was therefore
displeased with them, or took punishment of them, though the Scripture
mention, that one without Number. 15.
necessity gathering sticks on the Sabbath day, was stoned to death.

Christ himself may seem to give the reason for their defense, when he says,
The Sabbath was ordained for man, and not man for the Sabbath. Mar. 2.


Yea, in a moral commandment of God touching marriage, we see God to use a
manner of dispensation, in respect of the frailty of man's nature. The Scripture
says precisely, Quos Deus coniunxit homone separet: and yet in the law, we
find this dispensation Deuteronomy. 24
or qualifying thereof. When a man has taken a wife, and married her, if she
find no favor in his eyes, etc. then let him make a bill of diuorcement, and
put it in her hand, and send her out of his house.

Of this merciful bearing of God with the breach of his commandment, Christ
shows the reason, Math. 19. saying in this wise. For the hardness of your
hearts God suffered you to put away your wives, but from the beginning it was
not so.

Here we learn that our gracious and merciful God, for the shunning and
avoiding of a greater mischief among stubborn people, suffered his servant
Moses to give forth a more favorable interpretation of his just and perfect
Law, and to suffer diuorcements in such cases, as the right and rigor of his
justice in itself, had forbidden.

This have I written, not of purpose to encourage men to break and alter the
Laws and ordinances of God, but rather to comfort those consciences, whith in
this case may be troubled, and to put away that opinion, wherewith some are
led to think that that Congregation is not vvorthie the name of a Christian
Church, nor meet wherein a good Christian man should abide as Minister,
where all things are not reformed, to the perfect rule of Gods holy word.

Surely the ancient Fathers of the primitive Church do not seem to be of
that judgment. For they did all find fault with many enormities in their time,
as well in outvvarde ceremonies, as corruption of life, yea, and in some point
of doctrine also: and yet it is not read that they did therefore separate
themselves from the Churches, or think that they could not as faithful
Ministers serve in them. Saint Augustine shows of himself, and of Saint
Cyprian very notably, as in many places, so chiefly against the Donatists who
were infected with that error: Aug. de baptis. contra Donatist. lib. 4. cap. 9.
but most plainly of all other places, De Baptismo contra Donatistas, Lib. 4.
Cap. 9. Where at large he disputes this question: which place is vvorthie
diligent reading and consideration.

Cyprian had blamed the Bishops and Ministers Cypr. de lap.
in his time, of Covetousness; Extortion and Usury. And yet says Saint
Augustine, Cyprian writes unto Antonianus, that before the last separation of
the wicked and the Godly; no man ought to separate himself from the unity of
the Church, because of the mixture of evil persons. What a swelling pride is
it (says he) what a forgetting of humility and mildness, what a vaunting
arrogancy, that he can think himself able to do that which Christ would
not permit to his Apostles, that is, to separate the weeds from the Corn?
etc. Yea, and S. Paul himself as before I have said, judges the Church of
Corinth, an honorable and blessed Church of God, though there were in the same
not only some blemishes and imperfections, but many great and enormious
faults. Wherefore, to return again to my purpose, though our Bishops through
the necessity of time, neither at the beginning had, nor now can have perfect
good Ministers in every parish within their charge: I see no cause, why they
may not use such as with their best diligence they may have, especially if
they order the matter so, as the fault be not in their own negligence or
corruption. The causes why an unlearned Ministry is not the occasion of back
sliding etc.


That you may the better conceive, that an unlearned Ministry for want of
preaching of the Gospel, is not the cause of the backesliding and reuolting of
so many in these days, nor of sundry other inconveniences imputed to the same:
you shall easily understand, if you will call to your remembrance, that when
there were fewer Preachers and less teaching by great odds, then oflate years
has been, the people did not revolt as now they do. There is therefore some
other cause, if we will with upright minds look into it. There were fewer
Preachers and less teaching in the days of that King of blessed memory
Edward the sixth, and yet did not the people then revolt, as now, although the
reformation of the Church was then but greenely settled. They had the same
imperfection and want of Ministers, which we have now, and that in greater
measure: in so much as they were feign to help out the want with reading of
Homilies, as you know. Which devise, although it be greatly misliked and
inueighed against in these days, as intolerable: yet did that reverend and
learned father M. Bucer highly commend the same, and showed his good liking
thereof, willing more Homilies to be prepared for that purpose. And what were
they that were then Preachers, and in the state of government of the Church?
Surely such persons as did diligently observe those orders in outward things,
which the Bishops now, for fear of further inconvenience, desire and study
to maintain. In the first ten years of her Majesty's most gracious reign,
there was little or no backsliding from the Gospel, in comparison of that now
is: yet was there not then so much preaching, by the half, nor so many
Preachers in the Church of England by 1000. as now there are. And since that
time (I speak of good experience, and better knowledge then gladly I would)
that in diverse places where there has been often preaching, and that by
learned and grave men, there have been many that have revolted, and little good
effect declared among the residue. You will ask me then, what I think to be
the true cause thereof? Surely, the causes are many: but I will note unto you
only two or three, that be of greatest weight. First, to The first cause why
the Gospel prospers not so well here.
have the fruits of the Gospel settled in the consciences of men, and declared
in their lives: It is not sufficient to have often and much preaching, but also
to have diligent and reverent hearing. Though the Preachers be never so learned
and discreet, if it be not heard as the word of God, it is to no purpose. But
in these days, as in all other, men be easily induced to disburthen
themselves, and lay the whole fault upon the Ministers and Preachers.

Objection. Oh, say they, if we had good and zealous Bishops, and godly
Preachers, such as the Apostles were: undoubtedly this doctrine of the Gospel
would have had better success, and would more have prevailed in men's hearts.
For they are not zealous, nor seem to be moved with the spirit of God:
therefore it cannot be, that they should move other.

Answer. Though this reason seem somewhat plausible to some kind of men, and
to be of great force to excuse the common people: yet I advertise all them,
that have any spark of the fear of GOD in their hearts, that they take heed
of it, and beware, that, to their own great danger, they be not carried away
with it. For it has been seldom or never heard or read, that the people of
God among whom true doctrine has bin preached (as the Lord be thanked it has
been with us) did ever use such allegations for their own excuse and defense.
It has been always the pretense of the reprobate and wicked, to color their
own obstinacy, and contempt of Gods word, when they were offered the light
of the Gospel and called to repentance. But that these kind of men may not
flatter and deceive themselves: I let them understand, that the Scriptures in
no place teach them, that the offenses and faults of the Ministers, are
always the only cause, why the word of God does not take place in men's
hearts. It is more commonly, and almost alvvaies imputed to the waywardness,
unthankfulness and obstinacy of the people that hear it. Therefore it were
good for alsortes of men, of what calling soever, to look into their own
bosoms, and carefully to consider, whether the fault thereof be not in
themselves. For they know right well, that the master may be learned and
diligent, and yet the scholar not thrive, by reason of his own dullness. The
Physician may be honest and skillful, and the obstinate Patient make light of
his wholesome counsel. The seed may be good, and the seed sower a paineful
and skillful husbandman, and yet the fruit not to be answerable to his
travel, because of the naughtiness and barrenness of the ground. This our
Savior Christ teaches us in the parable of the Seede-sovver. Matthew. 13. The
Sower (says he) went forth to sow his seed, and some fell in the high way,
that is to say, into the hearts of them that were continually trampled with
wicked and ungodly cogitations, so that the seed could not sink into their
hearts, but by those birds of the devil, was carried away without fruit.
Some fell into stony ground, that is, into such hearts as wanted the good
juice and moisture of Gods holy spirit: and therefore when the heat of
persecution arises, or some great temptation assaulteth them, their zeal is
withered, and they revolt from the truth. Some fell into busshie ground, that
is, into the minds of them, that were troubled with the cares of the world,
with the love of riches, and with the pleasures of this life, which wholly
choked up the good seed of the Gospel of Christ, so that it could not in any
wise prosper and bring forth fruit. Here you may perceive, that for one
fourth part of good ground, that yields fruit of the doctrine of God, there
are three greater parts of evil ground, wherein it nothing at all prospers.
But in these our days amongst us, we have a fourth sort of men, which
obstinatly at al refuse to hear the word of God, and do shut up their ears,
not only against preaching, but against private exhortation also. If there
were less store of these evil grounds in this land at this day, undoubtedly
we should see more success of the Gospel, and more ample fruit of our
teaching then now we do. It were good for men to look that these
quarrellings at other men's lives, be not one of the coardes of vanity that
Esaias speaks of. Woe be to them (says God by his holy Esaias. 5.
Prophet) that draw on iniquity with coardes of vanity, and sin, as it
were with a Cart-rope, that is, Woe be to them, that imagine excuses and
colors, to nouzell and mainetaine them selves in contempt of Gods word, and
want of repentance. Let men take heed of such dealing, that such Coardes of
vanity pull not on iniquity so fast, that it draw them to the utter contempt
of God and his truth. Example where of is seen at this day, in too many, to
the grief of all good men's hearts: For the school of Epicure, and the
Atheists, is mightily increased in these days. The like effect Esaias notes to
have fallen out among the Jews, at that time. For this he makes them to say
in derision of the preaching of the Prophets, Let God make speed, and hasten
his work, that we may see it. Let the counsel of the holy one of Israel
draw near, and come, that we may know it. And in like manner deals the
wicked in Jeremy Chapter 5. They have denied the Lord, and said, It is not
he. Tush, the Sword, and the plague shall not come upon us, neither shall we
see it. The threatenings of the Prophets are but wind, and the true word of God
is not in them. They utter their own fantasies, and these things shall come
unto themselves. Even with like contempt and derision, many at this day abuse
the Preachers of Gods word. When we lay before them the terrible threatenings
of Gods wrath and indignation, if they revolt from the truth of the Gospel,
or suffer the same to be betrayed into the hands of the enemy, saying, that
God will for sake them: that he will take his defense from them: that he will set
his face against them: that he will bring strangers upon them to destroy their
country and possess their great lands and goodly buildings: Oh, say they,
These Preachers make great outcries: they put strange expectations into the
peoples heads: they are indiscreet: they meddle with matters, which do not
appertain unto them, if matters go amiss, the greatest fault is in them:
selves. But I have sufficiently spoken of this manner of intertaining of
Ministers already, and shall speak of the same hereafter.

The second, and in deed a chief cause of backsliding The second cause of
backsliding.
and reuolting, is the schism, faction and dissension, which for the space of
these fifteen or sixteen years, has exceedingly grown, between the
Ministers and Preachers of England. For the like has in all ages been a cause
to many, of falling, both from the truth of God, and to wickedness of life.
Basile speaking hereof, says, Ob haecrident increduli, fluctuant qui modicae
sunt fidei, ambigua est fides ipsa. The effects of this schism has been (as
in part I have declared in other parts of this treatise) First, that not only
in sermons publicly, but also in common table talk privately, yea, and in
writing and treatises spredde abroad into all men's hands wickedly, vehement
and bitter inuectiues have been made against the Bishops and other Preachers
of the Church of England, to the discredit not only of their persons, but also
of the doctrine which they have taught. Yea, the whole state and government of
this church, the Liturgy and book of Common prayer, and the administration of
the Sacraments established by Law and authority, the external rites and
ceremonies laid down only for order sake, have been publicly misliked,
depraved and condemned, as directly contrary and repugnant to the word of God.
Men have not only delivered forth these inuectiues against the whole state of
our Church, and all the parts thereof: but in the face of the world, against
Law, against authority, have taken upon them to alter all things according
to their own pleasure: Which dealing, you may be sure, cannot be without
great offense of an infinite number, as the world evidently sees it has
been. Moreover, many persons, both indiscreet and unlearned, because they
will not be accounted Dumb dogs, have taken upon them to preach without
license or trial: and entering into discussing of matters now in controversy
between us and the adversary, have handled them so coldly, nakedly, and
imperfectly, that many have been grieved to hear them, and some brought in
doubt of their consciences, which never doubted before. Many strange
Assertions, either plainly false, or as Paradoxes, true in some rare and
extraordinary sense, have been by sundry persons, and some of them well
learned, uttered and taught, to the troubling of many men's minds, and
specially such as were not able to reach to the depth of them. As for example,
that it is a grievous offense to kneel at the receiving of the Communion. A
gentleman of good countenance has affirmed to my self, that he would
rather hazard all the land he had, then be drawn to kneel at the Communion.
An heavy burden to lay upon a man's conscience, for an external gesture. The
doctrine of the Lords Supper, has been so slenderly taught by some, that a
number have conceived with themselves, that they receive nothing but the
external elements, in remembrance that Christ died for them. And these their
cogitatio^s have they uttered to other to their great misliking. Private
baptism, yea, and public also, if it be ministered by one that is no preacher,
has bin so impugned, as if it were no sacrament at all: whereby questions have
bin raised by sundry persons, what is become of them that were never baptized
otherwise: Or whether it were not necessary, that all such persons, as are
certainly known, not to have received any other baptism, the^ that was
privately done, ought not to be baptized again, because the other is esteemed
as no Sacrament?

The article of the common Creed touching Christ's descension into hell,
contrary to the sense of all ancient writers, has bin strangely interpreted,
and by some, with vnreuerent speeches flatly rejected. These and a number of
such other, have undoubtedly bred great offense, and wounded the hearts of an
infinite number, causing them partly to revolt to Papistry, partly to Atheism,
and neglecting of all Religion, as is seen by the lives of many, to the
exceeding grief of all them that fear God and love his truth. As I have
talked with many Recusants, so did I never confer with any that would use any
speech, but that he has alleged some of these offenses to be cause of his
reuolting. And some have affirmed flatly unto me, that in seeking to press
the^ to come to our Church and service, we do against our own consciences,
seeing our most zealous preachers (as they be taken) openly speak and write,
that as well our service, as the administration of the sacraments, are contrary
to the word of God. I beseech Almighty God of his great mercy, that he will
open the eyes of them, which thus eagerly have striuen against the present
state of this Church, to see what hurt and hinderance has come to the
profession of the Gospel, by these uncharitable and needelesse contentions.
And undoubtedly, if God move not the hearts of the chief Rulers and
Governors to seek some end of this Schism and faction, which now renteth
in pieces this Church of England: it cannot be, but in short time for one
Recusant that now is, we shall have three, if the increase of that number,
which I mention, be not greater. For I do hear and see those things, that it
grieueth my heart to consider. What hurt and trouble Satan has at all times
raised in the Church of God by occasion of dissension and discord, moved not
only by heretics and false teachers, but also by them, which otherwise have
been good and godly Christians: the Ecclesiastical Histories do evidently
declare. What should I recite the Schism between the East and West Churches,
for the observation of the feast of Easter, which continued a great number of
years, and grevv to such bitterness, that the one excommunicated the other?
What shall I say of the Schisms and grievous contentions in the East Church,
and especially at Antiochia, and Alexandria, between Paulinus and Flauianus?
Lucifer and Eusebius? the Meletians and Eustathians? all at the beginning good
Christians, and embracing true doctrine? And yet did they with great troubles,
eschevve one the others communion, as you may read in Epiphanius lib. 2.
Theodor. lib. 1. cap 8. etc. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 23. Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 18.
for the space of 80. years and above. I omit the great strife between
Chrysostom. of the one part, and Theophilus, Cyrill and Epiphanius, on the other,
for the burning of Origens books. They were all good and learned bishops, and
we do worthily reverence their memory: yet fell this matter so foul among
them, that because Chrysostom. would not consent to the burning of Origens
books, Theophilus and Cyrill would scantly ever acknovvledge him to be a
lavvfull Bishop. I mention not a great number of other like factio^s, which
grew in the same age, to the trouble and hinderance of true Christianity, as
many godly and learned men did then complain. And sundry grave authors which
have written in this our time, and before, judge, that these wayward
contentions in the East Church, were the chief causes that brought upon them
afterward, the heavy wrath of God that took his Gospel from them, and cast
them into the tyranny of Saracens and Turks, as we have seen now these many
years. A notable example to us (good Christian Readers) to take heed in time,
and earnestly to pray unto God, that he will so bless us with his holy
Spirit, that we may be all like minded, having the self same love, being of
one mind and of one judgment, that nothing be done among us, through strife
and vain glory, but that in humbleness of mind, every one will think of
other better then of himself, that we may grow together in one heart and
mind, against the common adversary to the glory of God, and the promoting of
his Gospel, the safety of our gracious Prince, and natural country. Of such
discord in the church, S. Basile grievously co^plaineth, When I was grown
(says he) into man's age, and often going into strange Countries, fell into
troubles, I observed and found, that in other Arts there was great concord and
agreement between them that were the chief of those Arts and Sciences: Only
in the Church of God, for which Christ died, and upon which he had plentifully
powered down his holy spirit, I saw great and vehement discord, as well among
themselves particularly, as in things contrary to the holy Scriptures. And
that which is most horrible, I saw them that are the chief of the Church so
drawn asunder in diversity and contrariety of opinions, that without all
pity, they did most cruelly tear in pieces the flock of Christ, so that if
ever, now it is verified that the Apostle speaks, From among your selves
shall rise men speaking perverse things, that they may draw Disciples to
follow them.

The third cause and the principal of all other is, The third cause of
reuolting.
that the ramping and roaring Lion that goes about seeking whom he may
devour, and watching all occasions to do mischief in the Church of God, has
taken the opportunity of this Schism and division among our selves. And
therefore ever since that began, he has not ceased from time to time, out of
his schools and Nurceries, to send into this Realm fit instruments for that
purpose, Jesuits, Massing-priests, and Seminary men, and such other of our
own nation, as have been purposely by them corrupted: which being armed with
some show of learning, but specially with readiness of tongue and boldness of
speech, with some outward show of holiness in words, have mightily prevailed
against the subjects of this Realm, taking commonly reasons of persuasion,
from the discord that is among our selves, as by particular dealings with the^
I have learned. The endeavors of these men have taken the greater effect, by
one persuasion, which they principally have used: which is, that they have put
into their minds a certain expectation of a speedy alteration and change to be,
not only in religion, but also in the state of the realm. Their reasons have
bin, that all the Princes Catholic in Christendom, were entered into league by all means that might be, to depose our gracious sovereign Queen Elizabeth, and
to set up in her place the Queen of Scots when she lived: and then woe be to
them that should be found in this land, to remain in the favor and liking of
the Gospel of Christ, which they blasphemously call horrible schism and
heresy, which would be revenged to the uttermost. To work this devise, they
were let to understand, what plots and means were made, how easy, how
likely, how certain to come to pass within few years, yea, months, yea,
days. For they confirmed the hearts of all them that bend to their
persuasion, with all hope that might be: In so much that I know some, that
within these two years were very forward in religion, and not only heard
Sermons diligently, but also were at sundry conferences, for their better
confirmation: yet within few Months, with the certain persuasion of this
expectation, were clean carried away, and so remain perverse and obstinate
Recusants, with the example thereof shaking the consciences of many other. In
these their wicked and deuilish practices against God and his truth, and
against the state of this land, they were not a little imboldened by slack
and remiss dealing toward them. The laws were not executed: the advantage
was given to some, that did favorably compound with them.

Hereby I know by good experience, that much harm has been done in diverse
places. They have also comforted and imboldened themselves in this, that mercy
and favor should be showed them. For this they can say, that Christian
Princes and Magistrates, especially such as be Protestants, by their own
doctrine, should show mercy and clemency, chiefly in matters of conscience.
But what a malicious hypocrisy is this, to call upon Christian Magistrates for
mercy and favor, and they themselves in the mean time, breath nothing but
cruelty and blood in their hearts? I grant mercy becomes a Christian
Governor, but not without severity of Justice. For severity stays a
greater number, then mercy and favor allureth, (as August. says) Sicut
meliores sunt quos dirigit amor: ita De Corre and Grati.
plures sunt quos corrigit Timor. The greater part is always the worst:
therefore Magistrates must take heed, that mercy be not turned into
cruelty: For as August. says, there is Misericordia puniens and Crudelitas
parcens.

Objection. Faith (say they) is the gift of God, it cannot be forced by any
punishment: by hardness and extreme dealing men may be made hypocrites, but
not religious: yea, they add further, that the Apostles used no such help of
Princes power to bring men to the faith, or to pull them away from error.

Answer. But these and such other like their Allegations, are contrary to the
word of GOD, and judgment of all the ancient learned Fathers, and specially
Saint Augustine, who chiefly dealt against the Donatists, in this, and other
opinions. Read the thirteenth and seventeenth of Deuteronomie, and see Deuteronomy
1^. and 17.
how straightly God gives charge for the punishment of them that seduce other
from the true worship of God. In Exodus he says, Qui immolat Dijs alienis,
praeterquam Domino soli, exterminetur. He that offers unto any other gods,
save unto the Lord, etc. In the Nombers, he that brake the Sabbath day, was
stoned to death, that his example might not seduce other. Paul in the Act. of
the Apostles, by the power of God, struck blind Elymas the magitian,
withstanding the truth of God. August. in the 11. Tract. upon John, disputing
against the Donatists, by the example of Nabuchodonosor, exhorts Christian
Princes to use sharp punishment against such persons, as contemn Christ and
his doctrine. If king Nabuchodonosor (faith he) gave glory to God, because he
had delivered the 3. young men from the fire, and gave unto him so great glory,
that he made a decree throughout all his empire, which comprehended so many
kingdoms: how should not our kings be moved, which know not only three young
men to be delivered out of the fire, but themselves, and all other faithful
persons delivered from the eternal fire of hell? especially when they see
Christ thrust out of the minds of Christians, and when they hear it said to a
Christian, Say thou art no Christian. Such offenses will they commit, but yet
such punishments will they not suffer. For understand you what they do, and
what they suffer? They kill men's souls, but they are afflicted but in body:
They work to other eternal death, and they complain that they suffer
temporal death. etc. Again, the same Aug. De vi coercend. Haereticis ad
Vincent. Epist. 48. writes in this sort, My opinion was at the beginning, that
none should be forced to the unity of the Church, but that we should endeavor
to deal by the word of GOD, by disputation, by reasoning, and persuading,
least happily of those which we knew to be open Heretics, we should make
counterfaite Christians: but this mine opinion was not overcome with the words
of them that reasoned against me, but by the experience of them, which showed
me examples to the contrary. For first mine own City of Hippo was objected
against me, which was wholly carried away with the opinion of the Donatistes,
and yet through fear of the Emperors laws was turned to the Catholic
unity. Which City, we now see so to detest that pernicious error, as if it
had never been among them. And likewise diverse other cities, were namely
rehearsed unto me, so that by experience I learned, that my former judgment
was not right.

The first Christian Emperor Constantine vvriting to his Lieutenant Taurus, It
has pleased me (says he) that in all the places and Cities, all the Temples
of the idols should presently be shut up, and all wicked persons forbidden to
have access unto them. Our pleasure further is, that all men should forbear
their sacrifices. If any such wickedness shall be committed, let them be beaten
down with the reuengement of the sword, and their substance to be seized
upon, and brought into my Treasury: And in like manner the governors of
Provinces to be punished, if they neglect to execute the same.

But I will make no longer discourse herein. Such as do doubt hereof, and
desire to be better satisfied, I refer them to a Treatise which Master Beza
has written for that matter. I have tarried the longer in this part, for that I
am desirous to let the indifferent christian reader understand, that it is but
an assectionate judgment of some, when they impute the only cause to be in
bishops, why there is in these days so great back sliding from the Gospel,
and so great mischief devised against the Prince and the State. It appears
their minds are blinded with affection, that they cannot see the truth.

AN other crime laid against Bishops, is, The quarrel of maintayning pouling
Courts.
that they maintain pilling and pouling, and (as some in despite term them)
bawdy courts. If they maintain courts for the administration of Justice, in
such things as are within their charge: they do, as I am persuaded by Gods
law they may do, and as by the laws of this Realm, and state of this Church
they ought to do. But if they mayntaine pouling in their Courts, that (in
deed) is worthy blame, and by no pretense can be salued. For, as all
Magistrates ought to deal uprightly, and without corruption: so principally,
such as be Spiritual, and of the Church of God. But how is it proved, that
Bishops maintain pouling Courts? Surely, I know not: For they do not lay
it down in particulars. If they did, I think the matter might easily be
answered with good reason.

It may be they think, the Under-officers take money and bribes, where they
should not: For that is polling and extortion. If it be so, it is evil, and
not to be suffered, and upon proof, the Law appoynteth sharp punishment.
Though it be true that they surmise in this case, that Officers are so
corrupt: it is one thing to say, The Officers use pouling, and another to say,
The bishop maintains a pouling Court.

A bishop may have an evil Officer, whom yet he will not maintain, no nor
suffer, if he knevve it, and be able to redress it. I am in persvvasion, there
is no bishop in this Realm, but if it be complained of, and proof made unto
him, that his officers take more then is prescribed by order and law that they
may do, but will mislike with the thing, and do his best to see it redressed:
Or if he will not, I favor not their State so much, but that I could vvish
him to be punished himself. But if a Bishops Officers shall be counted to
poule, when they take no more then the ordinary fees and duties by Law
allowed, and the bishop when he bears with the same, shall be called a
maintainer of a poulling Court: this is a matter in a slaunderer to be
punished, and not a fault in a bishop to be blamed. By this means all the
Courts in England may be defamed, and called poulling Courts, and the
Officers or Judges, under whose authority they stand, may be reproved as
mainteners of poulling Courts. Be it, that there is unlawful taking in many
Courts of this Realm, as happily there is in some by greedy Officers: were
it therefore the duty of christian and godly subjects, to spread libels
against the Prince or chief governors, as mainteners of corruption, briberie,
and pouling?

An hard matter it is, in so corrupt times, for any magistrate, to warrant the
doings of all inferior officers: I pray God this making of exception to
Courts and officers, go no further then to the officers of bishops and of the
Clergy. Whatsoever they pretend, the very root of the matter is this: The
whole state Ecclesiastical, by the looseness of this time, is grown into
hatred and contempt, and all inferior subjects disdain in any point to be
ruled by them. And therefore when they be called, conue^ted and punished for
such things, wherein they have offended, or be brideled of that they would do
disorderly: they grudge at it, their stomachs rise against it, and think all that is done to be unlawful, though it be never so just. And because they are
not able otherwise to be revenged, they cry out, that they be cruel and
poulling Courts.

Objection. To cut off the whole matter, it will be said, that by the word of
God it is not lawful for bishops to have such Courts, nor to exercise such
jurisdiction.

Answer. Yet truly I must answer, that it is lawful for christian subjects to
obey it, and unlawful for them to kick and spurn against it, seeing it
stands by authority of the Laws, and of our Christian and gracious prince,
by whom God has sent to us, and does continue with us, the free course of his
Gospel. But why may not a bishop exercise jurisdiction, and have a Court to
judge, determine, and end matters? Surely, Saint Paul says to Timothy,
Against 1. Tim. 5.
a Priest or Elder, receive no accusation, under two or three witnesses. Here
is an accuser: Here is a person accused: here are witnesses examined: here is
a judgment and deciding of the matter: therefore here is an exercise of
jurisdiction, and a manner of a Court.

They will say, It was not Timothies Court only, but jointly exercised with
the residue of the Elders, that had the government.

Undoubtedly, there is no such thing there in that place. The words are
directed to Timothy only: the adjoining of some other, is but the
interpretation of some few: upon which, to build the necessity of a doctrine
in the Church of Christ, is but hard dealing, and not sufficient to ground men's
consciences upon. And yet here note you, that by this place it is evident, that
ecclesiastical persons may have, and use jurisdiction.

To prove that bishops may not alone exercise jurisdiction, they add Christ's
saying, Matthew, 18 If thy brother offend thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone. If he shall hear thee, thou have won thy brother:
but if he will not hear thee, take yet with thee one or two: if he will not
hear then, Dic Ecclesiae, Tell it to the Church.

Here (say they) we are willed to tell the Church: but the Church cannot be
understood to be one person, as the bishop or such like.

First I answer, that by the consent of most interpreters, that place speaks
not of the exercise of public jurisdiction, but of a charitable proceeding in
private offenses. And Christ's large discourse, which immediately following he
makes unto Peter, touching the forgiving of them that do offend us, does very
evidently justify that meaning. If some do interpret the place otherwise (as I
have before said) Christians should not build thereupon a general doctrine of
necessity.

It will be asked what Christ meant when he said, Dic Ecclesiae. As some
interpret it, he meant, Tell the Governors of the Church. After some other,
Tell it openly in the Church or congregation, as Hierome says, Vt qui non
potuit pudore saluari, saluetur opprobriis, that is, that he which could not
be saved by shame, might have his salvation wrought by reproach. For a great
thing it is to one that has any fear of God, to have reproach in the face of
the Church.

And to this interpretation, the most of the ancient writers agree.

Objection. They will reply, that at that time there were many Presidents as
it were, and governors of the Church together with the chief Ministers in
every Congregation.

Answer. I grant it was so: But it does not follow thereupon, that it is a
commandment, that for ever in all places and times, it should be so. I am not
of that opinion, nor ever was any of the ancient Writers, no more are sundry
learned men of great credit at this time, Quod vna semper debet esse oeconomia
Ecclesiae, that is, that the external government of the Church, should
always, and in all places be one, and specially by a college or company of
Elders. When Christ said, Tell the Church, there was as yet no Christian church
established: but Christ took his speech according to the state of the Jews
Church that then was, as in another place he ^aith, If thy brother trespass
against thee, leave thine offering before the altar. If they will gather by the
former speech, Tell the Church, that of necessity, they must have a company of
Elders, as then was in the Jews church: why, let them make like collection of
the latter, that of necessity there must be altars in the church of Christ:
the absurdity whereof will be greater, then any good christian man will
easily receive.

Objection. They will say, the Apostles afterward, and the Primitive Church did
practice the same.

Answer. That is not yet proved: but let the^ struggle while they lust, theysh
al never find a commandment in the scriptures, charging that it should for ever
be so. It were to great a bridle of christian liberty in things external, to
cast upon the church of Christ. So long as the church of God was in persecution
under tyrants, might well seem to be the best and fittest order of Government:
But when God blessed his Church with Christian Princes, the Scriptures do not
take away that liberty, that with the consent of their godly magistrates they
may have that outward form of jurisdiction, and deciding of Ecclesiastical
causes, as to the state of the Country and people shall be most convenient.
And that liberty have diverse reformed churches, since the restoring of the
Gospel, used.

Now, as when other churches in their external order of government, differ
from ours, we neither do, nor ought, to mislike with them: so if ours differ
from theirs, retaining still the sincerity of the gospel and truth of
doctrine, I trust they will even as charitably think of us.

If any desire further answer in this controversy of church government, I
refer them to the reply of D. Bridges, until they have with modesty and
gravity answered his book.

It is objected also against Bishops, that they abuse The crime of abusing
Ecclesiastical Discipline.
Ecclesiastical Discipline. I take Ecclesiastical Discipline to consist in
reproving, correcting and excommunicating such as be offenders in the Church.
And I think their meaning is here, that bishops and their officers abuse
Excommunication, in punishing therewith those persons, which obstinately and
with contempt refuse, either to appear, when they be called to answer their
offenses: or when they appear, disobey those orders and decrees by
Ecclesiastical officers appointed. How this part of Church Discipline was
abused by the Pope, it is well known: and that he made Excommunication an
instrument to bring the necks of Emperors and Princes, ynder his girdle, and
to make the whole world subject to him. For this was almost the only mean,
whereby he became so dreadful to all men, and got to himself so great
authority. The perpetual course of the histories, even such as were written by
his own Parasites, and chiefly of this Realm of England, declare this to be
most true. For trial hereof, read the history of Thomas Becket.

But I think no man is so carried with the misliking of our Bishops, that he
will accuse them, in this sort to abuse Excommunication: seeing by their
preaching they have binprincipall instruments to overthrow the same in the
Church of Rome.

They cannot say, that any Bishop of this church, ever since the restoring of
the Gospel, endeavored to excommunicate the Prince and governors, of purpose
to make them subject to their authority in the Church. And happily that may
be a fault, yea and a great fault that is found with them in these days,
that they do not so, and constrain the prince and Rulers to do that, which by
persuasion they will not do.

But how expedient this manner of Excommunication is for this time, I leave to
the wise and godly to consider. Sure I am, that some of the most zealous
churches reformed have it not, nor think it tolerable. And yet such a manner
of Excommunication it is, Tygure.
that many strive at this day to have brought into the Church, under the name
of Discipline.

But how easily it would grow to abuse, and what danger it might bring in this
state of time, I think there is no wise man that does not foresee: unless it
be such, as to bring their purpose to pass, and to settle their devise in the
Church, think no danger to be shunned.

As for the Excommunication practiced in our Ecclesiastical Courts, for
contumacie in not appearing, or not satisfying the judgment of the Court: if
it had pleased the Prince, and them that had authority to make Laws for the
government, to have altered the same at the beginning, and set some other order
of process in place thereof: I am persuaded the Bishops and Clergy of this
Realm would have bin very well contented therewith.

Gualter a learned man of the Church of Tygure, writing upon the first to the
Corinthians, having showed the danger of this other Excommunication, speaks
of a manner of civil discommuning, used in that Church: Which, or the like good
order, devised by some godly persons, if it might be by authority placed in
this Church, without danger of further innovation, I think it would be
gladly reciued to shun the offense that is taken at the other, and yet
surely, under correction, the Law of alteration would breed some
inconvenience.

But the perpetual crying of many to have a mutation of the whole state of the
Clergy, and a number of other things in the Church beside, (which must needs
draw with it a great alteration in the state of the Realm also) makes the
Prince, and other Governors to be afraid of any mutation. For they know
what danger may come in these perilous days by innouations: And if they
should once begin, things are so infinite, shat they can see no end of
alterations. Therefore eeing we have a Church settled in a tolerable manner of
reformation, and all truth of doctrine freely taught and allowed by the
authority of this realm, yea, and the adversaries of truth by law repressed:
they think it better to bear with some imperfections, then by attempting
great alterations, in so dangerous a time, to hazard the state both of the
Church and of the Realm. And the like toleration in some mean things, I
understand, upon like consideration has bin used in other churches reformed
beyond the Seas.

Objection. An other crime is objected, not only against ishops, but against
all other of the Clergy, that is, The quarrel of ambition, and seeking of
livings.
Ambition and greedy seeking after livings and promotions. If a benefice fall
void (say they) then rides he, then writes he, then labors he, then
inquireth he, who can do most with the Patron. And if he be a Layman, then
at the least a reasonable composition will serve: And if the Bishop have the
gift, then Master Chancellor, or Master Steward, or my Lords Secretary, or my
Mistress his wife, must help to work the ma^ter.

Answer. Do you not see, how this malicious spirit passes over all the good
gifts, that God has in these days bestowed on a number of learned men, to
the great ornament of this land? and of purpose only to deface the Church,
takes hold of those imperfections and blemishes, which the corruption of man's
nature specially in so perilous times, and so large a Church, must needs
work in a number? Well writes Basile, Quemadmodum vultures etc. As vultures
or carren Ravens fly away to stinking carcasses De inuidia.
and pass over many sweet meadows, and many sweet sauouring places: And as
the flies shun the whole and sound places of the body, and rest only upon
scabs and soars, out of which they suck matter to norish them: even so the
envious, malicious, and backbiting spirit, passes over all the ornaments and
worthy commendations of the lives of me^, and carpeth and biteth at those
things that he finds worthy blame.

This Realm of England never had so many learned men, nor of so excellent gift
in delivering the word of God: It is the greatest ornament, that ever this
church had. For my part, surely, I do reverence and marvel at the singular
gifts of God that I see in many. But these things be wincked at, and passed
with silence, and the ambitious doings of some few, brought in, as matter to
discredit the whole number of Preachers.

Diogenes, seeing the cleanly furniture of Plato his house, got up upon his
bed, and trampled on it with his dirtie feet, saying, Calco fastum Platonis,
that is, I contemn and tread under my feet the pride of Plato. True it is,
quoth Plato, sed alio fastu, with another pride worse then mine. So these men,
in rebuking ambition, reach at an higher authority and power, then any bishop
in England has or will use.

Ambition, I know and confess, is very wicked, and has ever been a
perilous instrument of the devil to make mischief. By this he drew our first
parents to the disobedience of the commandment of God, persuading them not to
be content with that happy state that God had placed them in. By this he
incensed Corah, Dathan, and Abiram with other, to rebel against Moses and
Aaron. By this he thought to overcome Christ, when he saw he could not
prevail by other means. By this he has always raised discord, dissension,
rebellion, war and tumult, not only to the troubling and disquieting, but to
the shaking and overthrowing almost of all commonweals that ever have been,
and thereby also has wrought the murder and destruction of an infinite number
of the creatures of God. By this he has from time to time raised many schisms
and heresies in the Church of Christ. By this, undoubtedly I think he works
no small evil now at this day, in this our Church of England. But what then?
Do they think, that if the bishops lands, and the rich livings of the
Clergy be taken away, that they shall extinguish Ambition in the hearts of
the ministers? Was there no Ambition in the Church before that bishops had
lands, or before preachers had so large livings? No man can so think, but they
that are ignorant of the ecclesiastical histories. What was the first root of
the troublesome schism of the Donatists? Whereof sprang first the heresies of
the Nouatians at Rome? What gave the first occasion of the Optat. Mileu. lib.
1. Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 6. c. 42. and 43.
pestilent heresy of the Arians? What maintained and continued it? was it not
Ambition. and seeking of pre-eminence? But what should I number up any more
examples? Few schisms and heresies in the Church, but had their beginning out
of this root. And many know, that a repulse of a dignity desired, was the
first cause that our schism brake forth, and has so eagerly continued.
Surely, though I confess, that I see and know in our church more corruption
that way, then I am glad to behold, and so much especially in some kind of
Ministers, as I pray GOD by some sharp order may be diminished: yet this I
dare stand to justify, that all the enemies of the bishops, and better
sort of the clergy, shall never be able to prove, notwithstanding the
danger of this corrupt time, that there is at this day in this Realm, such
heauing and shoouing, such canuasing and working for bishoprikes and other
Ecclesiastical livings, as I will declare unto them to have been in the
ancient time above a thousand years since, in the best state that ever was in
the church, from the Apostles age unto this time. That there is no Ambition
used among us, (as I have said) I dare not affirm: but surely, if there be
any, there can be no Ambition on the one part, but there must be corruption on
the other: therefore let them look unto themselves, that have authority to
bestow the livings. The best sort of the ecclesiastical livings are in the
disposition of the princes authority. And those honorable that have to do
therein, and are counsailers to her Majesty, be not so unwise, but they can
espy Ambition in him that sueth and labors for them. And if they do perceive
it, they are very greatly to blame, if they suffer it to escape without open
shame, or other notable punishment, and thereby bring suspicion, either upon
themselves, or upon those that be about them.

As for the corruption in bestowing other meaner livings, the chief fault
thereof is in patrones themselves. For it is the usual manner of the most part
of the^ (I speak of too good experience) though they may have good store of
able me^ in the Universities, yet if an ambitious or greedy minister come not
unto them, to sue for the benefice, if there be an insufficient man, or a
corrupt person within two shires of them, whom they think they can draw to any
composition for their own benefit, they will by one means or other find him
out. And if the bishop shall make courtesy to admit him, some such shift
shall be found by the law, either by Quare impedit, or otherwise; that whether
the bishop will or no, he shall be shifted into the benefice. I know some
bishops, unto whom such suits against the patrones have been more chargeable in
one year, then they have gained by all the benefices that they have bestowed
since they were bishops, or I think will do, while they be bishops. They
have injury therefore, to be so openly slaundered in the face of the world.
If there be any bishop that corruptly bestows his liuinges by suit of
Master Chauncellor, or Master Steward, or any other: look what punishment I
would have any layman in that case to sustain, I would wish to a bishop
double or triple.

Objection. But now I must come to that which touches bishops The objection
that the Bishops be carnal and worldly disposed.
most nighly, that is, that they be carnally disposed, and not euangelically,
and this their affection and corruption they show to the world by hoarding of
great sums of money, by purchasing lands for their wives and children, by
marrying their sons and daughters with thousands, by increasing their livings
with flocks and herds of grased cattle, by furnishing their tables with
plate and gilded cups, by filling their purses with unreasonable fines and
incomes, etc.

Answer. We hear in this place an heap of grievous offenses, and indeed, if
they be true, well worthy such lamentable outcries, as are made against the^.
But the godly must consider, that where lauishing tongues and pens be at
liberty, to lay forth reproach without fear of correction or punishment, that
the best men in the world may be slandered and brought in danger, especially
where through envy and malice men have conceived displeasure against any State.

Eustathius, a godly and chaste Bishop, by conspiracy Theod. lib. 1. cap. 20.
and false suggestion of certain Heretics and Schismatikes, was not accused
only, but unjustly also condemned of adultery, and by the Emperor Constantine
cast into banishment, into a city of Sclauonie. Cyrillus a good and learned
father, Bishop of Jerusalem, and an earnest patron of the true faith of
Christ, was by the heretic Acasius, and his friends Soz. Lib. 4 cap. 26. Socr.
Lib. 2. cap. 30.
in the Court, accused to the Emperor Constantinus, that he had imbezeled the
church goods, and had sold to a player of Enterludes, a rich garment, given
to the Church by his father.

This false accusation so much prevailed, that the good bishop was for it
deposed, etc. I noted you the like before of that blessed man Athanasius and
other, Athan. Apol. 2.
and might bring a great number of examples, out of the Ecclesiastiall
histories and writers. For it was the usual practice of all such as did
endeavor to further any heresy or Schismatic faction, were they of the
Clergy or Laity, by all means they could, through infamy and discredit,
to pull down such as did withstand their evil and troublesome attempts in the
Church, and not only to rail at them, and to deface them with false and
unjust reports, but also to draw to their reproach their best and most Christian
^oings: as the charitable dealing of Cyrill, was so wrested, that it brought
him to great danger. And surely I cannot but fear, that the devil is even
now in hatching of some notable heresies, or some other hid mischiefs, which
he would bring forth, and thrust into the Church of England, and therefore
prepares the way for the same, by defacing and discrediting the best learned
of the church, that both would and should resist them. This we see already in
that peevish faction of the families of the love, which have bin breeding in
this Realm the space of these thirty years, and now upon confidence of the
disgracing of the state of Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Governors,
have put their heads out of the shel, and of late years, have showed
themselves, even in the Princes Court. The like I might say of the Anabaptists
and other Sectaries, as bad as they.

As touching this present point of the accusation of Bishops, I have to
admonish the godly Reader, that in Christian charity and wisdom they
consider, as well, what diverse of those persons which now be Bishops, have
been before time: as also, in what state they are now in this Realm, and
how they are beset on every side with adversaries and evil speakers of diverse
sorts, and then to weigh with themselves, whether it be likely that all is
true, which is uttered against them, or rather that for despite and
displeasure, many things are spoken falsely and slanderously, and many other
mean and small blemishes amplified and exaggerated to the worst, more then
truth.

That those which now be, or of late have been Bishops in this Church,
should be so carnally and grossly given over to the world and the cares thereof,
as they are by some defamed: my heart abhors to think, neither will the
fear of God suffer me to judge it to be true. I see what they are presently in
all truth of doctrine: I see how earnestly and zealously they teach and defend
the same in their preachings: I see how carefully they beat down the gross
superstition of Antichrist and his ministers: I call to remembrance, that of
late years, in the time of persecution, when the most of them were in state
well able to live, that they were contented for the freedom of their
consciences, and that they might enjoy the doctrine and liberty of the Gospel,
to forsake their liuinges, to leave their friends, to hazard their lives, to
be accounted Traitors, and to sustain all those miseries and troubles, that
might follow upon banishment, and casting out of their Country.

And I see nothing in them, if God, as we by our unthankfulness daily
deserve, should cast the like scourge upon this Realm again, but that they
would be most ready to do the same, although happily prosperity in the mean
time may draw them to some offenses. May any christian heart then conceive of
them, although there be faults in them more then the worthiness of their office
requires, that they be so carnally and fleshly given over to the world, as the
immodest accusations of many their adversaries do make them? Man's nature is
corrupt and frail, and therefore may fall to much evil: but that so many learned
men trained in the school of the Cross, and continuing in teaching and
preaching of the truth, should be so utterly carried away from God, I can not
believe, and I trust, God shall give some enident token of the contrary. If
there now be, or before time have been such, as have given just occasion in
such things, as they are accused of: I cannot but blame them, and wish to the
residue more fear of God, and care of their calling. I never entered into other
men's hearts to see their consciences: I never looked into their Cofers to see
their treasures: I never was desirous to be privy of their secret doings. I
must therefore by that I see, hear, and know, judge the best.

He that shall charitably consider the state of Bishops, as they are by the
authority of the Prince and laws of this Realm, will not think it impiety
in them, against the time of necessary service of their country, to have some
reasonable sum of money before hand, gathered in honesty, and just using of
their own. But if they hoarde up heaps, either for greediness and love of
riches, or of persuasion to put their trust in them in time of affliction, as
they are reported: surely their offense cannot be excused.

As touching their purchasing of lands, I have not heard much. The greatest
value that ever I heard of, does scant amount to one hundred pound: and that in
very few, scarce to the number of 3. persons. Which in them, that so long time
have enjoyed so large benefit of living, may seem no great matter, especially
toward the relieuing of their wives and children.

Objection. They will say perhaps, that Preachers should not be so careful
for their children, nor Bishops ought not to make their wives Ladies.

Answer. If any look to leave them like Ladies in wealth and riches, they are
to blame: but moderatly to provide for their wives and children, I think the^
bound in conscience, especialy in this uncharitable, unkind, and unthankful
world. For we may see the wives and children of diverse honest and godly
preachers, yea, and of some bishops also, that have given their blood for the
confirmation of the gospel, hardly to escape the state of begging, even among
us that profess the gospel, to our great and horrible shame. The sight
whereof, I think, does move some bishops, and other Ecclesiastical persons, to
be the more careful for their wives and children, that they may have some stay
after their time, and not to be turned to live upon Alms, where charity and
christian consideration is so clean banished. Ecclesiastical persons are not as
other parents are For so soon as they depart this life, or otherwise be put
from their living, because they have no state but for life, their wives and
children without consideration are turned out of the doors. And if in their
husbands time they have not some place provided, they hardly can tell how to
shift for themselves. And surely experience teaches me so much, that I must
needs bewail and lament the pitiful case of diverse honest matrons, and poor
infants, which in my knowledge, at the death of their husbands and fathers,
have been driven to great hazard and distress. And this causes, that most
honest women, of sober and good behauior, are loath to match with ministers,
though they be never so well learned, because they see their wives so hardly
bested, when they are dead. They that are not moved with this, have but cold
zeal toward the gospel.

And seeing the case is so among us in this realm: as he is worse the^ an
heathen by S. Paul's judgment, that in his life time does not provide for his
family: so surely he cannot escape the blame of an unkind husband, or
unnatural pare^t, that has not some care of his wife and children, after his
time.

I write not this to defend the perverse or covetous affection of any, neither
do I think that there be many such in this church. Diverse I know, that when
God shall call them, will leave so little, as their children, as I think, must
comme^d themselves only to the providence of God. And therefore it is not well,
that the fault of a few (if any such be) should be taken as a matter, to
discredit the whole calling.

But surely, they that murmr so greatly against the moderat provision of the
wives and children of Ecclesiastical persons, and turn that as matter of
heinous slander unto them: let them pretend what they will, it may be
suspected, they scantly think well of their marriages: Or if they do, the very
Papists themselves are more favorable and charitable adversaries to
preachers, then they are* For seeing the state of our Church allows ministers
to be married, they think it to stand with godly reason also, that they should
in honesty provide for their wives and children.

Diverse persons of other calling, by the exercise of an office only in few
years, can purchase for wife and children many hundreds, and all very well
thought of: but if a bishop, that by state of the law has the right use of a
large living many years, do purchase one hundred marks, or procure a mean
Lease for the help of his wife and children, it is accounted greedy
covetousness, and mistrust in the providence of God. I would it were not
spite and envy, with greedy desire of bishops livings, that caused this evil
speech, rather then their covetous and corrupt dealing. They fear that all
will be taken from themselves.

As touching that bishops are blamed for taking of Of taking of Fines, etc.
unreasonable Fines, and furnishing of their Cupboardes with silver vessel and
plate, I trust every charitable man, that hates not the present state, may
easily see what is to be answered. To take Fines for their leases and lands, is
as lawful for them, by the word of God, and by the law of this Realm, as for
any other christian subject, that has possessions. And likewise, to have plate
or silver vessel, their condition being considered, is a thing indifferent,
and not worthy so great reproach or biting speech as is used. If they had not
such furniture, it is likely a great number would think evil of it, and in an
other sort blame them as much for it. But if they take immoderate Fines, or let
unreasonable Leases, to the grieuing and burthening of their poor and honest
tenants: or if they pompously auaunce themselves, and set their glory in the
gorgious plate and gay furniture: I am so far from defending that abuse, that
I will be as ready to blame the^ as any man. And so much do I mislike such
dealing in them, as I would wish those that can be found faulty in these
things, by the Princes and Governors to be examined and tried, and upon just
and lawful proof of their offenses, to be punished according to their
demerits: And, ifye weight of matter so required, to be deposed, for the
example of other, and better set in their places. But if y^ trial were made, as
some faults perchance might be found unworthy their calling: so I am in hope,
they would not appear so great and so grievous, as to ye discrediting of
their doctrine, should deserve so heinous and bitter exclamations, and so
reprochful libels, as are given abroad against them. Faults, in all states, and
specially of ministers, would be examined, tried, judged and punished, by the
law and ordinary magistrates: and not an unchristian looseness and liberty
left to unquiet and ungodly subjects, either by evil speeches, or
uncharitable writings to slander them, and bring them into hatred and
misliking. The example whereof may grow to great danger, and has been counted
perilous in all commonweals, and much more in the Church of God.

But, I pray you, what is meant by this disgracing of bishops, and other chief
ministers of the Church? For what purpose are their lives in such sort blased?
to what end are their doings so defamed? Why is their corruption, their
covetousness, their Simonie, their extortion, and al other vices, true or
false, laid abroad before men's eyes? Why is the perfect rule of their office
and calling, according to the pattern of the Apostles time, required at their
hands only? Is God the God of ecclesiastical ministers alone? Is he not the
God of his people also? does he require his word to be exactly observed of
bishops and ministers alone? does he hate vice and wickedness in them alone? Or
does he lay down the rule of perfect justice to them only, and not comprehend
in the same all other states of his people, as well as them? Yes truly, I
think no Christian is otherwise persuaded.

Objection. Perhaps they will say, that all other States do well, and live
according to their calling. The word of God is sincerely every where
embraced: Justice is uprightly in all places ministered: the poor are helped
and relieved: vice is sharply of all other men corrected: there is no
corruption, no covetousness, no extortion, no Simonie, no usury, but in the
Bishops, and in the Clergy. There are no Monopolies in this Realm practiced
to the gain of a few, and the undoing of great multitudes, that were wont to
live by those trades. All courts be without fault, and void of corruption,
saving the Ecclesiastical courts only. All officers are upright and true
dealers saving theirs. None other do so carefully and couetously provide for
their wines and children. They only give the example of all evil life.

Answer. I would to God it were so: I would to God there were no such evils as
are recited, but in them: Yea, I would to God there were no worse then in
them, on condition that never a Bishop in England had one groate to live upon.
The want surely of the one would easily be recompensed with the goodness of
the other.

What then is the cause that Bishops and Preachers have in these days so great
fault found with them? Forsooth it follows in the next branch of a certain
Accusation penned against them.

Objection. They have Temporal lands, they have great liuinges, The
principal cause why the Bishops be so depraved.
They are in the state of Lords, etc. The Prince ought therefore to take away
the same from the^, and set them to mean pensions, that in poverty they may
be answerable to the Apostles, and other holy Preachers in the Primitive
Church: whereby the Queen may bring 40000. marks yearly to her Crown,
beside the pleasuring of a great many of other her faithful subjects and
servants.

Answer. This is the end, why bishops and other chief of the Clergy are so
defaced, why their doings are so depraved, why such common obloquie is in all
men's mouths upon them raised, that is to say, that the minds of the Prince
and Governors, may thereby be induced to take away the lands and livings from
them, and to part the same among themselves, to the benefit (as some think)
and to the commodity of their country and common weal. But it behooves all
Christian Princes and Magistrates to take heed, that they be not intrapped
with this sophistry of Satan's school. This is that Rhetorike that he uses,
when he will work any mischief in the Church of God, or stir up any trouble
or alteration of a state in a common weal.

First by defaming and slandering, he brings the parties in hatred and
misliking, and when the peoples heads be filled therewith, then stirs he up
busy and unquiet persons to reason thus:

They be wicked and evil men: they are covetous persons: they oppress the
poor: they pill other to enrich themselves: they pass not what they do, so
they may grow to honor and wealth, and bear all the sway in the country.
Therefore bring them to an account: let them answer their faults: pull them
down: alter their state and condition: let us no more be ruled under such
tyrants and oppressors: we are Gods people, as well as they. Did not he deal
thus in Nomb. 16.
Corah, Dathan and Abiram? did he not by them, charge the mild and gentle
governor Moses, and his brother Aaron, the chosen Priest of God, that they
took too much upon them? that they lifted themselves up above the congregation
of the Lord, and behaved themselves too Lordly over his people? that they
brought the Israelites out of a land flowing with milk and honey, of purpose
to work unto themselves a dominion over the people, and to make them to
perish in the wilderness? By this means they so incensed the hearts, not
only of the common people, but of the Noblemen also, that they led a great
number with them to rebel against Moses and Aaron, and to set themselves in
their rooms and offices. In like manner, and by like policy, has he wrought
in all commonweals, in all ages and times, as the histories do sufficiently
declare.

In this Realm of England, when the lewd and rebellious subjects rose against
K. Richard 2. and determined to pull down the state, and to dispatch out of
the way the counselors, and other Noble and worshipful men, together with
Judges, Lawyers, and al other of any wise or learned calling in the Realm: was
not the way made before, and their states brought in hatred of the people, as
cruel, as covetous, as oppressors of the people, and as enemies of the common
weal, yea, and a countenance made unto the cause, and a ground sought out of
the Scriptures and word of God, to help the matter?

At the beginning (say they) when God had first made the world, all men were
alike, there was no principality, there was nor bondage, or villenage: that
grew afterward by violence and cruelty. Therefore, why should we live in
this miserable slavery under these proud Lords and crafty Lawyers? etc.
Wherefore it behooves all faithful Christians and wise Governors, to beware
of this false and crafty policy. If this Argument pass now, and be allowed
as good at this time against the Ecclesiastical state: it may be, you shall
hereafter by other instruments, then yet are stirring, hear the same reason
applied to other States also, which yet seem not to be touched, and therefore
can be content to wink at this dealing toward Bishops and Preachers: But when
the next house is on fire, a wise man will take heed, least the sparks thereof
fall into his own. He that is author of all perilous alterations, and
seeks to work mischief by them, will not attempt all at once, but will
practice by little and little, and make every former feate that he works, to
be a way and mean to draw on the residue. For he sees all men will not be
overcome with all temptations, nor will not be made instruments of all evil
purposes, though happily by his colors and pretenses he be able to deceive
them in some. The practice hereof, we have seen in this Church of England, to
the great trouble and danger thereof. At the beginning, some learned and godly
Preachers, for private respects in themselves, made strange to wear the
Surplesse, Cap, or Tippet: but yet so, that they declared themselves to think
the thing indifferent, and not to judge evil of such as did use them. Shortly
after rose up other, defending that they were not things indifferent, but
distayned with Antichristian idolatry, and therefore not to be suffered in
the Church. Not long after came forth an other sort, affirming that those
matters touching Apparel, were but trifles, and not worthy contention in the
Church, but that there were greater things far of more weight and
importance, and indeed touching faith and religion, and therefore meet to be
altered in a Church rightly reformed: As the book of Common prayer, the
administration of the Sacraments, the government of the Church, the election of
Ministers, and a number of other like.

Fourthly, now break out another sort, earnestly affirming and teaching, that
we have no Church, no Bishops, no Ministers, no Sacraments: and therefore that
all they that love Jesus Christ, ought with all speed to separate themselves
from our congregation, because our assemblies are profane, wicked, and
Antichristian.

THis have you heard of four degrees prepared for the overthrow of this state
of the Church of England.

Now lastly of all, come in these men, that make Against the rich Livings of
Bishops.
their whole direction against the living of bishops, and other Ecclesiastical
ministers: that they should have no Temporal lands, or jurisdiction: that
they should have no stayed livings or possession of goods, but only a
reasonable Pension to find them meat, drink, and cloth, and by the poverty
of their life, and contempt of the world, to be like the Apostles. For (say
they) riches and wealth has brought all corruption into the Church before
time, and so does it now.

Answer. Now is the enemy of the Church of God come almost to the point of
his purpose. And if by discrediting of the Ministers, or by coumenance of gain
and commodity to the Prince and Nobility, or by the color of Religion and
holiness, or by any cunning he can bring this to pass (as before I have
signified) he so reseeth that learning, knowledge of good letters, and study
of the tongues, shall decay, as well in the Universities, as other ways, which
have been the chief instruments to publish and defend the doctrine of the
Gospel, and to enlarge the kingdom of Christ: And then, of necessity, his
kingdom of darkness, error and heresy must rise again, and leave this
land in worse state, then ever it was before.

But to persuade this matter more pithily, to cover the principal purpose with
a cloak of holiness, it is said, and in very earnest manner avouched, and
that by the word of God, that neither the Prince can give it them, nor suffer
them to use it, without the danger of Gods wrath and displeasure: nor they
ought to take it, but to deliver it up again into the Princes hand, or else
they shall show them selves Antichristian Bishops, vain glorious, and lucres
men, not ashamed, professing God to continue in that drossie way, and sour
lump of dough, that corrupts the whole Church, and brought out the wicked
botch of Antichrist.

This doctrine (as it is boldly affirmed) God himself has uttered, Christ
has taught, his Apostles have written, the Primitive church continued, the
holy Fathers witnessed, the late writers uphold, as it must forsooth be proved
by the whole course of the scriptures of the old and new Testament.

But (good Christians) be not feared away with this glorious countenance, and
these big words of a bragging champion. I trust you shall perceive, that
this doctrine is neither uttered by God, nor taught by Christ, nor written by
his Apostles, nor witnessed by ancient writers, nor vpholden by learned men of
our time: but that it is rather a bold and dangerous assertion, uttered by
some man of very small skill, countenanced with a fevv wrested Scriptures,
contrary to the true meaning of God the father, Christ his son, and of his
holy Apostles, and a little shadowed with vain allegations of writers, either
of no credit, or little making to the purpose. And surely, how great and
earnest zeal, how vehement and lofty words so ever the vtterer of this
assertion uses: it may be suspected, that either he is not himself soundly
persuaded in true religion, or if he be, that of simplicity, negligence or
ignorance, he was abused by some subtle and crafty Papist, that would set
him forth to the derision of other, to thrust out into the world, and openly
broach this corrupt and dangerous doctrine.

Wherefore it were good, that they which will take upon them to be the
furtherers of such new devises, should better look to their proof and
witnesses, unless they will seem to abuse al men, and to think that they live
in so loose and negligent a state, that nothing shall be examined that they
speak, but that al things shall be as easily received, as they may be boldly
uttered. But I trust, those that have the fear of God, and care of their
souls, will not be afraid of vain shadows, nor by and by believe all
glorious brags, but take heed that they be not easily led out of the way, by
such as will so quickly be deceived themselves.

I do not answer their vain Arguments, because I fear that any discreet or
learned man will be persuaded with them: but because I mistrust, that the simple
and ignorant people, or other that be not acquainted with the Scriptures, by
the very name and reverence of the word of God, will be carried away, without
just examination of them.

To descend something to the consideration of the matter, mark, I pray you,
the Proposition that is to be proved. It is not, that they may be good Bishops
and ministers of the Church, which have neither glebe nor temporal lands to
live on: It is not, that there were in the primitive Church, and now are in
sundry places, churches well governed, which have not lands allotted unto them:
It is not, that the Apostles had no lands, nor any other a number of years
after Christ: For these points, I think no man will greatly stand with them.
But this is the Assertion.

Objection. No Prince or magistrate by Gods word may lawfully assign lands to
the ministers of the church to live on, but ought to set them to pensions: Nor
any of the Ecclesiastical state can by the Scriptures enjoy, or use any such
lands, but should deliver them up to the Prince, etc.

Answer. Look, I pray vou, upon this Assertion, and consider it well. Do you
not see in it, even at the first, evident absurdity? Do you not see a plain
restraint of Christian liberty, as bold and as unlawful a restraint as ever
the Pope used any? Do you not espy almost a flat heresy, as dangerous as many
branches of the Anabaptists errors? It is no better then an heresy to say,
that by the word of God it is prohibited for Ministers to marry. It is no
better then an heresy to affirm, that Christian men, by the law of God, may
not eat flesh, or drink wine. Saint Paul does consecrate these to be
Doctrines of Devils, and therefore 1. Tim. 9.
not of the church of God: and the Primitive church does confirm these to be
heresies in Saturninus, Marcion, Tatian, Montane, and many other. And I
Theodoret. Epiphan. Clem. Alex.
pray you, what does this Assertion differ from the other, when it is said, It
is not lawful for Ecclesiastical persons to have temporal lands to live
upon? As marriage is the ordinance of God, and left free by his Genesis 3.
word to al men: As meats and drinks are the good creatures of our God, and
to be used of al such as receive them with thanksgiving: so are lands,
possessions, money, cattle, the good gifts of God, and the right use of them,
not prohibited to any of his people: For to their benefit he ordained them, as
his good blessings. Christ by his death made us free from all such legal
observations. Therefore S. Paul Colos. 2. If ye be dead with Christ to the
judgments of the world, why are you led with traditions, Touch not, Taste
not, Handle not, which all do perish in abusing? This boldness to bridle
Christian liberty, and to make it sin and matter of conscience, to use the
creatures of God, was the very foundation of al Papistical and Antichristian
superstition. Upon this foundation was builded the holiness in using, or not
using of this, or that manner of apparel: in eating or forbearing these or
those kinds of meats: in observing this or that day, or time of the year: in
keeping this or that external form of life, with 1000. like inventions and
traditions of men. Neither do I think ever any error did greater harm in the
Church, or brought more corruption of doctrine then that did. Therefore I am
sorry to see some in these days, to lean so much to that dangerous stay, for
the help of their strange opinions in things external. For, what do men when
they say, It is not lawful for a Christian man to wear a square Cappe, to use
a Surplesse, to kneel at the Communion? What (I say) do they but bridle
Christian liberty, and to the burden of consciences, make sins where GOD
made none? And in like manner, he that says, It is wicked and not lavvfull,
that Bishops, Preachers, or Ecclesiastical persons should have any temporal
lands to live upon, he seems to find fault with the creature of God. For,
that Bishops may have living allowed them, is not denied: but to live by
lands, that (say they) is sin, and prohibited, and therefore the temporal
lands and glebe must be taken from Bishops and other Ministers.

This doctrine notwithstanding, must be proved Bishops must have no lands.
and justified by the Scriptures, and first by the ordinance of God himself in
the old testament. In the Numbers, when God had declared to Aaron what Numb.
18. The answer to the objection of the law and ordinance of God.
portion he should have to live upon, he adds: Thou shall have no
inheritance in their land, neither shall thou have any part among them. I am
thy part, and thy inheritance among the children of Israel. Behold, I have
given the children of Leui all the tenth of Israel to inherit, for the service
which they serve in the Tabernacle. And again after, It shall be a law for ever
in your generations, that among the children of Israel, they possess no
inheritance. And in Deuteronomy. 10. the Lord separated the tribe of Leui, etc.
Wherefore the Levites have no part, nor inheritance with their Brethren, but
the Lord is their inheritance, as the Lord thy God has promised them. In the
14. Chapter, and in the 18. and in diverse other parts of the law, and in Joshua
14. Moses gave inheritance unto two tribes and a half, on the other side of
Jordan, but unto the Levites he gave no inheritance among them. Upon these
testimonies, the application and conclusion is inferred in this manner.

Objection. Here it may be seen what living God appointed his Priests to
have: not lands and possessions, but tithes and offerings. Seeing then God
denied it to his Priests, it is not lawful for our Priests. Whose Priests
are they? If they be Gods Priests, it is not there permitted: If they be
Antichrists priests, what do we with them?

Answer. As this reason may have some small show or likelihoode to the
ignorant: so I am sure, they that have trauiled in the Scriptures, and any
thing understand the state of Christianity, vvil marvel to see this
application of the Texts and the conclusion inferred, Shall the Ministers of
the Church of God, now in the time of grace, by necessity be bound to those
orders that were among the Jews appointed for Priests and Levites by Moses?
Will they bring the heavy yoke and burden of the Law again upon the people
of God, after that Christ has redeemed us, and set us free from it? Will they
have Aaronicall and sacrificing Priests again to offer for the sins of the
people? When it is in derision asked, Whose Priests ours are, if they be not
Gods Priests? giving signification that they be the Priests of Antichrist, it
may be right well and truly ansvvered, that they are the Priests of Gods
holy, blessed, and true Church, and yet that they are not such sacrificing
Priests of God, as are mentioned in those places, nor in any way bound to those
things that they were, the moral Law of God only excepted.

Objection. It is objected to our Bishops and Ministers, that in their Lands
and possessions, they retain the corruption of the Romish Church.

Answer. But I marvel to see them which so boldly control other, to
build their assertions upon the ruinous foundations of the Synagogue of
Antichrist. Theaduersaries build upon Popish foundations.
As I noted a little before, that they laid their ground upon the restraint
of Christian liberty: so now they settle it upon the imitation of the legal
and Aaronicall priesthood, as the Church of Rome did.

Whence (I pray you) came the massing apparel, and almost all the furniture of
their Church in censing and singing and burning of Tapers? their altars, their
propitiatory sacrifice, their high Bishop and general head over all the
Church, with a number of other corruptions of the Church of God, but only out
of this imitation of the Aaronicall priesthood and legal observations? Surely,
while they thus uphold as good, the wicked foundations of the Synagogue of
Satan, they shall never so purely build up the Church of Christ, as they
would be accounted to do. They may seem to be in a hard straight, that to
batter down the state of the Church of England, must crave aid of Antichrist,
to set up a fort upon his foundation.

The learned fathers of the primitive Church, did, so much as they could,
strive to be furthest off from the imitation of the Jews, and of the
Aaronicall priesthood, in so much that they would needs alter not only the
Sabbath day, but also the solemnizing of the feast of Easter: And shall the
Law of the Levites, and manner of their living be laid down to us as a
pattern of necessity, which the Prince must follow in refourming her
Church, or else the priests thereof shall not be the priests of God, but of
Antichrist? Is there no more reverence and fear of the majesty of Gods Prince
and sacred minister, then by such gross absurdities to seek to seduce her? If
this be a conclusion of such necessity, then let them go further: for by as
good reason they may.

God says to Aaron, Thou shall not drink wine, Leuit. 10.
nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons that are with thee, when ye go into
the Tabernacle of the Congregation, least ye die. Letit be a Law for ever
throughout your generations.

In an other place commandment is given to Leuit. 22.
the Priests, That they may not eat of that which is rent of wild beasts.
And in the same chapter. If the Priests daughter be married to any of the
common people, she may not eat of the hallowed offerings: but if she be a
Widow, or divorced from her husband, and have no child, and is returned into
her fathers house again, she may eat of her fathers meat, as she did in her
youth, but there shall no stranger eat thereof. In the 21. of Leuiticus it is
said, Speak unto the Priests the sons of Aaron, and say, Let none be
defiled by the dead among their people. And a little after, Let them not make
baldnes upon their head, nor shave off the locks of their beard. And again,
Let him take a Virgin to wife: but a widow, a divorced woman, or a polluted
etc. shall he not marry.

Now if the observation of the orders appointed by God to the Priests and
Levites of the old Law, be a thing so necessary in the church of God: Why,
then the Ministers of the Gospel may not drink wine or strong drink: they
may not suffer their daughters married forth, if they come unto their houses,
to eat any of the tenths and oblations, whereby they live: they may not come
nigh a dead body, nor bury it: they may marry no widows, but maids only. And
so likewise shall you bring in by as good authority, infinite numbers mo of
Leuiticall orders into the Church, and make it rather like a superstitious
Synagogue, as the popes church was, then like a sincere and undefiled Church of
God, as you would pretend to do.

But let us descend further into this allegation, and see how they overthrow
themselves in their own purpose. If upon this proof it be so necessary, that
bishops and other ministers should not live by lands: then, as the negative
is necessary in the one branch, so is the affirmative in the other. When God
has said, Thou shall have no inheritance in their land, he adds, Behold, I
have given the children of Leui all the tenth of Israel to inherit for the
service, which they do, etc. Then it is of necessity by the Law of God, that
bishops and preachers should live upon tenths and offerings, neither may this
order be altered by any authority.

And here is an other error of the Papists, that tenths and offerings are in
the Church Iure diuino, by the law of God, and not by any positive Law of the
Church. Thus we see that these men are not able to stand to their positions,
but they must join arm in arm with the Papists, in their greatest and
grossest errors. And if it be of necessity, that ministers must live by
oblations and tithes, and no otherwise: how can the prince by Gods Law take
away their Lands, and set them to mere pensions in money? Or if princes have
liberty by the Law of God, according to their discretions, to appoint the
livings of ministers, by pensions of money, contrary to the order that God has
prescribed to his priests in his Law: why have they not like authority by the
same word of God, (if they see it convenient for the state) to allot unto them
some portion of temporal Lands, and much more, to suffer and bear with that
order, being already settled in the Church? By this it appears, that the
assertion of the adversaries does not hang together in it self, but that the
one part impugneth and overthrows the other.

But me thinks these men deal not directly, but seem to hide and conceal
that which makes against them. For in the same place of Joshua, by Josh. 14.
which they will prove, that bishops and ministers may not have any
possession of Lands, because he says, To the Levites he gave no inheritance
among them, Immediately he adds, Saving Cities to dwell in, and the fields
about the Cities, for their beasts and cattle. And in like manner, The Lord
said Nom 35.
to Moses, Command the children of Israel, that they give unto the Levites
of the inheritance of their possession, Cities to dwell in. And ye shall give
also unto the Cities Suburbs hard by their Cities round about them, the
Cities they shall have to dwell in, and the Suburbs or fields about their
cities for their cattle, and all manner beasts of theirs. And the Suburbs of
the Cities which you shall give to the Levites, shall reach from the wall of
the City round about outward a thousand cubits, etc. And you shall measure
on the East side two thousand cubits, and on the West side two thousand
cubits, etc. In the twenty one Chapter of Joshua, The number of these Cities
is mentioned, And the lotte came out of the kindred of the Caathites, the
children of Aaron the Priest, which were of the Levites, and given them by lot
out of the tribe of Iudae, Simeon, and Benjamin, thirteen Cities. And the rest
of the children of Caath had by lot of the kinreds of the tribe of Ephraim,
Dan, and half the tribe of Manasses, ten cities. And the children of Gerson,
had by lotte out of the kindred of the Cities of Isachar, Aser, Nepthaly, and
the other half of the tribe of Manasses in Basan, thirteen cities. And the
children of Merari, by their kinreds, had out of the Tribes of Ruben, Gad and
Zabulon, twelve cities. The whole number therefore of the cities assigned to the
Levites in the land of Jury, amounted to forty eight.

Now I would demand of indifferent Christians, that were not obstinately
set to maintain an evil purpose, Whether the state of inheritance without
rent, of forty eight Cities in one Region, no bigger then England, with the
fields almost a mile compass, may be thought in truth, to be temporal
possessions or no? Surely I think there is no man so wayward, that will deny
it to be most true.

Wherefore, either the word of God must be found untrue, (which is blasphemy
to think) or else that boulde assertion, that is made of the contrary, is found
vain, and the argument to prove it, false and deceitful. They that had to
their portions forty eight Cities, with the fields thereof, did not live by
tithes and oblations only.

You see therefore (good Christians) how they understand the Scriptures, that
in such immodest and confident manner take upon them to be masters and
controllers of other: and by how fleight allegations and absurd arguments they
seek to lead men into error, even in great and weighty matters, without fear
of God himself, or reverence of his people with whom they deal. God bless
them with more grace of his true, mild, and humble spirit, that they run
not so headlong, to the danger of their own souls, and the trouble of the
Church of Christ.

And for the better understanding hereof, let us consider, what state the
Levites had in this Land that was allotted unto them. They might sell, and
alienate it, but not to any other Tribe or family, but to some of the same
family, whereof they were.

The Law therein says, Leuit. 25. Notwithstanding, the cities of the Levites,
and the houses of the cities of their possession, may the Levites redeem at
all seasons. If a man purchase of the Levites, the house that was soulde shall
go out in the year of Iubile. But the fields of their Cities may not be
sold, for it is their possession for ever.

And yet we read that the Prophet Jeremy bought Iere. 32.
a piece of land of Hananael his Uncles son, which I take to be, because
Jeremy was his next of kin, to whom by Law after him it should come: So
that Hananael soulde only the interest of his life time.

Thus, by the way you may note, that buying and purchasing of such ground as
was lawful to them, was not prohibited to Gods Priests in the old law.

Objection. Happily they will say, That although they had some temporal
Lands, yet it was in comparison of the large inheritance of the other Tribes,
but a small portion: And as the Ministers of God they lived meanly and poorly
upon it.

Answer. But they that rightly consider and weigh the quantity and largeness
of the Land of Promise, not being (as I think) so large as this Realm of
England, shall perceive, that the same being divided into twelve parts,
according to the twelve Tribes, that eight and forty Cities, with the fields
about them, only for the tribe of Leui, was a portion, although not so big,
yet not much inferior to the residue, although the one part had their living
together, and the Levites had theirs disparkled in sundry parts of the
Country. To which, if you add Gods part, that is, the oblations, the first
fruits and the tenths of their fruits, and cattle beside, you shall perceive,
that the Priests, Levites, and Ministers of the Temple of God were not left in
meaner or poorer, but rather in as good or better state, then any of the other
Tribes. Which thing undoubtedly God did of his gracious providence, nor that
his ministers should by wealth wax wanto^ (...) proud, but that by that means
they might be of more authority with his people, and not being drawn away by
the necessity of care how to live, they might more freely and quietly attend
upon the service of God in the Temple and other places. Wherefore these places
of the Law of Moses, were not fitly alleged to prove, either that the
Ministers of the Church should have no temporal possessions, or that they
should by stipends of money live in poor or base condition.

It pleased God, that the Levites should not have their portion lying
together, as the other had, but to be sparkled among all the Tribes of that
nation, that they might the better instruct the people of all parts, in the
Law and Ordinances of almighty God; as their office and duty was. But if
the value of their portion, together with the first fruits and tenths be
considered, you shall perceive it was nothing inferior to any of the best.

They that had not some peculiar drift and purpose in their heads, which by
all means, right or wrong, they will further and confirm, but did sincerely,
and with good conscience, seek the true meaning of the spirit of God in the
holy scriptures, out of these testimonies of the Law of God: might have
gathered a right and wholesome instruction, profitable not only to Ministers
of the Church, but to all other good and faithful Christians, to whom these
places appertain, as well as to bishops and Ministers.

For as Aaron the high Priest in the Law, was the The right understanding of
the places of the old Law.
figure of the true high Priest Christ Jesus our Savior: so the inferior
Priests and Levites serving in the temple of God, represent unto us all other
faithful and elect of God, whom he has chosen unto him, to serve him as his
peculiar heritage, and in steed of the first begotten of mankind. To this
interpretation alludeth S. Peter, speaking, not to Priests alone, but to the
whole Church of God, and number of the faithful. You are (says he) a chosen
generation, 1. Pet. 2.
a royal priesthood, an holy nation. This exposition S. August. confirms, As
for the Priesthood (says he) of the Jews, there is no faithful man that
doubts, but Lib. 2. quest. Euang. c. 40.
that it was a figure of the royal Priesthood that should be in the Church.
Whereunto all they are consecrated, which appertain to the mystical body of
the most high and true Prince of Priests, as Peter also witnesses.

Bid also writes very evidently to the same purpose. By the name of
Priesthood in the Scriptures, figuratively Li. de temp. Salom. cap. 16.
is understood, not only Ministers of the Altar, that is, Bishops and
Priests: but all they which by high and godly conversation, and by excellency
of wholesome doctrine, are profitable, not to themselves only, but to many
other, while they offer their bodies as a lively and holy Sacrifice well
pleasing God. For Peter spoke not to Priests only, but to the universal Church
of God. Now, if this be true, the right and sincere doctrine, that is to be
taken out of the testimonies of the law of God, is this, that as the Priests
and Levites had not a like portion of inheritance allotted unto them, as the
residue of their brethren had, but God only whom they served, was their
portion: so al faithful Christians, being of the true priesthood of God, must
not think they have any allotted portion in this world, but God only is
their portion, to whom they must cleave, and heaven to be their inheritance
after which they must seek, according as S. Paul says, Heb. 13.
We have here no abiding City, but we seek for one in Heaven. We be as
pilgrims and strangers in this earth. Therefore if we be risen with Christ,
we should seek those things that be above, where Christ our portion sits
Col. 3.
at the right hand of God the father, and our whole heart should be fastened
upon things above, and not on earthly things. This instruction, as nighly and
as deeply touches all Christians, as it does Bishops and ministers of the
Church of God.

But countenance must be given to this quarrel against bishops, and this
strange Assertion must be confirmed by the Prophets also, even as aptly
alleged as the other places before mentioned.

AND first they begin with Esaias. His watchmen Esai. 56. Allegations out of
the Prophets for the same purpose.
are all blind, they have altogether no understanding, they are all dumb
dogs, not being able to bark, they are sleepie, sluggish, and lie snorting,
they are shameless dogs that never are satisfied, the sheepheards also have
no understanding, but every man turns his own way, every one after his
covetousness with all his power. Out of Jeremy also are alleged these
words. I will Ierem. 8.
give their wives unto aliens, and their fields to destroyers: for from the
lowest unto the highest, they follow filthy lucre, and from the Prophet to
the Priest, they deal all with lies. The prophet Ezechiel also is brought in,
to help this matter, where he terribly thundreth against negligent, naughty
and corrupt shepherds, that devour the flock and feed it not. Thou son of
Ezech. 34.
man, prophecy against the Sheepheards of Israel, woe be unto the Sheepheards
of Israel, that feed themselves: should not the Sheepeheardes feed the
flocks? ye eat up the fat, ye clothe you with the wool, the best fed do
you slay, but the flock do you not feed, the weak have you not
strengthened, the sick have you not healed, the broken have you not bound
together, etc. but with force and cruelty have you ruled them. Wise and
discreet christians, that in judging of things fear to be deceived, and look
to the direct proof of that which is in controversy, will marvel to see
these testimonies alleged, to the end before prefixed: that is, that bishops
may not enjoy any temporal Lands. For there is nothing in these places of the
Prophets that touches it. But if the end were only to make an inuectiue
against the negligent, corrupt, and covetous lives of Bishops, or other
Ministers: in deed these allegations might seem not altogether to be unfit
for the purpose: And happily that is it that is especially intended, by such
means to make them contemptible and odious. And yet this is no sincere
handling of the Scriptures, to apply those places to the particular blaming of
some one sort of men, which the Spirit of God directs against many. Who
being acquainted with the Scriptures, knows not, that by the words Watchmen
and Shepherds, in the Prophets, are meant not only bishops, priests, and
Levites: but also Princes, Magistrates, and Rulers? Upon the place of Ezechiel
above recited, Hierome says: The speech is directed to the Shepherds of
Israel: by which we ought to understand, Hierome.
the Kings, the Princes, the Scribes, and Pharisees, and the masters of the
people. And again upon these words, The fat they did eat, by a metaphore
(says he) the Prophet speaks to the Princes, of whom it is said in another
place, Which devour my people as it were bread. Yea, when God himself says
in this same place of Ezechiel, Psalm. 32.
with force and cruelty have ye ruled them: It may evidently appear, that he
speaks not there to ecclesiastical ministers only, but to princes, judges,
and rulers also, which suck the sweet from the people of God, and do not
carefully see to their defense, and godly government, but suffer them to be
spoiled of their enemies, and to wander from God, and his true worship. But
what should I seem to prove that, which all learned know to be most true?
The Spirit of God speaks to the same purpose by these Prophets under
figurative words, that he does by other prophets in plain speech. O ye
Priests (says Osee) hear this O ye house of Israel, give ear O thou house
of the King: Judgment is against Osee. 5.
you, because you are become a snare in Mispath, and a spreadnette in Mount
Thabor, that is, you as hunters lay wait to snare the people, and to oppress
them by covetousness, extortion, and briberie: and your corrupt manners is as
a net to take other in, by your evil example. And likewise says Micheas.
Hear this O ye heads of the house of Iaacob, and ye Princes of the house of
Israel: they abhor judgments and pervert equity: They build up Sion with
blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. The heads thereof judge by rewards, and
the Priests thereof teach for hire, and their Prophets prophecy for money.
These be the ordinary voices of the holy ghost, uttered by the prophets, in
sharp and earnest reproouing, not only for the people for their wicked
reuolting from God, but also, yea and that chiefly, for the princes, rulers,
magistrates, judges, bishops, priests, ministers and other, whom God has set
in place of government. For God has appointed them, as Shepherds, as
guiders, and patrons of his people, to direct them, to keep them, to defend
them in his true worship, and right service, and, if they will be wandering
from him, either by error in Religion, or by wickedness in life, to instruct
and teach them, and by all means that may be, to call them home again: or if
they will not be ruled, by authority to bridle and restrain them, yea, and
by punishment to correct them. Now if the watchmen and Shepherds, that is, the
guiders and rulers of the people, whether they be Civil or Ecclesiastical,
shall wax ignorant, and unskillful of their duties, shall become negligent
and careless of their charge, shall be given over to voluptuousness and
pleasure of the world, or to covetousness, briberie, and extortion, to
injury, violence and oppression, and in their government seek their own
pleasure and commodity, and nothing regard, either the benefit of the
people, or the glory of God: then (I say) these speeches of the Prophets lie
directly against them, and may well be used to declare the wrath of God toward
them. But what makes this to the purpose pretended? how hangs this reason
together? God by the prophets earnestly reprooueth the Governors, as well of
the Church as of the common weal, for their wickedness, covetousness, and
extortion: therefore bishops, and ecclesiastical ministers may not by the word
of God enjoy temporal lands and possessions. Or this, God blames the
priests of the old law for covetousness: therefore the bishops of the
church of Christ may have no lands and possessions. They that will be persuaded
with such reasons, will easily be carried away into error. If it were certain,
and did of necessity follow; that all they, which have great livings and
possessions, must needs be covetous: then happily this reasoning might be of
some force. But I think there is no reasonable man that will grant it, and
therefore this reasoning is without all reason. The Priests and Levites, as
themselves confess, had no great lands and lordships, and yet we find them
often in the prophets accused and blamed for covetousness: therefore it is not
the want of temporal lands and livings, that can bring Neither does poverty
bring a contented mind: neither great possessions causes covetousness.
a poor heart and contented mind, void of covetousness. We see often as
covetous and greedy hearts in mean men's bosoms, as in the greatest landed
Lords in a whole Country. And on the contrary part, we find in them that have
very great possessions, as humble, and as contented minds, and as far from
the affection of covetousness, as in the meanest man that is.

Job was of great wealth and possessions, and yet we read not that he was
ever blamed for covetousness: Yea he bears witness of his own free heart
and liberality, and says, He never set his heart upon Gold, nor said to the
wedge of Gold, Thou art my hope, nor rejoiced of being rich, nor because his
hand Job. 31.
had found abundance, etc. Abraham also was rich, and God had blessed him
with great possessions, and yet surely his heart was far from the love of
money.

Joseph had no small possessions, and was in place of honor, and yet few in
the meanest state or degree did ever keep a more humble heart, or put less
delight in honor and riches then he did. I might say the same of David,
though a king, and of Daniel, though in very high estate, and in great
authority, and as it may be thought, in living proportionable to the same.
When Christ in the gospel had said, that it was as impossible for a rich man
Matt. 19. Mar. 10.
to enter into heaven, as for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, and
his Disciples had wondered at that saying, he answered: That which is with
man impos-sible, Luke 18.
is possible with God. Albeit man's corrupt nature, as it is generally given to
all ill, so it is chiefly inclined to covetousness, and delight of the
world: Yet the good grace of Gods holy Spirit does so guide the hearts of
his faithful, that in the midst of greatest abundaunce of his plentiful
blessings, they can retain the fear of God, and contempt of the world.
Wherefore, it is great rashness and presumption, to condemn all them to be
given over to covetousness and delight of the world, whom they see by the
state of the Commonweal, or by the goodness of the Prince, or by any other
lawful and just means to have lands and possessions, or wealth and riches,
according to their state. Such persons as so rashely deem of other, may seem
rather to bewray the sickness and ill disposition of their own minds, then
to judge truly of them, whom in such case they condemn. It is the poverty
and humbleness of Spirit and mind, it is not the poverty and baseness of
outward estate Matthew. 5.
and condition, unto the which Christ imputes Gods blessings. If covetousness
be a desire to have, for fear of want and scarcity, as some learned men have
defined it: then is a poor estate to a corrupt mind a greater spur to
covetousness, then lands and plenty of living can be. Before that bishops
and Ministers had any Lands assigned unto them, yea, when they were yet under
the Cross of persecution in the time of Cyprian: we read, that he Sermon.
delapsis. August. de bap. lib. 2. Not much more then 200. years after Christ's
alcension.
finds great fault with many bishops, which leaving the care of their
charge, went from place to place, using unlawful means to get riches,
practicing usury, and by craft and subtlety getting other men's lands from
them.

In like manner complain Hierome, Augustine, Chrysostom, Basile, and other
ancient Writers, and Histories of their time. Yea, in the Apostles time we
see some given over to the world, and led away with covetousness, when
Ministers as yet lived only upon the free benevolence of the people.
Wherefore, it is not poverty, or a low and contemptible state in the face of
the world, that can bring a satisfied and contented Spirit. And surely I am
of this opinion, that a poor and straight state of living in the Ministry,
especially in these days, would be a greater cause of evil and inconvenience
in the church, and a more vehement temptation to carry away their minds from
the care of their Office, then now their ample and large liuinges are. I
could, and will (when God shall give occasion) declare good reason of this my
opinion: which for some considerations I think good at this time to let
pass.

If our bishops and other chief of the Clergy, being now in the state of
our church, by the providence of God, and singular goodness of our Prince so
amply provided for, be so unthankful unto God, and so given over to the
world, as they are bitterly accused to be: surely their fault must needs be
the greater, neither will I, or any other that fears God, in that point
excuse them, but pray to God (if there be any such) that these odious
reports spredde upon them, may be a means to put them in remembrance of
their duty, and to amend. But undoubtedly (good christians) I speak it with
my heart, me thinks I do foresee at hand those days, and that time, when
GOD of his justice will both condignly reward our unthankful receiving of his
Gospel, and contempt of his Ministers, and also give to them just occasion to
declare unto their adversaries and evil speakers, that they are not such
bond-slaues of the world, nor be so lead away captive with the lusts of the
flesh, as they are defamed. Yea, I think, this cross of contempt, slander
and reproach, that now is laid upon them, is Gods fatherly admonition to warn
them: and as it were a mean to prepare them to that day that is coming: which
day undoubtedly will be a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heaviness, a day
of utter destruction and misery, a dark and gloomy day, a cloudie and stormy
day, a day of the trumpet and of the alarm against the strong cities. On that
day will the Lord Soph(...). 1. 2.
search Jerusalem with Lanthorns, and visit them which continue in their
dregs, and say, Tush, the Lord will do no evil. Therefore their goods shall
be spoiled, their houses shall be laid waste, they shall build gay houses, and
not dwell in them, they shall plant vineyardes, but not drink the wine thereof.
In that day the Lord will visit the Princes, and Kings Children, and all
such as wear gay clothing, and all those that leap over the thresholde so
proudly, and fill their Lords houses with robbery, and falsehoode. On that
day God will bring the people into such vexation, that they shall go about
like blind men, and all because they have sinned against the Lord, and
contemned his word. Wherefore, I most heartily pray unto God, that we
altogether, both Prince and people, honorable and worshipful, ecclesiastical
and lay persons, preachers and hearers, may join together in the faithful
remembrance of that day, and to consider that it can not be far from us,
and therefore that it is full time, and more then time, to turn unto God by
hearty repentance, and faithful receiving of his word. For surely the
sentences of the Prophets, of some men partially and affectionately applied to
the Clergy and ministers only, do in right and true meaning touch us al, of al
states and conditions. But I will return to my matter again.

The testimony of Malachie used of some to like effect, as the other before, I
have purposely left to this place: because it speaks particularly of
priests, and therefore will they have it more nighly to touch our bishops,
etc. And now O ye Priests Malac. 2.
(says the Prophet) this commandment is for you, etc. And a little after,
making comparison between Leui and the priests of that time, The law of truth
was in his mouth, and there was no iniquity found in his lips, he walked
with me in peace and in equity, and he turned many from their iniquity: but
ye have gone out of the way, ye have caused many to fall by the Law, ye have
corrupted the covenant of Leui, says the Lord of hosts: therefore have I made
you despised, and vile before the people. These words of the prophet do so
touch our Bishops and clergy men, if they be so evil as they are made, as all
sentences wherein the Prophets blame the Priests of their time, do touch evil
ministers of the Church: but how they either specially nippe our bishops, as
it is thought, or any thing pertain to the proof of the principal matter, or
reproouing of Preachers livings by Lands, I see not. In deed this sentence of
Malachy might be rightly used against the pope and his prelates, which
neglecting the whole duty of Gods ministers, both in preaching and living,
stayed themselves upon the authority of Saint Peter, and of succession, as
though the Spirit of God had been bound to their succession, though they
taught and lived never so corruptly. For so indeed did these priests whom
Malachie reprooueth: they neglected the true worship of God, and yet would
they be accounted his good and true priests, because they were of the tribe
of Leui, with whom God had Nom. 25.
made his covenant, that he and his seed should have the office of the high
priesthood for ever. But Malachie says they have broken the covenant on their
part.

That our bishops and ministers do not challenge to hold by succession, it
is most evident: their whole doctrine and preaching is contrary: they
understand and teach, that neither they, nor any other can have Gods favor so
annexed and tied to them, but that, if they leave their duties by Gods word
prescribed, they must in his sight leese the pre-eminence of his ministers, and
be subject to his wrath and punishment. They know, and declare to all men,
that the covenant on the behalf of Leui, that is, on the behalf of the
ministers of God to be performed, consists in these three branches: by
preaching to teach the right way of salvation, and to set forth the true
worship of God: to keep peace and quietness in the Church of God: and
thirdly, by honest life to be example unto others.

These branches of the covenant, if our bishops and preachers have corrupted
and broken, they have to answer for it before God, and their punishment will
be exceeding grievous.

As for their doctrine, I am right sure, and (in the fear of GOD I speak it)
will hazard my life to try it, that all their enemies shall never be able so
to prove it, but that it shall be found sincere and true: so that I doubt
not, but God him self will bear witness with them, as he did with Leui,
that Truth is in their mouth, and (as touching their doctrine) no iniquity
found in their lips. For they do both teach the truth according to the
Scriptures, sincerely, and confound the errors of the Antichristian Church,
learnedly and truly.

They therefore that speak so much against them, may seem less to regard
this part of their observing the covenant of Leui, then the duty of
Christians requires. But I trust, our merciful God will favorably consider
it, and bear with some other their imperfections in them. I pray God we be
not lighted into that time, that men have itching ears, and can like no
preachers, but such as clawe their affections, and feed their fantasies in
vanities and new devises. The covenant of peace they keep also, living in
unity and peace among themselves, and studying (so much as they can) by
teaching, and by good order, to keep it among other. And that is no small
cause of their misliking at this time, because they, being in some place of
government, according to their duties strive to repress those, which by
intemperate zeal seek to disturb the Church, and to give cause of faction
and disorder, by altering things external in a settled and reformed state.

As touching their lives and conuersations according to the Law of God, (as
before I have said) if I must judge according to that I know, I must think
the best, because I know no ill. Though there be imperfections in some things:
if men would charitablie consider, in what time we live, and whose Messengers
they are, and somewhat withal descend into their own bosoms, and lay their
own duties before their eyes: I think surely they would judge of them more
christianly then many do.

Objection. But they will say, that according to the words of Malachie, God
shows his judgment against the^ for their wickedness, because he has made
them so contemptible, so vile and despised before all the people: for (say
they) we may see how all men loath and disdain them.

Answer. It must needs be true (I confess) that Malachie spoke of the
Priests of his time: but I do not take it to be always an infallible token of
evil Priests and Ministers, or a certain sign of Gods displeasure toward
them, when the people do hate, disdain, and contemn them. I see more commonly
in the Scriptures, that it is a token of unthankful, stubborn, and
hard-hearted people, which smally regard the word of God, and therefore also
mislike his ministers. Elias, Micheas, Amos, and other Prophets were smally
esteemed, you know, among the Israelites. Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, were even
of as small credit and estimation among the jews. It may appear so to be,
seeing Esaias signified, that they lilled out their tongues, in mocking of him,
and other of his time. And I am sure, you know the favor and entertainment
that the Apostles had also among the same people. I trust then you will not say
it was a token of naughty and corrupt Ministers, or of Gods just judgment
against them: for they were the right and true Prophets, Apostles, and
Messengers of God, and yet were in great hatred and misliking of them that
thought themselves to be the people of God.

It may be surely, and in deed I think it to be very true, that God has
touched our bishops and Preachers with this scourge of ignominy and reproach,
for their slackenesse and negligence in their office: And I pray God they may
take this merciful warning, and shun his greater plagues. But I must say
withal, as Christ says of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate mixed with their
sacrifice, and of them Luke 13.
upon whom the Tower of Siloe fell: Do you think, that they only are
sinners? nay I say unto you, if you do not repent, you shall all taste of the
same sharp justice. If God punish his Ministers, he will not suffer the other
untouched. Now the time is come that the judgment begins 1. Pet. 4.
at the house of God, and if God punish those that he sent with his word, what
will he do to them that unthankfully receive his word?

THAT this matter of Ecclesiastical men's livings Proofs out of the New
Testament against the rich livings of Ministers.
may seem to be of great importance, and such in deed as God has had much
care of in all times: as before it has been countenanced by the Law and
Prophets, so must it now be drawn also through the whole course of the nevve
Testament. Yea, whatsoever is used, either of Christ himself or of his
Apostles, against covetousness, or the love and care of this world, and
delight of this life: all that, either by fair means or foul, is brought
into this fort, to batter and shake the lands and possessions of Bishops, and
other of the Clergy.

And first men are willed, to call to remembrance the example of Christ our
Savior, his birth, the state of his life, the choice of his apostles, and his
perpetual doctrine, exhorting to poverty and contempt of the world. His
parents (say they) were poor, and lived by an handie craft, descended of a
stock and kindred grown altogether out of credit in the world: in steed of
a princely chamber, borne in an Ox stall: wrapped in poor clothes, in steed
of white and fine linen: laid in a cribbe for want of a rich cradle: and in
place of worthy seruitours, he had the presence of an Ox and an Ass. And
that he might show himself to delight in poverty and contempt of the world,
his nativity was first revealed unto poor Shepherds watching their flocks.
As he was borne, so was he bredde, in the poor and contemptible Town of
Nazareth, out of the which Nathaniel thought nothing worthy credit could
come: in which Town, as it may be thought, by the exercise of an handie
craft, he lived in obedience of Joseph, and of his Mother. Such as his birth
and breeding was, such was the state of his living, when the full time of his
dispensation came: for he was not borne to any Lands or possessions, neither
had he any great wealth and riches to sustain himself, yea, not so much as
an house to put his head in, but was mainteyned by the alms as it were, and
by the charitable devotion of certain wealthy women of Galiley, and other
godly persons. His Apostles that he chose to follow him, and to be the
Ministers of his kingdom, he took not out of the state of Princes, noble
men, or great and rich Lords, with Lands and dominions: but out of the poor
state, and condition of fishers, Tent-makers, and toulegatherers. And thus may
we see our Lord and Christ altogether wrapped in poverty, and besette on
every side with the base and contemptible state of the world.

But to what purpose is all this alleged? Forsooth, that we may understand,
that it is not lawful for such as be guides of the Lords flock, to live in
any other state, then in that the Lord gave example of: For whosoever seeks
Christ (say they) in other state and sort, then he gave example of, seeks
not Christ, but Antichrist and the pomp of the world So that the sense and
effect of the reason is this: Christ was borne, bredde, and lived in poverty,
and chose unto him Apostles of poor condition: therefore bishops and
Ministers of the church must have no Lands or possessions, but stay them
selves in like poor state, as Christ and his Apostles did. I do not frame
this argument (good Reader) of purpose to cavil, but to admonish thee of the
principal state, and that considering the proof to be naked in it self,
thou may the better judge of the strength thereof.

Surely, I will henceforth cease to marvel at the wrested and violent
interpretations that Hermites, Monks and friars have made upon the scriptures,
to justify and set forth their superstitious life of voluntary poverty and
forsaking the world: seeing professors of the gospel, to maintain their new
doctrines, take upon themselves the like liberty and boldness, in abusing the
holy Scriptures and word of God: And yet surely it does grieve me, and make
my heart bleed to see it. What shall the adversary think of our dealing with
the Scriptures? Surely, that we do in so earnest manner pull them from the
interpretation of the Fathers and of the Church, to the end that by applying
them according to our own fantasies, we may set forth and seem to justify
to the world, what doctrine soever we shall think good our selves: And so
shall this be an occasion to discredit all the particular doctrines of the
Gospel, which hitherto, as well this Church of England, as other churches
reformed have taught. But to understand the weight of this reason before used
against the wealthy livings of our Clergy, we must try it by a right and
just balance: that is, by the true meaning of the holy Ghost. First therefore,
let us consider the causes of Christ's poverty, and of the choice of such
Apostles, which in mine opinion are two: The one is The right cause of Christ's
poverty and his Apostles.
the necessity of our redemption: the other is an example and just instruction
set forth unto Christians. As touching the first, when the certain purpose of
God had determined that his son should come into the world, to work the
redemption of mankind, and his deliverance from sin: necessary it was for
him to satisfy the justice of God, in sustaining all those difficulties and
punishments, that were due to man for sin: that is to say, affliction,
ignominy, reproach, contempt, poverty, and all worldly troubles and miseries,
and last of all, death. This is that the Prophet Esaias spoke of long before. He
is despised and abhorred of men, he is such a man as Esaias. 53.
has good experience of sorrows and infirmities: we reckned him so vile that
we hid our faces from him. Howbeit he only has taken our infirmities on
him, and borne our pains. Yet we did judge him as though he were plagued and
cast down of God. This is that humiliation and debasing of himself that Paul
speaks of, when he says, He being in the form of God, thought it no
Phil. 2.
robbery to be equal with God, but made him self of no reputation, taking on
him the form of a servant, and made in the likeness of men, and found in
figure as a man, he humbled himself, made obedient unto death, even to the
death of the Cross. These places (good Christians) declare unto us, both the
poverty and contemptible state of Christ here in earth, and also the very
root and principal cause thereof: that is, the salvation of mankind. The
son of God became the son of man, that he might make us the children of
God: he was borne a weak and tender babe, that he might make us strong men in
him: he was tied in swaddling bands, that he might loose and deliver us from the
bonds of the frail and sinful flesh: he was wrapped in poor clowtes, that
with the garment of his innocence, he might hide our nake dnes: he was borne
and lived poorly, that he might make us rich and plentiful in him: he was a
stranger in the world, and had not an house to put his head in, that he might
purchase for us a city and heritage in heaven: he was borne under bondage, and
paid tribute to Caesar, that he might deliver us from the tyranny of Hell: he
was debased even to the company of brute beasts, that he might bring us to the
glorious company of Angels: he lay in hay in a Crib, that he might procure
everlasting food for our souls: finally, he was accused of sin and put to
most cruel death, that we being justified by his merit, might appear innocent
in the sight of God. These be the sweet and comfortable cogitations that good
christians should conceive upon the consideration of Christ's poor and base
state in this life. For poverty in Christ was not so much for example of life,
as to satisfy a punishment due to sin. Riches is the good blessing and gift
of God: but poverty came in at the same door that death did, that is, by the
disobedience of our first father. We may not therefore think with Monks and
Friars, that poverty in it self is a more holy state of living, then wealth and
riches is. But of that more hereafter. Now let us consider what manner of
poverty this was in Christ. Christ was in himself exceeding rich, both as the
son of God, and as the son of man. As God, he had all things common with
his father. All things that my father has John 16.
(says he) are mine. And again. All thine are mine, and mine are thine. As
touching his humanity, he is likewise John 17.
of great possessions. For his Father says unto him, Desire of me, and I shall
give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
earth for thy possession. Psalm. 2.
How happened it then, that Christ being in right Lord of so great possessions,
became in the time of his dispensation, almost in the state of a beggar?
certainly, quia ipse voluit, because he would himself. For he that fills
heaven and earth, was borne in an Ox stall in Bethleem: he that had al power
in the whole world, was a banished person for a certain time in Egypt: he
that feeds with sustenance man and beast, foul and fish, partly by labor gat
his living, partly was fed with the liberality of other. He that provides
apparel foral things, hung naked upon the Cross: he that sits in heaven as
his throne, and has the earth for his footestoole, at an other man's charge was
buried and laid in a strange Sepulcher. Christ's poverty therefore was vvilling,
not of any necessity of holiness, as I have said, but to bear that which
for sin was due to us. Now, I pray you, mark ye strength of the former
reason. Christ, to sustain the punishment due to our sins, lived in great
poverty and humility in this world: therefore bishops and ministers of the
Church, of necessity, must live in poverty, and not have any wealthy livings,
by lands or otherwise. I trust they that have care of their consciences, will
not easily be led to any persuasion by such reasons. They will say, Christ did
this also for our example. I grant, in some respect he did so: By his example
he teaches us humbleness and modesty, that we may not be loath to do those
things, that he did, for the benefit and commodity of our Christian brother.
If we so swell with pride, that in respect of our Nobleness, or birth, or
great estate in the world, we disdain other, and think our poor neighbor
does us injury, if he in respect of Christian brotherhood require of us a
benefit for his better relief: then is it time for us, to behold the Son of
God lying poorly in a cribbe or manger, between beasts: who, although he were
God eternal with his Father, and by his mother borne of the most noble family
of many Kings and Prophets: yet for our sake he did so humble and debase
himself, that he came in so poor and vile condition before men. Furthermore,
Christ by his example, has as it were consecrated poverty, trouble, misery,
and affliction, that they may not be accounted tokens of the wrath of God, or
such things as do hinder true piety and holiness, or let the salvation of our
souls. For as man's nature does abhor all afflictions: so chiefly do men
think poverty and need, to be not only one of the greatest miseries that
can happen to man, but also hateful to God himself. Thus we see men commonly
to think of such, as are any way fallen into poverty and misery. Let Job
hereof be an example. In this cause also it is expedient for us to look upon
our poor Christ, and to set him before our eyes, that we may both more
patiently bear these things, when for Gods cause they light upon us, and more
charitably judge of other, whom God therewith touches: yea, it is good to
teach us to pull down our brissles, when we wax proud of those gifts of
plenty and riches, that God has given us. Thus you see what profit the example
of Christ's poverty brings: but I pray you, to whom is Christ an example? to
bishops and Ministers only? did he live in poor and miserable state for
Ministers only? did he die for their sins only? God forbid. He was borne, he
lived, he died for all mankind, and all faithful have the fruit of this his
birth, his life, and his death. Therefore the example of Christ's life must
stretch further then to Bishops and Ministers. It is a far truer argument to
say, Christ lived a simple and poor life, while he was here on earth:
therefore all Christians ought to live in the same manner that he did, then to
apply the same only to Ministers and Ecclesiastical persons. Therefore I will
all Christians to beware of this heretical and Anbaptisticall assertion:

Whosoever seeks Christ in other state and sort then he gave example of,
seeks not Christ, but Antichrist, and the pomp of the world.

For if this sentence be applied to the example of the poor state of Christ,
it is the very ground of Anabaptisticall community, and that none can be
saved, but such as renounce al their goods and possessions. Albeit the example
of Christ in this place be applied to Ministers only: yet in truth it
appertains to all other faithful, as well to them. And if the Argument
shall be counted good now: hereafter, with as good liklihood, and far truer
interpretation, it may be used against all that shall truly profess Christ. As
touching that Christ chose so simple Apostles, and of so poor estate, Saint
Paul shows the reason and cause thereof. Brethren (says he) 1. Cor. 4.
you see your calling, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many Noble are called: but God has chosen the foolish things to
confound the wise, and the weak things to confound the mighty, and unnoble
things of the world, and things that are despised, God has chosen, and things
which are not, to bring to naught things that are, that no flesh should glory
in his presence. If Christ in the entrance of his Kingdom, going about to
subdue the world to his knowledge, should have used the sernice and ministry
of Princes, Noblemen, great, wealthy, and rich men: or of such as hadbene
wise, learned, and eloquent, and politic: the glory of his mighty conquest
would have been attributed to the power and might, to the wealth and riches, to
the wisdom and learning, to the eloquence and policy of those, which had
been his ministers, and so the glory of God in that work of man's salvation,
should have been diminished. Therefore God, to show his power in heavenly
things, ouerthwarted the wisdom of the world, and chose his Apostles poor,
unnoble, simple, unlearned, without eloquence, far from the cunning, wisdom,
and policy of the world, and by them and by their preaching in few years
wanne the whole world to his knowledge, and defaced the kingdom of Satan,
consisting in superstition, idolatry, and wickedness. And indeed, this order
of Gods woorking by these poor and unlearned men, prevailed against all the
Nobility, the honor, the power, the might, the wisdom, the policy,
learning, the eloquence of the world, so that it might be truly said, Non
est potentia, non est prudentia, non est consilium aduersus Dominum. But what
hereof is to be concluded to this purpose? forsooth, that as Christ thought it
fittest to choose only poor men to his Apostles, and sent them abroad without
any stay of Lining in the world: so he thinks it meetest, that his
Ministers in his Church in all times and places should be in poor estate, and
not to have any wealth or riches.

It is good to consider this reason also, that you be not more led with it,
then the weight and force of it requires. The office of the Apostles was, to
go from Country to Country, from place to place, to plant Churches unto God,
so that they could not have any certain stay of Living: It is not therefore
like reason, that in a settled Church where the Gospel is received, the
Ministers and Preachers thereof may have no certain form of Living appointed
them, either by land or otherwise. As Christ chose his Apostles poor, so he
chose them simple, and unlearned, without eloquence, or any kind of knowledge,
that his glory thereby might the more be set forth: Shall we therefore
infer thereupon, that it is fittest always for the Ministers of the Church,
to be simple, without learning, eloquence, and knowledge? It is well known
that the Anabaptists, and some other phanaticall spirits troubling the reformed
Churches beyond the seas, upon the same example of the Apostles have gathered,
that learning and knowledge is not to be respected in the choice of Ministers:
because God needs no such helps to set forth his Gospel, yea they say
that learning and eloquence are perilous instruments, to corrupt the
simplicity of the Gospel, and to give countenance to error. Wherefore such
persons do usually admit among them to the Ministry handicrafts men, and
such as challenge to themselves the spirit of God only, without further
knowledge. But the godly, I doubt not, understand that all things neither can,
nor ought to be like in the state of the Church beginning and under
persecution, and in the Church settled and living in peace and quietness.

The Ministers and Preachers of our church, beside the example of Christ and
his Apostles living in poverty, are willed diligently to look into the
perpetual doctrine, which Christ in all the Evangelists does teach them,
touching the state of their living, namely against riches, covetousness, the
glory of the world, and care of this life. To this doctrine apperteineth that
which Christ teaches. Matt. 6. That they should not hoarde up treasure for
themselves Matthew. 6. Luke 12.
upon earth, where thieues break through and steal them, but that they should
lay up treasures in heaven etc. That they cannot serve two masters, God and
Mammon: That they should not be careful for their life, what they should
eat, what they should drink, or what apparel they should put on: but cast
all their care upon God, and seek his kingdom, and the righteousness
thereof, for that it is heathenish carefully to seek after those other things,
which God of himself will plentifully cast upon his: that riches, and the
pleasures and cares of this life, are resembled to thorns which Matthew. 13.
choke up the good seed of Gods word, and make that it cannot prosper: That
it is as impossible for a Mar. 4. Luke 8. Matthew. 19.
rich man to enter into the kingdom of God, as for a Camel to go through the
eye of a needle: That he cries out, woe to them that are full, for they shall
be hungry: Luke 6. Luke 12.
and to them that be rich, because they have already their comfort and
consolation: yea, he wills them to sell all that they have, and give unto the
poor, with a number of other places: wherein he instructing his Disciples and
followers, utterly wills them to renounce this world and the treasures
thereof. Whereupon it is thought it may be very well concluded, that the
Ministers of the Church may not have any wealthy livings, and especially by
lands and lordships: and therefore that our Bishops be not the true followers
of Christ, but walk in the steps of Antichrist. Surely our Savior Christ
did see, that as the perpetual enemy of mankind did continually seek by all
ways to dravve men from God: so he did not use any mean more commonly, then
by honor, glory, riches and wealth. And therefore when he savv that Christ
could not by other temptations be overcome, he assaulted him with ambition
and desire of principality, honor, and lordship. This temptation is therefore
the more dangerous, because man's corrupt nature is of it self greatly inclined
to the love of the world and earthly pleasures. Wherefore I cannot deny, but
that our careful and loving savior did often and in many places warn his
disciples, and by them all us, to beware of this working of Satan, and so much
as they could, to shun his snares. But shall we think therefore, that he
condemns principality, lordship, dominion, wealth, riches, lands, in them
that be his true and faithful followers? No surely: for that is the full
ground of the Anabaptists doctrine, to be shunned of alright christians. And
yet before I begin to answer this, I must needs protest it is a queisie and
dangerous matter, to speak of wealth and riches of the world, for fear of
mistaking, either on the one part, or on the other. For whatsoever a man shall
say in that case, among the ungodly will be drawn according to their private
affections.

The rich, when they hear the possession of riches and the right use of them
defended, by and by if Gods special grace stay them not, wax more confident
and secure, and with contempt and disdain of other, think themselves free
masters and Lords of Gods gifts, to use them even at their own pleasure,
and to the fulfilling of their own fleshly fantasies. On the contrary part,
when they that be poor and destitute of those gifts, shall hear the rich
blamed for the abuse of their wealth, and signification given, that whatsoever
is above the sufficient maintenance of their own state, is due unto the poor:
they also as rashly enter into judgment, and condemn all rich men as
covetous, as griedy gatherers, as thieues and extortioners, and cruel detainers
of that which by Gods law is due to others. Some there be also, that think all
use and administration of riches to be dangerous, and to bring no small
hinderance to the salvation of men's souls. Unto which persuasion, the
phanaticall spirits of the Anabaptists add more difficulty, not only taking
away all possession and property, and allowing a Platonicall community of al
things: but also denying superiority, and Lordship and dominion, and bringing
in a general equality, most dangerous to the society of man. Wherefore, it
behooves me so to speak of riches and possessions, that (so near as I can)
none of these offenses may be justly taken.

First therefore to begin, we may not think that Christ in them that be his,
condemns either the possession or the right use of Lordship, dominion, lands,
riches, money and such like: for they are the good gifts of God, wherewith he
blesses his people, as the whole course of the scriptures declare. The
blessing of Pro. 10.
the Lord (says Solomon) makes rich, and brings no sorrow of heart with it.
Blessed is the man (says David) that Psalm. 112.
fears the Lord etc. his seed shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of
the faithful shall be blessed, riches and plenteousnesse shall be in his
house etc. And again, His horn shall be exalted with honor: the ungodly
shall see it, and it shall grieve them. Therefore we see many of the good
Saints of God, that have been endued with great riches and possessions, as
Abraham the Father of the faithful, Job, Joseph, David, Solomon, Daniel. And in
the new Testament, Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathea, Lazarus of Bethania, Mary
Magdalene, Sergius Paulus Proconsul of Cypres, the Centurion, and many other.
We may not think therefore, that Christ condemns the gifts and blessings
of God, or the use of them, in his servants. And that the truth taken out of
the Scriptures may be of more authority with you, I will let you understand it
by the words of the ancient and learned Fathers: so shall you perceive, it is
not my interpretation, but theirs. And first Hieroms. Joseph, which both in
poverty and riches, gave Hierom. ad Saluinam.
trial of his virtues, and was both a servant and a master, teaches us the
freedom of the mind. Was he not next unto Pharao, adorned in royal
furniture? and yet was he so beloved of God, that above all the Patriarchs, he
was a Father of two Tribes. Daniel, and the three young men, had such rule over
the power and riches of Babylon, that in apparel they served Nabuchodonosor,
but in mind they served God. Mardocheus and Hester, in the midst of their
purple, silk, and precious jewels, overcame pride with humility, and were of
such worthiness, that they being Captives, bare rule over Conquerours. My
speech tends to this end, that I may declare that this young man that I
speak of, had kindred of royal blood, abundance of riches, and ornaments of
honor and power, as matter and instruments of virtue unto him. S. Augustine
disputes this question, Epist. 89.
writing to Hilarious, Thou writest unto me, (says he) that some say, that a
rich man remaining in his wealth, cannot enter into the kingdom of God,
unless that he sell all that he has, and that it shall not profit, though in
his wealth he keep the commandments of God. Our fathers, Abraham, Isaac and
Iaacob, understood not this reasoning: for they all had no small riches, as the
holy Scriptures witness, etc.

And least that some might say, that those holy men were under the old
Testament, and understood not the perfect law that Christ gives, when he
says, Matt. 19.
Go and sell all that thou have, and give it unto the poor, and thou shall
have treasure in heaven, the same Augustine adds, If they will say so; they
may speak with some reason: but let them hear the whole, let them mark the
whole: they may not in one part open their ears, and in an other part stop
them. He spoke that to one that asked him, What shall I do to obtain
everlasting life? and Christ's answer is not, If thou will obtain everlasting
life, sell all that thou have: but, if thou will have everlasting life, keep
the Commandemements, etc. And a little after, our good Master does make a
distinction between the keeping of the Commandments, and that other rule of
perfectness. For in the one part he said, If thou will enter into life, keep
the Commandments: And in the other he said, If thou will be perfect, sell
all thou have, and come and follow me. How therefore can we deny, that rich
men, although they have not the perfection, shall come into everlasting life,
if they keep the commandments, and give, that it may be given unto them? And
in the end he concludes his reason in this manner, after he has spoken of
the uncharitable mind of the rich glutton. This pride (says he) wherewith
this rich man did contemn the poor Lazarus lying before his gates, and that
trust that he did put in his riches, whereby he thought himself a blessed man,
because of his purple, silk, and sumptuous feasts, did bring him to the
torments of hell, and not his riches. By which words of Augustine, it may
appear, it is not riches, Lands and possessions, that GOD condemns in his
servants, but the evil use of them. Wherefore the same Augustine says, When
the Lord had said, It is easier for a Camel Psalm 51.
to pass through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of God: and the Apostles maruailing thereat, answered, Who then can
be saved? What respected they I pray you? surely, non facultates, sed
cupiditates: not great substance, but greedy desire of them.

Immediately he shows, that rich Abraham had pre-eminence in heaven, before
poor Lazarus, Read the Scriptures, (says he) and thoushalt find rich
Abraham, that thou may know, it is not riches that is punished. Abraham had
great store of gold, silver, cattle and household. He was rich, and yet was
poor Lazarus brought into his bosom: the poor man in the bosom of the rich,
or rather both rich before God, and both poor in spirit etc. Mark this, that
you do not commonly blame rich men, or put trust in poor estate. For if a man
should not put his trust in riches, much less in poverty. To the like effect
speaks Hierome, Is it evil to have riches justly gotten, so that a man give
thanks to God that gave them? No, but evil it is to put a man's trust in
riches. For in another Psalm it is said, Ifriches come unto thee, set not
thine heart upon them. A man may have riches for his necessity, but he may
not possess them to delight in them. Well therefore says Chrysostom, As I
have said, wine Homil. 2. ad popul. Antioch.
is not ill, but drunkenness is ill: so say I, riches are not ill, but
covetousness is ill. A rich man is one thing, and a covetous man is another. A
covetous man cannot be a rich man. Homil. 13. ad popul. Antioch.
And to the same meaning in an other place: Let us not falsely accuse either
riches or poverty: for both riches and poverty are such, as, if we will our
selves, bring instruments of virtue. Let us therefore so frame our selves, that
we judge not so, as we may seem to blame Gods gifts, but the evil affections
of men. The same Chrysostom, Riches Homil. ad popul. Antioch. 58.
(says he) kills not: but to be a slave to riches, kills, and to love
covetousness. And again, the rich glutton was punished, not because he was
rich, but because he wanted mercy. For it may be, that one having riches,
joined with mercy, may attain to all goodness. By these testimonies of the
ancient learned Fathers, grounded upon the examples and doctrine of the
Scriptures, you may perceive, that riches are the good gift and blessing of
God: that the Saints of God have used and enjoyed them: that wealth and
possessions of them selves are not hinderous to piety and godliness, but
rather instruments of virtue and means to come to heaven: that God does not
condemn them in his servants: that it is not a man void of lands and
possession, but a heart void of covetousness that Christ desires: that it is
not riches, but the sinful affections of men that he reproves. How then can
it be proved by Christ's doctrine, that any state of his disciples or
faithful servants and followers, ought not to have lands, possessions, or
ample and large livings? or that they be by his word so expressly prohibited,
that neither Prince may suffer it without danger, nor faithful Minister with
good conscience enjoy them? Let us somewhat better consider the particular
places of this doctrine of Christ, whereon this assertion is grounded. Where
Christ says, Hoarde not up treasures for your selves on earth, Matthew. 6.
he says not, you shall have no treasures. To have treasures, and to hoarde
treasures, be diverse. He that hoardeth up treasures, shows that he has a
careful mind to keep them: but a man may possess treasures, and yet with
free heart be willing to employ them to godly purposes: like as Job did, who
had his riches always ready to pleasure other. When Christ affirms, that
where a man's treasure is, there is his heart: by treasure, he means not the
possession of riches simply, but he means that, wherein a man reposeth his
chief treasure and felicity to consist. And in deed it can not be, but that
he that esteems his chief felicity in any thing, does set his heart also
upon it. He that sets his felicity in honor and dignity, has his heart
possessed with ambition. He that thinks it to be in worldly pleasure, has
his whole mind on playing, banqueting, feasting and riot. He that reposeth his
felicity in building, gives over his cogitations unto that. So he that
judges his blessedness in this life to be in possession of riches and lands,
undoubtedly can not but have his heart fastened upon them. And seeing that God
chalengeth unto himself all our whole heart, and our whole soul and mind,
they that so do, must needs offend God most grievously, and make of their
riches their God, and so as S. Paul says, become very idolaters. Therefore if
either Ecclesiastical persons, or lay men, do so set their minds on riches,
this place nighly touches them. When Christ says, No man can serve two
masters; etc. and ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Mark, I pray you, that he
says not: No man can serve God and get riches. For godly men both have before
time, and now may get lands and riches, procured either by heritage or by gift,
or by any other lawful means. Consider the Patriarch Jacob: who passed Gene.
32.
Iordane only with a staff in his hand, and in the time of his living in a
strange Country gate so great riches, as he returned with two great companies
of servants and cattle. And yet undoubtedly this Patriarch was a good
Christian, being saved by the same religion that his grandfather Abraham was,
the father of the faithful, who with rejoicing saw the day of Christ. Neither
does Christ say, No man can serve God and possess riches. For as it is said
before, Abraham, Job, and Joseph, possessed great wealth and riches, and yet
undoubtedly, truly, and sincerely served God. Riches are the blessings of God,
neither may any more rightly or with better title possess them, then the good
and faithful servants of God. What says Christ then? forsooth, No man can
serve two masters: or No man can serve God and Mammon. Getting or possessing is
one thing, and serving is another. Serving presupposes a mastership or
dominion in him that is served. He that serves riches, acknowledges them to
be his Lord and Master. Servitude or bondage has this condition, that he
wholly obey his master: that night and day he do nothing but that pleases his
master: that he shall be contented to have the displeasure of all other, so
that he may have the good vvil of his master: Finally, whatsoever a servant
does, what labor soever he takes, whatsoever by his pains he gets, he
does it to the use and behalf of his master. Whosoever is such a bond-slaue to
riches, is a traitor revolted from God, neither can it be possible for him to
serve God. Such a serving of Mammon it is that Christ in this place rebukes,
with which service, the service of God cannot be joined.

But it were great rashness to think all that possess lands, lordships, and
riches, of necessity to be subject to this slavish service of Mammon, as some
men uncharitably judge of the Bishops and Clergy of England. Joseph of
Arimathea was a rich man, and yet in time of great peril did more service to
Christ, then all his poor Apostles which had so little to leese. It is
written in the Evangelists, When Even was come, there came a rich man from
Arimathea Matthew. 27.
named Joseph, which also himself was Jesus his disciple. He went to Pilate
and begged the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered,
and when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
and laid him in a new tomb etc. Consider the circumstances of the history:
weigh the danger of the time: call to remembrance how many things might have
hindered, and stayed Joseph from this doing, and you shall perceive that
possession of lands and riches, may be joined with a free and faithful
service, yea, oftentimes more faithful, then poverty and base estate in the
world. Good Christians therefore may not condemn as slaves and servants to
Antichrist, all such as have lands and possessions. Experience in England God
be thanked) has taught, when a number of poor Priests and Ministers revolted
from Christ to the Mammon their Mass, that many which had the greatest livings
in this la^d, were most ready not only to be banished their country, but also
to shead their blood, and give their lives to serve faithfully their Lord and
master Christ: and I doubt not, will do again, if ever God give the occasion.
Judge therefore more charitably of your Ministers and Preachers, (O ye English
professors) which have seen these things with your eyes, and know not how
soon, to the sorrow of your own hearts, ye may see the same again. But they
which at this day mislike the state of bishops, and do write or speak against
them, are those persons, which in the time of affliction, either were not
borne, or else were very young, and therefore have no sense of that temptation,
which that persecution did then bring. As God of his goodness grants us now
some Halcion days: so I beseech him against that day, to give us the grace of
his mighty spirit, so that we may have the like constancy.

It is further alleged out of Christ's doctrine, that when he answered the
Pharisees, Mat. 22. he gives a Matt. 22.
plain commandment, that lands and possesions should be at the pleasure of
the Prince, and that Ministers of the church ought to give them up unto him.
For this he says, Give to Caesar that which is Caesar's, and to God, that is
Gods: But (say they) all temporal lands are Caesar's, therefore they ought to
give them unto Caesar: and our Caesar is our gracious Prince and Sovereign.

Truly it would make any Christian heart to lament in these days, to see
Gods holy word so miserably drawn, racked, and pulled in sunder from the true
meaning thereof. If the bishops, and other of the Clergy of England did grudge
or murmr to have their lands and Liuinges to be tributarie to the Prince,
and subject to all taxes and services, that by the laws of this Realm may be,
either to the maintenance of her person, or to the defense of our country: Or
if they did challenge such an immunitie or exemption from the authority of the
Prince, as the Pope and his Clergy did: Or if they did find themselves
grieved to be punished by the Prince for the breach of her Laws, as the
Donatists in old time did, and some now in our age do: If they were such
enemies to Princes and Governors, as they would exempt the^ out of the state
of true christianity, and of the Church of God, and make them only to serve
their turn in evil affairs: then in deed did this place make strongly
against them. But I trust the Clergy of England, are with all good men out
of the suspicion of these points. They are as willing and ready at all times
to be contributarie, as any other subjects are: they claim no exemption from
her authority: they willingly submit themselves to her correction: they
humbly acknowledge their obedience in all things, that any Christian Prince
may require: and this do they principally for conscience sake, because it is
the ordinance and commandment of God: but much moved thereto also, as men, in
consideration of their ovvnestate, which next under God depends of her
majesty. Seeing therefore the hand of God has more straightly bound them unto
her, then other common subjects: I doubt not, but she willingly has, and
shall have all duties of obedience at their hands, that any Christian
subjects by the word of God are bound unto. Neither are they in any fear that
her Majesty will press them to any thing, which shall not stand with the
glory of God, and furtherance of the Gospel. But how these words of Christ
before mentioned, do command them presently to yield up into her Majesty's
hands such lands and possessions, as by the grant of her goodness, and by the
law of this realm they now enjoy, indeed I see not. If such a Prince shall
com (as I trust in my days never to see) that shall put them to this choice,
either to forgo their lands and livings, or to loose the free course of the
Gospel: it is before declared, what their duty is to do therein. And I doubt
not, but in the late time of persecution, there were many of them that would
have bin glad with all the veins in their hearts, by that choice to have
enjoyed in this Realm the freedom of their consciences, though they had bin
put to as pore estate, as possibly men might have lived in. But how that
christian princes are warranted, either by this place of the gospel, or by any
part of the word of God, so hardly to deal with the state of the ministry, I
have not as yet learned, though it be in these days by some boldly affirmed.
Amb. has a worthy saying, wherein he plainly notes both what a christian
prince may do in these things that appertain unto the Church, and how a godly
bishop should in that case behave himself. When it was proposed unto me
(says he) that I should deliver Epist. lib. 5. in Orat. contra Auxentium.
the plate or vessel of the church, I made this answer: If there were any
thing required that was my own, either land, house, gold or silver being of my
own private right, that I would willingly deliver it: but that I could not
pull any thing from the Church of God. And moreover I said, that in so doing I
had regard to the Emperors safety, because it was not profitable either for
me to deliver it, or for him to receive it. Let him receive the words of a free
Minister of God. If he will do that is for his own safety, let him forbear
to do Christ injury. By these words ye may perceive, both that Ambrose would not
deliver the church goods, nor that he thought it safe for the Emperor to
require it. The mening of Christ is in those words, to teach his to put a
difference between the duty that they owe to the Prince, and that they owe to
God: and to declare, that within their due bounds, they may both stand
together. Therefore they that will rightly follow Christ in this doctrine, must
consider, in what consists the duty toward a Prince or Magistrate, and
wherein rests our duty toward God. We owe to the Prince, honor, fear,
and obedience: obedience (I say) in all those things that are not against the
word of God and his commandments. Those things that God commands, a
Christian Prince cannot forbid: Those things that God forbids, no Prince
has authority to command. But such things as be external, and by Gods word
left in different, the Prince by his authority may so by law dispose, either
in commanding, or forbidding, as in wisdom and discretion he shall think to
make most to the glory of God, and to the good and safe state of his people.
Among these things external, I think lands, goods, and possessions to be, and
therefore that the same ought to be subject to tax and tribute in such sort,
as the laws and state of the country requires: yea, and if there shall happen
in any country a magistrate, which by violence and extortion shall wrest more
unto him of the lands and substance of the people, then law and right
requires: I see no cause warranted by Gods word, that the inferior subjects
can rebel, or resist the Prince therein, but that they shall evidently show
themselves to resist the ordinance of God. For they have not the sword of
correction committed into their hand, and oftentimes God by evil Princes
corrects the sins of the people. Wherefore, if subjects resist the hard
dealings even of evil Magistrates, they do in that respect strive against God
himself, who will not suffer it unpunished. Wherefore Jeremy wills the
Jews to submit Ierem. 28.
themselves to the obedience of Nabuchodonosor, a wicked and cruel king: and
Baruch teaches them Baruc. 1.
to pray for the good estate of the said Nabuchodonosor and his nephewe
Balthazar. And Saint Peter and 1. Pet. 1. Romans 13. 1. Tim. 2.
Saint Paul, will Christian subjects not only to be obedient to the heathen
tyrants, which were in their time, as Nero, and such other, but also to make
most humble and hearty prayers for them, that his people might live under them
a quiet and peaceable life, with all godliness and honesty. Tertullian also
shows the same to have been Tertull. ad Scapulam.
the practice of the primitive Church, even toward the enemies and cruel
persecutours of the faith of Christ.

A Christian (says he) is enemy to none, and least of all to the Emperor,
whom he knowing to be ordained of God, must of necessity love, reverence, and
honor, and wish to be in safety together with the whole Roman Empire. And
again, We pray for all Emperors, that God would grant unto them long life,
prosperous reign, strong armies, Tertul. Apolog.
faithful Counsel, obedient Subjects. etc.

We may learn then by this, that Christian duty of a subject consists in
loving, in reuerencing, in obeying the Prince and Magistrate in all things,
that lawfully he commands: and in those things that he commands
unlawfully, not by violence to resist him, though the same touch our goods, our
lands, yea and our life also. As touching our duty toward God, we owe unto
him our selves wholly, both body and soul, and all things and parts to the
same appertaining, according to that his Law requires, Thou shall love God
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with thy whole
power. For we are his creatures, and he is our Lord and maker. But forasmuch
as Princes, Magistrates, Rulers, Parents, Masters, and all superiors, have a
portion of Gods authority over us, as his officers and Lieutenants in their
callings: therefore God does permit unto them some part also of his honor,
but so far, and in such things, and such manner as before is declared,
retaining unto himself our faith and religion, with all the parts of his
divine vvorshippe consisting in Spirit and in truth, the calling upon his
blessed name, the confession of his holy truth, and the obedience of his
moral Law: which things he does not make subject to any Princes
authority. And if any Prince or Magistrate by violence and cruelty shall
break into the bounds of our duty toward God, I say not that private
subjects may by violence resist it: but surely they may not obey it, but rather
yield into his hands, goods, lands, country, and life too. For so did the
Prophet Daniel: so did the young men his companions: so did the whole number of
the martyrs of God, by whom the Church of Christ increased as Augustine
says, Non resistendo August de Agon. Chri.
sed perferendo, not by resisting but by suffering. And Hierome: The Church of
Christ was founded by Hierom ad Theophil.
suffering reproach, by persecutions it increased, by martyrdomes it was
crowned. To this end, says Tertullian also, Semen Euangelij Sanguis Martyrum.
This is the true doctrine of the words of Christ before mentioned, by which
we are taught to put a difference between our duty toward God, and that we
owe toward the Prince, yielding to each that which is his: A doctrine most
profitable and necessary to all Christian Churches and commonweals. But who
can gather of this, that the Ministers of the Church of Christ, living under a
Christian Prince favoring and defending the Gospel, must of necessity give up
into the Princes hands those lands and possessions, which by the grant of the
same Prince and the Law of the Land is assigned unto them? For if the land be
Caesar's and therefore must be delivered to Caesar: then are all goods,
Caesar's, and must be also yielded into his hands.

God save us from Princes that will use like violence and tyranny toward our
Lands, goods, and bodies, as these men use to the word of God. I have not as
yet noted unto you (good Christians) the very ground of this corrupt
interpretation of the doctrine of Christ, and the mischief that is hid under
it. I pray you therefore consider, to whom does Christ speak in all those
places of his doctrine before mentioned? Whom does he teach? whom does he
instruct, that they should not hoarde up treasure upon earth? that they may
not serve God and Mammon? that they may not be careful what to eat and what
to drink? that they must sell all that they have and follow him? that they
must renounce all that they have if they will be his true Disciples? And
lastly that they must yield to Caesar that which is Caesar's? Are these things
spoken to Ministers only? does Christ's doctrine pertain to Bishops and
Ministers only? Is it his will that they only should follow his godly
instructions and commandments? Then of likelihoode, as he came only to
teach Ministers, and to be example of life to them alone: so he came to save
Ministers only. But what a wicked vanity were it so to speak or think?

Now if Christ's doctrine be general to all the faithful, as in deed it is:
(that being the true interpretation that they vvoulde have to be) it must of
necessity follow, that no true Christian can keep lands and possessions,
nor abide in any wealthy or rich estate: which is the very ground of the
Anabaptists doctrine, as all learned men do know. In so much, that all the
famous men, that in this our age have expounded the Scriptures, or written
against the Anabaptists, do note, that by this interpretation of the speeches
of Christ before mentioned, they do ground their community, and taking away
of propriety and possession of goods, with sundry like other doctrines. We may
see therefore, and it is time to take heed of it, how satan, under pretenses
seeks to thrust the spirit of the Anabaptists, and the grounds of their
learning into this church of England. The inconvenience then of this kind of
reasoning is, either, that these sentences of the gospel touch bishops and
ministers only, and all other are left free, which is a very great absurdity:
or else that the same doctrine gathered out of these places in the same sense
that they use, does belong to al christians, which with the Anabaptists takes
away al propriety and possessions of lands and goods, and (as I have before
said) brings in a Platonicall community. I say not, that they which use
these places do mean it: but surely that inconvenience and danger follows
upon it. Therefore, they that have any fear of God, ought to take heed, that
their immoderat stomach and affections against bishops and other ministers, do
not overmuch blind them, and carry them away, either to the affirming, or to
the maintening of corrupt and dangerous doctrines, both to the Church and
commonwealth. If this their doctrine spread in libels, shall once become
familiar unto the common people of this Realm: it may happily breed such a
scab and dangerous sore, as all the cunning in this land will scant be able to
heal it. God send grace, that heed may be taken thereof in time.

They will say (I know) That this is but a shift of Logike that the false
sophisters the bishops do use to turn the matter from themselves, when they
say, that this doctrine of Christ pertains to al Christians, as well as to
them: and will ask me how they will avoid those plain and evident words that
Christ speaks to his Apostles and disciples only, when he sends them abroad
two and two, to preach the kingdom of God. This (say they) does belong to
Ministers and Preachers only.

As ye go, preach, saying, that the kingdom of heaven is Matthew. 10.
at hand: heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils,
freely ye have received, and freely give you. Possess Mar. 3.
not gold nor silver, nor money in your purses, nor scrip Luke 9.
toward your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet a staff, For
the workman is worthy of his meat. These words, I must confess, do not
appertain generally to al christians, no more do they generally to al
ministers and preachers of al times and places. Is it evil in it self to have
gold or silver? or to have a staff on the way to walk with? or to wear
shoes to save his feet in iourneying? I think there is no christian that will
so judge. Christ himself had a purse, wherein Judas carried money for his
provision, and he suffered certain rich women to go with him, and to minister
to him and to his disciples. Peter also bare a sword, and ware sandalles on
his feet, when the Angel bade him put on his sandalles. And Paul writing to
Timothy, wills him to bring his cloak with him, although undoubtedly he
had an other garment before. We must consider then what it is that Christ in
this place means, seeing neither himself nor his Apostles did observe it
according to the strictness of the letter.

There be some that say these precepts be personal, and for a time only, not
general or perpetual: for that which goes before may seem to take away the
continuance of these precepts, Go not in the way of the Gentiles, but to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel. Which precept the Apostles at this time
observed, but afterward they preached the gospel unto all the nations of the
earth: so do they think, that Christ, for the time of this message only,
commanded them to possess no gold nor silver, etc. and from thenceforth that
this commandment was abrogated. This interpretation I cannot reject as evil,
or not pertinent to the meaning of Christ. There be also some hypocrites, and
Pope-holy persons, which will have these precepts perpetual, and build thereon
friery and monkish superstition: They will not touch any money: They will wear
no whole shoes: They will not have a staff to walk with, thinking that they
show themselves the holy servants of God therein. To this interpretation very
nighly comes that, which these men use to prove, that bishops and preachers
may have no lands nor possessions, nor riches, no nor money, further then will
barely provide the^ meat, and drink, and cloth, and whatsoever is above, to be
of superfluity. Some other think, that Christ in those words only compares
the Ambassadors of other princes with his: as if he had said, I send you
forth to preach the kingdom of God: and the state of an ambassade or message
does require, that I should deliver unto you money, and all other like things
convenient for this voyage, as Princes use to their ambassadors: but deceive
not your selves: the manner of this message is diverse from such messages as
civil princes use. In civil ambassades, great furniture (I know) is thought
convenient: but this message of mine is such, as needs no such matter to set
it out. For the majesty of the thing it self, and the miracles that you shall
work, shall sufficiently give authority unto it. This interpretation also I
think not amiss: but in my opinion, and that by the judgment of some other
learned men, also the true and simple meaning of Christ was, to teach his
Apostles to put their trust and whole confidence upon the providence of God
only, and for the better persuasion, would have them at this time to make trial
thereof, and by experience to learn, that though they have nothing in the sight
of the world to feed the^, to help or to defend them: yet that he will so
provide for them, if they continue in their vocation and calling faithfully,
that they shall want nothing: yea, that the fowls of the air shall rather feed
them the^ that they should lack sustenance. That this was Christ's meaning, it
may appear in S. Luke, where he says to his Apostles, When I sent you forth
without wallet or scrippe, or shoes, lacked you any thing? and they Luke 22.
said, No. Then said he unto them, But now he that has a wallet, let him take
it up, and he that has none, let him sell his coat and buy a sword. The
Apostles undoubtedly had great need of this instruction, and to be taught to
put their whole trust in the providence of God, and to depend upon that only.
For he did see that in the execution of their office they should be cast into
all the difficulties of this world, which either Satan or his ministers were
able to raise against them. This lesson is very necessary also for all other
christians, but principally for the ministers and preachers of the Gospel,
whenever God for the profession and teaching of his truth shall cast them
into the like difficulties. For if they do not rest upon that only, they shall
find lands, possessions, power, authority, kindred, friendship, and all other
helps of this world, to be but as a broken staff to lean unto.

But what makes this against that, that ministers of the Church in the calm
times of quietness, may ^nioy the benefits and liberality of good and
gra^ious Princes, whom he has appointed as fosterers and nourishers of his
Church and people, wherein soever those benefits of their liberality shall be
employed, be it lands, possessions, goods, money, or any other manner of
provision?

For further proof of this matter against the wealthy state of the Clergy, the
example of S. Peter also is broughtin, who says in the Acts to the poor
^ame man, Silver and gold have I none, etc. Lo (say Act. 3.
^hey) S. Peter was a right Apostle, and was in so poor ^ase, that he had
neither silver nor gold, no not so ^uch as he could bestow a mean relief
upon a poor beggar. His example should our rich bishops and Preachers follow.
And S. Paul to Timothy, Having food and raiment, we should therewith be
content.

Here we may learn (say they) what manner of living Ministers of the Church
should have, that is, so much only, as will provide them meat, drink, and
cloth: whatsoever is above, that is superfluity, and more then Gods word
requires. Who sees not (good Christians) whereat these men shoot, and what
state of the Ministry, this earnest zeal that now is pretended, would
settle in this Church? that is, more miserable and worse provided for, then any
other state of the land beside. Those hearts wherein is true devotion, and
the right love of the Gospel, are rather over bountiful toward the Preachers
thereof, then too sparing. For they are thus affected, that they think nothing
too dear for the^, yea, if it were possible, they would give their eyes unto
them out of their heads, as Paul says to the Galathians.

What spirit this is therefore that would so hard ly pinch and wring the
ministers of the church, it is evidently to be gathered. The principal purpose
at the beginning was, to prove yt the Ministers might not by the word of God
enjoy any temporal lands: but now forsooth, through the goodness of their
cause, in the vehemency of their reasoning, and fullness of their proof, it
falls out so, that Ministers may not have so much as any penny in their purse
to provide them sustenance: but must live upon the charitable alms of the
people, and content themselves with meat, drink, and apparel only, as the
Apostles did. For they are no spiritual men (say they) that have temporal
living. Yea, of the very tithes they ought to claim no more, then may serve
them to meat, drink, and cloth. And if the same be denied them, they may not by
law sue for it. For if their coat be taken from them, they should deliver
their clokealso. Matthew. 5.


This doctrine does very well justify the covetous and uncharitable dealinges
of many Parishioners, which partly by violence, partly by crafty means
detain from the Ministers their portion of tithes appointed by the law. This
doctrine gives good countenance to corrupt patrones, who will not bestow their
benefices, but by composition of a good part of the fruits to their own use
and commodity. And when the living shall be worth 100. pounds by the year,
they will ask, whether thirty or forty pounds be not a sufficient portion
for the Parson? This dealing before time has bin accounted little better then
sacrilege or simonie: but now it may be thought (if this doctrine be good and
allowable) that it is lawfully done, and according to the word of God: yea,
and that the minister is a covetous worldling, and worthy great blame, that
will not content himself with such a rate, as they willingly shall allow him.
What care they which thus reason have, I will not say of the preaching of the
gospel, but of the state of learning and knowledge in the Church of Christ, all
men may evidently perceive. Either they judge, as I have before written at
large, that men be Angels without corruption, and will follow the course of
learning for conscience sake, though there be no hope of reward to allure the^:
or else they think, that God will miraculously give knowledge to such as he shall
incline to the Ministry, as he did in the primitive Church to his Apostles,
and other.

As touching the example of Saint Peter, it is before declared, what cause
Christ respected in the choosing of so poor Apostles, and leaving them in so
base state and condition of life: that is, that the work of winning the whole
world to the doctrine of salvation by so simple and poor instruments, as in
the judgment of men they seemed, might be the greater glory to God, as Saint
Paul says: Especially seeing he did set them forth, and furnish them with the
heavenly riches of his holy spirit, that is to say, extraordinary knowledge,
rare gifts of virtue, and power to work miracles.

But upon this extraordinary dealing of God in the fou^ding of his church, to
ground a general and perpetual rule, to bind the Ministers of al places and
times, is such manner using ye scriptures, as must needs breed great
inconveniences among the people of God.

As for the words of Saint Paul, there is no man I 1. T^^. 6.
think, but that he may perceive they are spoken generally, and not to
Ministers only, as they are i^ this place applied. Remember the place: view
the circumstances: consider what goes before, and what comes after, and you
shall understand it to be true. For S. Paul there, speaks to the same
purpose, Matthew. 6.
that Christ does Matthew. 6. when he wills me^ not to be careful what to
eat, what to drink, or what to put on, but that they should seek the
kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and al other things should by
the providence of God be cast unto them. So, I say, S. Paul exhorts men not
to be in love with the riches of this world, which they shall never carry away
with the^, that they should not practice wicked ways to gain, but account
godliness their chief gain and commodity, holding themselves contented with
those things that the necessity of nature requires, that is, food, and
apparel: For whatsoever is above that, may seem to be superfluous. This
wholesome doctrine, the spirit of God in the scriptures does often cast upon
the consciences of Christians, as a necessary bridle, to stay the wicked
affection of covetousness and greedy desire of the world, whereto the corruption
of our nature is given. And yet he does not condemn riches, or a more
plentiful life, as evil in it self. It is the heart, the mind, and the
affection, that God would have stayed and kept under in his obedience, and not
the forbearing of the external creatures as before is at large declared. Job
in the mids of his greatest wealth had as poor and as contented a heart, as
he that had a small living, and did no more exceed in gluttony, or other
riotous excess, then he did, which had not a penny more then to provide meat,
drink and cloth. This doctrine, as it does generally pertain to all
Christians: so I deny not, but it very nighly and chiefly ought to touch
Preachers and ministers of the Church. Wherefore I must and do confess, that so
much as our bishops and Clergy want of the performance hereof, they want of
that perfection that by the word of God they should have. But how ca^ it be
proved hereby, that they may not have more ample or large alowance then shall
suffice the^ for necessary food and apparel? In deed that co^tentation of
mind they should have, whenever God calls them to that necessity, yea and
when they be in their wealthiest state that any condition of a christian common
weal does give them, they ought not in those things to exceed, but to keep
that moderation that godliness requires: and whatsoever is above that, they are
bound in conscience to see godly and honestly bestowed, or else they grievously
offend God, and give evil example to other. This rule (as I have said)
pertains in like manner to all christians: and therefore it can no more follow
upon this, that the lands and livings of ministers must be taken from them,
because it brings superfluity unto them, and more then the necessity of
nature requires, then you can conclude the same against all other Christians
that have more ample lands and livings then will suffice them to the like
purpose. As I have said before, so say I now again, If our bishops and other
clergy men, employ the overplus of their large and plentiful livings unto
evil and naughty uses, neither I nor any other can therein defend them.

For the better understanding of my answer to these places, and of the
imperfect manner of reasoning used by the adversary: it behooves to consider,
that God in his word lays down a perfect measure of his justice, and an
absolute rule of that life that Christians should lead. As for example, when
he says in the Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with
all thy soul, with all thy mind, with all thy power, and thy neighbor as thy
self: This commandment requires, that all the parts and members of our soul
inwardly, and our body and goods outwardly, should be bent and given over to
the setting forth of the glory of God. Our heart is the root of our
affections: therefore we are commanded to love or hate nothing, to fear or
hope for nothing, to desire or shun nothing, not to be sorry for any thing, nor
rejoice in any thing, but only in God and his glory. By our soul, is meant all the course of our life: our infancy, our young age, our middle age, and our old
age. Wherefore in this it is required, that the whole time of our life, from the
beginning of our birth to the hour of our death, should be employed to the
service of God. Our mind comprehends our reason and understanding: so that by
that branch, we are taught that our understanding, our reason, and all the
cogitatio^s of our mind should be occupied in nothing, but in the love of God.
Our power notes all the strength and senses of our body, and the ability of
worldly substance and outward gifts of God. So that there is nothing
apperteining to us, either inwardly, or outwardly, (as I have said) but God
wholly requires the same to his service: and if we do fail therein, we
offend his justice, and want of that perfect rule of life that is prescribed
unto us: Insomuch, that if the mercy of God in Christ our Savior help not,
we deserve for the same everlasting damnation. To the declaration of the
latter part of this rule, that we should love our neighbor as our self,
appertains the doctrine of Christ, Matthew. 5. that we should not so much as
once be moved with anger toward our neighbor, that we should not look upon a
woman to lust after her, that we should not only love our neighbor as our
self, but that we should love our enemies, bless them that curse us, do good
to them that hate us, pray for them that persecute us, etc.

As for our money, lands, goods, and possessions, we should have our minds so
little given to them, and our hearts so smally set upon them, that we nothing
at all should care for them further, then that they may be unto us, either
instruments of virtue, or necessary helps of our frail life. Yea, there is
nothing so nigh, nothing so dear unto us by Christ's rule, either eye, or
hand, or foot, or whatsoever it be, but we should cut it off, and cast it
from us, if it be a let or hinderance unto us to enter into the kingdom of God.
Finally, our bodies being here in this vale of misery, our minds, and hearts
and conuersations should be in heaven: they that have wives, 1. Cor. 7.
as though they had none: they that weep, as though they wept not: they that
rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: they that buy, as though they possessed
not: they that use this world, as though they used it not.

To this rule of christian perfection, appertain all those sentences and
exhortations of Christ and of his apostles, which before you have heard
alleged, te^ding all to this end, to pull away the hearts of men from the
love of riches and care of this world, that they may set the same wholly upon
God. This rule is laid down not only for ministers of the church, as though
they only were the servants of God, but also for all other faithful Christians,
whom it binds as straightly as it does the ministers. For it is a mark, unto
which they both should direct their whole endeavors.

They therefore that will apply this rule to some one state of men, and not to
other, fall into like error as Monks and Friars did, dreaming a more strait
order by God to be appointed to one, the^ to another. The Minister so much as
he lacks of this perfection, so much is he indebted and in danger unto God:
And if he fly not to the mercy of God purchased by the merit of Christ to
wash away that want and imperfection, undoubtedly there rests nothing, but
eternal damnation.

Now, as I have said of the Minister, so must I say of al christians beside.
Therefore out of this doctrine is no particular application to be made more to
one state then to another, but only this, that ministers, because of their
calling, should show themselves to come nearer to this mark, then other. Where
the error in resoning is, you may now by this perceive, which consists in two
points. First, that the branches of the rule of christian perfection generally
given to all, are applied only to ministers of the Church, as special precepts
to bind them: And secondly, that the perfourming of this rule is more imputed
(as the monks and friars did) to the outward refusing of Gods creatures, then
the brideling of the affections and humble contentation of the mind before God.

By this corrupt manner of reasoning in these days, are framed sundry dangerous
arguments against the state of the Ministry here now with us in England. As
for example, Our Bishops and Ministers are evil men: they answer not the
perfect rule, that is prescribed unto them by the word of God: therefore they
should be deposed, their state altered, and their Lands and Livings taken into
the Princes hands, or be otherwise employed as it shall be thought good.

The danger of this argument will be easily perceived, if you apply the same
to other states, as thus: Princes, Magistrates and noble men are evil, they do
not fulfill that rule of right and perfect government that the word of God
requires: therefore pull them down, set other in their places, or alter their
state clean.

This is a seditious and perilous argument, especially when common and
inferior subjects, not having authority, shall take upon them to be judges in
such cases, as now they do against bishops.

With this manner of reasoning (as I have before noted) the Devil fills the
heads and hearts of his troublesome instruments, when he intends to work
mischief, either in the Church of God, or in the state of any common weal.

This manner of arguments they always use, which for private respects, pretend
general reformations or alterations in the state of a Church or country,
wherein they live. Let the Bishops and Clergy of England have such judges and
trial, as the word of God requires, and ever has bin used in the Church of
Christ: yea, or such as other states would think reasonable and indifferent
for themselves in their calling: and then, on Gods name, let them abide the
hazard of the sentence either with them or against them, and the danger of
such penalty as in justice and equity may be assigned. Another dangerous
Argument is this: Bishops and Preachers by Christ are commanded not to be
careful for the world, not to hoord up treasures in earth, yea to renounce all
they have and follow Christ: therefore they ought not to have any lands or
Lordships, or great and wealthy Livings, but to be contented with meat,
drink and cloth. etc. The hardness of this reason will be the better
understood, if the like be applied to some other persons.

Noble men and gentlemen, if they will be right and true Christians, by Gods
word are commanded not to be careful for the world, not to hoord up riches
here on the earth, yea to renounce all that they have, and follow Christ:
therefore they may not have so great and ample livings more then other, but
shall content themselves with such a moderate portion, as may tollerably
maynteine them, in seeing the administration of justice in their countries, and
the refidue that now is spent in gaming and unnecessary pomp, and vanity of
the world, to be employed to the maintenance of a great number of the Princes
subjects, and people of God, that are not able in mean estate to live. For in
such case were the noble men and Gentlemen of the Israelites called Principes
familiarum, the Princes and chief of each tribe and family among the people
of God.

A many of such factious and seditious arguments may in like manner be framed,
more meet for rebels, then for good subjects or faithful christians, which I
do in this place for good considerations omit. For if they should be so
countenanced with particular allegations of the Scriptures, and furnished with
such learning and examples of histories, as factious heads are able to devise:
happily they would carry as much credit, and draw as a great number of
followers and mainteiners, as now the like dealing does against the Clergy.
I will not therefore tarry any longer in this point. I have set forth unto you
an example or two nakedly and barely, to this end only, if it might be
possible, to open the eyes of some, which seem in part to be blinded either
with affection against bishops, or with a desire to work and bring to pass
some special drift and purpose that they have devised: for what cause, it may
be more easily by wise men coniectured, then safely by me laid down in writing.

For the further examining of this matter, and that it may be the better
understood, whether ecclesiastical men may with safe consciences enjoy the
state How Ministers were maintained from the beginning.
of their livings by lands or no, Let us briefly consider the condition of the
Church, and how Ministers have bin maintained from the beginning, even to this
day. And here I must protest, that the Histories and writers, especially such
as be of credit, are so imperfect in this point, as the truth must be
gathered by conjecture of certain branches, rather then by any discourse in
their writing.

For the space of the first three hundred years after Christ, it is well known
to all such as have looked into the Ecclesiastical Histories, that it was
almost in continual persecution under heathen tyrants, which with all
endeavor sought means to oppress Christian Religion, and the true professors
thereof. Wherefore in all that time it was not possible for the church to have
any settled state, by Lands or certain reuenevv to maintain the Ministers
thereof: but they were sustained only by the liberal contribution of godly
persons, collected at certain times for that and other like Christian uses.

For Saint Cyprian signifies, that to certain persons appointed to the office
of readers, he distributed Lib. 4. epi 5.
the measure of gifts and distributio^s, as were assigned to the Priests. The
Canons attributed to the Apostles, Canon 5.
make mention of oblations and first fruits to be brought home to the house of
the bishop, beside such things as were offered in the Church. Origin somewhat
more straightly seems to require the tenthes and first fruits of such
increase as Christians have by the blessing of God: his words be these. It is
comely and profitable, that the first fruits should be offered to the
Priests of the Gospel also, for so the Lord disposed, Hom. 11. in Numer.
that he that preaches the Gospel, should live by the Gospel. And as this is
good and comely: so contrariwise, it is evil and uncomely, that one that
worshippeth God, and comes into the Church, knowing that the Priests attend
on the Altar, and serve the word of God, and ministry of the Church, should
not offer unto the Priests the firstlings of those fruits that God gives by
bringing forth his sun and seasonable showers upon them. For such a soul
seems not to to me to have any remembrance of God, or to think, that it is
God that gives those fruits.

It may appear also, that even in this time the Church had certain houses
allotted to their Bishops. For when Paulus Samosatenus after his deposition,
would not depart out of the house that belonged to the Church, it was appointed
by the authority of the Emperor Aurelius, that he should be Eusebius Ecclesiast
^ist. lib. 7. cap. 30.
removed from it, and the house assigned unto him, to whom the bishops of
Italy did agree in doctrine. Origin also mentions certain rentes and
revenues due to the Church. Many of us (says he) have Orig. tract. in Matt.
31.
need of this warning, that we be both faithful, and also wise, ad
dispensandos Ecclesiae redditus, to bestow the rents of the Church.

And one Petrus de Natalibus writes, that in the time of Vrbane bishop of
Rome, about 226. years after Christ, the Church first began to possess lands
tovvard the finding of the Ministers. Certain it is, that many godly disposed
persons, notvvithsta^ding they were let by the cruelty of tyrants, even
in that time gave large and ample gifts unto the Church, not only in money
and plate, but as it is to be gathered, in revenue also. For Optatus
Mileuitanus Opt. lib. ^.
vvriteth, that Mensurius bishop of Carthage before Cecilianus, when he was
sent for to the Emperor, fearing that he should return no more again, left in
the custody of certain persons Ornamenta plurima and aurea and argentea, many
ornaments of gold and silver. The restoring of which ornaments and jewels
afterward, was one great occasion of the schism of the Donatists, as the same
Optatus shows. Wherefore it may appear, the Church was not in those days so
poor and needy, as some men would have us think it was: though it were then
under heathenish and cruel tyrants, with all extremity forbidding, that any
persons should give either goods or lands to the relief of it. Sabellicus
writes, that in the time Ennead. 7. lib. 8.
of Maxentius the Emperor, one Lucina a noble and rich gentlewoman of Rome,
appointed the Church of Rome to be heir unto all her substance and
possessions. Which, when that cruel tyrant understood, he for the time
banished her out of the city. But when Constantine that good and first
Christian Emperor, undertook the defense and maintenance of Christian Lib. 1.
de sacrosancto eccles.
religion, he not only liberally bestowed upon the Church himself, but by law
made it free, to all that would give any thing unto the Church, were it in
lands or otherwise. Which law Valentinianus, Theodosius, and other afterward
confirmed, nor ever was it Lib. 16. Cod. Theod.
abridged but by Julian the Apostata. A copy of one decree of Constantine is in
Eusebius. Those things that Lib. 10. c. 5.
belong to the right of other, we will not only not to have retained, but
plainly to be restored. Wherefore our will and pleasure is, that so soon as thou
shall receive these our letters, if there be any goods belonging to the
Catholic Church of Christians, either in cities or other places, taken in
possession by the citizens, or by any other, that the same presently be
restored in like right, as before they had it. See therefore that all things,
either houses, or gardens, or whatsoever, be with speed restored to the Church
again. By this means, not only the Emperors themselves gave both lands and
many other rich gifts, but also sundry other rich and godly persons.
Constantine gave lands in the country Sabell. Ennead. 7. lib 8.
about Sabine, and an house and a garden at Rome. The same Constan. out of the
tribute of every city, gave a Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 8.
portion to the churches for the maintenance of their Ministers, and
established the^ to continue as a Law for ever. Eusebius writes, that beside
many other benefits ^useb. eccles. hist 10. ca. 7
(as contribution of corn, building of Churches, etc.) he granted to all
Ecclesiastical persons, free immunitie of all services and taxes, saving only
for their lands. For the lands of the Church were Lege tertia. Cod. de episc.
and clericis.
subject to tribute, as other were, by an ordinance made by the sons of the
forenamed Constantine. This may appear also by Ambrose, writing of the second
Valentinian. If he require tribute, we deny it not: Lib. epist. 5. in orat.
cont. Auxentium.
the lands of the Church do pay tribute. The church then had lands, and that a
good while before Ambrose his time, which was about the year of our Lord three
hundred sixty and eight. Yea, Ambrose himself lived by his own lands being
Bishop. Therefore it may appear he did not think it to be against the word
of God, for a Bishop or Minister of the Church to live upon the reuenewe of
lands.

After the time of Constantine, the wealth of the Church increased, as well in
lands as other substance and provision, not only by the gifts of Emperors,
Kings, and Queens, but partly also (as I have said) by the devotion of other
godly persons, who oftentimes left to the use of the Church, either a Basil.
epist. 140.
great part, or their whole substance and possessions, partly by the gift of
bishops themselves, partly by other ecclesiastical persons, which, because they
were not married, nor had issue or heirs, were by order bound to leave unto
the church, al their possessions, both lands and goods. Sometime also by the
punishment of offe^dors. For it is read, that one Bassus a ge^tleman falsely
accused Sixtus bishop of Rome, and when Platina. Sabell. ennead. 8. lib. ^.
Sixtus had cleared himself in a synod of Bishops, Bassus, for his
slanderous accusation, was banished, and his lands given unto the Church. The
same Sixtus gave lands unto the Church himself also. Crescentius a noble man
gave unto the Church of Rome all his substance, and a manor in Sicilie called
Argianum. Eudotia the Empress, wife to Theodosius, adorned Nieeph lib. 14.
cap. 5.
the Bishops house at Constantinople, and gave unto it a yearly revenue. By
the counsel at Berythe it may appear, the Church of Edessa had rentes,
manours, woods, and plate set with precious stones, etc. This state of wealth
ye church grew unto, not much more then in the space of one hundred years
after it pleased God to give peace unto it from outward and Heathenish enemies:
and yet in the mean time had it other tempests and bitter storms of
adversity, that did more hinder devotion and godliness, then the bloody
persecutions of the Emperors did: as namely the troubles raised by the Aria^
heretics, by the space of many years, and especially in Asia, Greece, and all the East parts of the world. And shortly thereupon followed the horrible
invasion of the Goths, Vandals, Herules, and other barbarous people, which as
swarms came out of the North parts, and with marvelous cruelty overwhelmed
all the west Countries of Europe, to the great hindrance, danger, and
unquietness of the Church of God. After these storms and tempests were
somewhat ouerblowen, the riches of the Church did very much increase, both in
lands and otherwise, by such means as before I have rehearsed. And this
generally I observe in all histories, and in all times, that the wealth thereof
under christian princes was never diminished, but rather increased: nor ever
did they murmr at it, or thought it too much, until the Pope challenged his
usurped dominion, and did seek to bring the necks of Princes under his girdle,
and to alter Empires, Kingdoms, and Principalities at his will and pleasure,
saying, that he had Ius vtriusque gladij, the power of both swords.

Here (I know) some will say, that by mine own confession, I am fallen to
acknowledge that botch that first bredde Antichrist, and set him up into his
throne above Kings and Princes, that is to say, the immoderate wealth of the
Ecclesiastical men, which then did corrupt religion, and so, say they, does it
now with us. No, no (good Christians) they that so say, either are blinded with
ignorance, or look into things with partial eyes, and seek rather a secret
furthering of private purposes, the^ the knowledge of the true causes of that,
whereof they speak. For they that will indifferently consider the states of
times, and with true judgment weigh the circumstances of them, may easily
discern, that it was not the wealth of the Clergy, but other causes of
greater weight and importance, that set up Antichrist aloft in his throne, and
wrought him the dominion of the church, which I pray God may be more carefully
looked unto among us, then yet I perceive that they have been: especially if we
mean so earnestly to keep away from us the return of his corruption, as many
now would seem to do.

The first cause that advanced Antichrist, was The true causes that set up
Antichrist.
Schism and here sie in the Church, for the space of 200. years and more,
together with the barbarous irruptions which before I spoke of. The second
cause was, the general decay of learning, and especially of the knowledge of
the Scriptures, and of the tongues. Thirdly, the usurpation of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, practiced against Emperors and Princes, by which he conquered
more then by all other means. The helping causes to these principal, were
these two: first, the negligence, the unskillfulness, the unworthiness of many
emperors and governors, given over rather to wantonness and voluptuous
pleasures, then to the care of their charge: and secondly, the superstitious
devotion of the people, maintained by corrupt doctrine. But the graund cause of
al causes was, the just judgment of God, for the general unthankfulness of
the world, in receiving the knowledge of his gospel, which he sent among them.

And this cause was universal in all estates and kinds of persons, as well
ecclesiastical as other. The bishops and Ministers were given over to
maintain factions and heretical doctrines: Princes looked more to their
sensual pleasure, then to the godly government of their subjects: the people
were bent wholly to superstition and wickedness of life, so that (a small number
only excepted) none did study how in life and godly conversation, to frame
themselves to the good and wholesome doctrine of the Gospel, which at the hand
of many godly men, they at the beginning had received. Sundry of these or the
like causes have we now also growing and increasing among us: and therefore have
we great cause to fear the like just judgment of God, that either shall cast
us again under the tyranny of Antichrist, or bring upon us some plague no
less grievous then that is.

Our ministers and Preachers break out to Schismatic factions and curious
doctrines. The people, in steed of superstitious devotion, have conceived an
heathenish contempt of Religion, and a disdainful loathing of the ministers
thereof. Vice and wickedness ouerwhelmeth all states and conditions of men.
None almost, unless it be some that God reserueth to his secret knowledge,
study to show themselves thankful to God, and in life to express that, which
in doctrine they will seem to approve. I pray God, that by abusing this long
suffering of the Lord, we heap not up wrath for our selves against the day of
wrath. God has dealt as mercifully with this land, as ever he did with any. I
beseech him, that in time we may repent with Niniue, and turn to him in
sackcloth and ashes, while he may be found, and while he stretches unto us
the hand of his gracious goodness, least when it is too late, and he has
turned his face from us, we cry unto him with vain gronings, and mourn with
unprofitable sighings. He sent the light of his truth into this Realm, first
in the time of King Henry the eight, and brake the power of Antichrist among
us: but because he saw neither thankful receiving of the Gospel, nor any
thing studied for by men generally, but the benefit of Abbey lands, and
possessions, to enrich themselves: he by and by cut off the comfortable
sweetness of his word, with the bitter savor of the six articles, and sharp
persecution of them that professed true religion.

His justice in deed could no longer abide the full ripeness of the
superstition, idolatry, and wicked life of the Monks and Friars, and such
other swarms of Antichristian impiety: but our unthankfulness deserved not to
have the same turned to our benefit, nor the freedom of his Gospel to be
continued among us to our further comfort.

In the time of that gracious Prince king Edward the sixth, he gave us a larger
taste of his word and a greater freedom of all points of sound and true
christian doctrine, to our inestimable benefit, if we could have received it
accordingly. But even then also, he perceived, that we sought not so much the
increase of his glory, or to frame our lives according to our profession, as
we did study under countenance of religion, by all means we could, to work
again our own worldly benefit and commodity. And therefore did he the
second time take from this realm his fatherly blessing, and cast upon us that
heavy scourge of persecution, which immediately followed, keeping us under the
rod of his correction by the space of certain years.

Nevertheless, as a merciful Father, declaring that by his chastening he
sought not our confusion but our amendment, even for the glory of his names
sake only, beyond all hope and expectation, he showed us again the light of
his countenance, and that more favorably and bountifully then ever he did
before, raising for us as it were out of the dust of death, a noble Queen, a
gracious Prince, as a nurse or protectresse of his church: Under the shadow of
whose wings, although but a virgin, he keeps us in great safety and
quietness, against all the ancient enemies, both of his church, and of our
natural country. Notwithstanding all this, our old unthankfulness and
forgetfulness of our duty still continues, and we show our selves the same
men that ever we did before.

And therefore beside the earnest preaching of his word, calling us continually
to repentance, who seeeth not, diverse times he has shaken the rod of his
displeasure over us? as in the Northren rebellion, and in many signs and
tokens from heaven, thereby, if it were possible, to waken us out of our sinful
security, wherein we sleep so confidently? Yea, and the more to keep us in
fear, he has made us to nourish in our bosoms the apparent instrument of his
wrath, by who^ we could not choose but see, that in a moment he might have
taken from us both the comfort of his Gospel, and the freedom and happiness of
our state. Here must I put you in mind again of his exceeding mercies showed
toward us eue^ in these few months, delivering us from the bloody cruelty of
our enemies.

But to what effect, I pray you, comes all this careful working of our
merciful God, by fair means and foul means thus laboring to draw us unto
him? Does it quicken in us the care of our salvation? does it increase the
fear of his displeasure? does it stir up any more zeal and ^oue of his
Gospel? has it any thing diminished our uncharitable strife and contention?
does it any thing ab^^e the obstinacy of the adversary? has it any way
diminished the loosenes of our living? has it taken from us our pride in
apparel? our daintines in feeding our wastfull and pompous building? has it
made less any evil among us, and not rather increased every thing, to an
higher degree then ever it was before? Shall we think then, that this our
insensible dullness and unthankfulness, can be without imminent punishment?
Surely, me thinks the song of Esaias the Prophet painteth out our state and
condition with the event that will follow of it. The Lord Esaias. 5.
has chosen this land, as his beloved vineyard, he has mounded it with his
gracious favor and divine protection, he has stoned it by casting out the
rubble of the Synagogue of Antichrist, the broken stones I mean, of idolatry,
superstition, false doctrine, and corrupt worship of God: he has planted
among us the sweet grape of his most wholesome Gospel, and the true vine
Christ Jesus: he has set up a watch Tower of Christian gournement, and a wine
press of earnest preaching of repentance, to press and wring men's hearts, if
it were possible, to yield forth the sweet juice of the fruits of the gospel
to the glory of God. And he long has looked, (for these his great benefits)
that we should have brought forth sweet grapes, and we have yielded nothing
but sour and stinking fruit, discord and dissension among our selves,
covetousness, oppression, extortion, drunkenness, banqueting, voluptuous
pleasure, whoredom, adultery, security in sin, contempt of God, disdain
of his Minister, despising of his word, selfe-liking in our own ^oings,
confidence and trust in our own wisdom and policy etc. I pray God therefore
in time we may take heed of that heavy judgment that follows, I mean,
that he will take away the ^edge, and break down the wall of his mighty
protection, whereby only we have hitherto remained safe, and that he will
lay us waste that the beasts of the field may ouertrample us: that he will
take from us the teaching and preaching of his Gospel, vvherevvith in vain
he has so long dug and delued in our barraine hearts: that he will
forbid the clouds of his heavenly providence to rain down upon us his
great and manifold blessings, which beforetime he has given us, so that we
shall be left as a desolate ground, breeding nothing but bushes and brambles of
ignorance, error, idolatry, superstition, heresy and wicked life, and be
made subjects and slaves unto our greatest enemies. The Lord turn away that,
which our unthankful hearts may justly fear to be at hand. etc.

By this that I have written, as I doubt not but the godly may perceive it was
not riches and wealth of the Clergy that first set up Antichrist in the
usurped throne of his dominion over the Church, but that there were other more
true and right causes that bredde that mischief: so likewise that conscience,
that fears God, and without affection looks into the state of this time
among us, and rightly weighs and considers things, may easily judge, that
it is not the Lands and great livings of bishops and Ecclesiastical persons,
but other matters, more heinous and more grievous, that will haste^ the wrath
and displeasure of God against this realm, which indeed, it behooves bishops
principally, and all other in their states and conditions to have care of, and
in time, while we may, by all godly means to prevent it.

The affection of them, which at this day speak so much against the Lands and
liuinges of Bishops, and other Clergy men, is much like the dealing of those
persons, that murmured against Marie of Bethania, which in the house of Simon
the leper, in testimony of her thankfulness, for the great mercies that she
had received of Christ, powered upon his head the precious ointment of
Spikenarde. For even in like manner our gracious Queen, when God had
delivered her out of the jaws of the greedy Lions, and cruel wolves that
sought her blood, and by his mighty hand had set her in the throne of this her
Fathers kingdom: to testify her thankful mind, and to show her liberal
and bountiful heart toward the Church of GOD, she powered upon it this
plentiful gift, toward the maintenance of the Ministers and Preachers of his
word, that she might declare to the world, that in embracing the Gospel,
and restoring the same to this Realm, she had not that mind and affection,
which some other have showed, that is, under color thereof, to make the
increase of her own benefit, and the commodity of her Crown. But as then
Judas and some other Disciples murmured at Marie, and under pretense of
holiness and charity toward the poor, found great fault with that
superfluous excess (as they thought it) even so now, many Disciples among us,
with like color of religion and holiness, and of zeal toward the perfection
of the Church (forsooth) murmr at the liberal benefit of our prince, which
she has bestowed upon the Church, and think the same a great superfluity,
that might be better employed sundry ways, to the benefit of the common
weal. Whatsoever is pretended, I pray God the cause of the grief be not the
same that John (...). 12.
mentions to have been that, which first began the murmuring at that time.
But whatsoever is the cause of this reproouing of the liberality of our
gracious prince and sovereign: if the time did now serve, I could with better
reason and authority prove the Contrary Proposition to that which they take
upon them to maintain: that is, That it is not lawful to bestow such livings
upon Lay men, as are appointed by godly laws for Ministers and Preachers of
the word of God. But the shortness of the time will not now serve to follow
that course.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1589.


