MORE WORK FOR A MASS PRIEST.

NVMBERS. 25. 16, 17, 18, verse. The Lord spoke unto Moses, Vex the
M^dianites, and suite them: For they trouble you with their wiles. depiction of
printers and press ALIIS SERVIEMVS, NOSMETIPSOS CONTERIMVS.



LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES, dwelling in Red-crosse street.

1621.

TO THE READER.
REader, in this Pamphlet, among other things, then shall find (...) proved,
that according to Popery, A man may eat his god with his teeth, as Homer.
Odys. lib 9.
Cyclops ate Ulysses companions: and that a subject may kill his King, as 1.
King. 16. 9. 10.
Zimri did his Master: and that one man may deceive and cozen another, as the
Joshua 3. 9.
Gibeonites did Joshua. Besides, thou shall find it proved, that the Papists make
of no sins, grievous sins; and of grievous sins, no sins, or at most
but venial sins. Yea thou shall find it proved, that the Papists make of
grievous sins, rare virtues: and that their Pope (Saint Paul's 2. The (...) 2.
3.
man of sin) takes upon him to forgive sins past, and sins to come.
Further, thou shall find it proved, that they equal the virgin Marie unto
Christ in many respects; and prefer her before him in some respects: not
considering the truth of Haere^ co^^^a Col*y^id^^n^s.
Epiphanius speech, Par detrimentum verae Religioni afferunt, illi qui vilem B.
Virginem habent, and illi qui vltra fas eius gloriam adaugent: They are equally
too blame, who vili^ie the Virgin, and who dei^ie her. Thou shall find it
proved, that Papists profess more dislike of Protestants, then either of
Turk, Jew, or In^ide^^^ and that they esteem of them no otherwise then of
(...) hat^, of whose salvation there is no more hope the^ of Lucifers. These
things, and some other of like (...) thou shall find herein proved against the
Papists, out of their own Authors. Which, if thou be a Protestant, may help
to keep thee from falling unto Popery: and if thou be a Papist, may help to
recover thee from Popery; which are the two only ends I aim at in suffering
it to pass to the Press. And this is all that by way of preface I have to say
unto thee, besides, Farewell.

GO, little book, make speed, apply the season,
Propound thy Quaerees with undaunted cheer:
Bid learned Priests and Cardinals speak reason 2. Pet. 2. 12.
.
The vulgar dare not read, but make them hear.
Yea give a challenge to the triple Crown,
Bid them reply, or cast their bucklers down.
E. W.

MORE WORK FOR A MASS.
PRIEST.
1 SIr Priest, I pray you tell me of what Order of Priests you are; whether of
the Order of Auron, or of the Order of Melchisedek, or of the Order whereof the
Priests of Baal were. Saint Paul witnesses, that Heb. 7. 12.
Aarons priesthood is changed; and that Melchisedeks is such, as Verse. 23. 24*
passes not from one unto another: so that (for any thing I see) you must hold
of Baal.

2 By your doctrine, sir Priest, when your number is so increased, as that you
be able to make your part good against our noble King, you are bound in
conscience to rebel. For, Philopat. Resp ad edict pro^^^lgat. 29 Nou^^b. A^.
D^m. 1591. sect. 2 nit. 157. page 149.
Est certum, and deside, quemcunque Principem C^ristianu^^ si a religione
Catholica manifest deflexerit, and alios auocare voluerit, ex^idere statim ab
omni potestate ac dignitate, and subditos posse ac deber^ (si vires habeant)
istiusmodi hominem dominatu abijcere. According to your divinity then* there
is nothing that excuses you from present blame, in that you rebel not, but
want of sufficient means, which is confessed by Dominicus Bannes the chief
Profossor of Divinity at Salamanca in Spain: for, Excusandi Anglicani and
Saxonij fideles qu* non se eximunt a potestate superiorum, nec bellum contra
illos gerunt: quoniam communiter non habent facul^atem ad haec bell a gerenda
contra Principes, and imminent illis grauia pericula: The faithful of England
and Saxony (says In 2. 2* Tho. q. 12. Art. 2. col. 467. edit. Romans ^nno 1586.
he, meaning Papists) are to be excused, in that they do not exempt themselves
from the power of their superiors, nor bear Arms against them, because
generally they have no ability to wage such wars against their Princes, and
great danger does hang over their heads if they should attempt it. Now you
Priests labor to increase your number, and so your means, do you not? And
do you not thereby labor to hasten rebellion? Speak out Priest, say the
truth, shame the Devil, and save the credit of your Religion if you can. Is
not your Religion and Treason so linked together, that you cannot play the
Priests, but you must play the Traitors also?

3 Men say, that your Conue^^. part 2. chap. 12. sect. 16.
Parsons commends those Rebels as sufferers for Religion, who were up in arms
against king Edward the sixth, in the third year of his reign, and for that
insurrection justly slain, and put to death. Men say, that your Motive 15.
Bristoe commends those Northern men, who were put to death for their
rebellion against Queen Elizabeth, in the eleventh year of her reign, for
Martyrs, yea glorious Martyrs. And I am sure, that that Catholic priest, who
made the Printed 1608.
Catalogue of late Martyrs in England, which is annexed to the English
Martyrologe, has registered therein Garnet and Oldcorne, two of the
powder-traitors for Martyrs. And that at Louaine, a Papist, in a Panegyricke
Oration made there, prayed publicly to Garnet thus: S. Henrice, intercede pro
nobis: Saint Henry, we pray thee pray for us. And I The state of the English
Fugitives, page 123
read that Clement the I^cobin, who killed Henry the third of France, by
sheathing a knife in his belly, is canonized for a Martyr: and that Refutation
of Cottons letter, page 14.
Gutgnard, who was put to death for commending Clemens his fact as heroical,
is canonized for another Martyr. Does not this your commending of Rehels and
Traitors, argue your affection to Rebellion and Treason?

4 You, sir Priest, hold it meritorious to kill Princes. The Monk who poisoned
our King John, Ioh. Mayor de gest. Scot. l. 4. c. 3
Regem perimere meritorium ratus est, thought it a charitable deed to kill him.
Th^anus hist. lib. 79. ad (...) 1584.
He that killed the Prince of Orange in the year 1584. could not be persuaded
that he had sinned in killing him, sed potius ea meruisse, vt rect a in coclum
tendere^; but rather, that he had deserved thereby to go straight to heaven.
The Jesuits at Auspurge and Triers, and a Franciscan at Torney, had so well
schooled him before, that his fact was commendable; and so fully assured him,
that if he were put to death for the same, in Martyrum numero collecatum iri,
he should be counted for a Martyr. Arn^ult in his pleading against the
Jesuits.
Parry, who intended the murder of our ever renowned Queen Elizabeth, was
encouraged thereunto by Anniball Codreto a Jesuit, who told him he could not
do a more meritorious work, then kill a Prince excommunicated by the Pope, and
that the Angels would carry him up into heaven. Yta Parry was encouraged
thereunto by a See B. Bilson of the Supremacy, part 3. and Stowes Chron. ad
ann. 1584.
letter from Cardinal de Como; wherein his resolution was ascribed to the
motion of a good Spirit: and wherein the Cardinal did promise him, in the Pope
his masters name, besides consideration in earth, merit in heaven. Arnault in
his Pleadings against the Jesuits.
Barriere, who attempted the killing of Henry the fourth of France, was
encouraged thereto by Varade a Iosuite, who assured him that he could not do
a more meritorious work in the world. Are not Papists rare Jewels, and much to
be esteemed of by Kings?

5 It is written in your own books, that Platina de vit Pontif in vit. Greg.
3. p Idem in vita Greg. 7.
Gregory the third deposed Leo the third of his Empire, for defacing of Images
in Churches: And that P Gregory the seventh deposed Henry the fourth of the
Empire, for commanding the Cardinals to repair to him to choose a new Pope:
And Cromerus de ^cbus gestis Polon. lib. 4.
Bo'eslaus the second, King of Poland, for killing of a Bishop. It is written
in your own books, that c. 15. q. 6. Alius.
Pope Zachary deposed Childericke king of France, for that he was not so fit for
government as Pipin was; and that Platina in vita Bonifac. 8.
Boniface the eight deposed Philip of France, for appealing from him to a
general Council. It is written in your own books, that Antonin. hist. part.
3. tit. 19. cap. 1. sect. 3.
Innocent the third deposed Otho the fourth, for that, contrary to his oath,
he invaded the Churches patrimony: and our King John of England, for that
I^h. Mayor. de ^est. Scot. lib. 4. cap. 3.
he sought not Absolution at his hands, when the whole Realm stood interdicted.
It is written in your own books, that Decretal. in sext. cap. ad. Agostoli^ae
de sen^entia et reiudicata.
Innocent the fourth deposed Frederike the second, for apprehending his
Cardinals and Bishops as they were going to a Council called by him; and that
See Carerius de potest. Romans Pont. l. 2. cap. 19 nis 27.
Gregorte the tenth took the Eastern Empire from Baldwin the second, who was
lawful heir to it, and gave it to Michael Pael^eologus, who had no color of
right to it. And that Massonius de v^bis Episcop. lib. 6. in vita Ioh 21 et
Clem. 6.
Clemens the sixth deposed Lewis the fourth of Bauaria, for holding opinion,
that the Emperor might depose the Pope, and place another in his room. It is
written in your books, Cromerus da gest. Polon. l. 27.
that George King of Bohemia was deposed by Paul the second for heresy. And
that Antonius Nebrissensis de bello Nauarre^si* cap. 1. 2. 3.
John King of Navarre was deposed by Julius the second, for favoring Jews the
twelfth of France, whom the Pope had deuounced a schismaticke: and that our
Saunders de schismat. Angl. lib. 1. page 108. edit. 1586.
King Henry the eight was deposed by Paul the third, especially for beheading
the Bishop of Rochester: and Queen Elizabeth, for supposed heresies, by three
of your Popes, one after another, viz. by Pius the fifth, Gregory the
thirteenth, and Sixtus the fifth. So bold have your Popes been with Kings and
Emperors de facto. But which concerns Emperors and Kings more to take
knowledge of, it is written in your books, that your Pope has right, Plagina
in vita Greg. 7.
Imperia, regna, principatus, and quicquid habere mortales possunt, auserre and
dare: to dispose of Empires, kingdoms, principalities, and whatsoever any man
living has. As according to your learning, he may Tract. de Ro^. Eccles.
primat apud B^^niam, to. 1. Cone. p 20.
Aperire and claudereianuas regni coeles^is quibus volueri^: open the gates of
heaven to whom he list, and shut out of heaven whom he list: so he may Auferre
and confer regna quaecunque quibus licet, take the Crown from any Kings
head, and set it on another man's head at his pleasure. For, as In vit. B^nif. 8.
Platina witnesses, Boniface the eight endeavored to persuade men so. If an
Emperor or King be Azor. instit. Moral. part. 2. lib. 10. cap. 2. 2.
Quaeritur, etc. 8. 3. Quaritur.
haereticus, vel schismaticus, vel fautor, vel receptator, vel defensor
haereticorum vel schismaticorum: an heretic, or schismaticke, or favorer of
heretics or schismatickes. If an Emperor or King be a Mosconius de maiestat
E^^l. sm^litantis, lib. 2. de Impertal Reg. and princip. part. 1. cap. 2. pa.
661.
tyrant; and, Ibidem.
tenens regnum contra formam iur is, and m^ntem P^pae, dicitur Tyrannus: He
who has his kingdom contrary to the Popes law and the Popes liking, is a
tyrant.) If an Emperor or a King be a sacrilegious person, k Ibid. page 660.
that is, such a one as goes about to infringe the liberties, immunities and
privileges of the Church, either by laying hands on Ecclesiastical persons or
Wide Azor. and Mosco^. lo^is cit.
their goods; or taking unto himself l Ecclesiastica iura, to be governor next
under Christ, of those particular Churches which are within his territories. If
they despise Claues Ecclesiae, the Popes Suspensions, Interdictions,
Excommunications. If they forbid Episcopos and Clertcos suo officto fungi,
Popish Bishops or Priests to say Mass. If they do homines excellentes sine
causa perimere, hang Priests who came into their kingdoms, to steal the
hearts of their subjects unto the Pope. If they do Sapientes de regno remouere,
banish popish priests out of their dominions. If they dissolve Societates aut
congregationes ad sancte honest que viuend^m: that is, Monasteries and
Nunneries. If they Albericus in Lege been d Zero^e de quadr. praescrips.
oppress or grieve populos sibi subject os, their subjects. If they govern
their kingdoms Albericus in di^tionario, verbo Para.
negligenter, ignaue, inepte, and inutiliter, carelessly and unprofitably. If
Mosein. lib. cit, page 601.
leges contra Ecclesiae libertatem aut permittunt aut condunt, they either make
any law against the liberty*. of the Church, or suffer any such law made by
some of their predecessors to stand in force. If they Glossa in c. Si Papa. d.
40.
commit any sin, and will not be admonished, by your booke-learning, they are
but gone men, they have forfeited their estates into your Popes hands; yea
though there be no fault in them, yet for Carerius lib. 2. de potestat. Romans
pont. cap. 19. nu. 27.
publicum bonum, if it tend to the Popes profit, he may vncrowne them, and
bestow all they have upon such, who had no title in the world to any part
thereof, before the Pope gave them all. And does not this argue, That Kings, by
your learning, are in worse case then Copyholders?

6 By your doctrine, sir Priest, Symancha instit cathol. cap. 45. nu. 13.
there is just cause to make war against heretics: by Heretics, you
meaning Protestants. By your doctrine, Allan against the execution of justice.
cha. 3
There is no war so just and honorable, be it civil or foreign, as that
which is waged for the preserving and propagating of your Religion. By your
doctrine, Vide Thuam. hist. lib. 42. ad ann 1585.
there can be no peace, yea, there ought to be no peace made with Sectaries.
Idem lib 65. ad ann. 1577.
Sectaries, that is, in your language, Protestants are more eagerly to be
pursued with fire and sword then Turks. And Symancha in loco cita^^.
when war is once proclaimed, any private man (according to your doctrine) may
take, spoil, kill such Sectaries, and burn their houses over their heads.
Thus you. Paulus Windebek in delib. de haret. extirp. page 414.
professing further, that when the Princes of your Religion make league with
Protestant Princes, they make them only for their own advantage: as for
example, to dispatch some by-businesses, which hinder them from falling upon
the Protestants with their whole forces. Now this being thus, Have not
Protestant Princes and their* subjects just cause to stand upon their guard;
and neither to trust to League with Popish Prince, nor friendship with popish
pesant? especially if it be true, which is further reported, viz.

7 That your famous Bishop Symancha writes, Instit. cathol. cap 45. nu. 14.
impress. Valissoleti, An. 1552.
Haereticis fides a prinato data seruanda non est: Faith made to an heretic by
a private person is not to be kept. A private person may reucale an heretic to
the Inquisitors, Non obstance side aut iuramento, though he has bound himself
by his oath to the contrary. And, Nec fides a magistra^^bus data seruanda est
haereticis: Faith made to heretics by the magistrates, is not to be kept. For
so some say, your Symancha says, proving his assertion by this, Ibidem.
that in the Council of Constance John Hus and Hiero^^ of Prague were justly
burned, albeit the Magistrate had given safe conduct. And that your Pope Martin
the fifth writ to Alexander Duke of Lituania, Apud Cochlaenm lib. 5 hist.
Hussitarum.
Scito te mortaliter peccare si seruabis fidem datam haereticis: Know thou
sinnest mortally if thou keep thy oath with heretics. And that your Divines
in France, An. 1577. Thuanus hist. lib 63. ad ann. 1577.
Aperto capite in concionibus, and eunlgatis scriptis, ad fidem sectar ijs
seruandam non ^bligari Principem contendebant, allato in eam rem Cont.
Constant. decreto: taught publikly both in the Pulpit and in the Press, That
Princes were not bound to keep touch with Sectaries, alleging to that end the
Council of Constance. For, If oaths bind not, farewell trust with you. And
the rather, for that

8 It is generally reported you teach, A man framing to W. W. in his sparing
discovery of English Jesuits and father Parsons proceedings, p. 11. printed
an. 1601.
himself a true proposition when he is asked a question, may conceal as much
thereof as he thinks good. As for example, If one of you should be examined,
whether if the Pope did come in warre-like manner, to invade this Realm by
force, he would take the Popes part, or the Kings: that man framing this answer
in his mind; I will take the Kings part, if the Pope will command me so to
do, may give this answer lawfully: I will take the Kings part, concealing the
rest, and so delude the Examinate. In like manner, Nauar. in manuaeli cap. 12.
n^. 18. et Petrus Giuuar^ in compend. m. n. Nauar. nu. 18. cap. 11.
if one of you having Horse and Money, should be importuned by one of your
honest friends, to whom you were not bound by law to give or lend: to lend him
Horse or Money; you framing this proposition in your mind, I have neither Horse
nor Money to give or lend, may safely swear, You have neither Horse nor Money,
and keep the rest to your self, and so mock your friend. Yea, it is said you
teach, that without any mental reservation you may absolutely deny some
truths. For, Confitens non peccat mortaliter qui negat se admisisse peccatum
mortale alias legitime confessum: That man sins not mortally, who having
shriuen himself of some mortal sin, denies afterward that he was ever
guilty of that sin. Nauaer. in ma^^. cap. 21. nu. 38.
According to your learning: Sa in Aphor. tit. de testibus.
Quod solum audisti, potes testificari te nescire: Thou may say thou know
not that, which is known to none but thee. Soto relect. memb. 3. q. 3. p. 306.
If one of you see ^eter kill John, and come to be examined upon the point, if
no body else saw, you may answer, that you know not whether Peter killed John
or not, according to your divini^e. For, Can such aequivocation by mental
reservation, and blunt denial of known truths, stand with plain dealing,
truth and honesty?

9 Ipsoiure priuatos esse haereticos omni debito side* litat is, dominij,
obligationis, and obsequij quoillis quic^^nque tenebantur astricti. That
heretics are deprived by law of all fidelity, authority, bond and service,
which any man owes them, is Symanch. instit. cathol. cap. 45. nu. 27. and 28.
current doctrine among you. Children, and servants, and subjects to heretics,
owe no duty to their parents, masters, er sovereigns. Good wives need not
lie with their husbands. Such as are indebted, need not pay their debts to
their Creditors. Keepers of forts and towns may surrender them into the
enemies hands. And this being thus, Can you be angry if Protestant Princes, and
their subjects, who have wives, children, servants, and money in other men's
hands, do wish you all, Vltra Garamantas and Indos, in the unknown world?
Especially seeing

10 You dubbe us with the name of Heretic, Brist* motive 2. and 4.
affirming that we are to be detested as heretics. You Azor. instit. moral.
par. 1. l 8. c. 16. 13. quaritur.
forbid your Bishops, your Archbishops, your Patriarchs, your Cardinals,
(except they be Inquisitors, or Commissioners appointed by your Pope to sit
upon heresy) the reading, yea the keeping of any of our books. You cannot
abide that one good word should be spoken of us: For, Epitheta honorifica, and
omnia in l^udem haereticorum deleantur: Let all honorable Epithites, and
whatsoever else in praise of heretics, be blotted out, Ind. lib. prohib de
correct. lib. sect. 2.
lay you. If In addit. ad Eusebij chro^. ad an. 1521.
Vlcichus Hutten a Protestant be commanded for Eques Germaniae doc^issimus and
poeta laud^* tissimas: a learned Knight and excellent Poet: I^ Ibid. ad ^n.
1525. a Beutheri fas^is mense Martie, die 3.
Frederike Duke of Saxony a Protestant be termed, Illustrissimus,
Sapientissimus, and Christianissimus Princeps: an illustrious, wise, and
Christian Prince: If our Edward the sixth be found praised, as Ibid. mense
Iulio, die 6.
admirande in dolis adoleseens, a young Prince of admirable towardliness,
there shall Index Hispan. lib expurg. p. 93 (...) 148.
deleatur be set upon the places. In the next impressions such commendations
must be put out. Yea you cannot find in your hearts, that our bare names should
be remaining in any books, Azor. lib* supra cit. 17. quaritur.
unless we be named per ignominiam and contemptum, with reproach and shame: and
such is your further hatred to our Princes, that you forbid the reprinting of
such Dedicatory Epistles as learned men have prefixed before their books for
the eternizing of the memory of our Princes; witness hereof your Index Hisp.
lib. ex purg fol. 98. et 150.
note of detrahatur, reijci^tur, deleatur, set upon three several Epistles,
written by Hadrianus Iunius, and Johannes Serranus, to our late Queen
Elizabeth, and to James, by the goodness of God, our present King. And so far
are you from approving of the keeping of a Picture, either of Prince or People,
that you account it, Azor. lib* et cap. suprac^^aio v^t. quaricur.
though it be kept in a Closet, a great presumption, that the keeper thereof
smells of heresy. And such is your burning charity toward us all, that you
adiudge us to the bottomless pit of hell. Certain it is, that whosoever in
this new faith and service has ended this life, is in hell most certainly
(says Motive 36.
Brist^^.) Fieri nequit vt Luther anus moriens saluetur, Gehennam euadat, and
aeternts ignibus eripiatur: si mentior, damner ipse cum Lucifero. Let me be
damned in Hell with the Devil, if any Lutheran be saved; if any Lutheran
escape Hell, says Reso. ad refut. ^uc. Osiand* proposit. 8. page vlt.
Costerus.

11 Bibi. sanct. la* verbo Traditiones.
Sixtus Senensis reports, That the Jews are bound to rail upon all Christians
thrice every day: and to pray God he will root out all Christians, with their
Kings and Princes from under Heaven. Sixtus reports, That the Jews are
commanded to account no otherwise of Christians then of beasts: that they
hold it lawful to spoil Christians of their goods, and to bereave them of
their lives, to pull down their Churches, to burn their Gospel. Yea he
reports they belch out such blasphemies against Christ, as are fearful to
think on, in no case to be spoken of. And yet I read you hold that Maldonat.
comment. in Ioh* 4. 9.
we are* acerb^ores hosts Christi, and multo magis detestandi: more bitter
enemies to Christ, and much more to be detested than they are: that it is more
dangerous to have any thing to do with us, than with them. And I hear your
Pope licenseth them to have Synagogues in Rome, even under his nose: whereas
we can not be allowed to have a Chapel in any place where he swayeth. Now I
desire, that either some rhyme or reason may be given, to justify your iu
stifying of the Jews before us.

12 By your doctrine, he sins not, who has probable reason for that which
he does. For, Non peccat is qui probabiliter licere id existimat quod agit;
says a Eudamon in apolog. pro Hen. Garncto. cap. 10. nu. 2.
Jesuit. And, by your doctrine, he has probable reason for that which he does,
who has the opinion of Author of the Treatise of Equivocation, cap. 4.
two or three, yea of Azor. instit. moral. par. 1. cap. 17. 5. qu^r^ur.
one grave Author. For, in foro conscientiae ad effectum non peccandi sufficit
eligere pro vera eius opinionem, quem merito cense^^us essevir^m ideneum ad id
scientia and conscientis, says In Man. cap. 27. (...) 288.
N^^arrus. Now does it not herehence follow, that he who has the opinion of
Lib. 1. de Rogu. cap. 7.
John Mariana touching the lawfulness of poisoning Kings, may poison Kings
without sin* He that has the opinion of him who made the Approved by
Blackwel circa an. 1602.
book touching the lawfulness of Aequiuocation, may equivocate without sin?
He that has the opinion of Apud Casaub. in epist. ad Frentonem Duc. page 140.
Binetus the Jesuit, touching the necessity of concealing Confession, may
conceal, without sin, whatsoever is confessed, though that concealing cost
all the Kings in Christendom, yea in the world, their lives? What villainy
approved by any of your Writers or Divines, may not lawfully be practiced,
though thousands be of another opinion, according to this your doctrine?

g Bellar* lib. 4. de verbo Der no^ scripto* cap. 2.
13 You teach, that the word of God is partly written, partly unwritten: And
the written word you call Scripture, the unwritten Tradition: yet you undertake
to prove diverse of your opinions both by Scripture and by Tradition. As for
example, Praying to Saints: praying for the dead: setting up of Images in
Churches, and worshipping them when they are set up: Christ's descention into
hell: the Virgin Mary's perpetual virginity, etc. Now I would know with what
honesty you can allege Scripture for that which you say is a tradition, or
tradition for that which you say you have Scriptures? Can one* and the same
truth be written, and not written?

14 You teach, that Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo non scripto* cap. 8.
it was not meet all m^steries should be written in Scripture, Costerus apo^.
pro 1. par. E^c^. contra Goma^^* (...) 2.
lest every ordinary person should come to the knowledge of them; and because
of the commonnesse of them, contemn them. Now I desire to know, why the
mysteries of the Trinity should be written in Scripture, rather then those
mysteries you speak of, if there be such danger that ordinary persons should
attain to the knowledge of whatsoever is written in Scripture; and upon their
knowledge of them, should contemn them. Secondly I desire to know, why it
should be less meet that the mysteries you speak of should be written in
Scripture, then in the Fathers, and in your Catechismes? Ordinary persons are
as like to come to the knowledge of them by reading, if not the Fathers, yet of
your Catechismes, wherein you discourse of them at large, as if they were
written in Scripture. Are they not, think you?

15 Men say, you teach, that Ioh. de Rada par. 2. Theol. cont^ou* inter Scotu^
(...) Tho. cont 20. act. (...) conclus. 6.
Licet praceptum praelati sit irrationale, and pro tali merito quandoque haberi
potest, tenetur tamen subditus illud obseruare: Though the commandment of the
superior be unreasonable, and may well enough be thought so, yet the inferior
is bound to obey it. Men say, you teach, Bellar. lib. 4. de To. Pont. cap. 5.
and Carerius de potest. Pont. l b. 1 c. 23. number 16.
Si Papa erraret pracipiend^ vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia
credere vitia esse bona, and virtutes malas, nis^vellet contra conscientiam
peccare: that if the Pope should err in commanding vice, and forbidding
virtue, the Church was bound to believe (unless she would sin against her
conscience) that vice was commendable, and virtue dispraisable. Bar^. de
potest. Pa^. cap. 41. p. 341.
Men are bound Papae sententiam exequi, to put the Popes sentence in execution,
albeit they know it to be unjust. Any man illaesae conscientia, with a good
conscience may execute the Popes unlawful mandate, by your learning. Now I
pray you, how agrees this doctrine with that of the Apostles, Act 5. 29. It is
better to obey God then man?

16 Sir Priest, I read in your books that your Pope is called Cont. Florent.
sell. vlt.
Caput t^tius Ecclesiae, Anton. Pucci^s in orat. habit. sell 9. Cont Lat. sub
L^one 10.
Pater Ecclesiae, Fillius Ecclesiae, Sponsus Ecclesiae, Gretser to 1. defens.
cap. 10. lib. 3 Bell. col. 1450.
Matter Ecclesia: The head of the whole Church, the Father of the Church, the
son of the Church, the Spouse of the Church, the Church our mother. Now I
would know of you, how he can be the Church her self, and yet head of the
Church, and the Churches husband* how can he be Father to the Church, and Did.
63. Ego Ludouicus. Bonifacius Germ. Apostolus in epist. ad Cutbert. Archtep
Cant. apu^ Baron. Annal. to. 9. ad an. 740.
and yet a son of the Church* how without committing incest, the father may
marry his daughter, the brother may marry his sister, the son may marry
his mother?

17 I read in your books, that your Pope is nor only called the Vicar of
Christ, and Successor of S. Peter, but d S. Peter's Vicar, and Sacrar. caerem.
To E^cles. lib 1. sect. 1. Gabriel. Patriarch. Alexan. in admonit. Legatis a
Clem. 8. data. quae habetur ad sinem* Anndl. Baron. to 6. n^. 14. Tho. Aqu^^ de
regimine princip^l 3. cap. 10 Bo^^u^ de temporal. Eccles. monarch. lib. 1. cap.
7.
Christ's Successor in respect of the government of the Church. Now here I
desire to know two things of you; first, how your Pope comes to be S. Peter's
Vicar, seeing S. Peter himself is but a Vicar; and it is a rule in your Law,
Extrade officio Vicari^. Cle^ricos.
Vicarius non potest substituere Vicarium: A Vicar cannot substitute a Vicar.
Secondly, how without blasphemy your Pope can be called Christ's Successor,
seeing he to whom another succeeds in office, does cease himself to bea^e
that office, as Act. 2^*
Felix did cease to be governor in Jury, when Festus came in place to be his
successor. I hope you do not think that Christ, who endures for ever, has
turned over all care of his Church to your Pope.

18 I read in your Genebr. chron. lib. 4. ad an. 1551.
books, that in the year 1552. your Pope was entitled by a certain Patriark
called Siud, The Peter of our time, and the Paul of our days: and that Baron.
ad fine^ to 6. Annal.
Clemens the eight was entitled by one Gabriel Patriarch of Alexandria,
Tertius detimus Apostolorum gloriosi Domini nostri Jesus Christi, and quintus
sanctorum Euangelistarum: The thirteenth Apostle of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and the fifth Evangelist. And that Genebrard approved of the titles
which Siud gave; and Baronius of those which Gabriel gave. Now I desire to know
of you, why Genebrard should like that any Pope should be called the Peter of
our time, seeing Baron. Annal. to. 11. ad an. 1009.
Sergius the fourth, being christened Peter, upon his election to be Pope, in
reverence to S. Peter, renounced the name of Peter, and took the name of
Sergius: and secondly, how Clemens the 8. can with any wisdom be held the
thirteenth Apostle of our Savior Christ, and the fifth Evangelist, considering
there were seven Popes of his own name, and upon the point of 230 Popes of
other names before him. For I cannot hear that he was such an A perse as that
he deserved these titles rather then any of his predecessors. And if all or any
of his predecessors deserved to be called Apostles and Evangelists, Gabriel (in
my opinion) failed in his Arithmeticke, when he termed him the thirteenth
Apostle and the fifth Evangelist.

19 I read in your books, that the jurisdiction of your Pope is boundless: I
His dominion. (as Christ's, Psalm. 72. 8.) is from sea to sea, and from the river
unto the ends of the world: whereas the jurisdiction of the rest of the Clergy
has narrower bounds by much. Yet I read in Hist. lib. 3. cap. 16.
Eusebius of Chrytofersons translations, that in Traians time, Pope Clemens
governed the church of Rome; and John the Evangelist the churches in Asia. Now
I desire to know whether this does not argue, that Pope Clemens jurisdiction
was lesser then S. John's, seeing it is apparent hereby, that Pope Clemens
governed but one Church, and S. John many.

20 I read in your books, Bellar. lib. 1. de To. Pont. cap. 16.
that S. Peter had authority over all the Apostles, and that the Apostles
depended upon him, as upon their head and commander, who was to direct them,
and to go in and out before them, and to chastile them: I read likewise, that
after Saint Peter's death, your Idem. lib. 2. de To. Pont. cap. 12.
Popes succeeded him in tota ipsius dignitate and potestate, in all his dignity
and sovereignty. Now it is evident that diverse of the Apostles suruiued S.
Peter; as namely Baron. Annal. To. 1. ad An. 69. Nu. 34.
S. Andrew, and Sophron. ap^d Baron. de script. Eccl. s. verbo Simon.
S. Simon surnamed the Cananite, (not in regard of his country, but of his
zeal, Chap.
as S. Luke witnesses) and Ierom. de script. Eccl. s. verbo Johannes.
Saint John the Evangelist. Two of these, if not all three, lived till Traians
days, in which time Linus, Cletus, Clemens sat Bishops of Rome. Now my desire
is to know of you, whether you think Linus, Cletus, Clemens challenged any
sovereignty over Saint Andrew, and Saint Simon the zealous, and Saint John the
Evangelist. Me thinks Saint John Ioh. 21. 20.
being the Disciple whom Jesus loved, Saint John being the person who was
allowed to Ioh. 13. 23.
lean on our Saviors breast at the eating of the Passover: S. John being the
man 2* Ioh. 19. 26.
to who^ our Savior x reco^mended his mother at his death: Saint John being
such a one, as that his writings are received for Canonical: me thinks (I say)
Saint John (not to speak of the other two) should not have been underling to
these three Popes. Me thinks he should not have depended upon them as on his
head for direction. Me thinks they should not have had that superiority over
him that they might have chastised him.

21 I read in your books, that an Archbishop and Cardinal of yours, called
Lib. de schismate Pont. inter German. script. p. 703.
Francis Zabarel, who lived about the year 1400. confessed, that certain
flatterers for many ages before his time, and till his time, had persuaded the
Popes, quod omnia possent, and sic, quod facerent quicquid liberet, etiam
illicita, and sic plus quam Deus: they could do all things, and might do any
thing, were it never so unlawful, and by that means they could do more then
God. And to tell you truly, I do verily believe him. For I do find they were
told they might dispense C 15. q. 6. Authoritatem, in Glossa.
contra ius natural, against the law of nature: Extra de coucess. prabend.
proposuit. in Glossa.
contra vetus Testamentum, against the old Testament: and Ibid.
contra Apostolum, against the Apostle Paul. I find they were told, Extra de
translat. Episc. et. Quanto. in Glossa.
De nihilo possent facere aliquid, they might of nothing make something: Ibid.
de iniustitis facere possent iustitiam, they might make wrong right: and Ibid.
in his quae vellent, ijs esse pro ratione voluntatem, they might do as they
list, and no body might say, Ibid.
Domine, cur ^ta facis? I pray you sir, why do you so? I find some taught,
that Test Ioh de Par^s^^^ de potestate Regia and papali, cap 23.
St homitidium Samsonis quod ex se malum est, interpretamu^ quod instinctu
diuino fuit factum, multo magis omne factum sanctissimi Patris interpretari
debemus in bonum: and siquidem fuer it furtum, Vel aliud ex se malum,
interpretari debemas, quod diuino instinct u^siat: If we impute the slaughter
which Samson made of the Philistines to an inspiration of Gods Spirit; much
more are we bound to interpret in the best part whatsoever the holy Father the
Pope does: if it be theft, or any other thing which of it self is evil, (
Did. ^0. Non nos, in Glossa.
as for example murder or adultery) we must likewise impute that to the
inspiration of Gods Spirit. About the time Zabarel speaks of, it seems it
went for current, which is noted by a late Massonus de vrbis Epise. l. 3. in
vita Job 9.
Historian, Episcopos Romanos ne peccata quidem sine laud committere, the Popes
could do nothing, were it never so mischievous, but it was commendable. His
geese were all swan^: his vices were virtues. I read in your books, Mosconius
de maiestate Eccles. militantis. lib. 1. cap 4. p. 97.
that men are bound to worship him with dulia: and that some have professed in
his hearing, Apud Anton. in sum. hist par. 3. tit. 22. cap. 17. sect. 1.
that they worshipped him with hyperdulia: and that in effect many have given
him latriam. For to omit that some have affirmed he was Marcel in orae hab.
sess. 4. Cont. Lat sub Leone 10
alter Deus in terris, a second God upon earth. Ioh. Aug Panthaus Venetus in
Art and Theor. transmutat. Metal. ad Leone^ 10. impress. Venet. an. 1518.
Deus mortalis in terris, and immortalis homo in coelis: a mortal God upon
earth, and an immortal man in the heavens. Baron. Annal. to. 7 ad an. 552.
That he has so much greater power then any of the Prophets, quanto
differentius praeill is nomen hereditauit, viz. Tues Petra, etc. by how much he
has a more excellent name given him then any of them had, to wit, Thou art a
rock. Some of you have given out, that he is, Massaib sup^^ citato cap. 1 p 22
non Deus, non hom^, sed vtrumque, neither God, nor man, but both. Some of you
have styled him, as Ioh. 20, 28.
Saint Thomas did out Savior Christ, with the titles of Extra. Ioh. 22. c. C^^
inter. in Glossa.
Dominus Deus noster, our Lord and God^ and as Apoc. 19. 16.
Saint John likewise did, with Moscon. lib. citato. page 26.
Rex regum, Dominus dominantium, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Some of you
now write, Baron. annal. To. 1. ad An. 57. Nu. 29. ^. Puccius orat. hab. in
sess. 9. Conc. Lat. sub Leont 10.
Christus omnem quam a patre accepit pote^^atem transfudit insuo^^ Christ
passed over all the power which God the Father gave him, unto his, meaning your
Popes. Agreeably to others, who in former ages were not ashamed to tell the
Pope, that z Tibi vni, to him alone was granted all power both in heaven and in
earth. Yea, Steph. Patracensis orat. hab. sess. 10. Conc Lat. jub Leone 10.
that there was in Popes all power supra omnes potestates tam coeli quam terrae,
above all powers both in heaven and in earth. I need not to tell you of the
Bishop who put up a supplication to Pope Nicolas, in these words, Faezellus
hist. Sicul. lib. 8. ca. 4
Miserere meifili David, O son of David have mereie upon me: nor of the
Religious persons who came from Panormi and other parts of Sicily as
Ambassadors to Pope Martin the fourth, to crave his favor, who cried thrice
thus, Antonin. sum. best. part. 3. ^t. 20. cap. 4. sect. 3.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata m^ndi, miserent nobis: O thou Lamb of God who
take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us: nor of him, who in
way of proving your Popes omnipotency, bids his reader note, Viualdus in
candelabro aureo. tit. de Absolutione. Nu. 28.
Quod in concessionibus vtitur illo verbo, Fiat, quo Deus vniuersum creauit
orbema that your Pope in subscribing petitions, uses the word, Let it be, by
which God created the whole world: intimating, that as God, so your Pope by a
word of his mouth may do any thing: nor of them who against the coming of
Paul the third unto the City of Tolentonum in Italy, set this inscription over
the gates, See Morney de Ecclesis, cap. 8. and Mou^ins defense of the King,
chap. 25.
Paulo 3. opt. max. in terris Deo, To Paul the third, the best and greatest God
in earth. Now that which I desire to know of you, is, what difference in
substance there is between many of these speeches concerning your Popes, and
theirs in the Acts of the Apostles, who applauding Herod's oration, cried
amain, Act. 12. 22. ^
Vox Dei and non hominis, the voice of God, and not of man? and whether your
Pope be not as guilty as Herod was, who hearing with his own ears diverse of
these blasphemous speeches, and perhaps all by report, did neither reprove
them, upon his ear hearing them, nor cause them to be razed out of the books
wherein they are written, having knowledge thereof at the second hand?

22 I read in your books, that you have had many unlearned Popes, not much
wiser then the Ga^riel de ^^ralete f^ria 2. btbd. 3. de praparat. c^^fess.
Bishop, who examining one that was to be made Deacon, in stead of asking, Quot
sunt Sacramenta Ecclesiae? how many Sacraments are there in the Church?
demanded, Quot sunt 7. Sacramenta? how many are the seven Sacraments? To whom
the Deacon answering, Tres. The Bishop replied, In quibus? What call you them?
And the Deacon told him, their names were, Thuribulum, Aspersorum, and sancta
Crux. For of Julius the second it is reported, that signing a warrant, in stead
of fiat, he wrote fiatur. And constat plures little adeo illiteratos esse vt
Grammaticam penitus ignorent, It is well known that many of the Popes were so
unlearned, that they knew not-their Grammar rules, says Lib. 1. cap 4. adu
haer^s. in edit. antiq^^^*
Alfonsus de Castro. I read in your books, that some of your Popes were silly
creatures. You had one, whom your Ioh. Andr. Baldus Jason and ser. B^utum
fulmen, page 201.
Canonists usually call, vnum pecus, in eo quod de mane faciebat gratiam, and de
sero reuocabat: a ve^ie Ass: for that in the morning he would grant many men
many kindnesses, and at night revoke them all again. I read in your Gl^ber
Rodul. hist. lib. 5. ca. vlt.
books, that you had one boy Pope of twelve years old, viz. Benedict the
ninth: and a May-pole-morrice-dancer Pope Baron. annal. to. 10. ad an. 955 ^u.
3.
of 18. years old, viz. John 12. alias 13. who made the Lateran a plain
Stews, as Hist. per Europum gest. lib. 6 cap. 6. and 7.
Luitprandus witnesses. I Masson. de vrbis Ep^sc. lib 4. in Ioh. 11. al. 12.
read that John 11. was a bastardly brat of Pope Sergius: and that you had a
See the book entitled Pope soane.
whore Pope called Io^ne. I read you have had Necromanticall Popes, such as
Platin. n vita Siluestri.
Siluester the second, who gave himself to the devil both body and soul,
that he might attain the Popedom. Thief Popes, such as Idem in vita Bo^if. 7.
Boniface the seventh, who robbed Saint Peter's Church: Sodomiticall Popes, such
as Sixtus the fourth, Agrippa de vanitaic s^ent. cap. 64.
who built a famous stews in Rome: Perjured Popes, such as Onuph. addit. ad
Plat. in vita Greg. 12.
Gregory the twelfth. Heretical Popes, such as Honorius the first, condemned
by the Act. 12. and 13
6. and Act 7. in definit. Synods.
7. general Councels for a Monothelite. Atheistical Popes, such as Leo the
tenth, Bale.
who called the Gospel a Fable. Apostaticall Popes, such as those fifty, who
as Chronol lib. 4. sect. 10.
Genebrard writes, entered in, not by the door, but by a posterne gate. I
read that Valla declamat in Donat. Cons^antini.
Recentes summi Pontifices videntur laborare vt quantum prisci fuerunt
sapientes and sanctij tantum isti impij sint and stulti: The later Popes seem
to strive, they may show themselves as very fools and knaves, as the ancient
Popes strove to approve their wisdom and holiness unto the world. Your
Bellarmine confesses, that the later Popes, Chronol. ad an. Christi 970.
Parum solliciti de Rep. took little care how the world went: Ad an. 1026.
A pietate veterum degenerauerunt, are grown out of kind. Your Relect. 4 de
potestate Papa et Conc. propos. 12.
Victoria professes, they are priscis ill is multis partibus inferiores, far
worse then their first predecessors. And in In Formoso 1.
Platina I read, that virtus and integritas defecit, virtue and integrity is
decayed in them: and in Ad an. 954.
Fasciculus Temporum, that sanctitas illos dimisit, holiness has taken her
leave of them. Men of your selves write, Guicciar. hist. lib. 16.
In Pontificibus body nemo sanctitatem requirie: optimi putantur sevel leuiter
boni sint, vel minus mali quam caeteri mortales esse soleant: At this day no
man looks for any honesty in a Pope: they are accounted excellent good Popes
if they have but a dram of honesty, yea, if they surpass not the wickedness
of other men. At this day the Papacy is so dangerous, that O^^ph. in vita
Marcells ad fine^ Platina.
Marcellus the second protested he did not see quomodo qui locum hunc
altissimum tenent, saluari possint, how a Pope can be saved. Your Saint
Antonin. hist. par. 3. tit. 23. cap. 14 sect. 13.
Katharin of Sienna told Gregory the 11. that In Romana Curia vbi deberet esse
Paradisus deliciarum virtutum, inueniebat foetorem infernalium vitioru^:
Whereas she looked to have found a Paradise of rare virtues in his Court, she
found in stead thereof a dunghill covered over with hellish vices, the stinch
whereof she smelt to Sienna, the place of her dwelling, an hundred miles off.
And the T^codoricus de Niem. Nem. vnionis inaquos^ trac. 4. cap. 8.
Virgin Marie told Saint Briget (as some of you say) that Multi Pontifices sunt
in inferno, Many Popes are in hell. And you know that Sylua^^ lib. 1.
Mantuans counsel was, Viuere qui cupitis sancte, discedite: Romoe
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum:
He that desires to live honestly, let him bless himself from Rome for a man
may be there any thing save honest, but honest he cannot be in any wise. Now
the question wherein I desire to be resolved by you, is, whether you think
indeed that Luke 22.
when Christ prayed for Saint Peter's faith, he prayed for the faith of your
unlettered Popes, sheepish Popes, boy Popes, swaggering whore-maister Popes,
bastardly brat Popes, whore Pope, Necromanticall Popes, these Popes,
Sodomiticall Popes, perjured Popes, heretical Popes, Asheisticall Popes, and
Apostaticall Popes? For there is no question but Toh. 11. 42.
Christ obtains always the things which he prays for: and me thinks there
should be no question, but when our Savior prayed for Saint Peter's faith that
it should not fail, by the name of faith, he meant a lively Christian faith
which works by love, and which Romans 3. 25.
embraces the promises of the mercy of God, which whosoever has, Ioh. 6. 47.
has assurance of eternal life: and if so, how is it credible that he prayed
for all these?

23 Your Sixtus 5. caused your vulgar Latin to be corrected, and printed at
Rome in the year 1590. Baron. Annal. To. 2. ad an. 232 Nu. 62.
The pains he took therein, as it seems, was wonderful. For notwithstanding
all other his papal business, he Angelus Rocca commen^. de Bibl. Valt^ a S.
10. 5. ^ondita page 229
read over every word of the Bible before it was printed, and after too,
correcting with his own hands the faults of the print. Then he published it,
and prefixed his bull before it in stead of a preface, signifying therein that
his good will and pleasure was, that this only should go for Authentical, and
that all other impressions in time to come, should be made according to it,
without any change, without taking away, or adding so much as a letter; and
that all former impressions, yea and M. S. differing from this, should be of no
credit: and all this he required upon pain of the greater excommunication. Yet
after the death of Urban 7. Greg. 14. and Innocent 9. successors of Sixtus 5.
Anno 1592.
comes Clemens 8. and he sets out another Bible, differing much from that of
Sixtus in many material points: auowing that this Edition of his, is
(doubtless) better then any Edition whatsoever heretofore Imprinted. Now that
which I desire to know of you is, whether Sixtus erred in commending his Bible,
or Clemens in commending his Bible, or both of them in their sever all
commendations: for I think you will not say, commending books so different,
they both spoke truth.

24 Sir Priest, is not this of In Symb to 2. operum Athanas. edit. Comelin.
Anno 1600.
Athanasius good Divinity, Filius a Patre solo est, nec sactus, nece creatus:
The Son is of the Father alone, not made, nor created? If so, then I pray you
tell me, how without blasphemy Discip. de Tip. for 111 Ca^^enaus Ca^al. gloria
mundi, part. 2 consid. 3. sol. 4. Bi^l Lect 4. in Can Missa.
you can say, Sacer dos est creator sui Creatoris: A Priest is the creator of
his Creator? meaning Christ the Son of God.

25 Again, if it be current Divinity which the same Loco suptacitate.
Athanasius delivers, Christus Deus ex substantia Patris, homo ex substantia
matris: Christ is of the substance of his Father as he is God, and of the
substance of his mother as he is man. Tell me where the wit of your John 22.
was, when Ho^^ B. Virgo Salu^ sancta facies fol. 68. edit. Paris 1516.
he said, Rex sit expane, The King (meaning Christ, the King of heaven) is made
bread. And why you are not ashamed to retain in your Canon Law these words, De
consec d 2. c. 72. virum sub.
Corpus Christi and sangais, ex panis and vini substantia efficitur: The body
and blood of Christ is made of the substance of bread and wine.

26 If it be true which De Ciuit. Dei, lib. 1. c. 29.
Austin says, that God is nusquam inclusus, penned in in no place: and that
the great Eurip. in Cyclop. Act. 4.
Cyclops (when Ulysses told him, that the wine which he had in a bottle, was
the god Bacchus) did not without cause in a wonderment reply, What? A god in a
bottle? I pray you tell me, why you pen up your Sacrament, which Alleu de
sacrifi^. Euth. cap. 41. and Bristo Motive 26.
you acknowledge for your God, in a pixe, or in a box? Of a be in a box, I
have heard much by many; but of a god in a box, I never heard but by Papists.

27 If it be evident, that they are no gods, whose priests keep their temples
with doors, and with locks, and with bars, left their gods should be
spoiled by robbers, as Verse. 17.
Baruch says in his 6 Chapter, which goes for Canonical Scripture with you.
If they, who cannot defend themselves from thieves and robbers, deserve not to
be reputed gods, as the Verse. 56.
same Author says. If Hom 57. in Gen 31.
Chrysostom justly derided Laban, when he said: O excellent em insipientiam!
Tales sunt dij t^i, vt quis eos furari possit? Non erubescis ditere, Quare
furatus es deos meos? O notable foolerie! Are thy gods such gods as may be
stolen? Art thou not ashamed to say, Why have thou stolen my gods? Why should
not you and your fellows, sir Priest, be whoopt at for holding the Sacrament
to be God, which for fear of stealing, Lindwood conslit Prouine. lib. 3 ^iulo
de instodia Euchar cum clousura, in c. dignis^mis.
you would not have hung over the high Altar under a Canopie, but reserved in a
surer place, under lock and key?

28 If it be evident, that they are no gods, which cannot be preserved from
rust and worms; which feel not when things which creep out of the earth eat
them, as it seems by Chap. 6. v. 11. and 19.
Baruch before mentioned* seeing it is the Joseph Angles flores; Quast. Theol
^n 4. S^^^. part. 1. 9. d^ susceps E^ch. ad 3* difficultat. 2. p. 96.
general doctrine of your Church, That worms may breed in your Sacrament: that
brute beasts, dogs, hogs, mice, choughs, etc. may eat it. Are not you
singular od-caps, to hold the Sacrament for your Lord and your God?

29 Ecquem tam amentemesse putes qui illud quo vescatur deum credat esse?
Think thou there is any man so mad, that holds it for his god whereof he
eats, says Apud Cicero* lib. 3. d^ Na^. deorum.
Cotta. Qu^mado quis sanoe mentis deum nuncuparit^d, quod vero Deo oblatom,
tandem ipse comedit? How can any man of reason think that to be God, which he
offers in sacrifice to the true God, and afterward eats thereof himself,
says Quast. 18. (...) Leuit.
Theodoret. And if this be true, do not you deserve to be sent to Bedlem for
eating the Sacrament, which you call your Lord and your God? Auerroes ( Espene,
de Euch adorat. lib. 4. c. 3.
they say) professed that he had traveled a great part of the world, and that
he had seen many men of different Religions, and yet he found not any,
Christiana deteriorem aut tam fatuam, worse or foolisher then the Popish
Christian, quia deum suum quem colunt, dentibus deuorabant, because they tare
him with their teeth, whom they worshipped for their god.

30 The God of right believing Christians is 1. Ioh. 5. 20.
life it self, and gives life to others, even Ioh. 6.
everlasting life to them who eat him, as the Scriptures speak of eating him.
But your God is such a God, and your fashion of eating, such an eating, as that
a man by eating your God after your fashion, may easily be poisoned. And I pray
you then how can your God be reputed the God of right believing Christians?

That a man may be poisoned by eating your God (that is, the Sacrament) after
your fashion, it is plain by diverse examples. For,

Victor 3, one of your Popes, Fuit extinct us per venenum in calicem missum,
was killed with poison in the chalice, says In Chron ad An. 1095.
Polonus, and Fascic. Temp. ad An. 1094.
others.

Henricus Archiep. Eboracensis cum diuina celebraret mysteria, hausto in ipso
caliee (vt aiunt) veneno obijt: Henry Archbishop of York died (as they say) of
poison, by drinking of the chalice when he administered the Sacrament, says
Hist. Augl. in vita Stephan. An. 1154. p. 122
Matthew Paris.

Henricus 7. Imperator intoxicatus fuit sumento Eucharistian: Henry 7. Emperor
of Rome was poisoned in receiving the Sacrament, says Ad An. 1314.
Fasciculus Temporum.

Nuper Prior noster Misericordiae Venetijs veneno in calici sublatus fuit: Of
late a Prior of ours in Venice was killed with poison put into the Chalice, says
See Monita Poluica, impress. Francofurt. An. 1609.
John Baptista Leo Ambassador to the Duke of Vrbinus.

31 A Apud Guitmun um lib. 2. de Sacram.
Synod of your Bishops in Italy decreed, That when the true flesh of Christ and
his true blood appear at the celebration of the Sacrament in their proper
kind, both the flesh and the blood should be reserved in them dst of the Altar
for special relikes. Now I would know of you, Sir Priest, what reason you have
to make a Relike of your god. Is it not enough for you to reserve Relikes of
Saints, but you must reserve Relikes of God, the sanctifier of Saints, yea God
himself for a Relike?

32 I read that Summa Angelica, verbo Missa. nu. 18. and ve^ho Encharistia,
sect 3. nu. 5.
you prescribe, Simusca vel aranea cadat in calicem post consecrationem, etc. If
either fly or spider fall into the chalice after the words of consecration, so
that there be fear of poisoning or provocation to vomit; the Priest shall take
sanguinem illum, and igne comburat cum aliqua stupa, vel pumo lineo in
ipsomadefacto, that blood* and burn it by the help of some tow or linen rags
dipped in it. Now whether it be poisoned or not poisoned, whether it be such as
will provoke vomit or not provoke vomit, as long as the species remains, it
is your God: And how then can you clear your selves from burning of your God?

33 I read you teach, Conc. Trid. Sess 22. can. 1.
that in your Mass, Christ is truly and properly sacrificed by you: and withal
I read you teach, that Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 2.
whatsoever is truly and properly sacrificed, if it be a live thing, it is
killed. Now I would gladly know of you, if this be thus, how you can excuse
your selves from killing of Christ: for Christ whom you sacrifice truly and
properly, as you say, is a live thing?

34 I read you teach, Bellar. lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 12.
Per consecrationem fit v^ Christi corpus vere and visibiliter adsit super
mensam: that by confecration Christ's body and blood is truly and visibly upon
the Altar. Visibly, Alex. lib. 1. de Euch. Sacramen. cap. 37.
not merely in regard of the species under which they lie, but simply and
property: vet I never met with Papist hitherto, who durst venture his credit,
that if his conseerate host was shuffled with vnconsecrate hosts, or his
consecrated chalice set among unconsecrated chalices, he was able by sight to
discern which was his God? Dare you Sir Priest, venture a book of six pence
price, that your sight will serve you better?

35 Your Annot in Heb. 1. 6.
Rhemists tell us, Wheresoever Christ's person is, there it ought to be adored of
men and Angels. And upon that ground (I think) you imagining that he is in the
Priests hands at the elevation in the Mass, and in the Pixe which is carried by
the Priest when he goes to visit the sick; you bow or fall down upon your
knees adoring him. Now I would gladly know, why you bow not, or fall not down
upon your knees before every Communicant upon his receiving of the Sacrament,
seeing according to your doctrine, every of them receives his maker, he is in
every of their bellies.

36 I am told you teach, Bellar lib. 4. de Euch. c. 16.
that there is no Transubstantiation, except he be a Priest who Consecrates, and
Idem. lib. 1. de Sacram, in genere cap. 27.
have an intent to consecrate. Yea, I am told that some of Ioh. de Combis in
compend. Theol lib. 6. cap. 6.
you teach, that to Transubstantiation non solum requiritur intentio
consecrantis, sed etiam intentio istud Sacramentum instituentis, it is not
only requisite that the Priest have an intent to consecrate, but that Christ
have an intent also that he shall consecrate. Now seeing it is confessed by
diverse of you, that Patolus Langius in Chron. ^th. ad Ann. 1514 Ioh. Franc. L^o
in Thelauro Fort Eccl part. 3. de prohibit. and praemijs. nu. 57.
some have taken upon them the name of Priests, who were none: Bodin Damond.
mania lib. 4. ^. 5. Nie* Plow tract. de Euch.
some being Priests, have used the word of cosecration, without intent to
consecrate: and that Ioh. de Comb. loco supra citato.
sometimes Christ is not disposed the Priest should consecrate, though he speak
the words, and purposes to consecrate; I would know how any Papist can
possibly know, when any of your hosts are transubstantiated, and when he may
safely adore it? because except there be Transubstantiation, he commits
Idolatry in adoring; adoring bread and wine the creatures, in stead of the
Creator.

37 Iram Iudicis placare nescit oblatio nisi ex munditia place it offerentis,
-- idcirco non Abel ex muneribus, sed ex Abel munera oblata placuerunt: prius
namque ad eum legitur, Dominus respexisse qui dabat, quam ad ill a quae dabat:
No sacrifice is acceptable to God, except the sacrificer be acceptable, -- and
therefore it is, that God had not respect to Abel because of his offerings, but
he had respect to the offerings because of Abel: for it is written, that God
first respected the giver before he respected the gift, says Lib. 22. expos.
in Job. c. 31. cap. 12.
Saint Gregory. And if this be true, I would know how you can avoid the
acknowledgement of this Paradoxe, viz. That God is better pleased with your
Mass Priest then with his Christ: or rather this, That God respects his Christ
for your Priests sake, and not your Priest for his Christ's sake: seeing your
Massepriests are the sacrificers, and Christ himself (according to your
learning) the sacrifice; especially this being considered withal, that your
Priests, after consecration, Canon. Missa.
pray God he will vouchsafe to look down with a merciful and cheerful
countenance upon the things offered, (to wit, Christ in your learning) and to
accept them as he did vouchsafe to accept the offerings of his righteous
servant Abel. For it seems by this prayer, that the Priests presume more of
their own credit with God, then of their offerings; in that they desire the
gifts may be accepted at their requests, and not they for the gifts.

38 It is plain by Scripture, that Abraham, Isaak, Jacob, Moses, David, etc.
were holy men, and in great favor with God. For we read in Scripture, that
Abraham is termed the Father of the faithful, Romans 4. 11. and the friend of
God, James 2. 23. that Isaak was the child of promise, Gal. 4. 28. that Jacob
was beloved of God, Mal. 1. 2. and preuatled with God, Genes. 32. 28. that God
spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his friend, Exodus 33. 11. and
that there arose not a Prophet since like Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 10. that Christ was
David's son, Math. 15. 22. and David a man after Gods own heart, Acts 13. 22.
But it is not plain by Scripture, nor by any ancient* approved Author, that
your George, your Christopher, your Katharin, your Vrsula, your Margaret, were
holy persons, and in great favor with God; yet you make special prayers to
these, and none to Abraham, I saak, Jacob, Moses, or David: whereof I desire to
know the reason. For me thinks it is gross foolery, to neglect the old
approved Saints, and to dote and rely upon younger, of whose sanctity, yea of
whose entitie, we have no certainty.

39 It is written in your books, that Maria apud Bernard. de Busti in Mariali,
part. 12 ser. 2. de coronat. Mariae part. 1. Excellentia. 6.
Deum omnibus Sanct is potentior est. Maria sola plus potest apud Deum
impetrare, quam omnes Sancti in coelo. The Virgin Marie can prevail more of
her self alone with God, then all the Saints in heaven besides. Yea, it is
written by Ludolphus, and Chrysostom a visitatione, that velocior est
nonnunquam salus innocato De vita Jesus, part. 2. cap. 68. sol. 257.
nomine Mariae, quam inuocato nomine Domini vnici Filij eius: Men oftentimes
find more present help upon their praying to our Lady, then upon their
praying to Jesus Christ. And in Discipulus de Lib. 2. de verbis Domin^ ^a filiu
in Nup^ijs. cap. 2* Ser 161. de Sanctis.
Tempore we read, Nihil nos Deus voluit habere quod per manus Mariae non
transiret: Gods will is, we shall have nothing which passes not* by the virgin
Mary's fingers. Now if this be true, I would know why men should not pray to
the virgin Marie only, who is so gracious and omnipotent, and cease to trouble
(if not Christ, yet) the rest of the Saints, which in comparison of her, are so
graceless and impotent?

40 I hear you say, that when you desire our Kellison in his Survey, lib. 3.
cap. 12. ^u. 17.
Lady and other Saints, to send you health, or to give you grace, and to have
mercy on you; your meanning is no other, then to desire them to procure of
Christ by their prayers and intercessions those benefits for you. But here
first I desire to know, if you mean no worse, why you speak so harshly?
certainly the Rich Glutton, Luke 16. 24. when he prayed, saying, Father Abraham
have mercy on me, had a further The I^ponians pray to their S aint Amida, D^
salusem Amida. Muff^us select. ^pist. ^x India, lib. 4. p. 209.
meaning, then to desire Abraham to pray for him. And the Patriarch Jacob, when
his wife Rahel said unto him, Give me children, or else Idle, Genes. 30. 2.
supposed she had a further meaning in those words, then to desire him to
procure her children of God by his prayers, for else why was his wrath kindled
against her for saying so. Secondly, I desire to know, if you mean no other,
why you tell us so many tales of the virgin Mary's descending from heaven to
help her suppliants on earth: and of other Saints personal and actual
performance of such things as were begged of them. It is written Caesar. dial.
lib. 7 cap. 24. Discip. lib. de miraculis B. Virginis, Exemp. 30.
in your books, That a Priest having his tongue cut out by heretics, upon his
mental prayer to the virgin Marie, had another put in. The virgin Marie,
digitis ori eius immissis, putting her finger into the Priests mouth (it was
well he bit her not) fastened him in a new tongue. She helped him not with her
prayers, but with her fingers.

41 In the same books of yours it is written, Caesar dial. lib. 7. cap. 25.
That the virgin Marie prescribed physic to a boy with a scald head, who used
to pray to her: and that by laying her own hands on his head, she preserved
him from head*acheuer after. By Physic, and other means Discip. lib. citat.
Exempl 35.
then prayers, the cured the boy of his infirmities. In the same books it is
written, That a good fellow called Peter, prayed to the virgin Marie for help:
and that she appeared to him with Hyppolitus in her company, commanding
Hyppolitus to help him* which Hyppolitus did, not by praying for him, but by
binding up his sores with his hands Chirurgion-like. In the same books Discip.
Exempl. 24.
it is written, that an Abbess, who was with child by an officer of hers,
prayed the virgin Marie to help her at a dead lift, and to save her credit:
which the virgin Marie did, not by praying for her, but by bringing two Angels
with her, who played the midwiues, helping her to be deliuerd of her child
instantly, and carrying it (by the virgin Mary's appointment) to an Eremite,
commanding him in the virgin Mary's name to keep it till it was seven years
old. In the same Casar. dial. lib 7. cap. 35. and Discip. Exempl. 25.
books it is written, that the virgin Marie saved likewise the credit of a
whore-Nunne called Beatrix, not by praying for her, but by personal supplying
of her place in an Oratorie, by the space of fifteen years together, whilst
she ran a whoring after a whore-monger Priest, and no body knew she was
missing. Your Cardinal Annal. To. 6. ad an. 449. (...) 39.
Baronius tells us soberly, that Leo 1. having written an Epistle to Flauianus
Bishop of Constantinople against Eu^yches and Nestorius, he laid it upon S.
Peter's tomb, praying him instantly that if there were any error, he would
amend it: and that after certain days (it seems S. Peter took time to
consider well of it) S. Peter appeared unto Leo, and told him that he had
amended it. Whereupon Leo sumens Epistolam de sepulchro B. Petri aperuit eam,
and inuenit Apostolica manu emendatam: the Pope taking the Epistle away, and
opening it, he found it corrected with the Apostles own hand. Which story
seems to argue, that when Leo desired Peter to amend his Epistle, he meant
more then to desire him to procure it amended of God by his prayers.

42 Annot. in 2. Cor. 1. 11.
Your Rhemists tell us, that it is absurd to say, that the intersession of our
fellows beneath is more auailable then the prayers of those that be in the
glorious sight of God above. Now if it be indeed absurd to say so, I would
gladly know of you why S. Paul, Romans 15. 30. desired the Romans, v and 2. Cor.
1. 11. the Corinthians, and Ephesians. 6. (...) the Ephesians, and Col. 4. 3. the
Colossians, and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 25. and 2. These. 3. 1. the Thessalonians, and Heb.
13. 18. the Hebrews, all of them his fellows beneath, to pray for him; and
desired none of the Saints in the glorious sight of God above to pray for him.
And why S. James, Chap. 5. 16. advised them to whom he writ, that one of them
(beneath) should pray for another; and required them not to pray to the Saints
in the glorious sight of God above for help.

43 F^ria 5. quartae Dominicae Quadrag ser. 30 de suff^agij^ mortuorum.
Again, if it be absurd to say, that the intercession of our fellowet beneath is
more auailable then the prayers of those that be in the glorious sight of God
above; I would gladly know why you tell us so many tales of souls creeping out
of Purgatory, craving the help of their fellows beneath; and not one, of any
soul craving the help of any of the Saints in the glorious sight of God
above. Have not the souls in Purgatory so much wit, as to repair to them for
help, who are best able to help them? Or are you of Leonard de Vtino his
mind, who holds, quod efficaciora sunt suffragia Ecclesia praesentis facta
pro aliquo in Purgatoric existente, quam orationes Sanctorum in patria: That
the prayers of the Church militant are more auailable for souls in Purgatory,
then the prayers of the Church triumphant?

44 Vergerius reports, ^nnotat. in Indie. lib. prohib. an. 1559. page 9.
that it is written in an Italian book, entitled, Flosculi S. Franciscs, that
the virgin Marie by the merit of her virginity saved all women to the time of
S. Clare, as Christ by the merit of hi^ passion saved all men till the time of
Saint Francis, in whose days S. Clare lived. And he further reports, that
whereas he answered that book, Discorsi sopra li. ^iore^ti, di S. Francisco,
lit. D.
his answer was condemned as heretical in three several Indices of books
forbidden, and so it is in the last of Clemens 8. Now if his report be true, I
would know how you can save Cardinal Bellarmines credit, who denies, Praefat.
con^. 7 to. 1.
that any Catholic did ever equal in any sort the virgin Marie unto Christ?
for as it is confessed in that book, that Christ saved me^, so the Author
professes, that she saved women.

45 Ambrosius Catharinus in an Oration which he made An. 1546. in the second
Session at Trent, Acta Cout. Trid. impress. Antuerp. 1546. fol. 57.
termed her Fidelissimam sociam Christi, Christ's most faithful fellow or
companion. And another great Papist did not stick to write, In Maviali lib. 1.
cap. 3. ^^st^ Illir^o i^ ^ italogo test. verit. col. 36. edit. 1608
Fuit Dominus cum Maria, and ipsa cum Domino in eodem labor, and eodem opere
redemptionis: Matter enim misericordiae adiuuit Patrem misericor diae in opere
nostrae salutis: Our Lord was with Marie, and Marie with our Lord, in the same
labor and in the same work of our redemption: for the Mother of mercy helped
the Father of mercy in the work of our salvation. Who fearing some might
reply on Christ's behalf, that it was written, Esaias 63. I have trode^ the
wine press alone, and of all the people there was not one man with me: in way
of preventing that, goes on thus: Verum est Domine, quod non est vir tecum, sed
mulier vna tecum est, quae omnia vulnera qua tu suscipisti in corpore, suscipit
in cord: It, is true Lord that thou say, There was no man with thee, but
there was a woman with thee, which suffered all the wounds in her heart, which
thou sufferedst in thy body. Do not these speeches argue, that some
Catholics have equalled in some sort the virgin Mary unto Christ?

46 You apply that to the Virgin Marie, which the Scriptures apply to Christ.
The Scriptures say, that Genesis 3. 15.
The seed of the woman (meaning Christ, the God of peace, Romans 16. 20.) shall
bruise the Serpents head: you Bernard. de Busti in Maviali, part. 12. se^. 2.
de coronat M^ri, Excell^^tia 27.
say, the virgin Marie bruised it. The Scriptures say, that Of his fullness we
all have received even grace for grace, Ioh. 1. 16. you say, Dis^^p. de Tep.
ser. de concepti^^^
Veraciter dicere possumus, tam de matre quam de filio, etc. we may as truly
say, that of her fulness we have received grace. The Scriptures say, that Christ
did reconcile all things to himself, Coloss. 1. 20. and that he did redeem us
from our vain conversation by his blood, 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19. and you say the
same in effect of her. For you affirm that she was Bernard. lib. citat. page
v^t.
Redemptrix vniuersi: Ibid.
Recuperatrix perditiorbis: and that Stainhurst in Hebdom. Mariana. printed
1609. p. 85. and 113.
per illam omnia in statum pristinum sunt restituta. The Scriptures say, that
Christ was given adeducendum claustro vinctum, to bring prisoners out of
prison, Esaias 42. 7. and you ascribe as much to her: for you pray to her thus,
Offi^* b. Mariae virg. post aduent. ad vesperas.
Solue vincla reis. The Scriptures say, that Christ was that Lamb which takes
away the sin of the world, Ioh. 1. 29. and you seem to believe she can do as
much; for to her you use to pray, Ibid.
Mala nostra pelle, put away our evils; meaning by evils, sins. The
Scriptures Heb. 7. 26.
note it as a prerogative of Christ's, that p Bernard. de Busts* in offi^. de
con^ept. Virg. die 6. lect. 6.
he was without sin: and you tell us, that sicut Christus redemptor noster sine
originali extitit, it a reparatrix nostra Maria illi similis in hoe suisse
comprobatur: she was like him in this. And does not this also argue, that some
Catholics have equalled in some sort the virgin Marie unto Christ?

47 You give the virgin Marie answerable titles to those which are given God,
For as God is called the King of heaven, ^an* 4. 34. so you call her, In
Antiphona quae incipi^, Salve Regina.
the Queen of heaven. As God is called, the Father of mercies, 2. Cor. 1. 3. so
you call her, Ibid.
the mother of mercy. As God is called, the Author of all comfort, 2. Cor. 1.
3. so you call her Stainhurst. lib. (...) p. 155.
the fountain of all comfort. As Christ Jesus is called Our Hope, 1. Tim. 1. 1.
so In Antiph. Salve Regina.
you call her. As Christ Jesus is called our Advocate, 1. Ioh. 2. 1. so Cosletus
in perorat. ad Virg. ad (...) Apol. 1. adu. Gom^rum.
you call her. As he is called our Savior, Luke 2. 11. so she Bonauent. in
Cant. ad in^tar Esai. 22.
a Sauiouresse by you. As he a Mediator. 1. Tim. 2. 5. so she Idem in Cant.
adi^star illius qui ascribitur Aug. et Ambros.
a Mediatrix. As he a Redeemer, Psa. 78. 35. so she B^rn. de Busts in Mariali.
p. use.
a Redemptrix. As he omnipotent, Math. 28. 18. so Bon^uent. in hymn^ ad in star
illius Exodus 15.
she. As he the morning Star, Apoc. 22. 16. so Coster. meditat. in hymn.
A^^e.
she. As he our life, Ioh. 14. 6. so Antiph. Salve Regina.
she. As he our Lord, Ioh. 20. 28. so Pasa^m.
she our Lady. As he our God, Ioh. 20. 28. so she our L^^s. l. de virg.
Asp^icolle, cap. 3 and 5. lib. 8 ^p. 17. Epist^l. d Bimbo script sub nonvine
Leo. 10.
Goddess. As he a chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 20. so Bon^uent. 10. 6. in lib.
inseripto, Laus b. virg. Mariae. p. 473. g
she. As he the glory of his people Israel, Luke 2. 32. so g she. And as he
was assumed into heaven in body, Acts 1. 9. so was she Rhem Annot in Act. 1.
14.
you say. And as the first day of the week is observed in remembrance of him,
Apocap. 1. so the last day of the week is observed holy by you in remembrance
of her. For Sabbathum cuiu sque hebdomadis Mariae sacrum esse, vix est qui ne
sciat, says Ferreolus Locrius Mariae Augustae lib. 6. cap. 23. and Dies
Sabbathi dedi nota est gloriosae virgini Mariae, says Discipulus de Tempore,
ser. 164. And does not this also prove, that some of you Catholics equal in
some sort the virgin Marie unto Christ?

48 Fiunt in Ecclesiis processiones annuatim ad honorem Saluatoris in die
Palmarum; and similiter ad honorem matris suae in die Purificationis ad
correspondendum ad diem Palmarum: As upon Palme-sunday you keep yearly a
Procession in honor of Christ; so answerably thereunto you keep yearly on the
day of the virgin Mary's purification, a solemn Procession in honor of her,
as Bernardinus confesses in Mariali 6. part. ser. 2. part. 2. de visitatione
Mariae. And Statuit Ecclesia Officium particulare quod di^itur* si^gulis diebus
ad honor emipsius Virginis, These words are left out in Edit. 1607. but they
are in the Edit. 1515.
sicut ^lind Officium ad honorem Dei: as you have set Service appointed for
every day to the honor of God, so your Church has appointed set Service for
every day in honor of her, as the same man witnesses in the same place. And
whereas David and some other holy persons made Psalms in their daye^ to the
honor of God, all which Psalms, except two, are recorded in holy Scripture:
did not a great Cardinal among you It was reprinted at Rome in Sixtus 5.
days, and since at* Ments An. 1609 To. 6. operum Bo^^^uenturae.
publish a book, entitled Psalterium B. Virginis, The Psalter of the blessed
virgin Marry? in which there are 150 Psalms, whose beginnings answer to the
beginnings of David's 150 Psalms; and eight other Psalms answering to eight
Psalms recorded in other places of the Bible, carrying the names of Esaias,
Ezechias, Hanna, Moses, Abacuk, the three children, and Zachary, besides one
much like to that which is fathered on S. Ambrose and S. Austin, beginning, We
praise thee O Lord: and another like that of Athanasius Creed, beginning,
Whosoever will be saved; and all this to the honor of the virgin Mary. Is it
not true, Sir Priest, that what David and other holy men in their Psalms and
hymns ascribed to God, especially in the first verse of every their Psalms
and hymns, that in this book of your Cardinals is ascribed to the virgin
Mary? Does not David in the first verse of his seventh Psalm say, O Lord my
God in thee I put my trust: and does not your Bonauenture in the first verse of
his seventh Psalm say, O thou my good Lady, in thee have I put my trust? Is
not this the beginning of David's ninth Psalm, I will praise the Lord with my
whole heart? and this the beginning of Bonauentures ninth Psalm, I will praise
thee O Lady with all my heart? In the 16 Psalm Da^^d says, Preserve me O
Lord* and your Bonauenture in his 16 Psalm says, Preserve me O Lady. I will
love thee, O Lord, says David in his 18 Psalm: but I will love thee O Lady,
says Bon^uenture in his 18 Psalm. The heavens declare the glory of God, says
Psalm. 19. 1.
David: The heavens declare thy glory, says Bonauenture speaking of the virgin
Mary. The Lord i^ my light, says Psalm. 27. 1.
David: Our Lady is my light, says Bonauenture. In thee O Lord have I put my
trust, etc. says Psalm. 31. ver. 1. 3. 5.
David: In thee O Lady have I put my trust* Thou art my strength and my
fortress; (...) thy hands O Lady I commend my spirit, says Bonauenture. Psalm.
33. 1.
Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous: Psalm. 34. 1.
I will always give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall be in my mouth
continually, says David. Rejoice in our Lady O ye righteous; I will always give
thanks unto our Lady, her praise shall be in my mouth continually, says
Bonauenture. Psalm. 51. 1.
Have mercy upon me O Lord, etc. Psalm. 54. 1.
Save me O God by thy name* Psalm. 92. 1.
It is a good thing to praise the Lord, Psalm. 95. 1. 2.
Come let us rejoice unto the Lord, etc. says David. Have mercy upon me O Lady,
according to the multitude of thy compassions put away mine iniquities; Save me
O Lady by thy name* It is a good thing to pr^^s^ the virgin Mary* and to sing
unto (...) lt us (...) Lady, let v^ worship and fall down before her, says
Bonauenture. Psalm 98. 1.
Sing unto the Lord a new song, etc. Psalm. 100. 1. 2
Sing ye loud unto the Lord all the earth, etc. says David Sing unto our Lady a
new song, for (...) ^ar^^llou^ things; Sing ye loud unto our Lady all the
earth, and serve her with gladness* says Bonauenture. Psalm. 102. 1.
O Lord hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee: Psalm. 103. 1. 2. 3.
My soul praise thou the Lord* and all that is within me praise his holy name:
My soul praise thou the Lord, etc. which ^ogiueth all thine iniquities, etc.
says David. O Lady hear my prayer, and let my cry come to thee; My soul
praise thou our Lady, which forgiueth all thy sins, says Bonauenture. Psalm.
110. 1.
The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, says David. The Lord said
unto our Lady, Good mother sit thou on my right hand, says Bonauenture. And to
omit a hundred like speeches, whereas David says, Psalm. 150. v. vl^.
Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord; Bonauenture says, Let every
thing that has breath praise our Lady. Esaias in his Psalm says, Chap. 12.
I will praise thee O Lord, etc. but Bonauenture in his Psalm says, I will
praise thee O Lady; Behold my Lady is my salvation, I will trust and not fear;
declare our Ladies works among c 1 Samuel 2. 1. 2. 7
the people. Hanna in her Psalm says, Mine horn is exalted in the Lord, etc.
but Bonauenture in his Psalm says, Mine horn is exalted in our Lady; There d
De^^. 32. 1. etc.
is none so holy as our Lady, she makes poor and makes rich, she brings low
and ex ilteth. Moses in the one of his two Psalms says, Hearken ye heavens,
etc. for I will publish the name of the Lord; but Bonauenture in his Psalm
says, Hearken ye heavens what I will e Dan 3. in the vulg. Lat.
speak of our Lady, ^ye. O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, etc.
said the three children in their Psalm; but Bonauenture says, O all ye works
(...) the Lord, bless ye our Lady, etc. Blessed he the Lord God of Israel* And
thou child shall he called the Prophet of the highest, said Luke 1.
Zachary in his Psalm; but Bonauenture says, Blessed be our Lady the mother of
our Lord God of Israel; And thou Mary shall be called the Prophet of the
highest. We praise thee O God, we acknowledge thee to be the Lord, said
Ambrose and Austin in their Psalm; We praise thee O Lady, we acknowledge thee
O Mary to be a Virgin, says Bonauenture. Whosoever will be saved, it is
necessary, before all things, that he hold the Catholic faith, etc. said
Athanasius; but Whosoever will be saved, it is necessary before all things,
that be s^edfastly believe what concerns the virgin Mary. And does not all
this prove, that some of you Catholics do in some sort equal the virgin Mary
unto Christ.

49 Omnia quae Dei sunt, Mariae sunt: quia matter and sponsa Dei illa est: All
things which are Gods, are the virgin Mary's, because she is both the spouse
and mother of God, says Chrysostom dvisitat* To. 1. de verb. Dom. lib. 4. cap. 8.
a great Rabbin of yours. And To^ creatureae seruiunt gloriosae Mariae virgi^i,
quot seruiunt Trinitati* As many creatures honor the virgin Mary, as honor
the Trinity, Apud Bernard. de Busti in Ma^ial^, part. 12. ser. 2. de coronat.
Mar ^. Excel. 10.
says another. Christ was willing (as Ibid.
some of your men say) Paterno principatui quodam modo principatum ^quiparare
matter number, that his mothers sovereignty should in some sort equal the
soueraignti^ of God his Father. As it is a true proposition, Ibid.
Diuino imperio omnia famulantur, and Virgo: All creatures, even the Virgin her
self, are subject to Gods command: so is this proposition true, Imperio
Virgin^ omnia samulantur, and Deus: All creatures, and God himself, are
subject to the virgin Mary's command. Bernard. de B^st, part. 11. ser. 2. (...)
Assump. virg. part. 1.
Duae Cathedra, etc. Two chaires of estate were prepared in heaven, the one for
Christ, the other for the virgin Marie. And she sits by him (as Idem ser 4. de
Assump. ser. 2.
you say) vt genus humanum habeat semper ante f^ciem Dei Adi^torium simile
Christo, ad pro^urandum suam salutem, that mankind may have always before God
an Advocate like to Christ. Were they no Catholics in whom we read these?
or, does it not manifestly herehence follow, that some of you Catholics have
equalled in some sort the virgin Marie unto Christ?

50 You Gabriel Biel in exposit. Can. Miss. Lect. 80. Bernard. de Busti in
Marials, part. 3 ser 3. de Nominat. Maria. Cassand consulta^ tit* de merit. and
intercess Sanct.
teach, that whereas Gods kingdom consists of Justice and of mercy; God
retaining to himself the one half thereof, to wit, Justice, gave the other
half, to wit, mercy to his mother. You tell us, Chrysostom. a visirat. to. 2.
lib. 1. de verbis Dom* ad s^lium in Nisp^ijs cap. 2.
that vt lo^ior est nonnunquam salus memorato nomine Mariae, quam invoke
nomine Domini Jesus vn^ti silij eius: Men may oftentimes be sooner saved by
calling on the virgin Mary* then on Christ. You tell us, Bern de Busti lib. cit
part. 9. ser. 2. Assi^^l. 2. Sedul. in Apolog. pro lib conform. lib. 3. cap. 17.
that Saint Francis his Friar who could not get into heaven by the help of the
red ladder, at the top whereof Christ stood, got easily into heaven by the help
of the white ladder, at the top whereof his mother stood. Manuell of prayers
printed at Doway 1604 page 304.
You wish sick folks to call upon the virgin Marie, in assurance that she
will make their entrance into the kingdom of heaven, when other wise it might
be, through the divine justice of God, they could not enter in by reason of
their iniquities. And the like counsel you give to others who are in
extremity: for cum adolescent quidam Lu^etiae ad supplicium ill ud exquisitum
and her rendum fide^ nomine duceretur, ac palo inspecto subind^ exclamaret,
Domine Deus habe miserationem mer; m^gni quidam nominis Theologus
mulaeinsidens, ide^^idem inerepantis voce and gesta acclamauit; Dic, inquit;
Mari^ matter gratiae, matter misericordiae, etc. when a young man was to be burnt
at Paris for his faith, upon sight of the stake, cried, O Lord my God have thou
mercy upon me; a great Divine of yours, who rode by on a mule, reproved him
sharply, and bad him call upon the mother of grace and mercy, etc. as
Consultas. tit. de meritis and intercess. Sanct. and lib. de officio ^ij viri.
Cassander witnesses. Now this being thus, I desire to know how you can clear
your selves from holding, that the virgin Marie is more merciful then Christ,
and that you repose more trust and confidence in her then in Christ?

51 It is well known that you make mo prayers to the virgin Mary then to
Christ: Dowly in his Instr. of Christ. Relig. chap. 8.
for she has ten Aue Mary's of you, for one Pater noster that Christ has. It
is well known Bernard lib cit. part. 6. ser. 2. de visit at Maria.
that your Preachers before their Sermons make their entrance not with a Pater
noster to Christ, but with an Aue Maria to the blessed Virgin. For Omnes pr
aedicantes exordium pro gratid impetranda a salutatione Angelica faciunt, says
Bernardinus de Busti. It is well known, that she has the honor of receiving
thanks before Christ: for upon finishing of your books which you publish, you
conclude with Greg de Vale^. ad fine^^ colleq. Mo^pelgurs^nsis and alibi sup.
Laus Deo and beatissimae Virgini, Deo item Jesus Christo: Glory be to God the
Father, and to the most blessed Virgin, and to God the Son: you giving
precedencie to the virgin Marie before her Son, not remembering at all the
holy Ghost. And does not this your so often praying unto her, and praying to
her before her Son, and rendering of thanks unto her before her Son, argue
that you honor her more then her Son?

52 It is well known, that you have more Churches and Oratories which you call
by her name, then by Christ's. Beru^r lib.cit. part. 6. sir. 2. part. 2. de
visuas Maria.
Non est ciuitas, vel castrum, seu villa, quae non habet Ecclesiam vel saltem
Capellam aliqua^ ad hinorem virginis Maria: imo plures reperiuntur Ecclesiae ci
intitulasae, quam in honorem Saluator is and Sanctorum omnium: There is not a
city, not a castle, nor a grange house, which has not either a church or a
chapel dedicated to the virgin Marie: yea there are mo^ Churches dedicated to
the virgin Mary then to Christ and to all his Saints. It is well known she
has more Holy days observed by you to her honor, then Christ to his: for he
(for any thing I can learn) has only these days observed as holy by you,
viz. his Nativity, his Circumcision, his Ascension, and Corpus Christi, as it
is called: but To r^ol. Locriut Mariae Augustae lib. 6. cap. 1. etc.
she has her Feast of Conception, of her Nativity, of her presentation in the
Temple, of her Annuntiation, of her Visitation, of her Purification, of her
Assumption, her snow feast, as you call it, besides the feast of her Espousals,
of her sorrows, of her joys, and her weekly Saturday feast. It is well known
she has more presents and gifts bestowed upon her, then Christ has upon him.
For Erasm in col^loq de Per^gr. Relig. orgo.
you deck her Churches and Chapels with gold and silver, and precious stones;
whereas Christ's are open to wind and weather. See D. Mortons Protestats
Appeal. lib. 2. cap. 12. soct. 12. page 242. iumarg.
Where she has had by Offerings 200 pounds yearly, there Christ has had some
years but five marks, and some years not a penny. It is well known you go
oftener of pilgrimage to her Image, then unto to Christ's. For in Italy you go
by droues to her Image at Loretto; in Liguria you go to Sauona; in Spain to
the mount Serrato; in France to the town of Clear, in the Low Countries to
Hales; and with us in England (when it was Popish) you flocked to her Image at
Ipswich and Walsingham, as Prompt. Cathol. in f^sto Not ^. Virg. p. 195.
Stapleton witnesses: whereas of such flocking to any of Christ's Images, we
neither read nor hear of. And does not this your intitling Churches with her
name, and observing of Holy days to her honor, and presenting her with such
gifts, and running of pilgrimage to her Image so far and so often, fortify the
former conclusion, that you honor her more then Christ?

53 Bern. de Busli in Marialipar. 6. ser. 2. a^ visisat. Mariae.
Slatuit Ecclesia quod singulis diebus ter pulsentur campanae ad honorem
benedictae matris Dei, maxim de mane, and de sero, vt omnes ipsam immaculatam
Virginem genibus flex is adorantes venerentur, ac beatificent; etc. your Church
has ordained that three times a day a bell (which you call your Auc Mary bell)
shall be rung to put men in mind of worshipping the virgin Mary, of
recommending your selves to her, of that thankfulness which you owe to her:
but you have no ordenance for the ringing of a bell in such sort, to put men in
mind of worshipping Christ. Your Church has taught men to pray to the virgin
Mary to command her Son. Orae Patrem, and iube Filio: Intr^ate God she
Father, and command God thy Son, was Cassand. consule tit. de ^eri^h and
inter^ess. Sanct. and lib de offici^ py viri* etc.
an usual prayer in many Churches: and so was,

O faelix puerper^,
Noftr^ pians scel^^a,
In re matris nupera
Redemptori.
And in your To. 6. Psalm. 35. page 481. edit.
Bonauenture Ladies Psalter lately printed, Coge illum peccatoribus misereri:
Compel him (viz. Christ) to have mercy upon sinners, says Bonauenture
speaking of the virgin Mary. And in another To. ^dem. page 466.
Treatise of Bonauentures making, called Corona B. Mariae virginis, this formal
prayer is to be found: O Imperatrix and Domina nostra benignissima, in re
matris impera tu^ delectissimo fil^^ Domin^ nostro Jesus Christ, vt mentes
nostr as ab amore terrestrium ad coelestia desideria crigere dignetur: O noble
Empress and kind Lady, we pray thee use the authority of a mother, and
command thy Son and our Savior to turn our hearts from the love of earthly
things, unto the love of heavenly. Does not this your care to see her served,
and the sovereignty which you give her over her Son, enforce that you
esteem of her more then of Christ?

54 You tell us, that Marialelib. 1. cap. 2 test Illyrico in catal. testium
veritat. edit. 1608. col 36
Solomon dicit, qui parum nouerat de Maria, Prou. 18. 10.
Turris fortissima nomen Domini, ad ipsam confugiet iustus, and exaltabitur:
nobis autem dicendum, Turris furtissima nomen Dominae, ad ipsa^ confugiet
peccator, and saluabitur: Solomon who knew little of the virgin Mary, said, The
name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous shall come visto it, and be
exalted: but we must say, The name of our Lady Is a strong tower, let the
sinner come unto it, and he shall be saved. You tell of a Discip de Tep. de
(...) vac. ^. virg. Exempl. 57.
^oldi^^* who did never any other good deed, then saying of an Aue Mary when he
arose in the morning, and another when he went to bed a^ evening, who graita
Virgini^ saluatus est, was saved by the grace of the virgin Marie. And you
tell us of a Ibid. Exempl^ 97. es Caesar. dial lib. 7. cap. 59. and Locrius
Mariae Augusta lib. 6. cap. 23.
thief and murderer, who did never good deed, but that he fasted Saturday in
honor of the virgin Marie, who for that was likewise saved. You tell us of an
Discip. loco cis. exempl. 96.
unthrift, who to get wealth by devilish means, renounced Christ; and yet
because he would not renounce the virgin Marie, was pardoned: and of a Exempl.
99.
graceless gentleman, of whom Christ himself complained as of one that
crucified him, who yet because he honored the virgin Mary by fasting Saturday,
sped well enough. You tell us of Exempl. 98.
one who should have been condemned by Christ, by reason of his sinfulness,
who yet was absolved at the Virgins entreaty, for that he was one of her
servants: and of Exempl. 50.
another that was indeed condemned to hell by Christ; and yet repriued by reason
of her importunity, and afterward saved. Do not all these tales (ordinarily
told in your pulpits) convince, that your forefathers labored to persuade the
people, rather to trust in the virgin Mary then in her Son Christ Jesus?
Multi videntur B. Virginem in maiore veneratione habere quam Christum filium
eius: Many seem to honor the blessed Virgin more then her Son Christ, says
a Bern. de Busti in Marials par. 6 ser. 2. de visita^. Mariae.
great man of your Religion; imputing the cause thereof to their Magi^ ex
simplicitate (...) quam sei^^tia.
simplicity; but he might more justly have imputed it to your doctrine; and the
rather, for that he adds in the same place, Quta honor matris redundat in
silium, Prou. 17. patientiam habet filius Del de hac qu^rundam vir orem and
mulierem simplicitate: Because the honor of the mother redound^ to the honor
of the child, as we read, Prou. 17. the Son of God bears with the
simplicity of such men and women as honor his mother more then himself. For
does not this doctrine afford good encouragement for such practice?

55 I find in many of your Institutio Christiana ad initiu^ Officij B. Maria
Virg. Ledesma.
Catechismes, the second Commandment of the Decalogue left out quite: and in
Ledesma. Adrianus Iesuita, lib. de confess. Bruno in his Treatise of the Sac.
of Penance cap. 12.
some of your Catechismes, for Remember thou sanctify the Sabbath day, I find,
Remember to sanctify the Holy days. And in your Cap. de 9. e^ 10 pr^cepto.
Trent Catechism I find the ninth and tenth Commandment so huddled together,
that I know not how it distinguishes and ranks them; whether it makes, Thou
shall not covet thy neighbors wife, the ninth commandment, as Ledesina.
Douly, etc. See Defense of the Censure, p. 134.
some popish Catechismes do; or the tenth, as Instit. Christ. supra citat.
Discip. de Tempore, ser. 143.
others do. My desire is you would give me a reason of leaving out the second,
and of changing the third according to your account, the fourth in ours; and
such nimbling of the 9. and 10. together, that you cannot agree among your
selves which is the ninth, which is the tenth.

56 You teach, that Radford in his Directory to the truth. chap. 16. p. 115.
to speak against your Pope is a most deadly sin against the first
commandment of God: that Nauar. in ^nchirin. cap. 11. n^. 32.
to devise or to procure pictures to be devised by others, which may in any sort
be disgraceful to your Pope or to his Cardinals, or to any of your Popish
Hierarchy, is a sin against the first commandment. That Vincent Bruno in his
Treatise of Penance, chap. 10.
to keep books either of heretics, or for any other respect, forbidden by
your Church, is a sin against the first commandment. That Ibid.
not to detect a man infected with heresy to whom he ought ( that is, not to
detect a Protestant to the Inquisition) is a sin against the first
commandment. That Ibid.
to dissuade or hinder any for entering Religion (that is, in your language, from
being a Monk or a Nun) is to sin against the first commandment. That
Brief form of confession added to Vaux his Catech. p. 225.
to set light by, and not to regard the ceremonies of your Church, is a sin
against the first commandment. That Pelancus Iesuita in direct. confess. p. 51.
he who is ignorant of the five commandments of the Church sins against the
1. commandment. That Method confess. in exposit. Decalogi, p. 41.
he who believes not undoubtedly your popish Purgatory, sins against the 1.
commandment. That Method. con(...)tends in explie. Decalogi. p. 41. impress.
Lugd. An. 1549.
not to believe whatsoever your Romish Church believes, is a sin against the
1. commandment. That Euercitiu^ pietatis, etc. Edit. Colon. 1592. cap. de
methodo recte confitendi.
it is an act of infidelity or heresy to communicate in both kinds. And do you
not hereby bowray, that you make of no sins grievous sins?

57 Saint Paul speaking of concupiscence, which rebelled against the law of his
mind, Romans 7. 23. complained of his hard estate, that he could not rid his
fingers of it, v. 24. terming it expressly sin, v. 17. yet your Sess. 5. de
peccato orig. Act. 5.
Council of Trent denies, that concupiscence in the regenerate is sin: and
your Apparat. sac. verbo Patres antiqui.
Posseuin thinks it not meet, that we, after the example of the Apostle,
should call it sin. Stealing for need is sin, as appears Prou. 30. 9; yet
with Bellar. lib de matrim. cap. 27.
you, stealing for need, is no sin. And do not these two instances bewray,
that you make of sins no sins? But your turning the Commandments of God into
Evangelical counsels, puts it out of all doubt. For though it be a sin, not
to observe Gods commandments, yet according to your learning, it is no sin,
not to observe Gods counsels. Azor. instit. mor. part. 1. l. 4. cap. 9. 2.
(...)tur.
Nemo peccat si Dei consilia praetermittat: Vega de Iuslif. lib. 14 cap. 12.
Intermittere consilia nullum peccatum est: Bellar. lib. 2. de monach. cap. 7.
Consilium si non seruetur, nullam habet paenom, goes for good divinity with
you. Now that you turn the commandments of God into counsels, it is proved by
this, that Resist not evil, etc. Love your enemies: Lend, looking for nothing
again: Pray for them which curse you: Let you communication be Yea, yea, Nay,
nay: If thy right eye cause thee to offend, placke it out, and cast it from
thee: Take heed you give not your alms before men, to be seen of them, etc.
Be not careful: and Care not for to morrow. If any brother have a wife that
believes not, if she be content to dwell with him, let him not for sake her:
and the woman that has an husband that believes not, if he be content to
dwell with her, let her not for sake him: are held by See Ioh. de Combis in
compend. The l lib 5. cap. 70. and Ludolph. de vita Christi, part 2. cap. 12.
(...) Azorus part. 1. lib. 5. cap. 2. et Bellar. lib. de matrivion. cap. 12.
you, not commandments, but Evangelical counsels. For upon this ground it
follows, that though a man resist evil, though he love not his enemies,
though he pray not for them who curse him, though his communication be more
then yea and nay, though he pluck not out his right eye when it offends him,
though he give alms to be seen of men, though he be careful for to morrow,
though he leave his unbelieving wife who would dwell with him, etc. in all this
he sins not.

58 Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, is culpable of judgment:
and whosoever says Rada, is worthy to be punished by a Council, says our
Savior, Mat. 5. 2^. yet unadvised anger, and Racaing of a man's brother, are but
venial sin^ with Ioh. ^e Rada 2. par. cont. The^l. enter Tho. ^^ Scotum, cont.
17. Act. 2.
you. Foolish talking and jesting, which are things not comely, says S. Paul,
Ephesians. 5. 4. yet they are but venial sins with Ibid.
you. Of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account
thereof at the day of judgment, says our Savior, Mat. 12. 36. yet idle words
are but venial sins with Azor. insist. moral. lib. 4. c. 9. 7. quaritur.
you. Flattery, from which the Apostle clears himself as from a foul fault,
1 Thessalonians. 2. 5. is but a venial sin with Did. 25. vnum otarium.
you. Drinkings.
Continual haunting of Tavern or Alchouse, noted by the Apostle as an
heathenish sin. 1. Per. 4. 3. is but a venial sin with Did. 25. vnum
oravium.
you: no nor yet Bonauent. in centiloq. part. 1. cap. 6.
drunkenness it self, which is condemned by the Apostle in the same place.
The provoking of wife and children to anger, which the Apostle forbids, Col. 3.
1. 21. is but a venial sin with Did. 25. vnum orarium.
you. Though we read Psalm. 5. 6. that the Lord shall destroy them that speak
lies; yet lying, provided it be but in a meriment, is no more then a venial
sin with Bonauent. loco citato.
you. Yea some kind of periuri^, and cursed speaking, though cursed speakers be
1. Cor. 6. 10.
excluded the kingdom of heaven expressly, and periuri in general condemned.
Mal* 3. 5. are but venial sins with Did. 25. vnum orarium.
you. If a boy rob lis father but of little sums of money: if he steal pins,
points, bowls, or such small things from his ompanions, he sins but venially
in Arorius loco si. p. a citato.
your opinion. Provided a man hear a Mass on the Sabbath day, he may spend the
rest of the day in hawking, in hunting, in skirmishing, in iusting, in
tourneying, in bowling, in curding, in dicing, in dancing, in going to plays,
or any such like idle exercises, and sin not at all, as Tolet. in sum. lib. 4
cap. 24.
some of you say, or at Nauar. in Enchirid. cap. 13. nu. 15.
most but venially. To manage a man's own estate whickedly, by spending
wastfully, or sharing miserably: to play the glutton, to exceed in apparel, to
spend the time idly, to pray retohlesly, to brag of himself insolently, are
but venial sins with Azor. lib. eir, 8. quaritur.
you. For one w^min to call another woman whore, or these, or what ever comes
first to her tonques end: for servants to miscall and rail one on another, is
but a venial sin with Tolet. in sum. ib. 5. cap. 9.
you. For a man in his fury or choler to play any impious or desperate part, to
revile God and his Saints, is but a venial sin with Azor. lib. 4. c. 9. 7.
quaritur.
you. And does not this argue your Religion to be a licentious Religion, which
of such practices makes but peccadilloes?

59 It is foul sin for subjects to rebel against their Sovereigns, Romans
13. 2. yet you commend rebellion in subjects. W. C. in his Reply to f. Parsons
libel, printed Au. 1603. fol. 66.
Your College of Jesuits at Salamanca in Spain, concluded the seventh day of
March, Anno 1602. that the Papists in Ireland might favor the Arch traitor
Tyrone, idque magne cum merito, and spe retributionis aeternae, very
meritoriously, and with hope of heaven. And in Lewis of Bauaria the Emperor
his days, they who rebelled against him, Masil. Patauius. defensor pacis.
part. 2. cap. 26. p. 396.
were called by your predecessors, Ecclesiae filij, and vere fideles, your
Churches white sons and truly faithful; whereas they who stood with him, were
called Heretics and Schismatiks.

It is a foul sin to use vain repetition in prayer, Math. 6. 7. yet you
commend your Jesus Psalters, wherein you repeat one prayer 150 times.

To believe lies seems a foul sin: for God threatens such as he resolves to
damn, to send them strong dclusions that they should believe lies, 2. Thessal.
2. 11. yet you hold the believing of lies to be meritorious in some persons.
For, Si rusticus circa Articulos credat sue Episcopo proponenti aliquod dog ma
haereticorum, meretur in credendo, licet sit error: If a country fellow believe
the Bishop of his Diocese preaching some heretical point against an Article
of his faith, he merits in believing him, says In Sum. lib. 4. cap. 3.
Tolet. And do not these four instances prove, that you make of sins virtues?

60 You take upon you to forgive sins to commit: which is proved by this,
Canton. in hi^. Anglia. Ioh. Mayor. de gustis Scotorum. l. 4. cap. 3.
that the Abbot of Swines-head absolved a Monk who acquainted him with his
purpose of poisoning King John with a pot of Ale, before the Monk poisoned the
King. And by the testimony of the Germans: for in their Grauam, Nee. German.
grau^men. 3.
grieuances exhibited to Charles the fifth, they complained, that the pardoners
persuaded the people they could pardon nox as praeterit as nut futuras, both
faults past, and faults to come. And as much may be gathered out of Sigismonds
the Emperors words at the Council of Constance, who speaking against
dispensations, said thus: Ioh. Episc. Chemensis Onus E^cl^s. cap. 19. de
Indisposie. Romans Curiae, sect. 13.
Legimus Christum Petro potestatem duntaxat relaxandi peccata, non admittendi
dedisse: We read that Christ gave Peter only power to remit sins, but not
to commit sins. For it is plain by this, that the Peter's of his days took
upon them to dispense with such as had a mind to sin. But most directly the
point is proved by Candela^. ^^v^uon, (...) de absolut. ^^. 28. Edit. ^rixia.
1595.
Martinus Alfonsus Viualdus, that great famous Spanish Doctor, for in him we
read, Quod Papa habet omnimodum pote^^atem in omnes Christi fideles, tam quoad
commissa, quam quoad committend^ crimina absoluenda: That the Pope has all
manner of power over Christ's people, to absolve them as well from all crimes to
commit, as from crimes committed. And by our most In his Meditation upon the
Lords prayer, page 58. 59.
noble King, who protestech that he has seen with his own eyes two
Authentical bulls, both of them pardoning sin as well to come, as bypast.

61 You Gloss. in 32. q. 2 Quodautem.
confess, that Marriage was instituted by God in Paradise, not only for
increase of mankind, but for preventing fornication. And yet you Aror. iustit.
moral. part. 1. lib. 12. cap. 6. 3 quaritu^.
teach, that a solemn vow (by reason of the Churches constitution) makes a
nullitie of marriage following after it. Now I desire to know, with what
honesty the Church can repeal or make void the institution of God by any
constitution of hers. For you know there is a text, Those whom God has joined
together, let no man put asunder. Your Extrae. Ioh. 22. de voto et voti r^demp.
c. Antiq.
Glozer acknowledged, that admiranda res videtur esse ista, this might seem a
strange thing* but for satisfaction of such as thought it strange, he could
give no better answer, then that the constitutions made by the Church, are made
by your Pope, and that your Pope not being a pureman (which I easily believe)
all was well enough. But cannot you give me a better?

62 You Tho. Aquin. comment. in Tit. 1.
confess, that he is more capable of Orders among you, who has kept two
where is, then he who has married one widow or two wives. And if this be thus,
may we not say with another of your In cap. Quia circa. Extra de Big^nis.
Glozers, Nota mirabile quod plus habet luxuria quam castitas, observe a strange
thing, whoredom has greater privilege then chastity?

63 You Bellar. lib. 2. de Monach. cap. 30.
confess, that your Votaries break their vows of chastity if they marry,
but not if they keep whores. Now I would know of you, whether this does not
argue plainly, that your Votaries chastity consists in not marying, and not,
in not whoring? Your Friars, your Priests may lie with a hundred Nuns, and keep
for all that their vows of chastity, if this be so.

64 By your Religion, Coster. in E* chir. cap. 17. Caelibatu. sace. proposit. 9.
It is less evil in him that has vowed chastity, is whore, th^n to marries
Rhem. Annot. in 1. Cor. 7. 9.
Marriage of them who have vowed chastity, is the worst sort of incontinencie.
See Hasse(...)uler. histor. Jesuit. ordinis, cap. 10. Erasm. de lingua
They (in more grievously by marying, who vowed chastity before, then if they
played the Sodomits, a^ used the sin of bestialitie, according to your
divinity. Your Popes as good writers witness) have been Cornel Agrip. de
vanit. scient. cap 64.
erectors of stews, and ibid. and Sansonius de gubernat. regn. and reruinpub.
lib. 11. cap de Iud, Mareschallo. and Sultan.
have made great profit by the stews. Your Cardinals have been Peter Martyr
comm. in Iudic. c. 16.
frequenters of the stews: your Doctors have Harding Ans. to the Apology.
Jesuits at Wi^bitch Sparing discourse. p. 13.
defended the stews: your Agripp. loco sup. cit. and Grauam. nationis German.
nu 91.
Bishops have licensed Priests for a certain sum of money to keep whores:
and your Agrippa loco citato and Grauamen 96 n t^enis German.
Officials for money have licensed married wives in their husband^ absence to
play the whores. Adultery is reckned by Cap. Et^^i Clarics. Extra. de
Iudici(...).
your men, inter minora (...) amongst the peccadillos. And as for fornication in
Priests, ^
Communiter dicitur, quod pro simplici for nicatione qui^ deponimon debet, cum
pauci sine ill^ vitio inneniantur: The common opinion ^^ongst you is, that no
Priest should be deposed for it; because there are but few Priests who are free
from it. I am ashamed to speak of Job. in. Casa.
him, who in Italian verses commended the sin of Sodom, though your Pope made
him Archbishop of Beneuentum. Does no^ the rest prove your Religion an unclean
Religion; and that you have little cause to brag of your chastity?

65 By your Religion, the Images of Saints are to be worshipped with
Processions, Gen^ flextionibus, inclinationibus; (...)ficationibus, deo
sculationibus, oblationibus, luminarum accensibnibus, and perigrinatio by
kneeling unto them, by bowing the body toward them, by inconsing of them,
(that is, sacrificing unto them, as Ibid*
Lindwood expounds the word) by kissing of them, by offering gifts unto them,
by setting up candies before them, by going in pilgrimage unto them. Now I
would know why you should not be held Idolaters forthis, seeing sacrificing to
any thing but God only, has been always Exodus 22. 20. Austlin de Ciuit.
Dei, lib. 10. cap. 4
reputed idolatry; and the burning of incense to any thing, has been always
held sacrificing?

66 I have seen a Hor^ B. Virg. impress. Paris. (...) 4. An. 1526. fol. 62. 63.
prayer of yours, which (as the Rubricke says) was showed unto Saint Austin by
revelation of the holy Ghost; and of which you give out, that who bears it
about them, shall not perish in five nor water, neither in battle, nor
judgment, nor shall die sudden death, nor be poisoned with venom. z lib. 1.
sac. (...)
And I have seen certain verses which your Pope (...) sent with three Agnus
Deis, to the Emperoue of Greece, running thus:

Balsanius, and munds cura cum chrysmatis vnda,
Consiciunt Agnum quod muns douibimagnum.
Font velut musum, per mystica sanctificatum,
Falgura de sursum depell^t ^^^^malign^m
Peccaium frangit, vt Christi sanguis, and ^angit^
Pregnans seruatur, final and partia liberatur.
The English is Iof. Hala in h^ disswassue from Pogetie, prefixed his book
entitled, The peace of Rome.
Dona defert dignis, virtutem destruit (...)
Port^ses munde, de flucti^u^ ^r^pit v^ dae.
Balsam, and pure water, and chrysine licour clear,
Make up this precious Lamb I send thee here.
All lightning it dispels, and each ill sprite,
Remedies sin, and makes the heart contrite*
Even as the blood that Christ for us did shed:
It helps the child bed paincs, and gives good speed
Unto the birth: great gifts it still does win,
To all that wear it, and that worthy bin:
It quels the rage of fire; and cleanly bore,
It brings from shipwracks safely to the shore,
Now I desire to know (not how your Pope can be excused from blasphemy, in
ascribing as much to his Lamb, as to the Lamb of God; for I know that passes
your skill, but) how your Church can be excused from sorcery?

67 Some of your Painters picture Christ and Simon of Gyrene carrying the Gross
of Christ jointly* but (as Concord. Eu. (...) cap. 143.
Iansenius proves well they carried it severally, Christ one part of the way,
and Simon another part of the way; whereby appears it was far from a cart
load: yet you tell us of so many pieces of it, in so many places, as that you
cannot deny, but that at this day it would fraught a ship of three hundred
Tnnue. Now I desire to know, how it, being insensible, of less then a cart
load, is become a ship load; especially seeing for the first three hundred
years after Christ, no body discerned any growth of it, yea no body regarded
it?

68 Baron. Annal. 30. 3. ad an. 326. (...) 52.
Some of your Crircifixes represent Christ nailed upon the Gross with three
nails, some with four: of mo hoiles then four, we neither read in your
Laymen books, nor in your Clergy books: yet there are a number of nails
showed in diu^^^ places, which are said to be of the nails wh^^ withal
Christ wa^ nailed unto the Cross. Now ^ desire to know, how they being but
four at first, are come to so many now* especially considering both Russinus
hist. lib. 1. cap. 8. and Socrates hist. lib. 1. cap. 13. and Theodoret hist.
lib. 1. cap. 18. testify, that Constantine made bridles of some of them, and
an helmet of the rest of them: and that De gloria Marty^. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Gregory Turonensis who relates the matter a little differently, affirms,
Helena her self cast one of them into the sea, to make it safely nauigable.
Did that which she cast into the sea spawn^ think you, that we have such a
fry of nails?

69 You Maij 3.
keep a solemn feast in honor of the Cross whereon Christ died, though
Christ was most despightfully used thereon. Now I desire to know, why you keep
not rather a solemn feast in honor of the Ass whereon Christ rode into
Jerusalem, seeing he was Math. 21.
royally used when he rid upon the Ass?

70 You Bellar. lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 27.
teach, that the Cross of Christ is to be worshipped, ratione contact us,
because it touched the body of Christ. Upon which ground would it not follow,
I pray you, that if the woman who was cured of the blooddy issue, Luke 8. were
living, she must be worshipped? and the multitude too, who at the same time
thrust him, and trad upon him? Would it not follow, that Judas who kissed him,
and the other sons of Bebial who bufferted him; and all the ground whereon he
trod both in Egypt and in Judea, ought to be worshipped in like manner?

71 Allen in his defense of Purgatory, ch^^. 6.
I read in your books, that a Nothing can enter into heaven, which is not
purified to the point. Nothing can stand in Gods sight, that has any blemish
of su^ne, any spot of corruption, any remnant of infirmitte. And I read
likewise, that upon this ground you maintain, that many men's souls go to
Purgatory to be purified to the point, that afterward they may have entrance
into heaven. Now seeing you confess, that Michael. Epise. Me^spurg. in ^atech.
cone. 11. de Symb. Apost.
men's bodies sin against God as well as their souls; and Allen loco ci^.
that sin has wrought in the body great filth and feebleness: I desire to
know why you do not maintain that men's bodies go to Purgatory to fit them for
heaven, as well as men's souls? Me thinks, it should be as unseemly to see a
filthy, a feeble, a corrupt body, as to see a sinful soul in heaven.

72 You tell us, that Bellar. lib 1. de Purgat. cap. 1.
Purgatory is only for those souls which are not perfectly purged in this
life: and yet you tell us, that Idem lib. 2. de Purg. cap. 2.
many men's souls whose sir sare forgiven in this life, go to Purg atorie. Now
I would know, how these two tales can stand together. For as sin defiles the
soul, so forgiveness purges it. That soul, whose lins are forgiven, is
perfectly rurged. And therefore if your Purgatory be only for such souls as
are not perfectly purged in this life; in seems to me, it cannot be for those
souls whose sins are forgiven in this life. But if you mean to give me full
satisfaction herein, you may not mock me, by distinguishing, that in sin two
things are to be considered, viz. Culpa and pant, the fault, and the punishment
of the fault: laboring to make me believe, that though the fault beremitted,
yet the punishment remaining, there is matter enough for Purgatory to work
upon. For I would have you know, that I know well, it is the fault of sin,
and not the punishment of sin, which defiles the soul. Bonauentur. in
Centileq part. 2. sect. 2. Bellar lib. 1. de ansiss. great. cap. 14.
Omnis paena, in quantum pa^na est, iusta est, and a D^^^ All punishment
confidered as punishment, is just, and from God* And it is absurd to say,
punishment is purged with punishment.

73 I read in your books, that your Pope for delivering of souls out of
Purgatory, prescribes sometimes no more but the saying of a Mass at such an
Altar in such a Church: or the saying of a pater nester twice or thrice, etc.
Now I would know, with what justice God can keep him in such horrible torments
as you say are in Purgatory, for the want of saying of a Mass, or two or
three Pater nost^r^l, whom in mercy he meant to deliver upon the saying of a
Mass, or two or three Pater nosters. One of your Jesuits affirms
confidently, that Maldonat. to. 2. de poenit. cap. de Indulgen* q. 6. page 202.
Deus esset profecto crudelissimus, si propter vnam orationem Dominicam quae
non diceretur, animam pro qua fudie sanguinem suum detineret in tant is torment
is: God might justly be reputed cruel, if for want of pattering over a Pater
noster, he would keep any soul, for which he shed his blood, in such
torments as are in Purgatory.

74 I read in your books, Viuald in candelab. aur ^. tie. de satisfac. nu. 17
edit. Brix. Anno 1595.
Solum Deam nosse quae sit iusta poenitentia, that God only knows how long
any sin deferues to be punished in Purgatory; though Discip. de Temp ser.
156. D.
some take upon them precisely to set down, that every sin deserves as many
years Purgatory torments, as there are days in seven years, viz. 2555. And
yet I read that your Pope grants Indulgences in this manner: Qu^ hot veljll^^
secerit, liherabit ani^^m (...) a Purgatory: He that does this or that, shall
deliver a soul out of Purgatory. Now I would know, how your Pope comes to
know, that souls are so near the time of their delivery, that the doing of
this or that will suffice to make even for the remainder of their punishment?
or rather, whether you be not of my mind, that the Pope in granting such
Indulgences plays the K. and the people in making reckning of them play the
fools. The Jesuit above cited, Maldonat. loto supra citato.
disputing the question, An Papa vel Episcopi possint animas liberare a
Purgatorio: whether the Pope or the Bishops have power to deliver souls out of
Purgatory, resolves they have, provided, tantum pro illis suffragi^ru^ (...)
liberentur: sed tamen neque possent, neque debent vti hac forms, Qui hoc
velillud fecerit, liberabit animam vnam a Purgatorio: (...) illerum scit
quantum debeat paenar^^^ illa an^ma quae liberanda est, vt iudicare posset
satis esse illud suffragium quod praecipit ad liberandam illam* concluding
thus, Cum autem hoc ignoret, non potest nis^temere dicere, Qui fecerit hoc,
liberabit animam vnam; which is in effect as much as I say.

75 I read in your books, that as in the old Law there was a Luke 20.
Treasury to keep money in for the use of the poor; so now there is in the
Church a Zecchins de Indulg. and Iubil, cap. 1. n^. 6.
treasury to keep spiritual commodities in for the use of such, who having
their sins forgiven them, are yet liab^e to great punishments, either here or
in Purgatory. Which spiritual commodities are raised (as Bellar. lib. 1. de
Indulg. cap 2.
you tell us) of the surplussage of Christ's sufferings; and of the surplussage
of other holy persons, such as Job, Elias, Elizeus, Esaias, Jeremy, Ezekiel, and
other of the Prophets, the virgin Marie, John Baptist, etc. For Christ suffered
more then he needed; and many holy persons suffered more then their sins
deserved, Zecchius loco citato nu. 5.
as you say: Bellar. lib. 1. de Iudulg. cap. 4. ad ob. 3. and 4.
which, ne inanes and sine fructu essent, lest they should be thought to have
been suffered idly and to no purpose, are reserved for the use abouesaid; and
are to be disposed by your Pope, whom you make the Solus Papa habet claues
huius the sauri. Ioh. de Combis in compend. Theol. lib. 7. cap. 6.
one only Lord Treasurer thereof: he by his Indulgences may communicate more
or less of* them to whom he thinks good. Now in as much as you confess
withal, that Christ's sufferings are of themselves sufficient to make
satisfaction for the temporary punishment of all men, as well as for the
eternal, and yet not exhausted: I would know why the sufferings of the Saints
should be joined to them? and whether it be not as absurd to hold, that any
part of Christ's sufferings were inanes and sine fructa, idle and to no purpose,
as holy men's? and how it came to pass that such a mass of treasure arising
from holy persons in the old Law, the Priests of that time could make no use of
it, but left it untouched for your Pope?

76 I read in your books, Bellar. de amiss. great. lib. 6. cap. 12
that diseases of the body are temporal punishments of sin: and that Rhem.
Annot. in 2. Cor. 2. 11.
your holy mother the Church pardons exceeding often and much, all or great
parts of what punishment temporal soever due or deserved either in this world
or in the next. Now if your Mother has power to do so, I desire to know, why
she cures not by her pardons, the Ague-fits, the Strangurie, the Stone, the
Goat, wherewithal many of her children, her best beloved children, her
Cardinals, her Popes, are oftentimes afflicted?

77 I read in your books, Antonp^r^. 3. cit. 32. cap. 5. sect. 5.
that your Pope has power to empty Burgatory at once. And if the saying of a
Mass or a Pater noster will help to empty it, as you have borne men in hand
heretofore that it will; I would know how you can excuse your Popes from
unspeakable uncharitableness and hard heartedness, in that themselves say no
more Masses and Pater nosters for Christian souls then they do, nor set more of
their Priests on that work. I do not doubt, but if such commodities would
redeem souls, the Carmelites should have no cause to brag of their
privilege, viz. These. Calmel. impress. Paris. 1601. test Moulins in the
defense of the Cathol. faith. Artic. 21.
That none of them shall lie longer in Purgatory then the Saturday following
their death: for the Pope might deliver* every man the same day he died.

78 I read in your books, Horae. B. Virg. ad vsum Sarum in 16. p. 206.
that your Bishops may absolve from blasphemy, from heresy, from perjury,
from sorcerie, from Sodomitrie, from ince^s, from bestialitie, from murder,
and from such like sins: but they may not absolve him that strikes a Clergy
man, that falsifieth the Popes letters, that says Mass in an unhallowed
place, that buries an excommunicate person in the Church or Churchyard, etc.
These are Papal cases. The absolution from these is reserved to your Pope. Now
I would know, why they should be denied the lesser, to whom the greater is
granted. It is written, Sixth. Senens. Bibl. sanct. lib, 2. verbo Tradi^i^nes.
Rabbini grauius plectendos esse cos aiunt, qui contradicant verbis Sc^ibarum,
quam verbis Mosaicae leges: that the Rabbis say, I hey deserve more grievous
punishment who transgress the ordinances of the Scribes* then they who
transgress the ordinances of Moses. And does not this your reserving of Papal
ordinances to your Popes hearing, suffering ordinary Bishops to dispense with
the breaches of Gods ordinances, argue your kin-ship to Jew sh Rabbis?

79 They who knew your practices better then I do, have written, Erasni.
scholijs in. ^pist. ad Epise. Basil. de delectu ciborum. Nu 29.
Qui gustauit ouum, trahi^ur in carcerem, cogi^u^g de haeresi causam dicere:
qai totim dtem Dominicum vacat temulentiae, scortis and aleae, audit bell as
homo: such as entean egg on a fasting day, are imprisoned by you, and called
in question upon suspicion of heresy: whereas they who* spend the whole Lords
day in drunkenness, in whoring; in dicing, are accounted good fell owes. Gerson
^. part. epirum Tit. de directione cordis. consid. 30.
Seuerius punitur quindoque Monachus sine euculla incedens* quam adulterium ^ut
sac^ilegium committens: A Monk walking without his cowl, is more rigorously
dealt withal* then if he were guilty of adultery or sacrilege. And in
general, Ibid. and Ferus co (...) i^ Math. 15.
Grrauius plect^^ur agens contra vnum Papae decretum, quam delin quens contra
diuinum praeceptum and Euungelium: He who offends against the Popes law, is
more severely punished then he who offends against the law and the Gospel. And
does not this show, that as Ma^h. 15.
the Scribes and Pharisees, so you make void the commandments of God for your
traditions?

80 I have a Hor^ B Virp. secun lu^n rsum S^ um in 4. i^press Paris, An 1526.
book of yours, wherein there are many pardons granted upon the saying of
certain prayers, some for scores, some for hundreds of days, some for
hundreds, some for thousands of years: among which there is Fol. 6^.
one for 1000000 years; and Fol. 144.
another promising as many years of pardon as there are bodies buried in that
Churchyard where the prayer is said, which may amount to a numberless number;
though perhaps not to so many as Pope Treatise of diverse matters concerning
London. Chap. Of the whole Pardons of Rome, granted by diverse Popes
Siluester granted to the Church of S. John La ^erans, who at the (...) of it,
granted so many years of pardon thereto, as there fell drops of water that day,
albeit never man saw a ^^eater rain then fell that day. Now I would know of
you, why any man should trouble himself with saying of those prayers which have
petty pardons of days, or some hundreds of years assigned them? Me thinks
it were enough to say that prayer which has 1000000 years of pardon, and the
other Churchyard prayer, which comes to a nemo scit, and to let the rest
sleep in the deck.

81 You Michael Epise. Mersp in cat^ch. Ca^hol. centione 60.
teach, that Auricular confession is necessary, to the end that your Priests
having power to bind and loose, to remit sins and to retain them, may the
better know whom they should bind, whom they should loose: whose sins they
should remit, whose sins they should retain. And l Math. 16. John 20.
indeed it is plain by Scripture, that Priests (as you call them) have equal
power to bind and to loose, to remit sins and to retain them. But this is it
that I marvel at, and wherein I desire to be satisfied by you, why if
confession be so necessary for the two foresaid ends, we seldom or never
hear of any who came to be confessed, whatsoever their sins are, who are
bound by your Priests, whose sins are retained: but that all go away loosed,
all get absolution.

82 You Nauar. in Man praelud. 9. nu. 8.
teach, that innumerable sins are venial, that is, Rhem. Annot Romans 1. 3^.
pardonable of their own nature, De tani^. and remiss. ^. Omnis vtriusque
secus. in Glossae.
such as we need not make confession of, Az^^ins^it. moral. part 1. lib. 4. cap.
8. 9. quaritur.
such as for which a man deserves not to be called a sinner, Ibid. 6. quaeritur.
such as make no breach of friendship between God and us; such as God
(according to Benauent. in 2. d. 42. Act. 2 q 2. ad vls.
some of your Doctors) is not displeased with: Franc. a Victor. in sum. Sacram.
de poenit. nu. 110
such as may be pardoned in this life by a knock of the breast, by the Bishops
blessing, by the holy water sprinkle, by saying a Pater noster, etc. And yet
you tell us, that if these sins be not pardoned in this life, Bellar. lib. 2.
de Purg. cap. 1.
the delinquents shall go to Purgatory, where the pain is so intolerable,
that a Discip. de Tep. ser. 160. B.
good fellow who had lien there thirty years, having it in his choice, whether
he would lie there one day longer, or return to the earth, and be bound for an
hundred years together to walk upon sharp iron nails which should pierce
his feet, and to eat nothing but bread baked on the imbers, and to drink
nothing but vinegar mingled with gall, and to wear nothing but that which was
made of Camels hair, and to lie upon the bare earth with a stone under his
head in stead of a pillow; made thoise to abide all this rather then to abide
in Purgatory one day longer. Now I desire to know what the reason might be,
that God in the next world should torment his friends in so horrible manner,
whom he would have quit from blame in this world for a thing of nothing?

83 A Illyrieus de sectis etc. Papistarum, p. 219.
Gentleman of Germany paid a yearly annuitie out of his lands to a Monastery
not far from him, bequeathed by his father, to the end that the Monks therein
should pray for the deliverance of his fathers soul out of Purgatory. Now in
process of time, the Gentleman understood that the Monks of that Monastery
bragd much of certain Indulgences which they had lately procured, affirming,
that whosoever would buy them of them, might deliver out of Purgatory what
soul soever they desired. Hereupon the gentleman pretending great care to free
his fathers soul from Purgatory, made offer of a good large sum of money,
upon condition they would make him good assurance that by those Indulgences his
fathers soul should be indeed delivered. The Monks swear he need not doubt
hereof, for it was certain he should be delivered: yet for his better
security, they procure it to be confirmed under the seal of their Monastery
and of their Order, and cause it to be subscribed with their own hands and the
hand of their General, that by the purchase of those Ingulgences his fathers
soul was undoubtedly delivered out of Purgatory. With these assurances the
Gentleman departed. And when the Monks, upon his fathers anniuersary day came
unto him for their Annuitie, he denied the payment, because his fathers soul
was delivered by the Indulgences which they sold him. With which answer the
Monks were discontented, and complained of the Gentleman to the Bishop; who
gave judgment that the Gentleman must continue the payment of the Annuitie: to
which judgment the Gentleman refused to stand. My desire is, you would deliver
me your opinion, whether the Bishop had better reason to give such a judgment,
or the Gentleman to refule the judgment*

84 A Illyritus loto citato and Lauzterus de spec^ris, part. 2. cap. 13.
country fellow was wont in meriment to say, That he was verily persuaded there
were but a few souls in Purgatory, or rather none at all. For which he was
at length called in question by the Inquisiters. Now he confessed that he had
often said so, and thought he had good proole for it. For (quoth he) you, and
such as you are, teach us, that none go to Porgatorie but penitent Christians,
who have not in this life fully satisfied for their sins. And you teach us
withal* That every Mass delivers one soul (at least) out of Purgatory: and
that the first Mass of every Priest delivers fifteen souls: and that
innumerable souls are delivered by Indulgences. Now we all know, that in every
village and town, there are more Masses said every day then there dies
penitent Christians. And how then is it possible that there should be any
souls in Purgatory? Was not this case prettily argued?

85 Che^^nis. in Ream. part. 4. tit. de Indulg.
Tecolius the Pardoner bragd he could forgive sins to come and past Hereupon
a Germain gentleman procured of him a Pardon for a sin to come; and
afterward robbed the Pardoner as he passed through a Forest, professing that
that was the sin for which he procured the pardon which he bought of him. Did
not the Gentleman serve the Pardoner right?

86 You Bel'ar. lib. 3. de ^ccl s. cap. 2.
define your Church, to be a company of men prof^ssing one faith, under one
head, to wit, the Pope. Whereupon it must needs follow, (must it not think
you?) that when you have no Pope, you have no Church. Now after the death of
every Pope, there is a time wherein there is no Pope. Your Chair stands
empty, sometimes many days, sometimes many years. And does it not thereon
follow, that after the death of every of your Popes, there is a time wherein
you have no Church?

87 You brag as much of the name of the Church, as the Iet. 7. 4.
Jews of old did of the Temple of the Lord. At every other word (almost) the
Church is in your mouths. And if your champion Rat. 3.
Campion lie not, Audito Ecclesiae nomine hostis expalluit, We no sooner hear
of the name of the Church, but our hearts fail us. Now I pray you of all loves
tell, what you mean by the Church, when you Gretser. tract. de ag^ oseend.
Script. canon. cap 4. Col. 1888.
say the Church is Index omnium controuersi^^um, Judge of all contronersies: and
that Infallibilias verb Dci ex Ecclesi^^^stimon^o pendet, The in^allibility of
the word of God depends upon the Church: and that we must hear the Church. Are
you of Gretzers mind, who Idem lib. citat. cap. 6. col 190^. et defend. Bellar.
lib. 3. cap 10. col. 1450.
says, that in these particulars, per Ecclesiam intilligimus Romanam
Pontifitem: By the Church we mean the Pope? If so, much good do you with your
Church; I had rather be of a poor Chappelrie, then one of your Church.

88 It is said, that all you Pr^ests take this oath, Bulla Pij 4. sup. formae
profeil* sid constis. 30 in summa cons^^s. s^^m. Pont. d Greg. 9. vsque ad
Sixtum 5.
^go N^sacram Scripouram iuxta cum sensum quem t nuit and (...) sancta matter
Ecclesia, cuius est iud^care devero sensu and interpretatione sacrarum
Scripturarum admit; nec ^^m vnquam nis^iuxta voanimem consensum patrum
acc^piam and interpretabor: that is, I such a one, do take the holy Scripture
in that sense, which my holy mother the Church, whose duty it is to judge
which is the true sense of Scripture, has taken it, and takes it in: neither
will I ever take it in other sense then such as the Fathers give thereof with
one consent. Now if you do so, I would know how you can clear your selves from
perjury, seeing it is plain, you sometimes take and expound Scrriptures in
that sense, which never Father gave of them. As for example, Mica 7. v. 8. 9.
which Bellar. lib. 1. de Purg. cap. 3.
you allege for Purgatory: for no Father did ever so expound it. Sometimes you
take and expound them in that sense which is contrary to some Fathers; as when
Idem lib. 1. de Purg. cap. 7.
you expound the words in 24 of Prou. v. 16. of falling into sin: for Non de
iniquitat^bus, sed de tribulationibus loquitur: The text speaks not of falling
into sin, but of falling into adversity, says Austin de Ciuitate Dci, lib.
11. cap. 31. Sometimes you take and expound them in that sense which is
contrary to all the Fathers, which we find to have interpreted them; as when
Ioh. de Paris. Tract. de potest. Regia and Papali cap. 3. S^^pleton. Antidos.
in Euang. Ioh. cap. 10
you take Christ's words, Ioh. 10. 16. which he spoke of one Shepherd, to be
meant of your Pope, and not of Christ himself: for the Vide Rainold. Apolog.
Thesium, nu. 24.
Fathers say, that by one Shepherd, Christ meant himself.

89 I am told, Symanch. institut. Cathol. cap. 23. tit. de Eccles. nu. 5.
Apolog. Staph. adu. Illyr. fol. 82. 83. Pigh. Hierarch. E^cl. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Hos. lib. 3. de authorit. sac. Script.
you commend the Colliar, who being asked by a Devil, as he lay on his
deathbed; or by a Cardinal, as he was traveling on the way, how he believed,
returned answer, As the Church believed. And being asked, how the Church
believed, replied, As he believed. Vouchsafing no other answer, but, I believe
as the Church believes, and the Church believes as I believe. Now if this be
true, is it not true also, that Laico-papismus nihil aliud est quam merus
idiotismus, The Divinity of Lay*papists is nothing else but foolery? Certainly
Lib. 5. cap. 20. Ad maiorum iudicia confugiunt, etc.
Lactantius laughed at them as fools who being asked a reason of that which
they be^eeued, could give none, but rested in their forefathers judgments,
quod ills in sapientes fuerint, ills prohauerint, illi sciuerint, quodesset
optimum: because (forsooth) they were very wise, they approved of that which
they held, they knew what was best to be holden: concluding, that such did
seipsos sensibus spoliare, and ratione abdicare, show themselves idiots.

90 It is written by the Watson in his Quodlib p. 100 and Sparing discourse, p.
36.
Secular Priests, that when Sixtus^* conuenting the General of the Jesuits
before him, demanded why he and his Order called themselves Jesuits: and
receiving answer, that they did not call themselves so, but Clerks only of the
society of Iusus: and that the Pope replying said, But why should you
appropriate unto your selves to be of the society of Jesus, more then other
Christians are, of whom in general the p Apostle says, Vocati sumus in
societatem filij eius, We are called into the society l 1. Cor. 1. 2.
of Jesus? The Jesuits General made hereto no Replication. Now my desire is,
you would supply what was wanting in the General of the Iesuit^s: for me
thinks the Popes answer does convince the Jesuits to be as faulty in taking
upon them in special to be of the society of Jesus, as if they had taken upon
them to be named Jesuits of Jesus. Which was held altogether unlawful in
former, as well as in these later times. For nuno dicimur Christiani a Christo,
and in Paradiso appellabimur Iesuani a Jesus: We are here on earth called
Christians of Christ, whereas in heaven we shall be called Jesuits of Jesus,
In Mar ali part. 7. ser. 5. de parturit. Maria, part. 4. sol. 259.
says Bernardinus de Busti. And ratio quare dicimur Christiani a Christ and
non a Jesus Iesuaniest, quia rem signatam hoc nomt^^ Christus, scilicet
vnctionem nobis commendant; sed rem signatam nomine Jesus, non communicauit
nobis. Interpretatur enim Saluaeor, cuius effectus viz. saluare ipsi soli
conuenit. Ipse enim vt dicitur in Euangelio, Saluum faciet populum suum, etc.
acsi dicerit, ipse solus and non alius: The reason why (here) we are called
Christians of Christ, and not Jesuits of Jesus, is this, says Constit.
Prouin. lib. 1. ^it. de consuetudine. Huius autem.
Lindwood: Christ has communicated to us what is signified by his name Christ,
viz. unction, but he has not communicated unto us what is signified by his
name Jesus: for Jesus signisieth a Savior; and it is his property to save,
and no man's else, as the Scripture witnesses.

91 It is written, Arnald in his Pleadings against the Jesuits and Azor.
instit. moral. part 1 lib. 12. cap. 21.
that the whole Order of your Humble Friars were put down in an instant by Pius
5. Anno 1570. for that some of them would have murdered Cardinal Borrhomaeus.
See Sedulius coment. in vitam S Fran^is. cap 3. nu. 8.
And all the Friar Minorites were banished out of Apulia by Fred^rik 2. for that
they persuaded the people to put in execution the Popes commandment. Azer.
lib. cit. cap 5.
And the whole Order of the Templaries, for suspicion of impiety, were spoiled
of all they had by Clemens 5. approuement. Now I would know, if you and your
fellows had bin so served for your Powder plet, what reason you could have
rendered against such proceeding with you; seeing it is an old said saw, Fares
culpa, parespoena, They who sin alike, ought to be punished alike.

FINIS.

