A general Confession of sins to be said every morning.
O Almighty God our heavenly father, I confess and knoweledge that I am a
miserable and a wreatched sinner. and have manifold ways most greuousli
transgressed thy most godly commandments, through wicked thoughts,
ungodly lusts, sinful words and deeds, and in my whole life. In sin am I
borne and conceived, and there is no goodness in me, in as much as if thou
should enter into thy narrow judgment with me, iudginge me according unto
the same, I were never able to suffer or a bide it, but must needs perish and
be damned for ever. So little healpe: comfort or succor, is there either in
me, or in any other creature. Only this is mi comfort (O heavenly father /
that thou did not spare thy only dear beloved son, but did give him up
unto the most bitter, and most vile and slaundrus death of the cross for me,
that he might so pay the ransom for my sins, satisfi thy judgment, still
and pacify thy wrath reco^cile me again unto thee, and purchase me thy grace
and favor, and everlasting life. Wherefore, through the merit of his most
bitter death and passion, and through his innocent blood sheddinge, I beseech
thee, O heavenly father, that thou will vouchlafe to be gracious and merciful
unto me, to forgive, and to pardone me al my sins, to lighten my heart with
thy holy spirit, to renew, confirm and strengthen me with a right and a perfet
faith, and to inflame me i^ love toward thee and my neighbor, that I may
henceforthe with a willing and a glad heart, walk as it becomes me, in thy
most godly commandments, and so gloryfye and praise thee euerlastynglye.

And also that I may with a freconscience and a quiet heart in all manner of
temptacions afflictions, or necessities, and even in the very panges of death,
cry boldly and merely unto thee, and say: I believe in God the father almighty
maker of heaven and earth.

And in Jesus Christ. etc.

But O Lord God heavenly father, to comfort my self in affliction and
temptacion with these articles of the christen faith, it is not in my power.

For faith is thy gift, and for as much as thou will be prayed unto, and called
upon for it, I come unto the, to prai and beseech thee, both for that, and for
all my other necessities, even as thy dear beloved son our Savior Christ
Jesus has him self taught us. And from the very botom of my heart, I cry and
say: O our father which art in heaven. etc.

A prayer to be said in the morning.
O Merciful Lord God heuenlye father, I render most high lauds, praise and
thanks unto thee, that thou have preserved me both this night, and all the
time and days of my life hitherto under thy protection, and haste suffered me
to live until this present hour. And I beseech thee heartily, thou will
vouchsafe to receive me this day, and the residue of my whole life from
henceforthe into thy tuicion, rulinge and gouerninge me with thy holy spirit,
that al manner of darkness, of misbelief, infidelity, and of carnal lusts and
affections, may be utterly chased and driven out of my heart, and that I may be
justified and saved both body and soul through a right and a perfect faith,
and so walcke in the light of thy most godly truth, to thy glory and
praise, and to the profit and furtheraunce of mi neighbor, through Jesus
Christ our Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A lamentacion of a sinner.
ALas wretch that I am: comfortles and forsaken of al men, which have offended
both heaven and earth* whether shall I goo or whether shall I turn me? To whom
shall I fle for succor? Who shall have pity or compassion on me? Unto heaven
dare I not lift up mine eyes, for I have greuousli sinned against it, and in
the earth ca^ I find no place of defense, for I have been noysom unto it. What
shall I now do shall I despair? God forbid, ^ul mercyful is God and my
sauyoure is meke and loving, therefore God only is my refuge, he will not
despise his creature, another forsake his own Image. Unto the therefore most meke
and merciful god come I all sad and sorrowful* for thou only art my hope and
thou art only the door of my defense. But what shall I say unto thee, seeing I
dare not lift up my eyes. I will pour out the words of sorrow I will heartely
beseech thee for thy mercy to forgive me my sins.

O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the father of heaven have mercy upon us miserable sinners

O God the son, redeamer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son, redeamer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy ghost, procedynge from the father and the son: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O god the holy ghost proceading from the father and the son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God have mercy
upon us miserable (...)


