POPE JOANE. A DIALOGVE BETWEEN A PROTESTANT AND A PAPIS^.

Manifestly proving, that a woman called IOANE was Pope of Rome: against the
surmises and objections made to the contrary, by Robert Be^^^^mine and Caesar
Baronius ^^^dinals: Florimandus Raemondus, N. D. and (...) Popish writers,
impudently denying the same.

By ALEXANDER COOK.

LONDON, Printed for ED. BLVNT and W. BARRET. 1610.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, TOBIAS, MY LORD Archb. of York his Grace,
Primate and Metropolitan of England.
IT is lamentable to consider how many stars are fallen of late from heaven,
how many Goddesses on the earth have departed from the faith, and given heed
unto the spirit of errors, and doctrines of slanderers, to wit, the Papists.
Yet me thinks it is no matter of wonderment, because we read, That if men
receive not the love of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11
that they might be saved, God in his justice will give them strong delusions
to believe lies, that they may be damned: for few, or none, of these late
Apostataes, for any thing I can learn, were ever in love with the truth. Among
us they were, but they were not of us, as now appears by their departing from
us; for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us; doubtless
they would never have fallen to Popery. For though Popery be managed after the
most politic manner, yet in it self it is a gross Religion: and the
Perfiters thereof, as shameless men in auowing manifest untruths, and denying
known truths, as ever set pen to paper. All which it is as easy to prove, as
to object, against them. But my purpose at this time is, to lay open their
shame in denying known truths: which though it may be showed by diverse
particulars, as namely by N. ^. in his wa^nword to S. Franc. Hastings
wa^chword, ^ncounter. 1. ca. 2.
Parsons and In his reproof of D. Abbats defense o^ Mr. Per^^^s. Preface to
the Reader. p 10.
Bishops denying that they call their Pope their Lord God: by Apolog^ ad lib.
Jacob. mag. Britann regis cap. 15. p 208.
Bellarmines denying that any Jesuit had any hand in the powder treason: by
their Bell (...). Baron. P^ ghius, etc
general denying that Pope Honorius the first was an heretic, and by such
like: yet most apparently their impudehcy appears in denying the report of
Pope Ioane, which is proved by a cloud of witnesses in this discourse (which I
make bold to present unto your Grace:) for they are driven to feign, to forge,
to cogge, to play the fools, and in plain English, to lie all manner of lies,
for the covering of their shame in this. Onuphrius, Harding, Saunders, Cope,
Genebrard, Bellarmine, Bernartius, Florimondus, Papyrius Maso, Baronius,
Parsons, and diverse others, who have joined hand in hand, with purpose to
carry this cause away by strong hand; are so entangled in it, that it is with
them, as with birds in the lime twigs, which stick the faster in, by how much
they flutter the more to get out. Which if your Grace upon perusing (at your
best leisure) shall find true, my humble desire is, that you will give me leave
to publish it under your Graces name: partly, that by it the simpler sort (for
I write not for the learned) may have a taste by this of the honesty, or rather
the dishonesty of Papists in ha^dling of points in controversy: and partly,
that it may be a testimony of that reverent respect, which I acknowledge due
to such Church-Gouernours as your Grace is, who give attendance unto reading,
which the 1. Tim. 4. 13.
Apostle willed Timothy to do: and after the example of the ancient Bishops,
preach often: drawing on others, not by words only, but by example also, to
performance of like exercises. Hereafter, if it please God, that health, and
means of books serve, I shall light on some more profitable argument. In the
mean while, I pray God strengthen your Graces hands to the finishing of the
Lords work, in the Province wherein you sit, as one of the seven Angels in the
seven Churches mentioned in the Revelation: that by your Graces means, the
Epha, wherein Popish wickedness sits, may be lift up between the earth and
the heaven, and carried out of the North, into the land of Sinar, and set there
upon his own place.

Your Graces at commandment ALEXANDER COOK.

TO THE POPISH, or Catholic Reader.
PApist, or Catholic, choose whether name thou have a mind to: (for though I
know that of later years thou art proud of both, even of the name Baron annot.
in Martyol. To. October. 16. b. Lorinus in Act. Apost. c. 20. v. 30 Anastasius
Cochelet Palaestrita honoris D. Hallensis pro Lipsio cap. 1. page 6.
Papist, as well as of the name Bellar. lib. 4. de Ecclesia, cap. 4. Rhem.
annot. in Act. 11. 26.
Catholic; yet I envy thee neither: only I would have thee remember, that
that firebrand of hell Hildebrand, commonly called Gregory the 7. Baron. annot.
in Martyrol. Rolan. 10 c.
was the first man who challenged it as his sole right, to be called Papa, that
is, Pope, whence thou art called Papist: and that diverse are of opinion, as
Annot. in 1. ad Cor. 13.
Hugo de Victore notes, that in some sense the devil may be called a
Catholic) I offer unto thee here a discourse touching Pope Ioane (if thou
dare read it, for fear of falling into thy Popes curse) whose Popedom I
will make good unto thee, not by the testimonies of Pantaleon, and Functius,
and Sleidan, and Illyricus, and Constantinus Phrygio, and John Bale, and Robert
Barnes, because thou In Indice lib. prohibit.
have condemned their persons, and their books too, to hell: but by the
testimonies of thy brethren, the sons of thine own mother, because, as
Nouatian. de Trinitate, ca. 18 nu. 86. inter opera Tertulliani
one says, Firmum est genus probationis quod etiam ab aduersario sumitur, vt
vertias etiam ab inimicis veritatis probetur: that is a strong proof which is
wroong out of the adversary, when the enemies of truth are driven to bear
witness unto the truth. And as Vi^es de Instrumento probabilitatis.
another, Amici contra amicum, and inimici pro inimico inuincibile testimonium
est: which s^unds as I conceive it, thus. The testimony of a Papist against a
Papist, and the testimony of a Papist for a Protestant, is without exception.
The reason why I have framed it in way of Dialogue, was, that I might meet
more fully with all the cauils which thy Proctors use in pleading of this case:
and that it might be better understood of common Readers, who are sooner gulled
with continued discourses. If I have spoken truly, I would have thee bear
witness with me unto the truth; if otherwise, I am co^eent thou strike me. For
though I hold thy Papisme, in some respect, to be worse then Atheism, agreably
to a speech fathered upon Epiphanius: (...), Heresy is worse then Infidelity,
and by consequent thy self a dangerous neighbor to dwell by, because, as one
of thine own Maldonat. in Ioh. 4. 9.
Doctors writes, Certe periculosius est cum haereticis, quam cum Samaritanis,
quam cum gentilibus, aut Mahumetanis agere: It is questionless more dangerous
to dwell by an heretic, then to dwell by a Samaritane, by an heathen, by a
Turk: yet I am not so far out of love with thee, but I can be content to
learn of thee, as Lib. 2. Retract. cap. 18.
S. Austine did of Tyconius the heretic, if thou can teach me. Yea I
profess, that though it may be gathered out of Ratio. 10.
Campian, thy Champion, and Tiburne-Martyr, that thou beleeuest one heaven
cannot hold thee, and such as are of my opinion; though Fieri nequit vt
Lutheranus mo riens saluetur, gehennam euadat ex aeternis ignibus eripiatur. Si
mentior, damner ipse cu^ Lucifero, says, Co^terus, Resp. ad refutationem Lucae
Osiandr. Propostr. 8. page vlt.
Costerus wish strangely, that he may be damned both body and soul, if any of
us be saved: yet that has not estranged me so far from thee, but that I wish
thee well, even eyes to see the truth, and ingenuitie to acknowledge it.

POPE IOANE. A DIALOGVE BETWEEN A PROTESTANT AND a Papist, manifestly proving,
that a woman called Ioane, was Pope of Rome.
PROTESTANT. WEll met, and welcome home Sir. What new book have you brought us
down from London this Mart?


PAP. Oh, I have an excellent book, which discourses at large about Pope
Ioane, whose Popedom you cast in the Catholics teeth so often.


PROT. What language is it in, I pray you? French? or Latin? or English? and
who made it?


PAP. It was An. 1602. Posseuin in errat. and praetermis. 1. to. quae habe^tur
ad finem To. 3 Apparat. sac.
first written in French, but I have it in Latin. The Author of it is one
Florimondus Raemondus.


PROT. Florimondus Raemondus? what is he, that I never heard of him before? Is
he, and his book, of any credit?


PAP. He himself is reputed Vir, cum primis illustris ac pius, and doctrina
insignis. Baronius Annal. Tom. 10. ad An. 853. Nu 62.
a very famous man for life and learning, so that, at this present he is one of
the French Kings Council at Burdeux; and as for his book, it is of wonderful
esteem.


PROT. With whom I pray you?


PAP. Even with Cardinal Baronius. For Praecaeteris commendandus fama nobilis
Florimu^dus: Baronius loco citato.
he holds it the worthiest discourse that ever was made of that argument; He
professes, that he could have found in his heart to have inserted it into his
Annals, but that it is somewhat too large. For by it as the Cardinal further
Sic confecit mo^strum istud, vt nouat^^es pudeat, quae scripserunt vel
somniasse. Ibi d.
notes, he has so confounded all the pack of Heretics, who heretofore
vpbraided the Catholics with it, that now they are ashamed of that which they
have said,


PROT. But has any man else the like opinion of it?


PAP. Yea marry, Posseuin is of the same mind. For Prorsus confodit haereticos
q^i commentu^ illud spar^erunt in vulgus, vt amphus ea de fabula hiscere non
audeant. In Apparatu sac. verbo, Florimondus.
Posseuin says, that he has killed the heretics outright. That since the
publishing of that book the heretics are whisht, they dare talk no more of
a Pope Ioane.


PROT. This is much: but have you read it?


PAP. Read it? Yea I have read it again and again. Besides, I have compared
it with that which is written of the same argument, by Buchingerus in Germany:
by Charanza in Spain: by Onuphrius, and Bellarmine, and Baronius, in Italy: by
Turrian, and Bernartius in Belgia: by Pontacus in Aquitania: by Genebrard, and
Papyrius Massonus, in France: by Sanders, by Cope, by Harding, by Father
Parsons, and others of our own country.


PROT. And what say you now (after the reading of all these) to the story of
Pope Ioane, tell me in good earnest, and dissemble not.


PAP. I say, the very truth is, that the whole story of Pope Ioane, is Onuph.
Annot. in Plat. in vita Ioh. 8.
a fable; a Harding in his answer to Iuels Apology.
fond and vain fable, a N. D. part. 2. c. 5. Nu. 21. page 391. of the 3.
Conuers.
mere fable, an Idem nu. 36. page 403.
heretical fable, a Ibid.
ridiculous fiction: and so Idem nu. 21. page 391.
known to the learneder sort of Protestants among you, but that you will not
leave to delude the world with it, for lack of other matter. Yea Idem. Nu. 36.
page 403.
I say further, there are so many improbabilities, and moral impossibilities
in this tale, as no man of any mean judgment, discretion, or common sense,
will give credit thereto: but will easily see the vanity thereof. And in a
word, Impudentissime ficta, stul. tissime credita Bernartius de vtilitate
legendae hist. lib. 2. p. 105. in marg.
I say, he was a knave that devised it, and he is fool who believes it.


PROT. Now this is excellent in good truth: I see there is metal in you. But
what reason have you on your side, that you are so peremptory? Did it not run
for current without controlment till within these forty years, or thereabout:
to wit, till the year 1566, that Onuphrius the Friar began to bogle at it? Was
not Onuphrius the first, that ever by reason sought to discredit the report of
it? And yet does not even Multos and magni nominis viros historiam hanc
suscipere, came quoque vulgo verum existimari Loco supra citato.
he confess, that many men of worth, as well as of ordinary sort, believed it
for a truth? Is it not to be found in Marianus Scotus, in Sigebert, in
Gotefridus Viterbiensis, in Johannes de Parisiis, in Martinus Polonus, in
Petrarch, in Boccace, in Ramulsus Cestrensis, in Johannes Lucidus, in Alphonsus
e Carthagena, in Theodoricus de Niem, in Chalcocondilas, in Platina, in
Palmerius, in Nauclerus, in Sabellicus, in Trithemius, in Volateran, in
Bergomensis, in Schedel, in Laziardus, in Fulgosus, in Textor, in Gassarus, in
Mantuan, in Crantius, in Charanza, and a Batthol. Cassa. 2. part. Catal.
gloriae mundi, nona Consideratio. Ioh. Turrecremat. in Summa lib. 4. part. 2.
cap. 20. Carolus Molinaeus. comment. in Parifiens. co^ suetud. Tit. 1. nu. 26.
Caelius Rhodigin. Antiquarum lect. lib. 8. cap. 1.
number more of your own faction, and of your own friends? of which some were
Grecians, some Italians, some Spaniards, some French, some Germains, some
Polonians, some Scots, some English; and yet never a one of them a Lutheran.
Yea do we not find it in some of your stories set down in pictures? And is not
so much to be gathered by that image of hers, which is set up amongst the rest
of the images of the Popes in the renowned church of Siena in Italy, and is to
be seen there at this day: which the Bishop of that place would not suffer to
be defaced at the last repairing of that Church, though your Jesuits did
earnestly request him to deface it? Was there not made of old (for fear of
such like after-claps) a stool of easement, on which they were set at their
creation, for proof of their humanity? Was there not a marble image set up as
a monument thereof in that place where she miscarried? to wit, in one of the
chiefest streets in Rome? which monument was to be seen likewise within these
few years, even in Pius the 5. his time. And is it not written by men among
your selves, that your Popes, when they go in procession, refuse to go through
that street, in detestation of that fact, and go further about? How say you,
is it not even thus?


PAP. It is written (I Philip. Bergom. in Supplem. chron. lib. 11. ad a^. 858.
confess) that our Popes, in detestation of that fact, when they go in
procession to the Lateran Church, refuse to go through that street: but they
who write so, mistake the matter. For the true reason why they turn out of
that street, which is the nearer way, is, for that, that street is angusta and
anfractuosa, a narrow street, and such a one as winds this way and that way:
and in that respect, unfit for so great atraine, as ordinarily accompanies the
Pope to pass orderly through: as Loco supra citato.
Onuphrius, and Lib. 3. de To. Pont. cap. 24.
Bellarmine, and Fabula Ioannae, c. 21. p. 184.
Florimondus, have observed.


PROT. Say you so? why, but if it be true which Philippus Bergomensis has
storied, this observation is false: for Eo omisso (c says he) speaking of the
Popes turning out of that place of the street, In Supplement Chron. ad An. 858.
wherein Dame Ioane was delivered) declina ad diuerticula, vicosque and sic,
loco detestabili postergato, reintrantes, iter perficiunt quod coeperunt: that
is, Leaving that way, they turn into by-lanes and by-streets; and as soon as
they are beyond that detestable place, they turn into their way again, and so
go on in their procession. For if upon their leaving that street, they enter
into by-lanes and by-streets, and as soon as they are past that ominous place
turn in again; the reason why they leave that street cannot be, for that it
is narrow, and winding in and out. For no question, but those by-lanes, are as
narrow: and by their turning out, and returning into the same way again, they
wind as often in and out, as if they went along through the same street,
though it were very crooked. But howsoever, shift it among you: for it
suffices me, that you cannot deny, but that which I told you concerning this
point, is written by men of your own religion: especially seeing De vitis
pont. in vita Ioh. 8.
Platina, who knew Rome well enough, and was desirous to cover the Popes
nakedness herein, as much as he could with any honesty, confesses, that this
is probable enough. What have you to say to the rest of my speech?


PAP. Much. For whereas you say Onuphrius was the first who by reason sought to
discredit the report of it: that is not so. Johannes de Columna a good writer
of Chronicles, long before Onuphrius, has likewise utterly rejected the
vanity of this fable as D. Co^futat. of the Apology, part. 4. fol. 166.
Harding notes.


PRO. Johannes de Columna his history is extant in Lattine in the University
library at Oxford: and in French, in New College library. But there is not one
word, good, or bad, for, or against Pope Ioane in it. If he rejected it, he
rejected it by silence.


PAP. But Annaliu^ Boiorum lib. 4.
Johannes Auentinus, rejected it in plain words. And he wrote a good many
years before Onuphrius.


PROT. Johannes Auentinus (I grant) reiects it as a fable in one word, but he
gives no reason of his rejecting of it. Besides, Ioh. Auentinus author parum
probatae fider: says Bell Append. ad ^o. de sum. Pont cap. 10.
Bellarmine casts him off as a writer of small credit: and Infecta^ haeresis
scabre bestiam pietate and doctrina omnino desertam. Baron Annal To. 10. ad
996. Nu. 54.
Baronius brands him, not merely for a skabd sheep, but for an heretical
skabby beast, destitute both of honesty and learning: and diverse of your Popes
have In Indicibus lib. prohibitorum.
cried down his history, as unworthy of reading; wherefore I see no reason,
that his reason-lesse rejecting of it, does any way prejudice the truth of it.
What have you else to say?


PAP. First I would know who told you there was such a marble image in one of
the streets at Rome?


PRO. Lib de priuilegijs and iuribus Imperij.
Theodoricus de Niem, who was Secretary to one of your Popes, told me that: for
Adhuc vetus statua marmorea illic positafiguratiue monstrat hoc factum, says
Theodoricus de Niem: that is, Unto this day an old marble image erected in that
place shows the matter under a figure.


PAP. Indeed Florimond. lib citato. cap. 21. nu. 2.
I cannot deny but that in former ages many have said so, and (to confess a
truth) I my self have read as much in Antoninus Archbishop of Florence, and in
Peter Mexia. But verily that image resembled no such thing. For neither was it
like a woman lying in childbed, nor was the boy which was graven by her, like
a child in the swaddling clouts, but like one of some years.


PRO. This your exception is to no purpose; for that age was a learne-lesse and
a witless age. And therefore perhaps had no more skill in grauing, caruing,
and painting, then they had, Aelian de varia hist. lib. 10.
who were driven to set either under, or above their pictures, Hoc est bos:
illudequus: hoc arbor: that men might know what kind of creature it was that
they had painted. Questionless Epist. 120.
Aeneas Syluius, pointing to a better time then that of Pope Ioanes, condemns
the painters and caruers thereof for notorious bunglers, saying thus; Si
duce^torum, trecentorumue annorum, aut sculpturas intu^beris, aut picturas:
inuenies non hominum, sed monstrorum portentorumque facies: that is, If thou
observe the graven or painted images which were made two or three hundred
years agone, thou shall find, that they are faced more like monsters, and
hobgoblins, then men. Now if they were such, what marvel, though intending to
ingraue a woman traveling, or rather newly delivered of a child, they did it
but untowardly? But what I pray you does that Image represent, if it represent
not Pope Ioane?


PAP. Lib. 3. de To. Pont. cap. 24.
Cardinal Bellarmine seems to like of their opinion, who guess that some
heathenish priest, who was about to offer sacrifice, and had his man before
him, is denoted thereby. But I am rather of Cap. citat. nu. 6
Florimondus mind, who thinks it was an idol, even an image of some of the
gods of the heathen.


PROT. If it had represented a sacrificing priest, and his man: the man should
have been graven behind, and not before his master. For the servant follows
his master, 1. Sam. 14. 12. 13.
as the young man that bare Ionathans armor, followed Jonathan, wherefore you
have reason to leave Bellarmine in this. But why do you incline to Florimondus?
does he give you any reason for this opinion? or alleges any Author of his
opinion?


PAP. Yes, Cum Onuphrio Panuino antiquitatis perscrutatore diligentissimo vetus
aliquod idolum existimaui. Florim. ibid.
he professes, that he follows Onuphrius therein, who was a most diligent
Antiquary.


PROT. But he lies in that. For Onuphrius speaks not one word good or bad of
this marble Image. He passes it over in silence, as though no man had ever
spoken of it.


PAP. I marvel if that be so. But yet I rest persuaded upon Florimondus next
reason, that that Image resembled not Pope Ioane. For if the ingrauer had
purposed to express such a matter, and to continue thereby the memory thereof
to the worlds end, he would have set some Inscriptionem praefixisset. page 188.
inscription over it; for so do all men who erect monuments for remembrances.


PROT. That is not so, for we read in Lib. 7. hist. cap. 14.
Eusebius, that the Mat. 9. 21.
woman who was cured by our Savior Christ of her issue of blood, etc. erected
(after the custom of the heathen) an image of him, no doubt for remembrance
sake. But we read of no inscription written upon it. In the book of Cap. 4.
7. 8.
Joshua we read, that the Israelites were commanded to lay 12. stones upon an
heap, as a memorial unto their children for ever. And yet it is plain by the
circumstances they set nothing thereon in writing. When you paint S. Peter, you
paint him with keys in his hand, and set no inscription over his head, nor
under his feet, as Obserat. in Annal. tom. 1 ad an. 57. apud Posseuin. in
Apparat sac. verbo. Caesar Baron.
Baronius confesses. Wherefore for any thing I yet hear, it is most probable
that it was set up for a monument of Pope Ioane.


PAP. Enjoy your conceit. But Sixtus quintus hunc vicum rectiorem duci curauit,
quo factum est vt imago illa sublata sit. Florim. cap. 21. p. 189.
I can tell you one thing. That image is now removed out of that place. For
Sixtus Quintus, that great builder and mender of high ways, when he made that
street straight, wherein that image was, was forced to remove that Image.


PROT. Belike, that image would have been some blemish unto the street, if it
had remained: and that made him move it.


PAP. Yea marry would it.


PROT. Now well fare his heart that was so careful to rid the streets of
such a combersome monument. But who told you that Sixtus Quintus removed it
upon that occasion?


PAP. Loco citato.
Florimondus.


PROT. Was it he? Then know him for a lier whilst you live: for it was Pius
Quintus, and not Sixtus Quintus, who removed it. And Pius Quintus removed it,
and cast it into Tiber, not for that it disgraced the street: but vt memoriam
historiae illius aboleret: that he might extinguish the memory of that shameful
act. And this is witnessed not only by some travelers, who were at that time
in Rome; but by Historia Iesuitici ordinis, cap. 10. de Iesoitarum patre and
matre.
Elias Hassenmuller, one (once) of your fiery order of Jesuits. Your
Florimondus will not deserve (I fear) half the commendation you have given
him.


PAP. I doubt not but he will acquit himself like a man, of whatsoever you can
say against him. But whence had you that of the stool of easeme^t, I pray you?
for Lib. 3. de To. Pont. cap 24.
in Bellarmin I read, that de sede ad explorandum sexu^ nulla vsquam mentio. Of
a stool of easement, to try the Popes sex, there is no where any mention:
and in Fabulosum, and ab imperito vulgo fictum. Annotat. in Plat. in vit. Ioh.
8.
Onuphrius, that it is but a mere toy, and an idle conceit of idle people.


PROT. That of the stool of easement, is recorded by Philippus Bergomensis,
Nobiliter doctus, historiographus celeberrimus. Trith. de Script. eccles.
verbo. Iacobus Bergomensis.
a man of great worth in his time as Trithemius witnesses. For upon mention
made of Pope Ioanes story, Ad euitandos similes errores statutum fuit ( In
Supplement. Chron, ad An. 858.
says he) ne quis de caetero in B. Petri collocaretur sede, priusquam per
perforatam sedem futuri Pontificis genitalia ab vltimo Diacono Cardinale
attrectarentur. That is, For avoiding like error in future times, it was
decreed: that no man should be held for Pope, till the youngest Cardinal Deacon
had found by trial, while he sat upon a stool of easement, that he was a
man. which is likewise testified by De rebus Turcicis, l. 6. page 98.
Laonicus Chalchondylas. For upon relation of that story, he goes on thus:
Quapropter ne decipiantur iterum, sed rem cognoscant, neque ambigant:
Pontificis creati virilia tangunt, and qui tangit, acclamat: Mas nobis Dominus
est: that is, Lest they should be deceived again, they make proof by feeling;
and he that feels makes it known by crying out; We have a man Pope. And you
may find as much in a later Papist, who within these few years, writ a book
of the Harmony of Romish magistrates, and in it this.


PAP. You say true indeed. For I now remember Cap. 18. p. 159. In ridiculorum
authorum grege anumerandus est.
Florimondus confesses so much, yet he reproves the Author for writing so.
But let us go on: for I long to hear of whom you heard that such a chair was
to be seen, in the Popes palace, within these few years.


PRO. I heard that of Aencid 9. lib. 1.
Sabellicus. For writing of the same matter, Spectatur adhuc in Pontificia domo
marmorea sella (says he) circa medium inanis, qua nonus Pontifex continuo ab
eius creatione resedit, vt sedentis genitalia ab vltimo Diacono attrectentur.
That is, There is to be seen at this day in the Popes palace, a chair of
marble, wherein the new Pope presently upon his election is set down, that as
he sits, the lowest Deacon may make trial of his humanity by touching. And
you may find as much in William Brewin, who lived in the year 1470. for in
Wilhelmus Brewin in codice manuscripto de 7. Ecclesijs principalibus v^bis
Romae.
Capella Saluatoris (says he) sunt duae vel plures cathedrae de lapide
marmoreo and cubio, cum for aminibus in ijs sculptis, super quas cathedras, vt
audiui ibidem, est probatio Papae, vtrum sit masculus, an non. That is, In the
chapel of our Savior there are two or three marble chaires with holes in
them, wherein, as I heard there, they make proof whether the Pope be a man or
no.


PAP. Cap. 20. page 176.
Florimondus acknowledges there is yet such a chair, wherein the Popesits
after his election. But that he sits therein to such an end as you speak, that
he utterly denies.


PROT. And what is his reason?


PAP. Ibid p. 181.
Because he sittes therein not in a corner, but in the great Church of S. John
Latera^, whither all the world (almost) comes to see him; where he is attended
by the whole College of Cardinals, and whereat there are many Ambassadors of
kings and Princes: for a closer place were fitter for such a purpose. They
might more conveniently have made trial of his humanity in the conclaue where
he was chosen.


PROT. And so they did, it seems: for presently upon their electing of him
before they proclaimed him Pope, they set him in a chair in their conclaue, as
you may read in the book of holy ceremonies dedicated to Leo the 10. Whereby
you may see how idly Lib. 3. de To. Pont. cap. 24.
Bellarmine talks, who taking upon him to clear the point, never speaks of
his sitting in the chair in the conclaue, but only of his sitting in certain
other chaires at S. John Laterans, as though he had been chaired only in
public, and not in private: and that he himself had said sufficiently to the
point in question, by proving that in public there was no such conclusion
tried with the Pope: whereas the conclusion was tried in secret. But can you
tell me what the end is why the Pope sits in such a chair in public?


PAP. Marry to the end that thereby he may be put in mind, that he is not God,
but man: in as much as he stands in need of a close stool as well as others:
for so says Cap. 20. p. 177. and 188.
Florimondus.


PROT. I promise you and he had need to be put in mind thereof. For though N.
D. in his Warn-word to Sir Fr. Hastings Encounter 1. cap. 2. fol. 30.
some Papists shamefully deny it, there have been popish clawbackes, Cap. Cum
inter. Extrau. Ioh. 22. impress. Paris. 1513. and Lugduni. 1555
who in plain words have termed the Pope, as Ioh. 20 28.
S. Thomas termed Christ: their Lord and God: and there are still Plane
supremum in terris numen. Stapleton princip. fid. doctrine praefat ad Greg. 13.
who give him such titles as are due to God, and ascribe like power to him and
God. But me thinks, they should not need to have set him in such a chair to
such a purpose; for his own necessity would have driven him to set himself
thereon ordinarily every day: and his chamber pot would have served to put him
in mind of his humanity sufficiently. For Antigonus the elder knew by that,
that he was man and not a God, as Part. 2. Moral. lib. de Iside and Osi^^de.
Plutarch writes. Besides, me thinks they should not have intended such a
mystery by such a ceremony, because they set him therein before he was in his
pontificalibus: for till he be mitred, till he be crowned, till he have
received the keys, whereby is denoted his power to bind and loose: and a rod,
whereby is denoted his power to punish the obstinate: me thinks there should
be no fear of forgetting himself. For till such ceremonies be performed, he
is not in his ruff. Again, had it not been better think you, if they had
aimed at any such mark, to have caused a boy to come every morning unto the
Popes chamber door (after the example of Stobaeus sermon. 19. ex Aeliano.
Philip king of Macedonia) who should have whoopt him out of his bed, and bid
him remember, that he was mortal?


PAP. If you like not Florimondus conjecture touching that ceremony, what say
you to Lib. 3. de To. Pont. cap. 24.
Bellarmines, which is: That he is set on such a stool, to signify how he is
raised from base estate, to supreme honor?


PROT. I say Bellarmines conjecture is as improbable, and fond as Florimondus.
For your Popes, since Pope Ioanes days, have been chosen for the most part out
of the number of your Cardinals. And your Cardinals estate is not so base, as
that he who is advanced from that unto the Papacy, can be truly said, to be
taken in any sort from off a close stool. For they are generally Cardinalatus
celsitudo ac splendour, dignitati regiae comparatur Sixtus. 5. in constitut. 5.
in princip. and sect. Praeterea. Ioh. Franciscus Leo. in Thesauro fori
Ecclesiastici, part. 1. cap. 2. nu. 1.
Princes fellows. Yea some of them (you cannot but know) have not been ashamed
to prefixe their own names before their own kings, using these words: I and
my king. Wherefore unless you can render me some better reason, why your Popes
are set on such a seat, I shall remain persuaded that in former times it was
for proof of their humanity, upon the accident aforesaid.


PAP. Enjoy your opinion for me. But where read you that there was such an
Image in the Church of Siena, which the Jesuits would have defaced, but that
the Bishop of the place would not suffer them?


PROT. That I have heard by many travelers, and read in master Bell; both in
his book of Lib. 2 cap. 6 Conclus. 3. page 80
Motives concerning the Romish religion, and in his Part. 3. cap. 2. p. 191.
Survey of Popery: whereunto never a Papist of you all dare answer.


PAP. Yes we dare, though we do not. But I can tell you news. Florim cap. 22.
p. 194.
That Image of Pope Ioane, which was set up in the Church of Siena, is cast
down by the commandment of Clement the 8. by the means of Caesar Baronius,
at the request of Florimondus. Caesar Baronius has certified Florimondus so
much by a letter, and for joy, Page 195.
Florimondus has published it unto the world.


PROT. What? is that Image cast down too? Florimondus might do well, to make
request to the present Pope, that those books which write of Pope Ioane may be
burned; in hope, that the present Pope will as readily burn the books, as
Clement the 8. threw down that Image, and Pius Quintus the other. And so in
time to come, when all evidences are imbezeled, and all monuments defaced, and
made out of the way, it will be a plain case there was never any Pope Ioane.


PAP. Oh! this angers you I perceive. And yet why should you be angry at the
throwing down of this? For suppose it had stood still, is there any sense that
because of such an Image, we should be bound the rather to believe there was
such a Pope? Si ea quae ab artificibus manu finguntur, credamus esse vera,
interdum veteris and noui Testamenti historiam peruertemus, etc. Florim p. 193.
I can tell you if we believe Painters and caruers we may soon mar all: for
in Saint Andrews Church at Burdeux, one of the excellentest Churches in all
France, our Savior Christ is described ascending up to heaven upon the back
of a flying Eagle: which stands not well with the Scripture.


PROT. That's true, if we believe your painters and caruers, we shall soon
mar all indeed. For we find the Trinity painted by you, sometimes in the
likeness of a man with three faces: sometimes in the likeness of a man, with
two heads, having a dove between the^; both which fashions of painting the
Trinity, are monstrous in Lib. 2. de Imag. cap 8.
Bellarmines opinion. We find our Savior Christ painted with long hair, as
though he had been a Nazarite by vow: which conceit is controlled by For
Nazarites must drink no wine. Numb. 6. 3. yet our Savior did, Mat. 11. 19. and
26. 29.
Scripture. We find him set on a weathercocke upon the top of the Temple of
Jerusalem, as though that Temple had had a spire steeple like ours: Tho. de
Truxillo. Ord. praedic. Domin. 1. Quadrag. conc. 1.
which is neither so, nor so. We find the virgin Marie treading on the
Serpents head, which the Genesis 3.
Scriptures foretold, that Christ himself should do. We find her set out in a
gown of wrought gold: whereas (no question) she was meanly apparelled: and
with a pair of Beads in her hand, whereas of a thousand years after Christ
there were Test Polydoro Virgilio de Invent. rerum, lib. 5. cap. 9
no Beads in the world. In like sort we find Hieron. ab Oleastro in Exodus 34.
and Aug. Steuchus in recognit. vet. Test. ad Hebraicam verit. in Exodus 34.
Moses painted with two horns; Iansen. Concord. Euang. cap. 13.
John Baptist, in a raw Camels skin; In nouis Biblijs Sixti Quinti and Clem 8.
yet he writ it 90 aetatis annum excedens, vt docet Baron. Annal To 1 ad An. 99.
nu. 2.
John the Evangelist, like a beardles boy, when he writ his Gospel; c Marie
Magdelen in a loose gown; Scultingus Confessio Hieronymiana. Polyd. Virg. de
Invent. rerum, lib. 4. cap. 9.
S. Jerome in his Cardinals robes: all which is false as God is true. Besides,
your painters reco^mend unto us a Saint on horseback, whom they call George.
And an other Saint on foot, as big as a Giant, whom they call Christopher: and
a she Saint, broken upon a where, whom they call Catharin: and a fourth drawn
in pieces with horses, whom they call Hippolitus: whereas in all antiquity, For
proof whereof see D. Rayn. de To. Ecclesiae Idololat. lib 1. c. 5. nu. 21. etc.
there is no mention of any such Saints. So that you never spoke a truer word
in your life, then this, that if we believe painters and caruers, we shall
soon mar all. But what if book proof concur with painting and caruing?
may we not then without fear of marring all, give credit to painters and
caruers? your Lib. 2. de To. Pont. cap. 11.
Bellarmin is of opinion that there can be no error in substance, as long as
besides booke-proofe, there be monuments of stone, or of brass, for the proof
of any ancient report. And if he speak the words of truth, the truth is with
us; for besides monuments of stone, we have the testimonies of many writers.


PAP. But not so many as you brag of, I believe. And besides, Si huius commenti
authors spectes, nihil illis vilius. Florim. c. 31. nu. 1.
those you have are but paltrie writers.


PROT. That shall be seen by a more particular view of them. Wherefore first,
what say you to Charanza, the last of them whom I named, who was a ah divinity
reader among you, and afterward Posseuinus Apparat. sacro. verbo. Barth.
Caranza.
Archbishop of Toledo in Spain? was he a paltrie writer? or has he not this
story, in your opinion?


PAP. I think he has it not. For Cap. 31. nu. 6.
Florimondus names Charanza, among them who disproued the story of Pope Ioane,
before he himself fell to disprove it.


PROT. Does he so? doubtless then he belies Charanza. For this is all that In
Sum. Conc. P. 370. edit. Paril 1564.
Charanza writes of that argument. lohannes 8. Papa. 105. sub Petro, sedit An.
2. men's. 1. dies 4. De hoc ferunt, quod malis artibus pontificatum adeptus est,
quoniam cum esset foemina, sexum mentitus est; and postea a seruo compressa,
doloribus circu^nenta, mortua est. Which in english is this. John the 8. the
105. Pope from S. Peter, sat 2. years 1. month, and 4. days. They report of
this person that he got the Papacy by evil means, because he feigned himself
to be a man, whereas in truth he was a woman; who being afterward begot with
child by one of her servants, fell in travel and died thereon. And this is not
disprouing of it. Is it trow you?


PAP. No verily if he say no more of it, but perhaps he says more, and you
conceal it from me?


PROT. Not a word I warrant you. Wherefore let us go on, and observe, who, and
what manner of men the rest are, who bear witness with us in this case. What
say you to Kra^tius? has he not this story? or is he but a paltry writer?


PAP. Krantius is commended by Chronograph. lib. 2.
Pontanus, for a famous historiographer. And seeing he wrote before Luthers
days there is no reason ( Krantius, homo Germanus, and qui ante Lutheranas
contentiones scripsit: proinde nec odio nec amore ducebatur. lib. 2. de effectu
Sacram. cap. 18.
as Bellarmine notes upon another occasion) that he should be suspected to
write any thing for love or hatred. But has he this story?


PROT. Yea. Metrop. lib. 2. edit. Colon. 1574. and Francofurt. 1590.
For these are his own words. Johannes Anglicus, ex Moguntia mulier, mentita
sexum, quum acutissimo ingenio and promptissima lingua doctissme loqueretur,
adeo inse conuertit omnium animos, vt pontificatum adipisceretur, vno famulo
sexum eius cognoscente, a quo compressa pregnans efficitur: and fertur
peperisse apud Colosseum An. 2. necdum expleto, in partu moritur: which in
effect sounds thus: John English, a woman of Mentz dissembled her sex, and
being of a quick wit and glib tongue; and one that could speak very
scholerlike, she won the hearts of all men, that she got the Papacy, no man
knowing any other but that she was a man, save one of her servants, who
afterward got her with child. They say she was delivered near the Colosses,
before she had sitten full two years. Thus Krantius.


PAP. And has Mantuan the same, whom you cited next before Krantius?


PROT. Yea Mantuan, who is commended by De Script. Ecclesiasticis. verbo.
Baptista Mantuanus.
Trithemius for a great Divine, an excellent Philosopher, and a famous Poet,
the only man in all Italy in his time: Mantuan, Philip. Beroaldus Hieron.
Carmelitae, ad initium To. 2. operum Mantuani.
at whom the people pointed as he went in the streets, and said, This is he;
which was wont to be held a matter of extraordinary credit. Mantuan, of whom
Picus Mirandula, Pontanus, Beroaldus, Baronius, Posseuin, and diverse others,
Posseuin. in Apparatu sacro, Tom. 1. verbo. Baptista.
give honorable testimony. This Mantuan has this story. For, falling to
describe hell, and what manner of persons were in hell, Hic ( Tom. 3. lib. 3.
Alphonsi. fol. 44. edit. Francof. 1573.
says he) pendebat adhuc sexum mentita virilem
Foemina, cui triplici Phrygiam diademate mitram
Extollebat apex, and Pontificalis adulter.
Which in effect sounds thus much* Here hanged the woman who went like a man,
and came to the Popedom. And here hanged he that committed adultery with her.


PAP You say right: for I remember now that Cap. 22. nu. 3.
Florimondus confesses the tale is in Mantuan. But Mantuan deserves no credit
in this: for he writes worse of her then ever any did before him: and Stabuli
po^tificij praefectum eum illa, laqueo in collum inserto suspensum,
commentatur. Flor^m. Ibid. and cap. 23. nu. 6.
feignes, very ridiculously, that her horsekeeper who got her with child, and
she were both hanged together.


PROT. Mantuan talks of no horsekeeper of hers, but in general of one who
committed adultery with her, nor of any hanging, save of their hanging in hell,
which is likely enough to be true. Your Florimondus can lay his finger upon
nothing, but he grimes it. He can comment upon no man's words, but he wrests
them. There is not a word in Mantuan more (concerning her) then that which is
comprehended in the three verses cited.


PAP. At better leisure I will examine your words more narrowly. In the mean
time, what has Achilles Gassarus for your purpose?


PROT. Achilles Gassarus, in his Epitome of all Histories and Chronicles,
collected out of the best historiographers, Achilles. Gassarus in Epit. hist
etc. impres. Antuerp. in aedibus Stelsij. 1536.
has these words: Johannes octauus, natione Anglicus, officio Papa, sexu tamen
foemina, sedit annos 2. and men's. 6. turpissime. Which is: John the eight, by
country of England, by calling a Pope, yet by sex a woman, sat shamefully as
Pope two years and six months. Is not this plain?


PAP. Yes: but what find you in Rauisius Textor?


PROT. Scitum est ex Chronicis, and a maioribus scriptu^ (says In Officina
Tit. Mulieres virilem habitum mentitae.
Rauisius Textor) Iohannem Anglicum ab Ephebis sexum virilem simulasse, and
tandem fato nescio quo, aut fortuna certe volente, ad Pontificatum peruenisse,
in quo annos circiter duos sederit, post Leonem 4. neque prius innotuerit facti
veritas, quam a quodam ex domesticis impregnata, tandem emiserit partum. That
is, It is a thing well known by the Chronicles, and written by our ancestors,
that John English from her youth up carried her self as though she had been a
man, and at length, by I know not what destiny, certainly by very great
luck, she became Pope, and sat about two years, after Leo the fourth, and no
body knew her cosinage till she was with child by one of her meniall servants,
and delivered thereof.


PAP. What find you in Fulgosus?


PROT. Marry I find in De Dict. factisque memorabilibus. lib. 8. c. 3 Tit. de
foeminis quae doctrina excel.
Fulgosus, So says Allen cap. 5. of his defense of the Seminaries, and
Posseuin. Apparat. sacr. verbo. Baptista Fulgosus
who was a noble and learned man, and sometimes Duke of Genua, that John the
eight was found out to be a woman.


PAP. And what in Laziardus?


PRO. Ioha^nes Anglicus in cathedra Petri sedit annis duobus, mensibus septem,
diebus quatuor, says Epitom. histor. vniuersalis. cap. 111.
Laziardus. Hic, vt fertur, foemina fuit, etc. that is, John English sat in S.
Peter's chair two years, seven months, and four days. This, as the report
goes, was a woman, etc.


PAP. And who was the next you cited before this?


PROT. Hartmannus Schedel, a Doctor of physic, yet not ignorant of holy
Scriptures, a very witty and well spoken man, as Lib. de Scriptoribus
Ecclesiasticis.
Trithemius witnesses.


PAP. Oh: Schedel (I confess) In Chron. aetatum mundi, aetate 6.
reports this. Schedel de hac Ioanna verba facit, sed ita ieiune, ita exiliter,
ita incerte, vt de ea re dubitasse videatur. Florim. lib. cit, cap. 4. nu. 3.
But he reports it so coldly, so fearfully, so faintly, that a man may well
see he doubted of it. For he confesses, that he knew not whether it was so or
no; and therefore fathers it upon one Martin, I know not whom.


PROT. Fie, that you should say so. Does he not use the very words without
change, which Platina uses in relating the same, whereof we shall have
occasion to speak ere we part? and against which you can take no exceptions?
And does he not (to imprint the matter deeper into the readers memory) set her
picture down with a child in her arms?


PAP. Yes indeed I cannot deny that. But to be plain with you, I care not what
he says of it. For as Loco citato.
Florimondus notes, Ex impura Hussitarum familia, etc.
he was one of the stinking brood of the Hussites, and lived in Nurinberge,
what time Nurinberge was infected with Husses heresy. And therefore no
marvel, if to curry favor with them, he touched by the way the supposed
Popedom of Ioane the woman.


PROT. See how you lavish. This Hartmannus Schedel borne in Nurinberge, was Ego
Hartma^nus Schedel, doctor Patauinus, etc. circa An. 1440. fol. 252 b.
student in Padua, where he was created Doctor of Physic by the great
Mathiolus. And he was so far from Husses mind, that in the same Circa. An.
1410. fol. 238. a.
book he has one whole chapter entitled, De haeresi Hussitarum, and eius
origin. That is, Of Husses heresy, and of the original thereof. Wherein he
follows Aeneas Syluius step by step, Historia Bohemica, cap. 35.
who speaks spitefully and bitterly against Husse and all his followers. It
seems Florimondus of whom you learned this, is one of some stinking brood of
liars.


PAP. Well, who is next?


PROT. Iacobus Bergomensis, a man well seen in Scripture, and an excellent
humanitian, witty, eloquent, of good conversation, and a most famous
Historiographer, as Lib. de Ecclesiasticis scriptoribus.
Trithemius reports of him. This Iacobus Bergomensis (I say) writes thus of
this point: Supplement. chron. lib. 11. ad An. 858 impress Venetijs, An. 1486.
Johannes 7. Papa, natione Anglicus, post Leonem Pontificem Pontifex factus,
sedit ann. 2. men's. 5. Hunc tradunt fuisse foeminam, quae adolescens admodum,
ex Anglia, Athenas ^um quodam doctissimo aniasio suo profecta, ibidem bonarum
artium praeceptores audiendo, tantum profecit, vt Romam veniens paucos admodum
etiam insacris Literis haberet pares. Ea quippe legendo, disputando, docendo,
orando, tantam beneuolentiam and gratiam sibi comparauit, vt mortuo Leone
praedicto Pontifice, in eiusdem locum, vt multi affirmant, omnium consensu
Pontifex crearetur: verum postea a familiari compressa, grauidatur, and Papa
existens peperit. Nam ex Vaticano ad Later anensem Basilicam aliquando ad
Litanias profecta, inter Colosseum and S. Clementem, praeter spem doloribus
circumuenta, sine obstetrice aliqua public peperit, and eo loci mortua ibidem,
sine vllo honor cum foetu misera sepulta est. Adcuius detestandum spurcitiem,
and nominis continuandum memoriam, in hodiernum vsque, summi Pontifices
rogationem cumpopulo and clero sacram agentes, cum locum partus, medio eius in
itinere positum, abominentur, eo omisso, declinant ad diuerticula vicosque: and
sic loco detestabili postergato, reintrantes iter perficiunt quod coeperunt. Et
ad euitandos similes errores statutum fuit, ne quis de caetero in B. Petri
collocaretur sede, priusquam per perforatam sedem futuri Pontificis genitalia
ab vltimo Diacono Cardinale attrectarentur. That is: John the seventh, by
country English, was created Pope next after Leo, and sat two years and five
months. They say this was a woman, and that she went very young out of England
to Athens with a certain great clerk who was in love with her: and that there
by hearing of good professors, she profited so much, that when she came to Rome
she had few like her in Divinity. Whereupon, by her reading, disputing,
teaching, and praying, she got her self so much favor, that upon Leo his
death she was chosen Pope into his room (as many men say) by common consent.
But see the luck of it; a while after she was got with child by one of her
acquaintance, and delivered thereof in the time of her Papacy. For going upon
a time from the Vatican to S. John Laterans in procession, between the
Colosses and S. Clements, ere ever she was aware, she fell in travel, and was
delivered in the high street without the help of any midwife. But she died
presently, and was buried without any solemnity in the same place, with her
little one by her. Now in hatred of her filthy dealing, and for continuing of
the memory of so lewd a part, the Popes to this day when they go in
procession, in respect of their dislike of that place of her travel, which was
in the midst of her way, forsaking it, do turn into by-lanes and by-streets,
till they have left that on their backs; and then returning into the same
street again, they go forward with their procession. And for avoiding of like
mischief in time to come, it was decreed: That none should be consecrated
Pope, before the youngest Cardinal Deacon had tried by touching (whilst the
party to be consecrated sat on a close stool) that he was a man. Thus
Bergomensis.


PAP. Is not this he that wrote Supplementum Chronicorum, in the year 1503?


PROT. No. But this is he who wrote Supplementu^ Chronicorum in the year 1486.
as Lib. de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis
Trithemius witnesses, and the book it self conuinceth. Your Lib. citato page
37.
Florimondus was deceived, who seeing (perhaps) that it was printed in the
year 1503, thought it was written the year 1503.


PAP. That error is not so great, though an error. But if it be he that I
mean, I say with Ibid.
Florimondus, That his reporting of it is an argument of his ignorance, and so
let him go.


PROT. So you may cast off all the rest if you be disposed, and make short
work of our conference, for you may say of every one: His reporting of it, is
an argument of his ignorance. When Anthropologia. lib. 22. page 503. edit.
Basil. An. 1559.
Volateran an historiographer of good note, shall be brought in saying:
Johannes. 7. Anglicus, quem dissimulato viri habitu dicunt foeminam alioquin
doctissimam fuisse, deprehensamque in via apud S. Clementem, quando peperit:
that is, John English, the 7. of that name, who (as they say) carried himself
like a man, when as indeed she was a notable well learned woman; and
discovered so to be by her delivery of a child in the way near to Saint
Clements: you may reply, Volaterans reporting of it, is an argument of his
ignorance.


PAP. And what if I did so? yet you shall know anon, that I have a better
answer to him, and to the rest. But mean while go on, and tell me what
Trithemius says to the matter.


PROT. Thrithemius Reuerendus and vndecunque doctissimus vir. Paulus Langius in
chron. Citizense ad An. 1515.
Abbot of Saint Martins Monastery in Spanhiem, a reverend and an exceeding
great learned man, writes In chron. Monastern ^irsaugiensis*
thus: Sancto Leone Papa mortuo, eodem anno Johannes Anglicus successit 2.
annis, and mensibus 5. quem ferunt quidam foeminam extitisse, and vni soli
familiari cognita^, and ab eo compressam, peperisse in strata publica. Et ob id
eum nonnulli inter Pontifices ponere noluerunt, quasi indignum facinus
abhorrentes. That is, In the same year that Pope Leo died, John English
succeeded for 2. years and 5. months. Now some say she was a woman, and that
she was known so to be but to one only, by whom at length she was begot with
child, and delivered thereof in the high way. And for this cause some would not
reckon her among Popes in disliking her villainous fact. Thus Thrithemius. With
whom in substance agrees Sabellicus, Sabellicus (...) vndecunque doctissimus
-- claret hodie apud Venetos maximo in precio. Trithem. lib. de script.
Ecclesiasticis.
a man of great reckoning in Venice, yea one of the famousest men in his time
for all manner of good learning: of whose books Papir. Mason. de vrb. Episc.
lib. 6. in Pio 3.
Pius the third professed he made as much reckoning as Alexander did of Homers
Iliads. Johannes Anglicus huius nominis 7 fit inde Pontifex, says Aenead. 9.
l. r.
Sabellicus. Fuit is Moguntiaco oriundus.


PAP. Stay you there, and save a labor. For I confess with In similem
impudentiam incidit Sabellicus, etc. says Florimondus, loco supra citato.
Florimondus, that Sabellicus by relying too much on Platina, has put it in
his history, doing therein very indiscreetly.


PROT. And what think you of Wernerus Roleuink, who is reckened by In chron.
Citizense, post An. 1493.
Paulus Langius, among the famous Scholars of the order of Carthusians, and
commended by Lib. d^ script. Ecclesiasticis.
Trithemius, for a man of good learning, and much devotion, Fascicul remporum,
aetate. 6. ad ^n. 854.
whose words are these: Iste Johannes Anglicus cognomine, sed natione
Maguntinus, circa haec tempora dicitur fuisse. Et erat foemina habitu vestita
virili: sic in diuina Scriptura profecerat, vt par ei non inueniretur, and in
Papam eligitur. Sed post impregnata, cu^pulice in processione pergeret, peperit
and moritur. Et hic sextus videtur fuisse Papa, qui nomen sanctitatis sine re
habuit vsque h^c. Et similiter sicut alij a Deo plagatus fuit: nec ponitur in
Catalogo Pontificum: that is, This John, by his Surname English, by his
country of Mentz, is reported to have sit as Pope about this time. And she was
a woman. But went in man's apparel. She profited so well in divinity, that she
had no fellow, and so was chosen to be Pope. But after a while being great
with ch^ld, as she went in public Procession, she was delivered thereof, and
died. And this seems to be the sixth Pope, which to this day was called holy,
and proved naught. And therefore he was plagued by God, as the rest before him
were plagued. Neither is she in the Register of Popes. How say you? did not
Wernerus indiscreetly in relating it thus plainly?


PAP. Yes marry did he. But I wonder not at him, for relating of it: because
in the same place (as Lib. citato cap. 7 page 64 and 65.
Florimondus observes) he writes, that in as much as she was a German, no
German could ever since be chosen Pope. Which is a lie with a latchet. For
diverse Germans since that have been advanced unto the Popedom, as Damasus
the second, and Victor the second, with others,


PRO. True: diverse Germans have been Popes since Ioane the woman's Popedom;
and if Wernerus writ the contrary, Wernerus lied shamefully. But he has no
rule of his tongue, who charge Wernerus with such a matter. For these are
Wernerus words, which follow presently upon the former: Nugantur aliqui, hac de
causa nullum Almannum in Papam eligi, quod falsum esse constat. Some prattle,
that for this cause no Germain may be chosen Pope, which is apparently false.
Whereby you may see that he reproves that in others, for which he is
injuriously reproved by your Florimondus. Your Florimondus may be a man in
office, but if he go on as he begins, he will hardly prove himself honest.


PAP. Good words I pray you sir. Florimondus may be honest enough for any thing
you say against him. For he Loco citato.
writes, that he has two editions of this Wernerus, the one bearing date what
Viz. 1480.
year it was printed, the other without date, but very ancient. And these two
(as he says) do differ in reporting the story of Pope Ioane, and in nothing
else. Now it may be that though in yours it be as you say, yet in his it is
otherwise.


PROT. I my self have seen two editions of Wernerus as well as Florimondus;
yea I have seen four; one By Henry Quentel.
printed in the year 1479. another printed by Nicolas Gotz of Seltestad, I
know not when, for it caries no date: a third without note either of the
printer, or of the place where it was printed, or of the time when it was
printed. But questionles very ancient: a fourth printed at Frankeford, 1584. In
the 3 ancient ones there is not a word different in the narration of Pope
Ioane: nor in the 4, saving that the words Nugantur aliqui, etc. are in the
fourth, and not in the other. But in none of them is there any such thing as
Florimondus charge him with. But will you hear what the next man says to the
point in question? He is Matheus Palmerius, Math. Palmerius, natione Italus. --
qui in Conc. Florentino (quod Eugenius Papa 4. contra Basil. Synodum
celebrauit) inter praeclarissimos viros annumeratus fuit. Trithem. de script.
Eccles.
an Italian, and one of the choice men which were at the Council kept by
Eugenius the 4. against the Council of Basil. Pontifex 106. Johannes Auglicus
(says In chron. ad An. 853.
Palmerius) sedit annis 2, mensibus 3. Fama est hunc Iohannem foeminam fuisse,
and vni soli familiari cognitam: qui eam co^plexus est, and grauis facta,
peperit Papa existens: quamobre^ eum inter Pontifices non numerant quida^, ideo
nomini numerum non facit. That is: John was a woman, yet not known so to be but
to one of her familiars, who lay with her. She was delivered in the time of her
Papacy: and because some reckon her not among the Popes, there are no more
John's for her, then if she had never been. Thus Palmerius.


PAP. Be it so. But what says Platina, I pray you, for your purpose?


PROT. Platina, Bartholomaeus Plat^na Apostolicus abbreuiator, vir vnde cunque
doctissimus, etc. Trith. de scrip^. Eccles.
keeper of the Library in the Vatican, a man of great wit and learning, De
vitis Pontif. in Ioh. 8.
writes thus: Johannes Anglicus, ex Maguntiaco oriundus, malis artibus (vt
aiunt) Pontificatum adeptus est: mentitus enim sexum cum foemina esset,
adolescens admodum Athenas cum amatore docto viro proficiscitur, ibique
praeceptores bonaru^ artium audiendo tantum profecit, vt Romam veniens paucos
admodum etiam in sacris Literis pares haberet, nedum superiores. Legendo aute^,
and disputando docte, and acute, tantum beneuolentie and authoritatis sibi
comparauit, vt mortuo Leone, in eius locum (vt Martinus ait) omnium consensu
Pontifex crearetur: verum postea a seruo compressa, cum aliquandiu ventrem
occulte tulisset, tandem dum ad Lateranensem Basilicam proficisceretur, inter
theatrum (quod Colosseum vocant a Ner^nis Colosso) and S. Clementem, doloribus
circumuenta peperit: eoque loci mortua Pontificatus sui anno 2. mense 1. diebus
4. sine vllo honor sepelitur. The meaning of which is: John English, borne at
Mentz, got the Popedom (as men say) by evil means. For he dissembled his
sex, being a woman indeed: and when she was very young, she went to Athens
with a scholar, who was in love with her. Where by hearing good Readers of all
good learning, she profited so well, that when she came to Rome, she had few
fellows, but never a one her better. Now by reading, and disputing, learnedly
and wittily, she got so much credit, that upon Leo his death she was chosen in
his room (as Martin writes) by common consent. But within a while after she
proved with child by one of her servants; and though she carried all closely for
a time, yet at length as she went to S. John Laterans, between the Theater
(called the Colosses) and S. Clements, she fell in travel, and was delivered
of a child, and died in the place. Which was in the second year, first month,
and fourth day of her reign. And she was buried without any solemnity. How
like you this?


PAP. So and so. But Bernartius is of opinion, that this was never written by
Platina, but was foisted into him. For I have heard ( Impudens a^quis nebulo
interpolauit scripta Platinae. Audiui ex Antonio Heetueldio, amplissimo
laudatissimoque viro, Consulari Louanie^si, dixisse sibi saepius Engelbertum
Boonium -- vidisse ^e Romae in Bibliotheca Vaticana, antiquissima Platinae
exemplaria manuscripta, sedulo examinasse, and de Ioanne foemina ne lite^am
quidem reperisse. Bernartius de vtilitate legendae hist. lib. 2 p. 111.
says he) by Antonius Hetweeld, a man of good report, and an Alderman of
Louaine, that one Engelbertus Boonius, a reverend man, and Deane of a great
Church in Germany, had oftentimes told him, that he had seen many ancient
manuscripts of Platina in the Vatican at Rome, and perused them diligently, and
yet found never a word in any of them touching Pope Ioane.


PROT. That Deane had the luck of it, if he light on such ancient manuscripts,
as the Alderman of Louaine told Bernartius of. But how chanced it, that neither
Onuphrius, nor Bellarmine, nor Baronius, who have had as free access into the
Vatican library as any, could never light on these manuscripts? How chances
it, that none since Bernartius thought good to except in that sort against
Platina? Onuphrius, Bellarmine, and Baronius acknowledgement, that this story
is in Platina, persuades me, that either Bernartius belyed the Alderman, or the
Alderman belyed the Deane, or the Deane made a fool of the Alderman. For
questionless if there had been any such manuscripts, some of them would have
found them out, and made it known to the world ere this. For they are glad of
narrower fig tree leaves to cover their nakedness withal, then such
manuscripts, if they were forthcoming. But perhaps you have some better answer
behind then this.


PAP. I have. For what could you reply, if I answered that which To. 2. de
Poenitentia, lib. 3. cap. 13.
Bellarmine has upon another occasion, to wit, that Platina wrote not by
public authority, nor took his history out of the public Registers of the
Church?


PROT. I could quickly tell you, that both Bellarmine and you spoke without
book. For, besides that Platina himself Prooemio lib. de vitis Pontif. in
epistola ad Zistum 4.
professes, that he writ by the commandment of Sixtus the fourth, Annotat.
in Plat. in vit S. Petri Apostoli.
Onuphrius confesses, that he followed Damasus, Anastasius, and such
Historiographers as had written before of the same matter.


PAP. But what say you to Lib. citato, ca. 4. page 36.
Florimondus, whose answer is, That Platina reported it rather to show his
reading, then for that he thought it true?


PROT. What is Florimondus reason for that?


PAP. Marry if he had thought it true (says Si haec vera sibi persuasisse^,
tanquam vnguis in vlcere fuisset, and odium quod in Pontifices conceperat,
audacius euomuisslet.
Florimondus) he would have exaggerated it, and made the worst of it, that
thereby he might have revenged himself of the Popes at whom he was angry. For
Paul the second (as all men know) racked him, and deprived him of all his
dignities, and justly cast him into prison, and kept him there as long as
himself lived.


PROT. That Paul the second racked Platina, and deprived him of his dignities,
and kept him long in prison, is very true. But that he cast him justly into
prison, is false. For De script. Ecclesiasticis. verbo, Bartholomaeus Platina.
Trithemius witnesses, that Paul the second dealt Crudelissime.
cruelly therein. Yet suppose all to be true: does it follow in your
Florimondus logic, Paul the second wronged Platina, Ergo Platina hated all
Popes? And why not the^: Sixtus the fourth gratified Platina many ways: Sixtus
the fourth set Platina at liberty, and restored him to his dignities: Ergo
Platina loved all Popes? If one man's kindness could not work love toward all:
it is not likely that one man's unkindness should breed an heart-burning
against all: wherefore, notwithstanding this, we may well think that Platina
wrote as he thought. And the rather for that in the words following, Apparet.
ea quae dixi. ex his esse, quae fieri posse creduntur.
he professes, that such a thing might well enough happen. What say you to
Chalcocondilas the Athenian, whom I named next before Platina, as a witness for
us in this controversy?


PAP. I say, Chalcocondilas has not this tale.


PROT. What man? are not these De rebus Turcicis. lib. 6. page 98.
his words? Constat mulierem quandam in pontificatum esse subuectam, quia sexus
ignorabatur. Nam Italiae Occidentales pene omnes barbam radunt. Cum autem illa
mulier grauida esset facta, and ad festum sieve sacrificium prodijsset, peperit
infantem inter sacrificium in conspectu populi. Quapropter ne decipiantur
iterum sedrem cognoscant, neque ambigant, Pontificis creati virilia tangunt,
and qui tangit, acclamat: Mas nobis dominus est. That is, It is well known
that a certain woman was made Pope, by reason they knew not her sex. For all
(almost) in the western parts of Italy, shave their beardes. Now when she was
great with child, and came abroad to solemnize some day, or to say Service: as
she was at service, she was delivered of a child in the sight of all the
people. Wherefore lest hereafter they should be deceived in like sort, Quamuis
apud Chalcocondilum Latin red ditum, eiusmodi fabula reperitur esse descripta;
non tamen ab ipso authore positum scias, sed ab impostore Clausero fraudulenter
appositum.
they make trial of his manhood by touching, and he that touches
proclaims: We have a man to our Pope.


PAP. I confess these words are in Chalcocondilas translated into Latin. But
I say with Annal. Tom. 10 ad An. 853. ^u. 66.
Baronius, that though it be in the Latin, yet that was by Clauserus the
translators bad dealing, who foisted it in. It was not written in the Greek by
Chalcocondilas.


PROT. How proves Baronius that?


PAP. Nay he medles not with proving of it, but refers you over to Florimondus
for it. For Florimondus has excellently well (as Ibid. Imposturam egregie
detexit Florimondus.
Baronius says) discovered Clauserus cosenage therein.


PROT. How I pray you? for I know you have Florimon^ at your fingers end.


PAP. Why, Florim. fabula Ioannae, cap. 6. nu. 2.
Florimondus compared Clauserus translation into Latin with a French man's
translation of the same into French: and by that he saw this tale was not in
Chalcocondilas, for ^e found nothing of it in the French man's translation.


PROT. And is this Florimondus reason so much commended by Baronius, whereby he
discouers Clauserus cosinage? Now the Vicar of S. fools be ghostly father to
them both: for why might not the French man as well leave it out, as Clauserus
put it in?


PAP. Oh, a faithful translator (as Ibid. Fidus interpres praetermittere non
ausus fuisset, si in Graeco exe^plari exaratum inuenisset.
Florimondus notes) durst not have left it out, if he had found it in the
Greek.


PRO. Nor put it in, if he had not found it in the Greek: durst he? And why
may not we hold Clauserus as faithful an Interpreter, as the French man? yea
why may not we hold him more faithful, seeing the French man was a Papist? for
Gretser. lib. 2. de iure etc. prohibendi lib. malos, cap 10.
Papists hold it lawful, in translating to omit offensive matter: and so does
no Protestant. If Florimondus or Baronius could have named the place where a
man might have seen a Greek copy, in which it is not, they had said somewhat
to purpose; but going about to disprove it by a translation of one of their
fellows, they deal ridiculously.


PAP. Well, if this answer please you not, know further, that it matters not
what Chalcocondilas writes of this matter. For in rendering the reason why she
could not so well be known to be a woman, he writes: That in the western
parts of Italy all (almost) shave their beards: wherein he was grossy
deceived, as In eo quod de barba rade^da asserit, turpiter lapsus est. Florim.
cap. 6. nu. 1.
Florimondus observes. And if in that, why not in the other?


PRO. He was not deceived in that of shauing. For by the Popes Canons, the
Italian Priests, yea all the Priests of the Western Church, are to be shaven:
Hic Papa (Anicetus) clericos comam and barbam radere in signum clericatus
iussit, says Chronograph. lib. 2.
Pontacus. That is, Pope Anicetus commanded the Clergy to shave both their
heads and their beards, in token that they were of the Clergy. And,
Occidentalis Ecclesiae Cleru^, ab ipsis Ecclesiae Christianae primordiis,
barbam radendi morem tenuisse, Greg. 7. lib. 8 Regist. Epist. 10 vt refert.
Salmeron, disput. 18. in 1. Cor. 11. pa. 147. and Baron. Annal. tom. 1. ad An.
58. number. 142.
asserit Gregorius 7. Pope Gregory the 7. avouches, that from the Apostles
days, the Western Clergy did shave their beards. To whom Rational. divine.
offic lib. 2. de Ministris, etc.
Durandus, who lived about the year 1280. subscribeth: for he acknowledges,
that before, and in his time they were shaued, proving the lawfulness of it
out of Ezechiel, and showing the mysteries that are imported by it. Yea Pro
sacerdotu^ ba^bis.
Johannes Pierius Valerianus, (as you shall hear hereafter) witnesses the
same, imputing your error in electing Pope Ioane, to the ordinary shauing of
beards: because by that means a man could hardly know a man from a woman. Will
not Florimondus lin lying? What think you of Theodoricus de Niem one of your
Popes Secretaries? is it doubtful whether I wrong him in calling him to be a
witness in this case?


PAP. I think you wrong him. For Cap. 10. nu. 5. and 6.
Florimondus reckons him among them who would readily have taken up such a tale
against the Popes if he had heard of it, and yet did not.


PROT. Florimondus is like himself, to say no worse, for these are Lib. de
priuilegijs and iuribus Imperij.
Theodoricus his own words: Johannes vocatus de Anglia, and fuit mulier de
Moguntia nata, quae studuit Athenis sub virili habitu, and in tantum profecit
in artibus ipsis, quod tande^ veniens Romam, and per bienniu^ in eade^ schola
arts ipsas liberales legit: and adeo sufficiens fuit, quod etiam maiores and
nobiliores vrbis, eius lectiones frequenter audierint. Ea postea in Papam
concorditer eligitur a Romany, and Papatum biennio and amplius tenuit: sed
tunc diuitijs, ocio, and d^licijs vacans, non potuit continere sicut prius
fecit, dum ardenter in paupertate posita literarum studio insistebat: vnde dum
quadam die in Rogationibus cum clero Romano, sicut tunc moris erat, in solenni
processione incederet, Papalibus ornata diuitijs and ornamentis, edidit filium
suum primogenitum, ex quodam eius cubiculario conceptum, prope templum Pacis in
vrbe, vt adhuc vetus statua marmorea illic posita figur atiue demonstrat. Vnde
summi Pontifices, dum ad Lateranensem de Basilica Principis Apostolorum, and e
contra vadunt, illud rectum iter non faciunt, imo per alios vicos, per
indirectum transeunt, illud aliquantulum prolongando. That, is John called
English, was a woman borne at Mentz, and she studied at Athens going in man's
apparel, where she profited so well in the arts, that coming to Rome she read
there the liberal sciences, and was held so sufficient a reader, that many of
the better sort became her ordinary hearers. Afterward with one consent she
was chosen Pope, and lived in it two years and upward. But betaking her self
more then before to idleness and pleasure, she could not live continently as
she did in her poor estate, when she plied her book diligently: whereupon one
day as she went with the Clergy and people of Rome (according to the custom
of that time) in solemn procession, being attired in Papal manner, she was
delivered of her first begotten son, begotten by one of her chamber, near
the temple of Peace, which stands in the city; as is evident by an old marble
Image which stands there to this day, to denote so much in a figure. And
hereuppon it is, that when the Popes go from the Vatican to Saint John
Laterans, and back again, they go not the direct way thither, but by other
streets further about, and so make their journey longer. Thus Theodoricus de
Niem.


PAP. I do not remember any particular answer unto this man's testimony.
Wherefore go on, and let me hear what the rest say. Yet if you will for
brevity sake, you may pass over the testimonies of Petrarch, and Boccace, and
Lucidus, and of our country man Higden, and some such others, because Cap. 3.
and 4.
Florimondus acknowledges that they speak to it.


PROT. Content. What think you of John of Paris, Trithem. de Script. Eccles.
verbo, Ioh. Paris. and Posseuinus in Apparat sac. verbo, Ioh. Paris.
who lived about the year 1280, and read publicly with great comme^dation in
the University of Paris, both divinity and humanity. Believed not he this
story?


PAP. I cannot tell. What say you?


PROT. I think he did. For showing how sometimes a man may lawfully dispute
and take exception against the Pope, in respect of his person, he De Potestate
Regia and Papali, cap 23.
notes, That such a person may be chosen as is not capable: vt si esset
foemina, vel haereticus, sicut fuerunt aliqui, qui ob hoc non enumerantur in
Catalogo Paparu^. As for example, says he, if he prove a woman, or an
heretic, as some have done, who in that respect are not reckoned in the
catalogue of Popes.


PAP. It seems by his words (I cannot deny) that he alludes to such a matter.
But did you not allege Gotfridus Viterbiensis for proof of the same? I pray
you let me hear him speak. for Answer to B. Jewels Apology
D. Harding reckons him among them who say nothing of her.


PROT. True, D. Harding does so. But so does no man else of his side, to my
remembrance. Which is a great probability that Harding belies him. But not to
stand upon probabilities, the history it self puts the matter out of doubt:
for between Leo the 4. and Benedict the 3. we Gotefrid. Viterbiensis Chro.
part. 20. in Catalogo To. Pont.
read thus (not in the margent, nor in any other letter, but in the current of
the text, and same letter) Papissa Ioanna non numeratur. That is, Ioane the she
Pope is not registered. Whereby it is manifest that he knew of her, though he
said little of her.


PAP. When lived this Gotefridus? and what manner of man was he?


PROT. He lived, as De Script. Ecclesiasticis, verbo, Godefridus Viterb.
Trithemius witnesses, in the year 1185. and was a priest well seen in the
holy Scripture, and not ignorant of humane knowledge: Godefridus was Imperialis
aulae Capellanus, and Nota^ius. Posseuin. Apparat. sac. verb. Godefrid. Viterb.
so that you have little cause to except against him either as a late writer, or
a rash writer. But shall we at length hear what evidence Martinus Polonus
affoords us in this case?


PAP. With all my heart: for there are Verius dixerim, haec omnia ex Heroldi
officina manasse, etc. Florim. c. 2. nu. 6.
diverse who hold opinion that that which is in Polonus touching Pope Ioane, is
cogd into him by Heroldus, who first printed him, or some such like fellow.


PRO. Do they say so? And can they show me any book written or printed,
wherein it is not in Polonus in Chro. ad An. 855
Polonus, thus? Post hunc Leonem Johannes Anglus, natione Maguntinus, sedit an.
2, men's. 5, diebus 4. Hic, vt asseritur, foemina fuit, and quum in puellari
aetate a quoda^ suo amasio in habitu virili Athenas ducta fuit, in diuersis
scientijs ita profecit, vt nullus sibi par inueniretur: adeo vt post Romae Gra.
loquitur. Dia. vera docet. Re. verba collocat. Mu. canit. Ar. numerat. Ge.
ponderat. As. colit astra. The three first make T^^uium. The four later,
Quadriuium.
triuium legens, magnos magistros, and discipulos and auditores haberet. Et
quum in vrbe, and vita and scientia magnae opinionis esset, in Papam
concorditer eligitur. Sed in Papatu per familiarem suum impregnatur: verum
tempus partus ignorans, quum de Sancto Petro in Lateranum tenderet, angustiata
inter Coliseum and S. Clementis ecclesiam peperit, and postea mortua ibidem (vt
dicitur) sepulta fuit. Et propterea quod Dominus Papa semper eandem viam
obliquat, creditur omnino a quibusdam, quod ad detestationem facti hoc faciat.
Nec ideo ponitur in Catalogo sanctorum Pontificum, tam propter muliebris sexum,
quam propter deformitatem facti. Which in effect sounds thus in English: After
this Leo, John English, by her countrev of Mentz, sat two years, five
months, and four days. This Pope (as they say) was a woman, and being carried
in her youth in man's apparel to Athens, by one who was in love with her, she
profited so much in diverse kinds of learning, that she had no fellow: in so
much that coming to Rome, and reading there Grammar, Logic and Rhetoric,
she had of the greatest Rabbis there many auditors and scholars. And being
much esteemed of in that City, both for her life and learning, with one voice
she was chosen Pope. Now in the time of her Papacy, she was got with child by
some of her familiars: and not knowing she was so near her reckoning, as she
went from Saint Peter's to Saint John Lateran, between the Colosse and Saint
Clements Church, she was delivered of a child; but died thereon, and was there
(as they say) buried. And because the Lord the Pope does always shun that
way, it is thought by some, that he does it in dislike of the accident. And she
is not numbered among the Popes: partly because of her sex, partly because of
the filthiness of her fact. Can they, I say, show me any book written or
printed, wherein it is not in Polonus thus? Does not Onuphrius, and Bellarmine,
and Bernartius, and Baronius, and N. D. with many others of your side, who
show more wit then honesty in pleading this case, confess that Polonus writ
this? and that this is to be found in Polonus?


PAP. Yes, the most do. But some, as I told you before, suspect the worst, and
namely In his Reply to D. Fulke. cap. 10. Demand 45. page 373.
D. Bristow; for he reports that many years ago, a Protestant (who was
counted a great historian) brought out the same Martinus in a fair written
hand, to show him this story. And behold, she was not in the text, but in the
margent, in an other hand. Whereupon when he saw that: Now I perceive (quoth
he) that this Author also fails you.


PROT. What Protestant was that, who had Martinus in so fair a written hand?
Can you tell me his name, or the place where he aboade, that I may enquire
further, for satisfying my self in the truth of this matter?


PAP. Nay, I know no more then I have told you. For the Doctor names no
particular circumstance. But I make no question of the truth of it. For I
presume that such a Doctor would not lie.


PROT. Oh no. A popish priest lie? that is not credible, no more then it is
credible that Dixerunt: homo sacerdos de semine Aaron venit, non decipiet nos.
1. Mac. 7. 14. in vulg.
a priest of the order of Aaron would deceive. But you know what a long story
that Motive 5.
Doctor tells, of one Margaret Iesop, who was cured of her lamenesse by the
Sacrament of miracle that was kept at Saint Gudilaes Church at Bruxels: and how
he amplifies every point, and sets it out with all the circumstances, as though
it were as true as the Gospel; whereas Meterran hist. Belg. lib. 10.
the Senate of Bruxels, by way of proclamation within a few years after, did
discover all to be but a pack of knavery. And therefore you must pardon me, if
notwithstanding I give him not the lie, yet I believe him not in this,
considering it is an old said saw: Qui versatur in generalibus, versatur
dolose: He that speaks only in generality, means falsely.


PAP. Well; be it that Polonus writ this, yet know you that as Lib. 3. de To.
Pont. cap. 24.
Bellarmine and 3. Conuers. part 2. c. 5. nu. 29 p. 399.
N. D. note, he was a very simple man: and that his manner of writing was vain
and nothing like to be true in Answer to B. Jewels challenge.
D. Hardings judgment. Yea know, that he was only famous for tales, for that
is Martinus Polonus fabulis ta^tu^ celebris, caetera obscurus homo. lib. 2. de
vtilitate legend. hist. p. 113.
Bernartius censure of him.


PROT. See the rashness of our later generation of Papists. Polonus was an
Archiep. Cosentinus, and Poenitentia^ius Papae. Posseuin. Apparat. sacer.
verbo, Martinus Polonus.
Archbishop, and the Popes Poenitentiary. Trithem. de Script. Ecclesiasticis,
verbo, Martinus.
He was learned in the holy Scriptures, and not ignorant of secular learning,
he was one whom Vi^ magnae doctrinae singugularis^ue vitae. Platina in vita
Victor. 3.
Platina relied on much, for matters of history, and thought worthy the
commendation of great learning, and singular good life. He was the man, whom
the Author of Fasciculus temporum, and Iacobus Bergomensis, two good
historiographers, professed that they followed especially. And yet with our
present Papists he is but a simple man, etc. Are you not ashamed of this
exception?


PAP. No. For I will prove his simplicity by many arguments.


PROT. And how I pray you?


PAP. Why first by this, Bernart. lib. citato, page 113. Florim. cap. 2. nu. 6.
That he would needs persuade us that Pompilius, who was Numa his father,
succeeded next to Romulus. For this is a mere tale, and yet he writes it is as
a truth.


PROT. Away, Away. Post Romulum regnauit Numa Pompilius, Lib. de quatuor
maioribus regnis, and Romans vrbis exordio. Cap. de Rectoribus and regimine
vrbis, page 10.
says Polonus. That is, Numa Pompilius reigned next after Romulus: but not
Pompilius who was Numa his father.


PAP. Bernart. and Florim. locis citatis.
Secondly he would persuade us that Numa of a Tribune of the people, was made a
king, which is another tale.


PROT. He would not. For he Suoputat post exactos Reges ad Christum vsque. Cap
de binis Coss. page 12
writes plainly, that Tribunes were ordained 16. years after the reign of
the Roman kings, when the people complained of the hard measure that they
received at the hands of the Consuls and of the Senate. He knew no such
officers in the time of the kings.


PAP. Bernart. and Florim. locis citatis.
Thirdly, he would persuade us, that the Church which is now called Sancta
Maria Rotunda, and in old time Pantheon, built by one Agrippa, was before that
the house of one Cybele, supposed to be the mother of the gods: which is a toy,
and a conceit of an idle head.


PROT. This is false too. For In Chron. in Domitian. p. 38.
he says only, that Pantheon was built by Agrippa at Cybeles motion, who was
the mother of the gods, which is confirmed for true by many others: he says
not, that it was first Cybeles, and afterward turned to the honor of all the
gods.


PAP. Bernart. and Florim. locis citatis.
Fourthly, he would make us believe, that that famous Theater made by Titus,
was the temple of the Sun; which is mere foolery.


PROT. No, No, Ante Coloseum fuit templum Solis, says Lib. de 4. maioribus
regnis, and cap. de Te^plis idolorum, pa. 8.
Polonus: before the Colosse there was a temple of the Sun. But that Titus
Theater was that temple, Polonus says not.


PAP. Bernart. and Florim. locis citatis.
Yet he says, That the temple of Peace, commonly called the everlasting
Temple, fell the same night that Christ was borne: whereas it is plain by all
ancient histories, that it was not built till Vespasians days, a good many of
years after Christ was borne.


PROT. The ancient histories witness, that Vespasian built a temple of Peace:
but that does not argue, there was no Temple of Peace before. Some write, that
Romulus built a temple of Peace. And Stromat lib 5.
Clemens Alexandrinus writes, that Numa built a Temple of Peace. But it
concerns not Polonus credit, whether there was any or none: for he says not,
that the Temple of Peace fell the same night that Christ was borne. He only In
Chron. ad An. Christ 1.
says, that the golden Image which Romulus set up in his palace, auowing,
that it should not fall down till a virgin was delivered of a child, fell
down in the night wherein Christ was borne: though if he had said the other,
the matter had not been great. For he was neither the first, nor the last;
Fabeha de collapso Romae Pacis templo, tempore Christ's ortus, multipliciu^ haud
vulgarium fuit scriptorum authoritate firmatum. Baron. Annal. tom. 10. ad an.
853. nu. 61
many of good note both before, and since, have written as much: namely Hom.
quae legitur apud Lip. to. 8. and Sur. to. 6.
Petrus Damianus, In catal. Sanct. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Petrus de Natalibus, Ser. 2. de die Natiuit. Dom.
Iacobus de Voragine, and the Author of that first sermon upon Christ's
Nativity, which is extant among the Sermons ascribed to Fol. 297. edit. Paris.
1517.
Bernard. If you have no better arguments to prove his simplicity, you may
soon prove your self a malicious slanderer.


PAP. My arguments are good enough against him, as you shall hear more fully
anon. But for the present tell me, what Marianus Scotus has that makes for
you. For I cannot think it is true, that Marianus Scotus has this story.


PROT. You jest I am sure. For do we not read thus in Marian. Scotus in
Chron. aetate 6. ad An. 854
him? Leo Papa obijt Kalend. Augusti. Huic successit Ioanna mulier, An. 2.
men's. 5. dieb. 4. That is, Leo the Pope died in the Kalends of August. After
him succeeded Ioane the woman, who sat 2. years, 5. months, and 4. days.
And, which I would have you note by the way, this Marianus So he himself
writes in Chro. ad An. 1028.
was borne in the year 1028. and Ab omnibus honor habebatur, and non sine
opinione sanctitatis sepelitur. Trithemius de Script. Eccles. verb. Marianus.
Ioh. Mayor, de gestis Scotorum lib. 3. cap. 5.
lived in great credit in his life time, and when he died was held a Saint:
and at this day is reputed by your Annal. tom. 1. ad ann. 34. number. 149.
Baronius, Nobilis Chronographus, a worthy Chronologer.


PAP. N. D. lib. cicato. nu. 27. page 397.
I do not deny but that you may read so in some printed copies. But I deny,
there is any such thing to be read in the more ancient hand-written originals,
found in Flanders and other places.


PRO. Do you not deny but that we may read so in some printed ^^pies? verily
you might have yielded unto me, that I may read so in all printed copies, for
you are not able to produce any printed copy (except it be of yesterdaies
printing) wherein it is not. But you deny it to be in the more ancient
hand-written originals found in Flanders and other places. And upon what ground
(I pray) deny you that? for In scripto codi ce ex quo prodijt prima editio ita
legitur. Baro. Annal. to. 10. ad ann. 853. nu 60.
Baronius your Cardinal Historiographer; confesses, that that ancient
hand-written original which the first printed copy followed, has the story.
And it is so ordinary with you Papists to belly hand written originals, that he,
who knows you, cannot in wisdom believe any of you upon your bare words.


PAP. I have good ground of that which I deny, I would you should well know.
But first I challenge you to make proof that we Papists, as you call us, belie
any hand-written originals, for me thinks you therein charge us deeply.


PROT. The proof of that is plain. For first one of your Bishops, even De
Opt. genesis interpret. lib. 2. cap. 6.
B. Lindan, to make good his own conceit of the right reading of the text Ioh.
21. 22. (about which you know there has been hot contention) which he
maintained to be this. If so I will he remain till I come, what is that to
thee? alleged for proof thereof the testimony of an ancient hand-written
original kept at Aix in Germany: whereas in truth, it is not so read in that
copy, but according to the Greek: If I will that he remain till I come, what
is that to thee? as Notat in Ioh. 21. 22.
Francisous Lucas a man of your own coat witnesses. Again the same B.
Lindan Lib. citato. cap. 3. and 5.
protested that he saw an ancient hand-written original of the Psalms in
Hebrew, found in England: whereby it was apparent, that the Hebrew Bible is
defective at this day in some points. Yet the same Notat. in Psalm. 13.
Lucas, who came to the sight of the same copy, assures us: That that Psalter
makes rather to the contrary. In like manner Annot. in Platin. in Honorio. 1.
Onuphrius your Friar above named, alleged certain hand-written originals of
Maximus a Monk, by which it is manifest, as he says, That Honorius the first
condemned the Monothelites: yet Turrian the Jesuit, who had access to the
self same manuscripts, confesses (as Defens. fidei Trident lib 2.
Andradius relates) that Maximus make no mention of Honoruas condemning them,
And whereas your great Goliath of Gath, Lib. 4. de To. Pont. cap. 11.
Bellarmine I mean, to prove that Honorius name was thrust by fraud into the
sixth general Council among the Monothelites, a^^irmeth: that Anastasius
(which was then in written hand only) did testify so much, now, that
Anastasius is Moguntiae, Ann. 1602.
printed, we set Bellarmines fraud. For Anastasius testifies no such thing. In
Leone 2.
Anastasius himself reckons Honorius for a Monothelite. In this controversy
about dame Ioane, diverse of your Onuph. Bell. Bernart locis supr. cit. and
Florim. cap. 14. nu. 1. and Sanders de visibili Monarch. lib. 7. page 412.
proctors plead as out of the hand-written originals of the same, Anastasius,
that upon Leo the 4. his death the sea was void but 15. days, and then
Benedict was chosen. Yet our printed Anastasius makes it evident, they belied
the hand-written Anastasius: for in the printed, there is not a word of the
number of days between Leo his death, and Benedict his election. Lastly,
whereas your gra^dhistoriographer Baronius, was informed by letters, from such
as your self, that Zoticus was shot through with darts, and so martyred: and
he who certified him thereof, assured him that he sent a true copy out of the
hand-written original acts of Zoticus, whereupon Baronius put it in print:
Quod arundinibus percussum martyrium consummasse Zoticum dixerimus, emendamus.
Haud enim fidelem nacti sumus testem, qui ea se ex Actis eius descripsisse, per
li teras ad me datas, testatus est. Accepi post haec Acta Martyris, and nihil
tale in allis reperi. In Martyrologium Romans lan 12. f.
Baronius was glad to retract it since; because (though he light upon the same
Acts) he could find no such thing in the^. How say you? do not these
particulars prove, that many of you are excellent at facing matters out under
pretense of handwritten originals: which when they come to viewing, make
nothing for you?


PAP. If all be true you say, Si ita sit vt ipsi fingunt, qui post Marianu^ de
Ioanna scripseru^t, nonne ipsum Marianu^ in suae sententiae patrociniu^
afc^uislent, and suam hac arce opinionem muniuissent. ^lworim c. 2. nu. 4.
it will prove (I grant) some bad dealing in some few persons among us. But you
shall never be able to prove as much by me: for I will prove whatsoever I say.


PROT. Go to then: Make you proof unto me that this story is not in the more
ancient hand-written Originals of Marianus Scotus: and if you do so, I will
yield.


PAP. Will you so? Then I argue thus: a if this story had been in the most
ancient hand-written Originals of Marianus Scotus, they who writ since his time
would have alleged him for proof of it. But no man till now of late alleged
him for proof of it. Wherefore this was not in the most ancient hand-written
Originals of Marianus Scotus.


PROT. I deny the consequence of your proposition, viz. They who writ since
Marianus his time would have alleged him for proof of it, if so be it had
been written in the most ancient hand-written Originals. For first, till of
late, there was no controversy about it, which made men less careful to
avouch their authors for it. Secondly, Marianus chronicle, till printing came
to some perfection, was rare (it seems) and hard to come by. For Praefat. in
Chron.
Polonus reckoning up the books out of which he took his story, names not
Marianus among them. No more does Annot. in Plat. in vit. B. Petri.
Onuphrius where he reckons up the Authors whom Platina followed. Onuphrius (I
say) does not reckon Marianus among them. Iacobus Bergomensis, and Wernerus
Roleuinck, in their prefaces to their histories, wherein they show whom they
followed, pass by Marianus as a man unknown unto them. And so do others. But
for making of this matter plain, tell me, have you not heard, Anastasius Papa
voluit occulte reuocare Achatium Constantinop Epise. damnatu^, quare diuino
nutu percussus est.
that Anastasius the second, one of your Popes, would have restored Acatius the
Bishop of Constantinople, who stood excommunicated by some of your Popes
predecessors, but that God prevented your Pope, and stroke him with a fearful
death?


PAP. Yes, I have heard so much. But Bell lib. 4. de To. Pont cap. 10 and
Append. ad lib de summo Pont. and Pighius Eccles. Hierarch lib 4. c. 8.
I take it to be as vain a fable as this of Pope Ioane.


PROT. Yet you cannot deny but that it is recorded for true, by De vit. Pontif.
in Anastas. 2.
Anastasius Bibliothecarius, by Chron. lib. 1. ad ann. 414.
by Rhegino, by Aetate 6. ad ann. 499.
Marianus Scotus, by In Chron. ad ann. 491.
Sigebert, by De vit. Pont. in Anastas. 2.
Luitprandus, by De vit Pont. in vita Anastas. 2.
Albo Floriacensis, by Did. 19. c. Anastasius.
Gratian, by In Chron. ad ann. 498.
Polonus, by De vit. Pont. in Anastas. 2.
Platina, by Lib. 22.
Volateran, by Supple. Chron ad ann. 495.
Iacobus Bergomensis, by Fascic. Temp. ad ann. 484.
Wernerus Roleuinck, by De script. Eccl. verbo Anastas.
Trithemius, by Summa. Conc.
Charanza, by Summa de Eccl. lib. 2. cap.103.
Johannes de Turrecremata, and Nauclerus, Antomnus, locis infra ci^.
by others.


PAP. No indeed I cannot deny that, for all these (I know) report it as true.


PROT. Yea, and that in their most ancient hand-written Originals: do they not,
for ought you have seen or heard to the contrary?


PAP. Good. But what of all this?


PROT. You shall see anon. In the mean time tell me only whether they who
writ since Rhegino, and Marianus his time, allege Rhegino, or Marianus for the
author of it?


PAP. Locis supra citatis.
Bergomensis, Roleuinck, Trithemius, Turrecremate, Nauclerus vol 2. Chronogr.
generat. 17 Antoninus part. 2. hist. Tit. 11. cap. 1. sect. 8.
and such like, allege Gratian for the author of it. But I do not remember
that any historiographer alleges Rhegino, or Marianus Scotus, for it.


PROT. If this touching Anastasius the second, may be in the most ancient
hand-written Originals of Rhegino, and Marianus Scotus, though they, who have
written since their times, allege them not for authors of it: why may not the
other touching Pope Ioane, be in the most ancient hand-written Originals of
Marianus Scotus, though they who writ since his time, allege not him for the
author of it? Have you not another argument?


PAP. Yes: Lib. 3. de To. Pont cap. 24.
for Bellarmine writes: That he who set forth Krantius Metropolis at Colen in
the year 1574. does witness, In antiquissimis exemplaribus Mariani Scoti non
haberi Ioannem foeminam. That in the ancient copies of Marianus Scotus there is
no mention of Ioane the woman.


PROT. And what was he that set forth Krantius, can you tell me that? does
Bellarmine, or Lib. citato nu. 27. page 397.
N. D. (who twangs on the same string with Bellarmine) name him?


PAP. No, but what is that to the purpose? He, whosoever he was, witnesses so
much. And is not that enough?


PROT. No believe me: No reason that a namelesse fir should be credited against
all printed copies, especially if it be true, which Lib. 4. de To. Pont. cap.
13.
Bellarmine says, in another case: Author sine nomine, est sine authoritate, A
man without a name, is without credit; Lib. 1. de Matrimonio. ca 17.
and, Canon a concilio cuius ne nomen quidem extet, facile contemni potest. A
Canon out of a Council whose name is not known, may very well be skorned. But
would you know why Bellarmine and N. D. did not name him? Questionless, not
for that they knew not what his name was: but because he was but a base fellow,
a Printer, a poor Batchler of the law. A man of small esteem in the world:
for he is named in the first page of the book, Gerwinus Calenius Lippiensis,
and his whole style is no greater, then Legum Licentiatus. And what was such a
fellow, to carry away such a matter as this, upon his bare word? But which is
more to be marked, this fellow barely says (without any proof in the world)
that the manuscripts of Marianus Scotus, which are extant, discover the
falsehood of them who put this story into the printed Marianus implying, that
all Manuscripts, not the ancient only, want it. Which neither Bellarmine, nor
N. D. durst or dare avouch, the contrary being confessed directly by Baronius,
and may out of themselves be gathered by consequence. Besides, he says as much
for clearing of Sigebert, as Marianus Scotus, for Annot. in lib. 2. Krantij
Metrop.
these are his very words: Quae hic Author de Iohanne foemina refert, in odium
Romanorum pontificum conficta fuisse ab illis, quos ipse deceptus sequitur, vt
alios omittamus quos Onuphrius in Platinam scribens recenset, testantur
Marianus Scotus and Sigebertus, quorum quae supersunt M. S. exemplaria, fraudem
illorum detegunt qui eorum impressis voluminibus id inseruer^t. That this,
which the author hereof reports touching Pope Ioane, is but counterfeit stuff,
devised to make the Pope odious: to say nothing of such proofs as Onuphrius
gives in his Annotations upon Platina, Marianus Scotus and Sigebert do testify:
whose Manuscripts remaining on record, discover their falsehood, who have chopped
this tale into their printed volumes. And yet neither Bellarmin, nor N. D.
durst allege him to prove that Sigebert is corrupted.


PAP. Peradventure they durst have alleged him so that purpose also, though
they did not: for doubtless there is no such story in Sigebert.


PROT. Why? But all the printed copies do convince you of shameless lying, in
so saying. For thus Sigebert Ge^blacensis in Chronico ad an 854 printed at
Paris. 1513.
they read: Johannes Papa Anglicus, fama est hunc Iohannem foeminam fuisse and
vni soli familiari cognitam qui eam complexus est, and grauis facta peperit
Papa existens. Quare eam inter Pontifices non numerant quidam, ideo nomini
numerum non facit. John the English Pope. The report is, that this John was a
woman, and that one only, who used to lie with her, knew so much: and that at
length, even in the time of her Papacy she was delivered of child. Whereupon it
is that some reckon her not among the Popes, and that there is not one Pope
John the more in number for her. What say you, is it not even thus?


PAP. I confess the printed copies make for you in this also. But in the
ancient, true, and approved copies of Sigebert in writing, this which you talk
of is not. Aliquis impudens nebulo interpolauit scripta eius. Some paltry
fellow has been tampering with his writings, Lib. supra citato. page 110.
as Bernartius notes. Marry whether it was Geffrey the Monk, or one Robert,
who continued the story of Sigebert for some years, I know not: but between
them it is as Annot. in Plat in vit. Ioh. 8.
Onuphrius supposes. And I am sure Sigebert never writ it. Bernartius loco
citato.
Cui rei adserendae fidus, and adpositus mihi testis est Gilbertus Genebrardus,
which is witnessed very fully by Genebrard.


PROT. The 9. q. 3. patet. in Glossa Ioh. Andreae Familiaris est haec probatio
quum Papa alium Papa^ adducit in teste^.
Canonists, when Popes allege Popes for proof, do note: that it is,
familiaris probatio. Meaning such belike, as that in the proverb, Ask my
fellow if I be a thief. And so me thinks is this of yours, which is fetched
from your fellow Genebrard. But what says Genebrard for your purpose?


PAP. Lib. 4 Chronolog. ad ann. 855.
Genebrard says, there be many Manuscripts of Sigebert, wherein this is not.


PROT. Yea, but that is the question. And how does Genebrard prove it? Names he
any place where they are, or any person who has seen them?


PAP. No not he, but Lib. citato nu 27. page 397.
N. D. does, for in the Monastery of Gemble in Flaunders, there is extant
(says N. D.) the original of Sigebert, which wants this story.


PROT. What? the original of Sigebert? Who told N. D. that the original of
Sigebert was in that Monastery? or was he there and saw it with his own eyes?


PAP. N. D. says naught of that. But you may have further proof thereof out
of Lib. 4. de Ro^. Pont. cap. 24.
Bellarmine: for he writes that Molanus a Doctor of Louaine saw the copy.


PROT. But Bellarmine says not, that Malanus judged it to be the original of
Sigebert: which yet N. D. avouches as confidently, as if he had held the
candle while Sigebert wrote it. Neither does Bellarmine tell us, to whom
Molanus told this: or in what book he writ this. So that yet there is no just
proof brought, that so much as one copy wants it, much less that it is
foisted into such copies as have it.


PAP. Is there not? hearken then to Florunondus, Protasius Fra^ciscani or dinis
decus, ad stringendam fidem prius iurciurando deuinctus, mihi obtestatus est,
etc. Florim. cap. 5. nu. 5.
who writes, that one Protasius, the credit of the order of Franciscans, swear
to him, that he saw such a book in that Monastery; and that reading it all
over, he found no word touching such a Pope.


PROT. This would have moved me somewhat to believe, that the copy in that
Monastery wants this, if Florimondus had sworn for the satisfying of his
reader, touching the truth of his report: as he urged the Franciscan to swear
to him for the justifying of that which he told. But Florimondus delivers it
barely of his word. And I have found him often false of his tongue. Wherefore I
cannot trust him. Cap. 27 nu 6. extat adhue Michaelis ad Nicolaum epistola, etc.
Florimondus would make us believe, that Michael the Emperors letter sent to
Pope Nicolas, wherein the Emperor obiecteth whatsoever might found to the
disgrace of the Roman sea, is extant to this day: yet Annal. tom. 10 ad an.
865. nu. 75. Non extant ipsae blasphemae Michaelis ad Imperatorem literae --
traditae sunt igni.
Baronius testifies that they are not extant. He writes, that the Pope burnt
them. Yea Florimondus himself in another Chap. 10 nu. 4.
chapter (forgetting the proverb, Mendacem esse memorem oportet) confesses,
that they are lost. Yet be it so, that the copy which is in that Monastery
wants this. Unless Florimondus can prove that it is the original, or truly
copied out of the original, he speaks not to the point, as I shall show by and
by.


PAP. Yea but he proves that it is the very original it self. For there (as
Florimond. cap. citat. nu. 5.
he says) Sigebert lived, there he wrote this book with his own hand, there
he left it at his death as a monument of his love. There it is showed by the
Monks to such as come thither, for arare and ancient monument.


PROT. Sigebert lived not there, when he writ that book. He writ both that, and
many others, in the Monastery of S. Vincentius, within the city of Metensis.
Which I speak not of mine own head, as Florimondus does, but out of
Sigebertus eu^ in coenobio S. Vincentij. Metensi ad instruendos pueros esset
positus, scripsit Historiaru^ lib. Trithe^. de script. Ecclesiasticis, verbo,
Sigebertas.
Trithemius. For in Trithemius you may read so.


PAP. Yet you cannot disprove Florimondus in that which he says of his dying
there: and bequeathing of that book by his will, to that Monastery for a
legacy.


PROT. No indeed. But neither can he prove his own saying. Now you know that
Actori, non reo, incumbit probatio: The plaintiff, and not the defendant, must
bring in his proof. That which is nakedly affirmed, is sufficiently answered
when it is barely denied. Si dicere, probare est: pari ratione, inficiari,
refutare est: as you may read in Lib. 3. de Ro^. Pont. cap. 20.
Bellarmine.


PAP. Why, but the Monks of that house do show it to all comers as Sigeberts
own.


PROT. That I believe. For I have Vergerius an notat in Catalogum haeret. Romae
conflatum. An. 1559. fol. 17.
read of a Monk, who gave out, that he had brought from the East some of the
sound of the bells which hung in Salomons temple. Ibid.
And that he could show among other reliks, some of the hairs which fell from
the Seraphicall Angel, when he came to imprint the five wounds of Christ in S.
Francis body. And I have Bellonius obseruat. lib. 2. cap 83.
read of others, who show the Pilgrims that go to Jerusalem a three cornerd
stone, and bear them in hand that it is that very stone whereof Psalm. 118. 22.
David spoke, saying, The stone which the builders refused, is the head of the
corner.


PAP. Tush, those Monks do but cozen folks.


PROT. No more do the Monks of Gemble, in my opinion: though it may be, they
are rather cozened, then cozeners. For many a Papist persuades himself he has
that, which indeed he has not. As for example. Many Papists are persuaded they
have that Syndon wherein Christ's body was lapped, when it was interred, wherein
(as they say) is to be seen to this day the picture of Christ: whereas indeed
( Gret^ er. lib. ^. de Cruc^, cap. 85. page 240.
by some of their own men's confessions) they have but one made after that
fashion. Again, many are persuaded, they have one of those nails,
wherewithal Christ was nailed on the cross: Idem lib. 1. cap. 20. page 50.
whereas they have but one fashioned after that nail; or at most, some nail
wherewithal some Martyr of Christ was tormented. And in like manner are they
themselves deceived in their conceit of other relickes. But that which makes me
most suspicious of your Monks of Gemble, is this. I have read, that among many
other goodly relickes which are showed at Rome by the Popes commandment, there
is a Bible showed, which they say was written by S. Jerome himself, even with
his own hands: and yet one of your own profession professes freely, that he
perusing it thoroughly, found it was written by the commandment of one king
Robert, and by a bungling scriuener. Illum ego diligentius inspectum
comperiscriptum esse iussu regis (vt opinor) Roberti, chirographo hominus
imperiti, says De donatione Constantini.
Valla. Now I suppose, if we had access to Gemble in Flanders, perhaps we
might find as much for discovering of their falsehood, in that which they report
of the original of Sigebert: as your fellow found for the discovering of the
others falsehood, who gave out, that the Bible which they showed was of S.
Ieroms writing.


PAP. Suppose it be not the original of Sigebert which is at Gemble: yet you
will not deny (I hope) but that it is some ancient copy, which they esteem
so much of.


PROT. Be it so. But will you thereupon conclude, that the Author never writ
it? I presume you are not so ignorant, but you know, that words, sentences, and
memorable accidents, have sometimes by negligence, sometimes by wilfulness,
been left out of copies: as for example, the words (no not the Son of man,
Mark 13. 32. whereon your Apology (...) defense of Ecclesiastical
subordination in England, cap. 12 fol. 200.
Jesuits as upon a chief foundation, build their doctrine of aequiuocation)
were wanting in many Greek copies, as Lib. 5. de fide, cap. 7.
S. Ambrose testifies: and yet both you and we do hold opinion, that they were
set down by the Author in the first copy. In like sort, the story touching
Christ's sweating agony, and the Angels comforting him, Luke 22. 43. 44. was
not to be found in many copies, as De Trinitat. lib. 10.
Hilary and Lib. 2. contra Pelag.
Jerome witness: which came to pass, not for that it was never written by S.
Luke, but (as Lib. 1. de verbo Dei. cap. 16.
Bellarmine in part, and Bibl. sanctas lib. 1.
Sixtus Senensis more fully notes) for that some simple Catholics, fearing it
made for the Arians, razed it out of their books. So the story of the
adulterous woman, in John the 8. was Iansen Concord. Euang. cap 76.
wanting in many Manuscripts both Greek and Latin, and namely in a Manuscript
of Eusebius. lib. 3. hist. cap. 39. test Bella^. lib. 1. de verbo Dei, cap. 16.
Eusebius: yet that does nothing prejudice the truth of our printed copies at
this day, in which it is: no not in the opinion of you that are Papists. For as
Ibid.
Bellarmine proves out of Austine, this history was blotted out of many
books, by the enemies of Gods truth. In much like sort (it seems) as the
words of Aelfricus, which make against transubstantiation, were cut out of a
fragment of an Epistle of his, in the library of Worcester, as Acts and
Monuments allegations against the 6. artic. page 1304. edit. 1570.
M. Fox proves evidently. And as this story of Pope Ioane is cut out of a
very fair Lib 5.
Manuscript of Ranulfus Cestrensis, which is to be seen An. 1606.
at this day in the library of New College in Oxford.


PAP. Is this story torn (indeed) out of Ranulfus Cestrensis in New College
in Oxford? Who think you was so mad?


PROT. Why, who but a Papist? For do not Index lib. prohib. per Clementem 8. De
correctione lib.
they give direction, that quae famae proximorum, and praesertim
Ecclesiasticorum, and Principum detrahunt, corrigentur at que expurgentur? That
such things should be altered or put out, which tend to the discredit of the
Clergy? And does not this touch at quick their Ecclesiastical state? Does
not Posseuine advise, that the Ioh. Neuisanus Sylua N^ptialis. p. 319.
note in John Neuisan the Lawyer, which mentions Pope Ioane, should be razed
out? Dele ( In Apparat. sacro verbo, Ioh Neuisanus.
says he) quia Johannes haec foemina chimera est, and impostura calumniatorum:
Blot it out, or rend it out, quoth Posseuine: for it is but a fiction, and a
forgery.


PAP. You are too suspicious of Papists. But if these answers, whereon I have
hitherto insisted, please you not, let it be as you would have it, that all
these Historians writ so. Onuph. annot. in Platin. in vit. Ioh 8. per vt aiunt,
and tradunt earn relert. ^^
yet I deny, that any credit is herein to be given unto them, because they
report it but by hearesay, with vt asseritur.


PROT. That is false. For Marianus Scotus reports it simply without vt
asseritur, as before I showed. And Laonicus Chalcocondylas reports it as a
certain truth, saying, Constat, etc. So does Rauisius Textor, and Barthol
Cassa^aeus 2. part. catalogi gloriae mundi, non a consideratio. Turrecremat.
sum. de Eccles. part. 2. lib. 4. cap. 20. Caelius Rhodiginus Antiqua^
Lectionu^. lib. 8. cap. 1.
others.


PAP. That which you say of Marianus Scotus, is true, if we were to be judged
by the printed copy, which Heroldus set out. But I can assure you, that
Heroldus unconscionably corrupted this place, and many others. For it is thus
Leo Papa ^bijt. Kal. Aug. Huic succesit loanna mulier an. a (...) 5. dieb. 4.
Haec in codice impresso Heroldi opera qui mala fide locum hunc cu^ alijs multis
corrupit. Nam in scripto codice ex quo prodijt prima editio ita legitur:
Johannes qui, vt asseritur, fuit mulier
written in the written copy, after which the first edition was printed. Ioh
anne^s ^ui vt asseritur, fuit mulier. John, who as the report goes, was a woman.


PROT. So your Annal. to 10. ad an. 853. ou. 60.
Cardinal Baronius would make us believe, (I grant) but he brings no other
proof thereof then test meipso. Which how ever it may go for proof among
Princes, yet is no proof among scholars. And for my part without proof, I
believe nothing, whosoever he be that speaks it, especially if he be a Papist.
For as Rerum memorabilium paraleipomen. Hist. Abbat. Vrspergens. annex a. p.
394.
Sigismund the Emperor said of Iudian the Cardinal, Legate at the Council of
Basil, when one commended him highly to him: Tamen Romanus est. Yea but he is a
Roman: so I may say of any Papist, reporting things unknown: yea, but he is a
Papist. Yet be it so, as Baronius says it is. Why may it not be true though it
be delivered with vt asseritur?


PAP. Why? Harding loco supra citato.
Because lies are commonly so soothed.


PROT. Indeed many lies pass in such general terms. As for example: Men say,
Golden Legend in the life of S. Patricke.
says your Legend, that S. Patrik drove with his staff all the venomous
beasts out of Ireland: and that he obtained of the Lord, that no Irish man
should abide the coming of Antichrist. The former of which Dial lib. 3. cap. 28.
Harpsfield Cope confesses to be a lie: and so I think all the generation of
you Papists think of the later. Else, why do none of your great Masters
allege it to clear your Pope from being Antichrist? Men say, says Nangiacus
as Chronol. lib. 3. ad an. Christ. 595.
Genebrard reports: that Kentish-men have tails like brute beasts, because
their ancestors mocked Austine the Monk when he came to preach unto the^. Now
that this is a lie well worthy of a whetstone, your self (I hope) will
acknowledge. Yet truth now and then is so delivered. When Boniface the Martyr
was demanded on a time, whether it was lawful at the administration of the
Lords Supper, to use a wodden chalice: it is said he answered thus, says De
sacris Eccl. benefic. ac Minist. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Duaren: Olim aurei sacerdotes ligneis vasis, nunc lignei aureis vtuntur. In
old time golden Priests used wodden chalices, now wodden Priests use golden
chalices. Mark, ( fertur) it is said, says Duaren, yet Alciat. parerga iuris
lib. 7. cap. 24. and de consecrat. did. 1. c. vasa
no question but he answered so. In like manner, it is written, that Pius the 2.
was wont to say, Marriage was upon just reason forbidden Priests, but now upon
better reason to be restored to Priests. Pius 2. dixisse fertur sacerdotibus
magnaratione sublatas esse nuptias, maiori restituendas videri. Platina in vita
Pij. 2. Fulgos. de dict. etc. lib. 7. cap. 2.
Of which his saying there is made no question, as may appear by this, that a
Pisanus de Continentia. cap. 11.
Jesuit replieth only to it, That it was recanted by him, and denies not
that it was spoken of him. That Alexander the 3. trampled the Emperor
Frederick under his feet, and commnded one to say that which is in the Psalm.
91. 13.
Psalms, Thou shall walk upon the Lion and Aspe, the young Lion and the Dragon
shall thou tread under thy feet: is Duaren. de sac. Eccl. Minist. lib. 1. cap.
2.
recorded by some with, vt fertur: and yet See To^tu^a Torti. p. 262. and the
B. of Lincolns book against a namelesse Catholic. page 282.
they have little to say for themselves, who call the truth thereof in question.
That merry Cardinal, who seeing after the death of Clemens the 4. that his
fellow Cardinals called still for the assistance of the holy Ghost, and yet
could not agree upon the election of a new Pope, Onup. Annot. in Plat. in vit.
Greg. 10.
cried out: Domini, discooperiamus tectum camerae huius, quia spiritus sanctus
nequit ad nos per tot tecta ingredi. My good masters, I pray you let us until
the roof of this room: for I fear the holy Ghost cannot get to us through so
many slates: is merely Onuph. ibid.
reported upon election of Gregory to have made these verses.

Papatus munus tulit Archidiaconus vnus,
Quem patrem patrum fecit discordia fratrum.
Yet who doubts but he made them? Disput. super matter. Conc. generalis, quae
habetur in Fasci culo rerum expetend. impress. Colon. 1535. fol. 201. b. Et in
Bibl. sanct patru^ Bygnaei. to. 8. edit. Paris. 1576.
Nicolas Clemangis Archdeacon of Baion in France, does write upon hearesay.
That when Balthazar commonly known by the name of John the 23. held a Council
at Rome, and caused, as the manner is, before the first Session, a Mass to be
said for the assistance of the holy Ghost: presently upon the Councels setting
of themselves down, and Balthasars advancing himself into his chair of
estate: a dreadful Owl (which is ordinarily thought to presage some evil
toward) comes out of her hole, crying after her evil favored fashion, and
flying to the middle balk of the Church, staring just in Balthasars face, to
the great astonishment of Balthazar himself, and all the whole Council, so that
he was glad to break off for that time. Yea he writes, that at the next
Session she appeared again, staring in the Popes face as before, and could not
be feared away with flinging of sticks, or with whooping, till one feld her
with a stick, and so killed her. Yet no man has cause to doubt of the story,
for he had it of a trusty man, and a faithful friend of his, who assured him,
of his credit, that it was true. That Aene as Syluius hist. Bohem^ca, cap. 13.
S. Cyril entreated the Pope, he might say the Morauians their service in a
known language: and that when there was some sticking at the motion, a voice
was heard, as it were, from heaven, saying, Omnis spiritus laudet Dominum, and
omnis lingua confiteatur ei: Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord,
and let every tongue confess his holy name: upon hearing whereof, the Pope
granted S. Cyril his suite: is but reported with, ferunt. And yet though In
Enchirid. controu. cap. 19. de precibus latinerecitandis.
Costerus in that respect make some question of the truth of it, De divine.
scrip quauis lingua non legend. cap. 33.
Ledesma, and Lib. 2 de verbo Dei, cap. 16.
Bellarmine receive it for true. That the worst Christians in Italy are the
Romans: that of the Romans, the Priests are the most wicked; and of the
Priests, the leudest are made Cardinals; and of the Cardinals, the badst chosen
to be Pope; it is Sir Edw. Sands in his relation of the religion used in the
West page 91.
written, but with asseritur. Yet to them that are skilled in histories, and
have observed the course of the world at Rome, there are not many things more
certain. In Bauaria palam ferunt, Iesuitas dolium in Collegium subuexisse, e
cuius fundo effracto, meretrix in publicas plateas prolapsa sit, faith Historia
Iesuitici ordinis, cap. 6.
Hassen Muller. They say openly in Bauaria, that the Jesuits caused a tub to
be carried unto their College, which breaking by the way, a wench dropped out of
the one end of it, in the midst of the street. And why may not this be true,
though it go but by report? The Papists believe as true, far more incredible
reports then this, which concern Protestants. But to conclude this point. Does
not Cope dialog. 3. cap. 11. page 355.
Harpsfield Cope avouch, that if men reject stories upon this quirke, that they
are related with ferunt and dicitur, they will soon mar all? You had best
devise a better answer then this, for fear that you be one of them who mar
all.


PAP. Take you no care for that. Yet in way of further answer to Polonus, who
is taken as Nu. 27. p 397.
N. D. writes) to have been the first relator of this fable. N. D. Page 399.
and 400.
I say, there are so many incongruities, simplicities, absurdities, varieties,
and contrarieties in his very narration of it, as it discovers the whole
matter to be a mere fable, and fiction indeed, and him a very simple man. For
he begins his narration thus: Post Leonem sedit Johannes Anglus, natione
Margantinus, After Leo the 3. John English, by nation a Margantine. But where
this country of Margantia is, no man can tell.


PROT. N. D. whose words you use, does Martinus Polonus open wrong, in
reporting this of him. For first, he says not that she sat after Leo the 3.
but Leo the 5. Secondly, he calls her not Margantine, but Maguntine, which is
witnessed by Annot. in Plat in vit. Ioh. 8.
Onuphrius himself, who cites his words to his best advantage, that he might
have the rather whereat to cavil. If any blind book have Margantine, it is
but the Scriueners falt, such as is committed once and again in that book of
N. D. whence this sweet cavil is taken. Page 396.
Where for Magdeburgians, we read Magdebugians. For in Polonus there is an, r,
too much, and in N. D. there is an, r, too few. Now where Maguntia is every can
man tell, to wit, in Germany.


PAP. N. D page 400
Yea but it follows in Polonus: Quae alibi legitur fuisse Benedictus 3. which
otherwhere is read to be Benedict the 3. So as this man seems to confound him
with Benedict the 3. and consequently ascribes to him the same time of his
reign that is assigned to Benedict, to wit, 2. years and 5. months. And yet
presently after he says, that Benedictus was a Roman, son to Prateolus, etc.


PROT. The substance of this your answer is false, and feigned of N. D. his
own head: for in Polonus there are no such words as ( Quae alibi legitur
fuisse Benedictus 3.) neither ascribes he to her the same time of reign that
is assigned to Benedict. For he ascribes to Benedict 2. years and 5. months:
whereas he ascribes to Pope Ioane 2. years 5. months and 4. days, or (as
some Onuph. loco citato.
of you say) but 2. years, 1. month and 4. days. N. D. might with as great
reason charge Anastasius to confound Leo the 2. and Benedict the 2. his next
successor: because Anastas. de vit. Pont. in Leo. 2 and Benedict. 2.
he ascribes to Leo the 2. the same time of his reign (within 5. days) which
he ascribes to Benedict the 2. Questionles, Chron. ad an. Christ. 94. and 103
Polonus ascribes to Cl^mens, 9 years, 2. months, and 10. days: and so he
does to his next successor Anacletus, without difference: yet he confounds
them not. Polonus ascribes to Celestinus primus, 8 years, and 9 days: and so
he does to Sixtus the 3. his next successor, and yet confounds them not.


PAP. Onuph. Hard. and Bellar. locis supra citatis.
Why, but what a foolish speech is it of Polonus, when he says, John an
English man, by nation of Maguntia. For Maguntia is in Germany, as you told me
before. And how could she being an English woman, be of Maguntia?


PROT. You run counter: she was no English woman, neither does Polonus say
she was: she was Ioane English (as Nu. 30. page 400.
N. D. truly translated, Johannes Anglus, in Polonus) but not Ioane, or John of
England. English was her surname, as See before.
Fasciculus Temporum observed; but England was not her country, her country
was Maguntia, that is, Mentz. There are many who carry the name of Scot,
French, Gascoigne, Westfaling, Holland, Welsh, which were not born in those
countries, but in several shires in England. Guitmundus, who wrote against
Berengarius, was Guitmundus Normanus cognomento, non natione.
Norman by name, but not by his country, says Apparat. sac. verbo Guitmundus.
Posseuine.


PAP. Florim. cap. 10. nu. 1.
Such writers as lived the very time wherein this matter is pretended to have
fallen out, (that is to Hoc est ab an. 847. ad ann. 858.
say) with Leo the 4. and with Benedict the 3. from the year 847, to 858.
write nothing hereof at all. Ergo, there was no such matter.


PROT. Who are these writers (I pray you) of whom you speak?


PAP. The Florim. loco citato.
first and chiefest is Rabanus Maurus, Abbor of the Monastery of Fulda,
wherein this Pope Ioane of yours (they say) lost her maidenhead. Rabanus
Maurus writes nothing of her.


PROT. Nor of any other particular Pope: does he? Rabanus Trithem. de script.
Eccl verbo. Rabanus.
wrote commentaries upon the whole Scripture, and some other Treatises: but he
wrote no history. Though if he had, yet could he not have written of this Pope
Ioane, for her knavery was not discovered till after the year 855. in Trithem.
ibid.
which Rabanus died. Rabanus lived not to hear of her delivery of a child, as
she went in progress.


PAP. Rabanus died in the year 856. and not in the year 855. as Annal. to.
10. ad an. 856 nu. 26 Posseuin. Apparat. sac. verbo. Rabanus.
Baronius notes. Trithemius who noted out the year 855 for the year of his
death, was deceived, and so are you.


PROT. Whether Trithemius was deceived in assigning the year 855. for the
year of Rabanus death, I mean not to stand arguing with you, because it is
all one to my purpose though he died in the year 856. For Pope Ioane was not
discovered till after the year 856. And therefore since he died in that year,
by Baronius and your own confession, he could not write of her.


PAP. Florim. loco citato.
Strabus, whose fellow Monk bereaved her of her maidenhead, as the tale goes:
Strabus (I say) writes nothing of her.


PROT. Strabus writes nothing of his fellow Monks, who by the instigation of
the devil, wearied Rabanus of his Abbotship, through their continual
grumbling against him, for giving himself more to the study of Divinity,
then to pleading about their worldly businesses. Yet we read thereof in De
script. Eccles. verbo Rabanus.
Trithemius and in Sixth. Senensis Bibli. sanctae, l. 4. verbo. Rabanus. and in
Posseuin. Apparat. sac. verbo. Rabanus.
others. Wherefore it does not follow, Strabus wrote not of Pope Ioane: Ergo
there was no Pope Ioane. Especially if it be considered, that Strabus wrote no
history, but glosses upon the Bible, and lived not til Pope Ioanes days, but
died about the year 840. For how could he write of that which fell out after
his death? Who is your next man?


PAP. Florim. p. 84.
Haimo, who writ a book of virtue and vice, writes nothing of her.


PROT. No marvel: for he died in the year 834, at least twenty years before
she was Pope. If Haimo had written of her, his writing had been as strange, as
her delivery of a child.


PAP. How prove you that Haimo died in the year 834? For by Annal. to. 10. ad
an. 853. nu. 71
Baronius, it should seem, he died in the year 853.


PROT. Though Haimo had died in the year 853, it helps not you in this case.
For till after that time, this Ioane was not made Pope. But that Haimo died in
the year 834, it is witnessed by De script. Eccl verbo. Haimo.
Trithemius, and acknowledged by Bibl. Sa^ct. lib. 4. verbo. Haimo. Apparat.
^acer. to. 2. verb Haim.
Sixtus Senensis, and by Posseuine. Wherefore go on.


PAP. Anastasius Bibliothecarius, N. D. part 2. cap. 5. page 392.
a man of great reputation, that lived in both these Popes times, and Florim.
p. 84.
was Secretary to them both, and was present at both their elections, and wrote
the particulars there^f, writes nothing of her, but shows among other points,
that Leo the 4. died the 16. day before the Kalends of August, and that all the
Clergy of Rome gathered together, and with one consent did choose Benedict the
third, etc.


PROT. Where read you that Anastasius was Secretary to both these Popes? or
that he was present at their elections? In vita Ioh. 8. nu. 110. Anastasi^ a
Job. (v^. 8) praefectus est Bibliothecae S. Romans Ecclesiae. Baron. annal. tom.
9. ad an. 787. nu. 9.
Platina writing of an accident which fell out in the year 884, notes, that
Anastasius at that time was a man of good account in Rome. But neither he, nor
any man else notes that he was Secretary to Leo the 4. and Benedict the 3, or
that he was present at their elections. Lib. 3. de Rom Pont. cap. 24.
Bellarmine himself durst say no more, but that he was present at the election
of many Popes, who either lived before or after this woman Pope. He durst not
say, that he was at the election of these, as you say. Again, who told you
that Leo died the 16. day before the Kalends of August? Anastasius In vita
Leonis 4. page 293.
writes, that Leo the 4. Papa obdormiuit in domino 16. Calend. August. But that
is but the 15. day before the Kalends of August, and not the 16. Thirdly,
whereas to win credit to this your Author, you commend him as a man of great
reputation, it is worth the noting, (which is noted Ioh Albinus Typographus
Mogunt. praefat. ad an icum Lectore^, quae praefigitur Anastasio. Qui sciret
tantum Grammaticam isto seculo rudi, doctissimus habebatur. Baron. annal. tom.
9. ad an. 802. nu. 12.
by one of your own friends) that in the age wherein he lived, doctissimi
censebantur, qui velsolam Grammaticam callerent: they were counted great
Clerks, who were skilled so much as in the Grammar. Albinus loco citato.
That in this Chronicle of Anastasius, the phrase is harsh, rude, and
barbarous. That many things are auowed therein, which are far from true. That
therein there are many errors in the account of time, and some things wherein
he crosses himself. Which censure, for the maine point, is approved by many
of your own mothers children. For many Papists, in many particulars condemn
it. As for example, Anastas de vit. Pontif in vita An^ceti, etc.
this man of great reputation reckens Anicetus before Pius, and Anterus before
Pontianus. Whereas Platina de vitis Pontif in vita Aniceti, and Onuph in Chron.
Romans Pontif.
your Chroniclers reckon Pius before Anicetus, and Pontianus before Anterus. In
vita Marcel.
This man of great reputation records, that Marcellinus (one of your Popes) was
brought to offer incense unto Idols, and that he did so: whereas your Annal to.
2. ad an. 302 nu 95. 96 etc.
Baronius inclines rather unto the contrary. This man of great reputation In
vita Liberij
records, that the priests of Rome, by the advice of Liberius, chose Felix a
priest to be a Bishop in stead of Liberius: whereas Ba^on to. 3. ad an. 355. nu
57.
your Chroniclers of greatest esteem maintain, that Felix was chosen priest
by heretics only, and not by consent of Liberius. This man of great
reputation In ^ita Liberij.
records, that Liberius subscribed to the Arian heresy: which neither P^gh.
hierarch Eccles. lib. 4. c. 8.
Pighius nor Annot in Platin. in vit. Fell. c. 2.
Onuphrius can abide to hear of. This man of great reputation In vita Anast. 2
records, that Anastasius the second Pope of that name, communicated with
Photinus the heretic, who was all one with Acacius the Eutychian. And that he
purposed with himself to restore Acacius, who was deposed by his predecessors:
but could not effect it, because God struck him with sudden death. All which
is false and fabulous in Lib. 4. de Rom Pont. cap. 10 and Append. ad. lib. de
summo Pont cap. 14.
Bellarmines opinion. This man of great reputation In vita Marcellini: cessauit
Episco^ at. ann. 7m. 6 dieb. 25.
records, that after Marcellinus, the Bishopric of Rome lay lea, seven
years, six months, and five and twenty days: whereas by Annal to. 2. ad an
304. nu. 25. and 26.
Baronius it lay lea but 25 days in all. This man of great reputation In vita
Eusebius.
records, that the Cross of Christ was found in Eusebius the Popes days,
about the year 310: whereas by Annal. to. 3. ad an. 326. nu. 41.
Baronius it was not found till the year 326. This man of great reputation In
vita Hono. 1
reckens Honorius the first among the heretics called Monothelites: whereas
the Onuph. annotat. in Plat. in vit. Honorij 1. etc.
most of your side, and by name Lib 4 de To. Pont. cap. 11.
Bellarmine, would gladly clear Honorius from this imputation. This man tells
us, that Alexander the first sa^e but eight years, and a few odd months:
whereas Baron annal. to. 2 ad an. 132. nu. 1.
Baronius tells us, that he sat ten years and odd months. In vita Alex. 1.
This man In vita Pij 1.
gives to Pius, 19 years, four months, and three days: whereas Baron. to.
2. ad an. 167. nu. 1.
Baronius gives him but ten years. This man In vita Soteris
makes Soter sit nine years, and upward: whereas by Baron to. 2. ad ann. 179.
nu. 51.
Baronius he sat not full four years. This man In vita Anteri.
says, that Anterus sat 12 years, 1 month, and 12 days: whereas Baron. to.
2. ad ann. 238. nu. 1.
Baronus says, he sat not a whole month. This man In vita Dionysij.
allows Denis but two years and a little more, whereas To. 2. ad ann. 272.
nu 21.
Baronius allows him 11 years and more. This man In vita Stephani. 5.
writes, that Stephen the fifth sat 7 years, and 7 months: whereas by Annal
to. 9. ad ann. 817. nu. 1.
Baronius reckoning he sat but seven months, and two or three odd days. And
so in many other things, this man of great reputation allows of that, whereof
you allow not, and disalloweth that which you allow. And therefore what reason
have you to press us with his authority in this controversy?


PAP. Great reason. For though he missed sometimes the truth, yet he aimed
always at it: and though he was unkindly dealt withal by some of the Popes,
yet he was not carried away with malice, and moved thereby, as many are, to
write an untruth,


PROT. What? Was Anastasius, the man of great reputation, unkindly dealt withal
by some of the Popes? Who told you that tale?


PAP. I had it of Florim. cap. 14. nu. 1.
Florimondus. And I think he was induced to say so, because we read in Leo
the 4. his time, our Anastasius was degraded by Pope Leo, and a Council of 67.
Bishops.


PROT. That Anastasius, who was degraded by Leo the 4. and the Council, was he
(as De vitis Pont. in vita Bened. 3.
Platina shows) who stood up Antipope against Benedict the 3. It was not this
Anastasius, Which you may learn of him, who made the Index Alphabeticall, for
the more ready finding out of the most memorable points in Anastasius
Chronicle: for In Indice littera a. verbo Anastasius.
he distinguishes Anastasius Bibliothecarius, from Anastasius degraded by Leo,
and set up in opposition against Benedict the 3. But let Anastasius be of as
great reputation as you are disposed to have him of. How soon after Leo his
death, does Anastasius report, that the clergy chose Benedict the 3? Can you
tell me that?


PAP. Yea. The Sea was void after Leo the 4. just 15. days, and no more. And
then, not Ioane, but Benedict the 3. was chosen.


PROT. Who told you so?


PAP. Marry, Annot, in Plat. in vit. Ioh 8.
Onuphrius, Lib. 3. de To. Pont. cap. 24.
Bellarmine, De vtilitate Le gend. hist.
Bernartius, Cap. 14. page 123.
Florimondus, and De vrbis Episc in Benedict. 3.
Papyrius Massonus. For they say that these are Anastasius his own words:
Sanctissimus Leo Papa 4. obdormiuit in Domino 16. Calend. Aug. sepultus ad
Sanctum Petrum, and cessauit Episcopatus dies 15. Quo mortuo, mox omnis Clerus
Romanae sedis, vniuersi proceres, cunctusque populus ac senatus congregati
sunt, etc. vno conamine Benedictum Pontificem promulgauerunt. That is, The most
holy Pope Leo the 4. died in the Lord the 16. of the Calends of August, and was
buried at S. Peter's, and the Bishopric was void 15. days. Now presently
upon his death, the whole Roman Clergy with all the nobles, and commons, and
officers of the city met: and as one man agreed that Benedict should be their
Pope.


PROT. They all lie falsely. For the words ( Et cessauit Episcopatus dies 15.)
are not to be found (as before I told you) in Anastasius. So that whatsoever
they build upon this circumstance (as the most of their building is) is built
upon a false foundation, and therefore cannot stand. Yet besides I would have
you know that Anastasius purposely passed over in silence diverse things, which
touched the Popes. For, Multa de Sergio desiderari videntur apud Anastasium,
Annal. to. 10. ad ann. 847. nu. 6.
says Baronius. Anastasius wants many things touching Sergius. Again,
Iohannis 8. res gestae desiderantur apud Anastasium, fortassis praetermissae ob
odiosam Photij restitutionem, says the same Annal to. 10. ad an. 882. nu. 7.
Baronius. The acts of John the 8. are wanting in Anastasius, perhaps because
he was loath to record that odious restoring of Photius.

Multa praetermissa ab Anasta sio inueniuntur, and inter alia depraedatio
Basilicae S. Petri quae in vaticanis collibus extra vrbis maenia posisita erat.
Baron. Annal to. 9. ad ann. 739. nu. 6. Plurima de eodem rege (viz. Luitprando)
P. Diaconus praetermisisle conuincitur. Sed haud rerum ignoratione, sed ne
tanto vito no tam inureret, etc. Baron. Annal. to. 9 ad ann. 744. nu. 22.
Anastasius forbeares to speak of Luitprandus sacking S. Peter's Church, which
is without the walls of Rome. And so does Paulus Diaconus too. Not for that he
was ignorant of that fact, since he lived in the same time, but for that he was
loath by telling truth to discredit Luitprandus. Wherefore let us leave
Anastasius, and come unto the next, who living in those days, passes over
Pope Ioane in silence.


PAP. Bell lib. 3. de To. Pont. cap. 24. N. D. nu 24. p. 393. Et alij.
Ado Bishop of Vienna, who lived at the same time, has not a word of this your
Pope Ione.


PROT. Ado lived not at the same time, nor near the same time, if either In
Bibliotheca verbo. Ado.
Gesner, or Apparatus sacer. verbo. Ado.
Posseuinus, or In hist. vet. patrum. edit. Paris. 1583. ad initiu^. Chron.
Adonis
Laurentius de la Bar, or In Bibliot. vatican. impress Romae. an. 1591 Tit.
Author q. in opere citantur nomina.
Angelus Rocca may be credited. For he (as they say) wrote a brief Chronicle
from the beginning of the world to his own time, to wit, to the year 1353.
Wherefore it is not much material whether he miss her, or mention her. Say on.


PAP. Florim. p 84.
Theophanus Freculphus wrote in those days an history from the beginning of
the world to his own time: and yet he writes nothing of her.


PROT. If Freculphus had written an history of that length, yet there was
little reason why he should have mentioned her. For we Freculphus floruit. an.
830. and quod excurrit. Posleuin. Ap parat. lac. verbo. Freculphus.
read not that he lived above the year 840. But indeed his history goes not
so far. He writ only to the year of Christ 550, as In Metho hist. Freculph
historicus ab orb. condito ad ann. Christi. 560. Chron, digerit.
Bodin observes: or to the year 560, as Chro^. l. 2. p. 110
Pontacus notes: or at furthest to the year 600. For having spoken a few
words of Gregory the great and Boniface who succeeded him, he ends presently
his story. Who is your next man?


PRO. O^uph. annot. in Plat. in vita Ioh. 8. Harding. loco in initiocitat.
Florim. p 84
Aimonius, A Monk of S. Germans, and a famous French writer, speaks nothing
of her.


PROT. Aimonius, or Ammonius, or Annonius, (for he is diversely named) your
famous French writer, drew out his story, by Annonius vsque ad ann. 820
historiam texurt, says Vasquez de Adorat. lib. 2 cap. 9. disput. 7.
your own men's confession, but to the year 828, or at furthest to Gencbr.
Chro^. lib. 4. ad an. 44
844, which fell nine or ten years short (at least) of Pope Ioanes time. And
therefore me thinks that you should not look that he should write of her.


aeAP. N. D. nu. 24. p. 302.
Audomarus the Parisian omits her also in his history.


PROT. Where might a man see Audomarus I pray you? Episco^us qui dam nostras
eos authors citauit interdu^, quos nulla vnqua^ habuit aetas. Canus. Loc. Com.
lib. 11. c. 6. fol. 327.
Canus tells of a Bishop in his country which was wont to cite Authors that
never were. Now I wish you be not of kindred to him in this: for I find no
mention of any such historiographer in Trithemius, or in Gesner, or in
Posseuinus. Neither does Bellarmine nor Baronius cite any such in their
disputes about this matter. When you can tell me certain news of such a
writer, you shall have a more certain answer. In the mean time proceed.


PAP. Nay stay a little: for though neither Bellarmine nor Baronius mention
Ademarus, (for so is his right name, and not Audomarus, as it is erroneously
printed) where they speak of this matter: yet Ademarus is mentioned by
Genebrard and Onuphrius, where they treat of this matter, as B. C. observed
well, in his Page 296. and 297.
Doleful knell of Thomas Bell: where he taxes Sutcliffe for captious
quarelling with father Parsons (as he calls him) for citing Ademarus, calling
him a counterfeit.


PROT. B. C. is a fit patron for father Parsons: but an unfit match to deal
with Deane Sutcliffe. Deane Sutcliffe (no doubt) scorns him. And good cause
why. For who but a fool would appeal to one of his own fellows for trial
of his truth? Are not Genebrard and Onuphrius as like to cite a counterfeit
Author as Parsons!


PAP. Florim. p. 84.
Lupus Seruatus says nothing of her.


PROT. Why? what occasion had he to speak of her, since he writ no books of
history? Besides, Lupus Seruatus migrauit ad Dominum anno 851, says In Chron.
Mo nasterij Hirsaugiensis ad ann. 851.
Trithemius: that is Lupus Seruatus died in the year 851. So that, though as a
Prophet he might have foretold of her delivery, yet as an Historian, he could
not have reported her delivery.


PAP. Yea but Lupus Abbot of Ferrara in an Epistola 103. quae habetur apud
Baro. anna. to. 10. ad an. 856 nu. 8. and Florim. cap. 14. nu. 4.
Epistle of his to Benedict the third, calls Leo Benedicts predecessor: and
thereby shows, as Annal. to. 10. ad ann. 853. nu. 69.
Baronius gathers, that there was no such Pope as Pope Ioane, between
Benedict and Leo.


PROT. What? does Baronius gather such a conclusion of such premises? Verily
he gathers where no man streweth. For I pray you, does this follow. John the
9. speaking of Stephen the 6. Baron. to. 10. ad an. 900. nu. 8.
calls him his predecessor. Ergo, there was no Pope between John the 9. and
Stephen the 6? If not, as indeed it does not, for there were two Popes who came
between them, the one called Baron. to. 10. ad ann. 901. nu. 1.
Romanus, the other Ibid.
Theodorus) then neither will it follow, that because Leo is called Benedicts
predecessor, therefore there was no such Pope, as Pope Ioane, between Benedict
and Leo.


PAP. Baron. to. 10. ad an. 853. nu. 69
Yea, but this Lupus in diverse of his Epistles, does complain of the
miserable estate of the Church in his time. And therefore if any such horrible
matter, as this of Pope Ioane, had fallen out, Cete si quod tam nefandu^ see
lus accidislet, di cere minime omisisser, sed im placabili luctu vir zelo
plenus planxisset.
doublesse he would have spoken of it, and mourned pitifully for it.


PROT. Doubtless, Baronius, if you give any credit to him, will make a fool
of you. For does not To. 10. ad ann 846. nu. 10. 11. 12. 14. 15. 17.
he mention diverse of his Complaining Epistles, sent to great personages?
wherein yet he complains of nothing, but that Courtriers robbed his Corban; I
mean his Monastery. Ad ann. 855. nu. 14.
That he wanted an ambling Nagge to ride to Rome on. Ad ann. 856. nu. 10.
That he wanted Tully de Oratore, Quintilian, and Donate upon Terence. And Ad
ann. 856. nu. 20.
that there was such licentiousness in France (among the Laity) that the
people neither feared God nor the devil. Of faults among the Clergy, Lupus
complains not at all.


PAP. N. D. p. 392. Florim. p. 84.
Luitprandus, who writ an history, speaks nothing of her.


PROT. What history of Luitprandus do you mean? That which is entitled De
vitis Pontificum, that is, of the Popes lives? which was printed the Anno. 1602.
other year at Mentz with Anastasius: or his history of such accidents as
fell out through Europe?


PAP. I mean the latter. For I see the former, though it carry the name of
Luitprandus, Ioh. Albinus praefar. ad Lectorem.
cast off by the Printer, as none of his.


PROT. Now then you are a wise man, to tell me that Luitprandus mentions not
Pope Ioane. For Luitprandus Ticiuensis Diaconns, historiam per Europam gestarum
libris 6, ab An. 858. ad ^0. vsque Othonis magni fere continuat, Chron. lib. 4.
ad ann. 955.
says Genebrard. That is, Luitprandus Deacon of such a Church in Italy,
continues his history of accidents which fell out in Europe, from the year
858. to the 30. year (almost) of Otho the great. By which you may see that he
began his history after Pope Ioanes time. And therefore had no cause to speak
of her.


PAP. N. D. and. Florim. locis citat^^
Lambertus Schafnaburgensis has not a word of her.


PROT. To this I answer, first that he lived not in the same time with her: he
lived anno 1077. Secondly I say, that this Lambertus did but touch by the way.
all ages from the beginning of the world to the year of Christ 1040. as Lib.
2. chron.
Pontacus truly observed: though he discoursed at large of the 37 years that
followed. Thirdly, this Lambertus does not so much as name Stephen the 4, or
Paschalis, or Eugenius, or Valentinus, or Gregory the 4, or Sergius the 2, or
Leo the 4, or Benedict the third, or Nicolas, or Adrian the second: and
therefore what marvel if he speak not of this Pope Ioane?


PAP. Florim. p. 85. Onuph. in Plat. in vita Ioh. 8.
Otho Frisingensis, who lived about the year 1150. makes no mention of this
story.


PROT. But he does. For John the seueuth ( Lib. 7. cap. 35. re^um in orb
gestaru^. Impress. Argentorati, An. 1515.
says he) was a woman.


PAP. Qui paul^ post illius aetate^ floruerunt, nihil de ea scripseru^t. etc
Florim. cap. 10. page 84.
They who lived within a few years after her, and writ at length of all other
accidents, write nothing of her: and that is another presumption, it is but a
fable which is reported of her.


PROT. Who are they you mean?


PAP. The first is Florim. loco citato.
Johannes Diaconus, who in the year 870. writ of the Popes lives.


PROT. That Johannes Diaconus w. it S. Gregory the great his life, For so I
read in Trithem. de script. Ecclesiast. verbo, Ioh. Diac.
I grant; and Posseuin. in Ap parat. sac. verbo. Ioh. Diaconus.
as some say Clements: but that he writ of any more Popes, I utterly deny. You
have a pretty gift in alleging writings that never were. But say on.


PAP. Florim, loco citato.
Milo Monachus who lived Anno 871. says nothing of her.


PROT. Milo Monachus I believe says nothing of her, nor any other Pope: for he
writ no history. They who commend him, Trithem. lib. citato, verbo Milo.
Sigebert. ad an 879.
do commend him for a Rhetorician, and for a Poet, and for a Musician, but not
for an Historiographer.


PAP. Florim. loco citato.
Passeratius Rabertus who lived in the year 881. says nothing of her.


PROT. This Passeratius is (surely) some author of your own devising. For no
man can tell any news of him. But (perhaps) you would say Paschatius
Ratbertus, for Trithem. lib. citato. Posleuin. appa. sac. verbo. Paschasius.
such a one lived about the time you speak of. Yet this writ no history. This
writ neither at length, nor in brief, of any of the Popes lives.


PAP. Yea but Florim. loco citato.
Rhegino, who lived in the year 910. and comprehends briefly all the choice
matters which fell out in the time of this supposed Pope Ioane, writes nothing
of her.


PROT. Rhegino writes nothing of John the 2, nor of Boniface the 4, nor of
Deusdedit, nor of Boniface the 5. He writes not a word of Sergius the 2, nor of
Leo the 4, nor of Benedict the 3: and therefore no marvel though he write
nothing of this Ioane the woman Pope.


PAP. Cum o^^es scribendi principes, quorum alij haeretici, alij schismatici,
alij anathemate separati -- quaecunque odium suggessit, in Po^tifices ex omni
vitae praeteritae causa collecta probra turpiter euomuerint -- nihil autem de
Ioannae Pontificatu dixerint: Existimandum est quaecunque de ea postea
diuulgata sunt, posterorum haereticorum fraud fuisse excogitata. Florim. cap.
10. nu. 5. and 6.
Why, but the greatest enemies that ever the Popes had, who lived in, and after
those times, and were ready to cast in the Popes teeth whatsoever they knew,
or knew not, to the end they might disgrace them, yet never objected this of
Pope Ioane. Which confirms me much in my opinion, that this is but a tale,
devised long after by some crafty headed heretics.


PROT. Who are these I pray you?


PAP. Florim. nu. 4.
John Bishop of Rauenna is one of them, Methodius Illyricus another, and
Michael Palaeologus the Emperor of Constantinople a third.


PROT. How know you, that these never objected Pope Ioanes lewdness to the
disgrace of the Roman Papacy? Have you read all that they writ, and all that
they spoke?


PAP. Nay: their writings are not extant, Florim. ibid.
I confess. But a man may know how they slandered the Popes by the answers of
many godly men, made in defense of the Popes. For as we Catholics at this day
are forced to make mention of your objections, when we undertake to answer your
books: so in those days the Catholics were driven to make mention of the
slanders which they refuted. Now in their refutation of slanders, there is no
such thing as this of Pope Ioane.


PROT. Why, pe^^duenture they knew, that in this they were slandered with a
matter of truth; and therefore they held it best to pass it over in silence.
Questionless your fellows at this day do so often. When Beza objected this
very matter in the assembly of Poysy, before the Cardinal of Lorraine, and
the Sorbonists of Paris: who answered him? Do not your Johannes Sam martinus in
fabulam Ioannae pseudo pontif. Romanae e corrupto historiaru albo erasam a
Flor. etc and Florim cap. 6. page 58.
own men confess, that no man said a word to him? When the Hussites (as you
call them) objected the same at the Council of Constance; Silentio
satisfecerunt Catholici doctores, etc Florim. cap. 6. nu. 6.
was not silence their answer? We read in a Synodus Parisiensis anno Christi
824. Fra^cofurti impress. apud haeredes Wecheli 1596. page 145.
book lately set forth, entitled Synodus Parisiensis, that In epist. Pauli ad
Romans
S. Ambrose asked, Quaratione, quaue authoritate, imagines Angelorum vel
aliorum Sanctorum ador ande sint, cum ipsi sancti Angeli vel sancti homines
viuos se ador ari noluerunt? What reason or what warrant men had to worship the
images of men or Angels, seeing the Angels themselves and holy men alive
refused to be worshipped? Now the two great Cardinals, Append ad lib de cultu
Imag.
Bellarmine and Annal. tom 9. ad an. 825. nu 3.
Baronius, snarle at this book, seeking by all means to disgrace it. Loco
citato, in initio
Bellarmine expressly professes the confuting of it: and Nu. 5. etc.
Baronius sets the most of it down in his Annals even word for word, making
glosses here and there upon it, in way of answer to it. But both of them pass
slily by the words of Ambrose. If we had not had the book it self, we should
never have known by their answers, of such an argument of S. Ambrose his
making, against Images. In like manner these Bellar. lib. 2. de Purg cap. 8.
Baron. Annal. to. 8. ad an. 604. p. 182 etc.
two Champions undertake to answer such arguments as are made to iustistifie
the report of Gregory, delivering Traian out of hell. Yet there is one
argument made by their Alphons. Sal meron in 1. Cor 15. disput 27.
opposites, which they never touch; and that is this: that in S. Gregory's
Church at Rome, the sum of that story is engraven in an ancient stone. Upon
which argument the Jesuit Cuius rei extat insigne Romae monumentum lapidi
antiquissimo inscriptum in aede sacra ipsius Gregorij -- quod ego proprijs
oculis hausi. etc Salmeron loco citato, p. 239 and 240.
Salmeron stands much. If their opposites writings were not extant, by their
answers, we had never heard of such an objection. Wherefore if you would
persuade me that these eager enemies objected not this against the Pope, you
must bring better proof thereof then this, that you find no foot-stepping of
it in the answers made unto them. But go on with your argument: what other
enemies silence persuades you that this story is a fable?


PAP. Florim. cap. 10. page 87.
Hincmarus Archbishop of Rhemes, Theodoricus de Niem, Waltramus Bishop of
Norinberge, Benno the Cardinal, bitter enemies unto the Pope, pass this ever
in silence. And that is a great argument to me, there was no such thing.


PROT. That Hincmarus Archbishop of Rhemes should have lived at enmity with
your Popes, it is not for your Popes credit it should be known. For he was
singularly well learned, very wise, and very honest, as Vir in diuini^
Scripturis singulariter doctus -- sapientia and honestate morum conspicuus.
Trithem, de script. Eccles verbo. Hincmarus.
Trithemius witnesses: in so much that your great Cardinal To. 9. ad ann.
760. nu. 3.
Baronius, when he has occasion to cite him, intitles him S. Hincmarus.
Saint Hincmarus: wherein his Ioh. Gabri. Bisciola Epit. Baron. ad an. 760.
Epitomizer follows him.


PAP. Well: Florim. p. 87.
what say you to Theodoricus de Niem?


PROT. I say (which before I proved) that he mentions the story.


PAP. And what say you to Waltram Bishop of Norinberge?


PROT. I say, there are few of his works extant: and in De Inuestitura
Episcoporum. printed at Basil anno 1566.
those which are extant, he shows no gall against the Pope: only he proves
that the Emperor has right to the inuestiture of Bishops.


PAP. Florim. cap. 10. nu. 5. and 6.
Why, but do you not think that Benno the Cardinal, who spoke so much evil
of Gregory the seventh, and other Popes, would have noted this, if he had
known of it?


PROT. No. Benno (no doubt) knew much foul matter by many other Popes, which
he did not touch. There are many shameful things reported in other stories by
many of your Popes, which Benno has not in his story. But do you think in
good earnest, that Benno the Cardinal was the author of that book which goes
under his name, and is entitled Vita and gesta Hildebrandi?


PAP. Nay indeed I do not. I rather think it was made by some Lutheran, and
falsely fathered on Benno. And of that mind is Lib. 4. de To. Pont. cap. 13.
Bellarmine in part, and Florim. p. 88.
Florimondus wholly.


PROT. So was not Orthuinus Gratius, who set it out at Colen, in the year
1535. For he, though as hot a Papist as any of the crew, held it for Benno his
own, and Malo magis huic Benoni Cas dinali quam Platinae, etc. crederc. Epist
ad Lector, fol. 39. in Fascie. rersi expetend. and fugiend.
professed that he rather believed him then Platina, and Stella, and
Sabellicus. But see you not by the way your own folly, in that you conclude
there was no Pope Ioane, because the writer of that story makes no mention of
any such Ioane. I hope (if he were a Lutheran that made it) he knew there was a
common fame of such a matter. And therefore if he had been disposed to have
disgorged himself of all that lay on his stomach, he would have cast up that
with the rest. But go forward.


PAP. Florim. p. 88. and 89. Rupertus Episc. Angl. -- quaecunque potuit
excogitare conuicia est ementitus.
Rupertus the English Bishop, who because he was excommunicated by the Pope,
devised and raked together all manner of lies against the Pope, did not for all
that object this.


PROT. Magnus habetur Philosophus Latinis and Graecis ad plenum eruditus,
lector in Theologiae scho lis, praedicator in populo, etc. Math. Paris. hist
Angl. in Hen. 3. page 1162.
Rupertus the English Bishop, whom you mean was the man commonly called
Grosthead. Quis est iste senex delius, surdus, and absurdus, says Innocent. 4.
Math Paris. ibid.
A great Philosopher, excellently well seen both in Greek and Latin, a
Reader of Divinity in the Schools, a famous Preacher in the pulpit, a man of
holy life and conversation: even so holy, that in the opinion of the whole
clergy of France and England, there was not such another among the Prelates of
that time: though it pleased your Pope Innocentius the fourth, to call him old
fool, surd, and absurd companion, and to threaten he would make him a byword
and an astonishme^t unto the world. And to say truth, this man had many
bickerings with the Pope, insomuch that in one letter he Apud Math. Paris. page
1161.
signified unto him, that by his writs with ( non obstante) he brought upon the
world a Noah's flood of mischieues, whereby the purity of the Church was
defiled, and the quietness of the common wealth hindered. That by his
Reseruations, Commendaes, Provisions of Benefices for Persons, who sought to
fleece, and not to feed the flock of God, he committed such a sin, so
contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles, and the Evangelists: so hateful, so
detestable, so abominable to Christ Jesus, as never sin was, but the sin of
Luciser: nor never shall be, but the sin of Antichrist, whom the Lord shall
destroy with the breath of his mouth at his coming. He signified unto him, that
no man could, with a good conscience, obey any such mandats as he sent, though
they came from the highest order of Angels. For they tended not to edification
but the utter undoing of the Church. Are these the lies by reporting whereof he
sought to revenge himself on your Pope? Alas, the Vt vera fateamur, vera sunt
quae dicit, said the Cardinals. Math. Paris. p. 1162.
College of Cardinals confessed before the Pope, that they could not blame him
for writing thus, for he said naught but truth.


PAP. Impuro ore alter Anglus no mine Mat. Paris. omne iniuriaru^ genus
conflauit. Florim. cap. 10. page 89.
Another Englishman, Matthew Paris by name, made a hodge-podge of all the
villainies he could remember, and yet he has not this.


PROT. Matthew Paris, indeed tells many foul tales of the Popes and the Papists.
As for example: Hist. Angl. in Guil. conquest. anno. 1072. p. 10.
He reports how Satanas, and omne contubernium inferorum. That is, The devil
of hell, and all his hellish crew, writ letters gratulatory to the whole
rablement of the Popish Clergy, acknowledging their kindness, in that
following their pleasures, and giving over preaching, they suffered more souls
to go to hell then ever went before.

Ibid an. 1074.
He reports how Gregory the 7. set the whole Church on a hurry, by deposing
married Priests from their priesthood, and forbidding the Laity to hear their
service; because he had no president for such his proceeding, and because (as
some thought) it was an unadvised part, contrary to the opinion of the ancient
Fathers, who wrote that the Sacraments of the Church, by the invisible working
of the spirit, have like effect, whether they be administered by good or bad
men, etc.

In Hen. 1. ad ann 1125. p. 93.
He reports how a Cardinal Legate, at a Council held in London, inueighing
against Priests Lemans, was taken the same night after in bed with a whore.

In Hen. 3. page 617.
He reports how Germanus Archbishop of Constantinople, signified unto the
Cardinals of Rome: that the Grecians stumbled much at this, that the Cardinals
desired to be accounted his disciples, who said: Silver and gold I have none:
and yet were wholly set upon gathering of silver and gold.

In Hen. 3. page 712. ad an. 1240
He reports how the Pope enjoined by one mandate to the Bishops of Canterbury,
Lincoln, and Salisbury, that they should provide for 300 Romans in benefices
next vacant. And they should give no benefice till they had provided for so
many competently.

In Hen. 3. ad ann. 1251. page 1089.
He reports how Hugh the Cardinal bragd, when Innocentius departed from Lions,
that whereas there were four stews at his coming thither, he had left them
but one. Marry that reached from the one end of the town to the other.

In Hen. 3. ad an. 1249. p. 1017 and page 539. and 757.
He reports how the Franciscans and Minorites, by commandment of the Pope,
appointed all sorts of people, young and old, men and women base and noble, weak
and strong, sound and sick, to go for recovery of the holy land. And yet the
next dare, yea sometimes the same hour, for money, they dismissed them again.

In Hen. 3 p. 1100. ad an. 1251
He reports how Pope Innocentius the fourth, stirred up the Christian people of
Brabant and Flaunders to war against Conradus the Emperor, promising them
for their labor for giuenesse of all their sins. Yea he promised such
warriers not only forgiveness of sins for their own use, but forgiveness
of sins for their parents also. The fathers and mothers of such as warred
against Conradus, had all their sins forgiven them, as well as the warriors
themselves.

These and many such like tales he tells by the Pope, which the truth it self
enforced him to do. But he meddles not with any thing which was done by any
Pope within 1000. years after Christ. And therefore no marvel though he
spoke nothing of Pope Ioane.


PAP. Florim. ca. 10. page 89.
John of Calabria, a man famously known for a railer against the Popes, spoke
nothing of this.


PROT. John of Calabria Roger Houe. Annal. pars posterior in Rich. 1. page 388.
told our king Richard the first, that Antichrist was as then borne in Rome,
and that he should be made Pope. Posleum. Apparat sacer. verb Cyrillus
Carmelita.
John of Calabria was generally reputed a Prophet, and a man of great learning.
Yet John of Calabria was so far from railing against your Popes, that (if
Append. ad lib de Summo Pont. cap. 11.
Bellarmine say true) he spoke very honorably of them. And therefore his
silence, in this case, does not help you.


PAP. Florum. loco citato.
Yea, but Dantes the Italian Poet, would surely have touched this story, if he
had heard any inkling of it.


PROT. Why so? Dantes found fault only with six of your Popes, viz. with
Anastasius the 2, Nicolas the 3, Boniface the 8, Clement the 5, John the 22,
and Celestine the 5, as Append. 2d l, de Sum. Pont cap. 14.
Bellarmine notes. Whereby it is plain that he never purposed to rave up all
the filth which he found written of your Popes. Questionless, he might well
have heard of this, for Polon. Dante antiquior, Bell, ibid.
he lived after Martinus Polonus, and in Martinus days the report of this was
common. Have you any more to say? N. D. p. 393.



PAP. Yea And not only the Latin writers, but even the greek Historiographers,
Zonaras, Cedrenus, Curopalatas, and others, that wrote before Martinus Polonus,
of matters concerning the Latin Church in those days, and were no friends to
the same, and would have been content of such an advantage against it, write
nothing thereof at all. Which is an evident proof there was no such matter.


PROT. What? an evident proof?


PAP. B. C. In his Doleful knell of Thomas Bell lib. 2. page 296.
Yea: an evident proof, which you may perceive by Sutcliffes answer to father
Parsons (as he calls him) for he never, I warrant you, so much as once names
these Greek Historiographers, but suppresseth that cunningly, or rather
maliciously, because he could frame no colorable answer unto it.


PROT. D. Sutcliffe, whom you scornfully call Sutcliffe, never intended to
trouble himself, or his reader, with laying open Parsons foolery in every
particular. Otherwise assure your self, he would not have passed by this. For
it is a matter of no great cunning to shape this argument his answer. For tell
me. Had you not once a Pope called Mark, who sat, as diverse of your own Plat.
de vit. Pon. in vita Mar Flores. Hist. ad ann. 341.
histories note, 2 years 8 months, and 20 days? And had you not another Pope
called Marcellus, Plat. in vit^ Marcell. 1. Onu. in Chron. ad an. 304.
who sat above 5 years?


PAP. We had. But what of that?


PROT. Your Lib a Chronogr
Pontacus, and Chronol lib. 3
Genebrard confess, that all the Greek writers in a manner, omit to speak of
the former. And Pontac. and G^neb. locis citatis
that all Greek writers without exception, omit to speak of the latter. Now
if you, notwithstanding their passing by of these, be yet persuaded that these
were Popes, why may you not rest persuaded that there was a Pope Ioane, though
they do pass by her, and write not one word of her? I hope you believe many
things, whereof they write nothing. We read in your Aurea Lege^d. Exaltation
of the holy Cross.
Legend, yea In your Breutar. Romans in officio Exaltat. S. Crucis.
Mass books, that Heraclius the Emperor when he would have entered in by the
gate, by which our Savior went to his passion, clad like a king, with the
cross on his shoulders: that he was miraculously hindered, and could not get
through till he had cast off his princely attire, and put off his hole and his
shoes. Do not you believe this? I am sure you do. Yet Lib. 1. de Cruce, cap.
57. page 170.
Gretzer acknowledges, that the Grecians, such as Cedrenus and Zonoras, write
nothing of this, professing that he likes it never a whit the worse for their
silence. For they (as he further notes) omitted many other matters of truth,
whereof no man doubts. But how know you, that no Grecian ever writ of such an
accident? It seems that they did: because Chalcocondylas a Grecian of later
years has writ thereof, as i before I have showed you. For, from whence could
he have it, but from the Grecians his ancestors? You must bring more evident
proof then this is, or else you will never persuade any man offense and
reason, that the story of Pope Ioane, which is commended to us by so great a
cloud of witnesses, is fabulous.


PAP. N. D. page 393
Why, but Hermannus Contractus, and Conradus Abbas Vrspergensis, and others mo,
write nothing of this Ioane of yours.


PROT. And what of that? will you conclude thereupon, that there was never any
such woman Pope? Tell me in good earnest, do arguments taken from authority of
a few men, hold negatiuely? Is it a good argument, S. Paul, S. Luke and Seneca,
do not say that Peter was at Rome? ergo Peter was not at Rome? Bellarmine
denies this argument. Respondeo says Lib. 2. de Rom Pont. cap. 8. vide lib. 2.
de I^dulg. cap. 20.
Bellarmine: Nihil concludi ex argumentis ab authoritate negative. Non enim
sequitur, Lucas, Paulus and Seneca, non dicunt Petrum fuisse Romae, igitur non
fuit Petrus Romae. Non enim isti tres omnia dicere debuerunt; and plus creditur
tribus testibus affirmantibus, quam mill nihil dicentibus; modo isti non
negent, quod alij affirmant: that is, I answer: negative arguments are naught
worth. For it follows not, that S. Peter was never at Rome, because Luke,
Paul, and Seneca do not report that he was at Rome. For these three were not
bound to report all that was true. Besides, three witnesses speaking to a
cause, deserve more credit then a thousand who stand mute, not denying that
which is witnessed by the three. And in another place, Certe (says Lib. 1. de
extrema unction cap. 6.
Bellarmine) magis credi debet tribus testibus affirmantibus, quam infinitis
nihil dicentibus: that is, Verily a man should rather believe three witnesses
speaking to a cause, then infinite, who neither speak pro nor con. Again,
tell me whether Denis Bishop of Athens, was not afterward B. of Paris; though.
Ado B. of Triers in Germany, and Suidas a Greek writer, make no mention of
that his second Bishopric? Your Lipomanus resolves upon Metaphrastes, and one
Michael Syngelus his word, that Denis was B. of Paris, though Ado and Suidas
speak not of it. Their passing it over in silence, does not prejudice
Metaphrastes and Syngelus report, who say he was B. of Paris, in To. 1. de
sanc. Hist. praefat. in Martyriu^ S. Dionysij per Metaphrasten.
Lipomanus opinion And why then though these and many mo, say nothing of Pope
Ioane, might there not be such a Pope, since as many and as learned as they do
reckon her among the Popes? Prolegom. 6. in Euang.
Salmeron, one of your prime Jesuits, notes, that when one Historian reports a
matter, and another passes by it, the latters silence does not prejudice the
truth of the other historians relation. Ealex apud historiographos obseruatur
(says he) vt quando vnus ex duobus historicis aliquid affirmat, quod alius
supprimit, non deroget affirmanti qui tacet.


PAP. Onuph. and Harding locis supra citatis.
Yea but there are in the Popes library six or seven tables of Popes, wherein
there is no mention of her.


PROT. And what of that? Your Popes Library is compared b Omnis copiosa
bibliotheca (in particular he means the Vatican) refert similitudinem sagenae
missae in mare, ex omni genere pi cium congregantis, bonos and malos continens
libros probatos and improbatos, vtiles and inutiles simul amplexans, says
Baron. annal. 10. 8. ad an. 604. nu. 50.
Baronius to a draw net, which gathers together good and bad. Your Popes
Library has in it books of all sorts, approved, disproued: profitable,
unprofitable. To. Biblioth habet libros tum suppositos, tum improbatae
lectionis. Cope. Dial. 4. cap. 19. p. 567.
It has counterfeit and forbidden books, as well as books of better reckning.
They are simple people ( Loco supra citato.
as we read in Baronius) who believe reports the rather, for that they are to
be found in books which are in the Popes Library. Yet suppose these seven
tables be of best note: will you yield thus much to me, that he who is numbered
in these seven tables, or at least in as many, as authentical as these, as a
Pope; was a Pope?


PAP. No, not I. For I know that Leo the 8. is numbered as a Pope in Bristowes
printed with his Demands
many tables, and in Onuph annot. in Plat. in vitam Alex. 3.
some of those seven, if not in them all. And yet. I am of Non dignus qui
Pontifex numeretur, sed intrusus and occupator potius nominandus. Annalium tom.
10. ad an. 964.
Baronius mind, that Leo the eight was an intruder and an usurper: and that he
was not worthy to be called a Pope. But why asked you of me this question?


PROT. If this be no good argument: Leo the eight is numbered among thee Popes
in seven tables that are in the Popes Library, or in seven as authentical as
these in the Popes Library, ergo Leo the 8. was a Pope: What reason have you to
think yours good, which is this in effect: Ioane the woman Pope is not numbered
among the Popes in seven tables which are in the Popes Library: Ergo there was
no such Ioane a woman Pope? If seven tables speaking out for a Pope, do not
convince the being of such a Pope: why should their silence convince the not
being of a Pope? Might they not as well leave out one who had been Pope, as put
in one who never was Pope?


PAP. But why should they have left her out?


PROT. Partly for her sexes sake, because she was a woman; and partly in regard
of the filthiness of her fact. For so your stories note. And this need not
seem strange to you, if you would but observe that other Popes, upon other
occasions, have been passed by, by diverse, as no Popes. As for example: Felix
the 2. was a Pope and a Martyr, as Lib. 4. de To. Pont. cap. 9.
Bellarmine teaches. For Felicem 2. vt Papam and Martyrem Ecclesia Catholica
veneratur, says Bellarmine. And the sat in the Popedom one year, four
months, and two days, as we read in In vita Felicis 2
Platina. Yet by Chronol. lib. 3. ad an. 368.
Genebrards confession, Marcellinus omits to speak of him in his Chronicle,
because he was suspected of heresy. And for the same cause, or some such like
cause, Epist. 165.
S. Austin and Lib. 2.
Optatus mention him not among the Popes, in their memorial of Popes. Nor yet
Bristow in his table of Popes, which is printed with his wise demands. In like
manner, that one Cyriacus was Pope, it is acknowledged by Golden Leged in the
life of Vrsula. Polon. ad. an. 238. Supple^. chron. ad ann. 235. Ranulf.
Cestrens. in Poly chron. lib. 4c. 20. Petrus de Nata. talibus in catal. Sanct.
lib. 9. c. 87
diverse. Yet it is rar^ to find him in any catalogue of Popes. For as a Ioh de
Parifijs de potestate reg^a and papali. page 217. cap vlt. In Sext. lib. 1. Tit
7 de renunciatione. in glos^a.
great Papist writes, Iste Cyriacus in catalogo paparum non annumeratur, quia
credebant ipsum non propter deuotionem, sed propter oblectamentum virginum
dimisisse Episcopatum. Cyriacus is not in the register of Popes, because it was
thought he left the Popedom, not for devotion, but for the love that he bare
to certain wenches. Damasus the second, has his place in Plat. in vita Damasi
2. Polonus in Chron. circa ann. 1040.
many popish Chronicles in the throng of Popes: yet there are Censent nonnulli
hunc inter Pontifices nequaqua^ numerandsi esse, says Plat. loco citato.
many on the other side, who let him go for one that is naught, and never
number him. And in much like sort they Felix 4. test Maslono de vrbis Episcop.
lib. 2. in vita lohan. 1 p. 85.
deal with others.


PAP. Florim cap. 22 page 190.
If Pope Ioane were omitted for the filthiness of her fact, why was that close
stool reserved; and that monument of hers, whereof you told me before, set up
in one of the high streets in Rome? For the stool and the image were as like
to continue the memory of her, as any record in writing. To be plain with
you, I do not see how you can rid your hands of contradiction in this point.


PROT. Well enough. For may not some be of one opinion, some of another? May
not some think good to continue the memory of that, which others, for shame of
the world, would have forgotten? See Le Frane discourse, printed anno. 1602.
Did not some of your fellow Papists in France deny, that John Chastell was
taught by the Jesuits to murder Henry the 4. of France, because they were loath
to make the Jesuits odious: and yet did not others help to erect a pillar of
stone near to the kings palace, whereby so much was notified? If any man
should affirm, that the same man who omitted Pope Ioane for the filthiness of
her fact, erected such a monument of her in the streets, and prescribed such a
stool to be kept for such a purpose, I know not how he could deliver himself
from contradiction. But speaking of diverse men, his speech hangs well enough
together: there is no show of contradictio^ in it. For further proof where of,
it is worthy your consideration, that when Paul the third, moved with the
spirit of God (as In his Reioynder to M. luel about the Mass page 177.
Harding says) and desirous to reform the Church, gave charge to his best
learned, wisest and most godly zealous men that he knew, 4 Cardinals, three
Bishops, and two others, to enquire and search out what abuses and disorders
were in the Church, and especially in the Court of Rome: which they did,
offering up unto him a libel containing the sum of all their proceedings.
Some thought their labors worthy of registring: others thought them fitter to
be burnt, which appears by this, that the libell is printed in Crabs edition
of the Council, anno 1551. and yet put into the Index librorum prohibitorum,
by Paul the 4, (one of those four Cardinals who exhibited it to Paul the 3:)
and left out of Dominicus Nicolinus his edition of the Councels at Venice,
auspiciis Sixti Quinti, in the year 1585. and out of Seuerinus Binnius his
edition at Colen, 1606.


PAP. Bell. lib, 3. de To. Pon. c. 24.
Yea, but give me leave I pray you. If Pope Ioane were omitted for the
filthiness of her fact: yet should there have been mention made of the
vacancie of the Sea, for that time she was Pope, or else there will be a
manifest error in Chronology.


PROT. A manifest error in Chronology? A foul absurdity indeed, to miss two
years in reckoning. But I trow there are fouler then this, how ever the matter
will be salued. For Onuphrius and Bristow reckon 230 Popes to Gregory the 13, and
So does Massonus de vrbis Episcopis.
Genebrard 234. Whereas by Platina his account, there should be 235. for he
reckons to Zistus the 4. with whom he ends 221. Popes: after whom, to Gregory
the 13. every man reckons 14. which makes up the number of 235. Yet Versteganus
in his table, printed at Antwerpe 1590, numbers no mo then 231. Again, do not
Anastas. in vita Euaristi.
some of your Chronologies record, that Eu^^ristus sat 13 years, whereas
Baron Annal. to. 2, ad an. 121. nu. 1.
others say, he sat but nine year? Do not Baron. Annal. to 2. ad ann. 272 nu.
21.
some of them say, that Denis sat 11 years. Anastas. in vita Dionysij.
Others that he sat but 2. years? And do not these differences, and such as
these are, whereof we have spoken before in part, argue manifest errors in your
Chronologies? If no further inconveniences follow upon Pope Ioanes omission
then a manifest error in Chronology for that space she lived, we may well
enough believe that some omitted her, not for that she was not, but that they
were ashamed of her. For 2. years and odd months break no square in your
Chronologies, no more then an inch with a bungling Carpenter.


PAP. Florim c. 1. p. 6.
Yea, but no body within 400. years after mentions her Popedom. B. C. in his
Doleful knell of Tho. Bell. p. 295. and 296.
And is it possible, that all writers should so conspire together, that the
truth thereof could never be certainly known, till 400. years after?


PROT. You lavish, when you talk of 400. years after. For I have proved unto
you already, by the books that are yet extant, that it was known sooner. But
suppose we had no writer who lived within 400. years of Pope Ioane, to produce
for proof: will you (in that respect) deny the story? Do not you Papists
commend unto us many stories as true, for which you can bring us no proof out
of any writer, who lived within 400. years after? Bell. lib. 2. de Imag. c. 10.
You tell us of an Image of Christ, which was made by Nicodemus, who came to our
Savior by night, for fear of the Jews: and of it you report wonderful
things. But you are not able to name the man, (shall I say within 400. years
of Nicodemus? nay not within 600. years of Nicodemus) who writes any such
thing. Again, Bell. loco citato, and Gretser. de Cruce. l. 2. c. 1.
you tell us, that S. Luke drew certain pictures of the virgin Marie. But
Lib. 1. Collectaneorum.
Theodorus Lector is the ancientest man, that your friends allege for proof
of this. And he Pliued at least 500. years after. Thirdly, Bell. loco citato.
and Baro. Annal. to. 1. ad ann. Christ. 31. nu. 61
you write that our Savior Christ, wiping his face with an handkerchiefe,
imprinted his Image therein: and sent it to Agbarus for a token. But you can
name no Author for this, but Lib. 4. cap. 26.
Euagrius See Baro. Annal. 10. 8. ad ann. 594. nu. 30.
who lived 600. years after Christ. Fourthly, Bellar. lib. 1. de Clericis.
cap. 9. Pamelius annot. in Cypr. epistola^ 52. nu. 29. Carerius de potestate.
To. Pont. l. 1. c. 18. Pet. de Natal. in Catal. sanct. l. 8. c. 53.
the most of you hold it for a certain truth, that Adrian the Pope was content
that Charles the great should nominate the B. of Rome, and other Bishops of his
dominions: and yet there are among your selves, who write, that there can be no
proof made thereof out of any writer who lived within 400 years of Charles
the great his time.

That the virgin Marie made that coat of our Saviors, which was without
seame, our Annot. in Ioh. 19. 23. in marg.
Rhemists teach, and Ludolphus de vita Ie^u, part. 2. cap. 63. p. 221. Col. ^.
Others of you add to that, that as our Savior grew in height and in breadth,
so the coat on his back grew. Do you think that there is an Author within
400. years after our Sauiors time that taught so.

Turrian lib 1. contra Magdeburg cap. 25.
Turrian reports, and Gretser. lib. 2. de Cruce. cap 1. To. 1.
Gretser after him: That the Apostles made this Canon in a Council which they
kept at Antioch: Ne decipiantur fideles ob idola, sed pingant ex opposito
diuinam humanamque, manufactam, impermixtam effigiem Dei very, ad saluatoris
Domini nostri Jesus Christi, ipsiusque seruorum, contra idola and Iudaeos, neque
errent in idolis, neque similes sint Iudaeis. That is, Let not the faithful
people be deceived by idols: but let them on the contrary part, make the image
of our Savior Christ both God and man, and the images of his servants; and let
them not be deceived by idols, nor show themselves like unto the Jews. But I
do not believe that this can be proved to be a Canon of that Council, by any
writer within 400. years of that time. Your Bellar. lib 2. de To. Pont c 26.
Baro Annal. ^^. 10. ad ann. 963. nu. 35.
Rabbis allege Concilium Romanum and Synuestanum.
two Councels, the one kept (as they say) in the year 303. the other in the
year 324. both sounding much to the Popes praise, and advancing of his
authority. But for any thing I read, the most learned among you can bring no
proof within 400 years after, that any such Councels were then kept. Nicolas
1. who lived in the year 860, is the first, whom Loco supra citato.
Bellarmine names for that purpose.


PAP. N. D. nu. 25. page 393.
Why, what say you^ to our ancient English histories written in the Latin
tongue, to wit, William of Malmsburie, Henry Huntington, Roger Houedon,
Florentius Vigorniensis, and Matthew of Westminster? For I have one argument of
no small moment, B. C. student in divinity, in his Doleful knell of Thom.
Bell, printed 1607. lib. 2. page 297. commends this for a very excellent
argument.
(as it seems to me) taken from them, c N. D. nu. 25.
for the overthrowing of the fable of Pope Ioane.


PROT. When lived these writers, from whence you draw your argument?


PAP. The first four lived 500. years agone, and the latest of them 300.
years.


PROT. Fie, 500. years agone? Scripsit historiarum libros ad an. 1142. says,
Posseuin. apparat. sac. verbo. Guiliel. Malms. but by the book it self (fol.
108.) it is plain he continued it to the year 1143.
William Malmsbury co^tinues his story to the year 1143: and Vide histor. l.
8. in fine.
Henry Huntington his story till the reign of Henry the second, which was
1154. and Fol. 464. ^.
Roger Houedon continues his story to the year 1201. which argues that the
first four lived not 500. years agone. But what is your argument out of them?


PAP. No one of them all makes mention of this Pope.


PROT. Oh, is that your argument? Why, I say to that, that our English
histories might omit her upon like reason as others, of other countries,
omitted her for her sexes sake, and for the filthiness of the fact. And do not
you think, this probable?


PAP. No, by no means, N. D. p. 394.
For our English writers above others should have mentioned her, if any such
had been.


PROT. And why, I pray you.


PAP. N. D. p. 395.
Because king Alfred living in Rome when Leo the 4 died, and when Pope Benedict
the 3. was chosen, must needs have known also Pope Ioane, if any such had
entered and lived two years and a half between them.


PROT. How know you that king Alfred lived in Rome when Pope Leo died, and
Benedict was chosen?


PAP. N. D. p. 394.
Because we read that his father delivered him into the hands of Pope Leo the
4. to be instructed, and brought up by him. And that the Pope received him with
great kindness, and detained him there with him.


PROT. That Alfreds father sent him to be anointed king, and that the Pope
anointed him at his fathers motion, we Roger Houedon. Annal. part prior. page
132. edit. Land. and Florentius in Chron. ad ann. 853.
read indeed. But that his father delivered him to Leo to be instructed and
brought up by him, we read not in Malmsbury, nor Huntingto, nor Houedon, nor
Florentius: nor yet that the Pope detained him there with him. But perhaps you
can prove he stayed at Rome, though it be not recorded that Leo detained him
with him. Now therefore let me hear your argument.


PAP. N. D. p. 395.
That Alfred lived in Rome some number of years, seems evident. First, for
that he returned more learned, and otherwise better qualified then any Saxon
king had been before him.


PROT. This argument is framed out of your fingers ends, and not out of the
stories. For the Houedo^ and Florentius locis citatis.
stories mention two iournies which Alfred took to Rome: the former, when he
was five years old, in the year 853. in which he was accompanied with the
nobility: the second when he was six years old, in the year 854, in which
he went in his fathers company, who stayed in Rome a year. Now though I find
it not set down in particular, that he returned with his father: yet it is
likely by the circumstances. For In regio Curto semper inseparabiliter
nutriebatur, says Florent. lib citato. p. 308. and Ioh. Asser Episcop.
Shyreburnensis in hist. Alfredi. page 7. which history was printed at London
1574. with Tho. Walsingham.
the stories note, that he was always brought up in the Kings Court. And it is
without all doubt, whenever he returned, that he returned not better learned,
nor better qualified. For at 12 years old and upward, he knew not a letter on
the booke^ which the Vsque ad 12 aetatis annum, proh dolor, illiteratus
permansit. Asser and Florent. loc. cit.
stories with great grief report. What is your next argument?


PAP. N. D. p. 395.
That Alfred lived in Rome some number of years, seems evident, for that we
find no mention of his acts in England until the reign of his third brother
Athebred. upon the year 871. at the famous battle of Reading in Barkeshire
fought against the Danes.


PROT. Alfred was but 22 years old in the year 871. and therefore no marvel,
though being in England we read nothing of his acts. Yet, not to speak of his
hauking and hunting in England, in his younger years, Math. Westminster. Flores hist.
ad an. 871. fol. 245.
whereof the stories speak much: we Math. Westminster. lib. citato. ad an. 868. fol.
236.
read of his marriage three years before the battle of Reading, and of his
going to aid the King of Mercia the same year. So that this proceeds of a
false ground, as does the former. Wherefore unless you have better arguments
to disprove the story of Pope Ioane, you may prove your self a fool, but
never it a fable.


PAP. I am able to prove it a fable. N. D. p. 396.
For our foresaid writers do not only not make any mention of Pope Ioane, that
came between Leo the fourth and Benedict the third: but do expressly exclude
the same, by placing the one immediately after the other, and assigning them
their distinct number of years before mentioned, to wit, eight and three
months to Leo, and two years and six months immediately following, to
Benedict the third.


PROT. Who is your first witness of the truth of this?


PAP. N. D. p. 396. in marg.
Malmsbury in Fastis reg. and Episcop. Angl. 847. and 855.


PROT. Where might a man see that book of Malmsburies? for I never read nor
heard before of any such book made by him. True it is, that in the end of
Malmsbury, Huntington, Houeden, Ethelwerdus, and Ingulphus, ( At Frankford anno
1601.
which are all printed in one volume) there is such a treatise. But that was
made by Sir Henry Sauile, who set them out. It was not made by Malmsbury. You
may as well say, that Malmsbury made the Index rerum and verborum, which
follows after it. But who is your next witness?


PAP. N. D. page 396. in margin.
Florentius in his Chronicle.


PROT. Does Florentius in his Chronicle give eight years and three months to
Leo? Now for shame of the world leave lying. Florentius notes, that Leo began
his papacy 853. and Benedict the 3,858: whereby it is apparent, that in
Florentius opinion Leo sat but five years. So is it apparent, that in his
opinion Benedict sat five years: for Benedict, according to Florentius
reckoning, began 858, and Nicholas his next successor began 863. Now from 858.
to 863. there cannot be fewer then five years. So that in prosecuting of this
argument, which is of your own devising, you have scarce spoken one true word.


PAP. Florim. cap. 30 nu. 4.
I pray you tell me how they called this Ioane when she read publicly in the
Schools at Rome?


PROT. They called her John. How else?


PAP. What? John? and was she called John after her election to the Popedom
too?


PROT. Yea: why not?


PAP. Florim. ibid.
That's not likely, For Sergius a few years before had brought in a laudable
custom: that the Pope elect should not step out of the Conclaue, before he had
changed his proper name.


PROT. Indeed there are Fascic. Temp. ad an. 844. Polyd Virg. de invent. rerum,
lib. 4. cap 10. Ioh. Stella in vit. Pont. in Sergio 2.
who say, that because Sergius had a filthy name before his election, to wit,
the name of Swines-snout, he changed it after his election.


PAP. Florim. ibid.
Yea, but they who say so, are greatly deceived. For Swines-snout was not his
proper name: but the surname of a noble family, whereof he was descended.


PRO. So are they greatly deceived, who say, that he changed his proper name.
For, ex paterno nomine a principio Sergius est appollatus: from his birth he
was called Sergius after the name of his father, as Annal tom. 10 ad an. 844.
nu. 1.
Baronius notes. The first who changed his name, was He would have said Sergius
the 4, as appears Annal. to. 11. ad an. 1009.
Sergius the third, and yet not for the filthiness of his name, but in
reverence to S. Peter. Cum enim ille Petrus vocaretur, indignum putauit se
vocari eodem nomine, quo Christus primum eius sedis Pontificem, Principem
Apostolorum, ex Simone Petrum nominauerat. For his name being Peter, he thought
it was not meet that he should be called by that name whereby Christ called the
first Bishop of that Sea, even the prince of the Apostles, whose name he
changed from Simon to Peter, as we read in Baronius in the same place.


PAP. I never heard this before. But I^ like it the better if it be in
Baronius. For I cannot Baronij laudan di sinem prorsus inuenio nullum Florim.
cap. 22. nu 6.
say too much good of that man. Marry I had rather thought you would have taken
exception against me, in respect that Platina ascribes this custom of the
Popes, in changing their names, to John the 12. who being called Octauian
before his Papacy, Non ignoro Plat tinam, qui saepius in alijs etia^ rebus
lapsus est, hanc consuetudinem Ioh. 12. accepta^ refer, etc. Florim. cap. 30.
nu. 5.
thought that name too warlicke for him after he was made Pope, and therefore
took the name of John. Now I could easily have replied unto this. For besides
that Platina speaks amiss in many other points, it is not likely that John
the twelfth made any conscience by what name he was called, seeing he lived as
licentiously after he was Pope, as before.


PROT. You have your learning at the second hand. Have you not?


PAP. I have this out of Florimondus I confess. But what of that?


PROT. Your Leare-masters deceive you, and especially Florimondus. For De vit.
Pont. in vita Sergij 2.
Platina is one of them who ascribes the original of this papal custom to
Sergius the second; for which he is reproved by Onuphrius. Onuphrius, and not
Platina, ascribes the original hereof to John the 12. Iohannem hunc 13. primum
esse inueni qui nomen in pontificatu mutarit, says Annot. in Plat. in vitam
Sergij 2 and Ioh. 13.
Onuphrius. Nam cum antea Octauianus vocaretur, gentili nomine omisso, tanquam
parum maiestati and religioni pontificis idoneo, se Iohannem appellauit: that
is, John the 12. was the first (as far as I can learn) who changed his name
when he was made Pope. Whereas before he was called Octauian, he left that
heathenish name, as little beseeming the Popes majesty and religion, and called
himself John.


PAP. Onuphrius must pardon me, though I believe him not in this.


PROT. Yet Onuphrius, in Onuphrius antiquitatis perscrutator diligentissimus.
Flo trim. cap. 21. nu. 6
Florimondus opinion, was a most painful Antiquarie. But what if Baronius say
as much? will you not believe him for Baronius sake?


PAP. How can Baronius say so much, if you wronged him not before, when you
told me that he referred this custom of changing names to Sergius the third?
If Sergius the third begun it, then not John the twelfth: if John the 12 began
it, then not Sergius the third.


PROT. Look you and Baronius to that, how both tales will hang together. But
assure your self, Baronius says both. For notwithstanding the former
assertion, coming to speak of John the 12, he To 10. annal. ad an 955. nu. 4.
uses these words, Hic reuera primus inuentus qui mutauit sibi nomen, vt qui
ex Octauiano vocari voluerit Johannes, pro mutata, non exuta tyrannide. Nam qui
dictus est a patre, ob temporale vrbis dominiu^, Octauianus: obspirituale,
nomine Iohannis appellari idcirco voluit, vel quod eo nomine eius patruus
Johannes 11 Papasit appellatus: vel vt in nomine saltem been posset audire in
adulatorijs acclamationibus, quibus male vsurpatum proferri soleret sacrum
illud eloquium [Fuit homo missus a Deo, cuius nomen erat Johannes:] that is,
This (in truth) is the first who changed his name, who of Octauian would needs
be called John: and not for that he meant to leave his tyranny, but for that
he resolved to use another kind of tyranny. For he, who was called by his
father Octauian, in respect of his temporal authority in the city, would now
in respect of his spiritual be called John, either for that his uncle John the
11. was called so, or for that he desired to hear well, at least for his names
sake, whilst in clawing and fauning acclamatio^s, the people fondly applied
unto him that good speech, There was a man that was sent from God, whose name
was John. Quisna^ huius Pseudopontificis pater, etc? Flor. ca. 8. nu. 5.
Thus Baronius. Have you not another question to ask?


PAP. e Yes. Who was Pope Ioanes father?


PROT. What is that to the purpose?


PAP. Much. Aliorum quidem pontificu^ parents, vt Lini Cleti, and omniu^
caeterorum in Annalibus leguntur. Florim. c. 7. nu 5.
For the histories expressly set down, who was the father of Linus, of Cletus,
of Clemens, and of all the rest of the Popes. And would they not have done as
much for her, if she had been Pope?


PROT. It is false, that the histories expressly set down the fathers of all the
rest of the Popes. For by the histories, you cannot tell me, who was the father
of Higinus, or Denis, or of John the 19. And that I will prove unto you by the
histories: for in Anastas. de vit. Pont. in vita Higini. Polon. in Chr. ad an.
154.
them we read, that Higini genealogia non inuenitur. No man knows of what
parentage Higinus was. And Anastas. in vita Dionysij. Polon. in Chron. ad an.
257.
Dionysii generationem inuenire non potuimus, we could not find out Denis the
Popes Ancestors. And Ioh. Stella de vitis Pont. in Ioh 19. ad ann. 999.
Johan. 19. cognomen and patris ignoratur. It is unknown of what surname, or
country, John the 19. was. Again, In the Onuph. annot. in Plat. in vita
vrbani. 4.
histories it is expressly written, that Urban the fourth was begotten, ex patre
sutore veteramentario: that is, of a Cobbler. That Paulus Langius in Chron.
citize^. ad ann. 1316.
John the 22. was filius veteramentarij, resarcitoris videlicet sotelarium.
That is, the son of a Botcher. That Idem ad ann. 1303.
Benedict the 11. was filius lotricis pauperculae. The son of a poor
laundresse. That Papyrius Massonus de vrbis Episcopis, l. 6. in Benedicto 12.
Benedict the 12. was Molitoris filius: the son of a Milner. Patre ortus qui
semper nautica^ exercuit. Papyr. Mass. lib. cit. in Sixto. 4.
That Sixtus the 4. was the son of a Mariner. That Onuph. Addit ad Plat. in
vita Adriani. 6.
Adrian the 6. was a Clothworkers son, or else a Brewers. That Cicarellus in
vita Sixti 5.
Sixtus Quintus was a base and beggarly fellows son, even the son, as is said,
of a Swincheard. But what the names of these men's fathers were, that is not
expressly written. You may peruse many histories, and find nothing to that
purpose. Your Alexander the 5, Papyr. Masson. de vrb. Episc. lib. 6. in Alex. 5.
confessed, Se nec parents, nec fratres, aut aliquem ex agnatis, cognatisue
suis vnquam vidisse. That he never saw either his father, or mother, or
brother, or any of his kindred. And can you tell me, what was his fathers name?


PAP. Well Sir, to be brief with you, I prove it a fable thus: N. D. nu 35. p.
40 2. and 403.
Either this Pope Ioane was young or old when she was chosen. If she were young,
that was against the custom to choose young Popes, as may appear by the great
number of Popes that lived in that dignity, above the number of Emperors that
succeeded often in their youth. But if she were old when she was chosen, then
how did she bear a child publicly in procession, as you heretics affirm?
Answer me this: for to this Sutcliffe says nothing in his answer to Parsons,
as he calls him. And no marvel, for nothing can with any color be pretended,
as B. C. assures himself, in his Lib. 2. p. 303.
Doleful knell of Thomas Bell.


PROT. I deny the ground of this your reason, to wit, That this Pope Ioane was
either young, or old, when she was chosen. For De Galeni sententia vniuersae
vitae sex sunt omnino aetates, Leonard. Fuschius Institut. Medicin lib. 1. cap.
5.
learned men divide the whole course of man's life, not into youth, and old age,
as you do: but into pueritiam, pubertatem, adolescentia^, iuuentutem,
constantem, mediamue and senectutem. Now middle age is from 35, to 49: whereof
she might have been, and so neither old, nor young: for Leo the 10. was chosen
Pope at 38. years of age. For he was not 46. years of age when he died, and
yet he sat as Pope 8 years, 8 months, and 20 days. And Gregory the 11,
fuit dum eligebatur in Papam forsitan circa 35. annos: was about 35 years old,
as Nem. vnioni^ Tract. 6. c. 39.
Theodoricus de Niem, and De vrbis Episcop. lib. 6. in Greg. 11.
Massonus witness. Again, she might have been chosen young, for any custom
you Papists have to the contrary. For Boniface the 9. (as Masson. de vrbis
Episc. lib. cit: in Bonifac. 9. Plat. in Bonif. 9
some write) erat annorum 34. dum eligebatur in Papam: was but 34. when he was
chosen Pope: and Masson. lib. 3. de vrb. Episc. in Innocent. 3.
Innocent the 3, was but 30. Yea she might have been one of the youths of the
parish: for (not to speak of the boy-Pope: I mean, Benedict the 9, Glaber
Radulphus. hist. lib. 5. c. vlt. and Masson. l. 4. in Bened. 9.
who was chosen Pope about 12 years old:) John the 13, alas 12, Paulus Langius
in Chron. Citizense ad an. 1389.
In iuuenili and florida aetate creatur Pontifex: was made Pope when he was in
his prime: that is, about the 18 year of his age, as Annal. to. 10. ad an.
955. nu. 3.
Baronius gathers by circumstances. But why might not she have been old, since
we read, that old women have borne children? Henricus Sueuus Imperator ex
vxore quinquagenaria genuit Fridericum 2, De vrbis Episcop. lib. 5. in
Celestin. 3.
says Massonus. Henry the Emperor begot Frederick the 2 of his wife, who was
fifty years old. Machutus Episcopus ortus est matre plusquam Sexagenaria, in
Catal. sanct lib. 10. cap. 64.
says Petrus de Natalibus. Bishop Machutus his mother was above threescore
years old when she bare him. Hic in Palatinatu ante annos aliquot vidi meis
oculis, and vocatus interfui partui cuiusdam foeminae amplius annos 56. natae,
quae binos mares enixa est eodem partu, Annotat Biblicis in Ruth. 1. ed^. vlt.
says Franciscus Iunius. A few years since, I was entreated to see a woman in
this county, above fifty and six years old, who was delivered of two boys
at a birth. N. D. whose steps you follow, has one good property: for he is
always like himself; he is no changeling. He began with lies, and goes on
with fooleries; yet in giving the reason why it was not the custom to choose
young Popes, he shows himself most fool. For the multitude of Popes above the
Emperors, came not by reason of their age, but by other accidents. In the
first 300 years, while the Popes were generally good, they were cut off by
martyrdom. For though it be not true, (as Annotat. in Plat. in vita Higini.
Onuphrius notes well) that all the Popes from S. Peter's time to Syluester, were
martyrs: which yet is confidently avouched by Bristow in his table of Popes.
some Papists: it is true (I grant) that the most of them were martyrs. Now in
succeeding times, their number grew the greater by their poisoning, and evil
entreating one of another. If you peruse diligently the stories of their lives,
you shall find that of forty Popes, already dead and gone to their own
place, there was not one that sat a full year: you shall find that within
compass of nine years, or little above, See Fasciculus Temp. ad ann. 904.
there were nine several Popes: you shall find, Test Bennone Cardinale in
vita Hildebrand
that one man, in 13. years, poisoned six Popes: you shall find, that God in
his justice cut them off, for their wicked and abominable lives.


Liberius sat about some six years, Sum. de Eccle. lib 4 part. 1. c. 9.
says Cardinal Turrecremata, and then died an evil death. Mala morte precibus
sanctorum extinctus est. He died not for age, but with cursing.

Anastasius the second, sat not two years, but God struck him suddenly for
his naughtiness, and he died. Yea he died (some say) as Arius the
arch-heretick died. For, Sunt qui scribunt eum in latrinam effudisse intestina
dum necessitati naturae obtemperat, says Plat. in vita Anastasij. 2.
Platina, and De vit. Pont. ad ann. 498.
Johannes Stella the Venetian. Clemens the 2, kept the Popedom but nine
months, not for that he was old when he was chosen, but because he was
poisoned, as we Genebrard. Chronol. lib. 4. ad an. 1046. Aeneas Syluius in
Decad. Blond. Epit. lib. 3.
read in your own writers.

Damasus the 2, Platina in vita Clem. 2.
who had a hand in poisoning this Clemens, kept the papacy but 23 days, not
for that he died of age, but by the just judgment of God, that he might be an
example to others (as In vita Damas. 2. Supplement. Chro. lib. 12. ad ann.
1042. Ioh. Stella de vit. Pon. ^d an. 1040 in Damaso 2.
Platina notes) who clime to that dignity by briberie, and unlawful means, to
which they should ascend by virtue.

Benedict the sixth, reigned but a year and an half, and then died, either of
strangling, or famine, in close prison, as we read in the same In vit. Bened. 6
Platina, yea in Annal. to. 10. ad an. 974. nu. 1.
Baronius.

Victor the 3, kept the papacy but one year, and 4 months, and died of
poison, say In vit. Victor. 3.
Platina, Chron. lib. 4. ad ann. 1087.
Genebrard, and In Sum. Conc.
Charanza, and In Chron. ad ann. 1095.
Polonus.

Pla. in vit. Pij 3
Pius the 3, died within a month, not without suspicion of venim.

John the 13, ( alias 12,) Kran. Metrop. lib. 5. cap. 1.
while he was committing adultery, was slain: whether Platina in vita Ioh 13.
Blond. decad. 2. lib. 3.
thrust through by some, who took him in the act, or Luitprand. Ti cinens. l.
6. c. 11. Sigeber. in Chr. ad an 963. Trith in Chron. Monast Hirsaug.
stricken by the devil, historians agree not. But your Turrecremat. Sum. de
Eccles. l. 2. c. 103. and l. 4. c. 9. part. 1. and so does Walthramus Episc.
Naumburgens. Tract de inuestitura Episcopotu^.
Cardinal takes that as more likely, which is more dreadful. For because
(says he) the life of Pope John was detestable, and marvelous offensive to
the Christian people, therefore Christ himself gave out the sentence of
condemnation against him. For while he was abusing a certain man's wife, the
devil struck him suddenly into the temple of his head. And so he died without
repentance.

Boniface the 7, sat but 7 months, and a few odd days, and then the beast
died, says Metrop. lib. 5 c. 1.
Krantius.

Marcellus the second lived but 22. days in the Popedom: not for that he was
full of years when he died, for he was but 55. years old, but for that he was
poisoned. And (which is strange) it is Obijt die 22. non sine veneni
suspicione, quod nimium rectus quibusdam videretur. Gen^b. Chron. lib. 4 ad
ann. 1555.
observed, that he was poisoned because some thought he would prove an honest
Pope.

That Sixtus Quintus, after the sixth year of his reign, was fetched away by
the devil, by whose help he came to that place; In his declaration made at
Vendosme. Ian. 28. anno 1601.
Sir Francis Breton a Monk of the order of the Celestines, protested, that a
Prior of S. Benets order assured him at Rome. And Relation of the Western
church by Sir Ed. Sands.
they say, your Jesuits report as much under hand in Italy. But to end this
point in a word: Pontifices tanquam monstra quaeda^ e medio breui Deus
sustulit. Platina in vita Christophori. Paucorum labes sinceris macula^, and
universe. Eccles in famia^ ingerit. Et in mea opinione ideo frequentius
moriuntur Pontifices ne totam corrumpant Ecclesiam. Ioh. Salisb. de Nugis
Curialium. lib. 6. c. 24.
your own men tell us in plain terms, that many Popes were of short
continuance, because God saw they proved monsters, and shamed the true
religion: God in his justice would not suffer them to live. And so this
argument of years has his answer.

PAP. Yea, N. D. nu. 35. page 403.
but it is a most unlikely thing, that the whole Roman Clergy would choose a
Pope without a beard, especially a stranger.


PROT. And why might not the Roman Clergy, as well as the Clergy of
Conftantinople ( N. D. nu 28. p. 396. Bell. lib. 3 de To. Pon. c. 24.
whom you vpbraid with such a fact) do such a deed? especially if all your
Clergy in those days (as some of you write) were shaven? For men by shauing
may make themselves look like women, and women by often shauing may make
themselves look like men. Certainly a Johan. Pierias Valerianus pro sacerdotum
barbis. fol. 21. ad Cardinal. Medicen. printed at London in aedib. Tho.
Bertholet. anno 1533.
learned man among your selves, imputes the error of Ioane the woman's choice to
this, that your Clergy were then shaven. For by the means of shauing (says
he) the people were so disguised, that men and women were scant known asunder.
And by this it happened that a woman was chosen Pope of Rome, to the perpetual
rebuke of that same holy order. The same reason is given also by Lib. 6. de
reb. Turcicis.
Chalcocondylas. And by it is another of your arguments answered, which by N.
D. nu. 35. p. 403.
N. D. is touched in these words: How did they not discern her to be a woman
or an Eunuke, seeing she had no beard in her old age? For it being ordinary,
that the Clergy should be shaven, why should they dislike her the more for
want of a beard?


PAP. Onuph. annot. in Plat. in vita Ioh. 8. Florim. cap. 23. page 197.
Yea but was there none, that either by countenance or voice, or other actions
of her, could discern the fraud?


PROT. Look you to that. But this is sure, if your stories be true, that
diverse women have lived longer among men in men's apparel unknown, then dame
Ioane lived in the Popedom. For Marina ( Rauis. Textor in officina. Tit.
Mulieres habitu^ virilem mentitae.
they say) lived all her life among Monks, and no body knew but she was a
Monk. Ibid. and Pet. de Natal. in Catal. sanc. lib. 3. c. 113.
Euphrosina lived 36 years amongst Monks, and was reputed for a Monk. So did
Vitas Patrum. lib. 1. Pet. de Natal. lib. 2. cap. 3. Pet. de Natal. in Catal.
sanct. lib. 9. cap. 36. and 37.
Eugenia, Pelagia, and Margareta, and no man suspected them of fraud.


PAP. N. D. page 402.
Yea, but how happened it, her own lovers had not discovered or her
incontinent life?


PROT. That her lovers did not discover her, it is no wonder. For partners in
mischief, are good at concealements. As for her incontinent life, that
discovered her at length. God, according to his Job 12. 22.
promise, bringing forth the shadow of death to light, that is, making known
her secret naughtiness.


PAP. Onuph. loco. citato. N. D. page 402.
Yea, but how could she pass through priesthood, and other Ecclesiastical
orders? how by so many vnder-offices, and degrees, as they must before they
come to be Popes, without descrying? Onuph ibid.
For 900 years from S. Peter, no man was chosen Pope, that was not brought up
in the Roman Church, and passed through priesthood, and other Ecclesiastical
orders.


PROT. That's not so. For Platina in vita Dionysij.
Dionysius was made Pope of a Monk: and Idem in vita Valentini.
Valentinus in the time of his Deaconship, before he was priested. And so was
Idem in vita Bened. 5.
Benedict the fifth too. And as for Geneb. Chron. lib. 4. ad an. 963. Annal to.
10 ad an 999. nu. 2.
Leo the eight, he was chosen being but a lay man: Per Othonem 1. homo laicus
Leo intrusus est, says Baronius. Your own Chronol. lib 4. ad an. 398.
Genebrard did note, that this Note of Onuphrius was worth nothing: yea that it
was false, as many other of his notes are.


PAP. Bell. l. 3 de To Pont cap. 24.
Yea but Polonus and others say, that this Ioane brought forth a child as she
went in procession. Now it is not credible, that a woman who had gone so many
months with child, would then especially go abroad when there was most fear
she might be discovered.


PROT. This is like the rest. For the time of childbirth is uncertain. For
though women go usually ten months, yet sometimes they come sooner, at nine or
eight, yea at seven months, as Leuinus Lem^ius de occultis (...) miraculis
lib. 4. cap. 22, (...) 23.
Physicians have observed. Honester women then Pope Ioane, have fallen in
travel upon the high way, ere ever they were aware, that they were so near
their reckning, as Theophilact observes: for nouit mulier quod pariet, quando
vero, non nouit, says (...)
he: Nam non paucae 8 mense pepererunt etiam in itinere, nihil praescientes:
that is, A woman knows she shall be delivered, but the time she knows not:
for diverse have been delivered in their eighth month, as they have been in
their iourneys, never dreaming of any such thing toward. What is your next
exception?


PAP. (...). cap. 23. (...).
They say, she was buried without any solemnities in the world. And how is that
credible, seeing it is a barbarous and savage part, to deprive them of the
honor of solemn burial, which have borne the greatest offices?


PROT. Is it so? Do we not read in Scripture, that God in his justice does use
to serve the greatest princes so, who dishonor him? Do we not read, that Ier.
22. 18. 19.
Iehoiachim king of Judah was to be buried as an ass is buried? etc. Yea, do
we not read in some of your own stories, that some of your Popes have had as
small solemnities? Bonifacius 7. post mortem Ioh. 15. sedit menses 4. repentina
morte interijt, and in tantum eum odio habuerunt sui, vt post mortem caederent
eum, and lanceis vulnerarent, atque per pedes traherent nudato corpore vsque ad
campum quiest ante caballum Constantini; ibi proiecere eum atque dimiserunt,
says Annal. to. 10. ad an. 985. e veteri Pontif. Vaticano codice.
Baronius. Boniface the 7. who sat after John the 15. four months, died a
sudden death: and he was so hateful to his own followers, that after his death
they beat him, and ran him into the body with lances, and dragged him by the
feet, all naked, till they came to the field which is near the place where
Constantines horse stands; there they threw him from them, and there they left
him.


PAP. (...) cap. 2, (...)
Yea, but it was never heard of before, nor never in use among Christians, to
bury a man in the high ways.


PROT. No? Is it not written, that (...)
Deborah, Rebeckahs nourse, was buried under an Oak? and that (...)
Rahel, Jacobs wife, a far honester woman then Pope Ioane, was buried in the
way to Ephrath? though if it had not, yet Pope Ioane was but right served to be
buried so: for it was never heard of before, nor never in use among Christians,
that a Pope should be delivered of a child. The extraordinarinesse of the case,
deserved extraordinary exemplary usage. Your friend Papyrius Massonus, Papyr.
Masso: vir praestans ingenio and pietate.
much commended by your Cardinal To. 10. Annal. ad an. 853. nu. 62
Baronius, De vrb. Episc. lib. 3. in Bened. ^
holds opinion, that if there had been any such Pope, the Romans could have
done no less (in equity) then to have hanged her up in chains after her
death. Because he finds not that she was shamefully enough handled after her
death, he denies the story.


PAP. Papyrius Masso is a worthy man indeed. Vltimo supplicio affecissent.
Vt ventus fumum, euanescere totam in auras fabulam fecit: he has disproued
this tale thoroughly Loco citato.
in Baronius judgment. But yet I think with Florimondus, they should have
allowed her Christian burial: they should have made her a tomb: they should
have written Epitaphs on her.


PROT. What? Epitaphs on such a whore? That had been a jest indeed. Yet
perhaps some mad-cap did so. And how prove you the contrary?


PAP. If she had had a tomb made for her, and Epitaphs on her they would have
been forth coming. For as Loco citato.
Florimondus writes, Sepulchrorum nunquam intermoritur memoria: Tombestones
continue for ever.


PROT. Indeed I have Polyd. Virg. de invent. rerum. lib. 6. cap. 10.
read, that by law it was provided, that no man should deface Tombe-stones. And
I have Bellonius lib. 2 obseruat. cap. 6.
read also, that to this day, hard by Troy, videre licet magna marmorea
sepulchra operis antiqui ex vno lapide, instar cistae, excauata, quoru^
opercula adhuc integra sunt: a man may see many marble sepulchers, wrought
after the old fashion, cut hollow, like a chest, out of one stone, the couers
whereof are still whole. But I do not read, that men can show, which was
Priamus his grave, which Hectors, etc. Yet but for evil fingers, I could have
told you where Pope Ioanes tomb was. Til Pius Quintus cast it into Tiber, it
was to be seen in Rome.


PAP. They say further, that she died instantly. But though the pains of women
be great at such times, yet it comes by thro^^, they have some intermission:
their pain is not like to a sudden Apoplexy, on which they die instantly.


PROT. Men do not die instantly who are taken with an Apoplexy, they may live
long after, and be cured thereof as Felix Platerus Archiater Basil. Pract c. 1.
p. 46. edit. Basil. 1608.
Physicians say. Your Florimondus herein is out of his element. Neither did she
die instantly, though it seems suddenly. For she was delivered of a boy before
her death.


PAP. Was she delivered of the boy wherewithal she went? and what was then the
cause of her death? Florimondus accounts this as one of the absurdities which
follows on this tale. Imo, vt aiunt, ( Page 205.
says he) masculum pepererat, quid igitur mortem repentinam attulit? If a
woman be once delivered of the fruit of her womb, there is no danger of death
in his opinion.


PROT. Commend me to him, if ever you see him. And ask the Woodcocke, if he
have not known women die in childbed, as well as in childbirth. Genesis 35. 17.
18
Rahel was delivered of her son Benjamin, and yet died shortly. 1. Sam. 4. 20.
21.
Phineas wife was delivered of her son Ichabod, and yet died presently after.
And if they died so: why not Pope Ioane? I pray you let me hear what
exceptions some wiser men take against this story. For I am weary of
Florimondus fopperies.


PAP. N. D. of 3. Co^uers. part. 2. c. 5. nu. 36. Florim. p 202. Bell. l. 3. de
To. Pont. c. 24.
How is she said to have gone from the palace of S. Peter to S. John Lateran,
whereas the Popes lay not then in the Vatican, but at S. John Lateran it self?


PROT. How prove you that the Pope lay not then in the Vatican?


PAP. Florim. loco citato.
Platina witnesses that the Popes lay not in the Vatican till Boniface the 9.
his days, to wit, till the year 1350.


PROT. Boniface the ninth, lived in the year 1390. not 1350. wherefore in that
circumstance you fail. And so you do in fathering such a fancy upon Platina.
For In vita Bonif. 9
Platina reports only that the Vatican was repaired by Boniface the ninth. He
says not, it was first inhabited by Boniface the 9. though if he had, yet the
Pope might well have gone to see the Lateran; for he had other houses to solace
himself, and his Courtiers in, besides the Lateran. He dwelt not always in
that: for De vitis Pontif in vita Greg. 4.
Gregory the fourth, made two goodly houses even out of the ground, for the
Popes use, as your Anastasius testifies. And Leo the 3. (as we read in the
same In vita Leon
Anastasius) made another goodly house near to S. Peter's Church, which stands
in the Vatican, Idem in Leone. 4.
wherein Leo the fourth gave entertainment to Ludouike the Emperor. But
besides, the stories do not report she went from S. Peter's palace to the
palace of the Lateran: but from S. Peter's Church to the Lateran Church. For
she was delivered as they went in procession. Now she might go from S. Peter's
Church to the Lateran Church, and yet dwell in the palace by the Lateran. For
Popes began not always their processions at the next Church to them. Platina
in vita Leon. 3. and Anastas. de vit. Pont. in Leone 3.
Leo the third appointed to go in procession three several days before
ascension day. And he began the first day, at one of S. Mary's Churches, and
ended at Saint Saviors Church. The second day he began at Saint Sabina the
martyrs Church, Ecclesia Dei genitricis ad praesepe.
and ended at S. Paul's. The third day he began at S. Crosses Church in
Jerusalem, and ended at S. Lawrences without the walls. So that this question of
yours is answered. Let me know if you have any more to say.


PAP. You shall: and first Baron. Annal. to. 10. ad ann. 853. nu. 67.
I will prove it a fable out of their own mouths that report it.


PROT. That's a piece of cunning in good earnest. But how I pray you?


PAP. Marry, even as Mark 14. 59.
Saint Mark the Evangelist proved the Jews liers, by the inconvenience of
their testimonies.


PROT. What mean you by the inconvenience of their testimonies?


PAP. Their disagreeing one from another.


PROT. But so did not S. Mark. For those false witnesses, whose testimony (as
he notes) was inconvenient, agreed well enough in their tale. Testes quide^
inter se recte conueniebant, cu^ eadem vterque verba, and eode^ sensu
recitaret. -- sed quamuis affirmarent, Christum dixisse: Ego dissoluam etc. non
iudicabant Pontifices posse propterea Christum ad mortem co^demnari. Maldonat.
in Math. 26. 61.
They only failed in this, that the matter which they witnessed against him
was not capital, though it had been true. For to promise the reedifying of a
Church in three days, is neither fellonie nor treason. And in this respect S.
Mark observes that their testimony was inconvenient, meaning to condemn him
to death. But what great disagreement have you observed among the relators of
this tale?


PAP. Baron. Annal. to 10. ad ann. 8^3. nu. 67.
Infinite. Insomuch that a man may well think God has taken anew the same
course with these, which he took of old with them who occasioned him to say:
Genesis 11.
Come let us confound their language, that one of them know not what another
says.


PROT. That's much, I long to hear the particulars.


PAP. So you shall by and by. But first I pray you tell me by the way, Marianus
eam Ioannam nouo adinuento and innouato vocabulo appellauit. Quorsum vero
nomen, quod antea solis masculis imponebatur, sola litera mutata, ad mulierem
detorsit? Florim. cap. 7. nu. 1.
why Marianus the first broacher of this tale, gave her such a new fangled, and
new devised name as Ioane? Why took he that name which in former ages was
proper to men only, and by changing a letter made it a woman's name?
Florimondus cannot reach the reason of this.


PROT. Florimondus is a proper Squire, and you are a wise man to demand such a
question. Read the Scriptures, and you shall find, that the name of Ioane is
no new devised name, nor proper to men only. For Luke 8. 3. and 24. 10.
they mention one Ioane, the wife of Chuza. Or, if for fear of proving an
heretic you dare not read the Scriptures, read your Legends and Festiuals,
and in them you shall find that your Sea-saint Nicolas his mother was called
Ioane. Golden Lege^d and Engl. Festiual in the life of S. Nicolas, and Pet, de
Natal. in Catal. sanct lib. 1. cap. 33.
If some should hear you demand such a question, they would think the fool
rid you. Wherefore no more of this if you respect your credit: fall to show me
the manifold disagreement which you promised.


PAP. I will. Audi quanta inter cos confusio in confictae foeminae nomine etc.
Baron. Annal. to 10. ad ann 853. nu. 67. and Florim.c. 4. ^u. 5. and.c. 7. nu. 4
And first observe with me the confusion that is among them, touching her name
before her Papacy. Some say she was called Agnes, some Gilbert, some Isabel,
some Margaret, some Tutta, or Iutta, others Dorothie.


PROT. Who calls her (I pray you) either Dorothy, or Iutta, or Tutta? who ever
called her Margaret, or Isabell? yea who of the ancient sort of writers, called
her Gilbert, or Agnes? In some of later time I find some difference, one
calling her Gilbert, and another Agnes. But of all those whom I brought in, to
give in evidence against her, there is not past one or two, who either before,
or after her Papacy, gives her any other name then Ioane. And for ought I
know, there is no man, either old, or young, who ever christened her Dorothie,
or Iutta, or Isabell, or Margaret. Know you any that have done so?


PAP. No. For I find no authors cited for proof of this, neither by
Florimondus, nor by Baronius, And I can say no more then I find in them. But
what say you to the next difference? Alij eam vocant Ioh. 7, alij 8, alij vero
9. ^aith Baronius loco citato. Some do feign him to be John the 8 some 9.
says N. D. page 401.
Do not some of your witnesses feign her John the 7, some John the 8, some
John the 9?


PROT. Who feignes her to be John the 9? Not a man that I know. If you bring
not some author for the proof of this point, you must give me leave to think
you speak over.


PAP. Over or short, I follow in this Baronius, and N. D. For some, says
Baronius, call her John the 7, some John the 8, some Ioane the 9. Some, says
N. D. do feign her to be John the 8, some 9.


PROT. Baronius and N. D. are as like to speak over as you, for they are
Papists: wherefore I neither believe them nor you, further then I see reason.
And herein neither they nor you show reason. For none of you cite so much as
one author, good or bad for it. Hoc vnum eorum animos torquet, vtrum Ioh. 7,
aut Ioh. 8 nomen sibi vsurparit. Florim. cap. 7. nu 5.
Besides your Florimondus confesses, that we are only troubled about this,
whether we should call her John the 7, or John the 8. He charge us not with
naming her John the 9.


PAP. Well, let that be your difference, that you know not whether to call her
John the 7, or John the 8.


PROT. That difference is not so great. For the like may be showed in other
Popes, which yet you your selves confess were Popes. But who styles her either
John the 7, or John the 8? verily neither Marianus Scotus, nor Sigebert, nor
Go^efridus Viterbiensis, nor Polonus, nor Platina, nor Palmerius, nor
Trithemius, nor Fasciculus Temporum, nor Krantius, nor Alfonsus e Carthagena,
nor Textor, call her either John the 7, or John the 8: but simply John, or
Ioane. For it seems they were of Annot, in (...) in vit. Ioh. 9.
Onuphrius mind in this, that numeri notam habere non debuit sacri ordinis non
capax. That seeing she was not capable of priesthood, she should not go for one
in the number of John's.


PAP. Yes, by your leave, Platina styles her John the eight, and the next 9.
For which he is reproved by Loco citato.
Onuphrius, and that upon the reason which you mentioned. For these are
Onuphrius words. Johannes hic omnino 8. non 9. est, vt a Platina describitur:
Nam etsi Johannes foemina Papa, quam profitetur, fuisset, non tamen numeri
notam habere debuisset sacri ordinis non capax: that is, This John
questionless is the eighth, and not the ninth, as Platina accounts him: for
though John the woman, whom he talks of, had been Pope, yet seeing she was not
capable of Priesthood, she should not go for one in the number of John's.


PROT. Platina styles her not John the eighth. Onuphrius, or some body for
him, has abused both Platina and you. For proof whereof I appeal to Platina,
printed in the year 1481. Platina moritur Romae, anno 1481. Trith. de script.
Ecclesiast. verbo Bartholomaeus.
which was the year wherein Platina died; and to the next edition Anno 1485.
For speaking of John the woman in those ancient editions, he sets no numerall
note upon her head, but begins his story thus, Johannes Anglicus, ex
Maguntiaco oriundus, etc. John English, borne at Mentz. Neither styles he the
next 9. but 8. For coming to that Popes life, Johannes 8. patria Romanus, etc.
says he: John the eighth, by his country a Roman, etc. For further proof of
which later point, I appeal to the Such as that of Colen, anno 1574.
later editions, whereunto Onuphrius annotations are annexed. For though we
read thus in them, Johannes nonus, patria Romanus, etc. John the ninth, by his
country a Roman, etc. yet, that that reading is false, and the ancient
reading true, it appears by that which is written of the next Popes life, to
wit, Martin the second, even in those later editions. For De vit. Pont. in vita
Martini 2
Platina showing how Martin lived in the time of Charles the third, adds
presently, quem ab Iohanne 8. coronam accepisse scripsimus, that is, who was
crowned by John the eighth, as we have written. Now Charles the third was
crowned by John next before Martin, according to In vita eiusde^ Ioh.
Platina. Wherefore the next before Martin was John the 8. in Platina his
account, and not John the ninth, as Onuphrius would make us believe. Which
oversight, or fraud of Onuphrius, was not so great, but that by this means he
is forced to alter Platina his numerall note, set to all the John's that follow,
to call him John the tenth, whom Platina calls John the ninth; to call him the
eleventh, whom Platina calls the tenth; to call him the thirteenth, whom Platina
calls the twelfth, and so unto the last Baldesar Cossa, who was in number of
John's according to the ancient editions, the 23, and not the 24, as he is
numbered in the editions with Onuphrius notes. But say on, what other
disagreement have you observed among the reporters of this story?


PAP. Alij ponun^ hoc anno 853. alij anno seque^te, alij 857. octa. alij,
quidam 904 praeter eos qui ponunt eu^ post Martinum 1. anno 653. alij post Ioh.
5. anno 686. Baron loco citato, and Florim. cap. 7. nu. 4.
Some say, she began her Papacy in the year 853, some in the year 854, some
in the year 857, some in 858, some in 904, some in 653, some in 686.


PROT. Why name you not the Authors that write thus? For to this day I never
read or heard of any who placed her either about the year 653. or 686. or 904.
All the aboue-named Historiographers mention her within the compass of five
years. Till you bring forth your proof, there is great reason to suspect your
truth.


PAP. Florim. loco citato.
Peradventure you will suspect my truth, if I tell you that some say, she
succeeded Leo the fourth, some Leo the fifth, ^me Benedict the third, some
Martin the first, some John the fifth.


PROT. I shall indeed. For I read in Lib. 3. de Rom Pont. cap. 24.
Bellarmine, that Omnes qui istum Iohannem admittunt, dicunt eum sedisse post
Leonem 4, and ante Benedictum 3. All who acknowledge such a woman Pope, place
her after Leo the 4, and before Benedict the 3.


PAP. Yea, but you have little reason to believe Bellarmine therein, For In
chron. ad an. 855. collat. cum anno 847.
Polonus writes, that she succeeded Leo the 5. And so does In chron. ad an.
847. collat. cum anno 854.
Sigebert too.


PROT. That Leo, whom Sigebert places next before Ioane the woman, is numbered
the fifth, it is some error in the print. For Sigebert names Leo the first, ad
an. 441. Leo the 2. ad an. 684. Leo the 3. ad an. 796 and the next is that Leo
who sat ad an. 847.
he names but three Popes of that name before that Leo. Wherefore when Sigebert
is corrected, you have no color of exception from him. No more have you from
Polonus. For though according to his account, Leo before this woman Pope, be
Leo the fifth: yet he is the same man whom others call Leo the fourth. Polonus
reckens one Leo, as Pope in the year 698, whom others reckon not at all, which
is the cause of the difference between him and others in the account of Leoes
that follow. But in the persons all agree. What is the next disagreement?


PAP. Alij eu^ sedisse tradunt anno 1. and men^e 1. and d^eb. 4. Alij an. 2.
tondemque men sibus and d^eb 4. Alij 2 annis cum dimidio: Duob. tantu^ annis
alij: alij vero 4 tantu^ men^es. Baron. loco citato. Florim. cap 7. nu. 4.
Some say, she sat Pope one year, one month, and 4 days. Some two years,
two months, and 4 days. Some two years and a half. Some but two years
full. This is in Florim. and not in Baronius.
Very many say, she sat one year, five months, and three days. And they are
no small number who say, she sat but barely four months.


PROT. If this be true, Bellarmine was far wide. For Lib. 3. de To. Pont cap.
24.
he writes, that Omnes qui istum Iohannem admittunt, dicunt eum vixisse in
Pontificatu duobus annis, and quinque mensibus. All that acknowledged such a
woman Pope, say, she sat as Pope two years, and five months. He knew none
(no more then 1) that gave her so little time as four months. He knew no such
difference herein as you talk of. Yet among the later writers, I confess
there is some difference of some few months: but Marianus and Polonus, which
are two of the principal, agree upon the point. They write uniformly, that she
sat two years, five months, and four days. And Platina is not far short
of that sum. For by his reckoning, she sat two years, one month, and four
days. But suppose the differences in these circumstances were great, and many:
what is that to discredit the substance of the story? We find great difference
among them who have written of Pope Lucius. For Platina de vit. Pont. in vita
Lucij 1. Onuphr. in Chron. Romans Pont. ad ann. 253.
some say, he was a Roman, Anastasius in vita Lucij.
some a Tuskan; Idem ibid.
some say he was the son of Lucinus, Plat and Onuph loco citato.
some of Porphirie: Onuph. loco citato.
some say he was chosen Pope in the year 253, Math. Westminster Flores hist. ad an.
254.
some in the year 254, Marian. Scot. and Polon. in chro^ ad an. 255.
some in the year 255, Abbas Vrspergen^. ad an. 259.
some in the year 259, Compilatio Chronologica ad an 275.
some in the year 275. Polon. and Math Westminster. locis citatis.
Some say, he sat Pope 3 years, 3 months, and 3 days; Marian. Scotus loc.
citat.
some 3 years, and 5 months: Albo Floriacens. de vit. Pont. in Lucio.
some 3 years, 7 months, and six days; Onuphr. loco citato.
some but one year, 3 months, and 13 days; Eusebius. lib 7. hist. cap. 3. and
Abbas Vspergensis loco citato, and Hermannus Contractus circa ann. 260.
some but 8 months, and no longer. And yet there is no man denies that Lucius
was Pope.

Again, do we not read, that Sergius the third began his reign in the year
905. as Math. Westminster. Flores hist. ad an. 905.
some say: as Polon. in chro^. ad an 907.
others, in the year 907: as a Baron. annal. to. 10. ad an. 907 nu. 2.
third sort, in the year 908? Do not Herman. Contract. circa ann. 907.
some also write, that he succeeded Benedict the 4, Luitprandus, test Baron.
ad an 908 nu. 2.
others that he succeeded Formosus, Baron ibid.
others, Christopher? And is not there difference also about the time of his
continuance in the Popedom? while Polon. ad ann. 907.
some say he sat 7 years, 3 months, and 16 days; Baron. tom. 10 Annal. ad
an. 910. nu. 1.
some 3 years only; yet who ever denied that there was such a Pope?

We Baron. annal. to. 10 ad an. 897 nu. 2.
read, that Formosus carcass was taken up out of his grave, by one of his
successors, and brought into judgment before a Council of Bishops, and that
it was spoiled of his papal robes, and clad with a lay man's garment: that it
was indicted, arraigned and condemned. But among them who report this, there is
great disagreement. For Luitprand. l. 1. cap. 8. and Abbas Vrspergensis in
Chron. ad an. 897.
some say, it was taken up by Sergius the third, of whom I spoke even now: some
say it was taken up by Platina in vita Steph. 6.
Stephen the sixth, whom many call Stephen the 7: Wernerus Roleuink in Fa^cic.
temp. ad an. 904
some say it had two fingers cut off, Luitprand. loco citato.
some three: Abbas Vrspergens. loco citato.
some say the head was chopped off, Luitprand. and alij.
some seem to deny that: Papyrius Massonus lib. 3. de vrbis Episcop. in
Bonifacio 6.
some say, the trunk of the body was cast into Tiber, Platina in vita Steph.
6.
others say, it was allowed lay-mans burial. I pray you now, dare you deny
the truth of this story, by reason of these differences?


PAP. Why not? Does not Annotat. in Plat. in vita Formosi.
Onuphrius upon that reason deny it, saying: Quae de Formosi cadauere ex
sepultura a successoribus eruto dicuntur, procul dubio fabulae magis quam vero
similia sunt, quod illorum qui de ea re scripserunt diuersitate and repugnantia
facile liquet: that is, The speeches which go touching the digging up of
Formosus body out of his grave, by some of his successors, are questionless
fabulous, not true: which is apparent by the disagreements and disconueniences
which are to be found among them that write of it.


PROT. Now see you then the disagreement, and disconueniences that are among
you Papists. For though Intentatum hactenus s^elus.
Baronius confess, Prae sui immaniate omnib^s incredibile. Annal. 10. 10. ad
an. 897. nu. 3.
it was such a villainous pranke, as was never played before: though he
confess, Erroris conuincuntar qui isla. de Formoso negant, and conficta putant.
it may seem incredible, by reason of the barbarousnesse of it: yet he grants
it true, and auowes that they err foully, who deny that such things befell
Formosus: who hold the reports for fables. Notwithstanding the manifold
differences in some circumstances, he durst not cast it off as Onuphrius does.
Neither could he indeed upon Onuphrius reason. For Lib. 2. de To. Pont. cap. 5.
Bellarmine says true in this, (though he miss the truth often) that
saepissime accidit vt constet de re, and non constet de modo, vel alia
circumstantia. It oftentimes falls out that men are sure such a thing is done,
when yet they are not sure of the manner how it was done, or of some other such
like circumstance. The difference among writers about circumstance, does not
weaken any man's argument touching the substance. If it do, (to give one
instance more) blot out for shame, S. Vrsula and her fellows holiday, out of
your October. 21.
Calendar: and all the prayers which you make to them in your Primers,
Portesses, and Breuiaries. For there was never greater diasgreement among the
relators of any story, then among the relators of that. Some Pet. de Natal in
Catal. sanct. lib. 9. c. 87.
say, that Vrsula was the king of Scotlands daughter: but Galfridus Monumentens
hist. Brit. lib. 5. cap. 15 and 16.
others say, she was the king of Cornewals daughter. Petrus de Natal loc. cit.
Some say, her father was called Maurus: but others say, he was called Herman.
Flien in vita S. Vrsulae October. 21.
Dionethus, or Ponticus Virunius hist. Brit. l. 5.
Dionotus, or Baron. Annot. in Martyrol. To October. 21. b.
Dionocus, or Incertus author apud Suriu^ to. 5. de vitis sanct. October 21
Deo notus; for so diversely do they christen him. And which concerns the
husband, to whom she should have been married, Pet. de Natal. loco cit.
some write, that he was king of England: Baron. loc. cit.
others, that he was king of little Britain. And Elizabetha Abbatissa
Schonaugien. in princip. Reuelationum.
one calls him Aetherius, another Frater T. in Reuelat. scriptis an. 1185. vt
refert Flien. loc. cit.
Holofernes, a Flien, loc cit.
third, Conanus. Now in her company, as c some say, there were only 11000
Ladies and gentlewomen, virgins: but as Ponticus Virunius and Gali ridus locis
cit.
others say, there were 6000. country maidens over and above those 1100. of
better rank. Besides, Pet. de Natal. loc cit.
there were diverse Bishops, and Lords of the Temporaltie who accompanied them.
Yea Cyriacus the Pope of Rome, like a good fellow, left his Papacy, and
followed these pilgrims say Vide supr. p. 67
some, though others deny it. For Hangerus Abbas Lobiensis in Catalog. Episco.
Tongerensium in Metropol.
some say, that they went in Pilgrimage to Rome, though Flien. Annot. in vitam
Vrsulae.
others hold not that probable. Martyro To. and Baron. Annot. in Martyr. October
21.
Some say, they were martyred on the sea coast: Flien loco citato.
some, before the gates of Colen. And Author Chro^. Colon. fol. 68. and Harig.
Abbas loco cit. etc.
some say, that all this fell out in the year 238. some, in Baron. in Martyr.
Oct. 21.
Maximus time: Sigebert in Chron. ad ann. 853.
some, in the year 453. Last of all, Lindan. apud Baro^um Annot. in Martyr.
Oct. 21.
some say, that if any be buried in S: Vrsulaes Church, though they be infants
newly baptized, the ground will cast them up again: whereas Flien. loco cit.
fabulam a^lem esse didici.
others say, that that is a tale of a tub.


PAP. I know not what to reply to this. But learneder Catholics will answer
you, I hope. And in the mean time I will go on. Onuph Annot in Platin. in vit.
Ioh 8. and Hard. Answer to B. luels Apology.
By the reporters of this story she was first carried to Athens. Now there was
no Athens standing at that time.


PROT. Yes that there was. For Lib. 8.
Paulus Aemilius writes, that Gotefridus was made Duke of Athens, and Prince of
Achaia, about the year 1220. And afterward, That certain Pirates inuading
the country of Grecia, slew the Duke of Athens, who was of the house of
Brennus, and took the city. In like manner we read in In Hen 3 ad ann. 1252.
page 1112.
Matthew Paris, that Johannes de Basing stocks Archdeacon of Johan. de Legria
vir in Triuio and quadriuio experientissimus.
Legria who died in the year 1252. studied at Athens, and that he learned of
the learned Grecians, many matters unknown to men of the West-Church:
especially of one Constantia, the daughter of the Archbishop of Athens.
Besides, Aeneas Syluins, who lived since that, does justify, that in his time
Athens was not quite razed, but carried the show of a pretty town. For
Ciuitas Athenitensis (quoth he) quondam nobilissima fuit, etc. eadem nostro
tempore parui oppidi speciem gerit. The noble city of Athens at this time
carries but the show of a little village. Lib. 6.
Wherefore neither does this your exception prejudice the truth of this story.
Your next had need be better.


PAP. By the reporters of this story she was not only carried to Consmograph.
de Europa. cap. 11.
Athens, but to Athens for learning. Now it is a plain case, as Constat eo
te^pore neque Athenis, neque vsquam alibi in Grecia ^uisle vlla Gymnasia
literarum. l: 3. de To. Pont. c. 24.
Bellarmine writes, that there were no schools at that time, neither in
Athens, nor in any place of Grecia.


PROT. What? no schools in any place of Grecia at that time? Notes Bellarmine
that? and that as a plain case? and does he prove it too?


PAP. Yea, Loco citato.
he proves it by diverse writers. And first by In Epist. vlt ad fratrem suum
Synesius scribit Athenis nihil ^uisse nisi nome^ Academiae.
Synesius who lived a little after Basil and Nazianzens time. For Synesius
writes unto his brother, that Athens retained only the bare name of an
University.


PROT. And does tha^ import (think you) that in Synesius opinion there was no
university at Athens? I for my part do rather think the contrary: I think
Synesius meant thereby that Athens was an university, though nothing so
flourishing as formerly. Questionless, when Petrus Abailardus nihil habens de
Monacho praeter nomen and habitum Bern. Epist. 193.
Bernard writ, that Peter Abailard had nothing of a Monk, saving the name and
the Cowle, his meaning was not that Peter was no Monk, but rather that he was
a Monk, though a sorry Monk. And I am the rather persuaded to understand
Synesius words so: because Athens, in S. Basils time (about some 40. years
before Synesius) Baron. Annal. to 3. ad an. 354. nu. 25. and 26.
was held the mother of learning: and in regard thereof termed golden Athens by
In Monodia in Basilij magni vitam.
Gregory Nazienzen. For who can think, in so few years learning should quite
be quenched, and that so famous an university should in so short time be
utterly decayed? But let us suppose there was no university at Athens in
Synesius time. What is that to prove that there was no University at Athens in
Pope Ioanes time, which was 400. years after? That university might get life
again in so many years. And in deed it did so: for 100. years after Synesius
time, Bocthuis went to study at Athens, as Annal. 10. 6. ad an 510 nu. 2.
Baronius confesses: noting further, that the study of Philosophy was revived
there in those days. Again, to suppose there was no university at Athens in
Synesius time, what is it to prove that there were no schools in any part of
Grecia in Pope Ioanes time? Now Bellarmine promised to prove that.


PAP. That is proved by Loco citato.
Bellarmine out of In vit. Michael and Theod. Imperat.
Cedrenus, and Zonaras. For they record, that in the sole reign of Michael the
Emperor, which fell to be about the year 856. Bardus Caesar restored
learning. Cum vsque ad illud tempus per annos plurimos ita fuissent extincta
omnia studia sapientiae in Graecia, vt ne vestigium quidem vllum extaret.


PROT. Bellarmine wrongs Cedrenus and Zonaras, in bringing them in, to witness
such a point. For they say no more, but that learning was not regarded of along
time before Bardus Caesar. They say not, it was quite extinct, Philosophia
neglecta iacebat ac prope omnino extincta erat. vt nescintilla quidem eius
appareret.
but almost extinct. Bardus Caesar added life vnto-it, Cuique disciplinae
scholas constituit, and do ctores designauit, singulis publica stipendia
decreuit.
by setting up schools for every of the liberal sciences, and appointing
public professors, and giving them stipends out of the Excheker, as Cedrenus
and Zonaras write: but he raised it not up simply to life. For if it had been
stark dead, how could he upon such a sudden have gotten professors to
furnish his schools? Again, do we not read in the same Zonaras, that at the
same time whereof Bellarmine speaks, there was a In philosophicis rationibus
incomparabilem, etc.
matchless Philosopher at Constantinople, and many skillful Mathematicians,
who were his scholars? And do we not read in Loco supra citato.
Cedrenus, that this Philosopher was called Leo, and that he Literis and poetis
Leo (vt ipse fereb at) ^^^itiatus fuit Byzantij. Rhetoricam, Philosophiam,
Arithmeticam, and reliquas scie^tias in Antro Insula didicit.
was brought up in learning at Constantinople, though afterward he learned
Rhetoric, Philosophy, Arithmetic, and the other liberal sciences, in the
Isle of Antro? And does not this argue, that Cedrenus and Zonaras do not
report, that there was no learning in any place of Grecia? Thirdly, is it not
well known, that Bellar. lib. 1. de Conc. cap. 5.
about the year 680. there was kept a general Council at Constantinople,
whereat there were many Bishops of Greece and among the rest the Conc.
Consta^tinop. 6. Act. 17.
Bishop of Athens? Is it not well known that there was kept another Council
at Nice an 100. years after, viz. Bellar. lib. 1. de Conc. cap. 5.
about the year 780. at which there were mo Bishops of Greece then at the
former? Is it not well known there was a 3. Council holden at Constantinople,
which did exceed in number either of the former 2, Bellar. loco. citato.
about the year 870? And how is it credible so many Councels consisting of many
Bishops should be kept in Greece, 350. test Bell. ibid.
and yet Greece utterly without learning? Welfare N. D. in comparison of
Bellarmine herein, for N. D. durst not (it seems) say with Bellarmine: that
about Pope Ioanes time there was no school in any place of Grecia. He was
ashamed to run with his master to such excess of lying. He left him in this.


PAP. True. But that Athens at that time had no school in it at all, nor many
years before Nu. 32. page 46
N. D. is as confident as his master Bellarmine. And that circumstance is that
which gals you most. Wherefore tell me what more you can say to it?


PROT. Nay first tell me how N. D. proves that? for I shall esteem of his
position, as I find his proof to be.


PAP. His position is evident ( Ibid.
he says) by Cedrenus and Zonaras in the places already cited.


PROT. He lies falsely. Cedrenus and Zonaras makes as much for Bellarmines
opinion, as for his. For they speak of the decay of learning through Grecia
generally, and not in Athens particularly; yet (as you have heard) they make
nothing for Bellarmine. N. D. might as well have cast off Bellarmines
witnesses, as Bellarmines opinion for insufficient. Have you any more
exceptions?


PAP. Onuph. and Harding, locis supra citatis.
Yea. For these tale-tellers report, that she came to Rome, and there professed
learning openly, and had great doctors to her scholars. But this is a
notorious untruth. For there was no learning openly professed at Rome in those
days, as the stories declare.


PROT. The Math. Westminster. Flores hist. ad au. 727.
stories declare, that Ina one of our Saxon kings did build a school in Rome,
a little before Pope Ioanes days: viz. in the year 727. and that to this end,
that the kings of England, and their children, the Bishops, the priests, and
the rest of the Clergy, might repair thither, to be instructed in the
Catholic faith, and afterward return home. Which school flourished in Ide^
ad an. 794.
king Offa his time, viz. 795. and continued at least till Alfreds time. For we
read, that Marinus the Pope, who sat in the year 883. freed it from all
paiments at Ide^ ad an. 883.
Alfreds motion. Now is it likely that such a school was built, and maintained
for such a purpose, where no learning was publicly professed? Moreover, we
read of many other schools kept in the same city, in Stephen the 6. his
time, which was about the year 885. For all the schools in Rome concurred in
joyful manner, bringing Stephen the 6. to the palace of Lateran, says Omnes
sanctae Romans Ecclesiae scholae coniunctae eundem (Stephan. 6.) ad Laterane^se
perduxerunt palatium -- gravi moerore affecus est, quia quod erogares clero and
scholis non haberet. Anastas. in vita Steph. 6.
one of your popish Chroniclers: and Stephen was sorry with all his heart he
had not wherewith to gratify the schools. And is it to be thought that all
these schools were maisterlesse? that they had no professors, no readers?


PAP. Florim. cap. 7. p. 62. Bernart. lib. 2. p. 117.
If there had been ever such a Ioane Pope, which some had forborne to speak
of, for reverence to that sea: the difference which is found among Historians,
in numbering of such Popes as were called by the name of John, should have risen
at that time, and by reason of that occasion. But the difference among
historians about the number of Iohn-Popes, arose not from that time, and about
that occasion. It arose in Pope John the 12. his time, about the year 955.
Ergo there was never such a Ioane Pope. Now answer me this argument, if you
can, for this is held Omne^ hanc de Ioanna conficta^ fabula^ hoc vno dicto
damnaru^t. Florim, ibid.
a doughtie one.


PROT. Is it so? Well, hearken then what I answer to it. I say, first there is
no reason that historians should have differed in their account of John's from
her time, though some for reverence of that Sea, forbear to speak of her. For
they who spoke of her, were not to set any numerall note upon her head, as Page
70.
before I showed you out of Onuphrius. They were not to reckon one John the
more for her. Neither indeed did any historian before Platina, reckon her in
the number of John's, though they called her by the name of John.


PAP. Yes, Platina set a numerall note upon her head, and called her John the
7. and so did many since his time.


PROT. Many since his time have called her so, I grant, being moved thereto (as
I suppose) by this, that they saw her so called in Platina. But Platina has
been corrupted by some of your generation, as Page 71.
before I noted. For he neither called her John the 7. nor John the 8. But
secondly I say, your minor is false. For the difference which is about the
number of John's, arose not from John the 12, but from this woman Ioane. For
since Platina his time, some called her John the seventh, some John the eighth,
and so disagreed in the total sum.


PAP. Florim. loco supra citato.
Nay, herein you are out. For that their disagreement began in John the 12. his
days, Lambertus, who lived in those days, witnesses: and your Centurie
writers do confess.


PROT. Does Lambertus witness that? Fie that you should say so. For he has
not one word sounding that way. No more have the Centurie writers.


PAP. Yes but they have. For they Cent. 10. ca. 10. as Florim. and Bernart. say.
write, that when as John the 12. was deposed by the Cardinals, and Leo the 8.
placed in his room: John the 12. got the Popedom again, and kept it four
months; which some historians not observing, made two Popes of one.


PROT. The Centurie writers do not write this. Your Fl^rimondus and Bernartius,
from whence you have this stuff, are shameless fellows to report this by
them. They say indeed, that there is great difference in writers about Pope
John the 12: meaning by John the 12. not him, into whose room Leo the 8. was
chosen, of whom you talk at random, but another John, who was son to
Sergius, commonly called John the 11. But that historians began to differ in
their account by reason of that difference, they say not. Yea it is plain,
they impute the difference among the historians to this, Ioh. 7. vt Sabellicus
vult, aut 8. vt Platina, vocatus est. Cent. 9 cap. 10.
that some called Ioane, John the 7. some John the 8. Wherefore you must cast
about for a new argument, for this will not serve your turn.


PAP. I have arguments good store: whereof, the first shall be taken from the
time wherein (they say) she sat as Pope. And Baron. annal. to. 10. ad an. 853
an. 64.
I will deal especially with Marianus Scotus, the first reporter of this
matter. For if he be confounded, all the rest must rest confounded.


PROT. Well: fall to your work, and be as good as your word.


PAP. Baron. ibid.
If Leo the 4. lived to the year 855, then Marianus Scotus lied falsely in
reporting that this Ioane was chosen Pope in the year 853: for by his
confession she succeeded Leo the fourth. But Leo the 4. lived to the year 855.
Ergo Marianus Scotus lied falsely in reporting that this Ioane was chosen Pope
in the year 853.


PROT. What is that to the maine chance, that Marianus Scotus mistook the
year of her entering into the popedom? In histories, a year or two break no
square. But how prove you that Marianus reports, that this Pope Ioane was
chosen in the year 853?


PAP. Baron. ibid.
By his own wosds. For thus he writes. Anno octingentesimo quinquagesimo
tertio Leo Papa obijt Kalend. Augusti. Huic successit Ioanna mulier annis
duobus, mensibus quinque, diebus quatuor. In the year 853. Leo the Pope died
on the Kalends of August: and Ioane the woman succeeded after him for the space
of two years five months, and four days.


PROT. These are not Marianus words. For he sets not down the year precisely,
but in numerall figures, by the side of the text. See Marianus chronicle, and
the case will appear to be plain.
And it is plain, by conference of years, that he meant to note out the 855
for her entrance, and not the 853. For Benedict the 3. who succeeded her,
entered not (by his account) till the year 857. Now if she had entered 853, she
had been Pope four years, or thereabouts. For between 853. and 857. there
run four years; whereas in plain words he notes, that she was Pope but two
years, five months, and four days. Secondly, it is plain by Marianus
Scotus, that Sergius the 2. began his popedom in the year 844. and sat three
years. It is plain. that Leo the fourth, next successor to Sergius, began his
in the year 847, and sat eight years. Now put these three odd sums 4, 3,
and 8, to 840, and they will make 855. So that whosoever succeeded Leo the 4,
must begin in the year 855; and that was Ioane the woman, in Marianus opinion.


PAP. Why, but right over against these figures 853, these words are set: Leo
Papa obijt Kal. Aug. Leo the Pope died on the Kalends of August. And does not
that argue, that in Marianus opinion, Leo died that year?


PROT. No. No more then the words following, Huic successit Ioanna mulier, etc.
which are set just over against these figures 854. do argue that she began her
popedom the next year after: or that Leo the 4. began his popedom in the
year 852, because right over against that number, his entrance upon Sergius
death is mentioned. Is not your next argument better?


PAP. The people of Rome, about that time, were evil affected toward the
Pope, Florim. cap. 14. nu. 6.
and so was the greater part of all Italy: for that Charles had subdued them,
and given them to the Pope. Now if such an accident as this had fallen out, it
might have given them just cause to have fallen from the Pope again: for they
might have pretended that they would not be subject to a womanish and an
whorish government. But we read of no such thing. Ergo.


PROT. Charles rescued Italy out of the hands of the Lombards, with the great
good liking both of the Romans and the rest of Italy. But he never turned them
over to live under the Popes government. All his life he kept them in obedience
to himself, and by will bequeathed the whole country to his youngest son
Pipin, as Annal. to 9 ad an 806. nu. 19.
Baronius shows out of the French histories. Ergo this argument is naught:
let me have a new one.


PAP. Flor. c 27. nu. 2
The Popes about the time of this your supposed Pope Ioane did take up roundly
both kings and Emperors for their adulteries. Which is a plain argument,
there was no Pope Ioane in that Sea guilty of any such crime.


PROT. What kings and Emperors were these, whom the Popes took up so roundly
for their adulteries?


PAP. Ludouicus the Emperor was one. For Gregory the fifth, turned him into a
Monastery for his adultery with one Judith: that there he might (apart) do
Penance for his sin.


PROT. Gregory the fifth lived almost 150. years after Pope Ioane; (...) 5.
Luio^^^ Imp^ratorem adulterij (...) Iudit^a quadam perpetrati reum -- cum da
^^^nobij clausius addixit. Flo^^m. ibid.
and besides, there was no Emperor called Ludouike in his time. Perhaps
Florimondus would have said Gregory the fourth, for he lived not long before
Pope Ioanes time, and in his days there was one Ludouike an Emperor.


PAP. Indeed it may be so, for the numerall figure might soon be mistaken. For
Gregory the fourth, a man may easily set down Gregory the fifth. And what
say you to it?


PROT. I say Florimondus is a palterer. For Ludouike, who lived in Gregory the
fourths time, was never noted for an adulterer, with any Judith, nor with any
woman else. Judith his wife was suspected of that sin with others, and
thereupon was veiled, and thrust into a Monastery by some of the Princes of
the Empire. And Ludouicke himself, upon other pretenses, was for a time
deprived of the Empire. But Gregory the fourth had no hand either in her
veiling, or in his deprivation, as you may see by Annal. to 9. ad an. 833. and
834.
Baronius. Besides, this fell out before Pope Ioanes time: and therefore does
not hinder but that there was such a Ioane. Me thinks you should be drawn
dry, you talk so idly.


PAP. Flor. c. 25. nu. 3
If there had been such a Pope Ioane, some historian would have written either
good or bad of her. But we read nothing of her in any history.


PROT. Do we read nothing of her in any history? whence have we this of her
aspiring to the Popedom, and of her lewd behavior in the time of her
Popedom? have I not proved it unto you out of the histories?


PAP. Yea, but my meaning is, Florim ibid.
that we read nothing in any history of her reforming the Church: of her
determining of causes and questions, usually proposed by Bishops to them that
are Popes, of any intercourse or affairs, that she had with King or Emperor.


PROT. No more do we read in any historian, of any such act done by Anastasius
the third, who sat as Pope two years and upward. Anastasius the third (as Ab
Anast^^^ nil memori: dignum, g^^ est. Plat. in v. Anastasij 3.
Platina witnesses) did nothing worthy of remembrance. We read nothing of any
great Acts done by Leo the seventh. He sat 3 years, and six months: yet he
did as Leo 7 (...) e^gnum memoria gessit. Plat. (...) vita Leoni. 7.
little as Anastasius, for any thing we read; he neither reformed the Church,
nor resolved any Bishop his doubts: nor intermedled with any Princes.


PAP. Florim. loco supra cit. 10.
Oh but that age, wherein you feign that this Ioane lived, was an age wherein
fell out great variety of matter, both in the East and in the West. In it many
Princes and Emperors of great worth reigned. In it many men of great learning
lived. And therefore if there had been any such monster then, we could not but
have heard of it on all sides.


PROT. So we have, as before I proved. But what great variety of matter fell
there out in that age more then ordinary?


PAP. Florim. ibid.
In that age there was old holding and drawing between the Eastern and
Western Churches about Images. Many Councels were kept by both sides, and many
evil words passed on all hands.


PROT. Go, go, I am ashamed of you, and of Florimondus your master. All
stories testify that the difference between the Eastern and the Western
Churches about Images, began in the former ages: and that, though they
continued some few years after the year 800, yet there was no talk of that
matter for diverse years before Pope Ioanes days. Yet I am willing to hear
you speak on. Wherefore tell me what store of learned men that age brought out?


PAP. Great store, but it were too long to reckon them.


PROT. It may be so. Yet you must know that they went for learned men in that
age, Qui seiret tan tum Crammaticam isto seculo rudi. doctissimus habebatur.
Baron. Annal. to 9. ad ann. 80 2. nu. ^^.
who were but bare Grammarians. And therefore were they never so many, Pope
Ioanes acts might pass unwritten.


PAP. Horim. cap. eit. nu. 6.
Yea but I would gladly know of you, what Dukes, what Princes, what Kings, what
Emperors, this Ioane inaugured, and crowned: what Ambassadors she entertained,
what honors she bestowed upon any persons.


PROT. Indeed you pose me now: especially in that which concerns the inauguring
and crowning of Dukes, and Princes, and Kings, and Emperor. For I remember
none inaugured or crowned by her,


PAP. I thought so. And therefore you do well to confesse^it. I trust at length
you will also confess that there was no Pope Ioane.


PROT. Why I pray you? did every Pope inaugure and crown either Dukes, or
Princes, or Kings, or Emperors?


PAP. Nay I say not so. But in that age the Emperors themselves had such a
reverend opinion of the Roman Popes, that they would not take upon them to
reign, except they gave them their consent and crowned them.


PROT. How prove you that?


PAP. Florim ibid.
By this, that Adrian the first, baptized the two sons of Charles the great,
and after that anointed them kings.


PROT. This proves not your purpose: for this fell out in the year 781, as
Annal. to. 9. ad ann. nu. 2.
Baronius notes: and not in that age wherein Pope Ioane lived. But do you think
that every Pope in that age inaugured some Dukes or Princes, or Kings, or
Emperors? I would gladly know of you what Duke, or Prince, or King, or
Emperor was inaugured, or crowned by Pope Eugenius the 2, who sat in the
year 824, or by Pope Valentinus, who sat in the year 827, or by Pope Gregory
the 4. who succeeded Valentinus: or by Pope Sergius the second, who fate in the
year 844. or by Pope Leo the 4, who sat in the year 847. I am sure never a
one of these crowned any Emperor. And I remember not that any one of these
anointed any Duke, or King, save Leo the 4, who anointed Alfred the youngest
son of Athelwulfus king of England. Which furthered him nothing to the
attaining of the kingdom. For till the death of his three elder brethren, for
all the Popes annoynting him, he lived like a subject, he lived not like a
king. Wherefore to put you in mind of the maine point; though Pope Ioane
inaugured, or crowned no such persons as you speak of, yet you cannot conclude
thereupon: Ergo, there was no Pope Ioane.


PAP. Florim. loco citato.
But if she bestowed no honors upon any persons: if she made no Bishops: if she
gave no Bishoprics: it is more then probable there was never any such.


PROT. Oh but we read, that contulit sacros ordines, promouit Episcopos,
ministrauit Sacramenta, caeteraque Romanorum Pontificum exercuit munera: she
gave orders: she made Bishops: she administered the Sacraments, and she
performed all other offices belonging unto the Papacy.


PAP. Where read you that? I warrant you, you had it out of Bale: of whom I
wish you to see at your leisure, what Florim. cap. 3. nu. 1. and 2.
Florimondus censure is.


PROT. John Bale (for ought I know) is far honester man, then Florimondus.
And to tell you truth, if Florimondus rail upon him, I shall have the better
opinion of him. For as Quiscit illum, intelligere potest, non nisi grande
aliquod bonu^ a Nerone damnatum. Ter tull. Apologet. cap. 5. Eusebius. hist. Eccl
lib. 2. cap. 24.
Tertullian persuaded himself that whosoever knew Nero, would easily believe
Christianity were good because it was disliked by Nero: so I persuade my self,
that whosoever knows Florimondus, he will the rather be well persuaded of John
Bale, because he is reviled by Florimondus. But yet I would have you know, I
read not this in Bale only, but in De vanitate scientiarum. cap. 62. desectis
Monasticis.
Cornelius Agrippa: a man much commended by Lib. 1. epistol. Epist 38 te mag
nopere commendamus, etc. says Leo the 10
Leo the 10. and in a Lib de vanitate scientiarum, is mentioned in the
Emperors privilege.
book of his solemnly privileged by Charles the 5.


PAP. Well sir, since these reasons prevail not with you, I will come a step or
two nearer you. And first to prove your story a fabulous fiction, I argue
thus. Si eafabula vera suisset, vt Romae hoc tempore sederit foemina, cui in
electione ipse Ni colaus tune Cardinalis suffragiu^ oportuerit contulisle qua
front Photium ted^^guere potuisser quod saepissime facit) co nomine quod cum
esset laicus ordinari se Episcopum passus esset, etc. Baron. annal to. 10. ad
an. 853. nu 70.
If the report of Pope Ioane be not afabulous fiction, then Nicolas the first
Pope of that name, who at the time of her election was a Cardinal, gave her a
voice, and so consented to her election. But it is not credible that Nicolas
gave her a voice, and consented to her election. Ergo.


PROT. First, I deny that Nicolas was a Cardinal at the time of Pope Ioanes
election. For he was made Anastas. Biblioth. in vita Nicolai 1.
Subdeacon by Sergius the second, and Ibid.
Deacon by Leo the fourth. In which order he continued Ibid.
till the death of Benedict the 3, who sat after Ioane. Secondly, I deny we
are bound to believe that he gave Pope Ioane his voice, though we should grant
he was a Cardinal. For it was never required, that all the Cardinals should
give consent to any Popes election. But principally I deny your minor
proposition, viz. that it is not credible Nicolas gave her his voice, and
consented to her election. And how can you prove it?


PAP. Baron. loco supra citato.
If Nicolas had given her a voice, and consented to her election, then could he
not honestly have reproved Photius Patriarch of Constantinople, for that he
suffered himself of a mere layman to be made a Patriarch. Imperatorem ipsum
acerrima reprehensio^^ perstingit;quod id agere praesumpsislet Baron. ibid.
Neither could he justly have reproved Michael the Emperor, for that he gave
his consent to Photius ordination and election. But (no doubt) he reproved them
both honestly and justly. Ergo he never gave Pope Ioane his voice, he never
consented to her election.


PROT. Why might not he without note of dishonestie reprove Photius and the
Emperor for their dealing, though he himself had a hand in Pope Ioanes
election?


PAP. Because he should have been guilty of the same fault, if not of a
greater: for a woman (you know) is not capable of holy orders.


PROT. Oh is that it? As though there were not a maine difference between
Nicolas his fact (to suppose he did it) and the fact of Photius and the
Emperor. Photius and the Emperor did that wittingly and willingly, which
Nicolas reproues in them. Nicolas chose a woman Pope unwittingly. It was with
Nicolas (in all likelihood) at the election of Pope Ioane, as it was with the
2. Sam. 1511.
200 of Jerusalem, who were called by Absalon to Hebron: of whom the Scriptures
witness that they went in their simplicity, knowing nothing. Now ignorance,
invincible ignorance, such as this was, excuses, though not from all fault,
yet from so great fault. Wherefore you must come nearer me yet, if you mean to
drive me from my opinion.


PAP. Have at you then, and that with a O locus epist. opportunus and auro
contra non carus, and quo facile protelem omnia aduersariorum tela, etc.
Bernart. lib. citato. p. 109.
golden argument, Rario ineluctabilis, says Genebr chron. lib. 4. Maximi
ponderis arg. says Florim. cap. 25. p. 209.
such as can never be answered, and this is it. Leo 9. epist. ad Michaele^
Episc Constantinop. cap. 23.
About 170 years after this devised election of Pope Ioane (to wit, upon the
year of Christ 1020) the Church and Patriarch of Constantinople being in some
contention with Rome, Pope Leo the ninth wrote a long letter to Michael the
Patriarch of Constantinople, reprehending certain abuses of that Church, and
among other, that they were said to have promoted Eunukes to priesthood, and
thereby also a greater inconvenience fallen out, which was, that a woman was
crept to be Patriarch. N D. lib. citat nu. 29. page 398.
Now (no doubt) Leo would never have durst to write thus, if the Patriarch
might have returned the matter back upon him again, and said: This was but a
slanderous report, falsely raised against the Church of Constantinople, but that
a woman indeed had been promoted in the Roman Church.


PROT. Is this your golden and unanswerable argument? Truly I am sorry for you,
that you have no more skill in an argument: for you presume in this, that Leo
would never object that against Constantinople, whereof Rome it self might be
convinced; and make that the ground of your conclusion. Now that is a slabbie
ground, as may appear by this, that it is ordinary with you Papists to object
that against others, whereof your selves stand most guilty. It is ordinary
with you Papists, to call your enemies, whores first. Do not you complain with
open mouths of us Ministers, for want of continency? and yet is it not well
known, that your priests and monks, Ier. 5. 8.
like fed horses, have neighed after their neighbors wives: and your Nuns
have opened their feet (to Ezech. 16. 25.
use the Prophets phrase when he speaks of such like light skirts) to every
one that passed by, and have multiplied their whoredoms?


Taceo de fornicationibus and adulterijs, a quibus qui alieni sunt, probro
caeteris ac ludibrio esse solent, Spadonesque aut Sodomitae appellantur: says
De praesulibur Symoniacis: in Bibliotheca sanctorum Patrum, printed at Paris
1576. page 655.
Nicolas Clemangis, speaking of your priests.

I say naught of your priests fornications and adulteries, from which crimes if
any man be free, he is made a laughing stock to the rest, and either called an
Eunuke or a Sodomite.

Laici vsque adeo persuasum habent nullos coelibes esse, vt in plerisque
parochijs non aliter velint presbyterum tolerare, nisi concubinam habeat: quo
vel sic suis sit consultum vxoribus; quae ne sic quidem vsquequaque sunt
extrapericulum, says the Ibid.
same man.

The lay people are so conceited of the incontinencie of all priests, that
willingly they would not have a parish priest, unless he have a whore of his
own, that so they might keep their own wives. And yet for all that, they are
scarce sure of their own by that course.

Fornicantur complures Monialium cum suis Praelatis, ac Monachis, and
conuersis, and in Monasteriis plures parturiunt filios and filias, quos ab
iisdem praelatis, Monachis, and conuersis fornicarie, seu ex incestuoso coitu
conceperunt, says Nemoris vnionis, tract. 6. cap 34.
Theodoricus de Niem, Secretary to Pope Urban the 6. going on thus, Et quod
miserandum randum est, nonnullae ex huiusmodi Monialibus aliquos foetus earum
mortificant, and infantes in lucem editos trucidant, etc.

Many Nuns commit fornication with Bishops, and Monks, and Conuerts, and are
delivered of sons and daughters within their Monasteries, which were got by
those persons fornicatorlike, if not incestuously. And which is most pitiful,
very many of these Nuns kill with saberdisauces the fruit in their wombes:
many kill them after they be borne.

Quid obsecro aliud sunt hoc tempore puellarum Monasteria, nisi quaedam Veneris
execranda prostibula, and lasciuorum, and impudicorum inuenum ad libidines
explendas receptacula? vt idem sit hodie puellam velare, quod and public ad
scortandum exponere? says De corrupto Ecclesiae statu.
Clemangis above named.

What are Nunneries (I pray you) now, save cursed stews and places for meeting
of wanton and shameless youths to satisfy their lusts in? So that now it is
all one, to make a wench a Nun, and to make her a whore.

Henricus Huntingdon. hist. l. 7. an. Christi 1125. Roger Houeden annal. pars
prior in Hen. 1. ad an. 1126. Math. Paris in Hen. 1. ad an. 1125. page 93.
Math. Westmo^. Flores hist. ad an. 1125.
Johannes Cremensis, one of your Romish Cardinals, held a Council at London in
the year 1125. wherein he inueyed bitterly against such priests as kept
concubines, dicens summumscelus esse a latere meretricis ad corpus Christi
conficiendum surgere, saying, it was a damnable sin for a priest to arise
from a whore, to go to say Mass: yet he himself loved a whore with all his
heart. For as we read in our English stories, ipse cum eadem die corpus
Christi confecisset, cum meretrice post vesperam interceptus est: he himself
was taken with a whore the same night after he had said Mass. And as it
seems, Huntingdon. Houeden, Math. Paris locis ^tat.
he was taken in the manner: for the historiographers note, Res notissima,
negari non potuit: the matter was so plain, it could not be denied.

Again, do you not condemn us of ignorance, Bristow, Motive 31.
reporting by us, that we are afraid to reason with common Catholics; and that
when we do reason, the common sort of Catholics are able to answer all our
arguments, and to say also more for us, then we can say for our selves: as
though ye were the people only, and wisdom must die with you. And yet are
not we able to prove out of your own mouths, that your Priests and Monks were
generally like the Jonas 4. 11.
sixescore thousand Ninevites, who had not so much wit, as to discern between
their right hand and the left?

Videas admitti ad sacerdotium caeterosque sacros ordines homines idiotas and
illiteratos, vix morose ac sillabatim absque vllo intellectu legere scientes,
qui Latinum and Arabicum aequaliter norunt: says De Praesalibus Symoniacis, in
Biblioth sanct. pat edit. Paris. 1576.
Clemangis. Speaking of the ignorance of your Clergy.

Thou may see ignorant and unlettered persons advanced to Priesthood, and the
other holy orders: which cannot read without stutting and stammering, who have
as great skill in the Arabian tongue, as in the Latin. And in an De corrupto
Ecclesiae statu.
other place:

Quotusquisque hodie est ad Pontificale culmen euectus qui sacras vel
perfunctorie literas legerit, audierit, didicerit, imo qui sacrum codicem nisi
tegumento tenus vnquam attigerit?

How many are there now adays preferred to Bishoprics, who so much as
cursorily, have either read, or heard, or learned, the holy Scriptures? yea who
have so much as touched the bible except it were on the outside of the covering?

Hoc seculo Episcopatus and sacerdotia indoctissimis hominibus and a religione
alicnis deferri solent -- Hodie Episcopi nostri (paucis exceptis) sacrarum
literarum scientia caeteris ex populo long inferiores sunt, says De sac.
Eccles. Minist and Benefic. lib. 1. c. 11.
Duaren.

In this age Bishoprics and parsonages are bestowed on most unlearned, and
irreligious men. -- At this day our Bishops (except a few) are more unlearned,
then the common people.

Pudeat Italiae sacerdotes, quos ne semel quidem legisse constat nouam legem:
apud Thaboritas, vix mulierculam inuenias, quae de nouo and veteri Testamento
respondere nescit, says Comment. de dict. and fact. Alfonsi regis lib. 2.
Apotheg. 17.
Aeneas Syluius. Grauamen 7. nationis Germa nicae, quod habetur in Fasciculo
rerum Expetendarum, im press. Colon. 1535. fol. 167. b.


Fie upon the Priests of Italy, who never read over the new Testament: a man
can hardly find a woman among the Thaborits who cannot answer roundly to any
thing out of the old and new Testament.

Ecclesiarum regimina minus dignis (Rome vidcelicet) committuntur, qui ad mulos
magis quam homines pascendos and regendos essent idonei.

The government of the Churches (even at Rome) is committed to unworthy
persons: who are fitter to look to the keeping of Mules then men.

Thirdly, do not you vpbraid us with baseness, and vileness: accounting no
better of our most reverend Bishops, then uncircumcised Philistines, which (as
Allens Answ. to the book of English Justice. cap. 3. page 44.
you say) were taken out of the raskalitie of the whole realm? Staplet. in the
4. book of the Counterblast fol. 481 and S. R. in his answer to Bells downfall
of Popery. cap. 8. Art 7 nu. 4. page 361.
Do not you give out, that a great part of our clergy rests in Butchers,
Cooks, Catchpols, Cobblers, Diers, and Dawbers, Fellons carrying their mark in
their hand, in stead of a shaue^ crown: Fishermen, Gunners, Harpers,
Innekeepers, Merchants, and Mariners, Netmakers, Potters, Apothecaries, and
Porters of Bilinsgate, Pinners, Pedlers, Ruffling Ruffins, Sadlers, Shearmen,
and Sheepheards, Tanners, Tilers, Tinkers, Trumpeters Weauers, Wherrimen, etc?
Do not Philopater ad edictum Reginae Angliae. nu. 192. sect. 3. page 180 alias
Stapl. for he is the author, test Posseuino in Apparat. sac. 10. 1. verbo.
Angli.
you report, that so many bankrupts, and infamous, and villainous wretches, are
admitted to it, that none, almost, except he be driven thereto by beggerie,
will enter into it? as though ye only were the sons of Nobles, and we the
children of Fools, and the children of vllaines, which were more vile then the
earth? And yet are we not abie to prove against you, that you have made
Levites, even Bishops, and Priests, of the blind, and the lame, of the
flat-nosed, broken footed, broken handed, of the crooke-backt, and bleare eyed,
of the sciruie and scabbed, of the lowest of the people, tag and ragge?

Si quis desidiosus est, si quis a labor abhorrens, si quis inocio luxuriari
volens, ad Sacerdotium conuolat: quo adepto, statim se caeteris Sacerdotibus
voluptatum sectatoribus adiungit, qui magis secundum Epicurum, quam secundum
Christum viaentes, and cauponulas seduli frequentantes, potando, commessando,
pransit ando, conuiuando, cum tessaris, and pilo ludendo tempora tota
consumunt: crapulati vero and inebriati pugnant, clamant, tumultuantur, nomen
Dei and sanctorum suorum pollutissimis labiis execrantur, sicque tandem
compositum, ex meretricum suarum complexibus ad diuinum altar veniunt, says
De Corrupto Ecclesiae statu.
Clemangis speaking of your Worthies.

If there be any lasie fellow, any that cannot away with work, any that would
wallow in pleasures, he is hasty to be priested. And when he is made one, and
has gotten a benefice, he consorts with his neighbor Priests, who are
altogether given to pleasures: and then both he, and they, live, not like
Christians, but like Epicures: drinking, eating, feasting, and reuelling, til
the cow come home, as the saying is; playing at tables, and at stoole-ball: and
when they are well cramd, and tipled, then they fall by the ears together,
whooping, and yelling, and swearing damnably, by God and all the Saints in
heaven. And after all matters be somewhat pacified, then arising out of their
whores laps they go to the Mass.

Asciscuntur nunc ( says In vita Sozimi.
Platina) non modo serui and vulgo concepti, ac nati, verumetiam flagitiosi
omnes ex flagitioso quoque geniti.

Now adays not only servants, and they which are begotten and borne under
hedges, are admitted to be of the Clergy, but every vile fellow, and every vile
fellows brat.

Ex Aulicis perditissimis and quod omni aetate fuit post Christianorum memoriam
inauditum, ex militibus deploratissimis, iisque sanguinariis -- Dei loco ad
Ecclesiae collocantur, imo repent intruduntur gubernacula, says Panopliae
lib. 4 cap. 77. p. 405.
Lindan. Quid quod puerulis and adolescentulis creduntur haec tractanda?

Wretched Courtiers, forlorn and bloody Soldiers (a thing never heard of
before among Christians) are all upon a sudden thrust in upon the Church to
manage it in Gods stead, yea boys and yongsters are made Bishops and Prelates
in the Church.

Bibones, scortatores, aleatores, and qui haec vitia, vultu, cultu, incessu,
totoque habitu prae se ferunt: passim (ad Sacerdotium) admittnnt. Erasm. Schol.
in epistolam Hieron. de vest Sacerdotali ad Fabiolam.

Does not Iam reipsa Caluinistis in Anglia mulier est summus Po^tifex. De notis
Ecclesiae. lib 4. cap. 11.
Bellarmin charge us with that fault, whereof you your selves stand condemned?
to wit, with making a woman a Pope, from which all the world, save foul
mouthed Papists, will questionless acquit us? Does not In the defense of the
censure. page 13.
Parsons auow railing, and foul scurrilitie, to be proper unto us, and to our
ancestors only; as though he and his were answerable to Moses in mildness,
and of so temperate carriage, that butter would not melt in their mouths, when
yet the contrary appears by their own books.

The general consent of all that ever have thoroughly conuersed with Parsons,
is this, (says Quodlibet of Religion and state. page 236.
Watson the Quodlibetting Priest) that he is of a furious, passionate, hot,
choleric, exorbitant working humor, busy headed, and full of ambition,
envy, pride, rancor, malice, and revenge: whereunto may be added, that he is a
most diabolical, unnatural, and barbarous, butcherly fellow, unworthy the
name, nay cursed be the hour, wherein he had the name of a Priest, nay of a
religious person, nay of a temporal lay man Jesuit, nay of a Catholic, nay
of a Christian, nay of a creature, but of a beast or a devil: a violater of
all laws, a contemner of all authority, a stain of humanity, an impostume
of all corruption, a corrupter of all honesty, and a Monopoly of all
mischief. And is not this railing? Now if this be thus (to return to the
maine point) why may we not think the Church of Rome to be faulty in electing
Pope Ioane, though Leo reproved the Church of Constantinople with the same?

PAP. N. D. Loco supra citato.
Yea, but how could Leo have answered the Patriarch of Constantinople, if the
Patriarch might have replied truly upon him, that Rome was guilty of such an
oversight?


PROT. Leo might have answered the Patriarchs reply, as Ahab, who charged Elias
with troubling of Israel, answered Elias, (when 1. King 18. 17. 18.
he replied: I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house:) to
wit, with silence. For otherwise I know not how he could have answered him
honestly. No more then I know how other of your Popes can answer other replies
(in other cases) which may be made upon the^.

In Epistola 1. ad Imperatore^.
Agatho one of your Popes, avouches, that the Roman Church never swarued from
the tradition of the Apostles, that she never gave ear to novelties; that the
Pope his predecessors had ever boldly, strengthened their brethren, according
to Christ's commandment unto Peter. For proof thereof he appeals to all the
world. In like manner Nicolas another of your Popes, speaking of his fellow
Popes, Nicol. 1. epist. ad Michaelem.
braues it out, that never one of them was so much as suspected to have held an
error. Now if a man should have replied upon them (as any man might have
replied truly) that Victor was suspected to have held, that Christ was a pure
man, and not God, which is witnessed by Eusebius hist Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 28.
Eusebius. That Zepherinus was suspected of Montanisme, which is testified by
Tertull lib. contra Praxcu^.
Tertullian. That Marcellinus sacrificed to idols, which is witnessed by In
Pontificali in vita Marcell
Damasus, and acknowledged by Lib. 4. de Romans Pont cap. 8.
Bellarmine, though denied in some sort Annal. To. 2. ad an. 302. nu. 101, and
102.
by Baronius. That Liberius subscribed to the Arian heresy, which is reported
by Lib. citato in vita Liberij.
Damasus, by In epist ad solitariam vitam agentes.
Athanasius, by Descript. Ecclesiasticis, verb. Fortunatianus.
Jerome, and by Hist. lib 4. c. 15.
Sozomen. That Felix, as ^ieron. de script. Ecclesiast. verbo Acacius.
some say, was an Arian, or at least, as Sozomen. lib. 4. cap. 10.
others say, communicated with the Arians. That Honorius the first was a
Monothelite, and for that condemned by name in the Act. 16. 17. 18.
sixth and Act. 7. in definit. Synodi.
seventh general Councels. How could Agatho and Nicolas have answered this
reply, think you?

We read, that Tarasius the Patriarch of Constantinople charged your Pope
Hadrian the first, with the crime of Symonie. And do you therefore think that
he himself was free from symony? or rather do you not know that he himself was
grieuouslie suspected of symonie?


PAP. Yes I See Baronius annal. tom. 9. ad an. 806. nu. 1. and 2.
know that though Tarasius was an holy man in his life, and approved so to be
by miracles wrought after his death: Baron. annal. to 9. ad an. 787. nu 58, and
59.
yet he was very greatly suspected of symonie. Wherefore I rather think, that
you never read he charged Pope Hadrian with that fault.


PROT. The Epistle which Tarasius wrote to Hadrian, wherein he reproves him,
for that is extant in print, so that you your self may read it also if you
will.


PAP. I remember Loco proxime citato. Certe quide qui eam primus edidit Theod.
Balsamo in suspicionem adducitur inposturae.
Baronius talks of such an Epistle. But he suspects that Balsamon, who first
published it, did counterfeit it, to discredit the Roman Sea. And indeed
Balsamon loved not Rome.


PROT. Posseuin. in apparat sac. verbo Taratius.
Gentian Heruet, who translated the epistle into Latin, was nothing suspicious
of it. No more was Nor Papyrius Masson. dev. bis Episcop. lib. 3. in Adriano.
fol. 131. b.
Bignaeus, who put it into his Library of holy Fathers. Nor Posseuine, who
mentions it in his Apparatus sacer. I see it goes hard with you, when you are
driven to plead, that the evidence I bring is forged. I thought that shift had
been proper to us Protestants, for Rhem. annot. in Act. Apost. 17. 34.
you often vpbraid us with it: but now I see it is common to us with you. But
why is Baronius suspicious of it?


PAP. Because it was first set out by Balsamon, who loved not Rome.


PROT. Baronius says therein untruly. For proof whereof I will use no other
witness but himself, his own mouth shall condemn him. For Annal. to. 9. ad
an. 787. na. 49.
he himself confesses, that Tarasij epistola ad Hadrianum Pontificem de
Symoniaca haeresi profliganda ab Anastasio ad finem septimae Synodi
positalegitur, nec non apud Theodorum Balsamonem in Appendice ad Nomacanonem
Photii: that is, that Tharasius epistle unto Hadrian the Pope, treating of the
rooting up of the sin of Symonie, is to be read in the end of the seventh
general Council, where it was put by Anastasius: and withal in Theodorus
Balsamon, in his Appendix unto Photius Nomocanon. For if Anastasius placed it
at the end of the seventh general Council, then was not Balsamon the first
that published it. For Anastasius lived about 300 years before Balsamon. For
Anastasius lived about the year 860, and Balsamon lived about the year 1180.


PAP. You speak probably. Onuph. annot. in Platina, in vita Ioh 8. Harding in
his Answer to Iu^ls Apology.
h But me thinks, though men at that time had been so far bewitched and
distract of their five wits, as they could not have known a man from a woman:
yet God himself, who appointed and ordained the Seat of Peter, whereof he
would the whole Church to be directed; should never have departed so far from
his merciful providence, as to suffer the same to be polluted by a woman,
which is not of capacity for holy orders.


PROT. And why (I pray you) might not God as well suffer that Church to be
polluted by a woman, as by so many monstrous men, of whom your own historians
write very shamefully? Why might not she sit there, as well as Sabinian, that
base and miserable companion, qui formidabili morte, and culpabili vita notatus
est: who is taxed by your Fascicul Tem poru^ ad a^ 614.
writers, for his vile life and fearful death? Why might not she sit there as
well as Some say it was Se^gus the reason of which d^^^rsine ^ee in D Reyno^ds
Co^ cr. chap 7. diu^^ 1. page 282. edit. 1534. in marg.
Stephen the 6, who (as Page.) 1.
I told you before) took up the carcass of Formosus his predecessor out of
the grave, brought it into judgment before a Council of Bishops, spoiled it
of his papal robes, clad it with a laymans garment, indicted it, arraigned it,
condemned it, cut off three fingers of it, and cast it into the stream of
Tiber: depriving all them of their orders whom he had ordained, reordaining
them again? Why might not she sit there, as well as Boniface the 7, Platina in
vita B^^nicacij 7.
who robbed S. Peter's Church, and fled for a time to Constantinople; who
afterward by symony and murdering two Popes, made himself Pope; who in
mischief outstr^pt the most notorious robbers and slayers by the high ways,
that ever were: which in cruelty went before bloody Sylla and Catiline, and
such as sought the ruin of their country, Bonifacius 7. annumerandus
interfamosos latrones and potentissimos grassatores atque patriae proditores,
Syllas and Catilinas horumque si^^les, quos omnes superauit sacrilegus iste tur
pissima nece duorum Pontificu^. Annal. to. 10 ad an. 985. nu. 1.
as your own Baronius confesses; and who at length died like a beast? Why
might not she sit there, as well as Syluester the 2, that famous coniurer, who
gave himself both body and soul to the devil, that he might get the
Popedom, and died thereafter? Why might not she sit there? --


PAP. Nay, stay a little. They say, it is a sin to belie the devil. Now
Florim cap. 24
I persuade my self that you belie Pope Syluester: for I Iodocus Coc^^us in
catechis. Cathol. lb. 7. Art. 15.
read, that he was reputed a notable man, both for his life and learning.


PROT. How notable he was, let Platina speak, who Platina de vitis Pont in
Syluest.
writes, that ambitione and diabolica dominandi cupiditate impulsus, largitione
primo quidem Archiepiscopatum Rhemensem, inde Raucunatem adeptus, Pontificatum
postremo maiore conatu adiuu^nte diabolo, consequutus est, hac tamen lege, vt
post mortem totus illius esset, cuius fraudibus tantam dignitatem adeptus erat:
that is, Syluester the 2. being diuellishly ambitious, got first by briberie
the Archbishopricke of Rhemes, then of Rauenna, and after that by the devils
help the Bishopric of Rome, yet upon this condition, that when he died he
should be wholly his, by whose means he attained to such dignity. Have you not
cause to believe, that this fellow was notable for life and learning? But
perhaps Platina is singular in this. No. In Chron. ad an 988.
Sigebert confesses, that Syluester was thought to have got the Popedom *
il-fauouredly: and that he was Non per ostiu^ intrasle creditur. A quibu^dam
negromantiae arguitur.
suspected of negromancie; and that some said, the devil brought him to his
end. The same in effect is reported by (...) vit. and cest. Hildebrandi.
Benno Cardinalis, by In chron. ad an. 1007.
Martinus Polonus, by De vit. Pont. in Syluest, 2. ad an. 995.
Johannes Stella a Venetian, by Supplem. chro^ ad an 997.
Philippus Bergomensis, by In Polychron. lib. 6. cap. 14.
Renulfus Cestrensis, by Flores hist. an 998.
Matthaeus W^stmonasteriensis, by Ad an. 1004.
Fasciculus Temporum, by In S^ma Conc.
Charanza, and by Comment. de gest. Conc. Basil. lib. 1.
Aeneas Syluius: for, Non nos fugit Syl^estrum secundum diabolica fraud
Romanum Pontisicatum ascendisse, says Aeneas: we are not ignorant that
Syluester the 2. got the papacy by devilish subtlety.


PAP. Tut: all this is to no purpose: Bell lib. 4. de To. Pont cap. 12 Onuph.
annot. in Plat in vit. Syluest. 2.
Pope Siluester was learned in the Mathematickes, and such was the ignoran^e of
that age, that thereupon they held him for a coniurer.


PROT. Indeed Lib. 2. de gestis regum Angl. cap. 10 ^ol. 6.
William^Malmsbury having related the same story in substance with the
aboue-named writers, supposes that some might reply so, saying, Sed haec
vulgata, ficta crederet aliquis. But some man peradventure will say, this is
but a mad tale, eo quod solet populus literatorum famam laedere, dicens illum
loqui cum daemone, quem in aliquo viderint excellentem opere: because the
common people are wont to say, that scholars who are singular in any thing do
use a familiar: yet he concludes, that he believes it for true. For mihi vero
fidem facit de istius sacrilegio inaudita mortis excogitatio, ( Loco citato.
says he) I am verily persuaded, Sylucster was such a villain, because of the
strangeness of his death. For, Curse moriens excarnificaret ipse sui corporis
horrendus Lanista, nisi noui scelcris conscius esset? For why should the
butcherly fellow have torn his own flesh (as he did) but that he was guilty
of some strange sin? Do not you think there is reason in this question?
Doubtless your Onuphrius was afraid to answer it And therefore in his notes
upon Platina, where he labors to clear Sluester of the imputation of a
coniurer, De morte e^us siu^ dia^oli percussione famam alibi commodius
conuellam Onuph. loco upra citato.
he takes day with his reader, to clear him from so fearful a death.


PAP. Bell. lib. 4. de To. Pont c. 12. Baron. Annal. to 1^ ad an. 999. n^ 7.
Yea but Syluester the second, is commended by Sergius the fourth, a very holy
Pope, who lived within five years after him: wherefore it is not Facinorosus
homo, quique vtfar, and latto ingressus est in ouile omum, laqneo vitam adeo
^fam: exitu, vind^^e Deo, clausit. to 10. Annal. ad ann. 900. nu 5.
credible that he died such a shameful death.


PROT. Say you so? Does not Baronius ibid.
Baronius confess, that though Stephen the sixth, was a wicked fellow: and
that as he entered into the Popedom like a thief and a murderer: so he died
like a thief: yet Ad ann. 904. na. 4.
Sergius the third, who succeeded within eight years after him, commended him:
yea John the ninth his next successor, who in that age was a singular honest
Pope, commended him, as a man of blessed memory. Upon Tete^^timum monstrum.
which later confession, he makes this observation: Hic considera Lector,
quanta solerent successores Pontifices quantulu^cunque reprehensibiles
praedecessorem reuerentia persequi, vt Johannes Stephanum suum praedecessores
tum sedis inuasione, tum etiam sessione, in omnibus plane execrandis
facinoribus detestabilem, piaetamen recordationis Stephanum appellet. The
effect of which Latin is, that it is worthy the observation, that the
liue^Popes spoke reverently of the dead-Popes, were they never so naughty.
Wherefore to go on why might not Pope Ioane sit there as well as Benedict the
ninth, that ugly monster, as In ^it. Greg. 6.
Platina calls him, Rodulphus Glaber quitunc v^^ebat. lust. lib. 5 c. vit.
Papynus (...) de vrb. spise in B^nedicto. 9.
who got the room when he was 12. years old, Platina in Benedict. ^igonius
(...) 8. ad (...) 48.
who when he was cast out for his unworthiness, got it again by strong hand
within a few days after; and for fear that he could not keep it long, sold
it to another for money: who after his death Caput (...) ^^^na, vt reliquum
corpus sicut vrsus. Fascic. Temp. ad ann. 1034. Plat. in vita Be^ed 9. Polonus
in Chron. ad ann. 1042.
appeared partly like an Ass, partly like a Bear, confessing that he carried
such a shape, because he lived like a beast in his life time? Why might not she
sit as well in S. Peter's chair, as Boniface the eighth, who Petrus Crinitus
lib. 8. de honesta disciplina. cap. 23. vt legimu^ in Fasciculo rerum
expetendarum, etc. fol. 44.
when he should upon an Ashwednesday (as the Popish manner is) have laid ashes
upon an Archbishops head, and religiously told him: that he was but ashes, and
should return to ashes: cast them in the Archbishops face, and eyes,
maliciously telling him, that he was a Gibelline, and that he should die with
the Gibellines? of whom Celestinus his predecessor (a man famous Caelestinus
vir sanctissimus, and tam ante Pontificatum quam etiam post miraculis plurimis
illustris. Bell. Appendix ad lib. de Sum. Pont. cap. 14. and 24.
they say for miracles) Calestinus 5. propherauit in hunc modum vt fertur:
Ascendisti vt vulpes, regnabis vt Leo morieris vtcanis Et ita sane contigit.
Tho. Walsingam in Edu. 1 and Polichron. lib. 7. cap. 40.
prophesied: That as he entered like a Fox, so he should reign like a Lion,
and die like a Dog, which fell out accordingly?

Why might not she sit there as well as Gregory the 7, commonly known by the
name of Hildebrand, Hilde brand. Ecclesiasticum subuertit ordine^ Christiani
imperij perturbauit regnu^, etc. Co^uentus Episcoporum 50. apud Brixian, test
Abbate Vt pergensi in Chron. ad ann 1080.
who set both the Church and common wealth on fire? Benno Cardinalis lib. supra
citato.
who hired a bad fellow to tumble down great stones from the battlements of a
Church upon the Emperors head, to squeaze him in pieces, whilst he was at his
prayers: Ibid.
who cast the Sacrament into the fire: who ordinarily Ibid.
carried about him a coniuring book: Ibid.
who shreudly bebumd his predecessor Alexander: who wrested the Scriptures to
cover his lewdness: Forentinus Vigotniensis in Chron. page 641. Math Paris in
Guil. Conquest. an. 1086.
who at his death confessed, that the devil set him on work, to provoke God
to wrath against the world.

Why might not she sit there as well as John the 23, Onuph. Append. in Plat. in
vita Ioh 24.
who was fitter for the camp, then for the Church; for profane things, then
for the service of God: as knowing no faith, no religion at all: Conc.
Constant. Sess. 11. Art. penult.
who taught again and again, and maintained it before many of good place:
That there was no life after this, but that it was with men as with beasts. Who
in a word lived so scandalously, that commonly he was called by them who knew
him, a plain devil incarnate. Why might not she sit there as well as John the
twelfth, Luitprandus hist. per Europam. gestarum. lib. 6. c. 7, 8. and 10.
who made Deacons in a stable, who made a boy of ten years old a Bishop, who
made the Lateran a plain stews, who drunk to the devil: who when he was at
dice made his prayers unto Jupiter and Venus, and to such Idolatrous Gods of
the heathen. Who at length was slain even by the devil himself while he was
committing adultery, as Page 97.
before Ibid. Art. 6. etc.
I noted. If you cannot deny, but God has suffered these and many as evil as
any of these (except the last) to occupy S. Peter's room, you may well wonder
with Part. 2. Tit. 16. cap. 1. sect. 7.
Antoninus, at the story of Pope Ioane, and say, Oh the depth of the wisdom
of God, how incredible be his judgments etc. But you have no cause in this
respect to deny it, you have no cause to cast it off as a fable. But give me
leave to ask you a question. How should this tale of Pope Ioane arise, if
there was not such a Pope? was there ever such a smoke and no fire? such a
report and no probability?


PAP. No indeed. Omnia insignia mendacia ab aliqua very tate originem habent.
Onuph. Annot in Plat. in vit Ioannae. ^uc^s quaedam inest ve^^ species. Florim.
cap 29. nu. 1.
Great lies arise always out of some truth. And so did this. For John the
twelfth, (to confess a truth) was a wenching fellow: and among other wenches
which he kept, there was one called Ioane, who was all in all with him, and
ruled the roast. Now the people perceiving what hand she had over him, termed
her Pope, and despised him. Whereupon the Churches enemies took occasion to
slander the Church, as though the Church had (indeed) had a woman Pope.


PROT. This is one of Florimondus reasons, is it not?


PAP. Yes. Loco citato nu. 5.
He mentions this, and likes indifferently well of it. But he mentions it as
out of Onuphrius. Wherefore take you it rather as Onuphrius answer to your
question, then as Florimondus answer.


PROT. Content: provided that you tell me, how Onuphrius proves that John the
12. had such a maisterfull whore called Ioane?


PAP. Loco supra citato.
Onuphrius proves that out of Luitprandus Ticine^sis, a writer of that age. For
he witnesses (as Onuphrius says, and Florimondus believes) that John the
twelfth had 3. famous whores, of whom the fairest, and therefore the best
beloved, was called Ioane.


PROT. Luitprandus, Lib. 6. c. 6. and 7
in the place cited by Onuphrius, witnesses, that John the 12. kept one famous
whore whom he called Raynera, whom he made governor of many cities, and on whom
be bestowed many golden crosses, and chalices belonging to S. Peter. In like
manner he witnesses, that he kept another called Stephana, and that he lay
with married wives, with widows, with maids, who came to visit the
Apostolical Churches. And withal he witnesses, that he kept a third called
Anna (who was a widow) and her niece: making the palace of Lateran no better
then a baudie house. But he no where names any Ioane, on whom that worthy head
of your Church, John the 12. doted, Onuphrius (I suppose) mistook Ioanna, for
Anna; and Florimondus justified the proverb, A fool believes every thing.
Have you not another answer to second this?


PAP. Yes. I have two or three besides this?


PROT. That's well. And what is the first of them I pray you?


PAP. This John the ninth, was made Bishop of Bonony, and afterward Archbishop
of Rauenna, and at last Pope of Rome, by the means of one Theodora, a famous
whore, who swayed all matters at Rome in those days. Now the people perceiving
that this Theodora could turn this John which way she would, and lead him
whither she list, they held him worthier the name of a woman then of a man, and
therefore called him Ioane, and not John. Whereupon arose the report of a Ioane
Pope.


PROT. And who (I pray you) is the father of this answer.


PAP. Annal. lib. 4
Johannes Auentinus, who by reason he was a German borne, knew best (no
doubt) the original of this fable, as Page 236.
Florimondus shows.


PROT. Then Florimondus believes this too.


PAP. He thinks it very probable.


PROT. But so did not his countryman Genebrard. For, Auentinus lib. 4. Annalium
fabellam esse asserit, a Theodora nobili scorto ortam, Genebrard. Chron. lib.
4. ad ann. 855.
says Genebrard: Ego vero e recentioribus adulatoribus in Romanae sedis odium.
etc. That is, Auentinus holds that this tale arose by reason of a noble whore
called Theodora. But I think, some latter clawbacks (of the Emperors) devised
it to discredit the papal seat. Thus Genebrard. And is not Genebrards no, as
good as Florimondus yea? especially since Genebrard Diuturno 10. annorum studio
Geneb. praefat. Chronograph. ad Po^tac^m.
spent upon his Chronicles ten whole years: whereas Fabu^a Ioann^ cap 31 p.
253. nu 6.
Florimondus by reason of his Clients, can spare no time for such studies?


PAP. Genebrard was a worthy man, I Posseuin. apparat. sacer. verbo Gilb^rtus
Genebrardus.
know. But I respect no man's person, wherefore give me a reason why you dislike
this conceit of Auentinus, approved by Florimondus.


PROT. I will. Yet first I would have you know, that though I grant, that John,
who was first B. of Bonony, then of Rauenna, and lastly of Rome, came to those
Bishoprics by the means of Theodora a famous whore: in respect whereof, your
Annal. tom. 10. ad an. 925 nu. 11 si ipse Pontisex est dicendus.
Cardinal historiographer makes question, whether he was a Pope or no; and
terms him Ad an. 912. nu. 12.
sometimes Pseudopontifex and Antipapa, a false Pope, and Antipope: Ad an. 928.
nu. 2.
sometimes intrusor and detentor iniustus Apostolicae sedis: an intruder and an
usurper of the Apostolical chair: yet I deny that this was John the ninth,
for he was John the tenth. John the ninth came by good means to the Papacy,
as your Annal. tom. 10 ad an. 90 1. nu 1.
Cardinal says. Idem ad ann. 905 nu. 1. and 2.
He carried himself honestly in it, and died naturally: but so did not this.
Frodoard. last. Rhemeus. lib. 4. cap. 19.
This confirmed a child under five years old in the Archbishopricke of Rhemes:
at which fact Ista noua, turpia, detestanda, solo auditu horrenda atque
pudenda. Annal. to. 10. ad an. 925. nu. 9.
Baronius stands aghast. Ibid. nu. 11.
Then this, turpior nullus, cuius sicut ingressus in Cathedram Petri
infamissimus, ita and exitus nefandissimus. There was never a filthier fellow
then this. This entered with infamy, and died fearfully. Idem ad an. 928. nu.
2.
This was stifled with a pillow by the procurement of one as famous for
whoredom, as Theodora who preferred him.


PAP. This of whom Florimondus speaks, was stifled with a pillow by Theodoraes
own daughter. But it seems you wrong her in her good name. For she caused him
to be stifled, because she could not brook his filthy kind of life with her
mother, as Cap. 29. nu. 3.
Florimondus notes.


PROT. Florimondus will never be good. The daughter disliked not her mothers
and the Popes course of life at all. She her self Luitprand. lib. 2. cap. 13.
agnoscente. Baron. annal. tom. 10. ad an. 908. nu. 5.
played the whore with Sergius one of your Popes, and had by him John the 11.
Baron. ad an. 933. nu 11.
She married her husbands brother, and lived with him in incest. The only
cause why she procured him to be stifled, was her envy to one Peter the Popes
brother, as Ad an. 928.
Baronius proves out of Luitprandus.


PAP. But in good earnest, was not this John, John the ninth? Florimondus Cap.
29. p. 235 and 236 cap. 30. p. 240, and 241.
again and again calls him John the ninth. And me thinks he should not
mistake him so often.


PROT. In earnest this was not John the 9. Florimondus was deceived.


PAP. Why, but Benedict the 4. succeeded John the 9. did he not?


PROT. Yes, that is true. But Benedict the 4. succeeded not this John. John the
11. as Lib. 3. cap. 12.
Luitprandus writes: or rather Leo the 6, as Leo Ostiens. lib. 1. cap. 57. in
fine. Baron annal. 10. 10. ad an. 928. p. 702.
others write, succeeded this John.


PAP. Florimondus writes, that Benedict the 4. succeeded this John: and
observes withal a knacke of knauerie in those who report this story, in that
they fathered this tale upon a John, whom a Benedict succeeded.


PROT. Observe you then a knacke of foalerie, or knauerie, or rather foolish
knauerie in Florimondus. For I tell you once again, Cap. 30. p. 242
that Benedict the 4. succeeded not this John: all histories are against it.
Baron. annal. to. 10. ad an. 901 nu. 1.
But suppose he was John the 9. If his loose carriage of himself with Theodora,
gave occasion of the report of a woman Pope, why was it not recorded as happening
in his time, but above forty years before his time? John the 9. was made Pope
in the year 901: yet this story is recorded as happening about the year 854.


PAP. Florim. cap. 30 nu. 1.
That came to pass by the subtlety of the reporters. For about the year 800.
the Empress who in a manner ruled all the world, was called Theodora. Now
these trifling tale-tellers hearing of a Pope Ioane in Theodoraes time, chopped
it into the time of Theodora the Empress, who lived about thirty years
before the harlot Theodora.


PROT. This would rather argue simplicity then subtlety in the reporters.
For, cui bono, whether it happened in the one, or in the other Theodoraes time?
But it carries no color of truth with it. For Theodora the Empress never
carried any sway in Rome at all. At Constantinople, for a while in the time of
her sons minority, she could do something: Baron. annal. to. 10. ad an. 855
nu. 51.
but in Pope Ioanes time she was turned out of office at Constantinople. She
was deposed from her regencie, and thrust into a Monastery, where she was kept
till her death. What is one of your other answers.


PAP. My third answer to your maine question is, that perhaps this tale arose
from John the 8. For John the 8. dealt not like a man in the case of Photius
Patriarch of Constant inople, but she^pishly and like a woman. For John the 8,
received Photius into communion, who was excommunicated by his predecessors.
John the 8. suffered himself to be overcome by half a man. Whereupon in
reproach he was called, non Papa, sed Papissa. And upon that reproachful
speech, came this tale of a woman Pope.


PROT. Who devised us this answer, I pray you?


PAP. This is Annal to. 10. ad an 879. nu. 5.
Baronius answer.


PROT. Baronius answer? Is that possible? Is not Baronius one of them who
holds, that the rumor of the Church of Constantinoples oversight, in suffering
a woman to creep in to be Patriarch, occasioned this tale against Rome?


PAP. Yes marry is he. For having set down Pope Leo his words touching that
rumor: Quae ita erant fama vulgata de Ecclesia Constantinopolitana, conuersa
in Romanam Ecclesiam a schismaticis eam odio prosequentibus, and calumnijs
proscindentibus, quis non intelligat? Annal. to. 10. ad an. 853 nu. 58.
says Baronius: that is, Who sees not, that what was reported of
Constantinople, the same was turned by schismatickes as spoken against Rome.?


PROT. And with what honesty can he say both? Cap. 5. nu. 29. page 399.
N. D. who holds of this later opinion, professes, that it seems most
certain, that in Pope Leo his time, viz. 1020, there was not so much as any
rumor or mention of any woman Pope that ever had been in the Roman Church. So
does Baronius himself: for verily ( Certe si vel leuissimus rumusculus per
calumniam de his spar sus esset, vtique is ab eo suisset antea diluedus, quam
vt fama perlatu^ facinus eiuldem generis obiecisset. Annal. to. 10. ad an. 853
nu. 66.
says he) if there had been but some flying tale of any such accident at Rome
in former days, Pope Leo should first have cleared it, before he had charged
the Church of Constantinople with the like. Was there not so much as a flying
report of a woman Pope before Leo the 9 his time, in Baronius opinion? How then
did John the 8. occasion such a report, who lived an 140 years before Leo? But
let Baronius go with this escape. What reason have you to think that the rumor
of Constantinople might occasion this tale against Rome?


PAP. Florim. ca. 25. nu. 3.
Good reason. For every man knows that Constantinople was called New Rome, and
Rome simply. Now a man might easily be deceived, in supposing that to be done
in Rome in Italy, which was reported to be done in Rome, but in Rome in Grecia.


PROT. That Constantinople was called New Rome, Constantinop. nouam Roman iam
inde a Constantini tempore Graeci vocabant. Papyr. Masson. lib. 2. de vrbis
Episc. in Simplicio
I easily yield unto you. But that it was at any time called simply Rome, that
your Florimondus is not able to make good. That's his own fancy; and in
delivering it he bewrayes his own folly. Yet to suppose it true: why did not
the relators of it, set it down as happening in Leo his time, but 240 years
before: if so be it was occasioned by the report that went of Constantinople in
Leo his days? If it had thence begun, it should have been registered as then
happening.


PAP. Well: suppose it were true: what gain you by it? or what is the Church
prejudiced by her? If Pope Ioane had been, she had not prejudiced the Church,
Part 2. of three Conuersions, c. 5 page 389.
says N. D.


PROT. But she had. For if she was Pope, then it will follow thereon
necessarily, that the Church (according to your learning) once hopt headless.
For the Church (in Bellar lib. 3. de Ecclesia, cap. 2.
your learning) is defined to be a company of Christian men professing one
faith under one head, to wit, the Pope. But she, how ever she carried the name
of Pope, was no Pope. Rhem. annot. in 1. Cor. 14. v. 34
For a woman is not capable of holy orders. A woman cannot play the Pope. Ergo
all the time of Pope Ioane, the Church hopt headless.


PAP. Indeed the only inconvenience of such a case is, Loco sup. cit.
as N. D. confesses, that the Church should lack a true head for the time.
But that is not so great a matter: for so she does when any Pope dies, till
another be chosen.


PROT. What is that you say? Does the Church hop headless, when one Pope
dies, till another be chosen? Now alas what a pitiful case is the Church in
then? Since Christ's time Cicarellus addit. ad Platinam and Onuph.
there have been above 240 Popes. And therefore by your saying, the Church has
been headless above 240 times. Yea, and sometimes between the death of one
Pope, and the choosing of another, there have passed many days, many months,
some years. As for example, Anaslasius de vitis Pont. in Cletus.
after Cletus, the Bishopric of Rome was void 20. days: Idem in Clemente.
after Clemens, 22. After Alexander the first, or 35. Idem in Alex. 1.
25. Idem in Pelagio 1. 1.
After Pelagius the first, 3, months and odd days. Idem in Pelag z
After Pelagius the second, 6. months and odd days. Idem in Ioh 3.
After John the third, 10. months and odd^ days. Idem in Sab ^niano.
After Sabinian, 11. months and odd days. Idem in Honorio 1.
After Honorius the first, one year and more. After Pont^^us Ch^^n g^^l. 2.
Clemens the fourth, two years and more. Ana ^^^^ lib citat in Marcellino, and
Polonus in codice Manu scripto, and Pontacus Chronog. lib 2.
After Marcellinus, 7. years and more, After Nicolas the 1.( Test Platina
invit. Nicol. 1.
as some say) 8. years and more. And after F^lix, sometimes the Duke of Sauoy,
S. Peter's chair stood empty 10. years, De repub. ib. 6. nu 71.
says Bodin. Whereupon will follow, that the Church has often and long
together been headless. But that is not so great a matter you say: Is it not?
Whence I pray you, should the Church have her wit, when she is bereaved of her
head? The saying is, Great head, little wit. But without question: no head, no
wit. When the Church is headless, she is witless, and by consequent helples.
And therefore, I take it, you have good cause to beware that you grant nothing
whereon it may be concluded: That your Church was once headless.


PAP. N. D. part. 2. c. 5 nu. 1^.
But did not Saint Austin hold opinion, upon supposition of a like case, that
the Church of Christ, should not be preiudicated? Did not Au^^^n. Epist. ^65.
ad literas (...) Do^^^st.
he, having recited up the Popes of Rome from Christ to his days, make this
demand: what if any Judas or traitor had entered among these, or been chosen by
error of men? and answers presently: Nihil praeiudicaret Ecclesiae, and
innocentibus Christianis.


PROT. Yes. But considering the body of your doctrine, you may not answer so,
nor think so. For you hold that your Pope is head of the Church, and that it is
necessary unto salvation to acknowledge him the head: but so did not S.
Austin. You hold that in a true Church one Bishop must lawfully succeed
another, or all is dashed: but so did not Saint Austin. For he puts the case,
that some traitor subrepsisset, that is, had come in unorderly into the Bishop
of Romes Seat: and yet resolves, that that was not prejudicial to Gods
Church. Conform your selves in these two points, of the Popes headship, and
succession, to Saint Austins judgment: and then you may better say in this
case of Pope Ioane, that which Austine said in the case proposed: That she had
not preiudicated the Church of Christ.


PAP. We make more reckoning of Saint Austin then you do. But I will not stand
wrangling upon his meaning now. N. D. loeo supra citato.
Because whatsoever inconvenience can be imagined in this case, is more against
you, then us. For your Church admits for lawful and supreme head thereof
either man or woman, which our Church does not.


PROT. Our Church admits neither man nor woman for lawful and supreme head
of the Catholic Church, as yours does. Our Church teaches that Christ only
is the head thereof. Our Church admits neither man nor woman for lawful and
supreme head of a particular Church. For our Church acknowledges the king
supreme governor only, not supreme head: and so she The oath of the Supremacy.
1. Eliz. 1^
styled Queen Elizabeth in her time, Though if we give our Princes more, yet
the inconveniences against us, are not like the inconveniences against you;
because the next in blood is to succeed with us; the greatest Symonist, who can
make his faction strongest, is to succeed with you.


PAP. What other inconvenience follows upon this accident, to suppose it true?


PROT. If it be true there was such a Pope, your Church must be discarded as no
true Church. For thus I argue: Bristow. Motive. 22.
That is no true Church, which cannot give in plain authentical writing, the
lawful, orderly, entire, without any breach, and sound notorious succession of
Bishops. But your Church, if Ioane was Pope, cannot give in plain authentical
writing, the lawful orderly, entire, without any breach, and sound notorius
succession of Bishops. For by reason of her Benedict the third, could not
orderly succeed Leo the fourth. She put in a caveat, or rather, was of her
self a bar to his succession. By her a breach was made in the rank of your
Popes. She, no fool, but a whore, marred your play.


PAP. No, no. For all that you can rightly gather upon her Popedom is, That
the Popes seat stood empty of a lawful Pastor for the space of two years,
and a few odd months. Now so it did often by reason of the differences among
the Electors, as you your self showed. And yet no man durst say, nor could
truly say, that succession failed, as Nihil praeterea ex ex eater miseri
nouatotes, lucri capiunt insi vt dic. possit duobus illis annis and mensibus
sedem Pontificiam legitimo vacuam ^u^sse pastore -- quod and alias ac cidit, vt
maiori temporis spacio seeds Pontificia, dilata per discordias eli gentium
electio ne vacarit: nec tam^ succession^ desijsle, quis vnquam ausus est
dicere, quod nec dici potuit. Sed tantum esse dilatam nullo vero modo sub latam
Baron. Annal. to. 10 ad an. 853. nu. 63.
Baronius notes.


PROT. As Baronius notes? If Baronius may be judge, there is nothing that can
mar your succession, neither vacancie, nor entrance in by the window. Whether
the chair be empty, or full, by irrepsion, or by usurpation, it is all one to
Baronius. Baronius will not give over his plea of succession. For though he
(not without grief) Quot proh ^pudor proh dolor^m eandem sedem visu horrenda
intrusa sunt monstra, etc. To 10. ad an. 900. nu. 3.
confesses, that many ugly monsters have sat in S. Peter's chair: though Non
Apostolici sed Apostatici. to. 10. ad an. co 8. nu. 4.
he confesses that many Apostataes, rather then Apostolical persons, have
occupied that room: though Qui non sunt nisi ad consignanda tantum tempora in
Catalogo. Romans Pontificum scripti. to. 10. an. 912. nu. 8.
he confesses, that there have been many Popes, which came irregularly to the
Papacy, and served for no other purpose then ciphers in Arithmetike, to make up
the number; yet he holds their succession sound. Though Homo nefarius, iam
antea bis gradu depositus etc. no^ numerandus inter Pontifices, vtpote qui
damnatus fuit in To. Synodo. to. 10. ad. an. 897. nu. 1.
Baronius writes, that Boniface the 6. who got possession of S. Peter's chair,
and kept it 15. days, was a wicked fellow, and not worthy to be reckoned among
Popes, in as much as he was condemned by a Council held at Rome. Though he To.
10. ad an. 897. nu. 1.
write, that Stephen the 7, Apostolicae sedis inuasor, and fur and latro --
indignus nomine To. Pontif ibid. an. 900. nu. 6.
such another as Boniface the 6, or rather worse, played at thrust out rotten
with Boniface the 6, and kept the Papacy 5. years. Though To. 10. ad an. 908.
nu. 1. Ibid.
he write, that Pope Christopher shuffled Leo the 5. out, and by violence
installed himself, and kept it 7. months: and that Sergius at the 7. months
end shuffled Christopher out, shearing him a Monk, and keeping it to himself,
as some say seven years, as Ad an. 910. nu. 1.
Baronius himself says, three years: yet all this shuffling in Baronius
opinion, does nothing stain succession. Yea, though he cannot deny that
Boniface the seventh, who sat as Pope one year and one month, was a
Scelestissimus vir ad an. 974. n 1. nefandis simus parricida, truculentus
praedo, qui ne pilum habuisse dici potest Romani Pontificis, ad an. 985. nu. 1.
wicked varlet, a plain tyrant, a savage beast, an usurper, one that had no
good property of a Pope. Though he cannot deny but that Leo the eight, who was
a schismaticke, and an intruder, and an Antipope, b in his opinion, kept the
place almost two years. Though he cannot deny but that John the twelfth
Ostensus fuit tanquam in scena mimus ponti ficem agens. to. 10. ad an. 955. nu.
4.
who was but like a Pope in a play, kept it nine years: and To. 10. ad an.
931. nu. 1.
John the 11, the bastardly brat of Sergius above named, To. 10. ad an. 931.
nu. 38.
who came to it by evil means and managed it accordingly, kept it 6. years:
and Inuasor and detentor iniustus Apostolicae sedis. ad an. 928. nu. 1.
John the 10. as false a lad as any of his fellows, who entered by fraud, and
ruled with violence, kept it 15. years: yet this lessens nothing the credit of
his succession. I warrant you, Baronius was of Genebrards opinion, Chronol lib.
4. seculo. 10. ad an. 904.
who though he granted that fifty Popes together came in unlawfully, and
governed as madly, would not yet let his hold of succession go.


PAP. Is there any further inconvenience, which may light upon us, if this
story be true?


PROT. Yea. For if it be granted there was such a Pope, the Popish Priests
among you may well doubt of the lawfulnes of their missio^: and you lay papists
of the sufficiency of the absolutions, which they give you upon your
Eare-confessions, and of the truth of the Real presence, and
Transubstantiation. For In Episcopis de iure diuino residet ista potestas
creandi sacerdotes. Tolet. Summa casuu^ Conscient. lib. 1. cap. 1.
unless the Popish Priests be priested by a lawful Bishop, their Priesthood
is not worth a rush: Anathema sit qui dixerit non solos sacerdotes esle
Ministros absolutionis, Conc. Trid. ^ess. 14. Can. 10.
unless you lay Papists be absolved by a lawful Priest, your absolution is
naught worth: and Semper in Ecclesia pro indubitato habitum est, ita necessanam
esse ordinatio^^ sacerdotale^ ad Eucharistia^ conficienda^ vt sine ea nullo
modo confici possit. Bell. l. 4. de. Eucha. c. 16.
unless the words of consecration be uttered by a lawful Priest, intent upon
his business, there follows no substantial change in the creatures of bread
and wine. Now how can your Priests be assured that they were Priested by
lawful Bishops: and how can you lay Papists be assured that you are absolved
by lawful Priests: or that your Masses are said by lawful Priests: seeing we
read (as Page 82.
before I showed) that Pope Ioane gave Orders, Pope (...) Deacons, and Priests,
and Bish^^ (...) Abbo^^. For it may be well enough that the Priests (...)
present age are (...) from those who were (...) by her: especially seeing we no
where read, that they (...) degraded by succeeding Popes, who had their
ordin^^^ from her. Her successors dealt not with her shauelings, as Pope John
the 12. did with Leo the 8. his shauelings. Sigebert. in chron. ad an. 963.
Baron. annal. to. 10. ad an. 964. nu. 9. Ioh. de Turrecrem. Sum. de Eccles.
lib. 2. cap. 103.
John the 12. degraded them all, and compelled every of them to give him up a
paper, wherein it was thus written: Episcopus meus (meaning Leo the 8.) nihil
sibi habuit, ^^hil mihi dedit had naught for himself, and gave me naught: but
so did not Benedict the 3. with hers. Unless you say, that communis error
facitius, as ff de officio Pra^toris.
Lawyers said in the case of Barbarius Philippus I know not what you can reply
with probability to this and yet that will not serve your turn; for though it
may be so in matters of the commonwealth, in matters of the Church it cannot
be so. For an error in the beginning, in matters touching the Ch^^^h, proves
often an heresy in conclusion. In matters of the Church, prescription adds no
credit to actions of evil beginning.


FINIS.
Errata.
Page 3. line 1. for Ramulsus read Ranulsus. Page 4 line 5. for (...) read
declinant page 12. in margin, for savior read savior p. 19 l. 2. and (...)
for Thrithemius read Trithemius. p. 20. l. 4. for ch^^d read child. (...) for
5000. read 50000. and for 1200. read 11000.


