A SERMON preached at Paul's Cross, the 23. of April, being the Lords day,
called Sunday. 1581.

By Anthony Andreson.

Printed at London by Ralph Nevvbery. Anno. 1581.

To the right worshipful Esquiers, master Edmund Andreson, Sergeaunt at Law
to the Queens most excellent Majesty: and to Master Thomas Fanshawe, her
Majesty's Remembrauncer in her honorable Court of Th exchequer, Anthony
Andreson Minister of Gods holy Gospel, sends most Christian salutations.
AS it pleased god of his provident purpose in his mercy to call me (your
poor kinsma^) to that notable place and honorable Audience at Paul's Cross,
to sound forth the word of his Grace, which in the simplicity of my soul, I
carefullye there delivered: So his wisdom has further used the godly, and
of good judgment, (and not a few) to draw from me my promise, to profit
his people further abroad, by the same his holy word in the office of this my
willing pen: which labor of mine therein, I have (by the Lords goodness)
now so faithfully here set down, as I suppose, neither any Method is altered,
or matter omitted, that by me then was there spoken. Happily some other words
in some places are used, (as otherwise it were not possible, unless I should
have first penned, and then conned my Sermon by heart, which had bin a heavy
labor, both loathsome, and needless I praise God of his mercies, to whose
glory I speak it) but the felf same substance of doctrine, matter, manner, and
order, which both your worships with the rest the^ heard is here continued. If
therefore it now seem to obtain less, consider the action is past, yet here
is the same matter, but wanting the voice, gesture, and person of him that
spoke it: But no doubt Gods spirit shall open the hearts of the Readers to
receive it (his seed) to their comfort, if they with desire of gain to their
consciences, turn over these little leaves. And I pray God, (in and by our
Christ) that it may fructify as much as my desire is, and that is so much
as possibly I can crave. And were it of much more valor (as it is for the
handling, but in middle sort) no other choice would I make, than to both your
Worshippes (my good cousins) as to them, to whom I owe my self, for your
loving and continual friendships toward me. This my poor gift, therefore
accept of your good natures, as from the heart of him that wishes you the
whole treasures of God, for ever to enrich you, in body, spirit, and soul, to
eternal life: Whose defense be ever yours, and your for ever his, in Christ
our Lord, Amen.

Your kinsman and wel-willer to his power in Christ, AN. ANDRESON.
At my Chamber in London, June. 6. 1581.
Emanuell. Let us pray, etc.
Luke. 13.6.
He spoke also this Parable: A certain man had a Fig tree planted in his
Vineyard: And he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none: then said he
to the dresser of his Vinyard: Behold, this three years have I come and sought
fruit of this Fig tree, and find none: cut it down: why keeps it also the
ground barren? And he answered, and said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year
also, till I dig round about it, and dung it: And if it bear fruit, well:
if not, then after thou shall cut it down.
Right honorable, learned, and dearly beloved in our savior Christ, this
sacred portion of Gods holy scripture thus read unto you, is spoken by our
Master Christ as a parable most fit, to express the wilful ignorance, and
obstinate rebellion of that pernicious people of Iewry which now, for their
unfruitful hearing, and contemptuous rejecting of the great graces offered
them by the word of God, are in short time utterly to be cast under the
curse of Gods malediction. The occasion of this Parable, was ye carping
speeches of the Samaritanishe Jews, in cause of Pilates crueltye, against the
Galileans, whose blood he had mingled with their pretenced sacrifices, which
abused the sacrifices of right religion, in the most curssed purpose, to open
rebellion. which purpose being most ungodly, God used that civil power, to
meet with their attemptes, before they had begone their endeavor, although
in much cruelty, the President used right revenge. The report whereof was
brought to Christ, as thereby either to draw from Christ some sharp censure
of the President his cruel act, or else to terrify his sacred person, in
cause he taught, under so severe a Ruler. But the Lord saw their subtlety,
and answered them with great discretion, affirming the execution of the
sinners to be just, leaving the manner of doing, to be decided before the Lord,
and by their own tidings took happy occasion to teach the^ the doctrine of
repentance, saying: Were these only sinners? I tell you nay: But except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. And God himself by that other kind of
correction in Jerusalem, does also forewarne you, that not only those.xviij.
upon whom the Turret of Siloah fell, were sinners, but also your selves yet
left alive, are likewise right guilty of death. And if you do not by this
his ordinary and extraordinary hand, take occasion to amend your lives: ye
shall al likewise perish. But you are sharp of sight into other men's actions,
and most blind to see your own estate. But behold: it is even like to this
Parable: A certain man had a Fig tree, etc. The Lord has planted you
Ierusalites in his fruiteful land, he looks for your holiness of life to
him, he labors to all that may be, that you should be fruitful, but
often coming, he finds you ever barren: Therefore it is not long ere you
shall be cut down, to your utter confusion. And this was fulfilled by
Vespasian and Titus, about forty years after the ascension of our Savior
Christ. And thus much for the Jewish Fig tree.

The argument or sum of this Parable is, that many are often suffered of GOD
to remain, whilste some are weeded out, that yet deserve like castyng forth,
with others from the Vineyarde: And that this long suffering of our good GOD,
is to draw us to repentance, but if we (abusing his grace) do remain
rebellious, our contumacie shall cause us with vehement force to be thrown
from the Church and common weal of Gods elect, to the gaping gulf of
extreme hate, and perfect misery.

The parts of this Parable (in my judgment) are two. First here is set
down right notably the singular grace and goodness of God to his people,
shadowed here by this Fig tree. Secondly, the constrained sentence of Gods
Justice, to and upon the same place and people, where before he has
notwithstanding diffused his abundant grace.

A certain man had a Fig tree planted in his Vineyard, etc. Cut it down,
why keeps it the ground also barren, etc.

The great and singular goodness of God shines here most brightly, as well in
the baseness of the tree, which he has planted, as in the most excellent
place, wherein he has right mercifully established it. The Metaphor is very
elegante, taken from the Fig tree, which by nature in the root is very
bitter, though by the Art and labor of ye dresser, his fruit become right
pleasant to ye eater. And surely, not only ye people of Judah* but also of the
Gentiles, if they be pierced at the root, shall approve this for most true,
that they are naturallye bitter to the eye and palate, of any sensible taster.
In birth we are most bitter, as being embrued from the conception, with our
first fathers sin, and in bitterness of sin, (not by Marriage, but by
natural propagation) we are al conceived both King and Caitife. As David has
said: in sin has my mother conceived me: For we are all the sons of Adam,
and of one propagation, after our common corruption. And in our birth no
sweetness, but bitter grippings of the mother, bitter wrawlings of the child,
and most bitter estate of the same, before the second birth. Whereof I refer
you to the reading of Ezech. 16. Ezech 16.1 2.3.
Chapter. Our father is an Amorite, our mother is an Hittite, our kindred is of
curssed Canaan, and we polluted in our own blood, and by condition the
children of Gods anger, Ephesians. 2.
Oh most bitter root, and unsavory Fig tree. But are we bitter in our
life? happily some man would think, that reason might reach us his hand of
good direction. But (alas) we then wax to increase in bitterness. For as the
Wormewoode grows bigger, and so increases into bitterness: even so we, as
we increase in stature, state and strength, so do we abound in bitterness of
sin. And if we would more plainelye see this, let each man sound the sea
of his heart, and he shall find there, great stony cragges full of
bitterness and gall against God and his own soul, and al godly men, albeit
that Gods spirit of regeneration does daily purge and mortify the same. But
from our selves let us cast our eyes with truth into the earth, and into
this our nation of England, and (o Lord) what bitterness? what bitter
controversies for religion received of the enemy? what great delight to
drink a carowse of that Wormewoode water of Popery, Revel. 7.11.
of which John in the Revelation speaks? And, as the third part of the
earth have druncke of it, so they are become more than three parts bitter by
it, against God, our gracious Prince, her godly laws, state and people.

What bitter hate bear they to the word? how bitterly bite they at the
Preachers thereof? What bitter root can yield such juice, as the Papisticall
spirits do stream out against us? These are Fig trees indeed, planted in
this holy land, they make the ground barren and bitter, wheresoever they
dwell, their children, their servant, their tenauntes, that Country that
does entertain them, those friends which do accompany them, are either
made very bitter, utterly barren, or much molested by them. The soil of the
land they do devour, the Nursse of the Country (our Gracious ELIZABETH)
they do despise. They are as Mice in the Lords barn, they eat up the owners
corn, but they refuse to joy his presence. This bitter tree brings his
fruit, but it is without the dresser of the Vineyarde: Even such as the
Galileans brought against their allotted Prince: seditions, conspiracies, and
public rebellion. And whatsoever good our godly Nursse and good Princess,
does endeavor, the same our bitter Papists turn to Wormewoode, reporting evil
of godly laws, and stirring up such foreign foes, and domestical enemies, as
they can procure to assay their best against us. And their pretense, with the
Galileans is religion, freedom from the bondage of conscience, and tyranny of
now government, when as the most bound of them, reap much more freedom, than
either their cause, or conscience can deserve, or yet ca^ win them thankeful
unto God. But is your Fig tree now ready ripe, you Papists? Your buds were
preately broken in the North, hapely your after growth is blossomed now, and
braggeth of his ripeness, and your Louanistes, Seminaries, and late vpstarte
Jesuits, are ready to reap the fruit of your bitter Fig trees. But (o
Lord) it is a bitter fruit, a pestilent Fig, and a deadlye diet, which
they desire, therefore grant, that they may perish. They are (O Lord) rotten
in their ripeness, let them fall to confusion, which in this merciful time of
so much proyning and dressing, by thy holy word, and her Majesty's softened
sword, can not be converted unto thee. But do you desire a day you bitter
Papists? What have you to do with that day? our sins indeed do fight
against us, and if our demerites bring us a heavy day, yet it is not yours,
but the Lords day. We may say to you, as the Prophet Amos Amos. 5.18
said to his wicked ones in his time. What have you to do with the day of
the Lord? woe to you that desire it. The day of the Lord is darkness, and
not light: it is as if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him, or
went into the house, and leaned upon the wall, and a Serpent bit him: So you
run from her Majesty, supposing her a Lion you Papists, and hope after a
day, but even in that day, you (I say) shall be devoured of the Bull, of
Romish Bashan, and the she Bear robbed of her whelps, shall tear you in
pieces. But you have peace offered you, and you seek for war. Wherefore you
hunger your own destruction, Ier. 24.
even in that day, wherein your suppose is of Popish solace. But (beloved)
were it that only the Papists of England were bitter, we might in
sweetness lament that sour fruit. But our selves are bitterly set one
against an other, our hearts and acts at home, our Courts and Assizes in the
Country, our thrusting and rushing into Westminster Hall, does compel you
my Lords of the Benches to witness it, that England is full of bitter Fig
trees. The Lord be merciful to choose us into his vineyarde, loving to plant
us, willing to dress us, and to proine us, that we may be fruitful, and bring
forth by his operation, sweet Figs, and odoriferous fruits unto him, for
his holy names sake. It may yrke us thus to hear of our bitterness, but it
may shame us to feed of such fruit. Surely it wearyeth one to think thereof,
and therefore I will now record Gods mercy and goodness to this Fig tree:
namely, how he has planted it in his holy Vineyard. What he has there
planted you have heard, even a bitter Fig tree: Now, where it is planted,
our Text does say, namely, in his Vineyarde, let every manne therefore apply
this to himself, as it may appertain him. The whole Realm of England is this
Fig tree, planted into the universal Church of God. This City of London is
likewise a part of this Fig tree, growing out of the same. And every Country,
Town, village, Potentate, preacher and private person is a branch of this
Fig tree of England, being borne or now nourished in ye same. And so every
man is to apply this unto himself, that he is this Fig tree, planted in this
land by Gods mercy, which land, is of his infinite grace and goodness grafted
into his Catholic Vineyarde, the universal holy Church of Christ Militant in
earth. The fertility of this Vineyarde is such, if thou do respect but the
soil of the land, that we must of necessity say of it, that which Esaias Esa.
5.2.
said of Jerusalem: My beloved had a Vineyarde in a very fruiteful hill: Of
this lands fruitefulnesse I rest to speak in this noble Auditorie, least I
should seem to tell them, that by far greater experience may teach me, that
it is the treasure house of Gods abundant and fruitful blessings, serving us
plentifully, and sending hence abunda^tly, sufficient proof thereof to all
nations, not only near, but far off situate from us, Gods holy name be
praised for it, and Christ Jesus make us thankful inahbitants, and fruitful Fig
trees to ye Lord, obedient to her Majesty, and trusty in truth, and give us
right English hearts one to an other. Oh Lord how great is thy goodness? but
herein much more, namely, yt of thy infinite goodness and grace thou have
placed us in this fruitful land, and planted the same, into thy most holy
Vinyard, and sacred sea of thy holy Church. Engl. is a member of ye church of
God, and (thanks be to God) the church of God is in Engl. But here some Papist
seems to say, (me think) Nay sir, not so, England is not, nor has the
Church of God in it. To whose blasphemy we may boldly answer: The perfect
notes, and infallible marks of Gods Church, both of the visible and invisible
Church, are apparante with us in our Church of England therefore England is the
Vineyard of the Lord which is the house of Jacob and the Church of God. Esa
5.7.
The visible Church of God we call here, that Catholic company, which is
dispersed into sundry places, and are by the word of God called into one
society and fellowship, as Gods elect people in outward profession of sincere
religion, participate together of ye Lords Sacraments, make confession of the
Christian faith, according to ye word, and do accept ye public and private
discipline of ye same, in seeming sincerity. And this catholic and militante
company, are placed into sundry territories, which for their situations and
diversity of Countries, be also divided into particular Churches, and bear
such names, as the Country soil is known by, as the Church of Corinth,
Laodicea, Ephesus, Thessalonica, England, France and Irelande, etc. And this
visible Church as it has in it in every Country where it is, both good and
evil ones, elect and reprobate, faithful and infidelious, Math. 3.22 Math 13.27
2 Timothy 2.20
holy and hypocritical, Wheat and Cockle, Corn and Chafe, vessels of
honor and dishes of disgrace: So the said Church of God, called the
Militaunt Congregation, is known to be there, wheresoever these certain notes
and marks thereof are resident, The infallible marks of the isible Church of
God.
and to be seen in common use: that is to say, Purity of Doctrine, sincere
deliuerye of Christ's holy Sacraments, and godly Discipline Which assured
marks and notes to know his Church by, our savior Christ has couched
into one sentence of the Gospel, under the commanding commission from his
Majesty to his holy Apostles, in the Gospel after Saint Mathewe thus. Math.
28.18
And thus spoke to his Disciples saying: All power is given unto me in heaven,
and in earth, go therefore and teach al nations, baptizing them in the name of
the father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo, I am with you always
until the end of the world Amen In this sacred sentence (dearly beloved) are
these three heavenly notes given of God, to try if his Militante Church be in
whatsoever kingdom, Country or people.

Go teach the Gospel,

Baptizing them in the name of the father, etc. Note well, that not only his
matter of Sacrament, but his method in Baptizing must be observed, where his
Church is established, and therefore the Lord delivers both the matter,
what, and ye manner, how, saying: Baptize them thus: In the name of the Father
and of the Son, etc.

Church, is registered under these words: Teaching them to observe al things,
whatsoever I have commanded you. Math. 1.29
Do not (says the Lord) only teach the nations my word, but baptize the
believing, and those which believe and are baptized, see that they be kept
in my obedience, and under my sweet and easy yoke, by your authority in my
spirit, that their conversation amongst men, may advance their confession
unto God. Lo, here is the rule and warrant for godly discipline in the Church
of God. Teach them to observe, bring them to obey, direct the Segniorie into
their duetye, teach them how they ought to govern in the Church: and let them
exercise their authority to my glory, and to the maintainaunce of the same.
Which then is in the right order, when they are taught by doctrine and
discipline, 1. Cor. 11. 1. These. 4.2
to observe all and every thing that I give you in commandment for them: and
when you fear to press upon them, any thing that you have not received from
me, which might tie their conscience to observe, as if it were of mine. Now
this happy land of England, by Gods great mercy, has al and every of these
marks, namely, ye word of God most purely taught, ye holy Sacraments of Christ
(in substance) sincerely administered, and godly discipline by wholesome laws
established: therefore this Church of England is the true church of God. For
the first, we dare appeal to the throne of God, and the consciences of upright
learned men, that we have the truth of Gods holy doctrine taught amongst us.
Which doctrine also, by her gracious Majesty, in her godly laws is mightily
maintained and by the helping hand of such as be godly Magistrates, is greatly
furthered, but by the learned fathers and zealous godly preachexs, most truly,
diligently, and plainly in these our days delivered. And we may for our
doctrine in Eng. (approved as I have said) right boldly affirm, as Pet. the
Apostle in his time, for ye Apostolical doctrine, said the^: 1. Pet. 1.25.
And this is the word which is preached amongst you.



England, and at this last Parliament (against the Papists) have the same
Christianly augmented. God grant that our godly and reverend Bishops, Judges,
Ecclesiastical Commissioners and officers which have the authority, may, and
would, so use this aucthoritye they have, that God might be won, (as it
were) with their godly endeavor, to enlarge the hearts of higher aucthoritye
over us in the Lord by lawefull power, to yield us further and more severe
discipline, to one and all in this Church of England. Lord for thy mercies
sake grant it to this thy holy visible Vineyarde of England we beseech thee.
And in the mean space (brethren) let us be obedient to this we have, and
heartilye praise God for the same, and pray earnestly with conjoined hearts,
for a further, by her Graces authority, and the strict rule of his holy
word. These holy and sufficient notes of his visible Church, we have in our
English Church at this day (the Lord be praised for them, and continue them
with us) and therefore against al your blasphemies to God, your sinister, but
subtle suggestions to Princes and people (o ye poor Papists) we stand by
proof to be the Fig tree, planted indeed in the most holy Vineyarde of
the Lord, and have our Church consecrated a sacred member of the Catholic
Church of God, visible with the rest of that Militante troop and company of
sanctified men in the universal earth.

And as for the other forged marks of Universality, and personal succession,
we count it sufficient to have the society with such the sons of God, as
have their fellowship with the Saints of Christ, 1. Io. 11.2.3 4.
and have learned to forsake the company of the wicked, and to avoid the way
of sinners, but greatly deteste, to stoop to that Cacolike Apostata of Rome,
Ps. 1.
which so arrogantly sets himself in that chair of the scorner. But
touching personal succession of Bishoprics and Churches, we hold it not to
be always a sure mark of Gods holy Church. Except ye will say of the Church
of Israel under Jeroboam, that Idolatour, that she was then the true Church,
(though an Apostata by her gross Idolatry) because she could boast of
personal succession from the Kings, and Bishops of that people. Or that the
Church of Judah under Manasses, (that idolatrous King) was (notwythstanding
the murder of Gods children, their sacrificing to Idols, their racing out of
the law of the Lord, and banyshing his holy sacrifyces,) was (I say) (all
this admitted) yet the true Church of God, because they had and could show
a personal succession of Kings and Bishops, even from the first Moses and
Aaron. But ye will possibly press us with the authority of the Fathers, as
with Tertullian that ancient, which boasted in truth, to have had succession of
ye Bishops of Rome, for the furtheraunce of his purpose. But forget not (you
Papists) that as yet the Fathers of that Church had not departed from the
faith: but with their succession had continued the Apostolical doctrine, upon
which point Tertullian chiefly stood: as it may appear by him. And also,
would God you would not with malicious hearts seek to darken that notable
doctrine of his, in that his Book of prescriptions, that although many
Churches, have not to show their personal succession of Bishops, yet, if so
they have the Apostolical doctrine, taught sincerely in them, for that
consa^guinitie and kindred in Doctrine: those Churches are, and are to be
accounted Apostolical. The Oriental Churches had due succession til Arrius
had infected them with his poison: shall personal succession now approve the
sect of the Arrians to be the church of God? So had the Church of Rome before
Antichrists possession thereof. Shall we therefore now say, when their doctrine,
their malice, their ambition, their pride, their devilish conversation does
convince them to be that whore of Babylon: Shall we (I say) now say, because
they possibly can show us a great Catalogue of Bishops from Linus or Anacletus,
that therefore they are now the true Church of God? And yet, were that a
sufficient proof of Gods Church, our Bishops in England then have their
personal succession from the first, even the first that you can name, as by
time, and next course succeeding one an other.

Thus you see (dearly beloved) how apparent it is, that this noble Realm of
England is planted by Gods great mercy into the Catholic Vineyarde of the
Lord, the visible Church of God, and is it self a notable member of the same.

Now time requires, that we speak something likewise of the invisible company
and Church of God, to the greater comfort of the godly in this visible
Church, which this day hear me, or hereafter may hear of this holy labor,
to their further benefit. If thou would know certainly (beloved) in thine
own conscience, whether thou art verily and indeed, the member of Christ,
and so a lively branch of the virident Vine, end a fruitful Fig tree:
examine thy self by these three points, The true notes of the invisible Church
al which the spirit of God again has laid up in one most sacred Sentence,
and this it is: The end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart, 1. Tim.
1.5.
and of a good conscience, and of says unfeigned. In this sentence (beloved in
Christ) is laid forth unto us, the very true and infallibe tokens to every
man's soul, whether he be the son of God or no. For, by degrees, from the
fruit to the tree, from the child to the parent, he goes and fetches thence
unto us, the certain marks, whereby we are sealed to the Lord. The purpose
of God, giuyng his word, is (says the Apostle) that ye purely love one
another, but your love must proceed from a good conscience, not from a
corrupted heart, and this conscience has his purging from an unfeigned faith.
Then take hence your certain notes of Gods children, and these they are. Rome
had sent their curses against him and this honorable nation, yet he is of god,
the member of Christ, and one of his invisible Church, which can not be cast
forth of the doors.

But that we may the better know how to sound our hearts, and have a more
full feeling of this heavenly sweetness, let us learn what is ye operation of
this unfeigned faith required. Surely, it works by Gods spirit and word three
notable things in us.

The first is, a perfect belief in our inward man, that though our outward
should be fully punished for sin, yet our inward man, should have
prerogative to bring both to the favor of God because our sins are not laid
to our charge, Romans 4.7.8 Ps. 32.1 1. Io. 1.
but remitted fully in the purging blood of Jesus Christ. And therefore through
his merit (our faith apprehending him) we may approach by that new and living
way, unto his grace, Heb. 10.19.
and call unto him, as his justified children, Abba, dear Father, and rest
assured, that we, by pure faith unfeigned have Christ Jesus to be to us
against our sinful folly, Gods holy wisdom, our iniquity, Gods righteousness,
our grosenes, his holiness, and against our dailye and deadly sins: Christ
Jesus our sufficient ransom, 2. Cor. 1.30.
as the Apostle has set it down unto us in these words: But ye are of him
in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us, wisdom and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption. Romans 8. tot. cap.
of al which, that most noble chapter of blessed Paul, the eyghte to the
Romans does assure us. Blessed art thou which haste thy part in the first
resurrection, Apo. 2.6
for thou shalt not taste of the second death, but shall be the Priest of God,
to reign with him a thousand years. But will ye know (beloved) who has
this regenerating faith? verily, even only they, which are of a pure heart: For
this is the ordinary work of God, by faith first to approach us to his holy
presence, to make us his best beloved children, to justify us by his grace,
and to sanctify us by his spirit. Then the same spirit descends to the
second degree of his most holy labor, Ezech. 36. Ephe. 4. Coloss. 3.1.
and does with his most holy finger, form and frame us anewe, changes our
acts and hearts, and fashioneth us, to the Image of God, in true holiness and
righteousness. And out of all doubt, great is the glorious God, by whose
mighty operation the sea of man's heart is turned so quite to another course so
as by ye spirit he is brought to hate that horrible vice, which before he
honored, and ardently to love, and embrace with great delight that virtue
which before he did despise. And to desire, to do those blessed things, of
which he erst could take no pleasure. And this is that puritye of the heart
by the Apostle to Timothy so greatly commended, and is the second sound note
of Gods holy child and member of the invisible elect and predestinat Church,
to life everlasting. And this second note you see consists in these three
blessed virtues. The true hate to sin, Romans Ps. 119.
even as to a Serpent. The sincere love of righteousness, with the exercise of
the whole body and spirit to it. And thirdly, the inward desire of the heart
in soul and body, to do the will of God: Although the same godly desire by
mighty battles with sin, and Satan, is every day impugned: as by Paul in
the seventh of the Romans, is most notably set down, whether for
breuities sake I send thee. care with all our power, 1. Cor. 10 31
to do them benefit, even as the Lord has commanded us, and do omit the
opportunity of revenge, or hateful memory of evil done deeds: But, as God
for Christ's sake, has forgiven us, do from the botome of our hearts, forgive
and forget the injuries of our brethren, according to this saying of Gods
spirit by Paul: Ephesians, 4 31.32.
Let al bitterness, and anger, and wrath and evil speaking, be put away
from you, with all malitiousnesse. Be ye courteous one to another, and tender
hearted, forgiving one an other, even as God for Christ's sake forgave you.
Shall we put the Papists to silence (o ye blessed people?) In this then do
it, that they blaspheming us as evil doers, may have their mouths stopped by
our godliness of life.

And further, 1 Pet. 2.12.15.
that so we may make our calling sure, and an entering into ye everlasting
Kingdom of God. Now then apply this doctrine to your selves, 2. Pet. 1 10.11.
(dear brethren) that ye have now heard, and say to your hearts, for
comfort (if ye find in truth these marks lively in you.) Now we know for
truth that Gods spirit does assure our spyrites, Romans 8.
that we are the sons of God. And so may you be bold, to bless God for this
grace, and say unto the Papists, Gods goodness is great, who has planted us
in England, and England into his Catholic Vineyarde, both visible and
invisible. But behold, yet further, his gracious goodness appears, and is
right notable to behold. England to the great benefit of the Fig tree he
has first placed a watch Tower. Esa. 5.
a Hedge of defense round about it. a Wine press within the yard, where
each trees fruit, shall, in convenient time be brought to his trial and
purpose of benefit. If that noble Prophet Esaias could say so of Judah and
Jerusalem, may not Gods Prophets cry it out now, concerning England, and
say, the Lords goodness is marvelous great to thee (o thou Fig tree of
England) For he has placed thee in his own Vineyarde, he has set up a Turret
in thee, whence thy watch men may see thee, and thine enemies purpose against
thee, wherehence to give thee warning of thine intended harms. And he has
set his hedge of providence round about thee, in more ample wise than ever
had the Isralits, for they had but warrant, when they came up to Jerusalem to
worship, that no enemies should invade them. But thou England art and haste
been hedged and defended, by the Lords miraculous hand, not seeking to serve
God, but after a fashion waxing cold of his service, and haste given thy self
to vanity and security in sin, art called, and go rather backwarde: And
yet, thine enemies abroad, Hos. 11 1. Esa. 7.1.2. and deinceps
and thy false confederates at home, seeking to make a breach in thee, thy
God, England, thy good God, says, it shall not be, and has vpholden thee,
and defended thee, by him self against al secret conspiracies open rebellion,
and foreign threats, now full this 22. years. Thy name be blessed for it, my
God, and Lord, give our England eyes, to see her sins, and thy long suffering
safety to us and for us in this thy provident hedge. The policy of ye
watchers, whereof her Majesty is chief, (whom the Lord still defend over us,
that long she may wake to God, and watch godlily, for this her people of
England, and also the Ecclesiastical, and civil honorable council, and
Christian governors) is great no doubt, for whose great and godly pains to us,
we owe in truth great things to them, and many blessings to God. Yet is it
neither simply, her Majesty, their policy, or other endeavor. (For all these
with us are sinners, in his sight) but his holy hand alone, and that for his
own names sake, that hitherto has guyded their holy counsels, and defended
us. Oh that the watchemen of our England, would consider then right deeply
their place. You be set my Lords alofte, to see aloof for ye help of us that
are appointed under you. Your carcks and care may not be, the Bishop to become
very rich, the Judge to be of great reverence, ye Councellor and ruler, to gape
after private gain, but you must be all helping, rather us, tha^ your selves,
yea, to your own loss, in winter, summer, heat and cold, day and night my
Lords, even as hiding places from ye wind, a refuge for the tempest, as rivers
of water, in a thirsty place, and as ye shadows of great rocks, in a wearye
land. So the Lord has allotted you. Esa. 32.^.^.
So Esaias the Prophet has told you. And the reverend Bishops must learn to
know, that God has called the^ to such reverend places, that they should not
be more idle and Lordly, Acts. 20.
but more laboring and lowely, yea, if possible it may be, than their inferior
brethren called to like fu^ction in the Lord, and holy office of preaching. And
(beloved brethren) of the popular sort, our parts is to bless God, for our
godly governors, both reverend fathers, and the civil Magistrates, which do
many of them painefully travail in their places to watch over us. And are to
pray with sighs and sobbes to God, for some such of them, as neither teach as
they ought, or watch as they should, or yet procure such as willingly would
to the benefit of the Fig tree. I know some where, some places in England,
that have a Turret or Pulpit, but no Preacher in it almost since her Majesty's
reign: For why? the spiritual officers look over it, some temporal statute,
and stearne Papists, do so out-countenaunce it, as, neither the word is
desired, or can with quietness happily have grace of hearing. The lord from
heaven be merciful unto his people in earth. Well we must render to either
state, our due obedience, suffer them to stone us, weed us, and proine us,
that we may become fruitful, and so behave our selves in all things by love
toward them, that as they must render accounts to God, for their offices, so
they may take pleasure to exercise their function amongst us. So does the
holy Apostle teach us, Heb. 13.17.
saying: Obey them that have the ouer-sight of you, and submit your selves: for
they watch for your souls, as they that must give accomptes (to God) that they
may do it with joy, and not with grief for that is unprofitable for you. The
Lord further says, he stoned his Vineyarde, and surely he has mightily by her
Majesty, cropped the tops, and cast out of the Church of England, the
stony hearted Papists. It remains, that the stoners under her grace, be not
stony themselves: For, if they be Papisticall, that be Rulers, how shall the
Papists of England, be stoned out of ye Vineyard? Lord, thou clensing God,
preserve thy little church of England, cleanse the Benches of the land, that
Benchers may call to the bar, such as hinder the growth of the Fig tree, in
every part of this thy kingdom and by justice, authority and grace, convert
them Lord, or cast them out of thy Vineyarde: For why Lord, should they also
make the ground barren? The allegory of the Wine press, let it be thus
understood, the work offered of God to every calling in this his Vineyarde of
England. The noble Potentates have us her people committed unto them, the
Lord does look, that their endeavor should fill the press with holy labors.
The reverend Fathers, and learned Preachers of the land, have their people:
namely, the Church of God to exercise themselves upon. The grave Judges have
their greedye plaintiffes and defendants, to try their industry, and toyling
service, yet holy to ye Lord. And surely my Lords, you must stoutly and with
good courage tread ye Wine press in your Assizes, and in Westminster Hall.
Your calling does not only teach it you, but your very robes do preach it
unto us: You sit in bloudye Gowns of Scarlet hew, as whereby your very
apparel does prognosticate to your selves, and us, with what hate to sin
and zeal to God, you must execute the laws, even to the not only drawing of
blood, by the sword of equity, but even to the dying of the place with the
blood of the wicked, which otherwise can not be reclaimed. Your eyes must not
look upon the mighty against the pore, or spare to strike the strong, that
else would grind the simple unto powder: But you must above all (my Lords)
that be Judges, take great care of religion, and if in your circuites, you
happily find any one bencher, that will not accompany your Lordshippes to the
hearing of the word, the same you must call to bar to taste of the sword:
For the judgment is the Lords and not man's. O Lord that I might once see that
example in England, of some one godly Judge or other, that, if any his
associates refused in conte^pte of the word and laws established to go with
him to Church, to hear the word of God there preached, his Lord would
command him from the Bench to the Bar, yea, though he were a Lord. Some of
you my Lords are more greatly beholding unto God, as by health and sickness,
drawn nearer and nearer him, and are restored again unto life, that Christ
Jesus should be seen afreshe to live in you. The Lord does know his Church
has need of you: and therefore in mercy he has again lent us you, play the
men, and help to stamp into the Wine press, those which without you can not
be brought to trial, and much hinder the gracious growth of the Fig tree.
Let your godly hearts, take that ancient precepte from Iehosophat, that godly
King, unto you, which says, or rather Gods spirit, in that place of the
Chronicles: 2. Chro. 19.6.7.
Take heed what ye do, for ye execute not the judgments of man, but of
the Lord, and he will be with you in the cause and judgments. Wherefore now
let the fear of the Lord be upon you: Take heed, and do it: for there is no
iniquity with the Lord our God, neither respect of persons, nor receiving of
reward.

The Wine press for you (my brethren) of the vulgar sort, is, that Christian
duty, which of duty we owe one unto an other, teaching us to live godlily,
Titus. 2 11. Gal. 6.9.
soberly, justly, and not to be weary of well doing one to another, but as
candles always light, we so shine, Math 5.
that our works may procure Gods praise. Let us do good unto all men, but
especially to the Children of God. And know well, that the Apostle to the
Ephesians, Gal. 6.10.
teaches this to be the end of our placing in the Vineyarde, that we be well
exercized in the Wine press, saying: Ephesians. 2.10.
We are his workma^ship created in Christ Jesus unto good works which God
has ordained, that we should walk in them. And thus much of the first part
concerning the great goodness and grace of God, to his Church this adua^ced
Fig tree. And now (beloved) we approach to the rest of our Text, which
sets sorth unto us the sharp and severe sentence of God, upon the same
Fig tree, that was before so happilye harbored.

The second part. Then, said he, to the Dresser of this Vineyard, behold,
these three years have I come and sought fruit of this Fig tree, and find
none: Cut it down, why keeps it also the ground barren?
THis second part of our text (dear brethren) contains two special points.
Then said he to the dresser of his Vinyard, behold, these three years have I
come, etc. Oh happy Vinyard that has such a Lord, who does not only plant it,
defend it, and fructify it, but also does daily visit ye same, calls upon
his people, and offers them the remembrance of the end, wherefore they are
so planted and placed in his holy Church. He comes first in long patience,
to his slothful trees to see, if at length they can take blossom, and bring
him fruit. Note then (good people) the end of your calling, it is to be holy,
Heb. 3.13.
lively workers in the Lords Vineyarde, Jude. vers^ 20.21.22.23 Esa. 58.
to labor the Lords increase, by teaching and exhorting one an other, while
it is to day, helping up some, and pulling out other from the fire,
comforting the weak, walking with the strong, delivering the oppressed, and
setting the prisoners free, restoring each man his right, using no violence to
the little flock, but by godly example in life, and daily practice to their
good, so to yield our Figs to our brethren, that they seeing our good
works, may glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Math. 5.16.
And thus shall we make our calling and election sure, as the Apostle Peter
has taught us, saying: Give al diligence thereto, to be partakers of the
godly nature, sleeing corruption and lust, join moreover virtue with your
faith, and with Virtue, Knowledge, and with knowledge, temperance, and with
te^peraunce patience, and with patience godliness, and with godliness
brotherly kindness, and with brotherlye kindness, love. For if these things
be among you, and abound, they will make you, that ye neither shall be idle
nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Lords people
must do the Lords works, and the working God does require a laboring
people. Forget not (beloved) that the Lord of this Vineyarde does in visiting
us often seek for fruit. Three things are of this Text to be considered:
very often, and if he at any time coming, find but some fruit, be it but
here and there a Fig, he yet keeps a blessing for that tree. But if after
often coming, and paineful searching, he yet (from whom nothing can be hid)
can find no fruit, then pronounces he his curse, upon that Fig tree, and
says: Cut it down, etc Oh ye long loking eyes of Gods mercy upon the Fig
trees of England: He came unto them in the beginning of her Majesty's reign,
and did mercifully plant us, he has daily since come by his Prophets ordinary
and extraordinary, and all to trim and proine us, Io. 15.
that we abiding in his Christ might bring forth more fruit. But he has by
his correcting hand to London, (oh London look to it, thou City of God) and
other places with punishing rods of plagues and sudden deaths, continually
of late visited us, as thereby reproving our wantes of fruit. And now he
stirs up the courage of his Prophets (the godly Preachers which truly
fear him) with one consent to sound, as it were the solemn blaste of a last
visitation, that if we can not yet be fruitful, Esaias.
65.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.15.
they should tell thee (O England) that then this his Vineyarde shall be
taken from thee, and thou cast out of it, and shall see it given to a nation
that shall bring forth his expected fruit. Oh England, GOD make thee careful
and mindful of this severe sentence, Cut it down.

I have come and found no fruit. Fruit, and apt fruit (beloved) is that
which the Master of the Vineyard expects. Blossoms are blown away with a
blaste, Buddes are beaten down with stormye tempests, but sweet fruit is
most meet for the Lords mouth. But it is a hard thing for the bitter Fig
tree to alter his nature: Wherefore he often draws the vigoure of the earth
to feed his bitterness. Look upon the Iewishe Fig tree, and the Lord
coming after long expectation for good fruit, what fruits found he? Esaias
says: Esaias. 5.4.
He looked that it should bring forth Grapes, but it brought forth Wild
Grapes, viz. he looked for judgment, but behold oppression, Verse 8.
for righteousness, but behold, a crying of them that are oppressed, through
joining of house to house, and field to field, so as they would banishe the
poor, to dwell alone by themselves. 11.
Early up to drunkenness and bibbing from morning till night, banqueting,
feasting, piping and dancing, but no regard of the work of the Lord,
wherefor he has made them. Furthermore, Verse. 20.
they gave a contrary tongue unto God: For they yielded commendation of that
which was naught, and flatly condemned the simple good. They altered the
times and seasons to their own fantasies, darkness for light, bitter for
sweet, and sweet for sower. 21.
They esteemed man's policy above Gods divinity, making much of their own
conceits, and became prudent in their own sight, they durst use, and brag of
it, that a carowsing Cup, or a hearty draught could not ouertumble them, and
therefore they would join Bacchus to Venus still. Verse 23.
Finally, they abused the seat of Justice, Equity was sent from home, and the
wicked were justified for bribes, yea, the godly, and his cause was by the
adverse power intercepted of his right, and his case perverted, so as either
the righteousness of his cause was darkened, or much diminished, or the true
alowance to it utterly taken away: therefore the Lord did threaten his cutting
down, Esaias. 5.24.
saying: Like as the flame of fire deuoureth the stubble, and as the Chafe is
consumed of the flame: So their root shall be as rottenness, and their bud
shall rise up like duste, because they have cast off the law of the Lord of
hosts, and contemned the word of the holy one of Israel.

Behold, (says he) these three years have I sought for fruit and find none.
By this term of time, we are to note (beloved) the long suffering of God,
which calls by it to repentance. So he dealt with the world in the days of
the floude, yea, even when he was ready to strike, then he gave them afreshe a
longer time to repent, namely, 20. years. Genesis 6.3.
So prolonged he ye time of his plagues, to their posterity, even when the
day was conceived, to see if they would prevent his anger with their returning
unto him. And by his holy Prophets, cried unto them: (oh ye people) why will
you dye? Ezech. 33.11
Turn you from your evil ways: gather your selves together (o people) not
worthy to be beloved, before the dresser come forth, and ye be as chafe that
passes in a day, and before the fierce wrath of the Lord come upon you.
Zephany. 2.12.
But they greatly abused his great forbearing, and so do we. Jeremy said of
them, Ierem. 25.3
that he had called them to repentance full 23. years, early and late, but
they would not hear nor incline thine ears to obey, but provoked him to
anger, albeit he long suffered them, and sent to them his Prophets, as before
is said. Oh Jeremy (Gods holy Prophet) thy term of time is cast upon us.
These three and twenty years has the Lord in mercy by the voice of his
Prophets, called for fruit of us in England. But what should be our
fruits? Surely, a duple degree in fruits, the Lord does require of us.

Philip. 1.27.
Of the first the Apostle Paul speaks thus: Let your conversation be as it
becomes the Gospel of God, etc. That is, that our hearts be one in
judgment, our offections in love, our confederacy in godliness, such as
we join hands in unity one with another, to fight together through the faith
of the Gospel against the adversary, and not as dismembered bodies and
companies, to devour one an other by iarring braules and causeless
contentions. Let this (beloved) be never out of our minds which are of one
religion: If ye bite one an other, Gal. 5 15.
take heed least ye be consumed one of an other. Our unity and love does
appall the pride of ye Papists: our brawling, contentions, and strife, (not for
knowledge but for malice) does breed a breach for the wicked. But, note that
our unity and godliness, must be a conversation, not a deed well done by
chance at a sudden, but a continued conversation in holiness: The guide of
which conversation is set down to us here to be ye faith of the Gospel of
God, as from which fountain every manne may fetch his several fruit, and
lycour to life. Mark this you mighty rulers and rich of the earth. From hence,
namely, from Gods holy word ought you first (to others godly example) to
draw the pattern to your conversation. God sends his holy Prophets ye
preachers of the word, first to call you hither. Go down to the house of
the King of IVDAH, (says the Lord) to Jeremy, Ierem. 22.1
and speak this thing and say: hear the word of the Lord o King of Judah,
thou that sit upon the throne of David, thou and thy servants and thy
people. Execute judgment and righteousness, etc. then shall ye live. I pray
you read the place at your leisure you princely Rulers. Know you, that first
you above all men are spectacles and myrrors unto men: your conversation
therefore must shine by the Gospel; and Gods holy word, and your love from
above must abound in equity to his Ministers. Moses must love Aaron and defend
him in truth against ye malice of ye wicked. But where is this Gospel-like
conversation? We will ask of the rich and mighty, now at the end of these
three and twenty years but this equal fruit. But it is with us fruit good
enough, for the Minister to be basely esteemed, it is no matter to prive his
portion to your own purses, but such are Nabothes and fear not God. I speak
not against the godly mighty, but against the rich men of the earth, which
care not for these words: Do my Prophets no harm: Nor for this: He that
teaches the Gospel, let him live of the Gospel: Nor for this: Muzzel not the
mouth of the Ox, that treads out the corn, etc. But are these worldlings
but few, or rather may we not ask who is it, that delights in this
conversation of the word? For the most part ye despise our holy calling,
but daily more and more, you labor and hunger to be possessed with our
livings. You are by calling properly temporal, but through elder abuse, many
of you are become improperly Ecclesiastical. The poor Minister must crouch
to such patrons, his knee to the ground, his steeple to their stealth, his
tithe to their granary, and his due portion to their insatiable provision.
These be improper persons, and therefore (I take it) by law, their Church
detentions are rightly called impropriate promotio^s. These improper persons
receive hundreds, but the pore Vicar can scarce have ten pounds, and yet the
whole burden is laid on his shoulders. I know not how many Fathers of the
law are embrewed with this blood. I am also a stranger to the City (a poor
man come out of the Country) and whether my Lord Mayor or his brethren be, or
have in their corporation this improper propriety, I cannot say: but I am very
sure of this, it is a very unseemly sight to see a Parson of a Parish
Church, so stately attyred in such costely robes and golden chains, as the
honor of this City does affoorde to her Aldermen. But if you be such
improper persons, I pray you yet have less care of your gain, and more of
conscience: let us not serve you for such parings, but somewhat more
liberally carue to us in the Lord, we admonish you. Remember, that the word of
God requires you to make us partakers of all your goods: Mala. 1.14.
And dare you so boldelye take from us then, our first allotted portions?

Malach. 3.8
It is counted a blessed thing with many, in these days to spoil the portion
of the Minister: but the days to come shall prove it accurssed with God.

But (Lord) this is thy judgment upon us thy servants which have not
served thee, as belongs us in these thy forbearing days, and thy further
plague to the posterity, for this contempt against thee. For thy word, by
this means shall be either sparingly, or not at all delivered them. But
surely, if Potentates had little regard to Religion, yet me seems it
their great policy, whylest the LORD does yet forbear, well to maintain
the preaching ministry: For the heart of man is his leader, and the
affectictions kindled there, enforce the body serviceable to his will. The
hands may be restrained for a time, but the heart not altered, a new assaye
is to be given. But if the heart of man be once converted unto the truth of
God, which comes to pass by the office of Preaching) then the soul
submits himself to every lawful power, Romans 13.1
as sent from God, and for conscience to GOD, and duty to his word, causes
his body to obey, even to most hard commandments, impositions, and every
demannd. Let a survey be taken hereof betwixt the Papist, and the true
Protestant, the one is ready to rebel at every motion, the other always
priest to aid authority, with goods, lands, and life. Wherehence comes
this, but that the hearts of men are settled by the word, to stoop and stand
to their superiors set over them, not for fear, but for conscience? Iere.
29.6.7
And good Jeremy and Barucke Baruc. 9.11.12.
do ever persuade the Israel of God, not only to bend their backs to
Nabuchadnezars bondage, but also hartilye to pray to God for his prosperous
reign, and for the life of his son Balthazar: how much more then will they
teach obedience to godly Princes, by whom God is greatly honored, and his
Prophets right lovingly entreated? But this is a hard fruit, (o noble
Fig Trees, and improrer persons) to give to God lame livings and halting
portions, to take the best by spoil from his Minister, and your selves not
sanctified to ye service. For you are not otherwise Ecclesiastical, then when
you call for tithes, but for the charge of the Cure you take no care. Oh, be
afraid of this, you that forget God, and yet boaste of his truth, for it is a
right bitter fruit, and root of a thousand evils, to the Church of God,
which is the very cause why I have thus said unto it. A branch whereof,
behold, our present time has bredde, for our Ministers in the Country, for
the most part, are either ignorant and idle, or else over poor and needy. The
people, for the most, are likewise under such, either blind and Popish, or
hauty and hard hearted, and yet the Lord does still bear, and cries for
better fruits: Heb. 3.
oh (beloved) let us hearken to his voice, while it is to day: that we do not
still thus fall, by degrees, from the living God, thoroughe the deceitfulness
of sin. It is enough that we have spent the time of two and twenty years so
vainly, 1. Pet. 4.2.3
let us know that hence forth we ought to live not after the lusts of the
flesh, but after the will of God. But this is a great wonder to many, that
men professing God, and endued with so goodlye wits should in the light of the
glorious Gospel (so many years gloriouslye shining) delight to dwell in
such obstinate blindness. But take up thy wonder (beloved) and look into
the matter: So shall thou perceive this bitter fruit to arise of these three
monstrous vices, namely, of the carnal contempt of Gods long sufferaunce: Of
the natural distruste of his word and promise: And of the presumptuous abuse
of his goodness.

only strike of mercies string, and seldom touch due Justice threat, our
wicked nature with tooth and nail, enarmeth hautie contempt against them. Even
so it is likewise to our good God, because he is slow to wrath, and does not
always strike, we straight contemn his threatening word, supposing, either he
is not able, or not knowing, to punish our open rebellion against him, and so
the wicked says in his heart, Psalm*
there is no God.

Malac. 3.1^
what profit have we to serve the Lord? or what be his promises unto us? we
will not hearken unto his word: Io. 22.14.15
For if we pray unto him what gain to us? In their deadly distrust, they
scornfully say: Ezech 33.
Come let us go hear what the Lord will say to us: but they hold his
Prophets as jesting persons, and pleasant Minstrels that satisfy the time. and
not as the sincere Prophets of God.

For neither believe they the promises of Gods love to appertain to them, or
the judgments of his wrath do they accept in truth, and therefore they
neither embrace the promise of his mercy, or be terrified with the threats of
his Justice. But in stead thereof they say: Come, let us eat and drink,
for to morrow we shall dye. Oh horrible and thrice curssed nature, so arming
thy carnal corpse, to abuse the long suffering of thy good God. But be ye sure,
yt the eternal word of God is yea, and Amen, that whatsoever it promises, it
shall perform, and though his infinite wisdom (to draw thee to repentance)
do differ his plagues, yet he will justify his word in the day of his anger.
When those things shall come to pass which he has spoken by his Prophets, and
then in the middle of his wrath, you shall confess, that not pleasant
Minstrels, but Gods true Prophets and Preachers were sent to forewarne you. 2.
Kin. 21.2
These be much more wicked tha^ curssed Achab, which yet believed the word,
at the voice of one Prophet, and received comfort: But these shall have him a
witness to their condemnation, in the day of Gods anger, which cannot, or will
believe ye Lords word, by so many years travel amongst them. Romans 12.1.
But let us labor to persuade you by Gods mercies, to offer up your bodies a
holy, liuelye, and acceptable sacrifice to God: which is your reasonable
serving of God: Tush, yt cannot move, for you believe us not: you have
Papisticall spirits, that is to say, doubtful hearts you dare not rest upon
the promises of God, and therefore will not be allured by his mercies. But let
us tell you, Esaias. 26 17
that if ye follow the fashion of this world, you shall die in the sins
thereof, you say to your selves, safe enough, for we have made a covenant with
death, our Preachers do but scare us, we see no such likeness of Gods anger,
all things continue their course as at ye beginning: But you wilfully are
ignorant, saying, 2. Pet. 3.3.4
that the Lord has a desire to save us, and would have none to perish, but
would all to come to repentance. Notwithstanding, be it known to you (O ye
curssed scorners) the Lord will come to you as a thief in the night, and when
you cry to your selves, peace and rest, then sudden shall be your
destruction, 2. Tess. 2.12
which would not credit the word of truth to your salvation. Genesis 7.
The first age believed not Noah, and are universally drowned. Genesis 19.
The cursed Sodomites scorned Loath, and with fire and brimstone are consumed.
And can thou think to escape with thy scorning covenant of death, thou Paynim
Papist, and carnal Atheiste? No, the Lord says to every such, your covenant
with death shall be disanulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand,
When a scourge shall run over, Esaias. 28.18.
and pass through, then shall ye be trodden down by it, etc. Our presumption to
sin: For we conceiving by a natural self liking, a sinister conjecture of Gods
mercy, that he does not so narrowly look to our offenses, or will so strictly
punish our sins: do therefore take occasion presumptuously to add sin upon sin,
to pass the days of our youth, in distemperate dealings against God and man,
promising to our selves a long life, a long time to repent, and a long
suffering God. But (O ye gallants of these days) which sin in this presumption,
know ye, that God is just as he is merciful, and that repentance is his gift,
to whom it pleases him, and given to the humble spirited that fear him: which
in the days of their youth remember him, before those evil days come, wherein
you shall for pain and grief in conscience and corpse say, we have no pleasure
to live. Be helping therefore to your selves in God, Eccle. 12 1.
and stowpe to the yoke of Christ in time. Now is the day of your calling,
when the sound of Gods Gospel ringeth in your ears, now is the acceptable
day: In this day harden not your hearts, nor treasure up to your selves anger
against the day of wrath. But lend your lusty ears to this necessary
demand of the Apostle Paul: O man, Rom 2.4
despisest thou the riches of his bountifulness and patience, and long
sufferaunce, not knowing, that the bountifulnes of God leads thee to
repentance, but thou after thine hardness, and heart that cannot repent,
heapest up as a treasure unto thy self, wrath against the day of wrath, and of
the declaration of the just judgment of God, who will reward every man
according to his works. Now (beloved in God) let us pray the Lord our long
suffering God to give us true repentance, that we abuse no longer his blessed
bounty, either with carnal contempt, natural diffidence, or presu^ptuous
sins: but that with David we may pray against the rebellion of our youth,
Psalm. 19.
our secret faults and presumptuous offenses, that in this long time of his
suffering, now, drawing so near the Lords Harvest, we may hasten through
him our hears to be fruitful, least we still abusing his great patience, at
the last shall hear to our endless sorrow, the sharpness of this sentence,
Cut down the Fig tree. But (O Lord) and dear father grant us thy
heavenly grace, we beeseeche thee for thy holy Christ's sake.

And now time requires to speak some thing of this sharp sentence, Cut it
down. If he had said but, cut it, it had been a hard word of Gods anger, but
in that he says, Cut it down, and with a further demand, namely, Why keeps
it the ground barren also? he signifies his love is gone, his wrath is
kindled, and therefore this barren tree must needs perish.

Two wicked evils you see follows this wicked Fig tree.



only fruitelesse to God, but very hurtful to the common weal round about
him, as for example, the child of hell, the shameful Usurer, as barren to God,
so he makes barren and unable to live, all the trees that earste bare great
show in that Forest of his Country. Likewise the hardened Papist is not only
an enemy to God, his religion, and her Majesty in his heart, but he makes
according the valor of his countenance, the Country by proportion where he
dwells very Papisticall with him. If he be a Gentleman, he corrupts his
tenants, and the godly Minister there has small joy of his labor: but if a
Justice of peace (as too many such there are) then he goes very near (if
not) to corrupt sundry his fellow Benchers, yet by the fleshly favor they owe
him, and through the linkes of blood or affinity to him, or other their
friends, they are become very sparing of religious fruit, both bearing with
his Popery, and all his, and also, not so dutiful to God, and her Majesty,
for the purging of the country of such bitter trees or fruits, as they, of
faithfulness ought, or for their own persuasion should, were they not made
barre^ by such a bitter Fig tree. Oh Lord why should such unjust Papists, sit
in place of Justice, so to barren the soil round about them. Mercy they have
had, and it does rather mar them: Lord, from heaven, from heaven Lord, grant
them Justice or mercy at thy good will. Convert them, or confound them Lord:
For why should they yet make their wives, their children, their servants,
their tenantes, their friends and kindred, their associates and country thy
people, her graces subjects in these growing times, so mightily barren? Well,
well, the iolity of these, and the number of our own sins, have writhen a coard
of marvelous length, Esa.
to draw this heavy sentence upon this Nation and people, if we repent not,
Cut it down. This sentence is most heavy, Cut it down: But yet it is here
intercepted, with a most loving petition of ye dresser of the Vineyarde, viz.
Lord, let it alone this year also, till I dig round about it and dung it,
and if it bring forth fruit, well: if no, then after thou shalt cut it down.

Greater glory God never brought to nation, than to this country of Judea, so
as the Princely Prophet David said of it: The Lord has not dealt so with any
Nation: And yet where he bestowed his greatest love, there they cast unto him
for thanks the vile sin of senseless security, contemning his grace,
despising his law, slouting his Prophets, killing his Christ, murdering his
Apostles, and persecuting his Church, detesting his Gospel, and leading their
lives without feeling with the Gentiles in most greedye filthiness. Wherefore
their glory is turned into shame, Zach. 11.
and the staff of their beauty, and the band of his couenante is broken al to
pieces, and they commanded to utter ruin, Cut it down. Oh that England
would look to this. More beauty, greater bands of Gods amity has not bin
seen, no not in Iewrie, yet England is too careless what she gives God: She
takes an argument from his former favor, and loving band of peace, to be
incorporate into a perpetual rest, but she remembers not that Jerusalem and
Judah are cut down, nor thoroughly weyeth the cause craving like censure now. In
truth (beloved tree of England) were it not for yt interception of thy
dressers petition, the intercession of thy only mediator Jesus Christ, there is
no let of this sentence against thee, Cut it down. Consider then with
thankfulness (beloved) who is thy safety, Even Jesus Christ alone our
mighty Michaell, Daniel 12.1
that stands in the gap these 22. years for thee. But here we may not
forget, ye Christ our dresser and defender to God his father does 2. things for
his church. Ezech. 22 3


Spare it Lord (says he) etc. till I dig it, if then it bring fruit, well:
but if no, thou shall cut it down.

Of Christ's vigilancie over this land, for her defense, we have most singular
assurance, and the same shall appear most plainly unto us, if we look into
the ancient sins of the same, in her elder people, and his sentence, executed
upon them after his long sufferyng, for that there wanted a Mediator at last
to stand in the gap. And in sincerity of our hearts do then level the line of
our wicked conversation, with the sins of our ancestors, and his defending
arm upon us, we shall be driven to acknowledge his loving vigilancie to be our
only stay. The ancient Brytanes the first Fathers of this Island, did live
after Christ's incarnation in abundant wealth, but they gave themselves (says
the story) to the heresy of the Pelagians, to the disdain of the truth, and
to great looseness of life, so as ye Nobility and Clergy were wholly given to
Bacchus and Venus. The Lord first sent them warnings, then wars with the
Picts and Scots, which mightily molested them. But what did these brute
Brytanes? They returned not to the Lord, confessing their sins, and repenting
their wicked lives, reposing their confidence in Gods hand, but continuing in
their lust still, they sent for aid against the enemy to the Saxons, about
the year of Christ 685. which was the first message of their overthrow. For ye
Lord in his just judgment used them his instruments to drive the Brytanes
into Wales, where they remain as yet, and these their confederates possessed
this pleasant Island. So came the Brytanes under this Censure, Cut them down.
Likewise the Saxons possessing this land, and abusing Gods blessings, gave
themselves to a declining from God and his truth, and charity was key cold
amongst them. Which two horrible vices can never dwell alone, and therefore
ignorance came into the country, and took possession of the Church.

It was a wonder (says the Book) to have a Priest to understand his Grammar.
The Nobility became Atheistes and wicked men, the common people were sold to
sin: For pride, whoredom, and drunkenness entered into the^ from high
Palaces. Niceness of apparel, had then a common habit with men: for new
devises were every day. And (that which is not at this day amongst the rest
to be forgotten) the Saxons did in very much bravery clip or shave their
beards to the very face, all except only the over lip. But the Lord (as
greatelye grieved at the Land, by some good Bishops reproved them, and when no
admonition could prevail, he bente the heavens with blazing Comets, to
threaten this Sentence: Cut the Saxons down. For, Anno. 1066. after the
Comet, came William the Norman, and did execute that sentence upon the Saxons,
conquering the land, and ouerthrewe the former state. O dear brethren in God,
can we Englishemen see our noble tree thus twice cut down, and not quake
for fear of like judgment? or is there not like cause in us, so to procure
Gods wrath? Be not deceived, GOD is not mocked, neither come I to flatter, or
yet to fear to speak the truth. England is full of sickness, byles and
soars, procuring death. We may truly lament, for it is as the Prophet Micah
Micah. 7.12.3.
did for his people, saying: Woe is me, for I am as the Summer gatherings, and
as the Grapes of the Vintage, there is no cluster to eat, my soul desired the
first ripe fruits. The goodman is perished out of the earth, and there is no
righteous among men. They all lay wait for blood, every man hunteth his
brother with a net. By this sentence the Prophet accuses his people of 3.
pestiferous evils: whereof the first is a Catholic backesliding from religion
and godliness saying: the good man is perished for those yt remain, are but
rare and thin, even the gleanings of the Harvest, and as the Vine tree, after
the Vintage which may happilye have here and there one Grape left behind. of
a general hypocrisy, for he says: Nemo rectus, No man treads by the measure
of ye line, which his profession and calling does leuil unto him, but makes a
show of another than that he is indeed. of an universal cruelty, using the
Metaphor, Every man hu^teth his brother with a net. And my brethren let us
examine the common condition of most parts now in England, shall not we
perceive these sins to abou^d in the same: look to our earnest profession of
the Gospel, in ye beginning of her Majesty's reign (who^ God in his mercy
long preserve over us, and ever in his Christ) how we hungered the truth the^,
how we ioyed of Gods Ministers, how we desired heavenly increase, and prepared
our lives to answer ye Gospel: we cleansed our Churchs, our hearts and houses
of popish Idolatry, we reedified ye same with ye squire of ye word, yt in such
zeal (namely, ye Potentates, Bishops, Citizens of London, and other many godly
ones) as we were no whit inferior to ye Jews, which with Nehemias and Ezra
Esra. 3. and 5 Nehe. ca. 3. ca. 4.
repaired the ruinous walls of Jerusalem. But (beloved) let us with a simple
eye, look into every state almost in England now, and we shall right sorowfully
see a catholic cooling of this former zeal to Gods house. Partly by ye malice
of Satan in his servants the Papists, seeking by persuasion and al policy, to
hinder ye former work, offering us their help to build, whose purpose is, wholly
to pull down: And partly, Esra. 4.2.
by our own weariness of well doing, which contenting our selves with our
first building, Haggai. 12.4.
have taken surcesse for a time, to build and pull down, and rebuild again (to
our great cost, and the Countries great pain) our brave bowers and sumptuous
towers, to feed our fantasies, and pore men's eyes: but the building of Gods
holy house, to the increase of faith and virtue in true religion, we have
almost laid aside, except a few summer gatherings, by grace conserved unto
God. May we not therefore admonish Magistrates, Ministers and godly men, to
apply this voice of the spirit of God to his holy church, which first was
sent to Ephesus? viz. I know thy works (says God) and thy labor, Revel.
2.2.
and thy patience, and how thou canste not forbear them which are evil, and
have examined the^ which say they are Apostles and are not, and haste found
them liars, and haste suffered (for my names sake) and have patience, and for
my names sake haste labored, and haste not fainted. Nevertheless, I have
somewhat against thee, because thou haste left thy first love. Remember
therefore from whence thou haste fallen, and repent and do thy first works,
or else I will come shortly and remove thy Candlestick. We are all less
loving, less laboring, and less zealous in religion, than erst we have
been: yea, one and all of us, which the Lords spirit (the true discerner of
all things) does call here a falling from our first love, and threatens a
coming to cut us down, if we prevent not his speedy coming to our
candlesticks. O Lord for thy mercies sake, grant to our godly Prince, and all
her noble Counselors: to the Bishops and learned Fathers, to the Judges,
Preachers and godly people (though Summer gatherings) thy grace, that they may
all in their callings and spirits, take hold of their first love, and do their
first good works, in thee, and by thy Christ, that our Candlestick (thy
holy gospel and Church, her Majesty, and this our hapy state) may firmly
stand to thy glory, and our continual comfort for thy holy names sake.
England, which yet are the best beloved of the Lord: what are we to look for
in the rest, which are but hypocritical? Nemo rectus, (says the Prophet) No
man keeps his heart, and his hand, by that line that the law of his God, and
the simplicity of his soul, does direct unto him. And surely, if you will not
wilfully be blind, when did you ever read, hear, or see of greater
hypocrisy, than is now resiante in England?

The Papist supposes, it his greatest grace to color his Italian heart with
his Papisticall hypocrisy: For let him be accounted Papisticall by the
superiors, and Lord, how he protests the contrary, and if his inferioure
inform him, then he frowneth, sweateth, swears, and takes it hotely: but
yet there is no greater poison in the Toade, nor fixed hatred in the Serpente,
or rigor in the roaryng Lion huntyng for his pray, Genesis 3.
than lurketh under the sugared tongues of our Italienated Papists: For the
poison of Aspes is under their lips. Again, what dissimulation amongst
men of all sorts in each degree? O Lord, it is a world to see Abels
countenance, but Caines heart amongst confederates, friends, parteners and
cobrethren universally abroad. It has been called the holy water of the
Court, but in every corner of the land at this day are great Welsprings of
this infernal Lake. If ye buy but corn of the husbandmanne, there is deceit,
if you deal with the Artificer, behold sweet words, and sleightie
subtlety. But trafique, or crave counterchaunge with the Marchaunte or Usurer
in City or Town, (except some special man of GOD) and behold a grave
countenance, a sugared tongue, and seemly welcome: but if thou deal with him,
he is as a thornie hedge. Thou take him for a shilter, but if he have
delivered thy clothes from some stormy rain: yet ere thou escape from under
him, he will all to scratch thy flesh: If he bit thee not to the very bones.
Oh seeming friendship, and sure hypocrisy. O Lord preserve thy holy ministry
from hypocrisy, and keep her far from Justice seat. But Micah Micah. 7.3.
said in his time of it thus: To make good for the evil of his hands, the
Prince (viz. the great Rulers in the land) asked, and the judge judged, for a
reward, therefore the great man, he speaks out the corruption of his
heart, and so they wrappe it up. The best of them is as a bryar, and the
most righteous of them is sharper than a thorny hedge. The day of thy
watchemen, and thy visitation comes, then shall be their confusion.

No maruayle (beloved) for a general iniquity, can not but begette an
universal cutting down. Would God hypocrisy had not spread his wings so
largely in England, and pierced so deep as to the hearts of many sorts in her,
or so cunningly colored his ugly shape, as he has at this day. For no where
shall religion, godliness, or honesty offer her self in England: but
hypocrisy dare adventure to presume of some preferment in that place. He is
the vesture of the proud, the habit of the adulterer, the gown of the
Usurer, and the best attire for the Macheuil. The Atheist girdeth him about
him, and no treason can be broched besides him. He delights not to dwell with
beggars, but offers salutations to sacred states, the Lord grant all godly
Princes and Potentates eyes to see him, and spirits to discern him, for his
glory and our best good.

Genesis 10.9.
Nymrod was called a great Hunter, but Nymrods hunting is nothing worth: he
hunted after beasts and buildings, but we against our brethren. And surely
this hunting must needs be universal, while it has taken hold of the
Clergy. Do not her majesty's Courts approve great hunting with a Net
lease often, twelve, or twenty years to come, is hunted so after, with a
covetous Nymrod now, that his poor brother which does enjoy it, must of
necessity, either take a new, or be in fear to be forestalled of his state
to come. No offices so base, that sundry nets of diverse webbes, are not
provided to forestall them. No forfeite, be it small, but greedily some one
does prosecute against an other by means whereof, sin is dailye sold for
silver For the informer takes his bribe, and lets the fault remain. No
entreaty, persuasion, or loving desire, can win the poor, but little favor
in this cruel age. Such dyking in of grounds, such barring men of common
right, as the poor Cottier must either beg, and be starued, or else
steal and be hanged: For so men hunte after blood. The Country Villages
do decay, and shire Towns are filled with beggars: for rotten sheep do over
run all. Oh Lord, cease this cruelty. Habac. 2.12.
The Prophet Habacucke cried out of them in old time, which builded Towns
with blood viz. rapine, oppression, and cruelty.

But he has left it also to thee in writing, which pullest down Towns, to
feed thy own covetousness with pore men's blood: Ho (says he) he that
coueteth an evil covetousness to his house, Habac. 2.9
that he may set his neste on high, to escape from the power of evil, thou
haste consulted shame, to thine own house, by destroying many people, and
haste sinned against thine own soul: for the stone shall cry out of the
wall, and the beam out of the timber shall aunsweare it, And concerning the
Clergy, such spiteful cruelty is bent against it, as it passes, not only
by others against us, but even of one of us against an other.

It is a great cruelty, my Lords, and Fathers of the law, that sundry
godly Preachers in this land, living obedient to ye now established laws, have
been possessed of their benefices for many years, shall be no more regarded
than a dumb Dog, a blind Idol Priest, that can nothing say: Nay, by some
such wicked persons and their accomplices, Noble men, and great men of
authority shall be abused, yea, reachyng sometime to the highest Gouernoures,
to flitte good mennne out of their seats. I could name some such lewd
persons, and will, if I be demanded, that make an occupation to espy advantage,
making no difference of men, for their filthy gain, to thrust out godly
Preachars from the Church of God, and for their fee, to thruste the greatest
giver into such roomths. These are shameful Hunters which hunt some twenty,
some thyrty, some forty years past, for forfaites of Benefices, to set
Symony on sale. I beseech your Lordeships aids and helps for Gods church
herein, that if you want law for these men, your endeavor may be to procure
further, as time and grace will offer it. Want law said I? nay my Lords,
you had need go afresh to your Books, and study more law, against the
cruelty of these days: For, what say you (learned Fathers) to this cunning
cruelty. A patron of a Benefice, gives his Benefice freely, fearing the
strict examination of some good Bishop, so as the poor Clearke to be
instituted by his presentation, may safely swear and perform, that he has
given nothing, promised nothing, either money or lease, he or his friends: but
the patron calls the friends of the party presented, and binds them in a
great sum, that whensoeur the same shall be instituted and inducted, he shall
at any time, within one month, after such his induction, at the demand of
the said patron, or his assigns, absolutely resign v^pe his said Bene^yre.
But what is the purpose of this cruelty? Forsoothe, either to compel the
incumbent having passed the Bishops hands, to lease unto him the covetous
patron, that benefice at his own price, or else to thruste him quite out of
that seat, for an other Chapman. O horrible and most grievous cruelty: I
speak not by guess, but by certain knowledge hereof, yet not in mine own
case, I praise God for it. But if cruelty be crepte so high, as it rages so
against the Ministers of God: shall we not think she has great authority
in the temporal sort? I purpose not here to say more of the sins of
England: but be you Judges (O honorable audience, whether the petition of our
Mediator has not hitherto most mightily prevailed against our deserved
sentence, Cut it down. But now let us consider likewise of Christ's
conditionated prayer for the Fig tree. Till I dig it, and dung round about
it: if it bring forth fruit, then well: If no, then after thou shalt cut it
down.

Here is prayer with condition, the condition has in it this: First, the
labor of the dresser, and also of the good success of the tree. I will dig
it and dung it, says the dresser of the bitter Fig tree. That is, I will do
to it that thing, which, if there be any life in it, shall without doubt make
it fruitful. The great mercy of God does still yet abound (beloved) and the
singular love of this our Mediatoure Christ, here also, that when the day
of destruction is preparing, even then the Father by the mediation of the son
is stayed from striking, to a further season. But Christ will dig, and
Christ will dung his Church this Realm, and every Fig tree to take away by
the one, the corruptions and impediments that may hinder his fruitetulnesse:
And by the other to shelter him, supple, and moysten his root, that the vigor,
which there is cowched as scante keeping life, should valiantly aspyre the top
of smallest twigges, and mightily make them fruitful. And this holy
operation Christ our Lord, works from heaven by his substitutes and
Ministers in earth, namely, his Magistrates, Civil and Ecclesiastical: his
holy spirit by them diggeth ye trees at the root, to ye glory of his name,
in converting and co^firming the Fig tree, or in Justice and equity to cut
down the same. And here you Governors under God, you must learn from Christ
two especial lessons: cut it down. Secondly, to be vigilant, sober and wise,
to discern ye time when to make present petition to the Lord, and to dig and
dung the tree, and to stand in the gappe against the Lords wrath. To the
first, Moses gives example, to al Magistrates, and (besides our Christ in
this Parable) Amos the Prophet to al Gods Ministers. And fear you not good
success of your prayer and your godly travel: for this Parable and other
places of Gods Book, do hearten you hereto: namely, the Lord by the Prophet
Ezechiell, Ezec. 22.26
who, accusing the Priests to have broken his law, to have defiled the
Sacrifices, and profaned the Sabbothes: The Princes to be ravenous as wolves,
and to destroy souls for their covetous lucar: The Prophets and Preachers to
have dawbed them (that is, flattered their vices) with untempered mortar, to
say, thus says the Lord, when the Lord spoke not so: The people of the land
by violence and robery, vexed the pore and nedy, and oppressed the stranger
against right: all which provoked Gods great anger, and their deadly
destruction, yet to the comfort of the civil and Ecclesiastical Governors:
he there says: Verse. 30.31
And I sought for a man among them that should make up the hedge, and
stand in the Gappe before me for the land, that I should not destroy it,
but I found none: Therefore have I powered out mine indignation upon them, and
consumed them with the fire of my wrath. Their own ways have I rendered upon
their heads, says the Lord.

Note well this, how God in his anger, seeks for his Gods and Ministers in
earth, to have their labor, to dygge and dung, to hedge and stand in the
breach against God, if his vengeance be coming: and they shall prevail. If
the love of Moses be in ye Magistrates, as we have great cause to confess
it, and the bowelles of pity in our fathers and Ministers of the church of
England: No doubt they will pray for us, they will endeavor to make us
fruitful. Of whose love, for breuities sake I send the Magistrates to Exodus,
32.31. and the fatherly Pastor to Amos the Prophet. 7.1.

Cut it down. God uses not now to speak to us, but by his holy Preachers,
which be ordinary and extraordinary. His ordinary Preachers (our daily
Pastors) we know, and by his great mercy feel the great blessings of God in
the^. His extraordinary Prophets are partly from heaven, partelye from earth.
The Lord by these does teach us into his obedience, and forewarneth us of
his plagues, when they perceive our iniquity to grow into ripeness. Amos.
And surely the Lord does still open his secreates to his Prophets, and does
give them eyes, to discern his judgments, coming by his former hand upon
like transgressions. They are called our watchemen, and surely, we must yield
them credit, Ezech. 33.
when rightly they ring the Alarma, or else we perish. And that they might not
be deceived, God has in his word told them when to pray, and to stir
up the Magistrates to dig and give compose. But when both the tokens in
the word, and the extraordinary Preachers of Gods sword do cry to us,
beware this sentence, Cut it down: then it behooves to dig and dung, that
is, to take away that and those things which hinder the fruit of the Fig
tree, and to add and lay to it, that which may comfort, supple, and moysten
the root thereof. Math, 9.

Esaias. 22.

Psalm. 4.5.
and by the lust of carnal Aegipt, does quench in her ye purity of love, and
does give her self to her own delyghtes, so as her husband Christ can take
no pleasure in her company. This is well signified to us by the Psalmiste, in
the 45. Psalm verse 10. Psalm. 45.10.
by the opposite doctrine: Hearken o daughter (says Christ to his espoused
Church) and consider and incline thine ear: forgette also thy fathers house,
(that Aegiptiacall and idolatrous house) So shall the King take pleasure in thy
beauty: For he is thy Lord, and reverence thou him. But by that we have
sufficiently said, and the experience offered to each man every day, we may
clearly see, that our Preachers have, at this very instant, great cause to
call to mourning. For the love to our Bridegroom Christ is almost al spent,
we wax weary of his word, we take us to our own direction, and begin to
dislike to be ruled longer by it: For the Papists will not hear, the
Christian does not consider his backesliding from his former love, neither
inclines with an obedient ear to the voice of the Bridegroom: but our
delights are wholly set, if not in the golden Calfe, yet to eat and drink,
and rise up to play, as erst we did, even as the Gentiles, Exodus 32 6. 1.
Cor. 10.7.
which knew not God, and that with greediness: but brethren we have not so
learned Christ. Ephe. 4.19.
Gods Prophets seeing this, and this to grow so great, as growing all
abroad, and for the ripeness of it, ready to the Harvest, with one consent
they cry to England, Math. 3.2
Repent for the kingdom of God is at hand. Verse. 10.
Now is the Are laid to the tree, therefore every tree which brings not
forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. But they cry and
lament with Esaias, Lord, Esa. 53.1. Romans 10.16
who is it that believes our saying? Wherefore it behooves you my Lords, and
Gods Magistrates, to join the sword with the word, and more forcibly yet to
dig about the Fig tree. Anno. 1581. primo Elizab. when in that tempest
this most notable monument (of Paul's Church) by which we stand, and is now
in our eyes, he, to show his kindled wrath, set fire upon the spier of it,
which was the beauty of the land. And Christianlye consider it (brethren) it
began not at the Church, least men might have imagined it, to have come of
treachery or negligence, but from ye golden bowl downwardes, that one and all
might see it, to be the only work of God. Many other Churches this noble
city has like subject unto GOD, but his good pleasure was to make choice of
this (the most notable Beacon of the land) as thereby to express his anger
unto al, if we repent not. Again, the fire fell not on our dwelling houses at
home, but only on the house of God: Even thereby, not only to convince us of
sin, for the abuse of his holy Temple, but also to signify to the best of
our souls, that we which bear the name of GOD, and his religion in our
profession, have not in sincerity answered our faith, and therefore are
under the censure of Gods anger. And surely, this double abuse is great this
day in England: For there is no place so egregiously polluted as the Church
of Paul's, or his word more contemned in any place. What means else that
accustomed walking, and profane talking in time of the Sermon there? Neither
is there any Nation more blessed with purity of godly doctrine in truth, or
any (so blessed) less fruitful unto GOD. Although I confess it, with
thankfulness to God, yt his Gospel has won to him, infinite souls in this
nation which do the Lord, his holy word, Sacraments, and Sabbath, as well in
this City, as in the realm abroad. But at the coming of this fiery
Preacher, we then cried (namelye this City, her Graces Court, and the whole
land) Lord, we have sinned, spare thy people O Lord: And so our mediator
Christ stayed the fire. And then also the Lord stirred up the hearts of our
honorable authority to give from her Majesty, Proclamation, to take away the
abuse thereof, which was an approved digging: but alas, how long did we obey?
even but a short space, for as the law came but for that house of stone, so
our stony hearts, cast off with speed, the very memory of this just
threatening Preacher. And now who makes accounts of it? well, well: nay, woe,
woe, to us, if we so loosely look about us. O Lord, what hearts have we? Shall
a sudden falling of a rotten and old Turret of Syloah, be by our Master
Christ instituted a doctor of repentance to the Jews, (for the fall whereof
reason could afforde us some cause) and shall we, or dare we so despise this
special messenger from God, this burned steeple, which calls us al to daily
repentance? Come hither to me, ye comers to the City (says Paul's steeple)
and behold the anger of our God. For as ye see me, so I remain corrected by
his revenging hand, to call you to repentance. But O Lord, thou God of Heaven,
this City, this land, this place, yea this day has forgotten this. Make us
mindful (O Lord) of thee, and penitently sorrowful for our sins against
thee, we humbly beseech thee for Christ's sake. And as Gods extraordinary
preachers came not alone, but had some one or other joined unto them, as Esaias
had Micah, Jeremy had Ezechiel, and Hoseas had Amos: So this fire from Heaven
has to associate his message in earth Gods swift arrowe, and burning sword of
pestilence, chieflye in this City, Psalm. 91.5.6.
from whence it has bin sundry times, in sundry places dispersed, and in
such sort, as our gracious Queen, and godly Magistrates have given forth
holy laws for prayer and fasting, to move the people to repentance, thereby
acknowledging this sword to be far other, and beyond natural cause of
infection. From heaven we have had also a third extraordinary Preacher of
Gods anger, and warning to repentance, which has bin termed, The gentle
warning, the Lord make us meek spirited in humble sort, to be rightly
warned by it. But howsoever it fare with us, yet these terms and godly acts
do approve these for Messengers sent of GOD, and that (by our consent in word
and deed) to our forewarning. The blazing Stars I speak not of, as having
foresighte to see this cavil: and why they to England more than to other
countries? wherefore I care to give us our own messengers. From earth also the
Lord has most notably cited us to judgment, and signified his sentence
ready to be executed, but for the mediation of our Christ, and that alone. What
means else that monstrous moving of that twentye acres of ground, Anno.
1570. as our allowed Chronicles do report? or such sundry inundation of
waters in every coast of our Country? Such monstrous byrthes, strange
sicknesses, and sudden deaths? But last of all, An. 1580. Aprilis. 6
that universal Earthquake, and like watershake, which drove us into present
fear, and forced the whole state to Christian prayer, and care to repent? If
now the Preachers of our time have not cause to say, Our God is angry and
prepared unto battle? wherefore also I would not have you to forgett our present
Irishe wars, which, although they be far from the heart, yet God grant us
to remember, that his power is great, our sins are ripe, and the enemies
purpose, (that traitorous Doctor Saunders and his adherents) right dangerous,
But if we truly turn to the Lord, he will turn to us and them, with their
aides, to utter confusion, as his grace has showed himself a loving God to us,
in their late overthrow in those parts, his name for ever be praised.

Now beloved Magistrates of both estates your office is at this instant
required, to dig and give compose, and above all, you must take care that
standing in the gappe to stop the breach for the people, you be not like
wicked, as the people: for their shall you perish before them, and great shall
be our confusion. The Lord Mayor must not be a Protestaunt, during his
office, and a Papist after, and so for his office sake, show himself occupied
about the Fig tree of his City: but he with his brethren ought to be touched
and sealed in heart to the Lord, that at all times, as they are preferred to
their people, so they be godly, religious, upright, and holy above the
people, that their prayer and Christian practice may ben defense for the
City, not only against the pernicious purpose of the evil disposed: but also
against the just revenging hand of God, when he warns us of iminent danger.
So likewise must the Bishops those reverend Fathers, and the other
councillors and governors abroad be, and have the same condition engraven in
their spirit with the pensil of God, that they may repair the broken hedge,
remove the hindering matter from the root of the Fig tree, and lay compose to
moisten, supple, and comfort the life thereof. Which grace God grant you for
your selves, and us for Christ's sake. But our text does direct your holy
labors unto two things: First, that you take from the tree, that which does
hinder the growth to the fruit thereof: Then that you lay to the root of the
same that dung or compose which may administer help to the life of it. But I
pray you let pore Haggai Haggai. 1.1.
deliver unto Zorobabel and Iehosuah the thing which mightily does hinder the
growth of the Fig tree, which may seem to your discretions, so much more
worthy of receipt, as that the same is sent to your memories, by that
Princely Prophet David. And it is that: Psalm. 1.1.
Zorobabell and Iehosuah, (of a mild purpose) have used to the enemies of this
tree such merciless pity, that by such ouermuche lenity, three pestilent
cancre worms are bred in the earth about the root, and eat up the life of
the Fig tree. But if they be not with speed dug and cast away, to the
help of his life, it is of necessity, that he must be cut down. their
travailing day of such Popish conception. As the last good Fridaye in our
parts, was a suspected number gathered, near unto a suspected place, where
that horrible sacrilegious Mass, if it often be not, may with great ease,
void of fear, be daily sacrificed. Their private persuasions are great, and
wrought by sundry, sometime by wandering Priests, (harbored of no beggars)
sometime by popish Physicians (greatly magnified of our greater Papists) and
these secreately solicit the Romish religion, to men in town and fields,
and in their weary beds, and much moleste the valor of the Fig tree.

But these sinners stand the more stiffely in their Italienated sin, because
they stand in that way, which many of our Worshipful and Noble States be
delighted in: to which Popish sin all lashing lust is fixed, and their
state does breed such stoutnesse, as it is even at this day deemed a sin,
either to reprove the^ for it, or this Cancre worm of death in them. And can
we look to have either Atheism, Popery, or Popish hypocrisy, once but a
little disgraced, so long as the Chair of aucthority in most of our shires is
filled with the Popish scorner? Sundry letters are carefully sent many times to
search out Papists, but they come to the hands of such, often, as have more
cause, to be called themselves, than to be in commission to convent others. And
what is then done? the packet once received, happily there is some priuye
packing (of the Popish Justice) to those known or suspected, so as for the
time, non est inuentus, is a good return: So is God dishonored, her Majesty's
godly endeavor disturbed, her honorable Council set to School, and the poor
Fig tree vndigged to her death. You see then of necessity it is, if ye will
(my Lords which have the authority to place into the Chair of Justice)
rightly dig, the hurting matter from the Fig tree:) you must take away this
earth, that countenance and purpose which earste have fed these cancre
worms, I mean that lenity and merciless pity, which in hope to win
thereby the hollow Papist, have greatly hurt and hyndered the true hearted
Protestant. And the very ground of your labor, and first setting the spade
to the earth, is and must here begin to dig out the Papist from the Chair
of auctority: For you may not forgette, that not only they are fruitelesse
themselves, but they make the ground also barre^, wheresoever they rule, yea,
they bite at the prospering Fig tree, they whet the teeth of their
confederates and are practicing their purpose (under the pretense of her
Majesty's power) against the branches, that their cunning may excel against
the body, and the very root of the tree of this common weal in the day of
their decree. But if that the Atheiste, hypocritical and scorning Papiste were
altogether discontinued the seat of authority: No doubt thereof, but their
agents the Popish practitioners, that so conspire into the hearts of men,
against Gods truth, durst not, or could have such freedom, neither such
standing in sin, or so mighty prevailing aid would be lent unto it. Oh
Lord, work this yet more effectually, for thy holy names sake, and for thy
love to the dresser of our Fig tree. And London, London, thy Rulers and
Governors must well look unto it: For, a little digging in the Country
does drive these cancred Papists into thee. So as thou art become a mother
to many godly: So also, a Nurse (unknown to thee) to many a wicked Papist,
which break up their being in the country, and lurk in the City of London,
and so are most safe when they are nearest the place of their deserved
danger: as near to the court, the Council, the Bishops consistory,
Westminster Hall, and the sword of authority. Wherefore my Lord Bishop must
be still vigilant, the Judges diligent, the Mayor painful, all to pick out
the scorning Papiste, this pestilent cancre worm, which for more safety,
creeps so near the root of the Fig tree. The reverend Fathers must be
helped with the aid of their preaching brethren. The godly Judges with the
help of their associats. And surely (praised be God for it) England had never
in man's memory, so many good christian Lawyers, which with their study to the
Common laws, have bin so able to benefit the bodies in ye common weal, as now
they are, by their increase in godly knowledge of his holy laws, to furnish
well the Fig tree to her growth in spirit, for the good success to his
church. This the^ remains (my Lords) that you being our godly Fathers of the
law, endeavor with godly strife, to excel one another in digging: and that you
become for your zeal in knowledge, so religious, and for your dexterity in
Justice so upright, that al other godly Judges succeeding you may with reverent
regard, fear to pronounce ye sentence of Justice after you, least they should
not equal your equity to Papist or Protestant, but chiefly in digging of evil
matter from the Fig tree. To your godly furtherance herein, I pray you read
Psalm. 101.

The second work of the Magistrate of either estate, is to lay to the root
of the Fig tree that which may supple, and comfort, and mightily help the
weakened life of the same, and is here, by our heavenly dresser, exampled unto
such, namely, earnest and hearty prayer unto God, to humble his church, to
quicken her, to make supple and nimble her veins, by his spirit, that his sap
may be vigent, and working in her making her more and more fruitful: And then
to dung the same tree, that is, to indicte to it such godly exercises, as may
rightly humble their hearts, and supple their souls before God. And that is,
the exercise of true mourning and fasting to the Lord, approved in the holy
Scriptures. Our time does ask it, our sins, his just anger, and the wickeds
glorious brag does enforce it, I mean not, that ordinary course of
abstinence, which the laws have wholesomely enjoined only, but I pray, in
humbleness of my heart, that to those provisions, might be added the purpose
of the Lord, in the outward exercise of Fasting: That is, that as our plagues
are to be feared greatelye, because our lives are so far out of order, our
mourning and fasting should be such, as might be extraordinary, and yet not
void of Gods ordinance, and may be said to consist in these two branches:
Namely, in the outward exercise of abstine^ce, and in the inward drawing of
water. The outward exercise of true fasting to humble and supple the heart,
the scripture commends unto us thus: First, that we by authority, I say,
by authority of the Pastor, and Magistrate, Zoph. 2.1. Joel 1 and. 2. Jonas.
3.7. Nehem, 9.1 1. Sam. 7 3. Ezra. 8.21.
be assembled into the house of God, there to do these things, for, and
during the whole day, which ought to be as a Sabbath unto us. First the
Ministers (Gods Prophets) are to preach to us the law of GOD, and to
signify our transgressions unto God, against ye same, which then shall most
humble us, when of purpose we assemble to that end: (and hereof read we in
Jeremy. 36.6. Iere. 36.6
and the whole Chapter: In Nehemiah, the eight and ninth Chapter, to the
diligent reading whereof, at thy coming home, I beseech thee good people.)
Whose Sermons, must be endeavored to show the cause of our assembly, and to
lay open, Gods anger against us, and the imminent danger that hangs over
us, which can not but prove the hearts of every such, as have any life of
Gods spirit in them, though by our insolency, abusing his great patience,
the same lie as almost dead within us. And further, the Preachers office in
this fasting day, is, to pray God heartily for the people. 1. Sam. 7.4. Joel.
2.17. Their direction to the people is ruled to us thus. That they in that day
of fast, should not only earnestly for ever after, utterly deteste all sin and
iniquity, but that they also obstain from things otherwise approved lawful,
and requisite, yea, very necessary. And these may be thus divided: Into the
godly abstinence of the Christian faster, from lawful and godly pleasures: And
into the like abstinence from necessary sustenaunce. Let the Bridegroom go
out of his chamber, and the Bride forth of her closet (says the Prophet) Joel.
2.16. Let man and beast put on sackcloth, says the law of Niniuie, Jonah,
3.8. which law, though it strictly tie not us, yet ought Christians to
consider, how absurd a thing it is, and far from the Analogy, of a true
humbled spirit, in the day of fast to assemble with the church in proud,
shining, and glorious apparel: for nothing may be the^ and there admitted,
which does not move to mourning. And for that our labor and trade of
occupatio^ and merchandise, works profit and so pleasure, and the use of it
that day, does work impediment to our fast, therefore, Daniel. 9.5.
the day of Gods fast we must solemnize as a Sabbath to the LORD, as to the
Jews it was commanded, Leu. 17.26.30.31 32. chapter ch 23.7.8.
and as a christian help, to our humility, before the Lord, is yet by
authority to be embraced, as the Lord shall work them, to think it
convenient. The holy abstinence from meats, Esther. 4.16 Jonah. 3.7.
is also in our godly fast required, not that thereby, God is simply pleased,
but that thereby, our bodies should be less sturdy, and our spirits more
humbled and apt to pray.

And this is the very cause why abstinence from (not one kind of meat, as
flesh only, but from) all sorts of sustenaunce, is in the Scriptures so often
required, namely, that neither fullness should make us lustye and proud
against our God, or drowsy and sleepie, when we were to hear of our sin:
but that our hungrye bodies, might teach our pyned souls, what need we
have to cry for the food of life, and how unable to live without his hand,
whom we so mightily offend, and that the biting worm of hunger, might help
to tame, and bring obedient to the spirit, that flesh, which farced full,
has so contemned, to stoop unto his God. Lo, this is the true use of our
abstinence, from all meats in Gods holy fasting day. But to abstain from
meats, by choice, and to use other, for religion, is merely evil and
Diabolical. 1. Tim. 4. Again, to abstain from meats, and not to use the
inward exercise, is to profane the holy right of fasting unto God, Esaias. 58.

Samuel at Mizpeh, when ye Lord had returned the Arc, and increased the zeal
to right religion, in his people, which twenty years and more had bin
returned from the Philistines. Samuel said, 1. Sam. 7.1.
If ye be truly turned to the Lord, and come to him with your hearts, then
put away the strange Gods from amongst you, and Ashtaroth, and dyrecte your
hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only, and he shall deliver you out of
the hands of the Philistines. Then the children of Israel did put away Baalim
and Ashtaroth and served the Lord only. And Samuel said: Gather al Israel
together at Mizpeh, and I will pray for you, and they gathered together to
Mizpeh, and drew water, and powered it out, before the Lord, and fasted the same
day, and said there: We have sinned against the Lord, etc. This time
answers ours, and here after our twentye years and odd, of Gods merciful
return to us, what does he ask of us, but that we, if we be come to him
with our hearts, put away the Popish Christ, and that Ashtaroth, that Italian
God and Romish Priest the Pope, and his pelf?

And secondelye, that we direct our hearts, not to our mincing, but to his
Majesty, and serve him only, and not our carnal policy, that we fast and
pray, and draw water, and power it out before the Lord. That is, that hearing
our sins, reproved by his word, and having our bodies, brought under in
abstinence, our spirits humbled, at the sight of our sins, we should
with Christian compunction, dig the stonye fountain of our hearts, and with
David, Daniel, Peter, Magdalene, and the Saints of God draw thence the
salted water of the same, and plentifullye pour it forth, by the conducte of
the eye, and that, before the Lord, not before Satan, thoroughe despair,
with Judas or Achytophel, or hypocriticallye before men, with Achab and
Ishmael, 2. K. 21 27. Iere. 41.1.6
purposing no amendment, but after mischief: but simply before the Lord, with
these Israelites and godly Samuel in Mizpeh, and unfeignedly cry, and confess
to his Majesty and fatherly mercy: We have sinned Lord and done unjustly:
We have neglected the glory of thy Arc and Testamente: We have loathed our
heavenly Mannah, thy blessed word: We have left our first love, and become
barren Fig trees. Wherefore, thy wrath is kindled, and thy fury is waxen hot.

But behold, we thus embrace thy son, our savior Christ, and prostrate our
selves before thee: We cast from our selves, all superstition, and that
antechristian Priest, thy great enemy: We humble our selves in this thine
approved exercise: We offer our selves by our only sacrificing Priest, Romans
12.1.
Christ Jesus, unto thee, a holy turned people, and lively offering, which is
our reasonable serving of thee: We therefore eftesoones beseech thee to spare
us, at our only mediator God and man, Jesus, our dressers petition, and cease
thy ready sentence: Cut them down. As these laws for fasting, which her
Majesty has godlily given us, be good: So let us pray God, that this our
like addition, by her gracious authority may be added, and so shall the Fig
tree, have rightly, his most fertile compose, Amen Lord Jesus. But let us
know, that neither Samuel can profitably pray, or the people rightly and
plentifully draw water, and fast to please GOD, except they turn in heart
to God.

And further note of Samuels words, that the duty of true conversion, is,
first to cast out of the Chair and Church, Baalym and Ashtaroth, the Italian
Priest and his adherents, and the^ to direct our hearts unto the Lord, in the
right addressing to his fast, which shall bring undoubtedly his old aduaile,
to our present Fig tree, that is, though, when we be best disposed at
Mizpeh, the Philistines take occasion to work our spoil (some by fawning
flatterye, and some by open war) yet the Lord will rowse up his strength
for us, and he will assemble the chariots of his Angels, and the artillery of
his thunderclappes (if men were not of force by him) to disperse the
confederates against us, that with easy pursuit we shall overthrow all
Popish Philistines: As, to our comfortable example and doctrine, we may read
the Lord to have done, for these his beloved in Mizpeh, 1. Sam. 7.7. etc.

And finally our kingdom, by his mighty hand, shall be then preserved, her
Majesty in much godliness, long continued, and we, her faithful subjects,
shall henceforth live in all godly peace, with ye whole Israel of God. This, and
al other thy graces, we beseech thee (o Lord) to grant in thy great and rich
mercy, to her majesty thy seruante, her counsel, to al spiritual pastors,
Magistrates and people, to ye whole realm of England, and her Graces
dominions, that we may not be cut down as barren Fig trees, but may endure
blessed, as ye Palm tree, by ye rivers side planted, and every of us, to bring
forth our allotted fruits. in due season, in the purity of Faith, by the
measure of true Charity, in the garden of a good conscience, through Christ
our Lord, to who^, together with thee (O dear Father) and the holy Ghost,
three distinct persons, and one eternal God, be all honor, glory, power, and
dominion, for ever and ever, Amen.

Lauds Deo per Christum seruatorem nostrum.
FINIS.



