THE CHVRCHES DELIVERANCE, Containing Meditations and short notes upon The
book of HESTER.

In remembrance of the wonderful deliverance from the Gunpoulder-Treason.

BY THOMAS COOPER.

AT LONDON. Imprinted by G. Eld for T. Adams, and are to be sold at the white
Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1609.

To the right worshipful, and truly religious Ladies, the mother and the
daughter, The Lady Katherine Rotheram, and the Lady Elizabeth Wakerings my very
good Aunt, and Cousine; Beloved in the LORD, grace and peace in GOD the Father
through JESUS CHRIST our common Savior.
RIght Christian Ladies, whom I love in the truth, till JESUS CHRIST be
perfited in you. It has pleased the LORD of glory, by a long, yet mild and
fatherly visitation, of late to summon me, his unprofitable servant to make
ready my Account: In the casting up whereof finding my self indebted unto your
Ladyships, for many christian and extraordinary kindnesses conferred upon me, a
despised bra^ch and outcast in the world: I have indeauoured in these my poor
labors to make acknowledgement of my debt, not with any purpose to clear the
score (for how should true members of Christ's body not be ever bound to each
other) but rather with intent to provoke to a further debt: because the debt of
love, as it ought always to be paid, so it must always be due, and the more
it is paid the more the debt is increased. Til it be at length perfited, and so
fully recompensed in heaven. Whether seeing it pleases my god very mercifully
to hasten me by keeping me through many tedious and linggring infirmities; in
an earnest hungring and fainting after my deliverance; therefore have I rather
hastened to perform this duty unto your Ladyships, as to whom in regard of
your places such mementos, from a withered branche cannot be unseasonable: and
most seasonable on his part, to be preformed, who while he has time, and can
do no other good, yet has obtained mercy of the LORD, to pu^ his servants in
mind of his wonderful mercies toward them; that the memorial thereof may
hold them in due thankfulness unto so gracious a father, that so their
happiness in this life may be a pledge unto them of that glorious crown which
remains for the Saints in that blessed Kingdom: These are my hearts desire
unto our gracious GOD for you. And that you may be happily furthered thereto,
and have a true and lively glass to behold the bounty of our GOD, I have bin
bold to commit to your remembrance that wonderful deliverance of our Church
and State, from that horrible plot of poulder-Treason; Wherein every true
hearted Christian and Subject may take a full view of al GODS former mercies
toward him, and if he do believe, may see in the same a full assurance of
whatsoever blessings of GOD are yet laid up in store for him. The greatness
whereof, howsoever I have heretofore endeauored once and again to measure, and
so commend my scantling thereof, to the due consideration of a thankeful heart
yet seeing the measure of that blessing is like the waters of the sanctuary,
which the more they were measured, the more unmeasurable they did appear, till
at length they became a deep, that could not be passed over. Therefore I have
bin glad to take this opportunity of my days yet lengthned out, once again to
measure this great deep: And by an history of a like wonderful deliverance, to
revive the dead memory thereof in the cares of a secure and unthankful world.
That so I might both pay my vows unto my GOD for my life of late renewed me as
a prey, and as near as I may have my conversation in heaven, employing the
small residue of my wretched life in meditations of GODS wonderful mercies
which is the only service that the saints perform in heaven. Oh what a
glorious thing it is to be thankful, when by doing this duty we come nearest
to the Saints in glory! And how will this wonderful deliverance teach us to be
thankful? How is this deliverance of the Jews from Hamans malice a most
lively glass to behold our deliverance from the bloody Papists. And may not
the LORD lengthen out my thread until I have finished this story. This that I
now tender you is but only the gate into the city, if it please GOD that I
may go through the City (as Jonas did) who knows whether by that time Niniue
may repent and turn, and so the LORD may repent him of the evil, and revive
the good that is ready to dye. The patient abiding of the righteous is joy, and
he that believes makes not haste: yet If we believe, we shall see greater
things then these, and blessed are we if we see a far off. A lesson which
for a farewell I do heartily commend unto your Ladyships, not only to see into
the present, but to behold a far off, to look up to Moses to the recompense
of the reward, and not to esteem to be accounted the son of Pharoahs
daughter, if we see not the present blessings how can we see a far off? And
yet we may so doat on the present, as not to desire to see a far off, and if
we desire not, is not the Lord just to give us our present desire, and send
leanesse into our souls. Behold therefore your present happiness in that
wonderful deliverance, yet look up with Moses, and see therein also your
future happiness. And so I heartily commend your Ladyships to the view of this
glass, and therein also to the mercy of the almighty, who give you wisdom to
redeem the time by seeing your faces often herein, and having viewed, not to
forget what Jacob did graciously remembr, Genes. 32, Luke, 17. 12.
and what our Savior wished to be remembered of his Disciples: So shall you
prevail with GOD, and find favor with men: your age shall be a crown of
glory, and your posterity shall be blessed: They shall be of you which shall
build the old waste places and shall be called the repairers of the breach: the
sto^es of the field shall be in league with you and the beasts of the field shall
be at peace with you: you shall laugh at destruction and death and shall not be
afraid of the beasts of the earth. GOD has and shall deliver you from all
adversity, and you shall see the felicity of the chosen: these blessings the
LORD of glory increase upon your Ladyships, to your full perfection in JESUS
CHRIST. To whose blessed protection I most heartily commend both you and yours.

From my house at Couentry January 1609. Your poor kinsman, most bounden in
the Lord Jesus. THOMAS COOPER.

To the Christian and discerning Reader, wisdom to see the plague, and grace
to hide himself.
WHen great blessings breed security, and profaneness, we must look for
sudden judgments. These are begun and have increased in the land, so much the
more fearful, because they are especially spiritual and the rather dangerous,
because they are less discerned, or, discerned only with a carnal eye, which
conceiving them natural and ordinary, yield them only carnal and ordinary
respect: ^uery man prouides for his own, but the house of the Lord, lies
waste: And so we flatter our selves that all is well, when nothing can be
well, it going ill wit^ the principal, we may sow much but reap little, and
what we gather is put into a broken bag, because the Lords house lies
waste, and every man looks to his own. Our great deliverance from that
devilish plot of the poulder treason, as it was wonderful, so it has passed
as a dream, or as a nine days wonder. And behold now we are awoke, we are a
hungery, pinched with famine both of body and soul: The bird was in the snare,
but we have let her loose. A blessing was offered, but the mess of pottage
has been preferred: Benaydad finds favor, and is become a broken reed to
Israel: and may not our hands be pierced therewith? Yea the whole heart is
sick and the head is heavy: and from the crown of the head unto the sole of the
foot, there is nothing whole therein: and which is the greatest misery, though
there be bakon in Gilead yet the hurt of the Virgin Israel is not healed.
Because the dead flies do corrupt the precious ointment of the Apothecary, and
the hurt of the daughters of Gods people, is healed with sweet words, crying
peace peace so that we, looked for peace, but behold trouble, because the Arm
of flesh has deceived us, and we have not rested upon the strong Tower: yet
the lives and is good unto Israel, even unto those that are true of heart. The
wise man sees the valley of Achor, and enters therein as into the door of
hope: And though the plague devour but the hindermost part of the host, yet
he sees the plague with the eyes of faith, and fear, and so hides himself,
by departing from evil: that so not being partaker in the sin, he may not
share in the judgment: yet must judgment begin at the house of God, that so
the faithful being tried may find rest, while the pit is dug for the
wicked. And whosoever seeks unto the Lord God of Israel in his affliction, he
is found of him: The more Israel is oppressed, the more it increases, and by
this we know that the Lord favors us, because he suffers not our enemies to
triumph over us: Oh that we could triumph over them in the remembrance of that
wonderful deliverance, that our God has wrought for us! How might we by this
have triumphed, if we had pursued that victory and rooted out Ameleck, that
would have rooted out us: but al for the best. Ameleck must remain as a prick
in our sides, to let out our corrupt and profane blood; our enemies must yet
be further means of our purging and preparing: that when the stones are
thoroughly squared, Gods house may be perfectly advanced: And the setting up of
the Arc will be the final overthrow of Dagon. In patience therefore (dear
brethren) committee we our selves into the hands of our faithful Creator.
That his hand is not shortened, we may see in that wonderful deliverance. In
memorial whereof, I have now the third time, tendered those meditations, that I
might pay my vows unto the Lord, for the sanctifing of that general
deliverance by a special deliverance unto me: and the rather, because the Lord
has even now of late delivered me out of the horrible pit, and restored unto
me the Joy of his salvation, that I might declare the wonders of the Lord in
the land of the living: The Lord has renewed me as an example unto them which
shall in time to come believe this wonderful work. And yet, (blessed be our
faithful God) this is a day of good tidings. The bush is not consumed the
scepter of Antichrist is broken, his sin repents, and the Lord reigns,
and hell is enlarged. And why should I hold my peace? Surely if my sight fail
me not, I see in that deliverance, Amelecks utter overthrow: Oh that Moses
hands may be held up still, that Ameleck may be destroyed from under heaven,
for the better strengthening of my weak knees and feeble hands to the due
meditation of that wonderful deliverance! I have spared some few hours from my
public study, and spent them in the meditation of a like wonderful
deliverance of the Church of God in former times. Very malicious was the enemy
when nothing would satisfy him but the utter rooting out of the Church of God.
And surely much more malicious our enemies, that had plotted the extreme
overthrow both of Church and commonwealth. 2. Very patient and wise was the
Lord in giving the adversary so far his desire, as even to have brought his
mischief to the point of execution; to make his confusion the greater, and the
Churches deliverance more admirable and comfortable. And surely that our
Adversaries had brought their plotte within less then eight hours execution
after two years secure contriuing, and ripening thereof: This as it magnified
the admirable providence of the Lord in ordering the actions of the wicked, so
it tended to the greater astonishment and confusion of Gods enemies, and,
notwithstanding the careless security of the Atheist, yet has, and shall
make, to the eternal comfort of the true believer. 3. Wonderful was the Lord
in disapoynting the practice of Haman and delivering of his Church: but that
the enemy was cast in the pit, which he had dug for others. Oh! how did
this magnify the justice of God, how did it confirm the faith of the
afflicted? And surely did not the Lord show himself much more wonderful in
our deliverance? Was it a small matter to deliver us as a prey out of the snare
of the Fowler, unless also our adversaries were consumed with the poulder
which they had prepared to blow us up, by an ouer-ruling hand of the Almighty?

This was the Lords doing, and it ought to be maruailous in thy eyes: And
mark what I tell thee? Never look to see the face of God in glory for thy
final release out of all thy troubles, unless thou do see the especial love
of thy God in this deliverance: and so still desire to see further; to the
increase of thy most holy faith; that so believing thou may see greater
things then these: yea best able to see a far off, even the final
deliverance of the Church out of all her troubles. For thy further direction
and provoking therefore to this Christian duty, In the fear of God make use of
this history which I do tender thee as a glass, wherein thou may daily view
that wonderful deliverance. I have as the Lord has enabled me, considered thy
weakness, and provided accordingly: That thy edge may be still sharpened, and
the dullness thereof prevented. I have divided the story in it parts: tendering
thee only for a taste, some brief obsruations on the two first Chapters:
which contain only the preface and the preparation to the history: yet
furnished and especially concluded, die the divine dispensation, with such fit
variety of matter, as may serve thee well for a full enterview of Gods
providence in the deliverance of Princes and Kingdoms from treasons and
conspiracies. Here for the time I make my first pause: studying breuity,
because this wanton age cannot endure long discourses, and my health will not
endure long studies: if thy appetite be sharpened, pray for health, and liberty
of the Gospel: and (so thou lust not after quails) thou may shortly by Gods
mercy have more variety. For the present consider my weakness, and magnify
Gods power: let the Printer bear his own burden, and yet as he has
provided, so ease thy self, and him, and me: Read with prayer, appetite, and
humility: So may thou attain the kernel: And for the shell neglect it (...)
it speak the language of Canaan: let it guide thee to our common City which
is above: whether I am hasting: and to this end, tender thee this light, that
we may happily mere there. The Lord hasten his work, confound Antichrist,
perfect the gathering in of the first borne, set up his standerd and glorify
his son, in all his Saints. So be it.

Thine in our common Savior, THOMAS COOPER.

Observations out of the first CHAPTER.
1. When the wicked are in prosperity then is the Church of God near great
danger. 2. The Chronology of the history examined and determined. 3. Of the
truth of the Scripture. 4. The wicked enjoy the greatest blessings in this
life. 5. God is the Author of government. 6. The benefit of government. 7.
The wicked do abuse their prosperity to the maintenance of the flesh. 8.
Prosperity of the wicked breeds security. 9. God translates Kingdoms, and
remoueth the seats thereof, 10. That Feasting is lawful. 11. The conditions
thereof: who may Feast. 12. What causes may further it. 13. The manner thereof,
and matter. 14. The end of Feasting. 15. The virtues of the heathen how to be
judged off. 16. Courtly state, and life, 17. policy of worldlings confounded.
18. Princes not unnecessarily to burden their subjects. 19. They are
especially to labor for inward glory. 20. Like Prince like people. 21. Wicked
Princes sent for the sines of the people. 22. Princes not to show their
magnificence in belly-cheere. 23. Dancing of men and women together unlawful.
24. God punishes sin with sin. 25. Drunkenness the effect of Feasting. 26.
The use of holy Ironies in the word. 27. Ma^ke of drunkenness. 28. Profane
persons abuse their wines to be especially baits of lust. 29. Wives how to be
chosen. 30. How to be used. 31. The wicked abuse Gods blessings to their
further condemnation. 32. Gods blessings to the wicked prove scourges in this
life. 33. Courtiers slaves to their Princes lusts. 34. The Courtly life how to
be accepted and used. 35. Rules for behavior in the Court. 36. The wicked
distracted and confounded in all the^r business. 37. Husbands duties to their
wives, and wives to their husbands: Wicked Princes keep state by anger. 38. Of
anger and the occasions. 39. The lawfulness thereof and circumstances required
therein. Causeless anger how to be repressed and reformed. 40. Cloakes of sin
are means of increase thereof. 41. Worldly Counselors how vainly employed.
42. Courtiers Usually brokers for sin and contriuers of each others
punishment. 43. Counselors to be chosen out of the Nobility. 43. 44.
Qualities of good counselors especially they must be religious. 45. How to
disce^ne them. 45. Princes must not be strange to their subjects but be
affable. 46. Tyrants their marks and punishment. 47. Wicked pretend law for
the satisf^ing of their mischiefs. 48. Whether a man may be his own judge?
49. How a man may be witness in his own cause 50. How a man should be approved
when he stands upon the testimony of his innocence to the world. 51. Wherein a
man may be judge in his own case. 52. Princes are to refer themselves to
the judgment of their laws. 53. Wicked Princes employ their servants in base
purposes and they are willingly slaves thereto. 54. Sins of great ones
exemplary. 55. Politicians in satisfiing of the lusts of wicked Princes provide
for their own. 55. Flatterers and malicious persons abuse Princes with
whisperings, and surmises. 56. Evidence must be of things known not surmised,
and of such as know the party. 57. Malice and flattery unfit accusers. 58.
Punishment must not exceed the nature of sin. 59. Judges must not accept
persons in judgment. 60. Worldling prefer the private before the public
goood. 61. Wicked have glorious clokes for their end and purposes. 62. Of
exemplary justice when to be used. 63. Terror no breeder of true love, where
how to reclaim a froward wife etc. 64. Wicked Princes easily yield to bad
counsel. 65. Wicked instruments of the fulfilling of Gods righteous will in
their punishments for his glory and the good of the Church. 66. God is the
author of promotion. 67. The prosperity of the wic^ked short and dangerous. 68.
Wicked in persecuting their lusts serve Gods righteous will. 69. Husbands are to
rule over their wives. 70. And how far. 71. Wicked must free their sin by
making it common to others. 72. Laws to be published in the vulgar tongue.
Observations out of the second CHAPTER.
1. Sin how it cease in the wicked. 2. Gods providence discovered herein. 3.
Occasions of the ceasing of sin in the wicked. 4. How sin is brideled in the
wicked by Gods spirit, and how by other means. 5. Impossible for the wicked to
forsake sin. 6. The rage of the wicked shall cease for the good of the
Church. 7. Anger must be renownced, and how. 8. The conscience calls the wicked
to an account in this life. 9. The use of it in them. 10. The particular
evidence of conscience. 11. The accusation of the conscience in the wicked, an
hindrance to repentance. 12. Credit in the wicked opposed to conscience,
whereby repentance is hindered. 13. Good justice herein. 14. The wicked how
chosers hereof. 15. The conscience Gods executioner in the condemnation of the
wicked. 16. False rules whereby the wicked justify their actions. 17. How they
dull and dead the conscience. 18. Conscience and credit in the godly go
together. 19. Laws what perpetual, and how to be antiquated. 20. Worldlings
why earnest for the eternizing of their laws. 21. Vows and promises what, and
how to be kept, how to be ordered. 22. The sovereignty of conscience. 23. The
wickedn i the troubles of conscience run to the world, and carnal helps. 24.
Courtiers drown their princes in pleasure. 25. Wounded conscience how truly to
be relieved. 26. Second marriage not unlawful. 27. Beauty warily to be proposed
in the choice of a wife. 28. Godly avoid such occasions as have ^tyced them
unto sin. 29. Profane Courtiers ready to satisfy the lust of their Prince.
30. The best gifts of the wicked. 31. Matters of state to be carried with
complement. 32. Wherhe a wife to be chosen, whether abroad in an other country,
or at home. 33. Tyrants prey and riot, on the goods and bodies of their people.
34. Misery of such as live under Tyrants. 35. Princes how far to command
their subjects. 36. The confusion of Idolatry and carnal wisdom. 37. Natures
infirmities to be cleansed and abstinency to be used therein. 38. Outlandish
fashions unlawful. 39. Painting of women unlawful. 40. Young heads fit to
give council to tyrants. 41. Sin in patient of delay. 42. Sin how to be
prevented. 43. Motions of Gods spirit how to be entertained. 44. The profane
guise of effeminate Princes. 45. That Mordecal was not carried away in the
Captivity. 46. Scripture not to be strayned. 47. Gods providence in planting
his children fitly, and for his glory and their good. 48. As also in planting
the godly among the wicked. 49. Gods children removed out of their habitation
and why. 50. Gods children kept undefiled among the wicked. 51. The Godly best
company. 52. Why we may converse with the wicked and how. 53. GOD gives his
children favor in the eyes of the wicked. 54. God no accepter of persons. 55.
The continuance of the Church and condition thereof, to the worlds end. 56. The
lot thereof to be scattered upon the face of the earth. 57. Gods faithfulness
in preserving the Church for ever. 58. The names to be given to children. 59.
Genealogies how recorded in the word 60. Children shall not be punished for
the fathers offense. 62. God continues and blesses the posterity of the
righteous. 63. Posterity how to be preserved. 64. The lot of Gods children to
go into Captivity. 65. Church how prepared to captivity. 66. Gods judgments
are to be recorded and meditated. 67. Benefits of Gods judgments. 68. God
often changes the outward porsperity and visibility of his Church. 69. Changes
of the Church tend to the exceeding good thereof. 70. The world confounded by
the changes of the Church. 71. Uses of the afflictions of the Church. 72. Great
ones drink deep of the cup of vengeance. 73. God uses great and mighty
enemies for the chastning of his Church -- as 74. Standing with his justice and
also- 75. With his mercy. 76. How to make flesh our friend. 77. God often
chastieeth his children with the same rod. 78. God chasticeth his children in
measure and by degrees. 79. Gods children are to comfort and relieve each
others in their troubles. 80. The bounty of Gods children is no snare, but
especially labors, the good of the soul. 81. God prouides for his children
in trouble with the safety of a good conscience. 82. Whether lawful for
Christians now to change their names? 82. Those which are raized to up greatest
dignities, are usually in most desperate, and low estate. 83. Kindred to
bereleeued. 84. Gods children left orphans in the world. 85. The more
excellent gifts of nature, need the straighter bridles. 86. The gifts of nature
being sanctified are good means of preferment. 87. How to use natures gift.
aright. 88. Adoption lawful though -- 89. A thing not commanded, but left
arbitrary 90. Who especially to be adopted. 91.^Einds of adoption. 92. Orphans
to be provided for. 93. God aduanceth his children by fair and likely means.
94. Gods children to yield to present necessity keeping themselves, from
apparent evil, and depending on Gods protection. 95. Gods children the nearer
preferment the greater extremities 96. God prepares his Church by afflictions
to great blessings. 97. God breaks the force of tentations, and provides
preservatives against them. 98. Gods children find favor in the eyes of
strangers. 99. Wicked have the shadows of many excellent virtues. 100. Marks
of true liberality. 101. Officers are to be faithful in distributing according
to their charge. 102. God raises his to preferment by degrees. 103. What
attendance fit for each sex. 104. Gods gives signs of his favor to his
children. 105. The best is due and bestowed on Gods Children in this life. 106.
Truth may be concealed, and how. 107. Cautions to be observed in concealing
truth. 108. Religion when and how to be given accoumpt for. 109. GOD disposes
the weakness of his children, in the accomplishment of his mercy toward them.
110. Gods children season each other with grave council and wholesome
instructions. 111. Silence a special lesson for Courtiers. 112. The safety of
Gods church ought to be our special care 113. Obedience to lawful authority,
a true mark of the child of God. 114. Sincere obedience rather respects the
power of the Commander, then the worth of the thing commanded. 115. True
obedience is performed as well in absence as in presence. 116. Parents how
far to extend their care for their children. 117. Care how it may stand with
the providence of God. 118. A mark of the wicked to riot out time. 119. Time
how to be redeemed. 120. Another badge of the wicked to riot out Gods good
creatures. 121. How to prevent the abuse of the creatures. 122. The wicked have
pretenses for their greatest abuses. 123. Rules for moderation in the
Creatures. 124. Wicked most eagerly bent upon their lusts and spare no cost,
for the satisfiing thereof. 125. Wicked Magistrates give the bridle unto sin,
and countenance wickedness. 126. Princes how to secure their estates. 127.
Pleasures of the wicked short and slippery. 128. Variety in sin greatest
snare thereto. 129. Wicked fall deeper and deeper into sin. 130. The
v^satiablenesse of the wicked in sin has this punishment attending on it in
this life that it shall not be satisfied. 131. Vnsatiablnesse in sin how to be
prevented. 132. Wicked winners or loosers, fare the worse by sin. 133. God
has a fit time to advance his children in. 134. The appoyinted time of
deliverance is not obscurely to be gathered out of the word. 135. Tokens thereof
in respect. 136. Of God. 137. Of his Church. 138. As also of the enemies
thereof. 139. Gods children in this life, adua^ced to the highest dignity. 140.
The good deeds of Gods children, are not forgotten of the Lord. 141. The
preferment of the righteous in faith. 142. Notes of faith. 143. Gods children
gracious with all men. 144. Wicked why they hate godly being forced to approve
them. 145. Princes are to be gracious in the eyes of their people, and by what
means. 146. Gods children are not always under the rod but at length find
deliverance. 147. Great blessings of GOD are to be had in remembrance by
special times appointed thereto. 148. God makes his children gracious, when it
may serve for his glory and their good. 149. God prouides a deliverer for his
Church before it be cast into the extremity of danger. 150. Mercies of God to
his, past finding out. 151. Whether great prosperity be a blessing in mercy to
gods children? 152. Whether we may pray for abundance? 153. Whether it be
lawful to receive great blessings offered? 154. Whether the minister may
receive wages for his pains? 155. Whether Hesters marriage lawful or no? 156.
Whether lawful to marry with an Infidel? 157. Feasting lawful at marriages.
158. Dedication of Feasts to the memory of particular persons. 159. When the
righteous are advanced the people rejoice. 160. Princes are not to oppress
their subjects to the inioying of their pleasures, but to give some relaxation
unto them, 161. Princes honor consists in easing their subjects of their
continual taxes. 162. Wicked brideled, and furnished with good gifts for the
good of the Church. 163. Princes are to be bountiful to their subjects. 164.
Gods children are to be liberal with all their power, according to their
ability. 165. Gods providence in unequal societies and matches. 166. The Lord
faithful in accomplishing his word. 167. The Lord accomplisheth his will by
contrary means. 168. The greatest afflictions profitable to the godly, for the
obtaining of greatest blessings. 169. The lusts of the wicked insatiable. 170.
Gods children contented with their callings and walk faithfully therein. 171.
Callings how to be left and changed. 172. Rules how to walk conscinably in our
callings. 173. Gods children not ambitious nor greedy of preferment. 174.
Aequiuocation damnable. 175. Honor does not quench love in the faithful. 176.
Marriage takes not away obedience from parents. 177. Marriage a nearer bond
then that of nature. 178. Prosperity of ye wicked slippery and subject to great
dangers. 179. God recompenceth the diligence and honest care of his children
with good success. 180. God recompenceth our love to others abundantly in our
selves. 181. Gods children in seeking the best blessings, obtain all the rest.
182. Gods children the only faithful subjects. 184. Gods children skillful in
discovery of secrets. 185. Treasos not to be concealed. 186. Treason to be
revealed in wisdom. 187. Particulars of wisdom herein. 188. A gracious wife
ought to watch over her husband, and to inform him of such dangers, as are
intended against him. 189. Gods children ought to approve and promote each or
there in their weldoing. 190. Gods providence and wisdom most eminent in the
discovery of treasons. 191. Traitors use to band themselves together for the
accomplishment of their mischiefs. 192. Great ones usually Actors in Treasons.
193. God makes instruments in sin rods to punish the same. 194. In greatest
trust greatest Treason. 195. Princes by what means they may prevent treachery.
196. Anger the complement of Courtiers. 197. The occasions of outrageous sins
and particularly of treason. 198. Princes marks of treason and rebellion. 199.
Sin not to be punished, before it be convinced, and how. 200. Traitors are to
be executed for their outrageous offenses. 201. The intent of treason
discovered is to be punished and why? 202. Gods children not unthankful for
whatsoever kindness they receive. 203. God usually meets with traitors in
this life. 204. God punishes evil servants. 205. The Lord takes notice of
the right^ousnesse of his servants, and causes the same to be recorded to
posterity, 206. Records and outward monuments necessary for the me^^^riall and
use of Gods blessings. 207. The blessings of God, are to be recorded to
posteri^.
FINIS.
FAVLTS ESCAPED, MAY BE THVS Corrected.
Page, 1. lin. 23. r. over. p. 4. l 30. r. best, p 5 l, 27. r seeing as, p, 6.
l, 20. r, and be we, and l, 26 r, gratify, and 1, 27 r, victory as also, p, 9.
l, 1. r, mercenaries, and l, 9 r, as the manner, and l, 30. r, glorious shows,
p, 10. l, 5. r, for superstition, p, 11. l, 22. r, of Statists, and l, 29. r,
and feigned, p, 16. l, 1. r, not vnvsual, and l, 27. r, Ironicall^ concessions,
and l, 23. r, mark of reproof, P, 18. l, 22. r, being now. p, 27 l, 12. r, to
the sin, p, 29. l, 20. r, as cont^^ue, p, 40. l, 6. r, and them also p, 41 l. 1
r. say that. p. 43. l, 17. r, by their Princes, p, 49 l, 7 r. to other, and l,
8. r, not only hereby, and l, ^3 r, to each in, p. 57 l, 16. r, for the same,
p, 61. l, 31 r, such as by the. p. 63. l, 21. r, a^ last the, p 68. l, 19 r.
there though, p. 71. l, 21. r, supplied in faithful, p, 72. l, 71. love
inioying, serve the country: and l, 10, 11. r, and their daughters his ha^lors.
yea their precious lives and that, which is dearer then live, their liberty yea
the, p 73. l. ^. r, therefore searching and l, 21. r both certain, p, 75 l. 6.
r, well let our court, p, 77. l, 5. r, being an orphane, p, 77, l, 9. r. become
her tutor, p, 78 l, 2. r, conceits ^ palle, and l, 12. r, we stretch the
Scriptures upon the tenters, l, 33 r. misery gracious, p, 80, l, 12. read, may
enjoy. page, 87. l, ^. read, are removed. page. 89 line, 1 r by declyning, and
line 4. read, to become the repayrer, and line 31. it condemns, page, 90
line, 15 r, to fit them, and l, 25 r, to the father of p. 92. l, 35. faithful
with God, and l, 36. r, and bound Kings, and l, 1. r, be mercyful, and l.
14. r. of his vvil, l. 37. r. graciously to. p. 97. l. 28. r drank one in. and
l. 30. r. his true repentance p, 99. l, 25. r, as it maynly, p, 102, l, 30, r,
a^^o, ciations, p, 105. l. 24 r, notable conviction p. 110. l, ^. r, more
homely, and l, 19. r. who both knows, and l, 21. r, of their st^ps, and l.
26. r, ab^ect defacing of natures, p. iii. l. 2. r, great Monarch, and l. 30. r
may revive p, 112 l 18. r, without, p, 113. l 3 r, preferred to p* 115. l, 1.
r, strong cries, and l. 6 let this strength appear. l, 15. r, in desolate, p
117. l, 10. r. enjoined. their relie^e, p. 119. l. 4. r, her kinsman, and l, 24
r, she stays not, and l. 28. r, can gi^e no other p. 120. l, 28. r, the
wicked vvors, p. 122 l, 23. r. extraordinary instinct;, and l, 27. r, out of
the, p. 124. l, 34 r, in circumstances. p, 126 l. 20. r, having s^e power, p,
127. l, 4. r, given change of, and l, 35 r we enjoy the, p, 133. l, 23. r, this
discovery might, p, 136. l, 5. r, to eat of, p, 139. l, 14. r, by impatiency
and, p, 141. l, 25. r, time yet cries in, p, 144. l, 23. r, let expediency, p,
146. l, 1 r, to much for and l, 3. r, that anointe him, p, 147. l, 13. r, by
drowning him, p, 150 l, 30, r, security, and p, 151. l, 30. r, he seal up
unto, p, 152. l, 14 r, be denied the, and l, 15. r, oh learn therefore, p. 153
l. 19. r, sin gets ground. p, 159. l, 26. r, she aprehends the, p, 160. l, 5.
r, by executing of, p, 165. l, 12 r. observe the bounty. and l, 30. r, by
davvbing with, page, 270 l. 27. r, to raise light, p, 190. l, 10. r, when the
flesh, p, 192. l, 27. read and prelation.

The Churches Deliverance.
CHAPTER. 1.
Argument and parts.
KIng Ahazueroth makes a great banquet to his Nobles and Captains: so does
the Queen to her Ladies and followers, to the 10. verse. 2. The King causes
Vashti the Queen to be sent for into his presence, who refusing, is by the
advice of his Princes and Council put from all regal society, to the end of
the Chapter.

Verse. 1. In those days,] that is, in the peaceable and prosperous reign of
Xerxes, then fell out this danger of the Church, then did the Lord perform
this deliverance; as if the spirit could declare unto us that

When the wicked are in greatest security, Obser. I1. The vvickeds pros^erity
is the means of their greater affliction
and prosperity, then is the Church of God subject, and near greatest danger,

1. So does the Lord hereby make way for the greater confusion of the wicked,
in giving them up to such a reprobate sense, that whereas they should use their
prosperity to the glory of God, and good of others, it turns on the contrary
to the special hurt of those, for whole sakes specially they do enjioy it.

2. And the wicked in this state, have more power, and leisure to do
mischief.

3. As for the Church of God, it is more subject to contagion, by smelling of
the wickeds prosperity, yea happily escapes not defiling thereby, and therefore
had need of such preservatives, and purgation to prevent, or purge out her
dross.

Use. 1. And is it then good wisdom to shroud the Church under there
prosperity, by making leagues with them, who are the likeliest rods to correct
the same? May we not see herein the folly of Gods children, pro. 29.
and then to prepare our selves to some great trials presaged Canaanites that
they may not prosper under us.

Of Ah^shueroth. That is, the Hereditary Prince.

Obse. 1. Whereby (me thinks) that great controversy among the Interpreters,
what King is here meant, whither Cambises Darius, or Xerxes, may easily be
resolved. That it cannot be Darius. i. because he was not the hereditary
Prince, in that he was chosen by an accident, and therefore it must needs be
Xerxes, who not only was hereditary from his father, in that he was the
natural son of Darius* but further also by the mothers side may be truly
called the Hereditary Prince, as being borne of Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus
his great grandfather. Secondly, it may be plainly resolved from India to
Ethiopia, or a hundredth and seven and twenty Provinces: which cannot be
understood, neither of Cambises because he had not so large a dominion,
neither rained full 8. years, whereas this Ahashueroth is afterward recorded to
have reigned 12: neither of Darius because so large a kingdom is not ascribed
to him by any memorial, and therefore it must need decifer Xerxes unto us And
surely how fitly did the Lord dispose the trial of his Church in his time, who
as by his baseness and intemperancy* ^e was made an instrument to bring the
Church of God to the pits brinke: so was he, after the deliverance of the
Church. made a memorable spectacle of Gods wrath, in the overthrow of that his
huge army by a small hand-full of the Grecians, according to that of the spirit
of God. The rightious escape out of trouble, Pro. 11. 8
and the wicked come in their stead. It follows.

This is A^asueroth) by this repeating of the name in this Parenthesis with an
adition of distinction, Obser. 1. Avouches the truth of the Scripture.
we may observe the care of the spirit of God to justify the truth of the
story by a circumstance of Cronology, and thereby are taught; That whereas this
name Ashachuerosh signifies an Heriditary Prince, and was given usually to the
Kings of Persia as an ensign of honor (as Pharaoh and Ptolomy was to the
Egiptians) 1. that our special trial of the truth of the Scripture; is from
ye exact agreement in the computation of time, 2. That civil titles of honor
are to be given even to profane magistrates.

That reigned from India even to Ethyopia]

Here the holy Ghost sets out unto us the large bounds of this Persian
Monarchy, when it drew near to it dissolution, out of which we are taught many
notable observations. Doctr. The wicked enjoy great prosperity.
As.

That even wicked and reprobate Princes have attained very large and fruitful
dominions: the reason is 1. because the Lord has free power to give the earth
to whom it pleases him. 2. because the Lord uses them as scourges to the
wicked that so his justice might appear more gloriously. 3. He shows his
great bounty and long suffering to the wicked in giving them herein more then
their hearts can desire to make them without excuse. 4. he makes way for the
breathing and increase of his Church, which has both some shelter in these
large dominions and has won some hereby to God, and lastly hereby he
prepares the wicked to their greater destruction, Luke. 12.
who the more they receive shall have more required at their hands, and the
mighty shall be mightily tormented: Psalm. 37.
Hence we learn not to marueaile or fret at ye great prosperity of Gods
enemies, Psalm. 72.
neither to envy them therein, nor desire to be like them, assuring our selves
that all there prosperity shall serve the Churches turn, Mat. 5.
and if they ye knew not God are thus recompensed on earth, how great then may
we imagine our reward to be in Heaven. Raigned] in that the holy Ghost implies
a peaceable subjection of so many diverse Provinces and different nations both
in language and nature under one Monarch, God is the author of government.
we learn here also by a consequent, that government is of the Lord. Pro. 8.
by him Kings reign, it is the Lord that sets up and pulls down, 5. Doctr.
Psa. 75.
for he only makes to be of one mind in an house, he only knits the hearts in
such unity, he only can bridle the different natures and conditions Romans 12. 2.
so must our Anabaptisticall presumptions, but we must even pray for the life
of Nebuchadnezzar and in the peace Iere. 27. 19.
remembering that seeing God appoints government, therefore he is above it that
so we may give unto Caesar the body and goods with a good conscience, Math. 22.
which are due unto him, and reserve unto our God the rule of the conscience,
which is his immediate peculiar above Caesar's.

Over an hundred and twenty Provinces.

See we here the great benefit of government that unites together so many and
different nations, Obser. 6. The benefit of government.
and that in such peace and outward safety that now they are one helpful to
the other and all obey one head. And learn we to be thankful for government,
though it altogether suit not with our desires, knowing that it is better to
have a Saul to defend us from the Philistines then that there should be no
King in Israel that every one may do what he lists, 1. Sam. 12. Judge. 17. 1 Timothy 2.
and what is wanting in government, learn we to supply by prayer to our God,
and more free and conscionable obedience: And seeing policy is no better a band
to bind diverse natures together, but at the last they are no better then
brethren in evil, embrace we the bond of perfection which proceeds from the
fear of God, that so the Lion and the Lamb may dwell together, yea the Lion
may be so changed into the Lamb that there may be the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace.

Verse. 2. In those daies]. i. when Ahashueroth had obtained victory over his
enemies, and thereupon sat in his throne. i. that is inioyed outward peace and
was drowned in security, 7 Obs. Wicked do abuse their prosperity to the
maintenance of the flesh.
then gave he his mind to feasting, and so made way for new troubles. As if the
spirit would hereby show unto us how the wicked do use their prosperity:
namely they pass and spend it all in excess and abuse of Gods blessings. A
thing they must needs fall into, 7. Doctr.
if we consider either the end why God bestows prosperity upon them, Ierem.
12. 13.
or their desire of prosperity, which is only for the maintenance of Psalm. ^3.
or lastly their secret fear that does assault them for the change thereof, and
therefore they will take their full of it while it lasts, whereby they become
executioners of Gods purpose against themselves. Hereby we learn, as not to
measure men's happiness by prosperity, but by the right use of it; so seeing
it is so apt to be abused, fear we Moses to the recompense of that reward,
Heb. 11.
and so choose we rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin

[ When King Ahashuerash sate] i. 8. Obs, Prosperity breeds security in the
wicked.
was quiet and secure etc. Behold how the fruit and peace of prosperity in
the wicked, Zach Lud,: 18.
namely they ^itte at ease and are drowned in security, so was the world when
the church was in affliction, so was Laish when evil was near them: And
surely no marvel if the prosperitig of the wicked make them secure, seeing
their hearts are set on it, so they dream of no other happiness* and so by
Gods justice are hereby prepared to their destruction. 1 Thessalonians, 5 3.
He that is wise shall understand those things, and to whom the Arm of the
Lord shall reveal Prouer, 22. Judge, 2. 17.
he will see in the security of a state the iminent charge of its prosperity.
And so seeing the plague will hide himself: and seeing will secure himself
of heaven by being a stranger on Baruch that he 1 Pet. 2. 12


Which was at Susan] 1. Lo here the Persian having spoiled and brought to
ruin the Assyrian Monarchy, translates the Imperial state from Babylon,
Ierem. 45.
to Susis, Obser. God tra^slats Kindomes and remoueth their nest:
in Persia. Which whether he did it for his greater security, as trusting his
own nation rather then strangers, or because he would have all the glory and
profit redoun'd to his own cnuntrimen. Yet here we see both the power of God
in changing of Kingdoms, as also the truth of Gods threatening against Babell,
Esa. 47
that it should be desolated, and Lastly the vicissitude of prosperity, even
in the most happiest; Babylon was, and Susan is, now Susan was and what is
permanent.

Use 1. And therefore who would set his heart upon that rather rest Esaias 4. 5
and we daily changed by it from glory to glory, 1 Pet. I
that so we may live for ever in glory. 2 Cor. 3.


3. Verse. The third year he made a Feast.] i. The third year of his reign
after in the the former year he had reclaimed the Aegiptians, Why this feast
was ordained,
which had revolted now being in peace, both to glorify his army for the
former inflame his wariors, to a new expedition; he solemnizeth this royal
feast.

A thing in it self indifferent, Obser. 10. Feasting lavvfull.
] and in the right use, lawful: that as soldiers after long travail should
have some refreshing, and that by the bounty of the Prince they should be
frasted together in a more liberal use of the creatures of GOD: Reasons. Exodus
23. Leui. 23.
so even Christians also may be enlarged herein: As being both the ordinance
of Having causes and occasions fauling out in the whole course of life: as
thansgiuing, society etc. Having an appointed time set down by the spirit of
GOD, Ecclesi. 3. 3 1 Cor. 3. 23
and lastly warrrnted by that Christian liberty, which is restored unto us in
Christ Jesus, and by virtue thereof practiced by the Saints, both before, Gene.
21 Ioh. 2


Use. And therefore as we may not either precisely with the Anabaptist, deny
our selves wholly this liberty, or superstitious Papist, deminish and deprave
the Gal. 5. 13
by making difference of meats: so we must be careful, that libertine like,
we abuse not this holy liberty as an but herein serve one another in a most
holy love.

This we shall do if we keep our selves within these bounds in the use of
this liberty: whereby we shall truly examine, this feast of Ah^shuerosh.

First we must consider the persons that may feast, Obser. 11. Conditions of
holy feasting.
not every one, because every one has not where-with-all, no not every one
that has: because many have which have no right therein, Who may feast
neither know how to use the blessings of GOD. I Tit, Luke 16. 12 1 Timothy 4. 5
Psalm 14. 8
But he only may lawfully feast, unto whom as the LORD has bestowed a larger
portion in his general providence, that so he may have wherewith to take his
liberty, so he finds this portion sanctified unto him by the special
providence and love of GOD in Christ Jesus, that so he may use this liberty
aright.

Use. And this as it condemns all Popish and Heathenish-feasting, 1 Tit. ^
unto whom being impure, all things are impure: so also by the same rule is
this feast of Ahashuerosh in the place 1. condemned.

2. We are to way the fit causes of feasting, Causes of feasting.
which the spirit of God sets down to be these.

1. The 1. is the approouing or external efficient cause, Efficient Magistrate.
under GOD which is the Magistrate, who only has power to authorize these
public feasts, Nehem. 8.
and from whom the true justification thereof does proceed.

2. Is the material cause, Material cause.
namely the plentiful provision to supply the same, Wherein these rules are to
be observed.

The provision must be such as must be whole-some for norishment 2. Provision.
easy of prise 3. not far fet, when it may be had nearer hand, as if
nothing were good which were not outlandish, and the more cost more worship,
4. prepared also frugally, rather to further sobriety, then entice to gluttony.

For the form and manner of the feast, here must be considered 1. the time,
Formal cause. ^. Time. Luke 16. Esaias. 58 4. Romans 2. 15. Esa. 5.
which is not every day but seldom: 2. not the Saboth, but on some week day.
3. not when the Church of God is in troubles, for then we must weep with them
that weep: 4. nether many days together, as here it was, but only some
seasonable part of one day, so that we may withal, follow both our general
and particular callings By which circumstances this feast of Ahashuerash is
condemned, Verse. 4.
in that it is said to be An hundred and twenty days.

Observe the fit guests to a feast, Guests.
wherein as we are to use an holy indifferency, Esaias. 5. 8.
in regard that all are of our flesh; so in this differency we are specially
to respect those, that excel in grace and so to have our tables furnished,
with the household of faith: not the rich only, but the poor as well as they,
Gal 6. 10. Mat. 5. Mat. 11.
and the poor not simply, because they are poor; but because they are poor
in spirit, and receive the Gospel.

See we provide good sauce to our feasts: Sauce.
not idle talking, and foolish jesting, not slaundering and reuiling, nor
amorous daliance, but our speech must be seasoned with sault, that so it may
season our feasting. To this end as it is fit to sanctify the feast by prayer
and the word, so to prevent vain speeches, 1 Timothy 4. 5. Mat. 14. 15.
intermediate holy conference is most fit and necessary, or else some quick and
sauory questions; and lastly the strength thereof is to be returned unto GOD,
in thanksgiving: Judge. 14, Music how lavvful at feasts
If any think that music is not an unseemly companion of state feasts,
surely as I gainsay it not altogether in them; so would I wish great wisdom
to be used therein both 1. for the makers of the music, that they be not of
the ordinary mummeries, in that kind and 2 for the manner of the music; that
it be grave and reverent: as also for the use, that it be rather only to show
that I have liberty therein, then to venture on a more liberal use thereof,
Steward and Attendants.
lest it tend to the satisfying of the flesh.

Better attendance without exception, are frugality, and sobriety: Frugality
Sobriety
the former teaches us not to make spoil or riot (as the mind is) but to
husband well the feast, and to gather up the residue that none be lost: the
latter, instructs us to Keep our right in the creature, not to make them our
masters, by surfeting and drunkenness, but so to rise from feasting as that
we may be fit for prayer, or any other duty of our callings whatsoever, neither
of which because they were kept in this Kingly feast, Ciui^ity
but all to the contrary; therefore is this feast also condemned from the
mannner thereof. Only one thing is here specially observed by the holy ghost.
Namely that the drinking was by an order none might compel, verse 8
but every one was left to his liberty, to take what he pleased, which though
it be no simple approbation of the feast, because it was rather a qualifying of
that evil custom in ciuilty which then it seems was in use, namely to
compel men to drink by measure, then an holy rule to provide for sobriety:
whereas indeed their should rather have been an order to have stinted that
liberty, to which every one was left, whereby they were apt enough to exceed,
though they were not compelled by others, (such glorious sons are the virtues
of the wicked) yet shall this shadow of virtue proceeding either from the light
of nature or from common ciuility, be a swift witness against our abominable
custom in this kind: where the grace of our feasting, is thus to be compelled,
where not to lie under the table, is counted disloialtie; and cruelty against a
man's soul, is esteemed the greatest courtesy.

Now touching also the end of feasting, Final causes and ends of feasting.
they are these. i the glory of God, not the setting out of our own
magnificencie, our ostentation of, Our riches and glory as is the-manner of
rich men's feasts, 1 Cor, 10. 31.
for which also this feast undergoes the censure: neither for suspicion, as if
there were more holiness in these festiuities. A fearful brand upon Popish
feasts.

A second end is thankfulness unto God for his mercies, which we do usually
express by the more liberal use of the creatures, there-by intending to show
our mercy toward others: and herein this feast was faulty.

A third end, is continuance of love and amity among Christians, not that our
tables should be snares to entrap our brother, Abac, 2.
that we may see his nakedness, or strippe him of his clothes; not by
inflammation of the creature, to be enraged one against another as here it fell
out in this profane feast.

Fourth end, is to show our Christian liberty, in the bountiful use of Gods
blessing, Esaias, 25.
and so to resemble unto feast of satisfying, in the Kingdom of heaven.

And lastly the releeuing of the poor has here its place: for whom we are
especially stewards in what is overplus. A shadow whereof though we find in
this feast; in that it is said: The King made a feast to the people; yet was
this no true charity, because without faith, and in-deed rather to show his
pomp, and gratefie the people, that they might be more willing afterward to
drudge for him, then of any conscience to comfort and refresh them: Especially
if we consider, that as the people generally pay for this excess, and so were
requited but with a feather for a goose (as we say in the proverb) so only the
people of Susis were feasted by the King, whereas those of the Provinces had
their teeth clean enough: whereto if we shall add, that to Citizens, feasting
is not dainty, with is rare among ye country people because neither their
leisure, nor means will afford the same we shall find ye this feasting of the
Susians was rather a justifying of that wherein they were too much faulty
already, then any true relief of their wants or gratification of their pains.

Whence we may observe.i* how to determine of their actions, Obs 12 Virtues of
the Heathen.
who are without God in Christ Jesus: Namely that they (as themselves
acknowledge) are but shadows of virtues* and deceiptfull sins, Splendida
pecca^a sim^lachra virtutii.
under pretense of liberty, satisfying our inordinate lusts. Whereby we
become slaves unto Gods blessings, when we would show our power over them.

1 Use. Whereby we are taught, as to condemn nature, and the glorious shows
thereof, because it greatest liberty is the most dangerous snare: So to seek
for our most glorious 1 Cor, 3.
who being once ours, all is ours also; whereby having a right in these
blessings, we shall have also grace to use them well, that so we may lay up a
good foundation against the day of account. 1 Timothy, 6.


We have here a lively Image of the profane courtly life, 13 Obs, State of
the court and world.
and so consequently of the world it self. All for the lust of the eye, the
lust of the flesh and the pride of life: nothing for the soul or for the
happiness of the same.

I Use. 1 John, 2. 16.
Wherein we may see the notable policy of Satists, that as they are in place
above other; Obs. 14 Policy of worldly greatness confounded.
so wanting indeed true virtue, whereby they may be manifested to the hearts of
their people, and to procure and hold them in love and obedience; Yet in these
outward things at least they will be singular and exceed; which being that
which most do hunt after and admire; therefore by these they rather desire to
obtain an outward admiration and fair reverence of the most, then by true
virtue to be loved of the best: Which as it is a deep mystery of their highest
wisdom, to coulor their inward villainies, so may we herein observe the
admirable justice of God, in taking these wisemen in their craftiness, and
thereby making way for their destruction, that their cxcessiue pomp, breeding
secret envy, while it is flattered with outward applause, and feigned devotions,
does thereby nourish discontent, and so dislike of their persons: and this
discontent being enraged, by imposing new burdens (which are usually the
effects of princes vain expenses) break out often into treasons, and
subuersions of their greatness.

Which though it be no just cause for such outrage in subjects, Rom, 12.
because vengeance is mine (says the Lord) and they are not their own, 15
Princes are not unnecessarily to burden their subjects. Use.
yet may great Potentates here learn not unprofitably this lesson, Not
unnecessarily to oppress their subjects by such superfluous pomp and vanity:
Because howsoever the subject may and must bear, yea till his back crack
again, Yet his patient bearing shall move the Lord to jealousy, prouer, 22*
who being a helper of the oppressed and abaser of the mightiest, will hear
the cry of the poor that are thus wilfully oppressed, and unloose even the
choler of Kings to the deliverance of his servants.

And seeing that earthly greatness is an image of the heavenly, 16 Princes to
labor specially for inward glory.
as proceeding from thence, and a gracious means thereto: therefore are earthly
Princes taught heer^ another lesson, Namely to labor especially for inward
glory: Whereby as they shall sanctify, and so quallefie, all their outward
greatness, to secure it from danger, and make it less burdensome; so, for
the savor of their good ointments shall their subjects truly love them: By
which conjunction of spirits, all things shall be easy, suspicions shall cease
from superior; and greeuances from beneath: and both Prince and people, shall
happily go up together to build the house of GOD, when the Magistrate by
example shall lead them the way: Thus by this sweet harmony shall heaven be
upon earth in an heavenly conversation, that earth may rest in heaven for
evermore.

The contrary whereof is most apparent in this president: 17 Like prince like
people.
Here is a profane and luxurious King: and here are.i. because we are both apt
rather to live by examples then by laws, and indeed it is not safe to cross
the world to maintain sin, and who shall without danger strive against the
stream.

1 Use. By how much ought Princes to be more careful of an holy conversation,
as being not only under God, unto whom they fall (and it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God) how-soeuer they may stand and
bear it out before men: but in this also that they

And seeing God sends wicked Princes for the sins of a Let men be angry with
their sins, Wicked Princes sent for the sins of the people.
and not with God or his ordinance, by their cheereful obedience, witnessing
their true repentance: so shall they either be able to bear the yoke; though
it be as heavy as Rehobohams scorpions, or according to their ability, the
yoke shall be bridled, or in due time, taken of their shoulders.

As for those that enjoy the blessing of good government: and let them use this
great blessing in fear and reverence: Nehemi. 2. 4.
taking this opportunity to build up Gods house, and mourning with those that
are making of brickes; and toyling in the mines: not setting up their rest, as
if this were all their happiness; nor flattering such golden times, as that
there may not be better: but still forgetting that which is behind, in steed
of that which is before. Yea esteeming all as dung, in comparison of Christ
Iefus; refusing with Moses to be counted the son of Pharoes daughter, Heb.
11. v* 25.
as having respect to the recompense of the reward,

Thus may we truly judge of feasting: And hereby also judge this feast of
Ahashuerus, Verse, 5.
to be profane and superstitious.

Somewhat may here be pretended justifiable in civility, as fit for the state
and magnificence of so mighty a Monarch: in that it is said, Verse, 7.
it was done according to the power of the King. Wherein howsoever the spirit
of God does grant a proportion of the feast to the power of the King, 19
Princes not 10 show their magnificence in bel^y cheer.
yet does he not at all justify this superfluous proportion as if it were fit
for Princes to show their power to the utmost in such vain and excessive
expenses, but rather Ironically taxes this ostentation of power in such
unnecessary occasions, which rather should have been extended in more necessary
matter for the glory of God, and public good of the commonwealth: and yet if
any commendation be picked out here, Luke, 16.
it is only such as the Lord commended the unjust steward, which being only
good after the opinion of ye world, for a misconceiued wisdom, was thereby a
greater condemnation of folly in the court of conscience.

This the spirit does lively set out unto us, by the event thereof. Namely the
breach between the King and his wife: then which their could be no more
fearful event, both to declare the unlawfulness of the feast* as also to
punish the King for his intemperancy therein.

The occasion to this breach is set down in the ninth Verse. Verse, 9. The
Queen Vash^^^ made a feast also for women.
Namely a show of modesty, in the Queen, who refrained from the company of
the King, and his Princes, at this great sollemnitie. Which whether it were of
pride, because she would keep state by her self: or of necessity, because
either the custom of the country, or the Kings Jealousy would not allow her
presence among so many of ye other sex: 20 Dancing of men and women vnlawull.
Yet surely this may condomne our most lascivious mingling of both sexes
together in dancing and such like meetings, howsoever it cannot excuse her for
her after disobedience.

And now behold the justice of God, 21 God punishes sins with sin.
in beating the wicked with their own rod, King Ahashuerosh makes a feast and
while he sins with excess, Verse, 9.
he is punished by the same, he looks upon the wine in the cup, 1 Iam, 25.
and tarries long at it, and lo says the spirit upon the seventh day he is
merry with wine (that is according to the phrase, Prou. 23.
he is bitten with it.) 3 Phil, 20.
A most righteous hand of God upon vainglorious persons, that as they make
their belly their God, 22 Drunkenness the effect of feasting. Prouer, 21.
so their glory should be their shame: The King is disgraced by his feast
which he made so much for his honor. His wine became a mocker, and strong
drnike rages.

A most usual effect of profane feastings to bite with drunkenness, whereby
we are often provoked to bite and devour each other.

And not unlikely to fall out if we consider, that opportunity cart-ropes, to
hale on sin. If we observe the policy indifferent, that the abuse goes
current for the right use thereof, and not to be drunk at feastings* is not
to feast aright.

Especially, Esaias. 28.
if we observe the justice of God, in punishing sin with sin, profane
feasting, with filthy vomitings: And our wisdom is herein mightily confounded,
in that our glory becomes our shame.

Wherein we may learn, as, to condemn this sin in other, so when we are not
removing only the apparent abuse, that men should be compelled: But rather
stinting men, Polidor.
as King Edger did, that they exceed not health and sobriety: Whereby we
shall not only keep peace in the conscience, and of the table to; but cut
of all hope, to be ensnared in this sin (a matter especially aimed at by the
drunkerds at these times, to bring other-into ye same excess with them) And
further also, putting drunkards to confusion, in y^ we will not exceed with
them, we shall happily (by Gods mercy) bring them to repentance; and so in time,
both case the Joel, 1.
and further threatened to be taken away from us.

Thus you see the occasion of drunkenness, the best use likely that profane
men make of all feastings. Now let us further consider the sin it self, it
is here said: He was merry with wine.

In which phrase of specch, the Spirit of God, as he does set out an effect of
large drinking, namely to make men merry, so withal he does ironically
discover the cloak, which the world casts over this sin, to cover its shame:
Namely, 23. The use of holy Ironi^s in the word.
( to call drunkenness mirth) because some mirth is lawful; therefore the
world concludes it is good to be merry, and so consequently not evil to be
drunk.

A thing not usual to the holy Ghost to speak Ironically after the opinion of
the flesh, Revel. 22.
both to discover the desperate blindness of the wicked, Esaias. 9. 11.
in cloaking vices with the as also prophetically to publish Gods further and
approve very gross impieties, Prouer, 23
that so not feeling the sin, they may follow it still: and so having made up
the measure or their sin, that now lastly they may be prepared to their
final condemnation; the spirit of God in these Ironicall confessions,
proceeds spiritually to execute this vengeance: note.
hereby setting-such a mark of proof upon them as shall make them utterly
without excuse, as implying thereby that they hate to be reformed, Ose. 4.
and yet thereby also harden them in their sin: Esaias. 5.
And therefore let no man reprove, Eccle. 11.
but let drunkenness be counted mirth, and evil be taken far good. Revel. 22.
Rejoice oh young man, and take thy pleasure: Let him that is filthy be filthy
still. 2 Thessalonians 2. 12.
Whereby not only the word becomes a stumbling block to harden them in their
sin; 2 Mich.
But, because they will not obey the truth, therefore shall the Lord give them
up to believe lies: Behold says the Lord there shall be like Priest, like
people, to preach of wine and strong drink unto them, deluding unstable
souls, that drunkenness is mirth, and to be merry is good: And I the Lord
have sent such Prophets. Ezech. 14.
Yea I have sent him, and he shall prevail, Prou. 11.
the fool shall make a sport of sin, and they shall think they do God good
service, Ioh. 16. 2
that perform vilest parts against his dearest servants.

Uses. And does the world count good evil, and evil word b^e a stumbling
block to the world? what need had we of eye-salue, to discern this
difference. When the spirit speaks according to it one verity, and when he
maintain the Certainly howsoever the spirit may speak fairly of sin, as
therein cxpressing what the world would have deemed, Yet the conscience hereby
will And though false teachers may cunningly dawbe up the same, yet the
g^i^e-saying conscience The best approbation of him, shall be that he is a
flatterer, and the best comfort to the conscience, that he is but a miserable
comforter: Nay to add further the shame of this dawbing: even the world it
self shall discover it own blindness, and though all

Hearken I pray you to the circumstances of the Text: Obs. 24. Marks of
drunkenesse* Esaias 5
Upon the seventh day. The King (it appears) sat well by it, and therefore,
if they that tarry but one day, will be enflamed with the wine, we must not
imagine, but the King had his burden: Object. ^say 5 Ans.
You will say, he was of a strong constitution, and being also accustomed
thereto, was better able to bear it: Yet there is a woe to them, that are
strong to drink wine, and the more strength herein, the greater sin: Object.
because it is an occasion to draw others into the same excess with us. ^ut
you will say, this ^King was careful to prevent this sin, in others, because
he made an order, that none should be compelled, Ans.
and therefore not likely to be guilty thereof. As if so be profane Kings are
not exempted from their laws, and by their examples allow that, Object.
which their law condemns. If you say, he might be merry with wine, Ans.
and yet not be drunk. I would think so to, if I knew not there were degrees
in drunkenness, among the which though some may extenuate the same in the eye
of the world, yet they do truly agrauate the same by the effects thereof. For
had it not been better for this Wine-bibber to have bin beastly or dead-drunke
(as we say) not able to have spoken* or known any thing, then so to be
merry-drunke as to be mad with reason. For what greater madness could there
be, then to call for his Queen to make show of her beauty to such a whitled
co^pan^, whose heads being full of wine their eyes must needs be full of
adultery, and so for the satisfying of their lusts, might have had their hands
full of blood, and not unlikely to have endangered the life of ye King
himself? And was not wine a mocker and strong drink raging? When for so small
an offense, as not to come at such an unseasonable an occasion, this beautiful
spouse was utterly repudiate, and so his merry draughts depriues him of the
chief means of his contentment: Object.
if you say this was done, not without respect of his estate, because he sent
(seven of his chief Princes) for the Queens more honorable conuoy: and
therefore it may seem he knew what he did, Ans.
and kept decorum herein; Surely (I take it) this rather bewraies the strength
of his intemperancie, who being not inflamed with wine, was thereby so
impotently enraged with lusts, Obs. 25. Profane persons abuse their wives to
be only baits ^ lust. V. 11.
that he must needs (presently) feed his eye at least with the object thereof.
Out of we we may observe, the best use that propha^e great ones, abuse their
wives, which is to pranke them up that they maybe baits of lusts to others,
(the people and Princes must see her beauty) to use them at their pleasure for
the satisfying of their lusts, here is no separation with consent, 1 Cor. 7.
to the contentme^t of both; for ye king has his change, and the poor Queen
must be defrauded, she must stand at reuersion and come when he sends for her,
and he will not send but to satisfy his lust, her desire must be subject to his
lust; but he will not give her due beneuole^ce, she must come to be seen to feed
ye eye with lust, when happily there was no strength to yield nature his due, or
if there were strength, yet ye strange woman should have it. Thus wives are
kept fasting to be looked upon as babies, when harlots deprive them of the
crown of marriage: Thus marriage is dishonored, and sin hereby ripened, and
the wicked many times beaten by their own rod: their babies oftentimes, make
them beasts, and so pay their debts. These ordinary harms may prove excellent
instructions both in the choice of our wives, Obs. 26. of the choice of wives
how.
and in the use of them.

That we choose not only for beauty, as being a broker to lust, and haruinger
to shame, and at the best cannot make riches our mark, which the fear of
God, Not matching with Popery, in hope to convert, but fearing rather, that it
will pervert us, neither refusing religion, simply without the other
complements: but respecting wisely some equallitie of age, least we be
unfit for marriage duties, when they are most required at our hands, and
especially proposing the inward beuty, together with it not rejecting the
outward.

Those having chose^ aright, How to be well used.
we must further learn how to use them: y^ so they may be truly helpers unto
us: and this is performed 1. by performing our duty to the^ and 2. by teaching
them, and exacting of them the performance of their duties.

The point of our duty, is to govern them in the Lord, as to dwell with them
lovingly, and so to avoid all vnnccessary occasion of absence, either from bed
or board. (A thing with the Law very graciously provided for, that at the least
the first year there should not be separation, though the affairs of the
commonwealth did necessarily require it) that the gadding of the wife, may be
also prevented: a thing that may bring her within danger of catching, and so
hereby love might be happily confirmed by wise experience in each others
natures.

He is to give good example, to prevent much schooling: and he must strengthen
his example, with wise counsel out of the word, least he be counted singular,
and she more confirmed, not only to avoid the evil, which she is subject unto
but to lead her forward in the ways of grace, using counsel freely but
reproouing warily, (and commending wisely) not for every light matter, unless
it be justified, neither before company, unless they give strength to sin,
but in much wisdom, and meekness, by the evidence of the spirit.

3 Due benevolence, must also be afforded, the husband, must bring in, and
provide cheerfully, for her maintenance; but within his cauling, and to
further in grace, allowing, recreation, but what may further repentance, and
employing her wisely whereunto she is most fitted, by the gifts of mind, and
ability of her body: so as to keep her from Idleness, and yet not to
discourage her: easing himself thereby of such labors: that so he may more
freely follow his own calling, and honoring his wife by that confidence in
her.

The duties that we must treach and exact of our wives is, that she reverence
us in heart, and stand in an holy aw of the husband, as being her head under
Jesus Christ. This she shall show 1. By meeckenesse in behavior, and 2.
Lowliness in speech 3. avoiding both gross and sour words 4. And yet not
sparing, to advise; yea, meekly to reprove, quieting her self, in mutual
love, yea rejoicing her soul, that she has so good a steward and protector.

2. We must procure obedience from them, even as Christ was obaied of his
Church in all things, that is in all lawful for Christ would command no other,
and that willingly, and cheerfully, though it cross private corruption. Thus
may we rightly use wives. But as for Ahashuerosh his use is for lust; and lust
is impatient.

And therefore, that we may see sin wants not wit, for the speedy effecting
thereof, behold he sends an effectual message, Obs. 27. The wicked abuse Gods
blessings to their condemnation.
that in his opinion could receive no repulse, so hot was he upon it, so wise
to do evil.

And had he no better employment for his counselors, then to send them on
such a message; which neither beeseemed his wisdom, nor their gravity? could
all his fullness, and attendance serve him for no better use. Oh how like is
he to all those happy children by nature who think the blessings of GOD are
given them to satisfy their lusts, 1 Use.
and so to be furtherances to their condemnation. i. But I would the children
of the Kingdom, Demas did not embrace the world, and Diotrephes love
preferment? Surely if Natures fools, shall not teach wisdom by their
experience; yet our profession might lesson us to embrace the time of
visitation, and to use our advantages for our best furtherance to heaven: To
whom much is given, much shall be required at their hands; and the greater
blessings abused the greater torments; not only stored up against the day of
vengeance, but many times in this life inflicted upon them: As may appear in
the case of the Queen, whose beauty is the occasion of her so great misery.

Wherein we may behold the use and end of Gods blessings in the wicked, Obs. 28
The blessings of the wicked prove their scourges in this life.
as they are given of GOD to fatten up the wicked: so for the execution
thereof, they are abused to sin, and thereby work out shame. Their tables
are their snares, Psalm, 69.
and their riches a pit to drown them in, their wisdom is their halter, 2 Samuel, 1^.
and their honor turns them forth as beasts; ^ Tim, 6.
their craftiness intrappes them, and their, friends confound them, Dan, 4.
Yea the wife that lies in the bosom, shall pronounce sentence against them. 1
Cor, 3. Hest, 6.


By which we may learn: As not to envy their prosperity, not to desire their
full cups, but rather to fear this and be contented with a mean estate. But
if the set our hearts upon it, neither be puffed up with the neither abuse
them to sin, but to make them weapons the same. And that, by sanctifying them
unto the word and prayer, and that reviving this sanctification, to employ them
soberly for our own use, and cheerfully for the benefit of our poor
neighbors, that so we may lay up a good foundation by them against the day of
Jesus Christ.

But would these Counselors and chief Princes, be sent so unseasonably on
such a message? Ought they not rather, to have advised, their Lord, of the
unfitness and danger thereof; and so have saved themselves that labor, and
their Master that shame? Surely whatsoever might be the cause of this their
speed, 29 Obs. Courtiers sl^ues to their Princes lusts.
whether they envied the Queen, and so sought occasion against her, or, were
in the Kings predicament, and therefore desired fuel to their fire.

Yet here we may truly observe the fearful condition of Godless Courtiers:
Slaves they must be if they will live there, and slaves they will be, to
choose, so they may dance in golden fetters: So corrupt are such Courts to
admit no other servants, so base is our nature, to make choice of no better
Masters: so strong a thing is love, that refuses no abject pains, so just is
the Lord, in fitting wicked Princes thus according to their desires; that so
they may be fitted for his purpose for their just confusions.

1 Use. O pray therefore for good Princes that they may command in GOD: that
so glory be given unto him: And pray again I say for constancy, and holy
resolution, that so thou may obey GOD rather then man: seeing he, that, thus
loses his life shall save it, and he that saves it shall loose it.

There is no service to the service of a King, if still we prefer the King
of Kings: winning or loosing we shall be Kings.

Concerning the profane Courtly life, 30 Obs. The Courtly life as how to be
accepted and used. Joseph. Genes. 41.
as thou see hereby, thou have little cause to desire it, so if thou be
called refuse it not.

Joseph was a Courtier, and yet remained the child of God: Dan. 4. 5.
Daniell a Statesman, and yet faithful with his God: Attendants on the Court.
only remember thou which would serve the Prince, what suitors and servants
will now haunt thee? Look to be envied, if thou do excel, and prepare thy
self to slanders, though thou do never so well; Nay look for secret
treachery, to hoyse thee on the sudden; and make account of gross flattery,
to make thee secure; here ambition will not fail to breed in thee discontent:
and lust will be importunate to discover the same, pomp will here entice thee
to forget thy God, and shows will inueagle thee to loose the substance,
examples will allure thee to commit sin with credit; and privilege will
warrant security therein: Gluttony will assault thee, to make thy belly thy
God; and drunkenness will requite thee; thy glory shall be thy shame;
Idleness will woo thee, to bring thee out of favor: and company will press
thee to frame thy self to custom: pride will exhalt thee, that thy fall may
be the greater, And Profaneness, will make sure, that thou shall not rise
again: In a word as the Court is a true Epitome of the world, so in this
little world look for a world of dangers: And therefore thou had need to
stand upon thy Guard.

Keep thy heart therefore fast locked with the fear of GOD; 31 Obs. Rules for
behavior in Court.
so shall thou not fear what man can do against thee: And open it daily, by
hearty prayer that Let thy carriage be humble, secure to prevent
allurements: Be dilligent in thine affairs, that thou may yet patient of
preferment, least Think no evil of thy in thy heart* least thy GOD condemn
set a watch before thy tongue, that it betraye Make a covenant with thine
eyes, that put thy knife to thy least thou surfeit of excess: Hear no tales
much less believe them, and be not prying least thou be quitted with usury.
Consort with thy equals yet such as are of the better sort, be familiar with
few, how soever courteous to all, Back so his greatness be in goodness, and sport
thee with such exercises, as are Martial and profitable, walk still in fear,
to keep thee from falling, And for fit thy self so to the present fashion, as
may And to give thee in fine two summary rules for all. Fashion thy whole
actions by the word, and not by examples: and prepare for remouall, for here is
no biding place for thee: Thus being armed thou may safely be a courtiar, and
that with such success, that at least, thou shall bridle sin in others, if
thou can not reform it; Ierem. 13.
if thou can do neither, yet thou may weep in secret for it, so though
thou make others worse, yet thou shall be the better, because the more thou
feast sin raingning, the more thou shall hate it, and seeing the plague thou
shall not only hide thy self: but either with good Hester, thou shall be a
means for the general good, or at least if the decree be gone forth, Jeremy.
39.
with Ebodmelech thou shall have thy life for a prey.

Thus you see out of evil manners, proced good laws, these bad courtiers have
taught us how some may be good.

Well, these Eunuchs have done their message, what answer have they?

The holy Ghost resolves this in the 12. verse. ver. 12.
But the Queen Vasty refused to come] being sent for by the King, in this time
of feasting, from her fit company of women, to an unruly company of men, and
that to no other end then the show of her beauty, which was like to have proved
a snare to all ( The spirit says she refused to come, at the Kings word). And
why did she refuse to come or was it lawful for her to refuse?

Surely how soever, it might be pretended that it was not seemly, yet hereof,
she was not now, but her husband the Judge, (the thing in it self being not
simple evil) though she were not ignorant that the King was distempered) yet
this would have made obedience more commendable; Joseph. lib 11. Antiq. cap 6.
and her Lord without excuse, if she had conceived that this had been against
the Law, yet she might know the Kings command, was a privilege above the
Law, and though she might plead ^eare of giving offense to the King, who by
this her coming might norish jealousy, Yet this being but supposed, and only
like to follow, was not to hinder a thing to be done. If it shall be granted,
that it was his sin thus to command her: yet it cannot be denied, but it was
her sin not to be commanded, Obs. 3^. The ^^struction and confu^ion of the
wicked in their actions.
Lastly if it shall be alleged that she had sinned in coming, yet it must be
also granted, that she sinned in staying. Thus coming and staying commanding
and not obeying (actions in themselves contrary) yet proceeding from an evil
heart, they all do tend to the same end, namely the maintenance of corruption,
and dishonor of GOD, so corrupt is nature that it yields no good fruit, so
deceitful is sin to intrappe on all sides so unsearchable our corruption to
be discerned, so impossible a thing it is to wind out the same.

Again we may here learn a duty for husbands toward their wives: they must
walk as men of knowledge in the midst of their families, Obser. 33. Husband
duties to their Wives. ^. ^ et^. 2. 7.
not controuling imperiously, but by good example leading them forward, both,
providing for them things honest and conuenjent as also giving them due
benevolence, so handling them tenderly as the weaker

Thirdly here is a duty of wives toward their husbands that they disobey not
their lawful commands as being subject unto them in the Lord. Oberser. Wives
duties toward husbands.


Well the Queen will not come, P. Pet. 3. 6. Col. 3. 1.
what follows hereupon. The text says. The King is very angry, and his wroth
kindled within him. And no maruile, for as it is counted a part of generosity
thus to fret and fume: so profane Princes do hereby especially keep state and
their variety of blessings gives heat unto their spirits and are as so many
bellows to blow the coals, and if (...) were more vehemently kindled, the
cause is apparent, his wine had enraged him: and his lust unsatisfied did cast
oil into this fire, and seeing his commandment was also despised, and that by
her who of all should have obeyed, this must needs set him all on fire, in that
his Authority and greatness was thus contemned, yea he did well to be angry to
justify his command.

Observe we here wisely the occasions of anger, Obser. 36. Anger and occasions.
that so we may not fall into the like distemper: and smother we it happily in
the first sparkling, lest it break out into a fire that cannot be quenched,
and see the occasion be just and weighty that may move us thereto: For did the
King well to be angry at so slight an ocasion? He had cause to be angry with
himself, for his abuse of Gods blessings, and horrible profaneness: but to be
so angry with his Queen, that she would not come at his call, this rather
Exodus, 32.
Moses did well to be angry, when the people had committed idolatry, so did not,
Ahashuerosh, because his wife would not make an Idol of him: God did well to
be angry, for the neglect of his ordinance: so did not Ahashuerosh, for the
contempt of Christ did well to be angry because the cause was weighty, and he
tempered his anger against sin, Exodus 14. Matthew. 3.
with compasson Let not the son go down upon our wrath: Ephe. 4. 26.
Sampson did well to be angry, to Obser, 37. Judge. 14. 19. The lawfulnes of
anger and it bounds. Exodus 16. 1 Cause.
In a word to be angry is Lawful, so we consider. 1. the cause it must not be
at good, but at things only evil, and that properly an evil of sin,
(neither natural defects, nor necessary burdens, must be cause of anger,) but
only sin and that committed with an high hand.

2 Observe the manner of anger, though their be weighty cause, Gal. 6. 1. 2
manner
yet we must not suddenly give the bridle to this passion (for it is the part of
a fool to be of an hasty spirit) but consider our selves, Iea. 1. 10. Math. 5.
22.
whether we be now fit for anger or no, and so accordingly give way to this
passion, and then it must be tempered both with love, Mar. 3. 5. 2 Cor. 12. 21.
and commiseration of the party, 1 Samuel 20. 3 Measure.
and accompanied with patience, and bounded within our callings least we break
out into revenge.

3. We must observe a measure in our anger, it must both sort with our persons,
as lest guilty of that we are offended in others, and be tempered also
according to the sign of tbe person, whom hereby we do humble, and it must not
only end with the occasion, but even prevent the same to the better reforming
thereof, because where it rests, it is in the bosom of a fool. Ecle. 7. 11.


4 We must be sure to level our anger at a right mark, 4 Object.
the sin we must aim at, and spare the person, and it must not be the wrong
done to us, but that which concerns God that we must be angry at.

5. And lastly the end of our anger must be wisely considered. 1. not our
credit or revenge, 5 End.
but the glory of God. 2. not the hardening of a sinner, but his breaking, and
conversion: Thus if we willbe angry we shall not sin. Ephe. 4. 25.
And herein sinned this King because he was not thus angry.

And therefore it had been good for him, to have repressed this causeless
anger, Obser. 38. Anger causeless how to be repressed.
by not giving way unto it, or turning the matter into a jest, by seeing a
forehand into the event, and considering in what case he was; he might have
wisely wayed that his wife was no fit object of anger, and that she might have
had cause rather to have been commended, he might have not believed what
report the Eunuchs brought, or if he did believe them, love and wisdom would
have taught him to have let it in at one ear and out at the other. Thus may
thou prevent unseasonable anger; Only one thing the Holy Ghost adds, which
may seem to quallifie this sin. Namely that upon his anger, he fell not
presently to revenge, having power in his hands, as furious husbands have done
upon such occasions: Verse, 13.
but, He said unto his wisemen which knew the times) That is he takes great
advise, in this small occasion, as if the state of his Kingdom were now in
question, wherein (as I take it) he does increase his sin, not only by this
deliberation, giving way to his anger, which being now silent, was thereby more
settled; and so like to do more hurt: But in that he calls a Council, to
determine of so light a matter, which might have been better decided within
the curtains, me thinks unto his anger he added extreme folly,
disenabling his wisdom, and abasing his state.

Behold here the wisdom of carnal men, Rom, 1. 1 King, 13. Ioh, 11. 48.
when they seem to be wise, Obs 39. The cloakes of sin are occasions to
increase the same.
they become fools, the fairer cloak they have for their actions, the deeper
thereby are they plunged in iniquity, and so prepare them to their greater
destruction: because the civil forbearing, and bridling of sin does both
secretly justify the same to their deceived conscience: and so furthers the
committing thereof with greediness; Whereby we may learn above al things to
take heed of being wise to do evil, Use 1. Ierem, 4. 22.
either blessing our souls in the outward bridling of sin, or contenting our
selves with the shows of virtues, but rather

See we here the vain employments of the great Counselors of the world: 40
Ob. Worldly counselors how vainly employed.
The best that they do is to satisfy the lusts of their Princes, as whom only
they count happy, and by whom only they are happpy, and the worst they do is to
bandy against God and his Christ, 1 Cor, 2 8. psalm. 2. 1. 2. 3.
whom as they know not, so his yoke they will not endure: vain men y^ are here
said to know the times and seasons, and yet were ignorant of the time of their
visitation: Luke, 12. 56.
Whereby the truly wise may learn their lesson, that as they must be
skillful, which shall see the Kings face, and be principal in his kingdom;
so to employ their special skill for the advancing of Christ's kingdom, least
he count them his enemies that will not let him reign over them; and having
first sought the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, as hereby
they shall best provide for the safety of yea which is the greatest wisdom,
they shall be Happy are the people that are in such a case, yea blessed are
the people which have the Lord for their God.

3. Observe we here one mark of the misery of Courtiers, Obser. 41. The
misery of courti^rs that they are contriuers of e^ch others misery,
that as they are brokers to one another in sin, so they are usually such as
contain each others punishments.

Queen Vashty no doubt and these had been brethren in evil, and so it is
their lottes to become her judges. It being most righteous with God, to make
the instruments of sin the author of it punishment, Reasons 1.
that so it might receeiue the greater confusion.

Use. 1. Whereb^ we are taught, as not foolishly to flatter our selves in
impunitie, because we are many partners in expect these as our rods, who have
been our brethren in evil; comforting our selves, with this gracious issue,
Isay 10.
that though Ashur shall be Isreal's rod, because Israel committed fornication
with him. Yet when Israel shall be purged, the rod shall be cast into the
fire. Ezech. 23.


These counselors are here described unto us, i. by their they were not taken
out of the meanest; but from the Princes of the people, so (says the spirit)
They were the seven Princes of Persia) men beside their wisdom, of greatest
birth and ability

A thing very fit, Obser. 42. Choice of Counselors out of the Nobility.
that such should be Counselors; both. i. because usually as they have the
best education, and so are likeliest to have most means of wisdom, so i^ that
they have power to countenance, and execute their counsels, as well especially
in the choice of these, if here we consider that three dangerous enemies to
Kingdoms are happily suppressed. Not only Envy which cannot fasten on these,
as having no benefit, but rather trouble by this calling, but covetousness
also, which here is needless, where generous greatness comes from
inheritance: and lastly coffeehouse is happily prevented, if meaner should
be Whereunto if we shall ad the practice of Tyrants, which is to root out
usually the true Nobility, and to advance in their steed vp-startes and vile
persons, we shall find the practice of the good Princes hereby to be more
Justifiable.

Use 1. By which, as that Machiuillian policy is utterly condemned, which
aduises Princes to let none grow great under them, much less to admit
greatness about them; so are not restrained here their prerogative; to advance
even mean ones for their gifts and deserts: the best wisdom, is to mingle
these, with others, if there be correspondency of gifts, that so both may be
humbled, and better fitted to give advise, that virtue being advanced may be
more thankful and profitable, and greatness being employed, may be more
faithful, and less dangerous: that the experience of the one, may keep the
others in breath, and the generousnesse of the other may prevent oppression and
covetousness, that so in the multitude of Counselors there may be
steadfastness, Pro. 15. 22.
and in variety of Judgments more wise deliberations.

A second description of these counselors is from their inward quality: It is
said,

They knew the times, Verse 14.
and the Law and judgment. i. that is, Obs. 43. Counselors ought to be
siklful in the Laws and customs.
they had experience how to order things fitly to the times, and that justly
according to law etc. as being acquainted with the judged cases thereof.
Qualities very necessary in those that shall be Counselors. As being both the
makers, and Judges of the laws, and upon whose direction the whole state
depends, which cannot be vpholden but by righteousness and judgment.

And surely very profitable would those have proved to the advancement of Gods
glory, if they had been truly seasoned with the word of God, for want whereof
as they were no better then weapons of the unrighteous, so they prove as
golden halters to hang such Achitophels withal:

A notable lesson to Christian Princes, Obs. 44. Counselors such as fear God.
that as they are not to neglect other complements in the choice of their
counselors to be about them, as wise experience, and civil knowledge, and so
especially they would single out such as fear the Lord, and above al things
make conscience of promoting his glory. How to dislcerne.
Which they shall know by the government of their families, according to Gods
words, by the promoting of religion, in the countries where they dwell: by
their conscionable usage, and government over their Tennants, and generally by
their care to ease the subject of oppression, and to give contentment to their
power unto them: hereby shall they attain to perfect wisdom, which without
Gods fear is carnal and devilish, Pro. 29.
and such wise men shall defend the Kingdom, and deliver the same from all
imminent dangers.

Use 1. Which as it condemns, that deuilish position, which would have
state-men, only to seem, and not to be religions, thereby instead of religion
setting up Hypocrisy, and Atheism. So, in that the providence of the LORD
works by means, and their can be no religion without learning, and the
means thereof. Therefore in the second place this condemns, their opinion,
that think learning to know their strength, and so provoking them to seditions
and such like, as if mother wit or experience, or traditions only, would serve
the turn: the very Whereby Christian And seeing by this means God raises up
out of the dust: and sets the poor upon the seat of Princes: Why should we
now be discouraged to employ our Chrildren herein? Why do we rather put them
to trades, Ioell 2.
and so empty the universities; Nay the Churches of GOD? Is the hand of the
LORD shortened? Nay is not his spirit enlarged in these latter days? does not
Satan's greater rage against it justify this calling? And is not our GOD
stronger to maintain. Where the oppositions are the greater? certainly how
soever our learning may not advance us to be Counselors to earthly Kings yet
being sanctified by grace, it shall promote us to Heaven, where in steed of
Counselors, we shall reign as Kings with Jesus Christ for evermore.

It follows, yet concerning these Counselors, that ( They saw the Kings
face). Nothing therein an extraordinary favor, that was granted to these
Counselors. Namely that whereas these Persian Monarkes were seldom seen of
any, unless they held out the golden scepter; yet these had free access into
the Kings presence, they might come into the presence (as we say) and see the
Kings face.

A very fit thing that Counselors should have more free access to Princes
then ordinary men, Obs. 45. Princes must not be strange to their subjects.
because they are persons of more trust and employment: And yet, not fit for
Kings to be strange unto their subjects, and to count it a matter of state to
be rarely seen of them; Wherein, may a King humility, then in being affable,
and courteous, may not his wisdom, be greatly seen herein, that to give
contentment to his subjects, that and should it not be as great joy for Kings,
to behold ye faces of their subjects, in whom And would it not quit cost, for
Princes thus to be acquainted with their subjects, to hear sometimes their
causes in their own persons, and so determine of them? do they not hereby
discharge their callings faithfully, and prevent wisely much injustice, which
otherwise falls out. Did not Solomon and other virtuous Princes hear causes
themselves? Samuel. Edger.
Did they not ride circuit to do justice, have they not had set days to such
necessary end: and have they hereby exposed themselves rather to danger? Have
they taken more upon them then they could well discharge? Have they abased
their authority, and deprived themselves of their lawful pleasures? Nay rather
have they not, hereby won the hearts of their subjects; and so their own
security? has not their honor been increased, by faithful discharge of
their calling? And their authority justified, in being examples to their own
laws? Is not Idleness hereby prevented, the very bane of Kingdoms, and true
contentment gained, instablishing sound peace and equity? And ought not this
to be the chiefest pleasure of Princes, to procure their true content, in
giving glory to God by faithful execution of their callings? Neither let them
fear to be oppressed with the weight of this burden, and therefore it must
follow they must put it off altogether. Moises his president will be a middle
rule in this case, Exodus 18.
that so the burden may be a pleasure unto them. Not to make distinction of
persons, as if the inferior were to base to come in trial before them, but
only the rich who may corrupt the law, (for this may smell of Papal pride
and covetousness, who reserues cases of such persons to his proper censure,
because thereby he may pick their purses,) but only of Causes reserving the
waightiest, and most intricate to himself (which may as well be incident to
poor as rich) as having a more ripeness of judgment to discern thereof, and
in wisdom better able then other to determine of the same. Thus will Godly
Princes procure their ease, in performing their duties, and sanctify their
honor in vnder-going the burden thereof.

But what shall we say of this Persian Monarch? Surely as he knew not GOD,
Obser. 46. Tyrants their note, and punishment.
so he knew not himself, neither any thing that truly belonged to his
calling. The sword was his scepter and lust was his law, pride was his glory
and fear was his protector, his subjects wear his slaves, and his Princes
were his bauds; And therefore no marvel though he loved to be rarely seen,
especially of the subject, whose spoil he daily intended: if happily of
Princes, but to be his fowlers for the prey.

Use 1. A just hand of GOD upon tyrannical Princes, by their pride and cruelty
to make them hateful to their subjects, that what they fear may come upon
them, and And an excellent lesson to Christian Princes, to keep state by love;
and seek glory in the discharge of their callings, that obeying GOD they may
prevail with men: and so establish their Kingdoms in this mortal life as to
make them steps to the crown of glory, It follows. What shall we do
according to the Law. Verse. 15.


Here we may see a show of equity in this Godless Obser. 47. Wicked pretend
law for the satisfying of their mischiefs.
Prince, though the disobedience of the Queen had much enraged him, yet
neither in his rage does he aueng himself of her, neither does he claim a
privilege to do it contrary to his laws (which happily he might have done
because the matter immediately concerned himself) neither does he take upon
him to be judge in his own cause; but referres the matter to the judgment of
the law, and that to be scanned by the wisdom of his Counselors, wherein that
he would not be his own Judge in his own cause, but referres himself for
satisfaction to the right censure of his laws, herein if we judge him by the
outward action he did not amiss, his baseness appears in that, that whereas
though he had referred himself to the sentence of his laws, yet he should
have reserved both the exposition and iudgemen of the Law unto himself, as
being a part of his royal prerogative; these his proper rights he leaves to
their lusts who happily gessing his mind might hereby satisfy both their own
and his unlawful purpose, concerning the point that a man may not be Judge in
his own case.

The equity hereof appears in this, Obs. 48. Whether a man may be his own
Judge.
that as men are blind in their Judgments and so cannot know themselves, so
they will be likely partial in their own matters, as loving themselves to well:
And therefore we must avoid all occasions of evil. And seeing we must avoid
all appearance of evil, therefore howsoever it may be, that a man may herein
Judge righteously, yet seeing to the world it will appear otherwise, therefore
for the approouing of his good name in the eye of the world, he is not in my
opynion to be judge in his own case. Obser. 49. How a man may be a witness in
his own cause.


If it shall be here demanded how then may a man be produced in his own case to
the satisfiyng of the world? the answer is plain: he is not produced as a
Judge but as a witness thereto, and not so as a witness as if the Judgment
depended upon himself therein: but seeing his allegations are confirmed by an
oath, as being the means which the Lord has appointed to end controversies,
whereby as he calls the Lord to be witness to the truth, so he conuinceth the
conscience of the Judge to assent thereto, Obse. 50. How a man should be
approved, when he stands upon the testimony of innocence: contrary to the
verdite, or report of the world.
therefore it is not the bare witness that caries the matter, but God and that
Judge they approve the same.

Use 1. This utterly conuinceth all popish religion and proceedings, if they
may not be their own Judges, but stand to the Judgment of the world, and it
condemns also the ground, of that gross opynion, that we may be so perfect,
as not to err in our judgments. It casts to ground all pleas for sin,
whereof few can hold, but from this assumpsit, that we may and must be judges
in our own cases ( whatsoever you say) I know it is otherwise, you know not my
case, and if you were in my steed, you would think otherwise. All which,
proceed from this only ground, that their is no competent judge of my estate,
but my self.

A notable fallacy, whereby Satan deceiues sinners; that because others many
times judge wrongfully of them, therefore they conclude that they best know
themselves, and best may be their own Judges concerning their sins.

A privilege which how-soeuer they stand upon, principally for this end, that
their iniquity may be hidden from the eye of the world, seeing this is an
especial means not only to ripen the sin, but further also to harden the
heart of the sinner. Therefore behold the admirable justice of GOD, in taking
the wicked in their own snares, that hardness of heart, continuing
impenitency, and so in the end working despair: hereby it comes to pass, that
they which would have the judgment deuolued to themselves; that so they may not
discern the true judgment of sin, it shall be unto them as they do desire,
they shall have judging enough, even to sink them to hell, they shall truly
judge of their damnable estate, and many times pronounce sentence against
themselves, and therein mis-iudge of the mercies of GOD. And this is a third
point condemned herein.

If therefore, Obser. 51. Wherein a man may be Judge in his own case.
we will be safely Judges in our cause, let us judge our selves for sin, that
we be not judged of the LORD: And that we may thus judge our selves, let us
be judged by others, submit we our selves wisely to the judgment of the word:
and let us not neglect the Judgment of the world, if it judge wrongfully we
have wherein to rejoice: If it judge aright, be we the more confounded that our
righteousness is cracked in the worlds opynion; only beware we here of
desperate judgment, whereby we may exclude our selves, from hope of mercy, so
judging ourselves by the law, that we also seek pardon in the Gospel, that so
we may be eased of our heavy burden. Math. 11
Thus being judged we shall come to true repentance, and recovering again the
favor of God, we shall also recover the uprightness of our conscience, and so
we shall be able to justify our own innocence. 1 Cor. 4. 4.
And the^ we may safely not esteem to be judged of man's judgment, and yet not
esteem our selves justified thereby, seeing, as what the law condemns for, is
in our selves, so that for which we are acquitted is ours only in Jesus
Christ; 2 Cor. 1. 12.
and though our rejoicing, be the testimony of our good conscience, which we
may lawfully cleave to, and thereby acquit; yet seeing that GOD is greater
then the conscience; Job. 9.
and we know not our own souls, and also that uprightness which we know,
proceeds from the righteousness of our Savior, therefore as by the
imputacion of his righteousness, we are only happy: so to the same only we
must ascribe even the power of that justification before men, that not
withstanding proceeds from inherent righteousness, Obser. 52. Princes are to
refer themselves to the judgment of their laws.
that so Christ may be all in all. Verse. 22.


Well, the King will not be his own judge, whom then will he be judged by?
The holy Ghost answers; by the laws of his Kingdom: which generally no
doubt did determine of the duty of Marriage: though perticulerly for this case
the Law was made afterward. Now seeing this was practiced among the heathen,
how much more righteous and wise a course is it, that even, yet Christian
Princes (though in cases concerning themselves) should refer themselves to the
judgment of their own laws.

Because, as they are of their own making, and therefore so it is in their
power to expound their own laws, and therefore may lawfully make favorable
constructions for themselves, Yea being also Judges of the law themselves, and
therefore may in discretion mitigate

Use 1. Which as it condemns the gross flattery and iggnorance of those that
exempt the Prince from ye government so it justifies that lawful prerogative
of Princes, which is to be makers and interpreters, yea Judges of their own
laws.

Again, this also reprooueth the abuse of laws which As also, that man of
sin is here condemned, who has rejected the law of GOD, and will be by
example, or opinion, stand upon custom or any such like, rejecting the law of
God, for the rule of their life, they are also condemned in this place.



Well, thus has the King referred the matter to the Judgment of the law, and
surely herein he did not amiss. only in this may he be justly charged of
folly, that he kept not the sword of expounding, and approouing the law in his
own hand; but unwisely puts it over to the determining of his Counselors. The
reason whereof although we may partly guess, because he would not be rid of
his wife, but with some color, and other must do that which he would not be
seen in. Obser. 53. Wicked Princes im^loy their servants in base purposes.


A matter usual in wicked Princes to deuolue the envy 2 Samu. 12.
of their vile courses upon their Ministers of state, by putting for a time the
sword in their hands, as David did into the hands of Ioab: yet that this was
not done without great inconvenience, may appear lively by their handling
thereof. See what it is to put a sword into a madmans hand; hark how Memucan
the Eunuch, lays about him. And Memucan said before the King and the Princes.
Verse. 16. 17. and 18.


The Queen Vashty has not only sinned against the King but against all the
Princes and people which are in all the Provinces of the King Ahashuerosh etc.

Thus, instead of a Judge he becomes an accuser; and the Sum of his
exaggeration, or rather indeed accusation (contained in these three verses) is
this, that Queen Vashties sin is herein exemplary, such as shall provoke
like contempt throughout the Land, among all sorts, as pleading herein the
example of the Queen and thereby taking occasion to disobey their husbands.
Whereupon will ensue much despitfullnesse, and wrath.

And surely, Obs. 54. S^^nes of great ones exemplary.
in that he apprehends the sin to be exemplarie, herein he judged not
amiss. For indeed the sins of great ones they are both patterns, and
priuelidges to the inferior, for the like: Who live by examples, and take heart
thereby, seeing the great ones sin usually, without controulement.

Use 1. And therefore of all sorts, great men are to take least liberty in
sin, because the eye of the world is and they shall answer deeply for the
sins of others, in that by their example they give warrant

And inferiors also may here learn their lesson, not Obser. 55. ^o^^ticians
in sat^s^ying the lust of wicked Princes provide for their own.


But that he falls to accuse, where rather he should have excused, and in
steed of healing the wound makes it far wider: this howsoever it may be good
for an orator, yet it cannot stand with the wisdom of a grave Councellor. But
somewhat was in the wind: he must needs speak thus because he had his fee:
the King was angry, and he meant to set him going: the Queen was an eye-soare,
and she must be removed. Such slaves are ambitious statistes to their own
and their Princes lusts, 2 Reg, 13.
but especially when their own plow is driven forward withal. 2 Reg, 11.
Then the honor of the King, Ioh, 18.
and good of the land must be pretended, Luke, 23.
when indeed they will especially serve their own turn therein.

1 Use. This may teach Princes how they put such, to much and therein also to
use the favor of their Princes not exasperating them against other least the
soame light upon themselves, and their own stroke return upon their own
pates: Their own injustice deserves and the justice of God shall find them
out in their sin, Hamans gallows in the end catches himself.

But let us a little further examine the truth of this accusation. Obs. 56.
Flatterers and malicious persons abuse Princes with whisperings and surmises.
Must all the Land know of this fact of Vashty? does the country know always
what is done at Court? see here what a sandy foundation malice grounds upon,
how flatterers abuse Princes, with surmizes, and scarce likely-hoods? Was this
a sound argument to unloose the marriage knot? Shall the state of a Queen
depend upon such dalliance? Shall a King be abused by if and peraduentures?
Well we see here that a friend in Court is better then a good cause; and it is
an easy matter to find a staff to beat a dog withal, Obs. 57. Evidence
must be of things known not surmised and such as know the pa^ty delinquent
Light out of darkness.
(as we say in the proverb) Poor Vashty must be condemned without repriuall:
and therefore the country must come in to give in evidence against her, that
happily never saw her by the face, nor ever had to do with her. And yet the
Lord had a righteous work herein; both to punish her pride, which likely the
country paid for, and to punish the King, who abused her pride, yea most
cspecially to punish these Counselors, even in this their wrong collection, as
hereby bringing this shame upon them, that they were not masters of their
own wives. This was all they got by it. even reproach and ignominy, and let
all unrighteous Judges look for no better; that in steed of quallifying small
offenses will set them on the tenters, to satisfy the lusts of profane
Princes.

But consider (I pray you) a li^^le further the inconsequence of the
accusation, so that all the women of the Land should hear of it, yet must
every wife here-vppon of necessity rebel against their husband? might not
private love overrule a public example, and wise government of the husband
prevent the like disobedience? probable happyly it might be, that some might
thus resist, which without this example would have been forward enough thereto,
but that all of necessity must follow, this may discover the Accusers blind
malice, but was no reason to enforce the poor Queens punishment.

But here you may see when flattery and malice gives information, Malice and
flattery unfit accusers.
shadows are made substances, and improbabilties necessities, so deceiptfull
is flattery, malice so unreasonable: and yet herein also the Lord is exceeding
righteous, who meets hereby with other sins of this insolent Queen, that
whereas no doubt she was an example of pride and vanity more generally to other
women, then she was likely to be in this point; therefore is she heerby found
out in her sin, and by this unlikely accusation condemned of a true fault.

Well thus we have heard this Persian play the Accuser, now let us hear how
he plays the Judge. Thus he shoots his bolt.

If it please the King let a royal decree proceed from him, Verse. 19.
and let it be written among the Statutes of Media and Persia. (And let it not
be transgressed) that Vashty come no more before the King Ahashuerosh, and let
her estate royal be given unto her companion that is better then she.

Behold here the sentence of this unrighteous Judge, Punishment must needs
exceed the nature of the sin*
discovering most apparently his folly and cruelty: was it not enough for him
to aggrauate a small fault by surmizes and improbabilities thereby to incense
and so wrong the King, but now he must sentence the sin with so extreme a
Judgment, as had been proportionable to the greatest offense? Indeed had he
only aggrauated the matter to have satisfied the King; and that the Queen
might have been brought to acknowledge her fault, that so the King being
satisfied might be inclyned to mercy, and the Queen hereby also fitted to
mercy: He had showed the part of a faithful Counselor, and performed the
duty of a wise Judge: But thus to add drunkenness to thirst in condemning so
extremely, when he accused falsely, showed his treachery in council and
corruption in judgment.

Only herein we may somewhat excuse him, Judges ought to be impartial in
judgment, not to respect persons.
and in this may he be a pattern of righteous judgment; that he seems to
be impartial in pronouncing of his sentence, he spares not the Queen,
seeing she has offended: and does he therefore well to pronounce so severely
against her? For admit we the fault deserved some punishment? is their
therefore no measure, but even extremity? could he have devised a greater?
could the poor Queen have undergone an extremer? Is this to kill the sin for
the good of the offender, and not to strenghthen the sin by driving the
guilty to dispare? What then does this Judge plead for himself to justify
the equity of this his extreme sentence? does he plead as Divines do, that
sin was committed against the greatest person, and the thing commanded being
very indifferent, therefore by these circumstances the offense was more
heinous, and so did deserve so heinous a punishment? or does he rather like a
Politician hereby justify the Kings anger; by inflicting so extreme a
punishment for the provoking thereof? Does he as a bawd hereby make way for
change, as happily smelling the Kings purpurpose herein? Surely though
happily in policy he intended both the one and the other, because rather then
Princes must err the subject shall deeply smart for it, and Courtiers many
times are glad to be such cooks that they may also lick their own fingers:
Yet in policy he hides all these and makes a fair gloss upon it, he implies
that one must be made an example for the procuring of peace to many, better one
perish then that unity be destroyed: For says he.

When the decree of the King which shall be made shall be published
throughout all his Kingdom (though it be great) all the women shall give
their husbands honor both great and small. Verse, 20.


Here we may see the height of his wisdom, Worldlinge prefer the private
before the public good.
he prouides for himself and his like, that they may have honor of their
wives. But for his Lord and master he must have no honor from his, but
rather he must be dishonored, In putting her off upon so slight a cause, and
the miserable Queen must be dishonored also, and that with apparent wrong
and eternal contumely. So cunning are Polliticians to secure themselves with
the dishonor of their princes: So foolish are such Princes thus to be led
by the nose by them, so righteous is the Lord to make the one here by a rod
unto the other, that Politicians hereby growing insolent and great, are caught
in their month and so emptied in their Princes, as being spunges to fill
themselves with the spoils of others, that they may afterward wring them out
at their pleasure.

Thus you see the depth of his council, Wicked have glorious clokes for eeuill
purposes.
and yet behold what a goodly veil he has to cast over it: The woman shall
give honor. As if he had said that they being made wise by the Queens
punishment would hereafter not dare but honor their husbands, least they also
be subject to the like censure. Do you not see what a mask here is to cover
his cruelty? It is good says he that some should be made examples to keep
other in awe, and therefore let Vashty smart soundly for it, that all we may
live more peaceably.

A most righteous thing: Exemplary Justice when to be used.
that some should be made examples, and yet the Queen might well have been
spared out of the number of those some, if her fault would not, yet her state
at least should have privileged her, every small fault must not make an
example, though exemplarie Justice be profitable for others. But shall it be
granted that this example would be profitable? Terror to breeder of true love.
will terror breed true love and can their be honor without love. Well
therefore might this Persian hereby dominere over his wife bouldly, well might
she crouch for fear and play the hipocrite with him, well might she flatter
him in his sin and further him to hell, as being all the honor that carnal
men look for of their wives, but true honor will never be yielded by terror,
flattery is not love, nor soothing true submission: So that howsoever, in other
cases this course might have had success, yet in this case between man and
wife a far better might have been taken. Namely to have labored with the
King to be reconciled to his wife. Oh this example of mercy had been more
undoubtedly profitable.

So let us make up the breach, and not set it more open. Let our censures aim
at the sin for the recovery of the party, and let charity cover especially
build we not upon surmizes to cast away Above all things keep we holy and
inviolable the let only the defiling thereof be the Math. 19.
let us compose them wisely among our selves. Is their none wiser then other,
that we must beray our own nests, and discover our weakness abroad that we
may be snared with our own infermities? Had Ahashuerosh been wise the matter
needed not to have gone any further, and then his Princes had spared that
labor and he had escaped this dishonor: yea the miserable Queen had not thus
wickedly been divorced: But as it seemed the King was set upon it, and
therefore no sooner had Menucan pronounced the sentence without demurre on the
matter, or delay of the execution: Verse 21. Wicked Princes easily yield to
bad council.
but the holy Ghost adds that. The saying pleased the King and the Princes.

So hard are wicked Princes to be pleased with good Council: and so easily do
they embrace even that which is pernicious. But how shall it appear the King
was pleased here-with: It follows because he ratifies the sentence
pronounced: He did (says the spirit) According to the word of Menuchan, and
to show his willingness therein, Verse. 22.
least after-witte might cross it, he sendes his laws throughout all the
Provinces to this effect, That every man should bear rule in his own house:
And that the law concerning all, each might take notice of it. It must be
published in the Language of that same people. That so the law being
published might not afterward (even for his credit) be abrogated.

But what might be the cause of all this haste? Surely let us here look up
to GOD and the matter will be cleared. The Church of GOD was like to be in
extremity, and delaie was dangerous. Hester was to be advanced that she
might be means of deliverance, and therefore Vashty must be deprived of her
Regal dignity, that so according to the sentence, Wicked instruments of
fulfilling of gods righteous will in their punishments for his glory and the
good of the Church.
her royal estate might be given to her companion that was better then she.
So do the wicked therein fulfill the will of GOD wherein they do against his
will, and in their wickedness are his righteous instruments that he may have
the glory in bringing light out of darkness, and they might confounded in
their own mallitiousnesse: Whereby we may learn in all such Accidents, as

And therefore let not Memucan brag that he had cast out Vashty. Nor let
Ahashuerosh bost that he has done his will.

No they did no more herein then God had appointed, Acts. 4.
it was the Lord that advanced Vashty, Psalm. 75.
and it was he alone that did cast down the proud from their seat. Luke 1.
It is the Lord that seteth up, Promotion from God.
and he only casts down, he

And therefore let noe man's heart fail him because with Esaias. 42.
If he cast down who then

And is Vashty so suddenly down that was so late aloft? Job. 12.
is the prosperity of the wicked so flitting and momentany, Prosperity of the
wicked momentany.
that so GOD may be more exalted and they much more confounded, Athalia.
Iezabel. Achab.
shall the wicked be abased that the Godly may come in their stead? and even in
this life will the Lord make some of them examples of his power and Psa. 125.
Let the falls of the wicked teach us to get sure footing in faith where we
shall never be removed but be ever had in remembrance, and seeing we have here
no abiding City, seek we diligently after that which is above, that so we
may be received into everlasting habitations.

Lastly consider we wisely the Tenor of the decree: Namely, That every man
should bear rule in his house.

Here then you see the scope and drift of the law, namely to establish a comely
order in the Oeconomical government that the head may rule and the rest may
obey.

Thus evil examples are the occasions of good laws and even the wicked when
they satisfy their lusts, Wicked in their sins serve Gods righteous will.
subscribe unto the righteous law of God, For howsoever no doubt the law
proceeded from lust, and could not choose but redound to the shame of the
lawgiuers who were not laws to themselves neither could rule their familes
and therefore they must have a law to force this obedience and it is a
miserable obedience which is only forced by the law, 1. Sam.
yea if we consider the nature of this profane people to apt of it self to
Lord it over the weaker, Number. 24.
and therefore needed rather a bridle to curb their tirany, then any warrant
to make good their imperiousness, therefore to them the law was not
seasonable, Husbands are to rule over their wives.
(so wisely ought laws to be fitted to the state and conditions of the people)
yet if we shall consider the matter of the law in it self, 1. Use.
as it has it ground out of the law of nature so is it warranted also by the
word of God. For does not the law of nature enforce no less, then that they
which are best able by reason of their different strength; they which deserve
best, as being the prouiders for the family, they which must defend all and so
shall answer for all, that they I say should have the pre-eminence. And does
not the word of GOD justify this law of nature which gives unto man the
superiority over the wife, and that not onley in the time of man's fall, Genesis 2
as if before they were one flesh, and therefore no difference of superiority
between them (as if this superiority were only a part of his or the wives
punishment:) Genesis 3.
but also in the time of his restitution by Christ; thereby justifying the holy
right thereof, Ephe. 5.
and approving the same to be a special blessing: Wherein we may behold an
admirable providence of God, Col. 3. 1.
that how-soeuer this law of superiority concerned even the state of
innocence, Tim 2.
because even to that happy condition this holy subjection was necessary: 1.
Cor. 11.
Yet is not this law given till ye fall of man, because then there was necessary
use thereof in regard of sin that now had taken footing, which though it give no
way to proud insulting and imperious behavior, much less allow power of
bitter speaking, cruel correction, or judicial proceeding in the case of life,
because though the husband be a King in his family, yet his kingdom is but
spiritual, and for temporal reformations subject to the Temporal sword: no
otherwise to take the same into his hand then by special warrant from the
civil Magistrate: yet it establishes such a power over the wife as Christ
has over his Church, And how far
if to call Peter Satan when he sins of ignorance, then much more to reprove
sharply presumtious sins, that God may be justified and sin ashamed, and
repentance being renewed may be the renewing of love: as treading love under
foot in regard of Gods glory in the advancing thereof, confirming our
affections, which as yet condemn the basnes of such carpet Knights that
prostitute their dignity as a baud to lust, and become slaves to their wives
for a little dalliance: Math. 16.
so hereby we may learn also for conclusion in this point, to give God his
right and superiority over us in a happy conquest of our rebellious
affections, that so we may retain our dignity over our wives. Had these
profane men learned this lesson they had not needed a law to have procured
this dignity. But for want hereof even their law they think scarce strong
enough, and therefore they endeavor to strengthen it with a further policy.
Namely, 1 They cause it to be published in the several language of each
Nation, that so being particularly understood, it might appear more
authentical, and being hereby intended as weighty, and in good ernest it might
both more easily procure obedience and so take away the hatred from the
law-giuers. For seeing no doubt the repudiating of the Queen for so small a
matter, must needs hear odious in the ears of the subjects, Wicked justify
their sin by making it common to others.
therefore to quallifie this hatred the people must be gratified, and (wherein
think these wisemen) shall we gratify them better then by giving them power
to domineere over their wives; so that now though they use them never so
contemtuously yet this law shall stop their mouths, and so tyranny shall
increase from the highest to the lowest, wronging and repudiating what shall
not now be lawful. So politic are great ones to cloak their own sins, by
making them common, and so justifiable in others: So wisely does the Lord
confound them in this their policy yt while by this communicating of the law
to either, they provide for their credits, they do not hereby discover their
shame but by this means also ripening sin generally they prepare the way to
Gods general judgments.

Use. Well howsoever the drift of these politickes might herein be wicked in
publishing these laws thus to catch in their mother tongue, yet is there an
equity in this point yt may teach us many good lessons.

Namely seeing laws are published in such a language that they may be known
to all; Laws to be published in the vulgar tongues.
therefore as no man may claim privilege beyond the law, so we are hereby
taught to be acquainted with the laws, not to entrap others or defend our
selves from wrong only, but that so we may perform conscionably obedience to
the same. And if so be we are to take notice of men's ordinances, that so we
may obey them, how ought then our delight to be in the law of the Lord that so
we may meditate therein day and night, Psalm. 1. 2.
And by the direction of the same reform our ways? Which as it condemns
that man of sin who locks up ye law of liberty in an unknown tongue, that
so not knowing the will of God we might not care to perform it, so it may
cause us to lament the ignorance of the world even in such places where the
Gospel is received, and to fear for the fruit of this ignorance (even
desperate wickedness) that the judgments of God are not far from us.

Argument and parts. CHAPTER. 2.
THe remorse of the King with the power of it. Ver. 1. The corrupt means is
used for the contentment of him: Yet very holily disposed and wisely used by
the Lord for deliverance of his Church. From the 2. verse to the 7. The
intertainment of the means together with the preparation and approbation
thereof, as also the consummation, in the marriage of Hester. From the 8. unto
the 22.

Lastly the confusion of all this Iollitie by a consequent danger, which
notwithstanding is discryed, and prevented by the Church, for the good of the
Church to the end of the Chapter.

After these things.i. (after the wine was out and the sentence past and
executed against the Queen) when the wrath of King Ahashuerosh was appeased.i.
(That is when ye Wine being out, and the object of his wrath removed, the
passion ceased for the time) he remembered Vashty and what she had done and
what was decreed against her.

He considered both the benefit of a wise which he was now deprived off, as
also the small cause that had robbed him of so great a comfort, and also he
could not forget the baseness of his Counselors and the wrong sentence that
was pronounced against her.

After these things, 1. Afer that the feast was past, and the wine and
Ahashuerosh was parted, and by the decree of his wisemen his wife was
departed; and so both the fuel of his anger spent, and the lust thereof
satisfied: After these things says the word of truth, was the wrath of the
King appeased. And so this mad fit (you see) is ended: the spirit does not say
that he repented of his anger or that he labored to make amends for the same
but only this, that his anger was appeased, that is, not forsaken as a sin,
but only quallified, and for a time laid a sleep to be raked up again upon as
slight an occasion. 1 Ob. How the wicked leave sin.
Wherein the holy Ghost does notably set down unto us the manner how the
wicked leave their sin or rather how sin indeed leaves the wicked; not to
clear them of the guilt of it, no nor for the corruption of the same, but
only for a time leaves them in regard of the rage or the temptation, that so
slattering themselves with the imputation of great maisteries over themselves,
as if hereby they were great conuerts, and being puffed up hereby they may
be drowned in securite, that so the sin returning in a seven times worse
manner it may repossesse them more fully, and so their latter end may be worse
then their beginning.

Wherein we may behold the Admirable providence of GOD, Sect. 1. Gods
providence d^scouered herein.
who giving the wicked their desire that they shall have their fill of sin,
does by this especial means dispose the same, even by brideling sometimes
the rage of sin, and giving intermission to the force of the temptation.

For as by this restraining them, he makes them more fit for human society,
which (if they should continue in their outrage) would not endure them, and so
thereby keeps them from many legal punishments which happyly though they
meet with the body might be a means to save the soul; whereby having
occasions offered to pursue their iniquities, as they forslow them not, yet
still either for fear or credit they are somewhat brideled: so the more the
fire is suppressed the more it inwardly rages, and thereby takes deeper root
in the unbelieving heart: so yt to the wicked the outward ceasing of the
stream, tends to the inward increase of the corrupt fountain, which
afterward upon occasion will break out with greater violence: And so much the
rather is sin hereby strengthened, because by this stay of our sin, not only ye
heart is flattered with show of virtue and so thereby hardened, but as the
falling of one wave is the raizing of an other, Esaias. 4. 8.
so the wicked are as the raging Sea foaming at their own shame, the
intermission of one sin is the provocation to another: That so by this means
being plunged in all kinds of wickedness, they might be given up to a
reprobate sense, and so make up the measure of our unavoidable destruction.

A matter which will yet appear more manifest unto us if we observe the
occasion of the wicked in leaving of sin, Sect. 2.
which is not any work of grace wrought in the heart, proceeding from the
power of Christ through the preaching of the word, but only such outward
accident effects the same: which inwardly reuiues the sin, and so ripens the
sinner to his just condemnation. Occasions of the ceasing of sin in the
wicked. Prouer, 26. 20.
For eitther the wine is out, and so the occasion ceasing, the sin for a time
slaketh from its heat; or our credit bridleth though our heart be good; either
we fear the smart, and are out of date: and deeplier in elsewhere, and so you
you must spare us here, may sin deeplier in drunkenness. maintain inward
corruptions, as spiritual pride, when the Devil cease tempting? And is he
not usually quiet where all is his own? Luke 11. 21.
We riotous in sin that we may longer hold therein: And to say the best in
this case; though we spirit of God will bridle us therein, though not for our
own, yet for others good, and yet we shall not champe the bridle; but
willingly endure it; the Lord not forcing the will, but leaving it to its rage,
and by contrary occasions justly provoking the same: For either the Spirit
bestows gifts of knowledge etc. upon us, Sect. 3. How the spirit bridles sin
in the wicked.
which that we may put forth to the utmost, for the maintaining of spiritual
pride, therefore we desire to be restrained from gross and open sins. Or
else we attain to some such calling in the Church or commonwealth which
because it cannot be managed with credit if we fall into foul offenses;
therefore for our glory and estimation we desire here also to be restrained;
and so are either kept, or not suffered to rest in those gross iniquities:
awakens the conscience; and so sin is suppressed, and for a time hindered: Or
else on the contrary; custom deads the conscience, and so sin is either some
rod is our bridle that we cannot as we would, or our profit will reiourne sin
because we have now no leisure, or else we loppe off only the branches and
Sect. 4. Impossible for the rich to forsake sin. Rom, 7.
Yea so impossible is it for the wicked to forsake sin truly that they are
not only ignorant of the chief sins which especially reign in them, yea
do not understand the power thereof, but even those that they know they will
not acknowledge to be sins, Esaias, 5 21.
either by corruption of judgment taking light for darkness, or by the
shallowness thereof, apprehending only the outside of sin, and so the best
they do is but to make clean the outside of the platter. Thus you see the
occasions why the wicked leave sin, Math. 23.
as also the manner and measure of it ceasing in them.

1 Use. Wherein we may learn as to judge wisely of al such glorious shows of
civil honesty, natural righteousness, hypocrisy, and such like which go
current in the world for true conuersions.

2 So by the contrary notes we may judge our selves comfortably whether we be
in the faith or no.

And because they which will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer many
afflictions; Obs. 2. The rage of the wicked shall cease for the good of the
Church.
harken we for our comfort to that which yet follows, the holy Ghost says,
the Kings anger is appeased. And for the Churches good, the Lord shall cease
the rage of the wicked: Ahashuerosh shall be angry that Vashty may be divorced,
and his anger shall be appeased, 1. Cor. 10. 13.
that Hester may be advanced.

Use. 1. And therefore why art thou presumptious oh thou enemy seeing the
goodness of God herein appears daily? Psa. 42.
Oh why art thou so disquieted oh my soul seeing Esa. 48.
yet wherein man is good to thee, therein is he infinitely more: if a mother
cannot forsake her child then much less will he leave thee, if Ahashuerosh
cease his anger that the Church may have deliverance, thou may then be sure,
Esaias 54. 8.
that his anger will not last for ever, Lamen. 3.
but though he has been angry with thee a little yet in everlasting
campassion will he gather thee again. And for they learning yet observe here
an other point, Namely that as thou woulds not have thy God to be angry for
ever, Obs. 8. Anger must be renounced.
so thou must cease from anger. So did here this wicked Prince and shall he
rise up in judgment

Use. Not to be justified
And therefore say not with Jonas thou do well to be angry: it is for thy
credit who could endure it: pluck out both thine own eyes, to pluck out one
of thy brothers? if thou will be aduizd by me feed not thy anger, but rather
ease thee of such a guest, as will eat thee out of house and home, view thy
self Remedies of unjust anger.
hold thy hands wisely, least thou repent at

Surely if thou will not forsake thy sin by remembering thy end, behold thy
sin shall remember thee even when thou would forget it, and though the King
(no doubt) would have been spared this memento, yet says the spirit, 4. Ephe.
26.
He remembered Vashty and what she had done. Obser. 4. The conscience calls the
wicked to account in this life togeether with the use of it in them.
This son of Adam is now called to account in the cooling of his passions and
his conscience remembers him of his former outrage: so wise is the Lord to
school him in his better mood, so just is he also not to leave sin
unpunished, and all this by the power of conscience left in man by nature;
which though it excuse for sin, Mat. 10. 19. 20.
as it is misinformed by the corrupt judgment, that so the sinner might be
encouraged to do the same, John. 16.
yet withal does it check and repress the doing thereof, And though it in
some measure inform us in well-doing, Romans 15.
yet it accuses also even that very well-doing, to the just confusion of
Carnal confidence, and most righteously also accuses for sin, Esaias. 29. 13.
both to justify God against whom the sin is committed, and by conuincing the
sinner so to leave him without excuse, and thereby to yield him up to the
iaylor to be reserved for vengeance even til he have paid the uttermost
farthing, Oh consider this yea that forget God and Job. 22. 14.
he is hid in the clouds, behold your conscience will condemn you for sin,
Ezec. 8. 1^.
and God which is greater then the conscience must much more condemn you, Ioh.
3. 20.
consider I say you unwise among the people, hope not therefore to corrupt thy
conscience as if it labor not to dead it that it may not flatter not thy self
when it does excuse thee But bless thy God that thou may see thy true And
bless him again that thy conscience keeps And keep this watch true, by
daily setting it by the word, that so it may tell true, and not And seeing it
tells true rebel not against it, though it be but a worm it will turn
again: and at the best it will so sting thee, that thou shall wish thy self
Of all torments most fear this rod, and yet of al rods santcified look for
best issue of this.

But what does the conscience here remember unto this miserable King? Obse. 5.
The particular evidence of conscience.
surely she forgets not any thing that may torment him, she remembers him of
his beautiful Queen, whose comfort he had now lost, that so he might see how
justly he was punished.

Now he burns in Just, yea she remembers of that small fault which the poor
Queen had committed, that so his sin might yet appear to be the greater in
putting her away for so slight an offense, yea she remembers him also of those
base Courtiers that had been ministers to his lust, that yet he might be
more vile in himself as to have abased him to such counselors: yea she
remembers him of the decree, excluding her restitution that so this might cut
his heart the more, in that the evil was remediless, that the constancy of
his laws must make him constant in his misery.

Thus you see the conscience remembers with a witness, she fails not a
particular but sets his sins in order before him, and she plays the Orator
to amplify his sins that so he may have sour sauce for his unsavory
pleasures.

So does the Lord of conscience judge righteously: so shall the son of God
judge the world; we shall give

So may we believe that their shall be a general judgment when we feel the
conscience thus making way for the sin, so by this secret arraignment may we
still So by this particular judgment of the conscience

He remembered the decree] somewhat more their is in this that he is said to
remember the decree, Obser. 6. The accusation of the conscience in the wicked
an hinderance to repentance.
wherein I take it the Holy Ghost would have us to understand the maine bar of
his repentance, that he could not make recompense to his wife, nor restore
himself to his right, which by rashness and folly he had stripped himself
of, and therein also to discover his desperate condition that he is utterly
excluded from all hope of reconciliation, the means hereto is intimated to be
the decree, even that decree which his wife counselors had propounded unto
him, and he in madness having assented thereto, Obser. 7. Credit in the wicked
opposed to conscience whereby repentance is hindered.
cannot now with his safety and credit recall it again.

His conscience tells him that it was a rash decree and therefore was to be
disanulled: but his credit tells him that it stands not with his state least
their should appear an error in his government (a thing which Princes will no
way hear of; as they are peerless in greatness so they must be accounted
absolute in goodness: that so they may rob GOD of his honor; and he may lay
their honor in the dust) yea his safety tells him that he must not cross his
Princes, nor antiquate his laws, least his Princes rebel, and turn the edge
of the law against him.

And therefore in his carnal Wisdom he sticks to that which was his best
hold, namely to provide for his credit, and present safety, as for the
conscience, that was but a fit of melancholy, and howsoever it might lead him
to the hope of a better life, if he would have obeyed; yet being without that
hope, no marvel if he leaves the guide thereto and so makes ship-wracke of
his conscience to embrace this present world.

Behold the miserable estate of the sons of Adam! here is a Kingdom divided
against it self and can it continue? here is credit against conscience, and
safety of life present opposed against the security of the life to come: but
will you see the issue? the lean Kine devour the fat, Sect. 1. Gods Justice
herein.
credit reiects conscience, and present contentment excludes the hope of future
happiness. And yet the Lord is exceeding righteous herein, who though he has
appointed to fat up the wicked hereby to the day of slaughter, yet by this
combat does it appear that he puts the choice to themselves.

Behold I set before thee this day life and death, Deu. 30. 19
good Yea that they may the rather be allured to the better: Psalm. 17. 14
behold the Lord filles their bellies with hidden treasures, Yea he tries them
also by some crosses and afflictions, that he might see what is in their hearts
and whether they will obey his commandments or no.

But all is one, Deu. 8. 2.
they have set up their rest, they see no better and therefore must make the
best, of that they see.

Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die, they have made a covenant
with hell and with death, 1 Cor. 15.
they are at an agreement, Esaias. 28.
they have made a mock at the council of the LORD, Psalm. 9.
and for Heaven it is but a dream, and conscience a bug-beare: let us have the
present, and take the future who list, depart from us Lord we will not the
knowledge of thy ways, Job. 21. 14
our belly is our God and we will sacrifice to our net. Thus God appointing,
the wicked are the choosers, and is God unrighteous to give them their desire?

But how shall the wicked be confirmed in this choice? Sect. 2. The wicked how
satisfied herein.
how shall they bless their souls and so harden themselves therein? do they
not hear of a better within them? Do they not see a better before them? yes
(beloved) the conscience tells them, that there is a better; in that it checks
them in the best use of the present: Yea their happiness Ecol. 2.
and taking it wings on the sudden, and flying away. Pro. 23.
Yea which is more fearful, their heart leads them to the desire Number. 24
Oh that I may die the death of the righteous! how is it then that they will
not use the means thereto? how is it that seeing the better and approving the
same, yet they follow the worse, and that with greediness too? Obs. 8. The
conscience Gods executioner in the condemnation of the wicked.
surely the work of the Lord is admirable herein and worthy to be sought out
of all those that will secure their election, and especially wrought by the
ministry of the conscience.

Which being GODS Agent in the wicked to accomplish his will, the more it is
rejected the more it is enraged, and thereby proves such an inward
handwriting to confound all their outward delights, that seeing they must to
corrupt the conscience, yt so they may hence it is that the right square being
cast off, Sect. 1. The false rules which the wicked devise to iustefie their
actions.
which is the word of GOD, false rules are devised, to blind the light of the
conscience; examples are embraced, and multitude is followed, Time becomes one
rule and Opinion another, and to take down the edge of it, that it may not cut
at all, or else very dully, behold here they plunge themselves deeper in
sin, Sect. 2. How they dull and dead the conscience 4. Ephesians. 19.
and give the bridle more freely unto all iniquity, that so they may dead the
conscience and make it past feeling, which howsoever the wicked may attain for
a season, and in some measure be free from the checkes thereof, that so they
may bless themselves in their choice, and thereby make up the measure of their
sin, Yet behold the justice of God; when the harvest is ripe the sickle shall
be put in, and who shall give the onset but the conscience that was thought to
be dead: Sect. 3. The conscience how and when revived in the wicked.
This do the wicked surely find in each temporal cross, and especially they
drink deep of it when death seazeth upon them: The worm that never dies
begins with them in this life, yea in their laughter their heart is sad, and
in the end of that mirth their is unspeakable heaviness. Pro, 14. 13


Use. Thus does the Lord bring about the destruction of the wicked; and that
especially by the ministry of the conscience: so vain is it for them, to
resist the power thereof, so justly they herein renounce their own salvation
in preferring credit or present safety before the government of conseicnce.
This was right the case of this miserable great one. And this is the case of
the wicked of the world that are prepared to destruction, their conscience
would retain them but their credit says no, their securing for present
happiness excludes them the hope of eternal glory: and makes also their
present happiness to be most fearful and miserable.

So righteous is the Lord in accomplishing of his will so inexcusable to teach
his Children to count all things as dung in regard of keeping faith and a good
conscence, Phil. 3. 8
But may not a good name and a good conscience stand together, Obser. 9.
Conscience and credit in the Godly go to geather.
may not he be secure of the earth that secures himself to heaven? Is not
Godliness profitable as well for this life as the life to come? 1 Timothy 4. 8
Had not Solomon, wisdom given him and riches to? 1 Reg 3. 1
And if we do first seek the Kingdom of heaven shall not all these things be
cast upon us? Math. 6. 33
If we prevail with GOD shall we not prevail Are not the Children of GOD of
the best report? Is not wisdom justified of her Children? Nay is not Was not
our Savior And Pro. 16
and if we seek aright we shall find the faithfulness of our GOD? had
Ahashuerosh his Judgment bin right he should have here seen no direct
opposition between conscience and true credit: but that as his conscience
told him that the decree might have been reuersed, so it might also have well
stood even with his credit to.

For to examine this point a little in the Court of conscience? Why might not
this decree with good conscience be reuersed? was it because it was a law of a
mighty Kingdom, the happiness whereof depended upon the maintenance and
obedience of good and wholesome laws?

Surely; though it cannot be denied but that such laws of Kingdoms ought not
to be antiquated, which are expositions of the moral law of GOD; and thereby
entend conscionable obedience thereto (such as the Gentiles are directed from
the light of Nature, Obs. 10. Laws what perpetual and how to be antiquated.
by the benefit whereof no doubt this Persian Monarchy had gained some) and to
the Jews were commended by the mouth of GOD himself, and so from them
conveyed to the Christians by the word of God, howsoever I say they may not be
altered because they proceed from an immutable ground, and concern especially
an eternal substance; yet other particular laws their are, concerning the
times, persons, and diverse occasions of particular states, which depending
only thereon, are to determine therewith. Among which laws seeing this was
one, as instituted on a particular occasion, and that neither warrantable,
therefore in a double respect this might well have bin abrogated, both in that
the occasion thereof was mutable and so the law might be changed, and also
being slight and unseemly was therefore in equity fit to be cancelled. What then
should be the reason why this Persian state should be so peremptory for the
eternizing of such laws? Sect. I. Worldings why earnest for the eternizing of
their laws.


Surely, is not hard to conceive the causes thereof, if we do understand the
nature and condition of these Kingdoms. Old Adam lives not in vain in all his
Children, he had a conceit to be like unto God, and this conceit is the voice
of God and not of man: Act. 12. 25.
Hereupon that they might maintain an opinion of this deity in the hearts of
the people in the making of their laws, they especially extended the same. Not
only, in ascribing the original of their laws to some divine power, as if
they had no beginning, but further also procuring hereby an opinion of eternity
to them, that they shall stand for ever and not to be reuersed, and all this to
this blasphemous end that the laws might be Advocates to justify their deity,
as being the daily rules whereby their subjects were governed. From this
conceit of deity, proceeds usually two effects I. an opinion of extraordinary
wisdom, and perfection, and from hence vnmeasurble pride and shameless
insolency, both which Whereby they were not only maintained their pride, but
further also hereby they became Masters of their desires, not only to yoke
any of their subjects bridle the King himself, and to make him a slave to
their baseness and Dani. 6.
as by this means taking the King at an advantage, and thereby tying him
(notwithstanding his after wit) to such inconveniences, as might not only
wound his conscience but empaire his credit too. This we see here apparent in
this Persian Monarch and the like may we see in his predecessor Darius; that
which they take to be their honor, turns to their disgrace, because they
preferred with Saul rather to be honored before men, 1. Sam 15
then to preserve a good conscience in the sight of God.

Use 1. Wherein as we may see the justice of God in taking the wicked in their
own Counsels that so their glory becomes their shame: So we may behold on the
contrary Whereby as Pro. 28.
then he which flattereth with his lips: so it leaves a fearful brand upon al
reprobate Saules that care I Sam 17 Obser. 11. Vows and promises what and how
to be kept.
that seeing God will honor those that honor him, therefore all their worldly
credit shall turn to their confusion.

Which as it may lesson; us generally to discern between things that differ
and so wisely to prefer our conscience before our credit; so in the case of
vows and promises it may be a good direction unto us, how far

Lastly if we have power of our selves to make such promises, Psalm. 15.


Use. 1. Which as it condemns all popish vows and such like rules as neither
being of things commanded but contrarying the same, 1. Popish vows condemned.
neither being in our power nor standing with Christian liberty, but being
merely forced and contrary to our callings: Also rash and forced promises.
So it also reproves all such rash and forced covenants and promises, which
either being forced by our passion, of others threatenings, are not therefore to
stand, because the ground was not voluntary. And therefore as the Saints of
God, David 1.
have wisely broken such oaths and rash promises, Sam. 25.
so may we lawfully refuse to stand to such covenants, 3. To be broken.
not using our liberty herein as a cloak of malitiousnesse, or deceit, but
endeavoring in all things to keep a good conscience, and so wisely delivering
our selves from the snares of the wicked, And how.
who if they have so caught us that by the law we are bound, then let us follow
the Council of the Pro. 7. 1.
wise man, humble we our selves, solicit we our friends, and give no rest to
our bones till we have delivered our selves as a Do from the hand of the
Hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the be Fowler; 4. How to be prevented.
And that being warned we may the better be armed, that we may prevent such
cunning en-snaring. Let us not be servants of men, nor slaves to our lusts,
keep before our tongue, and a compass according seake we truth from our
hearts and labor sincerity in all our actions. Lastly to our doue-like

Lastly whereas the King though he has a Law to clear him, Obser. 12. The
sovereignty of conscience.
and a whole world to defend him; yet notwithstanding his conscience does most
righteously condemn him, herein we may behold the sovereignty of conscience,
which if it stand with us, we need not fear who is against us, if it only
plead against us, what will all the world advantage us?

1. Use. Whereby we may learn as to fear in our greatest outward safety, if
the conscience be not quieted; so on the contrary to be most secure in the
greatest danger, because Prouer. 18.
And thererfore as we are to prefer the peace of our consciences above all
the world, so we are to labor the procuring right in all, and by the same
shall have that to use which shall be better then great riches of the ungodly,
so keeping our consciences unspotted of the world, we shall be free from the
danger thereof, and having boldness before God in the peace thereof, we shall
not need to run to the world for a plaster to heal it soars.

This the Spirit of God settes down to be the case of Ahashuerosh; Obs. 13.
The wicked in the troubles of conscience run to the world and carnal helps.
Verse, 2.
his conscience so wounds him that he must needs have help, and instead of
such means which might have brought him to repentance, his servants advise him
for such as in truth tend especially to the increase of his sin.

(Here what they say) Then said the servants of the King that ministered unto
him: Let them seek for the King beautiful maidens etc.

Let us drown him again in pleasure to drive away melancholy, that so he
may remember his iniquity no such miserable comforts are so wretched is our
nature to endure no so does the wicked help each other forward So does the
LORD threaten that there shall be like Priest like people, so are Gods
judgments most righteous against them; when that by them is done in the hight
of their wisdom which ye Lord has appointed as the only means of their
destruction.

Wherein we may behold as a special office of Courtiers. Namely to be brokers
to the lusts of wicked Princes, Obs. 14. Courtiers plunge their Princes in
pleasure.
so herein also their devilish policy. Namely to plunge their Princes in
pleasure, upon pretense of easing their shoulders of unnecessary affairs;
that so corrupting their Or if by Gods mercy they are at length reclaimed, who
must be the sacrifices to appease the people, Jeremy. 8. 10
and purge the land in this case? Who must pay for their errors but these that
have been the bellows to set all on fire?

Use. A notable lesson for all Christians that they daub neither running
falling to gaming and such like vain helps. The wounfded conscience how to be
releued.


But that being wounded with sin, they go to the true Physician for the
curing thereof, and so use the right means which he has prescribed. Ierem,
^. 13.
Namely to, Psalm, ^ 2. 5.
1. know their iniquity, and 2. acknowledge the same with grief, Ietem, 3. 36.
so to be 3. humbled therewith, as withal 4. to sigh for pardon, Hebr, 10.
21.
and 5. to beg the same instantly at the throne of grace; Peter I, 5. 2. hill.
6. offering holy vows never to commit the like again; Ephesians, 6.
and 7. watching over themselves by holy fear, and 8. soberly, that so they
may stand fast in the day of temptation. But let us examine the best in their
offer: Namely that the King may have another spouse for so it is said: Verse, 4.
That there may reign instead of Vashty. A matter very equal, Obs. 15. Second
marriage not unlawful.
that ye King should have a comforter, and the light of nature here taught
these prephane men, yt even a second fornication, I see not, but the thing
being simply lawful to marry a wife, we may find even all these blessings as
well in the second as in a former choice: Nay if we shall consider that
experience teaches wisdom, why may I not hope to have more comfort in my
second choice then I have had in my first.

Use 1. And therefore howsoever this liberty may be the occasion of some evil
dealing against the wife, (which has bin the occasion why some have been
straight even in just causes to allow of divorce) and though this liberty be
not indeed to be taken of every one, 1 Timothy 5.
but of those especially that may increase so the Church of God thereby, yet
seeing we have the examples of the holy men of God for our warrant, and the
word also does not simply forbid the same, but by a consequent does plainly
allow it; I see not but this liberty may be lawfully practiced among
Christians, observing no other conditions then are required in the former
marriage.

That which is added concerning the special quality of the wife that must be
chosen, Obs. 16. Beauty warily to be proposed in the choice of a wife.
That she must be picked out of the most beautiful Virgins, as if beauty were
the best mark to guide the eye in the choice of a wife: this as in it self is
more liable to reproof, so, though otherwise not to be neglected, Yet now in
conscience should least have bin intended, because beauty was the occasion of
the former sin. Obs. 17. Godly avoid such occasions as have enticed them to
sin.
And surely hereby do the Children of God best testify their repentance when
they dread the fire that has so scorcht them, and avoid such occasions as
have bin fuel to their sin. But what do I speak of repentance to this King
and his Courtiers? here is no sin acknowledged, and therefore can we look for
any avoiding the like occasions? No, no, their sin is their happiness, and
therefore when ye former wood is spent, Obs. 18. Prophaine courtiers rea^y to
satisfy the lusts of their Princes.
what should. they do but cast on more to maintain the flame: thus beauty must
still be supplied to maintain lust. Let them seek beautiful Virgins. Say these
ioylie courtiers both she wing therein their chiefest aim, and not being
ignorant what would please ye King.

Use. 1 Oh that we could be so wise to take notice what would please the King
of heaven, as these carnal wretches are to serve the honor of this earthly
Monarch, that we could so further one another in the way to happiness, as the
wicked are skilful to fit each others turn to hell, that we could see our own
weakness to be humbled therewith, as the wicked fit each others corruption to
the strengthening thereof, that we could so know our own strength to be
resolute against sin, as the wicked know each others weakness to help
forward to evil: Surely if we do not, these Courtiers shall condemn us: their
wisdom in sin, our folly to goodness.

Let them seek for the King beautiful Virgins; Obs. 19. The best gifts of the
wicked tend to their destr^ction.
well fare then deformity, for beauty bringes bondage: here is no seeking for
foul ones, the fair must serve the Court; So do the best gifts of the
wicked tend to their destruction, and no marvel: For as they are given of God
in anger so they are desired of the wicked, for And therefore as they occasion
the wicked to so because these will serve the turn, for snares and stumbling
blocks to them and others, and so both hasten and increase their damnation.

That which we may learn here is partly touched before. Page 13. 2.
But heereto we may add these public lessons.

1 use. Namely as to condemn the world for respecting so much the rather for
excluding by these the more excellent blessings, as if so be religion were
enemy to policy, and sound holiness would not work true subjection.

portions cast upon the wicked to their greater condemnation: Therefore let
us not be discouraged if we are scanted of them, but rather let us seek
after durable riches. Let us not take pains and lay out our money upon things
of no value, but rather let them that thirst come to the waters and buy without
money, as being assured, that if we choose the better part we shall not want
the complement, these outward things shall be cast into the reckoning. This shall
be wisdom, riches, honor and all unto us.

Thus far of the quallitie by which this wife must be chosen: she must be
beautiful, the best pearl in a carnal eye.

But where shall we seek for this beautiful wife? Hearken what these
Ministers advise in this point, must we fetch her from other countries that
differ in manners and religion from us? No say these Counselors.

Let the King appoint officers throughout all the Provinces of the Kingdom,
and let the gather all the young beautiful Virgins into the Palace of Sushan
into the house of the women under the hand of Hege the Kings Eunuch, Verse, 3.
keeper of the women to give them their things for purification.

And the maid that shall please the King let her reign instead of Vashtie.
Verse, 4.


This you see is the sum of their council, why this wife should be chosen,
and it may be drawn to these heads.

1 Because it is a matter of state, therefore it must be done in state;
Officers must be appointed (happily a new) and for a season only for this
work, that so it may be done in order and decency

2 These Officers as they must not exceed the bounds of the Kingdom, so their
commission is large, the whole kingdom is their circuit.

3 Though there be but one to be chosen, yet all the beautiful Virgins in the
Kingdom must be sought out and gathered together, that so of them all this
choice of one may be made.

4 They must be brought to the place of Sushan, near the hand of the chief
Keeper of the women; that so they may be sure for starting away, or at least
loose the crown and pride of their rejoicing.

5 They must have things given them for their purification, that they must be
trained up to the fashion and manners of the Court, and they must be fitted
here to the state and lust of the Prince etc.

These are the particulers of this prudent Counsel. Now let us examine the
equity thereof. Obs. 20. Matters of state to be carried with complement


And surely that matters of state should be carried in state, and affairs of
Princes ought to have complement accordingly: So that howsoever they differ
from common men, yet this may stand with their lawful liberty; both their
calling does require it, and their means will allow; and who may better be
employed herein then the subject; who fitter then Abraham's servant to procure a
wife for his Masters son? Genes 4.


Only observe we that the complement of state be no no cloak to sin, nor
countenance to secret wickedness. 2. yt ye matter they are employed in be
answerable to their service and the state whom it does concern, and 3. that
the end be holy and profitable to the church and common wealth: which as it
conde^neth the imploime^t of many unnecessary officers to base and unseemly
services toward propha^e princes, when the subject is taken up for satisfying
private lusts: so it is a good lesson to christian princes, yt though they have
the lawful command of the bodies and good of their subjects, not to make them
drudges to every base seeruice, but if the just man be merciful to his beast,
then surely ought they much more to be respective of man, Verse, 16. 7.
as much concerning their glory and their safety too, but of this point more
largely anon. Nay if we consider ye compass of their commission yt they must
not exceed the limits of the Kingdom; surely herein they advise not amiss.

For seeing in y^ choice of a wife we should especially respect similitude of
time, which is best discerned by agreement in the same religion, Obs. 8. Where
a wife to be chosen whether at home ^n our own country or abrod.
correspondency in manners, and conformity to our guise, and laudable fashion:
was not his own country likeliest to afford these, and was it not therefore
fit to make his choice here? To make him great and strong by foreign alliance,
to unite diverse nations by this means together: As this is not the fashion of
Tirants, whose greatness rises by the sword or treachery, so indeed Christian
Princes are to be wise herein least while that they seek for greatness they
loose goodness, while they labor to be strong abroad they while by foreign

Else what need all the beautiful virgins to be gathered to Sushan. Obser, 22.
Tyrants how they revel in the goods and bodies of their Subjects.
The King would have but one and therefore what need so many hundreds? And
though he might show his power, thus to ingrosse beauty to him self, because
if he commanded who durst deny: yet surely this must needs turn to great
grief and coffeehouse of his subjects, thus to be deprived of the staffes
of their age, and also much frustrate the end which he proposed therein, namely
out of those many to make choice of one. For if the eye be never satisfied with
seeing, and among so many like objects the mind must needs be distracted; how
shall he grow to a resolution which shall be she, that in his choice is only
led by such a rule as makes no difference between the one and the other
unless we will say y^ out of this multitude he meant to chose more then one,
though not for his wife yet to supply the number of his concubines and
wandering. Diuah straying so far from home might be good meat for courtiers
(remember I pray you we are yet in Persia,) groser fare will serve them:
whatsoever it is, we may here behold ye miserable slavery of such as live under
Godles Princes, the best that they have must serve ye Tirants lust, there
servants must be his bauds and her daughters his harlots. ^ Sam. 8
Beloved, their odious lives and that which is deererhis harlots their riches,
their liberty ye dearest of all their souls and consciences, these must be
prostituted to the lust of wicked Princes. So blasphemously do they exalt
themselves hourly above all that is called God. So just is the Lord to satiate
the wicked with their own So Pro. 14
That as the insolence of Princes punishes the Idolatry of the subject, 1 Samuel
8
so the rage of the subject shall punish the Idolatry of the Prince.

Use 1. Which though it be no warrant to cast of the yoke of government,
because the wicked abuse the same: Yet it is Princes how to command their
subjects.
yet it is in the Lord, his glory for and the public good. And subjects also
may here take out that Romans 8. 27


4 In that these Virgins must be brought into the palace of Sushan and as it
were clapped under hatches, under the custody of the Eunuch that had the charge
of the women, the misery hereof being such as ought not to be named among
Christians I spare therefore to searching thereunto. Obser. 23. The confusion
of Idolatry and carnal wisdom.


Only consider we the power of Satan in these Chrildren of unbelief that as
it was counted a great honor among those vassalls of Satan, to offer up the
souls and bodies of their daughters in fire unto the diuil; so to prostitute
the chastity also of their Virgins to the lust of their Priests, as if it were
a sacrifice most acceptable to their supposed Gods. Whereupon also it came to
pass that as their Princes affected a kind of deity herein to have the spoil
of the Virgins chastity, to be a cloak to color their lust, so it was no
small honor accounted even to these to become the Paramours to so mighty
Monarchies.

Use Which as it does apparently justify the righteous vengeance of God
against Idolators that they shall account that their greatest honor which
brings both ceraine infamy in this life and eternal condemnation in the other
life. So we shall see that the devil is not dead, if we consider a like power
of Satan not only among Papists where this sin is maintained; Solemnity.
yea worse justified by Papal privilege: But, which (I shame to speak) even
among the professors of the Gospel themselves, among whom drunkenesse is
counted good fellowshippe and uncleanness manhood, whoreing faces it with
privilege, 1 Timothy 3
and all iniquity has gotten to the upper hand.

Well the Virgins are thus appointed to be brought to Susan: Obser. 24. Natures
infirmities to be cleansed and abstinence to be used therein.
here must they now be prepared and fashioned to the Court. They advise is.
They must have things given them for purification.

That is such things as might both serve to cleanse natures infirmities, and
also might set out nature more gloriously to the satisfaction of the lust of
the eye, wherein that means are used to heal Natures sickness: This in it
self is a most lawful thing as both commanded by God, Deu. 21.
in a most precise manner and tending much to the health of both parties, in
that the disease is not without his infection.

Use. 1. Which as it condemns the practice of those worse then brutish
natures that run together at all so also this very clensing shall be a heavy
witness against those gentiles, yea against all such in general that are thus
precise to cleanse the infirmities of the body, and yet never regard the purging
of the soul And therefore the best of us may And seeing such care there was of
purifiyng, that these virgins might please an earthly King, 1. Ioh. 3. 3.
how ought we to purge our selves, that we may appear before the Lord Jesus?
surely he that has this hope will purge himself, and to whom the arm of
the Lord shall reveal these things. As for the wicked it is not so with them:
they make clean the out side, to the further defyling of the inward man, and
this is that for which this purificacion is justly faulted, because it was to
provoke the lust of a Tyrant.

And surely if we consider the other manners of this purification which was to
set out nature more gloriously to the bewitching of the eye by some painting or
newfangled attire. Obse. 25. Out landish fashions unlawful.
This also was most profane and prepostrous. For if the exornation were by
some strange and antique attire not agreeable to sobriety or the garish fashion
of the country; this the Lord himself condemes and does threaten that he will
visit such as are clothed with strange apparel.

If it be by painting ye visage or such like hypocrisy; Obser. 26. Painting of
women unlawful.
this surely, as it discover notorious prides not to be contented with what God
has given, but rather to find fault, yea to go about so it beraies our it, and
so disfigure and alter our hue, that God when he Cyprian.
besides what a snare and viser it is to entangle? what a bait to

1 Use. Well let us Court, and Citty-dames learn here instruction, and let al
take heed of the like hypocrisy, least seeming to be yt which they are not;
they prove only what they seem, 2 Timothy 3.
and so deceiving others, at length deceive themselves.

Thus far of the counsel that these yongsters give their Sovereign: What? now
he is not ashamed of such counselors? No sure he was al on fire with ^ust,
and therefore he cares not who powers in oil thereto: and who fitter for such
an occasion then young heads. Obs. 27. Young heads fit to give council to
tirants and godless, Princes.
Such Rehoboams are Princes to be led by young Counselors, because as they
have less knowledge, and therefore may be ouer-reached of their Prince, so
they have less courage, and so are fitter to be ouer-ruled by him, and which
is the maine, they are less settled in their affections, and therefore most
likely to aduize Use 1. A notable lesson for Princes that they follow not young
heads, but rather to distrust themselves when such stand before them; procuring



This pleased the King and he did so: It is a true proverb: They must needs go
that the devil drives, here is more have then good speed; no sooner spoken but
approved presently, no sooner approved, but presently executed. Obs. 28. Sin
impatient of delay.


Behold the impotencie and impatience of sin, it admits no reasoning to
dissuade the sin, it indures no delays least it should happily be
frustrated, so cunning so mad upon us is our corrupt

1 Use. Seect. 1.
whereby we may learn how to prevent sin, if temptation Sin how to be
prevented
and

And seeing the wicked are so forward to put evil motions Sect. 2. The motions
of Gods spirit how to be incertained.
Esteem of them highly, and embrace them readily, practice them cheerfully and
return the strength to the giver: so shall thou cherish the spirit of God,
and by the means thereof attain a perfection.

Well thus you hear the King is pleased; And with what The ordinary state of
these Persian Monarchs rather to live in a chamber making love Ballads to
their Minions, Obs. 25. The profane guise effeminate Princes.
then to meet the enemy in the gate: their belly was their God, and their
gluttony must needs have vent, their eyes full of adultery and soul fraught
with filthiness,

A notable president for Christian Princes to possess their vessels in
holiness and honor, not suffering the stranger to devour their strength, nor
exposing their posterity to cursing and dishonor, but to be careful of
chastity in themselves. So to banish the occasions there of from their Courts,
as idleness, filthy dancing, vain stage-plaies etc. And to see the Laws
severely executed against this sin, least the stranger indeed do devour their
strength; and as they took it of the hyre of an harlot, so they shall return
to the wages of an harlot.

But he that is filthy will be filthy still. The King is pleased, and he puts
his desire in execution.

Now let us further consider how God is pleased herein. What light bringes he
out of this darkness? What way makes he hereby for the deliverance of his
Church?

In the City of Shushan there waas a certain Jew whose Verse. 5.
name was Mordecai the soune of Shimei. etc.

In these few next verses the holy Ghost sets down such means whereby Hester
is advanced to the Court, as show their grounds and reference to others. And
they are of two sorts.

The first is her preservation and education, being for an orphane captive, and
so more extraordinarily plunged in affliction, and thereby more extraordinarily
cast upon the providence of God: who as he usually works by means, so he
prouides a kins-man to become his tutor and nourisher, and such a kins-man who
as he was pertaker with her in her humiliation should also be pertaker with her
of her advancement.

This kins-man therefore is here described at large, by his habitation he dwelt
in Sushan; secondly by his Country he was a Jew. 3. by his name he is called
Mordicai. 4. by his pedigree he was of the tribe of Bitter contrition.
Benjamin where also his descent is remembered; the son of Iair, the son of
Shimey the son of Kish etc. verse. 5.

5. He is described unto us by his outward condition, namely that he was borne,
in the captivity, which the holy Ghost necessarily implies when speaking in
the 5. verse. of his father Kish, He it was (says the spirit) which had bin
carried away from Jerusalem with the captivity that was carried away with
Ieconiah King of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezar King of Babel had carried away. verse.
6. Wherepon it must needs follow that Mordecai was not carried away in the
captivity, but his father Kish. And so the work of GOD herein appeeres more
admirable, that one man borne in the captivity should not only be guardian to
his cousin, left fatherless and comfortless, who in all likelihood might
need of such help himself, but that both these being in such a desperate
condition, should be so highly advanced in the land of their captivity.

Now that by this verse, Kish the father must be meant, and not Mordecai the
son. I take it is more then probable.

1. Because men at this time usually attained not to half those years (for
Jewish conceits pass them not) as of necessity Mordecai must now be of, Obser.
30. Mordecai was not carried away in the captivity.
if he were one that was carried away in the aforesaid captivity.

2. The text it self does seem to resolve the matter where it makes this
Mordecai cousin-german to Hester, 25 being the daughter of Abihail who was
Mordecaies Uncle, Wis. 7. 15.
Now among. i. cousins as there is usually much likeli-hood of years, so there
could not here be such difference as that Mordecai in any wise could be of that
captivity.

3 And what need we search the scripture upon the authors of Jewish fables and
unnecessary supposals; seeing granting that there might be diverse men of that
same name, one succeeding another within generations, Scripture not to be
strained.
which is neither contrary to the chronology of the story, nor the Anology of
faith, both the scripture is justified in it literal exposition, which we are
to cleave unto, when no false-hood or absurdity follows, and there-vpon all
this controversy is happily ended?

So then we will take him for Hesters kins-man and indeed he performs the
part of a Kins-man unto her, as here in the verse is described. He nowrished
Hester who was the daughter of his uncle, and the holy Ghost gives a fourefold
reason of it, One from the bond of affinity, she was his uncles daughter, and
therefore by the rule of nature he was tied to nowrish her. Secondly from her
miserable condition, she had neither father nor mother, and therefore, she had
need of such of a guardian: and that we may see the providence of the Lord, in
the tempering of his Childrens misery, that there shall be somewhat even therein
not only to move to compassion, but to give hope of repentance, or else at
least to make misery greeuious: behold another reason is added.

Namely the maid was fair and beautiful to look and therev on follows a
fourth reason: why he holy affection. Namely that after the death of her
father and mother he took her for his own daughter; that is he not only
adopted her to be his Child, as by the rule of conscience he was bound, but
further also as his Child did most tenderly and fatherly train her up, ^as his
love did guide him and her condition did require, having also likely some
portion from her friends, the rather to induce him thereto: and that may be a
sixth circumstance in the description of Mordecai. Namely from the uprightness
of his conscience and conversation in love: and this is the first, Obser. 31.
Gods Providence in planting his children fitly for his glory and their good.
means here set down of Hesters advancement.

Wherefore, that first this Mordi^ai was planted in Sushan, not in any out or
obscure corner of the Kingdom, far from notice and so from preferment, but
having his abode in the Imperial City, whereas there wanted no means to
corrupt, so their wanted not also means for employment and advancement,
according to the fitness, and forwardness of men thereto; herein we may
behold, the admirable providence of GOD, not only, in keeping this his servant
and his Nephew undefiled in such a sink of wickedness, but hereby also making
a nearer cut by the advancement of these, for the deliverance of his Church.

And surely that Mordecai is resident in Susis; that Susis has a Mordecai to
keep out the wrath of GOD, Obs. 32. The providence of God in plan^ing of the
Godly among the wicked.
and that Mordecai dwells in S^sis not subject to Gods wrath, as being kept
from pertaking with them in their abominations, herein does appear two
admirable acts of the divine providence.

The one of his general providence to the wicked, that when he will lengthen
out temporal blessings unto them, and bear with longer patience, such
vessels appointed Lot or Mordeeaies, either to bridle their sin by their and
thereby flatters themselves in a vain happiness; or else to pluck some out of
the fire that they may avoid Job. 26. 16. 17
and the innocent shall divide the silver.

as to leave it to Gods providence concerning our abiding, because we are in
his hands to dispose at his pleasure, and therefore neither to plot Sushans,
nor to murmur at our Lot in Sodom, so for the changing of our habitations, to
rest upon the unchangeableness of that providence, who if he takes us out of
Canaan and plant us in Aegipt, where we would or should not be, yet it is the
will of our glorious GOD and therefore must not be gainsaid, Psa. 120.
and shall serve in the end to our exceeding good: and therefore that this may
turn indeed to our good, Let us take it a part of our humiliation that we
dwell in Mesech* to be humbled for our sin, Obs. 23. Why God remoues out of
their Hahitaltions.
and yet let us account it a part of Gods mercy toward us, that we are
removed from Canaan to Aegipt: because Aegipt shall nourish us, when Canaan
cannot, and Aegipt also shall fare the better for us, that we may be honored,
only let us be careful that we fare not the worse for it: Though Israel play
the harlot yet let not Judah sin: gleane we the good of Egypt, but partake
not with her in her evil: Let us labor if we can to make Sodom better, but
at no hand let Sodom make us worse: Humble we ye flesh Sodom, and provoke
we the flesh by crossing Haman, 2 Pet,
so the increase of their rage shall increase our faith; and their plots against
us, shall ripen their sin, that is, their fall may be our raizing up, and the
place of sorrow may be the crown of our glory. Thus did God provide for
Mordecai by planting him in Susis.

But was it possible that Susis did not corrupt Mordecai? Could Joseph live in
Egypt and not swear by the life of Pharoh? Did Moses leave Pharohs Court
because he would not enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season?

Behold here an act of Gods special providence Mordecai shall be in Susis and
yet be undefiled: Obs. 33. Gods children are kept pure and made b^tter by their
conuer^ation with the wicked.
Gods children shall dwell with the wicked and yet keep their sincerity; Else
how should they know that their sincerity is from him; that the beginning and
continuance thereof is from his mercy; he that gives it without means can keep
it contrary to means, and therefore neither the terror, nor flattery, nor the
example, nor fellowship of the Sodomites shall corrupt righteous Lot, because
the Lord is the giver and keeper of righteousness: and where the Lord keeps,
contrary means shall further: great cold without shall cause more heat
within; and the greater wickedness of others shall make us both discern and
approve better the righteousness that is in us: Yea we shall hold it Trees
which they have planted.

And therefore howsoever we should rather choose to converse with the godly,
Obser. 34. The godly best company and why?
because they most please God, and best suit with our affections, they are
traveling our way, and so shall best further us to happiness, they only are
safe company, and who yield true comfort: 2 Cor. 6.
Yet seeing we must go out of the world if we will not meddle with the wicked;
Obs. 35. Why we may converse with the wicked and how.
and we are bound to make others better, without fear of making our selves
worse: and God will try us whether we do good of conscience or not: and ye
world must have a stumbling block even by our liberty herein: therefore though
we are not purposely to come into evil company, or principally to make choice
of them, yet if call us we are not to refuse, because his commandment they
seek unto us in their extremity we may not deny them, for the hole have no
need of the Physician Goshen, and the righteousness of his Saints shall have a
glorious trial, when it is justified and desired by ye enemies thereof: thus was
Mordecai safe in Shusan. But how comes it to pass yt he is planted in Shusan:
the reason hereof the holy Ghost delivers afterward: namely he was called to
the Kings household, and made keeper of the Court gate (as chief porter and
keeper of the Palace) wc palace requiring his continual attendance and the
Court being usually at Shusan; therefore he is said to be in the city of
Shusan. And surely herein also the providence of the Almighty is no less
wonderful thus to provide for his servant, in the land of his Captivity, that
he finds such favor with the Prince as to be admitted to his service, Obser.
36. God gives his ^auour in the eyes of the wicked.
and that to a place of such trust and employment, wc may well give testimony of
his loyalty and diligence, as also prepare a way to his further advancement.
Thus has God given his children favor in the greatest of their troubles, even
with those that are Gods special instruments for their greater affliction.

Thus was Joseph gracious: Genes, 39.
Wheresoever he came, his master highly affects him wholly, he was in his
family when he was in the prison, Genes. 40, 41. 42. etc.
he winnes the Iaylors favor, when he is out of prison, Pharoh himself sets
his heart upon him, yea he found favor in the sight even of all the Egiptia^s,
who in likelihood must needs envy his greatness and practice against him. But
what shall we say? This is the Lords doing to turn the hearts of The power of
godliness is such, as sometimes to ravish al: Verse. 16. 17.
and God will have both the wicked left inexcusable hereby, and his the better
secured by the same:

1 Use. And therefore though service of princes be no inheritance, and their
favor (as themselves) partial and mutable: and so not ambitiously or
corruptly to be bought or begd of us, yet neither must we neglect nor if it be
cast upon us, proudly to reject it, as being both a true Mordecai to the Court,
and so did Mordecai very graciously answer this end.

Well thus we have heard of the place of his habitation. But may we not know
of what Country he was? Yea the holy Ghost tells us he was a Jew by nation, a
son of Jacob, and heir of the Covenant, who in the greatest Apostacy of his
brethren remained faithful with his GOD, and therefore in that greatest
misery finds favor with men. Obs. 37. God no accepter of persons.
Behold how the Lord is no respecter, of persons, but in every nation they that
fear him shall be accepted of him, here is tribulation upon the Jew in general,
because they had forsaken their god, Acts. 10. 35.
and yet Mordecai the Jew is exempted, because he is faithful with his God:
Mordecai of the house of Saul y^ rebellious and so wise is he so absolutely
perfect to do all things by him and for himself.

Use. Where we may learn as to be like unto God in not so we must take heed
that with the Anabaptist we abuse neither let us rob Gods free election
with the Papist, Math, 23.
as if because he is no respecter Obs. 38. The continuance of the Church and
the condition.
if we be oppressed let us not despair, for the cry of ye fatherless is in
the ears of the Lord, only let us resign up our selves wholly into the hands
of yt gracious God who loved us before we were, for his own sake and not for
ours, and so let our love be proportio^able, not for our sakes, but for his
glory, yt being purged daily of this drossy corruption we may be fitted to yt
Mordecai the Jew preserved in Susis, is a Benjamin, of the posterity of Saul,
reserved among the Heathen, to praise the Lord, and deliver his Church: Oh ye
liberty of the rich mercies of God, how faithful is he in his promises, Psalm.
80.
how mighty to the preservation of his Church?

Who would have looked for good of Saul's posterity, yt was forsaking of God,
and had the Kingdom rent from him? Who would have thought that there could
have bin a remnant in Susis, to call upon the name of God, and to be zealous
for his glory? Psalm. 80
Will God pla^t a vine in Canaan, and remove it into Aegipt? shall it be removed
out of Aegipt into the wilderness, and so into Canaan again? shall it be removed
out of Canaan into Babylon, and from Babylon to Susis? shall his Church be
tossed and tumbled to all these places? Revel. 2.
shall all sorts of nations give harbor thereto? shall the Turk harbor it?
yea Antichrist himself shall not be able to root it out: but even there shall be
a Church, where satan has his throne and the devil his Synagogue: Christ
shall reign in the midest of his enemies.

1. Behold here the condition of the Church in this miserable world: Reasons.
It must be a Pilgrim upon earth, scattered it shall be over the face thereof
that Gods power may be more magnified in the preservation thereof, Obs. 39.
Condition of the Church to be scattered upon the face of the earth.
and his work the better accomplished both in, and by the same, while it being
thus posted, and tossed to and fro, they rather look and long for that City
which is above; and by being thus changed, from vessel to vessel, it may both
leave savor of it good behind, it to the conversion and reuocation of others,
and may have it own dross also purged out thereby to be prepared to her
eternal rest.

Use 1. By which we may learn to discern the true Church of God, Esaias 47,
not by her sitting as a Queen of the nations and flattering her self that
she shall not be changed, but by this we may disecrne the true Church of God,
namely that as she must be tossed and scattered over the face of the earth,
Ephesians. 6.
so she has her loins guirt up and her feet ready shod thereto: not setting
up her rest because it is good to be here, but waiting the Lords leisure to
call her forth where it please him. A notable warning to carnal Iere. 7.
the Temple of the Lord will be no bond, Ezech. 10. 11.
to hold him among them: And withal a most excellent Sushan shall receive
them, when Judah casts them out, and which may yet make for our greater
comfort, this removing of the Church, as it tends to the continuance thereof in
this life, fo it also fitteth it to eternal rest in heaven. And therefore let
us not think it strange if we find not a biding City but are tossed up and
down and scattred among the nations. It is the portion that our God has
allotted us if we will be true members of his Church, and it is good for us thus
to be changed, Psalm. 55. 15
that we may feate and trust in God, who as by removing our habitations he does
pluck us out of those common desolations, which lie upon places that despise
his word: so in that he has given us the heathen for our inheritance and the
uttermost bounds of the earth for our possession, hereby does he also inuest us
with the possession of each Nation and the blessings thereof, which indeed
properly do belong to us: and all this that his Church may be continued on the
face of the earth, Obs. 40. The faithfulness of God in that the Church of God
shall abide for ever.
yea may still prevail and get ground in the world, till all her enemies be
troad under her feet.

And is it possible that this poor afflicted Church should still hold our
being so scattercd and weakened? shall she continue for ever and shall no power
prevail against her? 1 Esaias 9.
shall there yet be a remnant and a little seed; shall there be a truth, ^say 65.
and a cluster that has a blessing in it: Romans 11
shall Mordecai Hester both Jews remain to revive the Church Lord is
faithful, and in indgement remembers mercy. Exodus I.
The afflictions of the Church shall be a Yea the enemies of the Church shall
become servants unto it. Psalm. 72.
Her weapons are And her soundings are means to revive her again. 2 Cor. 10. 4
What should I Her outward abasing, increases inward glory: and her She must

Use. Which being so. 1. as therefore the bandyings of So is ou^ fear as vain
that the Church may be destroyed. And Let us not forsake that fellowshippe,
Hebr. 10.
Oh let us not end in Let us hold the profession of our hope without wavering,
and continue to the end, so is the crown of righteousness laid up for us,
which the righteous Judge shall give at that day.

And that we may be the rather certain hereof, behold the Lord knows who are
his, he calls them by their names, yea their names are registered and finally
recorded in the word, that they may be the better persuaded that their names
are written in heaven: so faith the spirit. Obser. 41. Fit names to be given to
our children.
Whose name was Mordecai. See here the person whom God appoints for the
deliverance of his Church; Mordecai is his name and bitterness is his portion:
he is the son of contrition, yt must be son of cosolation. So do the children
of God answer their names yt which they are they also make profession of. So
does God sanctify his children to ye accomplishme^t So are they fitted to give
him al y^ glory.

Use 1 Whereby we may learn As; give fit names to our children, to show our
hope of them, or to put the^ in mind So we are to acknowledge the love of God
unto his Sara, Sarah. Abram, Abraham, Jacob, Israel.
yt they may be witnesses of his love toward them; Yea herein also may we
observe a special art of Gods providence in recording the names and generations
of such champions of his as have stood out valiantly for the cause of his
church: and being his instruments for the have in him everlasting life. Ioh 3.
To this end it follows.

This Mordecai was the son of Iair the son of Shemei the son Kish a man
of Gemine. In which words the holy Ghost sets down the pedigree of Mordecai by
the lineall descent from his ancestors.

And yet very briefly too, Obse. 42. Genealogi^s how recorded in the word
omitting many generations as the manner of the spirit is, the recording of
some being sufficient to avouch the truth of the story, and among the rest
mentioning espetially such who might more set forth the truth of Gods promises
to the faithful, and thereby more settle faith for future occasions.

To this purpose is it that many others being omitted, there is special
mention made here of the tribe of Benjamin and of some such in special which
may seem to come out of the house and family of Saul. That so we might know
how that this Mordecai was of the house of Saul and therein behold the great
mercy of God, who though he rejected Saul, and in a manner rooted out his
posterity, yet he showed great mercy unto the posterity of Jonathan not only
in preserving the same in a lineall descent for the sum of five hundred
years (if this Mordecai draw his petigree there, Obs. 43. Children shall not
be punished for the fathers offense.
and surely it must be here or not from Saul) because his other children left
no issue behind them, but in restoring also the same in some sort to the
government which Saul and his posterity was utterly deprived of. A notable
demonstration of the mercies of God that indeed they are above all his works,
2. Sam. 9. 3.
he retains not his wrath for ever because mercy pleases him he will not
punish the the children for the fathers transgression, but the righteous seed
shall l^ue though the wicked stock be rooted up, for shall not the Judge of all the world do right? are not al souls

Use. 1. Surely if this lesson were througly learned, how how would it comfort
the outcast and despised that he may get the blessing? how is he taught hereby
to repair his fathers house, even by declaring wisely the sins how may he
hope by this means to see Esaias. 58.
and to turn the curse into a gracious blessing? what glory shall it be to him
to borrow the repair of the breach and the restorer of the paths to dwell in.
Such was Mordecai of the family of wicked Saul; such was the son of God, many
of whose ancestors in the flesh were wicked persons. So will not God be tied
to nature in the bestowing of his blessings; and so wi^ God make nature
beholding to him in blessing beyond desert the fruit thereof.

And surely where God bestows blessings they come not alone: behold the same
God that prouides out of the loins of Jonathan those that shall build up the
old wast places, he also continewes the line of Jonathan even for the space of
five hundred years and very likely in the posterity of Mordecai has not cut
of the same; 1. Sam. 10. 15.
so requested Jonathan that mercy might not be cut of from his house for ever;
so promised David, and so the Lord makes it good; the seed of the righteous
shall be mighty upon the earth and the posterity of the Just shall abide for
ever, Obs. 44. God continues and blesses the posterity of the reighteous.
but for the seed of the wicked it shall be cut of and their generations shall
be destroyed from the face of the earth: which as it stands with the
righteousness of God that they which are heirs of the covenant should also be
partakers of the blessing thereof: ^al. 112.
so it concerns his power to maintain the righteous seed, (...). 37. 26. 28
29.
which the world especially labors to root out: ye yea his mercy is exalted
in giving his children and his Church is by

Which as it contains that Doctrine of devils which so it also checketh the
Neither can they also here be excused, who having may deprive them of the
blessing of the covenant, then by holy education fit them thereto: Math. 2.
surely that Lord that therefore made one though he had abundance of spirit
because he sought a Godly seed, Pro 2.
will undoubtedly destroy the seed, that the stranger has sownne and the
bastard slips shall not take root. Obs. 45. Posterity how to be continued.


Would thou therefore know how thy posterity may abide for evermore. First
then graft thou in an holy stock, and then drink the waters of thine own
cisterne, Pro 3. 15.
offer up the first borne to God and prune thy olive plants with holy employ
them in such callings as may humble the flesh, and Mordecai. Now lets a little
further confider of his condition, it follows. Psa. 128.


Which had been carried away from Jerusalem with the captivity that was carried
away with Ieconiah King of Judah, Verse. 6.
whom Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel had carried away. Obser. 46. They let Gods
Church to go into captivity.


In which word being referd as we have proved before to the faith of Mordecai
the spirit of God sets down the estate and condition of Mordecai by a
consequent, namely that he was borne in the land of his countries captivity. He
was a captive in a strange land, so were his forefathers in Egypt, and so are
his posterity now slaves to all nations so are the children of God exercised
with this affliction: Joseph was sold for a bond-slaue and it is the lot of ye
poor Christians under the Turk and such enemies of the Gospel to be sold and
led captives into a strange land. And that not without the especial providence
of God* both to put his children in mind of their natural condition that they
are no better then the slaves of Satan, Ecele. 23.
and also punish them justly for their ^ornications with other nations, by
giving them up as a prey unto them, and yet even to their especial good and his
great glory. Psalm. 137.


Who while they are in Babylon remember Sion, and apprehend the true cause of
their affliction namely the contempt of Sion, and the comforts thereof, but
remembering Sion they also revive such comforts as before they had stored up,
thereby to maintain in them the true life of grace: and so often remembering
Sion, and meditating To this end is it that while they are in captivity they
heartily labor the conversion of others, that Exodus 54
but further also in quickening the life of grace their vows are renewed, Ezra.
45.
and heaven suffers violence, Eehe. 45.
whereby preuayling with God, they do also prevail with men, and so find such
favor in the sight of the heathen that once by them they are sent forth to
Sion again. Obs. 47. Church how prepared to Captiuit.


Use. Thus captivity being a judgment with may befall the Church of God, as
this condemns the vain presumption of those that dream of a local
perpetuity and visibility of the Church of God: so it also chalendgeth their
extreme folly that prepare the Church of God to so heavy a judgment, either
by bringing the Church in bondage at home, while they captiuate the liberty
here of to the lusts or by impudent communicating the wickedness bear the rod
before we feel it, yea one correction of the almighty shall foretell another,
that so we may see the plague and hide our selves, and happily avoid the
vengenace to come, who so is wise let him understand these things and to whom
the arm of the Lord has revealed them.

Well the Churh of GOD is in Captivity, and is it not to some purpose that the
holy Ghost, makes such particular and often mention of it? Iere. 39.


1 Yea surely. Iere. 51 2
As the Lord is known by executing of Judgments, Reg 25 2
2. So would he have us meditate and contemplate the same, Chro. 36. etc.
that so we may be confirmed more and more in knowledge. Obs. 48. Gods
Judgments are to be recorde^ and meditated.
3. And surely as they are some of those works of God which are worthier our
consideration 4. So do they keep us from security in sin and presumption of
Gods mercies. They confound Atheists and scorners of religion. Psa 16.
They keep us in obedience and increase our faith. Psalm. 111


Use 1. And therefore seeing the Lord does daily bring his judgments to light,
Psalm. 10. 4.
let them not pass above our Let us not esteem them Let us not suppress them
in policy deprave them by malice. Let us not in pride diminish As seasonable
Profits of Gods judgments.
as lively glasses to see our faces in, and therefore not to forget our
iniquities that are censured thereby: and as profitable furnaces to purge out
our dross, and take away our sin, Esaias I.
and therefore we should be rather be amended Surely if they do not amend us
they will be witnesses against us and draughts of that cup of wrath which the
wicked shall be drunken withal in hell.

But is the glory of the earth gone into captivity? Obs. 49. God often changes
and confounds the outward prosperity and visibility of his Church.
is Jerusalem the city of the great God, and place of his delight where he
promised to dwell for ever, and so made fast the bars of her gates, is she
led captive into a strange land? Does she dwell among the heathen? and there is
none to comfort her? are her adversaries chief? and do her enemies prosper? y^
while she was faithful when God troad upon the necks of her enemies and turned
Kings in chains and Nobles in fetters of iron? Ps: 13. 2
Oh what a change is here of this glorious City? has the Lord forgotten to
be morneful? or can his will be resisted? Surely, Ecclesi. 9
as these outward things fall alike unto all, and no man knows Gods love Not
only in that he deals indifferently to every Rom 1.
unto the Jew first, and then to the Grecian, but further also by the changing
of the outward

Use 1. Which as it makes the way to the accomplishment of his own, so it
justifies also the truth of his promises, which being conditional in regard of
temporal blessings namely so long as they shall be fit for us, and we can make
right use of them: when we fail in those conditions, these promises are yet so
expired, that the right of them are remaining; we are only so far deprived
of the effect, as that being humble therein and so renewed by repentance, we
not only recover our possession in these things, but are also further fitted to
the enjoying of the substance whereof these are but very shadows.

And therefore as it stands with the constancy and covenant of God, that the
Church may be thus obscured, and to the outward view extinguished, so does it
make also for the exceeding good of the Church of God and condemnation of the
world. Obser. 50. Changes of the Church tend to exceeding good thereof.


Concerning the Church it tends to the good thereof many ways.

1. That it may discern it self to be the true Church of God, in that it
lives and inwardly prospers, yea intierely preuailes, though the branches and
leaves seem dead and withred.

2 The Church hereby is exceedingly humbled in regard of the abuse of her
former liberty, and so is fitted grievously to repentance.

3 She is also stripped of carnal confidence, by occasion whereof she fell to
such abuse and so is provoked to settle wholly on God.

4 She has now more comfortable experience of the power of God and Godliness,
who as he now shows himself more inwardly gracious, 1 Ioh. 2.
so does he justify the soundness and integrity of his Church.

5 She has now more leisure gather inward strength as being happily eased of
outward prosperity, a very maine let and weakening thereof.

6 It has by this means experience of her friends, and so is drawn thinner
and nerre to God. And lastly she is by this means delivered from greater
desolations which in the Land of her prosperity might have happened unto her:
as for the world it receives his condemnation hereby many ways. 1. It is
offended at this blackenesse of the Church and the cross of Christ is a
stumbling block thereto. Ioh. 7. 48.
2. Affliction is hereby added to affliction, and now they cry down with it
down to the ground, 1 Cor. 1. 23
Haman is not content that the Church is in bondage, Obser. 51. The world
confounded by the changes of the Church.
but he will lay a plot to root it out quite. 3. Hereupon grows security and
ripenes in sin and so when the harvest is ripe the sickle shall be put in.
Joel. 3. 13. Thus does God dispose of these great alterations of his Church.
Psalm. 137.
Thus make they for his glory the benefit of the Church of God and the
confusion of the world. Hest. 3


And therefore seeing the Church of God may sometimes be thus base and
contemptable in the eye of the world. 1. Uses of the afflictions the Church.
^ost we not upon such preuiledges as are of the world. 2. Neither content we
our selves with such whose glory shall be our shame. Iere. 7
3. But adorn we the hidden man in the heart which shall be glorious for ever.
Osse. 5.
4. Reverence we the power of God who is able to overthrow the glory of the
world: Amos 5.
5. And fear we his justice if we be found in the like sins. 6. But magnify
we his providence, yt is able thus to bring light out of his darkness. 7. and
believe we constantly the perpetuity of the Chruch which is meruailously
preserved in her greatest decaies. Well thus we have heard of the captivity of
the Church. But who are they that bear the brunt of this heavy affliction?

Surely I^coniah the King his Princes and Nobles, Obs. 52. Great ones drink
deep o^ the cup of vengeance.
the mightiest are most humbled and the ritchest are most aimed at. So are
great ones sure to drink deep of the general scourge, when happily the poor
of the land are eased thereby: a matter most agreeable to the justice of God.
Eccle. 9. 6.
1. Because great ones have a conceit, Iere. 39
that they are out of gunshot, who dare touch them? Esaias 23.
who can pluck them down? come famine and such like judgments, they will have
a preuiledge, and therefore the Lord to confound their confidence he has a rod
of his indignation even to break the greatest in pieces.

2 These greater persons are the ringleaders in sin, and therefore there is
a time when they shall be met withal.

3 They are the rod to scourge and afflict their people and therefore it is
just with God to hear the cry of Exodus 22
the poor and to aueng them of their oppressors by giving them ease when their
oppressors shall be recompensed. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7.


4 The pride and covetousness of the conqueror aymeth at the greatest, these
shall be sure to the spoil, howsoever others escape; a notable lesson both for
great ones and inferiors.

1 As to humble the great ones in the sense of their greatness, because they
cannot out-stand the wrath of God.

2 So to advise them also to be careful of their ways, not sparing great
offenses* nor presuming of their own greatness, les^ the smart of their sin
light most heavily upon themselves.

3 Secondly the subject is here instructed as not to dream of impunity seeing
the greatest shall smart for it, and therefore to bear the yoke with patience,
seeing there will be an end. 4. So to mourn when Princes do eat in the
morning, and st^etche themselves upon Iuory beds* not regarding the affictions
of Joseph because this is a certain note of some judgment ensuing. Amos. 6. 5


5 And yet herein also to comfort themselves; that God will set a mark on
those that mourn for the present evils; they shall be delivered from the common
calamity.

But who is the rod that the Lord appoints to this great execution: the holy
Ghost adds.

Whom Nebuchadnezar King of Babel had carried away.

Behold the rod with God uses for the chastisement of his Children: Obser. 53.
God uses great and mighty enemies for the chastizing of his Church.
even a most proud, mighty and malicious enemy, whose eyes shall not spare
them, nay who shall hope utterly to root them out. And yet the Lord most
righteous and merciful herein. 1. Abac. 12.

The righteousness of the Lord appears in these circumstances. Esaias 8. 10.


1 Because it is in his choice to use what rod he will and the rod he uses is
sanctified thereto. Sect. I. This stands with his justice.
Esaias 15.

2 The wickeds teeth are an edgetil they be on this work, it is the office
they desire, this count they their greatest of happiness, all their honor is
nothing, because Mordecai will not bow unto them, Ezech. 29.
and therefore to choose they will have a fling at Mordecai. I Reg. 22.
3. And is not the Lord righteous herein, Hest. 5.
so to give them their desire that while they spurn at a stone it breaks them
in pieces? Zach. 12.

4 The Godly themselves makes choice of this rod: they will commit
abomination and al filthiness with them, Exo. 23
and in their extremity they will seek for help of them. Iere. 2. 34
5. And is not the Lord righteous to give his children their desire herein,
Sect. 2. It stands also with Gods mercy.
that being thoroughly secured hereby they might answer Gods desire in their
unfeigned repentance? 1. And does not this magnify exceedingly the mercies of
God, to provide such a furnace as shall not dally with them but purge the^
thoroughly. 1 Cor. 11. 32
2. That so being chastized soundly in the world they may not be condemned in
the life to come.

Use 1. Surely as here we may behold the estate of the Church, that she must
look for great and sharp afflictions So we may also take notice of the power
of sin in arming our own flesh thus cruelly against us; And seeing al curses
from Adam are turned into blessings by Christ, therefore let us learn to make
our flesh our friend, Sect. 3. Flesh how to be mad our (...).
not by soothing in sin, nor pertaking therewith: but by sound reproof and
wise preserving our selves from the contagion thereof: Labor we to subdue the
flesh (...) God, and then it shall be serviceable unto us. Verse, 16. 17.
nor in the sons of men, put we no confidence in a Councellor, no not in the
wife that lies Math* 10.
but count we ^l as dung in regard of the peace of a good conscienee* so shall
we hereby either make our enemies our friends, Mich. 7.
or at least we shall bridle and sanctify to our good, their rage against us.

Well thus we see the Church of God is carried away captive* But was this the
first draught of this cup of affliction? Surely no: We shall find that this
people of the Jews, Obs. 54. God ^^a^^s^^h his children often with the same
^od.
besides many fore-running Judgments of the famine, pestilence, civil wars,
forreyne invasions, and the like, had three great draughts before even of this
cup of captivity, and after this drank the dregs, of this cup. The
first draught did the Kingdom of Israel drink: One by Tiglath Pileser the
King of Ashur, who carried away diverse of their Tribes into bondage, 2. King.
15. 19.
and the latter by Shalmaneser King of Ashur, who carried away the whole
residue of the ten Tribes into perpetual captivity: 2 King 17. 9. 10.
the other three draughts the Kingdom of Judah drank at in Manasseh his time,
who was carried away captive into Babylon, 2 Chro. 33. 11.
and upon his time repentance restored again. The second draught was in the
time of Iehoiakim King of Judah, who having rebelled against Nabuchad-nezzar
king of Babell after that he had served him three years; 2 Reg. 24. 10.
therefore the King of Babel having first sent his Captains to spoil and
waste the Country round about, to the very walls of the City, at length in
the reign of Iehotachim the son of Iehoiachim the former, begirts the City
and and strangely beseegeth it, The extremity whereof, the King and his
Princes being not willing to endure it, by the persuasion of the Prophet
Jeremy, yield themselves to the conquerors pleasure, and so for this time
though they saved the City from desolation, yet both the spoil thereof was
abundantly carried away, and together with the King, Wis. 14. 16.
his Princes, and Ministers of state, and means of defense, at least
seauenteene thousand are at this time carried into Babylon: and this is the
captivity mentioned in this book of Hester; the same which is here Iechoniah
being no other then Iehoiachim, as appears by ye evidence of the word, 1
Chro, 3. 16.
and circumstances of the history: It being no vn-usuall thing with the holy
Ghost to call one person by diverse names. Ienem, ^2 ^4


After this captivity in the reign of Iehoiachim, followed the last and most
extreme draught of this cup, some eleven years after, when Zedekiah reigned
as Viceroy under Nebuchad-nezzar, who because he rebelled against his Lord: 2
Chro. 36.
therefore came Nabuchad-nezzar ye second time and beseeged the City, and the
inhabitants standing vppon^their defense, Icrem, 39.
he after some two years siege took it, 2 Reg. 25. 11.
and not only exposed it to the spoil of his Army but after defaced and
consumed it by fire. The glorious Temple and stately Palaces, the sumptuous
building and proud walls, all were desolate, broken down, and ruinated: And
not only so, but even all the glory and multitude of the people were carried
at several times into Babylon, save only some poor that were left to Till the
Land.

Thus did this people drink of this cup of captivity, and yet (as you have
heard) in measure, in the branches thereof; not all at once, least they should
be drunk thereby, and so returning to their vomit, Esaias, 17.
make no right use thereof but by degrees, Obs. 55. God chastises his children
in measure and by degees.
now a little, then som-ewhat more, the rod being a teacher, even while it lay
upon them, and therein teaching us the singular wisdom and mercy of our God in
the chastising of his children: he comes not upon them suddenly, neither
sweepes he them away at once: but as he gives them warning of the rod, that so
they may be prepared for it, so he orders his judgments that they may best
prevail. And therefore first he shootes forth his more gentle and scattering
arrows of the famine and pestilence: which though they hit some, yet they fly
over the heads of many, that by these, being warned they might be brought to
repentance, when these milder corrections will not serve, then he smites them
yet seven times more: Leuit. 1
here come in civil dissentions and forreyne Invasions, to humble and abait
the pride of the great ones; and if as yet they will not return unto him, then
behold he will smite them seven times more: Amos.
The cup of Capiuitie shall be ministered unto them: yet shall they drink
thereof at times, in measure and by degrees: So does the Lord in justice
remember mercy, so does he measure out his Judgments, both that we may bear
them, and that by them we might be brought to repentance: As for the wicked,
the Lord deals not so with them. Affliction shall not rise the second time, 1
Nehemia,
with one stroke will he make an end of them: root and branches, head and
tail, Genes, ^9.
will he cut off at one blow.

Use. Which providence of God is manifested most infallibly in the course of
his chasticements upon his Church, as it namely confounds the insolency of
the wicked, so it enemy, Job. Lament. 2.
and themselves to be dealt withal not as friends but enemies.

And seeing affliction gives understanding, and the Lord especially aims
hereat in this ordering of his chasticements; hereby that God appoints them,
in that they are so wisely and mercifully ordered: and so let us patiently
undergo this burden and be comforted therein, that we are under the hands of
a father who knows whereof we are made, and therefore will lay no more upon
us then And seeing the Lord hereby intends our repentance, Amos. 2. ^3.
that if we will ^ase him of our sins, he will ease us of his rods: Let us
here wisely take notice of the cause of the continuance of his judgments,
namely impenitencie and increase of sin. And let this be our mark* to
look for seven times more if we do yet multiply our sins against the Lord
of glory. And therefore let us meet the Lord by repentance that he may stay the
hand of his justice Let al States be humbled, because ye Lion has roared.
Ierem 13. Amos. 3.
And seeing the hand of the Lord is stretched our still let us not live by
examples, and build our happiness upon y^ broken reeds of Egypt: Let us not run
to Ashur, and trust in vain helps: but let us turn to ye Lord, for he has
wounded and he will heal us he will render us the loss that the pestilence and
inundations, the intolerable frosts, and fearful earthquakes (our cruel
oppressors at home, and treacherous friends abroad) have made: he will yet
devell among us for his name sake, and restore beauty for ashes* yea we shall
for ever live in his sight. Thus have we now the condition of Mordecai, he is
in the state of bondage and slavery to ys^ wicked: How does he now behave
himself in this condition? Does he yield to necessity, and embrace the
present world? Does he renounce he God and the care of his country, to eat of
such things as please the wicked? No you have heard before that he lived
vnrebukeably: but what instance have we to give evidence thereof: It follows
therefore

He nourished Hadassah that is Hester, Verse* 7.
his uncles daughter: What reason had he to move him thereto? Here is, first
the bond of nature: She was his uncles daughter. Secondly, Here is the bond of
necessity, for she had neither father nor mother. Thirdly, here is a privilege
of nature. And the Maid was fair and beautiful to look on, rather to allure
and persuade him thereto. Fourthly, here is the bond of conscience, likely it
is she was committed unto him after her fathers and mothers decease, and
therefore it is said.

And after the death of her father and mother, Mordecai took her for his own
daughter.

First he not only took upon him her education and maintenance, but adopted
her also as his own daughter, and so to confer upon her the privileges of
a Child.

Wherein first we may behold the great mercy of God unto his children, that in
their greatest afflictions, they shall be provided for: Mordecai shall be able
to nourish Hester, and Hester shall have her Uncle Mordecai not only to
preserve her from the extremity of misery (which Orphans are subject to) but
to train up this tender Maiden in the fear of God; and to defend her
chastity from the rage of lust.

Two notable privileges of Gods children under the cross, that either they
shall be able to succor others, or they shall find relief with the safety of
their credit, and peace of conscience.

And surely that Gods children in their troubles, Obser. 56. Gods children are
to comfot and relieve each other in their troubles.
as they are able, so they should comfort others, this serves to the magnifying
of GODS power, and faithfulness toward them; and also to the great trial of
their most holy faith.

The power of God is seen herein, that the wicked are brideled, who (out of
question) would not have the righteous live by them, unless they will hang
upon them, if they might have their wills, they would keep them bare enough
from doing good to others; and so the children of God are planted in the midst
of their enemies, and herein also does appear the great faithfulness of our
god, who inables his children to lend where they should borrow, and by this to
be assured of a good success in all occasions seeing in ye land of their
captivity they can minister to others: and is not our faith very graciously
tried herein, when having our lives continually in our hands, and therefore no
certainty of what we have; yet depe^ding on Gods providence, we do comfort
others, that had more need of we have little enough for our selves, we cannot
spare it least we want in the we must keep somewhat to appease our
taskmaisters, somewhat to buy our liberty, we shall be thought to be rich if we
be harbourers of others, and so shall be We shall hereby discover and where
shall he have such comfor and portion in weldoing, Moses. 1 Exodus
and therefore he will rescue he knows y^ to fear well doing in regard of the
wicked, is to give strength to the wicked, and so deprive himself of the
opportunity of doing good. He believes yt God will then come to deliver Moses to
take the cause in his hands; he sees it will daunt the enemy when Gods
children make he fears no evil tidings, no not the spoil of his estate,
Psalm. 112.
because his heart is stablished and believes in God, and he disiributes
thereof to the poor, whereby he wins the hearts of the enemy, yea he will not
fear until he see his desire upon his enemies. And why? the Lord is his
shepherd, and he lives by faith in the son of God, and though he pass
through fire and water, yet the Lord shall bring him into a wealthier place.
This is ye merciful man that sowes in tears: the Lord will recompense him
abundantly; he shall reap in joy: so was Mordecai, and so he did find. 1.
Use. A notable president of tr^e bounty, and therein also a lively mark of the
true child of God. And therefore let not inabilitie hinder mite be a witness
against us: Let not policy discourage us from Let us not fear want let us
not doubt of requital, let us not be newters in but let us Obediah will nourish
the Prophets of God, though Iezabel intend the contrary, and Jonathan will
succor David, though his father seek his life: and did they want their reward?
Mordecai nourishes Hester, who happily for her sake being beutyful might have
endangered his estate. Oh let us not But how I pray you is Hester nourished?
What does she pay for her outward maintenance? Is her conscience set to sale
for ye belly? Is her beauty made the broker to maintain this miserable life?
Verse, 12. 10.
Does she offer the sin of her soul, for the fruit of her body? Verse, 23.
Surely no; upon these terms she might have found favor in the eyes of a
Persian, Psa. 69. 22
and such mercies of the wicked had bin extreme cruelties. Obs. 57. The bounty
of Gods children is no Snare, but especially labors the good of the soul.
Behold here then the true bounty of Gods children; their table is no snare,
their riches are no bait to corrupt ye souls of men: they intend not to make
David their slave, by their kind intertainment, they give him not Michel to
bereave him of his life: They blind not the eyes of the wise by their bosom
liberality, nor hunt after the precious life of men, with their sacrifices and
peace offerings: Deuteronomy, 16.
they kill not when they kiss: but give that it may be given: Verse, 7.
their principal mark is to win the soul; Ioh, 2.
So did our Savior trune water into wine, that nature might be turned to
grace: so did he give a great draught of fish to make fishers of men. so does
GOD bestow these outward blessings, that believing in him, we may see greater
things the^ these.

And so are his children like their heavenly Father, so they do find their
bread after many days again, when it is thus distrst^buted in conscience and
wisdom.

Use 1. A notable rule for true liberality: that the stream thereof turn good
to the soul. Not that we should be exempted hereby from doing good to the
Neither God help etc.) neither yet to neglect But so to supply the body as
that it may So to seek the Ki^gdome of Heaven, as So to show our true love to
the soul by releeuing the body for it sake: And so to humble the sin as that
we have compassion Making difference therein where we And shortning our bounty
where it may be an occasion to the flesh. Thus he that scatters shall have
plenty. So did Mordecai distribute, and so the Lord gave a blessing.

And was it not a wonderful blessing of GOD, that a beautiful Maiden, left
fatherless and motherlesse, should meet with such a guardian: who did not set
her beauty to sale, Obs. 58. God prouides for his children in trouble with the
safety of a good conscience.
and her conscience on the rack? how many destressed souls are there, that in
the land of their captivity, think it an high blessing if the ship-rack of
their conscience may procure their quiet and the prostituting of their beauty
may win them favor.

Behold here then an excellent privilege of Gods children in their
extremities, that they shall find releife with the safety of a good
conscience: not one hair of their head, much less the peace of the mind
shall miscary: thereby: and why? are they not the beloved of God and in their
chastizements most beloved? and how shall this love appear if they be not
kept fit for it? has not If they be not here ^y drawn nearer to God and made
more conformable to him.
and shall then their afflictions be means of their chiefest hurt? Have not
the Saints of God come out purer from this furnace? can the outward relief be
a blessing without the feast of a good conscience? nay does not the inward
peace give true contentment in affliction; and so keeps us from reaching out
our hand to wickedness, for the

Are we not by these troubles summoned to our end and

And what I pray you is it that holds up in troubles?

Use A notable condition of the height of worldly wisdom, whose maine plea is
this, that they must live, and therefore when troubles comes, which summons
them to die, yet they must do as the world does, that is, that they may live
longer in misery, they will (what lies in them) renounce the means of living
for ever in true happiness: As if there were a necessity laid upon them to
make shipwreck of a good conscience, that they may escape Or if there were
hope of longer life, yet the keeping of a sound heart would not be Where is
those men's faith that plead only with Esau for the pottadge that they may not
die What madness is there to run deeper on the score when we are called to
payment? What folly to distrust God What wisdom to

Use Well, who so is wise let him understand these Let him learn to live by
faith, that so sin do not deceive him. Let him wisely consider the inualuable
Let him know he shall least enjoy that which he buies at so dear a rate: and
for the after receiving (I tremble to speak of it) Let him remember

And let him in patience possess his soul, looking with Moses to the
recompense of the reward, that so he may avoid the pleasures of sin, and
run with joy the race that is set before him: Thus was Hester preserved by
the tuition of Mordecai. Thus found Daniel favor in the eyes of the Eunuch,
Obser. 59. Of the change of names, and whether it be lawful now for Christians
to change their names.
and so was kept undefiled from the idolatrous meats.

But let us proceed a little further, and consider who it is that is nourished
by Mordecai, who it is that is brought to so low an estate. It was Hadassah,
thatis Hester, even she that is after advanced to the highestestate on earth.

Concerning this variety of names imposed on one person, Genes. 41. Joseph*
Abraham, Sarah, Jacob, Israel. G. 32. Daniel and. Socis.
whether it were by Mordecai her Turor as taking her to be his child, or by the
King at her marriage, to give her the more honor: For the thing it self,
there is no controversy, but that the custom of changing names, has been
ancient, 2 Reg. 23 et 24. Ioachim (...) Zedekiay.
and laudable. And the reasons of these changes, might be these.

1 Either some increase of blessings, a special favor which has been
signified by such changes, and this might be the reason why the Lord changed
names.

2 Or some change of the outward condition, which was the reason why the
conquered had their names changed. 3. Or to show the power of the conquerors
over them; so servants when they were made free, had also their names changed.

4 Or lastly some change of the inward condition, and so the names of
Christians where changed at their baptism, or at their conversion by our
Savior Christ etc.

Use 1 Which howsoever it has been the practice of former times, and that
used not only by the heathen, but by God himself, yet as many such customs
were particular to their time 2. So I take it, this custom is now so far
antiquated, as the special cause thereof (namely the changing of names at
Baptism) is now ceased. 3: If among us any such occasion fall out, where Jews
and Turks, etc. are to be converted, I see not but this liberty remains
still. 4. As for us who have such names imposed on us even at our entrance in
the world and Church, which should be badges of our profession, and provoke us
to constancy therein: I see not why these in any sort should be changed,
unless we think it lawful to change our profession with them. Obs. 60. Those
which are raised up to greatest dignities are usually in most desperate and low
estate.


And is it then Hester the Queen; that is Hester the fatherless? Is she a
miserable captive that was after a royal Empress? must she be nourished by
Mordecai, who after gives laws to a mighty Kingdom? so was Moses, Joseph and
the like: This is the Lords doing and it is admirable in our eyes.

1 This does he in power work, without and contrary to means to confound the
pride of nature. 2. This does he in wisdom, that we may ascribe promotion to
him. 3. Nay this he does in love, that we may give him the glory, in being
truly humbled with so great advancement.

Use 1 Learn we here as not to presume of means. 2. So not to distrust the
want of them as to be comforted in our so to prepare for Hester before she was
exhalted.

But what reason has Mordecai to take this care of Hester? First it is said
she was His uncles daughter.

The band of affinity moved him to this duty, she was his cousin German,
and therefore he took charge of her.

not only imposed by God in this case upon the like occasions of widdowhood.
Obs. 61. Kin^ed to be relieved.
etc. But very agreeable to the law of nature, both being of our blood in a
more particular manner, so that in natural affection; 1 Romans
the want whereof is a maine challenge of impiety. 2 Timothy, 3.


1 Use. This condemns those monsters in nature y^ feed

As also they are here reproved that prefer the natural

not stripping our posterity of their lawful inheritance, upon pretense of
preferring the spiritual affinity, least we burden the Church and wrong our
posterity: but wi^ely dividing unto each his right: our children their
patrimony, and the Church her competencie; in equallitie of inward gifts,
giving nature her privilege, and God the glory in preferring greatest
blessings.

But had Hester this need of relief from her Kinsman? Yea surely it follows.

For she had neither father nor mother. A stranger she was, and therefore to
be relieved; a kins^oman she was, and therefore nature requires it but she was
an O^phane, and therefore there was a necessity in it.

And surely such is the condition of the children of God, Obs. 62. God children
le^t Orphans in the world.
they are left fatherless and motherlesse: even to the wide world. And that
not without the spec^all providence of God, who both may thus leave them as it
seems good And does this also for their exceeding good that forgetting their
Fathers house and the proppes of flesh they may more entirely depend upon him,
and have better

Use 1 And therefore: let it not be strange unto us, if God shall thus deal:
neither let us desire this day of affliction: Psalm. 27
and in the end they are sick for them. Let us make sure of God our father and
make much of our spiritual Pray we for the and love

But does not God, make his servant gracious in the eye of Mordecai, the better
to move him to the performance of this duty? Yea surely besides the inward
beauty of her mind, wherewith she was furnished to approve her to Mordecai:
Obser. 63. ^he great^r natures gi^tes nee^ the greater ^^idl^s.
Behold the Lord adornes her with outward grace, and beauty, that so she might
be fitter for that honor which after was cast upon her: so it follows.

And the maid was fair and beautiful to lo^k^ one, That is, together with
her beauty, she was comely and welfauoured; two notable outward graces of a
young Virgin: In regard whereof, as she had more need of a guardian, Because of
natures aptnes to sin upon such a preuiledge, And the forceable battery that
would be laid to her from without: so it pleases GOD to provide for her

Use. 1. Which as it condemns the practice of parents that usually give most
liberty where natures gifts are more eminent, and put forth their beautiful
children to the preferment of the world, as if their outward feature would be
their preueledge and prouider, keeping their more humble so it is a notable
lesson to all natures children that have outward endouments above the other,
that in this respect they most fear themselves, and they rather carry a
severe hand over themselves for these priueledges; as knowing that such gifts
not kept under, are but fuel to sin; yea patterns thereof, and yet by
restrayning of them they may be sanctified unto us.

And surely, Obs. 46. The gifts of nature being santified are good means to
procure favor and advancement to Gods children
if it may please the Lord to sanctify them unto us: may they not be
furtherances for the bettering of our estate in the world; yea surely, as God
gives them not in vain, but to be used in the world, so by this means they
shall prevail as both rightly used of us and so worthily respected of GOD
himself: who both craves his gifts with convenient honor in this life, and
makes the least of their steps to advance, us to eternal happiness.

And therefore as this does not warrant that whorish sophisticating of natures
gifts by adulterous arts upon pretense to set out nature in her glory, and to
procure her so it condemns on the contrary, that object And so Sect. 1. How to
use naturs gifts aright.
and so to use them as may stand therewith, Namely in a holy fear of them to
be humbled in them, and the rather in regard of them both to stand in awe of
God, as also to a void such occasions as may make them weapons unto sin,
maintayning them daily by the word; and the examples of the most sober: and
wisely considering the changeableness of them make we them servants to inward
graces and let their special grace and luster be from thence so shall they
serve us to prevail with God, and prevailing with God we shall also prevail
with Men, well now we see the reason why Mordecai takes upon him the tuition of
his kinswoman: and that we may observe in him a care and conscience more then
ordinary, behold he not only receaues her into his famile, and so delivers her
from misery, but adopts her also as his child: both to give her more security
and also thereby to fit her to further advancement, as being now the reputed
daughter of him, who was admitted one of the family of this great Mordecai: and
that a place of no mean trust, even to be keeper of the palace. An office the
likeler to be of more trust, by how much these Persian Princes kept great
estate, and were more jealous of their persons: and thereby also not unlikely
to be more commodious in regard of the stricktnesse of access into the palace.
Behold here a further act of the providence of God. Miserable Hester has now a
house to put her head in, and the fatherless has a father provided for her by
the Lord, for so it follows, And after the death of her father and mother
Mordecai took her for his own daghter. Obs. 65. It is lawful to adopt.


See here the lawfulness of this liberty of adoption. Gal. 4.
Mordecai adopted Hester to be his daughter, so does Pharaohs daughter Moses to
be her sons: so does God* in Christ Jesus adopt us to be his sons: A case
wherein the mercy and goodness of God is most comfortably manifested not only
that the adopter here by is supplied with the benefit of children, which are
the blessing of God, and so-strenght of age in whom he may receive his life,
and continue his posterity, Adoption not commanded but a thing left to our
liberty.
but hereby also the want and misery of orphants is graciously relieved, and
that blessing of God is in part performed to a land that there shall be no
beggar in Israel, And does not the Lord in this liberty provoke us to mercy?
does he not graciously make trial of our bowels of compassion? by leaving us
to this liberty though he command it not? does he not secure us hereby of
doing good seasonably and conscionably? are not vain controversies prevented
about dead men's goods? are not foolish hopes here by wisely cut of? and each
man sent to depend on Gods providence and work out his living? Sect. 2.
surely though this may justify the lawfulness of this liberty, yet because
we may abuse the same to the maintenance of the flesh, therefore are we to set
bounds unto this liberty, Who to be adopted.
both in regard of the persons that we are to adopt, as also concerning the
end of our adoption.

Concerning the persons we are to adopt, as here we may safely perferre, our
kindred before a stranger: so I take it we must have herein a principal respect
unto the spiritual aff^nity if so be our kin shall not be in apparent
necessity: Those especially which being furnished with grace want means to
employ the same.
nay if the household of faith be in like extremity, we are rather to make our
choice there, then any were else: because we have more and better bands to tie
us here: And we may with one comparison look for better success of our
liberty; And which is especially to be heeded of us, because we have the
example of our gracious God for our warrant therein; who as he only adopts
those that were eternally beloved in his son, so especially when it is in our
choice, we ought to make choice of such for our children by adoption; who have
best evidence to be the sons of God.

Use. 1. Which as it condemns the practice of those that ty themselves in
their choice simply to their kindred, without respect of inward fitnes: whereas
they might have better choice in the Church; both for inward and outward
gifts; so I take it hereby they do much cross the providence of God, which
entending by this liberty the choice of the most worthy, is hereby resisted,
when the choice is thus tied to the kindred. Sect. 3.


If it shall be objected the GOD will provide for his, Objection. God will
provide for his.
their gifts will advance them, and therefore I ought rather to provide for such
as by reason of there impotency of gifts are like other-wise to stick by it:
indeed as the impotencies of nature are to be supplied, so her best gifts also
as has been taught,) had need of a bridle of Tuition to restrain their
privilege, and so fit them to grace, but yet warily to be preserved to the
benifit of adoption, because, as hereby their corruption is likely to be
maintained, so without this benefit of adoption, such as have best gifts of
nature, are most likely to shift in the world.

But for the gifts of grace, it is not so with them: they are hated of the
world, and so make their owners hateful: where then shall this be remedied?
do thou say God will provide for his, and therefore i will pass them by? I tell
thee. God has bountifully provided for his: he has given them his son and
so all is theirs, 1 Cor. 3. 22
they have a right in all, thou have no use but for their sakes; thou art Gods
steward for their good. Their is plenty in Aegipt to relieve the Church. And
how shall thou then better make thee friends of thy unrighteous Mammon, Luke 16
then willingly to admit those into the possession thereof: who as they are
exposed to want to try thy wisdom herein, whether thou will sanctify thy
estate or no, and take true comfort in thy riches: so lest the gathering of
these things, might hinder them in better: therefore the Lord has a time to
put them into possession without their labor whither thou will or no: though
thou should heap up silver as the dust, Job. 26
and prepare raiment as the clay, thou may prepare it, 16.
but the just shall put it on and the innocent shall divide the silver. 17.


And were it not better for thee when it is in thy choice, to make sure thy
habitation by this life, and so lay up a good foundation against the day of
Christ, receiving God into thy family, in the adoption of his children: then by
shutting out the Lord, thereby to shut thy self out also, not only from the
earth, but from heaven to: and yet al thy policy shall be mightily confounded:
Joseph's brethren shall bow unto him: and the righteous shall be thy hairs,
whether thou will or no?

Use 2 And surely this does no less condemn the vanity of those, that
neglecting religion and only seeking a name on earth, do therefore make choice
of such in this kind, as are of the name: rejecting also nature, and common
humanity: Little do these men consider that it is the memorial of the just
only, that shall endure for ever, as for the wicked, their name shall rot; and
though they build them houses, and call them after their names, though they
adopt such children, as may continue the name; yet look we to the third
generation if the place remain in the name, nay consider we wisely, if the
place it self can be found?

3. As for those who adopt strangers, and do also change their names, moved
thereby neither by the bond of religion, no not so much as nature, but rather
by the abuse of nature and fellowshippe in evil: Though such things should not
be named among Christians, yet it is no marvel, if like will love their like,
and society in evil will have a cloak for the maintenance thereof

Thus far of the persons whom we must adopt. Sect. 4. Ends of adoption.


Now for the ends we must propose herein; proposing principally the glory of
GOD, the furtherance of religion and releeuing of the truly afflicted; we may
here also in a second place respect present comfort herein and future
propagation of posterity, being wisely purged of security and vainglory.

Well thus we have Hester now the adopted daughter of Mordecai, and so by Gods
good providence this Orphane is well provided for.

And has not the Lord much better provided for us; whom he has in Christ
Jesus adopted to be his children, and so to be heirs with him of eternal
glory? Oh that we would therefore walk worthy of so high a calling; that we
would behave our selves as sons of so gracious a Father? Surely Hester in all
her glory is not like the meanest of the sons of God: and the least in the
Kingdom of heaven hs greater then Solomon in all his Majesty.

Well, Sect. 5. State of adoption in Christ how discerned.
let this be our comfort, that though it be not our lot to meet with a
Mordecai to be adopted to an earthly Kingdom, yet we have such an enheritance,
which all the world cannot deptiue us of. And let us make trial of our
adoption by our strange cries unto our Father. Let this justifying his cause.
Let his cause be increasing his kingdom, and his kingdom being come, Let us
lift up our heads that his will may be Obser. 66. Ophanes are to be provided
for and how. Psalm. 109


And surely though it be a curse unto the wicked to be left as Orphans, yet it
is but a temperall judgment, and so may befall (and has) the Godly, and
therefore though the wicked being Orphans shall seek their bread and desolate
places, Deu, 10. 18
yet GOD is the helper of the Fatherless, Psalm. 9, 19
yea he is a Father unto them. And therefore as he has given express
commandment that they should not be hurt, Psalm. 68. 5.
left the like judgment befall the oppressors, ^xod. 22. 22 24
so has the Lord also precisely inioiend that relief and succor and that not
only uncertainly as strangers by startes, and at their felemne festiuities,
when by reason of the abundance, Deu. 16, 11
it is not so thanks worthy; but as those within their gates and of their
household that are to have a free and settled maintenance; Deuteronomy. 24.
as having Oh What a Job. 29 The benifit thereof.
What a sacrifice to God? what a sweet savor to man? What peace does it breed
at home? What true honor abroad.

Use 1. Well, Let this be a glorious crown to those And let it be the glory
of true religion Let the Ostrich be ashamed that leaves her eggs in the sand,
and let vnnaturallnesse be confounded that forsakes her own: Cruelty be
condemned and let opression and take we heed of hypocrisy that secretly
deuoures where it pretends devotion; and enclosers could wash their hands from
do not gardians of wards trample deep herein? Well let us not live by examples
but by laws; and let good example provoke us to the obedience of them.
Mordecai takes upon him the tuition of this orphane: now let us see what
success he has herein, it follows.

And when the Kings commandment, and his decree was published, Verse. 8
and many maids were brought together to the palace of Sushan under the hand
of Hege: Hester was brought also unto the Kings house under the hand of Hege
the keeper of the women.

In which words the holy Ghost sets down a second means, by which Hester
is advanced to the Court. Namely she is taken in the general suruay, according
to the Kings commandment, and so together with those many other Virgins, that
were chosen out by these officers out of all the Kings dominions: she is
brought to the Court; And so the Kings commandment and the thorough execution
thereof, is a second means of her advancement.

And surely, if we consider the end of this commandment: Namely that the King
might have a wife: if we observe the equity thereof; that he might make choice
of his wife where it pleased him; throughout his dominions; if we wisely
examine the lawfulness of these Officers employment in this business, and
success therein: all these will witness unto us that Hester had a lawful
calling to the Court, the means of her advancement were honest and honorable.

She is not thrust upon the Court, to be a prey thereto, neither does she
basely seek to it, to make sale of her chastity, she follows it not to
catch a fall by it, but the court follows her, and seeks her out: As Daniel
was sent for, and Joseph fetched out of prison, so she is sent for to the Court:
GOD guiding the general intent of the King to his particular purpose; and so
reserving the issue to his special providence, that though she might fear
the worst, to become the Kings concubine, yet she might hope the best, to be
received as his wife: and so the case being doubtful and the danger not being
invincible; she was to cast her self upon the providence of GOD, for a good
issue of that which might threaten evil; as undoubtedly persuading her-selfe,
that as she believed, so it should come unto her.

Behold then the mercy of GOD, Obs. 67. God aduanceth his children by ^aire and
likely means.
in the advancement of his Children: the means thereto shall be fair and
likely: Hester shall have natures guiftes, to fit her to the Kings bed, She
shall be seasoned with affliction to bear her greatness more wisely, She
shall be trained up in religion under a gracious Tutor, that so having favor
with GOD, she may prevail with man: And the authority of the Prince shall call
her to the Court, that so she may be warranted both from God, and man; so was
Moses, Mordecai and the rest. And all this to two special ends; Namely that
they may be cleared from ambition and intrusion, two encrochers on greatness,
and dangerous enemies thereto, that envy may be removed, the moath of
advancement, that pride may be abandoned which will make their fall the greater:
that having hereby an evidence of their holy entrance to dignity, they might
have better use, and longer continuance thereof.

Use 1 A notable lesson, for all aspirers, that they wait such holy and likely
means, as GOD has sanctified thrusting themselves to preferment. Not hunting
greedily after the same, not by base flattery, and detraction to clime into
favor: Neither by ^ordid corruption fitness by gifts both inward, and
outward: and yet to wait not neglecting such as GODS providence does offer,
neither resisting such necessary means, as may be unlikely thereto.

For to examine a little further the case of Hester: the king commands; must
she not obey? is it not lawful for a subject to come to a profane Court? is
it unlawful for a religious person to have her abode among the wicked?
especially, where the providence of GOD does extraordinarily cast her, and no
present iniquity lying therein? A necessity lies upon her and she cannot
refuse. Surely Gods children are to yield to the necessity of more where as
their is a providence of GOD to overrule them to good: and our yielding
thereto, is not simply evil. Obs. 68. Gods children are to yield to present
necessity keeping themselves from apparent evil and depending on Gods
protection.
I. Because all this while we keep our selves within the compass of Gods
protection where by we shall be sure to be secured our selves.

2. And what know we also, whether the Lord has herein a further work to use
our Ministry for the good of others? was it not so with Hester, Daniel and the
like? If it shall be said; that the King had no good intent therein, because no
doubt he meant hereby to supply the number of his concubines, and it might have
been Hesters lot, to have been one of them.

Surely this being but coniecturall, and the public purpose of the King being
to make choice of a wife: and God intending that purpose to prevail, why might
not Hester safely rest upon this known purpose, and so commit her self into
the hand GOD, for the issue thereof? If it shall be said, that the best intent
was bad; namely that Hester should mary an Infidel. Surely as this cannot
chalendge the Kings purpose, which was simply to choose a wife, so neither may
it prejudice Gods providence, who knowing what he would do, prouides this
means to bring his purpose to pass: As for Hester this was more then yet she
knew of (when she knows of it you shall hear her Apology.) As yet she has
little reason of any such hope, and therefore she will herein yield to
necessity; because the Lord might as well preserve her undefiled in the Court,
as he had done before in the house of her kinswoman.

Use And therefore as herein she seems to be blameless, because she yields
that, which might turn either to good or evil when she could not otherwise
choose: so herein she does teach us. An excellent point of wisdom in our
obedience. That as we must obey rather God then man: so we must yield to man,
when there is no apparent We must not cast, what may neither must we demur with
our superiors, where our selves are uncertain; but yield we so to necessity,
that we still depend on our God: who will accept our obedience, and give a good
issue thereto. So did Daniell and God preserved him undefiled. So did Hester
and the Lord gave a blessing.

And yet surely not without great difficulties and extremities: the nerer she
came to it, the greater were her dangers: First, her body is in hazad by being
left fatherless, God here supplies and she is received into Mordecaies
family: who together with her body, prouides principally for her soul. Here
she says no, being where she has greatest comfort, but shortly she is removed
out of heaven even into hell, to a profane Court she is called, where Satan
has his throne. And to what end I pray you? surely reason and likelihood can
give neither, but to the apparent destruction both of body and soul. Obs. 69.
God^ children, the nearer preferment the greater extremties.


Thus the nerer Gods children approach to their comfort and preferment; the
greater are their dangers, the more desperate their extremities. So was it with
the I sraelits before their deliverance. Their burdens were increased, their
straw was taken away; Exodus 1 Exodus 5
and then came Moses, then came the deliverance. Cap. 5. Hest. Gens. 45.
So was it with Mordecai, with Joseph and the rest: And no marvel? For by
this it appears their promotio^s is of God, by how much the greater they find
the oppositions, to the same, that so he may have only the glory of their
advancement: this makes Satan to rage the more, that so if it be possible he
may hinder the good of the hereby the wicked are more confounded, in the
disapoyntment of their malice, and hereby GODS Children are better fitted to
their preferment, and so are provided to make better use thereof.

Use. Whereby as Gods children are taught not to be discouraged, if their
afflictions do still increase upon them, because if deliverance approach not,
yet patience shall increase, to make the deliverance So are they to increase
their faith as their temptations do increase, by more earnest prayer, and
examining of themselves, more abasing themselves, and increasing constancy in
well-doing, that so they may hasten the work, and be fitted thereto.

Thus was Hester brought at length from Mordecaies house to the Court, that in
this fiery furnace (being thoroughly purged) she might be fit for the
work that GOD had appointed, so marvelous is the LORD to turn all things to
the good of his children; Obs. 70. God prepares his church by afflicts to great
blessings.
such difference does he make between them and the wicked, that as the best
blessings do make the wicked wise, so the greatest occasions of evil do make
his children better, when necesrily they are cast upon them.

And surely if we shall wisely observe the providence of God herein; that
though Hester is brought to the Court, a place of liberty and provocation to
evil: yet she is restrained in the Court, under the hand of a Keeper, and as
it were clapped up in a glorious prison, being not to come abroad but when the
King calls, nor to frequent any society, but such as is appointed her for her
necessary attendance and comfort; does not this exceedingly magnify the mercy
of GOD, that uses this as a preservative against the infection of the place,
and so even therein sanctifies her coming thither? Had she been exposed to
the liberty of the Court? might access have been free unto her? As her trial
had been the greater, so her danger must needs be the greater.

And therefore behold here the faithfulness of Almighty God to his children;
Obs. 71. God breaks the force of temptations and provides preservatives
against them.
that, considering whereof we are made, and what we can endure, though he
cast us into the Furnace, yet he quallefies the rage of the fire, or else
applies preservatives that it shall not hurt us. So does he here provide for
his servant Hester, because her beautiful youth being exposed to applause and
liberty in the Court, might be a means of taynting her; therefore he makes
the place of her advancement, the place of her imprisonment, that so the lust
of the eye and pride of life, and such like temptations might want their
nourishment, and so without wood the fire might be quenched.

So when the Lord had brought Joseph into the land of his advancement, that the
pride and fullness of the Country might not corrupt him; He is cast first
upon Putiphers family: Where though he receives no small preferment, yet it
is sauced with such temptations, as might grievously humble the heart of his
servant. And yet is he further sent to the prison, where the yrons might enter
into his soul, to his further humiliation: Yea when he is advanced, he has
an Office to humble him, whereby he is both kept from the Court, the place of
temptation, and also from idleness the root of all evil. And was not this a
great humbling to Hester in the flesh, that her glorious beauty must be
pinned up from being seen? she must be kept as a prisoner, where liberty
was so pleasant, And yet the work of the Lord most admirable herein; both to
keep her flax (as I may say) from the fire, and by a less affliction to
prevent a greater.

1 Use. Oh that we would therefore praise the Lord for his faithfulness and
observe his gracious providence in the quallifying of our temptations!

That we would rest upon our God, in the greatest and wisely admit lesser
chastisments to prevent Surely there is no temptation has overtaken 1 Cor. 10.
13.
which will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength: but will even give
the issue with the temptation, that we may be able to bear it.

And therefore admit the worst that may be said in this case: Say it was her
great affliction to be brought to the Court; and her greater affliction to be
in danger of defiling: and therefore her infirmity to put her self into this
danger (although I cannot see how she could avoid it) (so desperate is their
case living under profane government) yet seeing God bringes light out of
darkness, and turns our infirmities to his glory and our good: Nay seeing
he iustifies particular actions by extraordinary instants, which we being
ignorant off, are therefore to keep silence in: why shall we censure that, of
the ground whereof we may be ignorant? Why do we not rather give our God
the glories, whereof the infirmities of his children, raises means for their
strength, and hereby makes way for his absolute glory?

Well thus we have heard of some of the outward means of Hesters advancement.
Namely Mordecaies nourishing of her, and her bringing to the Court. Now let
us further consider of her intertainment in the Court, and so of some means
whereby she fitted is to the marriage bed. It follows.

And the maid pleased him, Verse. 9.
and she found favor in his sight and to show that he was pleased, he caused
her things for purification to be given her speedily, and her state and
seven comely maidens to be given her out of the Kings house, and he gave
change to her and to her maids of the best in the house of the women.

In which words the holy Ghost settes down unto us a third step to Hesters
advancement. Namely, that she finds fouour in the sight of the Keeper of the
Maidens. By which means it was likely that the King beging much led by his
judgment and commendation, would call for her more speedily to his presence,
and so consequently prefer her.

And there is in the word contained two special things. i. The favor that
Hester finds with the Eunuch, testified by a variety, and increase of speech;
not only the Maid pleased him (but) she found favor in his fight. 2. there
are set down the undoubted signs of his favor in that liberal and
extraordinary allowance which he affordes her for her maintenance, in the rest
of the Verse.

And surely that she finds this extraordinary favor in the sight of the
Eunuch, who was likely to be a means of her speedy advancement.

This magnifieth the gracious providence of Almighty God, who having the
hearts of all men in his hands to dispose them as he pleases; Obs. 72. Gods
children find favor in ye eyes of strangers.
does therefore incline the heart of this stranger, to affect this beautiful
maiden, that so she might have more liberty in this time of her restraint;
and more security also against such dangers as such places do threaten.

So gracious is godliness even in the eyes of the wicked, so does the Lord
still sort the means for that the weakness and he might have

1. Use. Whereby we are taught as to show favor unto So not to despair the
reconciling most bitter enemies, seeing our God can make this Eunuch to affect
a poor captive, how shall not he also turn the hearts of our enemies toward
And therefore let us not provoke an enemy by vpbrayding to keep him further
off, but rather draw we Labor we to please our God, so shall his heart be
turned toward us. And make we much of friends, seeing the love of enemies is
so douhtfull. Especially, make we much of the As for our enemies they shall be

Well thus Hester finds favor in the eye of this Eunuch: But how does this
appear? It follows. He makes have to give her things for her purification:
he is not kind in show, but he performs it in-deed: and that we may know his
willingness, he causes it to be done speedily, yea he enlarges him self, and
even stretches his authority; he increases her attendance, and gives her
seven comely maids out of the Kings house, yea he gave change to her and to
her maids of the best in the house of the woman; and all this to make good the
truth and greatness of his favor toward her. Obs. 73. Wicked have the
shadows of many excellent virtues and may in some sort teach true kindness.


Thus ever the wicked have their shadows of excellent virtues: yea they have
some relikes of the true inconstancies required therein. They are not only
kind in words, but they make it good in deeds: yea they are cherefull
weldoing, and bountiful therein.

Use 1. Which though it will not any thing justify them but rather tend to
their greater condemnation: because they foolishly content themselves with this
^^imme light of nature: which only concerns this present life, and will not
embrace the light of grace, which would lead them to glory. Yet shall even
these Gentiles condemn boast of false liberality; making great shows in
words, and performing So when they do any thing the Children shut from their
favors: nay I would the worst they could do were not good enough for them:
Ioh. 16. 1
I would they thought they did not God good service when they entertain his
Saints with greatest outrage. Surely though religion must not teach them to
favor their contraries, yet wisdom might lesson them, herein to provide for
themselves. Do not they fare the better for the Saints of God? and shall they
fare the worse by them? will they remove them out of the gappe, who keep away
their scourges, and are the only means to maintain their prosperity? Oh that
the world would learn to be wise! but he that is filthy will be filthier still.
Obse. 74. Marks of tue liberality.


Lastly from these shadows of bounty we may learn the true substance thereof.
Not only in words but in deed to make good our kindness, and that not
forcibly, or with grudging, but cheerfully; and that not sparingly and basely
but bountifully and with a large hand: and if we shall do this from the true
ground because GOD has commanded; and to a right end, namely that God may be
glorified, and our neighbors bettered, three shall not be any thing wanting to
true liberality: but of this heretofore. That which may further be commended in
the Eunuch is his faithfulness in his office. Obs. 75. Officers are to be
faithful in distributing according to their chardg^.
In that he makes not private gain of such provision as was allowed to these
Maidens, but rather enlarges himself in the true bestowing thereof.

So was Joseph faithful in distribution of the corn: so was Jacob faithful,
under his uncle Laban. A notable president to all officers, Obser. 71. Officers
are to be faithful in distrubiting according to their charge. A good lesson
for justices, Captains, Gardians for the poor, Treasureres of provision for
the publicque good. etc.
that are put in trust for the behoose of others that they lick not their own
fingers, and fill there own roofes with that which should serve for the
provision of others.

Use. I. Which as it condemns all Zibaes, and Iudasses, that carried the bag
for their private profit, and like false stewards rob others to provide for
themselves so it advises Princes to appoint sufficient stipe^ds for such kind
of officers, yt they need not fall to such shameless oppressions. And also
teaches such persons to be content with their allowance, and to esteem it
their greatest glory, yt their charge prospers under them, least ye lean kine
devour the fat, the wrongs of ye oppressed cry for vengeance against them. That
so honorable an atte^dance is granted to this poor captive, who so lately
lived at ye best but a servant; in the house of her uncle this as it serves
much to ye commendation of the Eunuchs bounty, in whose power no doubt it was
to have contented her with one, so does it much more commend the mercy of God
unto this his servant: that in this glorious servitude she there has this
benefit of such society which as she might better rule, having ferme power
over them, so she might less fear, as being of her own sex: which as it
might give her some hope of her further advancement, Obs. 76. God raises his
to preferment by degrees.
as being yet a further step thereto, so therein we may observe the wisdom
of our good and gracious God, who as he does not suddenly cast his upon
preferment, but by degrees raises us thereto, that so we might the better
wield the same, so in this manner of his providence does he much quicke^ our
faith and patience, that seeing him coming we might not be hasty, Obs. 77.
Attendance what fit for each sex.
but wait the good time that he has appointed. Psalm. 125. Concerning y^ kind
of attendance that here is tendered to Hester, only such of her sex as being
fittest thereto: this howsoever in this case might have iealosie for it ground,
yet has it a good ground for the like fitnes in our attendance, Obs. 78. God
gives signs of his favor to his children.
that they should be such as be of our own sex. the eye of the servant to
look upon the hand of his master, and the eye of a maide^ unto the hand of
her mistres, a matter politickely observed in popery to take away suspicion, at
least of uncleanness yet surely even this policy shall condemn that prophanes,
where there is not this care of fitnes both to preserve order, and comlines in
the family, and also to avoid occasions, and apparances of evil.

Lastly that to Hester and her maids is given charge of the best in the house,
Obse. 79. The best is due and bestowed one Gods children.
howsoever this may be imputed to the carnal and blind affection of the Eunuch,
respecting especially herein the beauty and likelines of Hester, yet we may
herein behold a special point of Gods wisdom y^ Hester being advanced to the
highest dignity, might have a pledge hereof in the best preferment that the
Eunuch could give her, and so by this liberal and suitable maintenance might be
fitted thereto. So shall not the children of God want signs of their faith, to
help there weakness, Ves.
and confirm their faith, whereby we may learn as not to desire a sign when
the thing is

And does not this also commend the exceeding faithfulness So had Jacob and
his famile the best of the land of Egypt: so had Jacobs posterity the most
fruitful country of the world: so have ye Saints of God had this their right
renewed that the Gospel has taken place even in the best inheritance, what
country may compare in happiness with those where the word has been
entertained? So righteous is the Lord to give his children the best in this
life to assure unto them the enjoying of the better, so profitable is
Godliness to be recompensed with the best gain: have not the children of God
shared even with the best and of the best? shall not the widow give the Prophet
before she relieve her self? Shall not Joseph have the next best chariot, and
Mordecai the horse that the King rides on? Oh that we could believe, how should
we be established! How should we envy the best if we could hope the best, that
our iniquities did not many times deprive us of the best: that the world should
think the worst to good for the best. Surely though we have not the best in
it self, yet contednesse And if we be faithful in using the least, we may by
Gods mercy attain to the best: let this be our comfort that we shall have
what is best for and therein if we live by faith, we may take hold of only
wait we the Lords leisure, and he will give us our hearts desire: and resign
our selves always into the hands of our most gracious father, who only
knows what is best for us.

Well thus is Hester now provided honorably for in ye house of the maidens.
How does she now behave her self to keep her in favor? Does she reveal her
country, which was odious to these Gentiles? Does she conceal her religion,
which was to these abomination? Or does she fall to temporising after ye manner
of the Court? Does she forget her former affliction, and so grow headstrong?
Does she now having changed her keeper, change her obedience? Hearken I pray
you what the holy Ghost says of her.

But Hester showed not her people nor her kindred: Verse. 10.
That is she did not make known that she was a Jew; Verse, 20.
nay she did not discover she was Mordecaies Kinswoman.

Whereby it is apparent that it was not yet known, so the reason of this
concealment may be coniectured to be this; namely that had Hester yet been
known to be a Jew; she might instead of good intertainment, receive both
dishonor and disgrace too; as being in regard of her country most abominable
to these Gentiles. Obs. 80. Truth may be concealed how, etc.
Reason therefore she might have to conceal her country, and surely such I
take it as may stand well with religion. Which though it inioyneth us a true
profession of truth in the simplicity of our hearts, when we are to give an
account of our faith: it allows us also in spiritual wisdom to conceal the
truth, when it may stand 1. with Gods glory, 2. the satisfying of others, 3. ad
securing of our selves, 4. without the prejudice to the truth, and just
scandal to our profession, especially when we are not questioned thereof. So
does Samuel and Moses conceal part of truth: Exodus 5. 1. Samuel, 16.
So does the Prophet Elisha conceal the whole truth; when meeting with the
messenger of the Kings of Syria who were sent of purpose to seek him; instead
of telling them, that he was the man (which he wisely conceales) he tells
them that that was not the way, nor that the Town, in a^l which he spoke
truth; but if they would follow him, he would lead them to the man they sought
for. So does Hester here wisely conceal the truth, because she is and the
concealing thereof And surely as none is to bring by such concealments both and
also Gods Children hereby reserved to better times: and therefore so intend not
to smother the truth by our present concealment thereof, Cautions ^o be
observed in (...).
but only to refer the discovery to in fit opportunity: so we are not ashamed of
the truth of God, but only conceal it that it may not be reproached: So we
do not by silence betray the truth, but rather by this hely So we deny not our
^^ofession, So we indammage not so we (...) not only the avoiding of danger but
rather purpose to do the most good hereby. Surely upon these grounds (I take
it) truth may be concealed, especially if it be a truth concerning only civil
occasions. And this was the case of Hester in this place: she conceales not her
religion she denies not her profession; but only not being demanded, she
reueales not her country nor her kindred, both civil things.

Object. If it shall be demanded how she could conceal her country, seeing her
diet and religion which could or should not be hid, must needs declare it
though she hold her peace (as Daniel and his followers even by this were
necessarily discovered) And therefore it was impossible to conceal her country:
unless you will say, she framed in her diet an outward ceremony of religion,
to the present time, and so she would prove no less then a deep disse^bler.

Ans. Surely as we may not in any case justify dissembling, so I doubt not
but we may very well clear Hester from the same, if we consider that in some
things, her diet might be answerable to the place wherein she lived (the Jew
agreeing with the Gentile in the promiscuous eating of the most things) and so
by yt her country might not be discovered. Doubt.
The greatest doubt is concerning her religion: how she could conceal her
country, unless she also concealed this; and if she concealed her religion,
how she could practice it: which (in my opinion) may be easily resolved, if we
consider her present condition, Answer.
who living private might well perform her deuotio^s, and yet not be observed,
especially having now no other means and liberty to practice her religion, but
such as might well be performed secretly in her closet, only in the presence
of her God. If it shall be imputed unto her, yt she should have made a bold
profession of her nation and religion, thereby the rather to free her from that
present bondage, and so to prevent her future defiling, rather choosing to be
disgraced and cast out of the Court again, then to endure ye pleasure of sin
for a season.

Surely concerning the profession of our religion, Obs* 81. Religion when and
how to be given account off.
as ye Apostle would have us principally ready thereto, that so in due season
we may publish the same: so he seems to aim at a special season, namely
when we are demanded a reason of our hope. 1. Pet. 3. 15.
And therefore though no doubt this servant of God was ready to give an account
of her religion, yet (I take it) now it was not a fit season, because she was
not demanded the same of any: If you say, her own case did now especially
require it, yt she might be delivered from ye imminent danger. Surely for any
danger wherein yet she was, I see not but she was to undergo the same with
patience: as being so far subject to government, as might stand with the
salvation of her soul: as for future dangers, concerning her defiling, etc.
though they were likely in regard of man, yet if we look up to God, might not
they be prevented? Especially seeing she walked on her ways, she yet did no
more then necessity, and her duty imposed upon her: and therefore might
safely wait upon the protection of her God: That happily she did not here
abstain from all appearance of evil, that she did not avoid the occasions
thereto; this being a thing that was not now in her choice, as we may not
rashly condemn her for the same, so what know we whether by some extraordinary
instinct, she was encouraged and warranted herein. So that in her that may be
justifiable, which of us simply is not to be immitated. Obs. 82. God uses the
weakness of his children in the accomplishment of his mercies toward them.
And surely the weakness of Hester must needs commend highly ye faithfulness
of God to his children, who as he is not diuerted from his purpose toward them
by their infirmities, so does he in his special providence use the same in the
contriuing of his work, yt he may have the only glory of the accomplishme^t
thereof.

Use* 1. Whereby we may learn that there is a time to hold our peace as well as
to speak, and when we may safely conceal a truth. 2. We may observe the bounds
of lawful subjection, that we so far obey the magistrate as may stand with the
safety of our souls. 3. We may contemplate ye absolute power of God, in giving
his children extraordinary dispensations even beyond his righteous law, that so
we may not fear ye pardon of our sins, if in weakness they be committed
against the law of God. Lastly, we see here an holy use of our infirmities; not
that we should presume here-vpon to sin: But rather that hereby our faith
being increased we may get daily from Christ Jesus more strength against sin,
not measuring Gods faithfulness by our desert, but by the eye of faith,
looking for light out of darkness, that so God may have the glory of all his
mercies. Thus does Hester conceal her country and her kindred too. But by
whose advise does she this? It follows.

For Mordecai had charged her that she should not tell it.

Lo here the cause of Hesters silence: her foster-father Mordecai had given her
this in charge: and among many other holy instructions, which he had furnished
her withal, that so she might be better armed against the abuses of the Court:
this was one especial, that she should rule her tongue, and especially herein
impose silence on her self, yt she discover not her Nation, nor her fathers
house.

Wherein, Obs. 83. Gods children season one a another with (...) council and
wholesome instructions.
1. we may see a notable practice of the Saints of God, Namely to season their
tender plants with good counsel, and wholesome instruction: when they are to
leave the wing (as we say) and try the world. So does David counsel Solomon,
and Joseph his brethren; so does Jacob his children. This is the best legacy
they can bequeath unto them: hereby they show ye vnfainednesse of their love,
and so arm them graciously against this present evil world.

Whereby we may learn to set forth our children, and friends into the
world: not so much providing stocks, and such furniture for the body, as
especially with good counsel to arm the soul; as knowing that if it be
secured the other shall not want, and the full provision for the body, may be
a means to expose the soul naked to all temptations.

But what is the sum of this council that Mordecai gives to Hester? Surely
silence, the chief outward ornament of women and keeper of their chastity,
Jacob, 3. 1 Jacob.
the government of the tongue (that unruly member) which if we refrain not,
our religion is in vain; and to rule it well, is a note of true profession.

Wherein as we see the fitness of this Christian council; Obs 84. Silence a
special lesson to be learned of Cou^tiers.
What fitter lesson to a woman then silence? So we may learn hereby the
necessity of this virtue, especially when we come abroad in the catching and
observing Court. what greater gain here then silence? Whereby a man may
learn, and make use of all others speech, that so when he is called, he may
speak with authority.

Use. And therefore let not impudent beggars here continue still craving,
upon presumptions that the Prince will never be weary of giving: Let not
discoursers run themselves out of breath at tables and chambers, to make let
not co^plementers account it their glory to pratle of every thing, when they
make no conscience to practice let not flatterers trust to this same glibbe and
Let not and Detractors hope to carry it away cleanly, seeing their own tongues
shall one day cry quittance with them: But let al remember Mordecaies lesson to
Hester, y^ in the Court they rule their tongue, and so shall they be sure to
keep their friend. But what end does Mordecai aim at in this his lesson of
silence? Surely his heart was touched with the care of the Church, for he saw a
greater storm like to come in upon it: He feared least Hester by this
disunion might endanger the same: he hoped that her wise silence for a time,
might breed good blood for it deliverance: and therefore does he advise her,
especially, silence in this case, least her discovery might be a means of
indangering the Church of God: As being that which the enemy lay in wait for;
and to which her weakness and youth might be easily abused. Wherein we may
observe what principally ought to affect us, ye danger whereof we ought
especially to prevent: Namely the Church of God and its success.

1. Thus does our god principally regard, Obs. 85. The safety of Gods church
ought to be our special care.
and so should we have the like respect of it. 2. On the welfare hereof
depe^ds al our private happiness: and therefore if we be wise, we will herein be
wise to our selves, 3. yea our care hereof will be means to comfort us in our
troubles, and make way for our yea which is especially to be regarded of us,
our zeal to Gods Church witnesses our true interest therein; that if we
mourn with it, we shall also rejoice therewith; Psalm. 42. 130.
and so reign for ever as lively members of the same in glory. So was
Nehemiah, David, Josiah and the rest.

1. Use. What shall we then say of those that never take thought for Gods
inheritance? Let it sink or swim What case are they in that drink Joseph
is in affliction? How fearful is their condition that help forward the
affliction; rejoicing greatly at the Churches fall? And with all their strength
and policy cry it down to the ground; But of this we shall have fitter
occasion to speak hereafter, when we consider of Hamans and Mordecaies
contrary affection herein.

Thus you see the care of Mordecai for the Church of God: and to this end you
have heard of his charge to his Nephew. Now let us see how Hester obeyes this
iniunction: It is said that

She did not show her people nor her kindred. i. she was obedient to the
Council of her Father Mordecai, and does not discover her country nor her
Fathers house.

A notable mark of the true child of God: Obs. 86. Obedience to lawful
authority, a true mark of the Child of god. 4. Sam. 15.
Namely in lawful things, to be obedient to superiors commands; 1. So has
God commanded; 2. so shall we prolong our days, 3. so is corruption humbled and
patience tried. 4. so is faith excercised, and order maintained. 5. so is God
honored better then with sacrifice. 6. and man also where obedience is, there
is safety, What may we then judge of those y^ justify treason and rebellion in
inferiors? that allow the subject to rebel against the Prince, yea to take his
life from him? that warrant the child to forsake their parents, and justify
disobedience in all sorts: shall we think yt this proceeds from an heroical
spirit? Shall we esteem it as greater obedience and honor unto God? who because
he is obeyed above man, therefore we must not obey man in him, and under him?
So the Papists advance their traitors and justify their treaso^s: Surely how
necessarily must these err, not knowing the Scriptures? how fearfully do
these reject God in not obeying his ordinance? shall we look that God will
honor them that do thus dishonor him? Blessed be our GOD who has
maintained his own cause, and has justified his ordinance in the confusion of
his enemies. So let all thine enemies perish oh Lord, so be thou exalted in
the protection of thine Anointed.

But wherein does this obedience of Hester show it self? Obs. 87. Sincere
obedience rather respects the power of the Commander then the worth of the
thing commanded.
Surely in concealing a secret not fit to be known; No doubt her father had
given her many other good lessons, and happily among so many, she might have
forgotten this; or happily she might have dispensed with it, as a matter of no
great consequence; and seeing it was a thing would not be long hid, why might
she not prevent the discovery thereof by others, and so make her own peace by
the benefit of such favors with were cast upon her by ye Eunuch and such like?
neglecting the estate of the rest of her country. Surely (I take it) herein we
may observe the conscionablenesse of her obedience; that though she might have
thus strayned in the point, yet the reverent authority of the commander keeps
her from these demurres, and so not so much she considers the weight of the
thing commanded; as that she is simply led by the authority of her superiors.

A notable evidence, of the sincerity of our obedience, that it depend not so
much upon the thing commanded, as upon the just authority of the commander
himself: because as our service is then most acceptable to GOD when it has
least respect to our selves, and most to his glory, so it is most free from
mercenary baseness when we stand not so much upon the thing commanded which
does concern our own good; as upon the power of the commander for whose sake
we do it.

Thus did the Lord try the obedience of our first parents, the things he
commandes might seem to be of no great weight, but that the Authority and
commander gave power thereto: which they not wayghing duly (as in conscience
they should) but principally respecting what a small matter was only imposed;
not to cut of an Apple: were therefore easily drawn to very fearful
disobedyence; and so have set their childrens teeth on edge, by eating that
forbidden fruit.

Use. 1. Whereby we may learn, how to certify our Namely to have an
especial respect to ye just power of the superior, and so in reverence of that
power, not making difference thereof, in regard of the things commanded, but
performing indifferent obedience to al alike; as they proceed from a like power
of those whom God has set making conscience as well of the least as ye
greatest commands; because the Commander is the same, And our faith and
humility being more tried in obeying the least, will be a good means to
further to preferment, that so not obeying man for hope of reward; we may not
yet be disapointed of our hope in the reward above. Obs. 88. True obedience
performed as well in absence as in presence.
Thus does the Lord approve the sincerity of Hesters obedience. Unto which if
we shall add that which further in is remembered in the 20. verse, that Hester
did even as conscionably after the words of Mordecai, being now from under
his government, as when she was nourished by him: We have herein a further
testimony of the uprightness thereof. The holy Ghost (as I take it) signifying
herein unto us the maine ground of her obedience: Namely that though she was
now exempted from the sight and government of her earthly father Mordecai, yet
she remained under the obeisance of her heavenly Father: For whose sake she
performs as conscionably obedience to Mordecai being absent, as if he had her
under never so much subjection. So does she approve her obedience to be in the
sight of God, Col, 3. 22.
and so is cleared from eye-seruice, and such like; so does she witness it
also to be for the Lords sake, and so purges it utterly of all carnal
respects: And in this her bodily absence performing as true service unto
Mordecai as if he were present; she retains her right in the holy family, and
so is partaker of the prayers, and blessings thereof. Yea she keeps hereby
within the covenant of God, and so prepares a way for further blessings.

Behold here a pattern of sincere obedience: And does not the Lord requite it
accordingly? Yea surely, as Hester obeyes Mordecai when he is out of her sight;
so does Mordecai care for Hester though now she be from under his government.
For so it follows.

And Mordecai walked every day before the Court of the women's house, Verse, 11.
to know if Hester did well, and what should be done with her. Thus careful is
he of his Nephew even when she is of years to govern her self.

So ought parents not to reject the care of their children, Obs. 89. Parents
how far to extend their care for their children
even when they seem to have least need of them: Because 1. as hereby they
show the soundness of their affection: so this riper estate of their children,
does now most require this care, as exposing their children to more fearful
extremities, as now knowing their strength, and And wherein shall earthly
parents Nay how shall they otherwise differ from bruit beasts, if they only
care for their children to hatch them up, and so send them forth into the
world; Ruth, 2.
and there is an end. Had not Job a daily care of his children, though in regard
of the world, they had no need of him? Because the more they had of the world,
the longer they had lived therein, the more they were subject to greater
danger? Job. 1.
what care had Naomi of her daughter in law Ruth? how did Moses take care for
Gods people when they enjoyed great prosperity?

Use 1. Well let Mordecai condemn profane parents that think much to give
their Children even bringing up, if they have done this, they think they are
fully discharged; especially if they can provide them some trade, or portion to
get a living withal: Alas if they considered well, the greatest care is
behind; when do children more greiue and shame their parents, then at this
estate? when they come to their own liberty, and have fuel to their lusts?
and how many just curses do lie upon parents, not for giving too little, when
they were Children, as for giving to much liberty, when they have grown up to
be men.

If you say they are now past correction, they are better able then I, Object.
wherein then should I show my care?

Surely give good example unto them, that so they may be ordered. Ans. 1.
Let them be often in thine eye, that so thy Spare not to reprove them
plainly, and forget not instruction as occasion shall be offered. Keep them to
the duties of children, without respect of Keep the staff in thine hand, and
let Let the Magistrate But especially Obser. 89. Care how it may st^nd with the
providence of God.


But what need Mordecai take this care of Hester? was he not persuaded that GOD
would care for her? Yea surely, and therefore also is he careful for her,
because he knows the providence of God to subordinate And who more fit to
care for her then he that had bound himself thereto? Act. 27.
So then an honest so avoid security and presumption, two maine enemies of our
most holy faith.

Use. 1. Which as it condemns their presumption, that cast all upon God,
neglecting the means: So on the other The mean which (I take casting about
the best means, and 2. caring to compass our desires, that we neither tie 3.
the issue absolutely to our labor, but refer it wholly to the blessing of
GOD, nor 4. sacrifice to our care as if by it we had obtained, nor by it make
5. sacrifices of our selves to Satan in our cruel macerating of our selves to
impotency and distrust. But as we must 1. care, to be humbled thereby; so we
must also cast our 2. care on God, for he cares for us, 3. contenting our
selves that we have done our best, 1 Pet. 4.
howsoever happily it may have bad success, and being 4. comforted further
also in the greatest plunges, because our GOD shall turn all to our good. Thus
does Mordecai give God the glory of his faith, while yet he shows his love to
his kinswoman. And does not the Lord give a gracious issue thereto? Consider I
pray you what follows next.

12. And when the course of every maid came to go in to King Ahashucrosh after
that she had been etc.

In these three next verses, the holy Ghost sets down the abominable custom
of these maidens; in their preparing to the Kings bed; and also, their
admittance to the same.

Their preparation is set down by two circumstances. First by the continuance
of Time which was allotted for this preparation: It was no less then twelve
months. 2. It is also described by the means thereof, and those are of two
sorts. The first is ordinary, and this also is twofold, they must be anointed
and purified six months, with oil of mirrhe. 2. and the other six months
with sweet odours, and in the purifying of the women.

The extraordinary means that is allowed for their purification, is here
described indiferently: Namely whatsoever any of the Virgins did otherwise
require, to set out their beauty, and steal away the Kings heart, that must
also be given unto them.

The maidens being thus prepared, are in the second place, admitted to the
Kings bed, and herein also we may observe two circumstances.

1. The time of their admission, a very short time: In the evening she went
and on the morrow she returned etc.

2. The condition of her admission is here also commended, unto us. Namely that
when ever she returned, she came unto the King no more except she pleased the
King and were called by name. This is breefely the sum of these words.

Wherein that no less then a year must be spent in fitting these miserable
Virgins to the lust of the King, Obser. 90. A mark of the wicked to riot out
time.
does not this set out unto us, his most prodigious luxury, and profusion? does
it not discover such effeminatenesse, as cannot well be deciphred? May we not
herein observe a note of desperate folly thus to riot out time in vanity? May
we not set it down as a mark of him, that knows not GOD, that he makes no
conscience of the redeeming of the time, Times portion.
but rather imploies his wits and wealth this regard most precious, 2 Cor. 6. 2.
because the Lord therein offers us a pearl of chiefest price, no meaner a
Jewel, then the salvation of our souls? Must not salvation be far from
them, Pro. 1. 24. 25
that neglect so gracious opportunity? can they be accepted of God, Act. 1. 7.
that refuse this acceptable time? And is

Use. Oh that we were wise to consider these things! that our Time-seruers
would lay it to their hearts: what a heavy wittnes time will be against them,
when neglecting the Jewel thereof the salvation of our souls, they are only
slaves to the corruptions of time? Did our gamesters wit, and money, and
honesty, they also play away their time, that most precious time which can
never be won again: surely they would labor with God, Psa. 90. ^2l.
that he would teach them to number their days, that so they might apply their
shall not time be a witness against our wordlings, who have no leisure to come
to the marriage of the Kings son? but all time is to little for their farms
and for their oxen? What shall I say to our profane E^awes; that say it is not
yet time to build the house What is this birthright to us? shall we die for
hunger? hearken how our voluptuous-persons, have disposed of time? At all times
let thy garments be white, and let no oil be lacking upon thy head. Eccle. 9.
8.
Let us eat and drink, 1 Cor. 15. 25
for to morrow we shall die: soul take thy ease thou have goods laid up for
many years. Shall not the Lord of that ^eruant come in an hour when he knows
not? shall not he say, and make it good, thou fo^le this night shall thy soul
be taken away from thee? Luke 12. 20.
But why speak we to the belly that has no ears? Surely the voice of Time
yet was in our streets and the man of wisdom, Math 6. 1 Pro. Esaias 55. 2 T^me
how to be redeemed. Pro. 6
shall hear the name of God. Oh ye foolish how long will ye love
foolishness? Why do ye lay out silver, and not for bread? Why do you spend
your time, and strength, without being satisfied? Say not with thy self, yet a
little sleep, yet a little slumbe^? put not off (as Felix did) til a more
convenient time? Oh boast not of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may
bring forth! rather admire the mercy of thy God, that thou art not already
consumed: and seeing the Lord has spared thee, Eccle. 5. 12
to recover what thou have lost, Oh think it sufficient that thou have spent
the time past, Lam. 3. 13.
after the lust of the Gentiles: the more time thou have lost, the more do
thou labor for the time to come and redeem thy time with the price of thy
former pleasures Account daily with thy self how thou do bestow it, and
esteem every minuite precious that is offered thee, Eccle. 5.
and be sure thou feast therein an image of eternity. And considering that the
patience of the Lord does lead thee to repentance, Rom 2. 4.
make no long tarying to turn to the Lord thy God, least abusing his patience,
Genesis 27.
thou harden thine heart, and though thou cry after, yea bitterly as Esau did,
yet the Lord will not hear thee, Pro. 1. 24. 28.
because thou would not hear him. Oh that we were wise to consider these
things! But they that are filthy will be filthier still.

Behold his drunkenness added to thirst: you have heard how these Princes
Minions spend their time, Obs. 91. Another mark of the wicked to riot cut Gods
good creatures
a whole year at least must be spent to fit them to uncleanness, that so they
may more desperately follow the same all their life long. And shall they only
give an account of ye mispending of their time? No surely: what is there that
escapes taynture by this abuse of time? The soul that is hardened and made
impudent in sin, the body is made a factor and baud for sin, the good
creatures of God are made fuel to sin, here is no sparing of cost to
maintain sin: All the creatures of God are to little in this case, but that
Art also must be made a broker even to corrupt nature ( six months) upon
pretense of our right in the creature: No end to condemn our usurped power
over them: so corrupt is our nature to abuse our liberty, Romans 8. 19.
so just is the Lord to turn our liberty to our further condemnation; Joel. 1.
that the creature abused, being subject to vanity, might cry unto the Lord to
be eased of the burden, and so hasten vengeance upon the wicked, while they
heap abuse upon the creature.

Use. 1. A notable evidence of the fearful condition of the wicked, who in
the judgment of the world seem therefore to be most happy, because they have
most commands over outward blessings. Whose great liberty on the creatures,
provoking to greater abuse, does either thereby move the Lord to cast out such
Nebuchadnezzars as beasts in this life, Dan. 4.
and to strippe them of all, or else there continuance in these blessings,
increasing sin upon them, does thereby further vengeance against the day of
reckoning. A thing which because the wicked cannot avoid as usurping over Gods
blessings, and therefore necessarily making them strangers unto them. How to
prevent abuse of the creatures. ^. Cor. ^. 17. 1. Tim. 4. 4.
That we may therefore avoid running into the same excess; let us labor to be
in Christ, that so we may have a right in these things, and let us renew our
right by prayer and holy employment of them in our several callings, that so
we may attain to a right use of them, frugally husbanding them as the good
blessings of God, and using them soberly as hand-maides to higher graces, 1.
Tim. 6. 19.
that so we may lay up a good foundation by them, and also give a cheerful
account for them at the day of Christ Jesus.

But is there no color for this great excess? might not this be imputed as a
complement of state, Obs. 92. The wicked have pretenses for their greatest
abuses.
that these maidens should have such exquisite preparations, because it was for
the most excellent personage? might not seemelinesse, and necessity be here
pretended, that they might be offered fitly and unspotted to the bed of a King?
might not liberty be pleaded, and therefore who shall restrain? might not
ability be avouched to justify this cost? Surely the greatest sins will have
their cloakes, pride must go for cleanliness, and excess must keep state,
the clensing of the body must be with the defiling of the soul, and lust will
have a law to enrage and provoke the same. Thus are the wicked deceived, while
they deceive others, thus are they hardened in their sin while it has a
cloak to keep it from shame: Thus pretending what they may do, what evil
will they not prosecute with greediness, seeing power is in their hands, and
so having made up the measure of their sin, be suddenly caught with
destruction, while they say peace and security. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.

Use 1. Oh that we would try our selves whether we stand in grace or no! To
sin is natural, but to cloak sin is devilish. 2
And therefore though outward ability may afford means of such excess; Rules
for moderation in the creatures.
yet the ability of the mind should temper such means, for the good of both;
and though it be lawful for me to take my fill of Gods creatures, yet
expediency will moderate as may best fit me to glorify my Creator: And what
should necessity do with such superfluity? what seemelinesse can their be where
Nature is thus adulterated? As for complement of state to be furnished hereby,
what greater abasement of state then to be a slave where it should rule? and
what more enthrals greatness then abuse of it power, then excess in it
liberty? Let us therefore cast away these cloakes of shame; and in the fear
of GOD, 1 Cor. 10, 31
learn we an holy and sober examples deceive us, liberty enthrall us: let
not necessity make us ^antons, fullness make us miserable. But use we the
blessings of glory of the giver: Let our callings be the measure, and our
salvation the end, let necessity be the motive, liberty the moderator: Let
experience be the Judge, 1 Cor 10. 8 Romans Math. 25
and edification the mark we aim at: so shall we use aright the good
blessings of God: and being faithful in a little, we shall be made stewards of
great blessings.

Well thus we have removed these shameless vyzards, and pretenses for this.
Now let us examine the true cause of this excess. It follows in the. 13.
verse. What soever she called for, Obser. 93. The wicked most eagerly bent upon
their lusts, and spare no cost for the sat flying thereof. Exodus 32
it was given unto her to go with her out of the women's house into the Kings
house. Lo here the maine cause of all this superfluity. It was to go into the
house of the King, to satisfy his lust: And therefore spare no cost, let there
be given what-soeuer is called for: So engerly are the wicked bent to the
satisfying of their lusts, so do they spare no cost, for the fulfilling
thereof. Not their eare-rings and bracelets but shall go willingly to make the
yea the fruit of their body, for the sin of their soul. Mich. 6.
Such pains do they take to increase their pain: so foolish are And How shall
they justify this vanity in the eye of the world, but by being at so great
cost How should they make others in love with sin but by prizing it How
should sin be nourished, but by There credit now binding And this cost,
giving for a time some miserable comfort in the sin, that so they might at
length make up the measure thereof.

Uses 1. Which as it condemns that opinion of the world, that rich men are
only righteous, and only the poor wicked; whereas rather these being not
able to be at the cost of sin, are so kept from it, the other having
where-withall, are the likelier chapmen: So it much

Surely if GOD be the bestower of those outward blessings, and to this end they
were given, that he might And yet poor, but they are badde husbands also:
Though they have not such means, yet they can bestow to much cost on sin:
they will bestow their Time, and whatsoever they have: their wills are as good,
though they cannot put it in practice; and what can the devil have more then
all that they have.

Well let such consider of this, that think all cost to little (...) service
of GOD, 1 Malack.
that rob the LORD in tithes, and offerings: that give him but the lips,
and outside in his service, that rent him in the power and plenty thereof, as
if we could be to righteous or he too much served, shall not the gross sinner
rise up in judgment against them?

But what? must these wantons have whatsoever they call for? must they do what
they list as (if their were no King in Israel) and yet does the King command
it? Indg 17
does authority allow such license to sin?

Behold here a note of wicked Magistrates, Obser. 94. Wicked ^ag^t^rates give
the bridle to sin, and countenance wickedness in others.
instead of bridling sin, they give the reine to it. Else how should their
example be warranted if they did not warrant others? How should they hope for
the love of their people, if they gave them not this liberty, if they made them
not like unto them? How should they (as they think) keep How should they

Thus does Atheistical policy give liberty to sin. But not I pray you to the
confusion thereof? Let us a little examine these grounds? must sin be made
common that I may go uncontrolled? what extraordinary privilege and delight
can I have herein, seeing I abase my pleasures as common to every one? What
security can I have in the continuance of them when I have so many sharers and
spoilers thereof? Ought I not therefore rather restrain sin in others, that
so I may in them reform my self? that my ill example may be better endured,
when I am beloved not for my own worth, but for conscience sake? surely even a
bad husband, will yet see his servants shall work, that so he may have to
maintain his vnthri^tinesse with all: And shall I hope to be beloved of my
people by giving that liberty which makes them hateful to themselves, and
unfit for any duty whereby they might show their love?

Surely though by this means I make them like unto me, yet neither is
likeness in sin the ground of love especially between the Prince and
subject, neither will fellowshippe in evil ever breed true love, but rather
jealousy and hatred arc the hand-maides thereof. 1 Samuel 14
Remember Amnons love to Thamar, and the issue thereof.

And shall evil be prevented by giving the reyne thereto? does not liberty to
sin give strength thereto, even justly to be avenged, of such foolish
indulgence? It may be this license may for a time abject the subject to a
slavish obedience, and having made him a beas^ you may happily so use him as
your drudge and pack-horse, but if you tread on a worm to hard, he will turn
again: and while you hope the better to rule him by drawing him in pleasure,
take heed you make him not more savage and hard to be tamed.

And therefore if you plot for true love and security of your states, Obser.
95. Princes how to secure their estates.
kiss you the Son of righteousness, that your people may embrace you: Give
laws that may breed fear, and chase away the wicked, by the power thereof, so
shall your thrones be established in justice. So shall the righteous dwell in
peace, and shall bless your government. This shall be the means to prevent al
conspiracies, when the Keeper of Israel watches over your Kingdoms, and
knitteth the hearts of your people toward you, and by this you shall learn to
be merciful to your beasts, much more to your subjects, that they may
cheerfully obey you. Thus ought Godly Princes govern their people: But as for
our Persia* Monarch his lust is his law, and his belly his God, and therefore
no marvel if he do after his kind, and in his greatest wisdom hasten his
own destruction.

For to come now to the issue of all this preparation: of all this liberty and
abuse of GODS creatures: Is it not to provoke the lust of this Epicure, and so
to wast his body, and destroy his soul? yea surely, the holy Ghost
witnesses no less, in that which follows.

In the evening she went and on the morrow she returned, Verse. 14
into the second house of the women under the hand of Shaashgaz the Kings
Eunuch, which kept the Concubines: she came in to the King no more; except
she pleased the King; and that she were called by name.

In which words the admission of these maidens to the Kings bed is declared
unto us: and, i. the Time of their admission is specified, in the evening she
went, and on the morrow she returned that is to say, Job 24, 15
She is, to go in the evening, as fittest for a work of darkness, the eye
of the adulterer waits for the twilight, he is ashamed of the light, he
fears it will bewray him. And her pleasure continues but for a night: Obser.
96. The pleasures of the wicked very s^ort and ^lippery.
so momentary are the pleasures which the wicked do enjoy. So just is the LORD
to confound their vain confidence, that while they promise to themselves
perpetuity therein; they both presume of more then the nature of their
pleasures can perform, and are prevented by Gods justice confounding the same,
even in their greatest likelihood and ability thereof. Luke 12. 20.

Use 1. And shall we set our hearts on that which is such a stranger unto us?
So dangerous in the use? So Shall we to catch these shadows, forsake the
substance? shall the pleasures of the right hand which last for evermore, shall
these (I say) be disclaimed for these pleasures of sin which endure but for a
season? Shall we think our selves unhappy because Shall we esteem those
blessed that abide in such slipperie places? Iere. 2
Shall we not rather choose with Moses having Ought we not the rather to
secure these slipperie Estates Psalm. 73
Hebr. 11


But is there not a mystery in this, that the Virgin must come in the evening,
and return in the morning. She must stay but a night, lust must have change,
that it may be satisfied, Obser. 97. Variety in sin the greatest snare thereto.
and change has a sore with it, to consume the body, and so to be avenged for
the abuse of this liberty.

So wise are the wicked for the maintenance of sin. So just is the LORD, in
confounding this their wisdom, So is the Epicure met withal in the variety of
his danties, so is ambition tangled in the stirrops of her climing, so variety
of means to sin, is the snare thereto.

Use 1. And may not they then be condemned of extreme folly, which think it
pleasantest swimming; where there is many baits? they may be here, or there:
what liberty is this?

2. Is not their madness intolerable, that when one is to much to choke
them, will be nibbling at them all^ nay, will swallow them greedily, as if they
had found great spoils. Surely such is the case of the Whore-maister, and
drunkard: such is the ambitious person, the coueteous, and oppressor: such are
all they that delight in sin, these must have variety* that their confusion
may be the greater. Oh let us not therefore bind sins together! Let us fear
such baits as may further change in factors for other Let us single out our
sins that we Let us not seek But And not live by examples, which may so
dangerously corrupt us.

Well thus we have heard what short pleasure this poor maiden has had. Obs.
98. The wicked fall deeper and deeper into sin.
Now let us hear a little of her pain. It follows. She returned into the
second house of the women: that having made sale of her honesty, and so changed
her happy estate of Virginity to become a Concubine, she changes also her
habitation: And whereas before she was in the house of the Virgins; now she is
removed to the house of the women; such as had left their honesties behind
them, R^asons I.
that here among fellows in evil grief might be provoked, and yet
notwithstanding she might be hardened in her sin; as being here like to find
companions therein, and so miserable comforters to excuse and justify the
same. So cunning is Satan to maintain his new gotten hold: So unthankful is
sin to recompense our service with shame and sorrow. So desperate is the
condition of the wicked, they sink just is the Lord in their appointed
shortness of pleasure, nor change thereof into sorrow; nor disgrace of men,
nor sting of conscience: nothing shall stay the wicked, indeed nothing can
stay them, till they have made up their measure, that God may power on his.

1. Well let this aduize us not to believe the fair promises of the world; the
best recompense she can yield us when she has made us serve her lust, is to
thrust us into the house of the women, to reap desperate sorrow for the same,
or else to harden us further therein, seeing now we are known to be but broken
ware, here is the best remedy the world affords for sin, even to send us to
our like companions in evil: that so we may have company to go to hell withal.

let him not hope to recover out of sin by giving further liberty thereto
through fellowshippe etc. Let him take heed of the house of the women, of
pleasure, sencerity etc. such means as do harden. Nay let him not enter into
his brothers house in the day of his humiliation: miserable comforters are
these all.

But let him go to his God, by true repentance, and let him single out the
Lord, that so he may be more vile in his presence: Abac. 3.
so shall he find rest in the evil day. Psalm. 32. 5.
I said I will confess my sins unto the LORD and thou forgauest me the
iniquity of them.

But let us a little further consider of that which follows.

She came into the King no more, except shece pleased the King and, (this was
a sign that she pleased the King) if that she were called by name.

Behold here a further evidence of the badde wages of sin: Obser. 99. The
vnsatiablenes of the wicked in sin has th^s punishment attending on it in this
life that it shall not be satisfied.
This defiled woman must now burn in lust, and shall not be satisfied* to the
King she must come no more, but at a long leisure and for other means, the
jealousy and honor of the Prince, and the watchfulness and safety of the
keeper will look to it soundly. What then is her punishment? surely not only
to be denied of that, which she most desires, but by this denial to be
tormented with the rage of her unsatisfied lust, to the great vexation both of
body, and soul.

So is the covetous man tormented in the restraint of his insatiable desire; so
is the proud man reproched because the world will not honor him; Haman. 5
Hester.
so is the Epicure punished in this life, Aristot. et Plin. de Aquilis.
by being given up to such a desire of eating, that nothing can satisfy; so do
the birds of prey even die for famine. So patient is the Lord hereby to provoke
the wicked to repentance, so justly does hasten hereby their condemnation,
because sin so wisely does he discover so righteouslie does he seek up
into them, there eternal

1. Oh consider this you that forget GOD, and dead your consciences, Ephesians. 4 19.
Non cum satietate, sed cu^^^^ditate indicat sp^ritus appe^^^ insatibi^e, no^
satiandum.
that you may commit sin with greediness: you that enlarge your desires as
hell, that you may take your fill of sin: behold the more greedy you are,
the less you shall be satisfied; even no less then hell that never can be
satisfied. Do you not see herein how sin will owe you nothing? your desires
shall be laid open, how insatiable they are: and God shall give with his own
ways? Prou. 14. 4
when he shall not be satisfied, wherein he is insatiable, when his
^atiating in sin does make him more insatiable: how just is it that offenders
should burn in lust, and so be deemed the comfort Oh leave therefore to purge
the fountain of this mischief, labor to prevent insatiableness in sin, 1.
purge it from the heart, or else it must be insatiable; 2. Vnsati^blenesse in
sin how to be prevented.
refrain it in the occasions, which may breed a desire of insatiableness,
look to the liberty of sin, that in giving thee thy desire, shall nothing
less then satisfy thee: and consider wisely the rest of sin, even restless
torment, and yet never satisfied.



Thus we may see (for conclusion of this point) that whether the wicked win
or loose in sin there is no gain on either side. Obser. 100. The wicked,
winners or loosers fare the worse by sin.
The King he takes his liberty more freely, and is a looser thereby, he
increases his sin by abusing the chastity of others, and putting off
repentance by a new supply; and his body also gettes nothing by the bargain:
as for the poor Concubine, her loss is apparent, she parts full unwillingly
with the bed of her pleasure, and meets untimely with the house of her sorrow,
she burns within, and freezeth without, the King has so his desire that he
may be less satisfied; the Concubine has not hers, and therefore is not
satisfied, and yet the Lord most righteous herein: who in not giving her her
present desire, satisfies her inward and maine purpose, and by this means
inflameth the same namely never to be satisfied, but ever to burn in lust. Let
this impose silence to all bragging of diminishing of sin; the beggar he
flatters himself that he is not prodigal, and the gelded person that he is
not incontinent: what gets he hereby, seeing he would be so? The great one he
boasts that he steals not for need, he flatters himself that he has enough
to do at home, what does this advantage him if he steal without need? nay
how shall we know hereby, but that he would if he had need whether we be
restrained in what we would, or enjoy our desire to the utmost: sin got
ground in both; the outward restraint increases the inward desire, and the
inward desire is also enraged by the outward accomplishment thereof. Let us
therefore labor first to rectify our defires by the word of GOD, ^abou^ we
to have our persons accepted of GOD, so sin restrained, or committed, shall
be less desired. And so much concerning the abominable custom of these
Concubines. Now let us see how GOD brings light out of darkness. It
follows.

Now when the course of Hester the daughter of Abihail the Uncle of Mordecay,
Verse. 15. 16 17 18.
which had taken her as his one Daughter came, that she should go into the
King, etc.

In these four next verses, the holy Ghost sets down unto us, 1. the
admittance of Hester into the Kings presence, 2. her advancement to the marriage
bed, and so to the kingdom, and 3. the solemnity thereof. And that still we
may see the Lord is like himself in using fit means to bring good things to
pass: the spirit of God sets down in this 15. verse, diverse notable
circumstances to show the orderly and worthy admittance of this poor captive
to so great sovereignty. First, it is said, When the course of Hester came,
that is; she is not hoysed on the sudden, least she might be unprepared,
and puffed up therewith: neither is she called before her course, least her
^ellows might envy her, as being grieved at it: neither shall she stay after
her course to put her out of hope: but even in the fit time.

When her course came, Obs. 98. Gods children are advanced in convenient time.
then is she called, then is she advanced. So when his appointed time came,
and the council of the Lord has tried him, then did the King send for Joseph
and loose him, then was he delivered and made Lord of the house.

Thus has God an appointed time to advance his fittest and most comfortable
that they may know their advancement is that they might wait with patience the
LORDS good leisure, and be confirmed in faith, for the accomplishment thereof.

Use 1. And therefore, as in vain do the wicked threaten, (as if the times
were in their hands) because Eliah shall prosper, and his word shall prevail
against Iezabel: so weak is the faith of GODS children, that will prescribe
GOD his time: seeing when it is fittest then it shall come to pass, and art
thou wiser then Oh that we would be still! and the LORD that we would fit our
selves, to the time, that God has appointed.

Surely there is an end ^thy hope shall not be out of, Pro. 2^ 18
yea the patient abiding of the righteous shall be galdnesse.

And seeing the Lord will not hide from his children what may be for their
good, Obs. 102. The appointed time of deliverance is not obscurely to be
gathered out of the word.
and they that live by faith may see a far of, though the times and seasons
are in the hands of God, yet has he not left us without very probable marks,
whereby we may discover the time of a deliverance, that so we may be better
fitted to the entertainment thereof and be confirmed in our faith, in the
enjoying of the same: when the signs do graciously answer our expectation.

To this pupose is it, that as the Lord has appointed a time when he will
deliver his Church; so does he also in the word discover the same; and also not
obscurely lays open the marks of his childrens apprehension thereof. Tokens
hereof.
And these are either in regard of God who is the delyuerer, or themselves
that are to be delivered, or in their enemies from whom they are to be
delivered.

Concerning almighty God as he is the only deliverer of his Church: 1. In
respect of God.
so does he commend himself unto us by some special actions in the word;
when he purposes to deliver his people; while his people are under the
burden, he is said to be a sleep to forget them, to be angry with them, Psalm.
^4.
etc. not that indeed he is angry, but because he shows such effects, Psalm. 77.
which we do being angry: neither that he forgets them, otherwise then not to
answer their present desires, neither indeed is he otherwise a sleep, then
that graciously preserving them in the estate of their affliction, he does not
yet deliver them out of the same. But when the Lord purposes to deliver his
people, then the spirit discribes him in another manner. Namely that he awaketh
and rowseth up himself as one out of sleep, he returns to his people,
Psalm. 74.
and has compassion on them and he repents him of the evil* Psalm. 101.
etc. And that we may know that the Lord is awake he does manifest the same by
many notable signs of his special providence.

As first he puts on righteousness as an habergeon and an helmet of salvation
upon his head: ^say. 59. 17. 18.
he puts on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and is clad with zeal as
a cloak. To what end? Surely to make recompense to requite the fury of his
adversaries, with a recompense to his enemies, he will fully repay ye Islands;
mark I pray you how the holy Ghost sets down the order of ye execution of Gods
recompense 1. He makes inquiry of the fury of his adversaries, he comes down
to see whether they have done altogether according to that cry against God and
his children: Cenes. 18. Psalm, 9. 12.
He makes inquisition for blood, and remembers it: and forgets not the
complaint of the poor. But does the Lord make this inquisition? How does he
approve the righteousness of the complaint of the poor?

Surely, Psalm, 44.
1* By making it apparent that his children for his sake suffer all these
evils, in that neither would their enemies persecute them, Exodus, 5.
if they would renounce their God, and yet they shall give testimony of their
righteousness, 1 Samuel, 24. 26.
though for their credits they must still proceed against them. So was our
Savior Christ approved by Pylate and his wife: so did Saul justify David and
yet he continued persecuting of him: so have Gods children been justified by
their enemies. By which it comes to pass that the more the godly are
justified, the wicked are more enraged, and so lay more grievous burdens
upon the Church of God. What follows here-vpon. Now does the Church Judge, 5.
Namely he raizeth up some extraordinary Champions to venture themselves for
the reskuing of his people: Nehem. 2.
Now stands up Nehemiah, 4 H^stor.
and now resolves Hester, Exodus 4.
if I perish I perish; Now is Moses sent forth though sore against his will.

And will not y^ Lord accompany these his servants with third note when God will
deliver his people: Genesis 15. 14. Psalm, 106.
Namely he will send fearful signs into the Land of Ham, and show his
wonders in Egypt, and the red Sea, that so the wicked may be compelled, 1 Samuel,
5.
to let his people go: he will send Emeroids among the Philistines, and soar
plagues upon the uncircumcised, that so they may be compelled to send ye Arc
home. Genes, 15. 14.
Thus will the Lord Judge the Nations before he deliver his people; that their
hearts hereby being hardened, and more indurate against God and his people, the
deliverance of the Church may be more free and glorious, and ye confusion of
the wicked more just and fearful. Thus does the Lord awake and return when
he will deliver his children, giving them herein these apparent marks. Namely,
First The clearing of his children by the mouths of their enemies: Second, The
raizing some up among them to spend their lives in his cause. Third, inflicting
many secret and open judgments upon their mallicious enemies. Fox.
So before he delivered his Church from the tyrants of Antichrist among us,
were not some of the persecutors made fearful spectators of Gods wrath, to
bridle or harden the rest? And to justify the Church of God?

And surely if we do consider the state of the Church of God, 2 In regard of
the church.
when the Lord prepares it to a gracious deliverance, we shall find many
evident tokens therein: to give good hope of the hastening of the work: by
which we may be confirmed in the expectation thereof.

To this purpose we may observe a different estate of ye Church of God under
troubles. First, she stands upon her privilege, as if she had wrong herein:
she looks to former times, and meruailes why she is thus: she grows impatient
under the burden, and complains of her lovers, that they have deceived her;
she dissembles with God and seeks to human helpers; she yields to the
present necessity, and so she bows her neck to the yoakes, and her conscience
to the lust of the oppressor: she gives her most precious things for meat, and
obiecting her self to the iniquity of the time, she gives over hope ever to
rise again, Thus you shall find to have been the state of the Church of God
upon it entrance into captivity: and so along toward the time of her appointed
deliverance. As the Prophets do most lively decipher the same: Vid. Ierem, 41.
42.
who lived with them in the captivity, and observed their use thereof. And
surely if we observe the providence of God herein: Lament, 2. 3. 1 Lamen, 11.
Ezech.
does it not exceedingly justify this righteous hand of god against his
church? Does not the church of God hereby sink deeper in the mire, and so set
her self more strongly in the bonds of Gods justice, that so the time
appointed of her trouble may be accomplished over her? And does not the Lord
admirably by this means bring light out of darkness, and so prepare his
Church to her appointed deliverance? Yea surely the more Gods children wrestle
with the rod, the more they are beaten, and at length tired therewith: and so
in the end being thoroughly weary, ye poor church of God would gladly find some
rest. And seeing the hope of the Hills is but in vain, and she finds it too
true that her lovers have deceived her: Ierem, 3.
Therefore she resolves to go and return to her first husband: 1 Lamen. 19.
to look up unto the Lord and wait for God her Savior: Osea, 2. Mich, 7.
Assuring her self that her God will hear; Psalm, 66.
And being fully resolved that if there be iniquity in her hand, the Lord will
not hear her prayers; therefore she purposes to forsake her Lovers, and
renounce her sins. Here is it, Lament, 1.
that she weeps continually and gives no rest to her eyes, because the Lord
has forsaken his rest: And that her sorrow may be more kindly, Psalm, 137.
and take deeper impression, She remembers Syon, Lamen, 5. 18.
while she sits in Babylon: she remembers all her pleasant things, that she
had in times past: And withal remembers her rebellion which was the cause of
that great loss: 1 Lamen, 7.
And so apprehends her affliction from the cause and greatness thereof: Thus
is she brought to justify the Lord, 1 Lamen, 18.
because she has rebelled against him, Psalm, 6.
And being sent out of her self by an holy despair, Ezec, 28. 45.
acknowledging that she is worthy to be cut off: She recouers strength in
God from her own weakness: the more vile she finds her self, the more
she strives with her God to restore her beauty unto her, 1 Lamen, 21. 22.
she lays hold on GODS promises for the confusion of her enemies, and in
their confusion sees a far off her deliverance; here she stays not, but
draws nearer unto God; Lament, 2.
and so yet further abaseth her self in the fury of her misery, Lament, 3.
and so far she wades in the apprehension thereof as that she dispaires of
Gods mercy; Lament, 5 ^1.
she concludes in her weakness, Lam, 3.
that her strength and hope is perished from the Lord. Lamen. 3. 54. 23. 24.
56. 57. 58. 59. 31. 40. 41. 44. 45.
Being thus past hope, and so even her spiritual weapons failing her; now she
is recovered by the Lord, and hopes above hope: she confirms her faith from
former experience, and comforts her self in her true humiliation; and so
gathers assurance that the Lord will not forsake for ever. She is persuaded he
will return: she sees him coming a far off: Here-vpon she prepares her
self to meet her God by examining of her self, and trying her ways; she
incounters her God by earnest and hearty prayer, though she have the repulse;
yet she will have no nay: Her eye droppeth without stay, till the Lord look
down and behold from heaven.

And considering the promises of God for the reserving of the Church: she
presses the Lord to arise and have mercy upon Syon; and by the power of faith
gathers y^ the appointed time is come. Psalm, 102. 14. 15.
That his servants might delight in the stones thereof; and show compassion
unto the dust of the same. Thus is the Church changed and purged inwardly, that
so she may be fitter for outward glory: And so being fitted, she applaudes
the time thereof, not so much for her own good, as for the glory of God, which
shall be magnified in the restoring thereof. And from her own estate may the
Church of God gather apparent notes of her deliverance.

Now if we shall look into the practices of Gods enemies: 3 In regard of our
enemies.
they will also teach us to guess at the time of the Churches deliverance.
Psalm. 119.
When they make no spare of destroying, and will root out GODS word, then it
is time for the Lord to put to his hand for they have destroyed thy law, when
by their policy, and cruelty they have made such hauock, that there is none to
offer himself in the cause of God: Esaias 59. 16.
then shall the Lords arm save it, his righteousness it self shall sustain
his cause: when they shall open their mouths against heaven, and blaspheme the
power and mercy of God. Psalm, 6. 12. Psalm, 9. 16.
Then I will up (says the Lord) to avenge the poor, then shall the Lord be
known by exempting of judgments the wicked shall be turned into hell, and all
the Nations that forget God: Isay, 28. 15.
Yea, when the wicked have made a covenant with hell, and so in their security
do bless their souls: as if they had Gods children so sure, that none could
deliver them: as if their happiness were so sure, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
that none could remove them: Then shall a sudden destruction come upon them:
and they shall not be able to avoid it. Then shall the destruction of the wicked
be the deliverance of the Church. Thus even from our enemies we may hear
good news of deliverance; their own mouths will tell us, their practices
cannot hid eit.

A second probability of Hesters advancement, is that she is of the seed of
the righteous, Psalm. 111.
which shall be mighty on the earth; Obs. 103. Gods children in this life
advanced to highest dignity.
she is say they, The daughter of Abihail the Uncle of Mordecai. i. She is a
Jew to whom belongs the birthright, whose privilege it was to rule the
Nations; to whom Esau and all his posterity should bow, and do homage.

So faithful is the LORD in keeping covenant So truly is Godliness profitable
for this life: so ours both by right and possession: so are Gods so is eternal
happiness Obs. 79.

Only we may not here forget what the holy Ghost vouchsafes us again to
remember.

Namely, that Hester was taken by Mordecai for his daughter.

Thus the Lord thinks it fit again to make honorable mention of this
charitable work of Mordecai: The good deeds of Gods children are not forgotten
of the Lord.
As wherein he was glorified and did delight therein, to confound the practice
of the wicked, that seek to obliterat the same and to approve to his children
the acceptaunce of the same, as also to assure them hereby of the reward to
come, and withal to provoke the Saints to the imitation thereof.

Oh how vainly then does the wicked hope to put out their names from under
Heaven: whose names as they are how wickedly do they deprave, how weak What
comfort may how may we be established against the reproaches of the world? how
little need we esteem to be judged of men, 1. Cor. 44.
seeing it is God that approves? who can condemn? with what confidence may
Reave. 3.
who already presents our prayers in the golden censor of his righteousness:
and does not only make mention of us, but mediation for us at the throne of
glory, that we might not be confounded in the day of refreshing?

A third likelihood here set down of Hesters advancement, is her confidence in
God and relying on his immediate providence, specified in this; that it is said.

She desired nothing but what Hege the Kings Eunuch the keeper of the women
said.

Wherein the spirit of God would give us to understand, that though the other
maidens standing upon there preferment, used all art to set out there beauty as
the means thereof: and therefore spared not to demand of the Eunuch such
means of painting, etc. as might further the same, yet this gracious virgin,
contenting her self with y^ image which God had set on her, and resting on the
divine providence, that had enclinde the heart of the Eunuch toward her: she
does not impudently press him further then God should move his heart: but
humbly takes what Hege directs her to: who no doubt being inclined of the LORD
to show her extraordinary favor; was also restrained of the LORD* that he
should not offer her otherwise then was fit for her profession. The LORD as it
is likely, giving her a like favor in the eyes of this Eunuch as he gave unto
Daniel with the other, that she was not defiled with this vain and superfluous
preparation, but as she was willing to leave the Eunuch to his liberty, so the
Eunuch also might leave her to hers: how-so-euer, though in other things she
might happily submit her self to the present necessity: as to take that which
the Eunuch offers her, Obse. 105. Gods childrens preferment is in faith.
and so might discover her weakness and want, of courage, yet in this does
her faith appear not obscurely that she does not ambitiously seek by corrupt
means to advance her self: but soberlie entertaines the means that are cast
upon her, resting on GODS providence for the good success thereof. Sect. 1. 3
Notes of faith.
And surely (as I take it) we may here observe diverse notes of lively faith.

One is that she presses not impudently to insinuate into the favor of this
wicked Eunuch, though by the Kings avthority she might have occasion thereto,
lest she should seem to depend upon him and give him some advantage over her
precious liberty; To receive what is offered by him, especially moved thereto
by the LORD, herein she shows her faith; which knowing all was hers, does
herein take her right, and shows her power therein, in that she refuses not
her own, though tendered by the wicked, She knew the profaneness of the Eunuch
could not make GODS blessing* ineffectuall to his children; And therefore she
receives them aright, though from an unjust possessor. And lastly in that she
uses such ordinary means as were offered, not seeking to advance her-selfe by
adulterating, or profaning of nature; herein also in the third place she
shows her faith, which as it refuses not means, so it is not curious of
means; but takes what are offered, reiects such as are not warrantable.

Whereby we may learn that the advancement to Gods children is warrantable and
for their good, seeing it is in faith, and hereby to try our selves whether we
be in the faith or no.

A fourth token of her advancement is this which follows. Note of Hesters
advancement.


And Hester found favor in the sight of all them that looked upon her.
Thus did the Lord make her gracious in the eyes of all men that her
advancement might be with more power, and less envy: both for her own and the
good of others, that she both to the wicked might be a great terror, as and
the Godly might have a more gracious protection of her, yea her own slippery
estate

And surely; Obs. 106. Gods children gracious in the eyes of al men.
howsoever it be the property of GODS children to be hated of all men, yet is
not this incident unto all, or not at all times. Some may be exempted by
special preuiledge: All at some-time shall have a general approbation. Math.
10.
So had our Savior favor with GOD and men, who after was hated of all and
forsaken of his own, so when the ways of man do please the LORD, he will
make all his enemies at peace with him: either they shall willingly approve
him, or GOD shall extraordinarily bridle them: So does Hester here find favor
in the sight of all, not that happyly some one might not repine at her: but
generally the most part applauded her beauty, the LORD turning their eyes
upon her, (...) and their hearts toward her.

The speech I take it is hyperbolicall; we being by the universal to
understand the most, or better sort, who giving her intertainement the inferior
durst not openly gainesay. And yet more likely for Hester to be applauded of
all: because, as there was that apparent which might set the eyes of all upon
her, and move their hearts toward her, namely her beauty, so that was
concealed which would have made her hateful, namely her religion and country;
especially we are to ascribe this to the ouerruling hand of GOD, who thus
gives her favor generally with all, that so her favor might be more easily
perceived, and constantly maintained with the King, who the rather would
affect, where his people liked, and was likelier hereby to settle his
affection, and so to continue it to Hester for the good of the Church. Obse.
107. Wicked why have Gods children being forced to approve them.
Howsoever for the comfort of GODS children let me add this further, that
though it be our lotts generally to be hated, yet they that cry. Crucify him,
shall before cry hosanna, even they shall be convinced in conscience, that we
are to be approved, yea their own mouths shall give testimony unto us, if it
shall then be demanded: why they do after hate us, 1. Pet. 4. 4.
the reason is plain, because as they loved us, to make us like unto them, or
to like of them: that so the may fare the better for us; Iho 16. 2.
so when they see that we neither like of them, Ioh. 15.
nor can be like unto them: therefore they speak evil of us, therefore they
hate us. Thus do the wicked love us, before they hate us. And do they not also
approve us even while they prosecute their malice against us? yea surely though
they think they do God good service, while they thus hardly entreat us, yet in
that they persecute us, they show we are not of them, we are contrary to them.
And do they not herein wonderfully justify the generation of the just. Nay
would they not fetch us again, when they have made us away? do they not
approve us when they have made a riddance of us? Math. 23. 29. 30.
else; Why do they build the tombs of the Prophets: and garnish the
sepulchers of the righteous: and say if we had been in the days of our
Fathers, we would not have been partners with them in the blood of the
Prophets: What can we have more? seeing they that hate us do thus approve of
us? Is not the LORD wonderful to clear us by the mouths of our enemies? may
not the Children of God have this testimony to be approved of all?

And surely if we consider the power of GOD; who if we observe neither bounty
of Godliness, which is able to ravish all: If we wey the privilege that the
Children of GOD have, that all shall do service unto them: If we apprehend the
purpose of GOD herein, to make the world more inexcusable; we shall find it
no hard matter with Gods Children to be approved generally, and have favorable
respect of all that look on them.

And therefore as this may serve to commend the greatest Godliness, So it
will be a heavy witness against Oh what comfort is here to Gods Children that
the world shall justify them! What vantage have they of May we now hope to
find And shall

Well, Jacob. Gene. 32.
what may we learn further out of this point, that Hester being to be advanced
is thus gracious in the eyes of all? Obs. 108. (...) are to be grat^^us, in the
eyes of their people.


Surely; that such as are to be in authority, and raised to greatness: they
are to be gracious in the eyes of their people: hereby the Lord approues their
government: and so knitting the hearts of the people unto them, confirms and
establishes the same by this means: the blessings of government are
plentifully inioied on either side; The Prince rules in love, and the people
obey in truth; and both subject and people are prepared to eternal happiness.

Oh that Princes would wisely lay this to their hearts! and by what means.
That they did know that the love of their subjects is the best maintainer of
the Crown and armor of the Prince: by requiting ingenuous service, and
accepting it by prizing highly the lives of their people, and preserving their
Christian liberty above their lives.

Thus may Princes be gracious in the eyes of their they estrange not
themselves from them, nor if they make them gracious

Thus is Hester gracious in the eyes of all men. What follows here-vpon?

Namely; Verse.
So Hester was taken unto King Ahashuerosh, into his house royal in the tenth
month, which is the month of Tebeth, in the seventh year of his reign.

In which words the spirit of God sets down the receiving of Hester into the
Kings house, and the time thereof: that so this great benefit might be the
rather remembered. Obs. 109. Gods children are not always under the rod, but at
length find deliverance from the same etc.


And that this miserable captive is now taken to the royal Palace of this
great Monarch, and after many changes, and remouings from Mordecaies house to
the house of the maidens, is at length brought to a place of rest and honor:
Does not this commend unto us the exceeding faithfulness of God, that will not
suffer his children always to lie under the burden, and continually to pass
through fire and water, Psalm. 66.
but at the length will bring them to a wealthyer place.

Did not Joseph at length see an end of his troubles Was not Mordecai quiet at
length? Did he not find rest and honor? Yea surely, the Lord is merciful,
and Mich, 7.
he will return and have mercy, that his people may gloryfie him. The rod of
the ungodly shall not always Psalm, 50. 15.
least the righteous put forth his hand to wickedness. The Lord will hear
Psalm, 125. Psalm, 21. 2.
and he will make them hidings for others, that are in trouble; they shall have
gracious

Lo thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord. Use. 1. Mich, 7. 8.
9.
Rejoice not therefore against me oh mine enemies, for though I fall yet I
shall rise again. Oh that mark well the just man, and the end Faint not
therefore under the burden, neither repine thereat, for thy Savior Christ
does Jonas, 2. Esaias, 54. 7 8.
I said I mas cast out of thy sight, yet will I look back toward thy holy
Temple: For a little while did I forsake thee but in everlasting compassion
will I gather thee again, though I utterly destroy all the nations where I have
scattered thee, yet will I not destroy thee; but I will correct thee by Judgment
and not utterly cut thee off: Ierem. 30. Psalm. 73.
But I will guide thee by my counsel, and after bring thee to glory.

Thus is Hester now received into the house-royall of the King. Psalm, 30. Psalm,
21.
The Lord has set her up, and not suffered her foes to triumph over her, and
because the heart of his servant trusted in the Lord and in the mercies of the
most high: therefore she shall not slide: Psalm. 112
her heart is established in the Lord her God: and therefore she will not
fear until she see her desire upon her enemies.

And is not so great a blessing worthy remembrance? yea surely, the holy Ghost
precisely sets down the day and year thereof: that so we might be provoked to
remember the same And might learn that such blessings ought so long to be
remembered of us, as the days and times continue in our use. So has the Lord
tendered great blessings to his Church, at especial times. The return of the
captivity in the first year of Darius: the passion at the feast of the
passe-ouer: Dan. 1. Math. 26. Act. 2.
The gift of tongues, at the feast of the pentecost etc.

1. That the extraordinarinesse of the time, might put us in mind of the
extraordinary blessing, and be a continual remembrance of the ^ame for the
praises of God. So has the Church of God appointed and set solemn times for
the perpetual remembrance of great blessings: and commended therein the
celebration of Gods blessings, for ever, Hest. 9.
so was the 14. day of Ader set apart to this purpose by ster and Mordecai: so
is the 5^ of November consecrated to the remembrance of the most admirable
deliverance of the ^ritaine State and people from the gunpowder treason. Obser.
110. Great mercies of God are to be had in remembrance by special time
appointed thereto.
And surely, as these great favors of God are lively testimonies of his power
and goodness: so are they worthy to be had in remembrance, yea very profitable
is the remembrance thereof to us, both to stir up our thankfulness, and
increase our faith, that so they may be sanctified, continued and increased
upon us; yea be undoubted pleadges of eternal happiness.

And therefore seeing the Lord hereby prouides, that his blessings may not be
forgotten, and so pass without this may serve for the great condemnation of
the world: who on the contrary, uses all occasions to put out the remembrance
of Gods mercies from the earth: either ascribing Gods mercies to their wit or
desert, or putting them off to second causes: as if not the LORD but some
ordinary means had compassed the same: or which is worst of all imputing them
to blind chance etc.. And are not they also as faulty regarding them at all,
or speaking basely of them? What shall we think of these, that gnash their And
are there not some that

May nor policy aduize that so great mercies of God should be suppressed,
lest the rejoicing thereof, vpbrading Surely if there were

Well let us look our faces wisely in this glass: and Let us keep a regester
of Gods blessings that And

And for our comfort let us further learn this; that between Israel and
Aegipt: when the obstinate shall be confounded: then shall the righteous
flowrish: yea the Lord will provide means for the constancy of their
happiness: for so it follows.

And the King loved Hester above all the women, Verse. 17.
and she found grace and favor in his sight more then all the Virgins: so
that he set the crown of the Kingdom upon her head: and made her Queen
insteede of Vashty.

In which words the spirit of God, sets down what befell Hester after her
taking into the Kings house. Namely that she is advanced further to be Queen
in steed of Vashtie, which is notably described. First by the occasion hereto;
Namely that the King loved her above all the women. And secondly by the sign
of this preferment, he set the crown of the Kingdom upon her head.

Concerning the extraordinary favor and affection, Obs. III. God makes his
children gracious when it may serve for his glory and their good.
that the King is here said to bear unto this gracious maiden. As it was the
admirable work of God for her more speedy and sure advancement, necessarily
to be taken at this time, when the iron was in the fire: Carnal love being so
inconstant, especially when it is in some sort satisfied: And the poor maiden
(no doubt) much power, mercy and Wisdom of GOD unto us.

His power in this: that he both can turn the affections of the wicked upon
his Children, and settle them constantly thereupon, when as the cause in them
rather threatenes change.

His wisdom also appears in this: that this extraordinary favor of the
Prince, being now necessary, for the advancement of Hester, and so for the good
of the Church, though afterward it bated (to show the inconstancy of flesh,
and also a further power of God in the reviving of the same) yet now it
increases contrary to the carnal occasion, which being satisfied, usually
breeds loathing: especial in those, whose honor and delight in is change, so
that above all the rest only Hester is gracious: the favor of this great
Monarche is constant to her.

And the mercy of God does also shine herein most comfortably, both to the
good of the Church, and particular contentment of his servant.

The Church hereby is now provided for a deliverer: before she be plunged into
the extremity of her danger: and the poor maiden is by this advancement
recompensed for her loss; and comforted also in some measure with the
sanctifying of the same in a lawful calling?

And surely that the Lord provided a Savior before man had sinned: Obser. 112.
God prouides a deliverer for his Church before it be cast into the extremity of
danger. Esaias 65. Math. 6.
that Moses is borne before Isreal's oppression is increased; that Iosephes
advanced before the famine is in Canaan: that Hester is advanced before Hamans
conspiring breaks forth, does not this exceedingly commend the watchfulness
of GOD over his Church? Does not this manifest the freeness of his love, that
goes before the particular object? Does not this serve much to the confirmation
of our faith, that before we call he will hear us, before we have need he
willl provide for us? So did the LORD provide an Elizabeth before the great and
sharp storm fell upon his Church.

Use 1. And shall we then fear that the Lord will forsake us in our troubles
when he prouides means of deliverance before troubles come? Is he a God a
far off, and shall we not believe him to be a GOD nere at hand? 2 Pet. 1. 8.
Oh let us learn to live by faith, so shall we see a far off! Let it stay us
in our present troubles, that God loved us before we were: that even when we
were his Psalm, 139.
he sought us, and prevented us, and shall he not now much more reskue us
being his friends? Oh we of little faith!

But are the mercies of God here at an end? No surely, Obs. 113. The mercies of
God to his children past finding out.
the mercies of the Lord are everlasting, and his truth past finding out: Wade
we yet further into them in this particular case of Hester, and let us
willingly loose our selves in the meditation thereof. Was it not a great mercy
of the Lord, to advance her to the Kings house: And was it not a greater mercy
that in the Kings house she is humbled, that so by renewing her repentance she
might be better fitted to her further estate. And was not the mercy of God
very admirable herein, that being abased by the King, she yet finds
extraordinary favor in his sight, that so she might find comfort in her
former sorrow? But was it not yet a further mercy, that being a subject, yea a
stranger* and of the abominable and inthralled Nation; yet she is called to
be the lawful wife of so mighty a Monarch, and not only so, but even to be
advanced to the highest dignitye of all.

So constant is the LORD, that whom he loves, John, 13. 2.
Such a privilege has godliness that to the pure all things are pure: 1
Tit, 14.
So sure is our salvation that even all things shall Romans 8. 29.


Use. 1. And shall we then sink under the burden Shall we plead unwisely
against GOD, seeing he cannot choose but love us, seeing his love is
manifested in our sins, and his power in Shall we repine at his
chastisements, Shall we distrust his blessings, seeing he bestows them in
mercy? Surely, if we see not mercy every where we want the eye of faith, And
if we lay not hold of eternal mercies, we fight not ye good fight of faith.

But let us examine a little further this case of Hester? 1 Timothy, 4. Obs. 114.
Whether great prosperity be a blessing in mercy to Gods children.
May we truly say that here is nothing but mercy? Was it the mercy of God, that
she should be so highly advanced? Why then does the spirit teach Gods
children to pray, that the Lord would not give them neither poverty nor riches:
Object. Prouer, 30.
least being full they should deny him: being empty they should blaspheme God.

Ans. Surely the prayer of the servant of God, as it was conditional, not
simply renouncing either fullness, or want, but as it might stand with the will
of God and good of the receiver: so thereby does it grant a power unto God, to
give either fulness or impose want at his pleasure. And seeing where God gives
in love, he also sanctifies the gift, may not then the Lord give fullness, and
yet preserve in humility, and obedience? May he not lay poverty on his child,
and yet keep him from impatience? Yet at least so far as that he shall not
take the name of God in vain: Indeed if nature be left to it self, and that
as this most likely and usual be considered in this case: fullness may breed
forgetfulness, and poverty profaneness and distrust of Gods providence. And
therefore in regard of our weakness and aptness to offend in the excess:
Yea considering our folly, that we know not what is fittest for us; and the
wisdom of God, which we must not set to school: The spirit teaches us
rather to pray for the mean, that God would feed us with food convenient for
us, neither yet simply to tie God to this measure, as if no other were fit for
us, but to acknowledge herein our infirmity to God, who as without GOD we are
not able to compass any, so least able to sway that state, with is most subject
to temptation: and yet this does not prejudice, but God may give even fulness:
seeing he does make even ye greatest honors convenient for his children, and
therein does show his great mercy in their preservation: by how much the more
their estate is subject to temptation.

Yet if it shall now be demanded, Ques. Whether a man may pray for abundance?
seeing the Lord gives fullness, whether I may not lawfully seek it by prayer
of him?

Ans. Surely where God in particular has promised, and leads me along with
apparent likelyhoods thereof, there I may safely draw on the Lord, to the
accomplishment of his work; because by faith we obtain the promises: and
prayer is the means to express and increase our says. And this was the case
of David when he prayed for the accomplishment of Gods promise concerning the
Kingdom. But where there is no such manifestation of Gods purpose in
particular, there I may safely desire in general what God will cast upon me
for my fitting unto him: but for this or that condition, I must leave it to
God, least I prejudice his wisdom, and discover my distrust, least I presume
to come to god, whereas al he gives us is of free mercy. Only I deny not but
some extraordinary instinct may warrant some particular extraordinary practice
in this case: which being singular, is not to be imitated of us.

If it shall be further demanded whether it be lawful to receive such
excellent blessings as are cast upon us, Ques. Whether it be lawful to receive
great blessings offered?
seeing Elisha refused Nahamans gifts, etc. Daniel at the first refused the
Kings reward;

Ans. Surely I see not, but God being the only giver, and we having the best
right; much good likely to be redeemed hereby, and good means used in the
compassing thereof; these

As for Elisha and Daniel, their refusal was just, because the gifts of these
giuers were respective and conditional, if they would do such a thing for
them, Ques. Whether the Minister may receive wages for his pains?
or in regard of such a thing done: and therefore the servants of God, to show
they were not mercenary, did justly refuse these reproachful gifts. (Say you)
may we not then receive a recompense in lieu of our pains? Is not the labourer
worthy of his hire? May he not justly exact it? May he not lawfully receive it?

Yea surely, 1 Cor, 9.
the Lord has appointed, that they which serve at the Altar should ^ue of the
Altar: It is a sin not to give: It is a greater sin to spoil and deny: and
therefore it is most lawful to receive what is due unto us. And yet sometime we
may refuse, though not simply as Elisha did: Sometime we may not exact, though
we have power, as the blessed Apostle Paul did. 1 Cor. 11.
Yea may refuse first, and yet receive afterward, as Daniel did: refuse we may
when the wicked think our pains no better worth then their gifts, or hope
that only by these gifts they may compass the benefit of our pains: So did
Daniell first refuse the gifts of the King: So did Peter refuse the gifts of
Simon Magus; And yet to show our right, we may also receive them for our use;
when these stumbling-blockes are removed: So did Daniel afterward receive those
honors which before he refused. Ques. Hesters marriage whether lawful or no?
And was there not some such stu^bling-block in the advancement of Hester?
Might she safely marry with him that was divorced from his wife? (and
acccording to the custom of these countries) was not without his choice of
wives. Surely the Lord Jesus himself the most perfect examiner of the Law, he
has determined, yt whosoever puts away his wife, unless it be for
fornication, commits adultery: And therefore it follows that who soever
marries with the party, that takes this liberty to be divorced, not upon that
urgent occasion; does no less commit adultery. And did not the Lord therefore
(though he had abundance of spirit) yet appoint this knot in marriage to be
only of two, and no more: because he sought an holy seed? How then may Hester
be cleared from the case of adultery? How can she be freed from an unholy
marriage?

Ans. May not the Lawgiver dispense with his Law? And may not that in Hester
be good by a dispensation, which in others without such extraordinary
privilege, is simply evil? And what though the Lord should admit sin in
the accomplishment of the work: may he not pardon the sinner, and get
himself the glory. Surely though we dare not simply justify Hester in this
case; yet if we shall measure things by the manner and success, did not the
Lord admirably bring this thing to pass? Did it not tend to the great good of
the Church.

Nay who I pray you were loosers hereby? The Lord he winnes himself great
glory, in advancing so highly his handmaid from so base an estate. Hester
looses not hereby, she obtaines the greatest honor and content that the
earth can afford; and yet she forsakes not her righteousness, but rather
increases it.

The King he gains hereby some truer contentment of his mind and restraint of
his lusts, yea his reproach in repudiating Vashty is hereby well cured: The
Provinces and whole Kingdom, they obtain rest from their grievous
oppressions: And the poor Church of God, that is the greatest gayner, as being
delivered from a most desperate extremity, and advanced also to great peace and
prosperity, even in a strange land.

But yet there is an other flaw in this marriage: Ques. Whether lawful to marry
with an Infidel.
she marries with an Infidel and cursed Idolater: how may this be dispensed
withal?

Surely by the same Lord who brings light out of darkness, and turns the
evils of his children to his glory, and their good. And yet we may not simply
condemn this maiden herein: she was a subject, and therefore could not do what
she would in this case. And yet the Lord here did what he would: Ios, 23.
yea what Hester simply was not to refuse. For though the Lord had commanded
that his people should not marry with Idolaters, Judge. 3. Deuteronomy, 21.
yet does he also not simply deny them upon conditions to marry with such
captives as they had taken in war. And the Saints of God have warrantably
matched with strangers, and the Idolatrous brood etc. As Boaz with Ruth,
Sampson with the Philistian etc. When the occasions have been extraordinary
and the dispensation heavenly.

And therefore no warrant for us that have choice of holy seed to sow amongst
the thorns: thereby to wound our own souls, and choke our seed, or else by
the egg of the Serpent, to breed the Cockatrice, to have mungrell issue, that
shall speak half Ashur and half Canoon; shall not this unequal yoke cast
out the yoke of Christ? shall not the stranger devour our sdtrength? shall
not the curse of God cast out such root and branches from the face of the
earth?

Well, thus we see the mercy of God truly justified in Hesters advancement:
let us now see how Ahashuerosh the King justifies and adorneth the same: It
follows.

He sets the Crown of the kingdom upon her head, and made her Queen, etc.

Lo here the ensign of this great honor which is due unto this poor
captive, the Crown of the Kingdom is set upon her head. So does this new
Bride-grome strive to do all honor unto his bride: So does God confirm his
child in this extraordinary dignity: by this means is Hesters advancement
made known to the Church of God, and by this full performance of complement,
is more honored and approved. But this is not all: It follows.

Then the King made a great Feast to all his Princes and Nobles, Verse, 18.
etc.

In which words the holy Ghost sets down unto us the solemnization of this
royal marriage, and that by five circumstances.

1. The King makes a great feast thereat to all his Princes and servants.

2. This Feast is dedicated to the memorial of Hester, which was Hesters feast.

3. Rest is given to the Provinces, they are made pertakers of this common joy,
that the marriage of Hester might be more acceptable to them.

4. The King gives gifts unto the poor, and sends presents abroad far and
near.

5. He shows the power of the King in this his magnificence, to signify his
true contentme^t and joy in this marriage. And first, to add greater state and
solemnity to ye marriage of his new spouse, the King yet further makes a solemn
feast to all his Princes and Nobles; of the lawfulness and right use whereof
we have spoken plentifully heretofore. Obser. 115. Feasting lawful at marriages.
Only thus much we may further add concerning the occasion of this feast: that
the custom of solemnizing marriages with feasts has been ancient and
commendable, as being a time of great joy, and therefore fit to be showed in
the means of joy; especially in regard of such company, as at such times come
together: who may lawfully take occasion of a more liberal refreshing. And
therefore not unlawful to be used, and hereby even of Christians, who as they
know their liberty: so also they can best tell how to use it, in a wise
dividing of the time, and moderation of Gods blessings.

That which follows concerning the dedication of the feast to the memory of
Hester; Obseru. Dedication of feasts to the memory of particular persons.
as it does discover the greater affection of the King toward his spouse: so
it magnifieth yet further the mercy of God toward his servant: who by this
memorial is commended to posterity, and even highly honored of the enemies of
God: which though it be no warrant for that popish custom of dedicating feasts
to the honor of Saints, unless the fact of a wicked Prince shall justify the
same: so notwithstanding in the equity there of does approve such holy
remembrances of the Saints of GOD, which may both put them in mind of Gods
mercies toward them; and provoke posterity to an holy imitation thereof: as
tombs, trophes, etc. Thus does Ahas^uer osh celebrate the memory of Hester by
a solemn feast, and so shall the children of God be honored of their enemies,
so shall their names and memorials be continued to posterity.

And yet the affection of this Monarch stays not here: but yet furt her to
grace this wedding of Hester, behold, he gives rest to the Provinces, which
were even tired with taxes and exactions: so d^ the wicked fare the better even
for Gods children sake: so does the Lord make away for his children, even to be
justified of the wicked.

And surely whither he caused these nuptials generally to be solemnized
throughout his kingdom, by setting a part the day thereto, that the subject
might be pertaker in the Princes joy, and celebrate his marriage with feasting
and liberty; or rather spared his subjects for the time, of some tribute that
was due. This as it makes to the great honor and celebration of Hesters
marriage, because God being glorified, Obs. 116. When the righteous are advanced
the people rejoice
there is peace with men; so it also serves to the great approbation of
godliness, the whole land it at rest, when Gods Church is respected, when Gods
children are advanced, Prou. 29. 2
when the righteous are in authority then the people rejoice; Prou. 28. 12
then is great glory, great peace and contentment. So does the Lord sanctify
great good foundations against ye day of Christ: I. Tim. 6
so does he secure here by their ticklish estates, by knitting the hearts of
the people unto

Use. And does not this condemn the folly of men that complain of
righteousness, as if it were the greatest trouble-house and trouble-state that
may be; Nehem. 2.
that thrust out Gods children, as the only disturbers of their rest and
happiness; are not they more then blind, Job. 21. 15.
which see no profit in godliness, Psalm. 4.
but still are poaring like the Sodomits, when the door is before them:
saying, who will show us any good? do not they open their mouths against
heaven, Malach. 3
that say it is in vain to serve the Lord? Are not they the greatest enemies
to themselves, that keep down Gods children, and hinder their advancement;
that above all things fear least the Lord should be glorious in his Saints;
Psalm. 2. Math. 10. 34
least he should set his King upon his holy hill of Syon? Surely if the son
of GOD, Luke 12.
bring a Sword upon the earth, it is not because he is not the Prince of
peace, Esaias. 9
because he offers not also peace unto them: Math. 20
but because the world refuses peace, therefore do they pluck down a Sword
upon them, and the corner stone becomes a rock of offense. And if any be afra
de, wherein they should take most comfort; they are the sinners in Ston, that
are thus afraid; fear takes hold upon the hypocrites: these indeed shall not
dwell with the devouring fire: these cannot endure the everlasting burning.
Malach. 3, 2. 3. 4.
What flesh shall endure when he appears; who is like a purging fire, and
like Fullers Soape? Yet shall the silver abide the touch, and be purified
thereby, yea the sons of Leu^ shallbe fiaed and prepared, that they may bring
offerings unto the Lord in righteousness. Then shall the offerings also of
Judah and Jerusalem be acceptable unto the Lord, as in old time, and in the
years before, yea the Lord will take away the i^iquitie of the land in one
day. Then shall many be turned away from iniquity, Malach, 2.
and ye shall call every man his neighbor under the Vine, and under the
Figtree. Zacn. 3 9. 10. Then shall Jerusalem be inhabited without walls, for
the Lord will be unto ber a wall of fire round about, Zach. 2. 4. 5
and will be the glory in the midst of her. Then will the Lord turn to the
people a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, and
serve him with our shoulder: Oh that the Lord would arise, 1. One consent and
without grudging.
and have mercy on Syon, that he would take out of the midst of her them that
rejoice of her pride, and are puffed up, in regard of the holy mountain: that
the lying and aequiuocating generation were rooted out, Zeph. 3. 13
that the vile were separated from the precious. Then should there be an humble
and poor people, and they would trust in the name of the Lord: then should
there be holy vessels unto the Lord, yea every pot in Jerusalem should be
holy, then should not Ashur save them, neither would they ride upon horses:
Ose. 14
but in their God, the fatherless should find comfort. The righteous Lord
shall be exalted in the salvation of his chosen.

Use. Who so is wise and he shall understand these things, and prudent and be
shall know them: for the ways of the Lord are righteous, and the just shall
walk in them, but the wicked shall fall therein. But of this point more fully
(by Gods grace) hereafter. It follows.

Gods grace) hereaster, It followetb.

And gave rest unto the Provinces, Obs. 117. Princes to the enjoying of their
pleasure, are to be careful not to oppress their subjects, but to give some
relaxation therevvithall unto them.
and gave gifts according to the power of a King.

In that this Persian Monarch here releases his subjects of the burden of
subsidies and taxations, when he and his court do enlarge themselves in their
pleasures: herein we may seek shadow of that substance, which is required in
Christian Princes: namely, that though their state and fullness afford them
pleasure and ease, by the toil, and labor of others, yet in the use thereof,
they should so indifferently behave themselves, as to let this oil of
gladness run down to the skirts of the garment; Psalm. 133.
that those may taste at least of the cup of their pleasure: who especially
troad the Wine Press, and prepared the cup unto them: and by pertaking
therein, may both better and so still maintain the plough in

Little therefore do such Princes know what wrong they do themselves, when they
will not speak comfortably to their people, much less allow them some
immunity when they take their pleasures: as hereby esteeming their delight to
be peerless and acceptable, because they are singular and above the reach of
others, yea accounting their pleasures herein the better seasoned, when they
are procured and enjoyed with the pain and toil of their people: And less
do such know what belongs to God, or the safety of their kingdoms, that give
the bridle to their subjects, to profane Gods Sabaothes and contemn his word,
that so they mighty less enjoy them in their godless pleasures, or else the
better endure such drudgery as they are put unto, when wicked Princes run
riot. And surely in that herein they think to gratify their sin, and
granting pardon for any offense: this as it does most dishonor God so it shall
surely tend, to the reproach of such indulgence, as being the special means
of the disobeying of government when God is dishonored for the contentment
thereof. Oh that gouerners were wise to consider these things: that they would
consider how pleasures communicated are both less envied and less set by: and
so both prevent danger in their use and abuse also by wise intermitting the
same. And yet yt they would be wise in yielding this liberty, not to cloak
their own abuse, neither with the dishonor of God, not to the justifying of
sin, nor hardening of sinners* not as if hereby they would make demonstration
of their happiness: or basely prostitute themselves to the lust of their
people: but herein wisely acknowledging their common condition by nature, and
so to become equal with those of the lower sort: recompencing hereby the
labor of their subjects: and keeping herein that royal law, even to do to
others as they would be done unto themselves: considering wisely that seeing
they are to weep with them that weep: Romans 12.
so they must not rejoice to make their subeects heavy. Obs. 118. Prince*
honor consists in the easing of their subjects of their continual burdens.
And surely if we consider this particular wherein this heathen Prince
gratifies his subjects, namely to release his subjects for a time of their
continual taxes; as this was especially intended to honor his Nuptia's, yt the
loins of his people might bless their Prince, and his marriage: so we shall
find it no small part of the Princes honor, as not unnecessarily to exact upon
his people, for the satisfying of his pleasure: so even to remitte somewhat of
lawful exactions, to give some breathing and intermission thereto. For is he
not herein a law unto himself, when in that which is lawful, he bounds
himself, and does not what he may, but what is most expedient? And so ruling
himself, shall better rule his people: Is he not wisely to keep some stock
in store and not still to be laying forth least he have not in the season to
compass the market: Does he not hereby keep his subjects in heart; that
they may still supply cheerfully whereas the King must loose his right, when
there is no more to be had: And then the King must supply when the subject
has it not: Whereas otherwise the King receiving moderately, the subject may
have where-withal; and so both supplied, and contented thereby.

Surely happy are those Princes that know their strength; Yet more happy if
they knew how to use it: which is not to enjoy their pleasures with their
subjects pain, not to empty their people, to fill themselves; but as to
esteem it their glory to have multitude of people: so wisely to maintain this
multitude; and will they be maintained with nothing? If they be still emptied
how can they prosper? And how can they then be the glory of the Kingdom? Well
Behold our Persian Monarch here does not only give rest unto the Provinces, but
also.

Ga^e gifts according to the power of the King. Obs. 119. Wicked brideled and
furnished with good gifts for the good of the Church.
Thus even the wicked, when they are employed in Gods service, for the good of
his Church, shall not only be bridled from much evil which they would do, but
moved also to do much good in show, though otherwise they would not do: Here Is
no mention of drunkenness, no calling for Vashty: as were in the former feast.
The marriage of Gods servant shall not be dishonored with such abuses. But
what? here is rest given to the Provinces who were like to endure heavier
burdens; and gifts distributed according to ye power of the King, whose power
is usually seen in taking from his people. So does God honor his children by
restrayning the wicked: so does he harden the wicked in that they shall not
want the show of virtue in the service of those which yet notwithstanding only
for their virtue, they do most deadly hate: so does he get him glory by them
both in confirming hereby the faith of his children, Obs. 120. Princes are to
be liberal to their subjects.
and ripening the wicked to their appointed damnation.

And if we shall further consider the bounty of this Monarch, in giving gifts
so magnifically: Does not the Lord hereby further honor this advancement of
his servant?

May not Princes learn hence to be bountiful to their subjects; and instead
of pilling of them, to bestow sometimes largess upon them? May they not we
ldoe it, seeing they give them but their own, and do they not win their
hearts thereby 3. and can they store it up better then there where they may
require it again. And do they not ease themselves of much care and fear.

Surely as it was the custom at such extraordinary kinds of joy and feasting,
to enlarge the heart in such gifts, and so shall Princes find a great
commodity herein: the people are contented, and the kingdom well fenced,
virtue is encouraged, and misery releiued, and Princes herein do most come
near unto God, and the people are more faithfully knit unto their Governors.

But mark I pray you the bountifulness of this King, Obs. 121. Gods children
ought to be liberal according to their ability and with all their power.
it is said, that he gave gifts according to the power of the King: Not
niggardly and basely, but bountifully and according to his ability. So ought
the children of God much more to extend their liberality according to their
callings, least this heathen Monarch rise up in judgment against them.

And therefore they are 1. to distribute in faith, with warrant from the word,
and looking for recompense at the hands of God, Prou. 5.
not being weary of well doing. 2. They are to give in righteousness, both
of that which is their own, and also where it may be lawful, not to
maintain sin, but for love of the person, yea where it is most necessary, to
those that are in greatest want: and among them especially to the household of
faith. 4. We must respect the end of all our well-doing principally the
salvation of the soul and glory of God: whereby we may both condemn all
Popish charity, which generally fails in all these circumstances, and so
try our selves whether we be truly charitable or no.

Thus is the marriage of Hester solemnized with all the state and complement
suitable thereto: Obser. 122. Gods providence in unequal matters and societies
of unlike.
thus is a Captive Virgin advanced to be a royal Queen. Thus is virtue
joined to vice to bridle the same. Thus is vice a companion of virtue, thereby
to humble and so to try the same. Thus two are in a bed, the one forsaken, the
other elected: both brought together by the Lord, and by him hereby fitted to
their several ends. Behold here some resemblance of the estate of Gods
children in a visible Church, where shall they sit but they may meet with a
Judas in their dish? 1. Cor. 5.
if they will not converse with the unclean, must they not go out of the
world? does not the Lord hereby humble the one, and harden the other? is not
his providence most admirable, in accomplishing hereby his righteous will, in
them both. But of this more fitlye by Gods grace hereafter. And thus far
concerning the advancement of Hester: wherein for conclusion we may note. 1.
The faithfulness of God, Obs 123. The Lord faithful in in making good his
word.
making good his promise. That whereas the Prophet Ieremis persuaded Iechoniah
the King not to stand out against Nabuchadnezzar; when he came to besiedge the
City, but to yield himself willingly to the decree of God, to go into
captivity: promising him there-withall, and the people (in the name of the
Lord) that if they obeyed his council, it should both go well with them in the
land of their captivity, and after seventy years they should again return
into their country. The King obeying this council, is honorably according to
his estate respected during his life; and among the rest, this Hester being
daughter to one of those that were in that captivity, is here advanced to the
most eminent dignity, and so is a means for the most gracious preservation of
the Church of God. So constant is the Lord in performing his promise: Because
he is God and cannot all sufficient, and who can hinder he is truth it self,
and therefore has he said neither will he for his glory disappoint

Use. 1. Let therefore the faithfulness of God condemn our distiust: let the
wicked be confounded, that make a mock thereat. In the experience of what is
past, let us be let this teach us to keep and as the Lord promises, so is he
also as faithful in his threatenings, and therefore let us fear him for the
one, and love him for the other: and give him both the glory of his mercy and
his justice.

Thus does the righteous Lord make good his promise: but does he not magnify
also his power in the means thereto? Behold through many crossings and contrary
blasts, is this ship brought to the haven: and through many desperate plunges
is this poor captive at length advanced to greatest dignity. 2. Cor 4. 6.
Lumene Tenebris.
So does the Lord work by contrary means, that his power may be more manifest
in making such unlikely means serve him. Whereas otherwise if the means were
likely, Obser. 124. The Lord accomplisheth his will by contrary means.
he might be thought to serve them. That carnal confidence being confounded;
faith may be increased: And the Lord may have the only glory of all his
mercies, So, Atheism is wisely convinced, that imputes things to chance;
seeing such contrary means, implies extraordinary power and wisdom in the
effecting of things.

Use 1. Let us not therefore presume, when the means are fairest, neither let
us despair, when they are most cross Yet let us use despise the unlikeliest,
when God imposes the same. Because, as here the unlikeliest, will best try
our faith, so there the likeliest do show our obedience. 1. As being commanded
of God, 2. and most agreeable to reason fittest for our use, and most
justifiable in the issue whether we prevail or no. Lastly that Hester, Obs.
125. The greatest afflictions profitable to Gods children to the obtaining of
the greatest blessings.
by these manifold and strange afflictions, is necessarily brought to so great
preferment, we may here observe the great benefit of troubles: That they are
means to work out our greatest happiness. So at that will live Godly must
suffer affliction and by many tribulations we shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven. Because afflictions do both purge out our dross, 2 Timothy 3. 12
and make us fit for mercy, Act 14
and they are good means so to humble us, yt we may use happiness aright. Esaias
1. 25
They keep us from going a stray* that so we may come to the wished haven,
Psalm. 66 11
and they preserve us from such quicksands, Psalm. 11 9
as would sink us in our journey.

They try us wisely whether we will keep the way or no, prove very
comfortable associates, to prevent Idleness, and wearisomnes. What should I
say? though the world account and to the wicked the prove no less? yet to Gods
blessing is well seasoned without them: No blessing well obtained, but by their
ministry.

Use 1. And therefore though the world ^ee ^ffended at the Cross of Christ,
and esteem them cursed of God, Ioh. 7.
Yet let us take up the corsse, that so we may obtain the crown. 2 s^m 2.
Let us suffer with Christ, that so we may reign with him. Let us look for
troubles, let us distrust our goodness, and let this be our comfort,

Thus Hester is advanced through great tribulation; and at length finds rest
in a most honorable estate.

As for her companions it is not so with them: Nay the King himself he finds
no rest. And has not Hester also some affliction to season her great
prosperity? yea surely. The Kings affection grows could and his lust
enereaseth. Verse. 19.
And therefore it follows that The Virgins were gathered the second time. To
wit; for a new supply of the Kings insatiable lust. So unreasonable is lust,
so inconstant carnal affection: so lawless are the wicked: so short is any
happiness of perfection in this life. Obs. 126. The lust of the wicked
insatiable.
Thus Tyrants cease not to molest, and spoil their subjects, that they at
length may be justly spoiled.

Use 1. And shall not the righteous fear even greatest happiness? shall they
rest upon it? shall they not have Shall wickeds torments have an end, whose
lusts are thus shall we not hate this flesh that is so treacherous shall we not
be more watchful over our selves, and others, by how much our greatest happiness
is subject to such foyles? such is Mordecai. So it is here recorded of them.

Then Mordecay sat in the Kings gate.

That is, he attended on his office in these times of Hesters advancement, he
does not presently conceive higher matters, and so neglect his ordinary calling
(as some ambitious vpstart would have done:) busying himself to creep to
preferment; having so direct a means to raise him speedily: but soberly he
attends on his office; as* contented therewith: and for state matters, he
leaves them to higher powers: as for preferment, though the Lord had a purpose
shortly to advance him thereto, and therefore it might be thought some spirits
might be put into him to this end, yet wisely does this holy man put off the
thought thereof, by accustoming himself to his mean condition, and yet not
without regard of his advanced Nephew; whose advancement growing now jealous
in regard of this new gathering of Virgins, he is therefore said further to
sit in the Kings gate, to have intelligence thereof, and so to aduize and
determine according. And surely in this example of Mordecay we have many
notable points worthy our consideration. Obs. 127. Marks of Gods children to
be contented with our callings, and walk faithfully therein.


One is that he is contented with his calling, and imployes himself faithfully
therein; a notable mark of the child of God, who as he is commanded to abide
in the calling whereunto the Lord has called him: as being fittest for him,
and a trial of his faith, to exercise his humility: so i^ he to walk
faithfully therein, as whereby he does sanctify the same unto him, 1 Cor. 7.
shall see the blessing of God therein, and also make way thereby to a greater
blessing. 1. 2. 3. 4.


Use. 1. Which as it condemns those that will live in no calling: Psalm. 128.
so it also reproves such as make choice of such callings as can yield no
contentment, Math. 25.
neither with any credit or and are not they condemned hereby: y^ having holy
and lawful callings, basely abuse the^ to ye lusts of others, or else neglect
unnecessarily to the satisfying of their own lust? or else giving the^ over, or
changing the^ for others, surely though it be not simply unlawful to change
our callings, if they will not maintain us, or we be lawfully called to
other more necessary, Callings how to be left and changed.
for the Church or commonwealth, as being fitter. So we must look that
necessity and contentment, be the measures of our maintenance, and that the
means and manners of our further calling, Sect. 2.
be direct and suitable. Rules how to walk conscionably in our callings.


As for our holy abiding in the calling unto which God has called us,
Certainly if we do but remember the account we must make; and consider the
uncertainty if we look for our reward from God, and make a good conscience
our rule to if singleness of heart shall season our casting our care on God,
be the casting of our if our buying to profit, be not unprofitable to the if
our striving for profit be not from a desire of riches; If prayer be the
foreman of our shop, and thanksgiving give up the account at night; if
Christian keep the cash, and con^ednesse be the Counter. if our laying out,
be without prodigality, and our receipts without covetousness; These rules
well observed, 1. Tim. 6.
and be means to lay up a good foundation for us, against the coming of
Christ Jesus.

A second thing to be considered in Mordekay, is, that he is not hasty of
preferment, Obs. 128.
nor ambitiouslie seeks the same: Gods children not ambitious nor greedy of
preferment
He sits in the Kings gate, he is not fawning on Hester, nor proaling for
greatness. A very true and lively mark of the child of God: such was Hester
(as we have noted before): so was David, Joseph, and the rest: these look
higher then the earth, and therefore count these things these know the danger
of climing high: and therefore that when it is cast upon them, they may

Use. 1. Which being so, let hasty climers see what right they have in heaven:
let them wisely consider how they cast let it suffice them, that they can clime
no higher; and seeing they are hastening to the city which is above let them
wisely decline such mountains as may require some dangerous worship at their
and rather desire to have their life hid with Christ in God, so may they more
freely employ themselves in the things which are above, which in the flesh is
kept low; and And if they will be safely ambitious indeed, let them strive to
exceed in grace, and go foremost to heaven: here the more have the better
speed, and the seaner sped the lesser misery, the longer happiness.

But why does the holy Ghost here make such precise mention of Mordecayes
sitting at the gate? no doubt though he attended his office, he forgot not his
daughter now being advanced; and as a tender father, has an ear after her; he
sits in the gate to hearken after her estate, and to aduize as he should be
called. So careful ought fathers to be for the good of their children. So is
cur heavenly Father careful and continually provident over us But of this
point heretofore. As also of the next verse, concerning the concealing of
Hesters nation and kindred, according as Mordecay had formerly aduized; only
let us add for the justifying of this practice of Hester thus much: that
though she lawfully conceales her country and nation to prevent danger, Obs.
129. Aequiuocatio^ damnable.
yet is she no warrant to Popish dissembling* and damnable equiuocating: for
she conceales being demanded; they being demanded corrupt the truth, by
reserving truth in the mind, and uttering a lie She conceales for the safety
of her self, and the Church of God, they keep themselves close to who has
lawful power thereto: they take warrant from that man of sin, who has none
to give. Thus is Hester no warrant for Popish equiuocating, much less will
equiuocating warrant and maintain Popery, The Lord will confound the liar and
the deceitful man.

And seeing that Hester now being so honorably married, Obs. 130. Honor does
not quench love in Gods children.
does yet so respect the advice of her Uncle, this may teach us, That as
honor does not quench love in the Sanits of God: so marriage also does not take
away obedience to Parents.

And surely how should honor quench love in them, who the more pledges they
have of Gods love, the more are they provoked to love one another* by how much
they have now better means to show their love: the fire go out when more wood
is cast on? and can there be and how shall honor be maintained without

Use. 1. What comfort then can such have of their greatness and honors, that
place the glory thereof in despising inferiors, and giving them all occasions
of hatted against them? what hope of continuance where love is not fear is but
a sorry keeper of honor, and jealousy will hardly procure continuance thereto:
let them hate, me, so they fear me, is the voice of tyrany: and if they hate,
they will plotte destruction: this is the justice of God. But of this point
heretofore. Now.

Concerning the obedience that this gracious Queen performs to her father,
Obs. 131. Marriage takes not away obedience from parents.
being married away from him: this also teaches us: that children are bound to
obey their parents, and perform duty unto them, though they be married from
them, and so be under an other government. And the reason is, because one of
these governments is subordinate both agree without impeachme^t to each other:
yea obedience to either in their places, is that and surely, if consent is
enjoyed. Thus did the Patriarchs obey their Fathers, and the commandment of
obedience to parents being moral, and perpetual, does it not bind us all our
life long?

Indeed, Obs. 132. Maraiage neeres bond then that o^ nature.
as the bond of marriage is nearer then that of nature; because it both renewes
the bond of nature, and aduanceth also nature to an honorable estate: yea
resemsbleth the most near conjunction between Christ and his Church: so ought
we rather to keep this bond, then the bond of nature: if such occasion should
be offered which should be preferred: not that herein we break the bond of
nature, but wisely establish it, in subordinating the same to a more high and
nearer bond. So is our Savior to be understood, Math. 19.
when he faith: For this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother and cleave
to his wife: meaning thereby, that marriage is a nearer bond, then that of
nature: therefore of the two, rather cleave to thy wife, if occasion should be
offered whether should be forsaken. The resolution hereof stands in the
consideration of such duties, as do belong to these several callings. Whereof
some are common to both, others are peculiar to either. Those which are common
to both are either simply common to both, or respectively and comparatively.
Those which are simply and generally common to both callings, are 1. Reverence,
2. Love, and 3. Natural affection etc. generally such as simply respect their
persons, as they bear the Image of God, and resemble his authority over us.
Those which are common to both with respect and prolation, are Obedience,
Maintenance etc. which though we owe to both, yet are we to perform them in
their order. Obedience first to the husband before the Father, maintenance to
the wife before the parents, yet herein also being lead by the chiefest bond.
Galat. 6. 10
Namely to do good especially to the household of faith: and wisely discering
the inuinciblenesse of necessity: not standing on what want may be, neither
what superfluousb ^e we think fit: but so depending on the providence of
God: as not to neglect present relief, and therein to be led by the nearer
bond.

As for such duties as are proper to either: such as are due benevolence,
cohabitation, in the state of marriage: these not concerning parents, may well
be performed without impeachment to their honor. As likewise such duties as
are not proper between the Father and the Son, may very well stand with the
performance of such as concern the State of marriage: so that they all tend to
the glory of God, and principally intend the salvation of the soul.

Use 1. Which as it condemns those Parents that having advanced their
Children to this honorable Estate of marriage, do either basely crouch unto, or
by too much indulgence loose the right in their Childrens subjection: So does
it convince their extreme folly, which is the cause the Lord hears their
cry, and punishes such rebellious plants, by rooting them out, and laying
wast their habitations.

And therefore also such children may here learn their lesson. As not so much
to stand upon portion, or such outward to perform conscionable obedience,
while they are at home, so shall they not forget it when they are abroad.

And married folks also, may here take out their lesson, not to despise their
aged Parents but rather now to perform them double honor, because they were
not only the cause of their being, but in placing them thus comfortably, a
good means of their well being.

Yea they that are left of their Parents, to take their they can more
sufficiently requite them in that they were means of their being: So being now
put to a more just trial of the sincerity of their obedience, and being
certainly persuaded; that as what was wanting in Parents has been supplied
by the Lord: so his hand shall not be shortened if they enlarge theirs; even
where they have no other cause but only for Gods sake; when they can hope for
no better pay-maister then God himself.

And thus far c^ncerning Hesters obedience.

But what? are all of Hesters mind to perform obedience to their superiors:
does Ahashuerosh find as faithful subjects as Mordecai found faithfulness in
his advanced Nephew? Surely no; Behold Hester so highly preferred yet performs
duty to her Father, and yet ahashuerosh being chief Commander, cannot find
loyalty in his subjects: but while he is wallowing in the fullness of his
pleasures and blessing his soul in his security and false content, his life is
sought for by two of his attendants, even those that he appointed keepers of
the door, or of the entry, for his greater safety: so it follows.

In those days when Mordecai sat in the Kings gate, two of the Kings Eunuchs
Bigthan, Verse. 21. 22.
and Teresh, which kept the door were wroth and sought to lay hands on the
King Ahashuerosh etc.

In which words the spirit of Gods sets down a very seareful and yet usual
accident unto Tyrants: befalling this voluptious Prince in the glut of his
pleasures to sauce the same, and so to make him more without excuse: namely a
desperate treason intended by two of his servants, whom he put in some trust,
tending to no less, then the taking away of his life. Wherein we may observe
these circumstances.

1. The time when this Treason was committed: In those dales. i. in those days
of pleasure and security, of rauishing and deflowring of Virgins, of enjoying
delight with the wronging and oppression of others: then is this luxurious
Prince summoned to his account, then is his life sought for; then is he most in
danger.

2. The person is described by whom the Treason is discovered, and the danger
prevented: who is Mordecai the servant of GOD: he proves the faithful servant
to his Prince, he that is most despised, yet does most good.

Now Mordecai is here described. 1 by his faithful attending on his office: he
sat in the Kings gate. 2. by his intelligence of the Treason. The thing was
known to Mordecai. 3. by his wisdom in the discovery of it. He told it unto
the Queen Hester and Hester certefied the King thereof in Mordecaies name.

3. The parties are set down by whom this treason is committed, and that. 1.
by their number, they were two, Secondly by their quality, they were Eunuchs.
3. by their names. they were called Bigthan and Teresh. 4. by their office,
they kept the door. 5. by the occasion moving them thereto, they were ( wroth.)

4. The Treason it self is laid open, Namely to lay hands on the King
Ahashuerosh to take away his life.

5. The person is described against whom the Treason is committed, namely King
ahashuerosh.

6. Here is set down the discovery of the Treason, and that both by the Author
as before, and manner of the discovery, namely inquisition was made and it was
found to be so.

7. Here is commended unto us the execution of these Traitors. They were both
hanged on a tree.

8. The holy Ghost concludes this history with a notable relation of wisdom
even of those Godless men, namely it was written in the book of Chronicles
before the King, that so memorable a deliuetance might never be forgotten, and
the service of Mordecai might hereafter be remembered.

These are the particulars in this memorable accident. And 1. conceruing the
Time when it fell out.

In those daies] That is when the King is drowning himself in pleasure, and
says, soul take thy ease: Then does the Lord raise some of his own house to
call him to an account, Ps^ 73 Obs. 133. The prosperi^ of the wicked slippery
and subject to great dangers.
and to strippe him in a moment of all his vain confidence. So slippery places
are great ones placed in: so does the Lord sauce their prosperity with sudden
and unexpected dangers, to confound their carnal confidence therein; and
thereby, to make their dotage much more inexcusable that will build their house
upon the sands, which every blast will ouerturne. Math. 7


1. Whence we may learn, not to give the bridle to prosperity neither to set
our hearts upon it: neither to envy to fear and seek to esiablesh it in our
superiors, by prayer to God for them, and watchfulness in our callings.
M^rdecai, he sat in the Kings gate: he was watchful in his calling and so the
Lord honoreth him to be a means of the preservation of his Prince, Obser. 134.
God recompenceth the diligence and honest care of his children with good
success.
and liberty of his Church.

So acceptable are the labors of Gods Children in his eyes: so does he win
them in this life, to encourage us in well doing: and to seal up unto us our
eternal reward in the life to come.

1. Shall we then say it is in vain to serve God, Malach 3.
what profit No let us resolve that and if we wll try God further, we shall
see greater things then these. Concerning faithfulness in walking in our
callings we have spoken heretofore.

One thing we may here further observe from the end of Mordecaies sitting at
the Kings gate, Obs. 135. God recompenceth out love to others abundantly in
our selves.
which was to hearken how it fared with Hester: now it went with those that
feared God: That he which was careful for the good of others, especially of
such as were of the household of faith, has this fruit of this his love
redounding plentifully upon himeselfe, Pro. 11. 17
he is merciful to his own soul; the LORD by this means offering this
occasion for his own good and advancement: so gracious is the Lord to
recompense the love of his servants, so thankful is love to come but of our
debt; so does the Lord provoke us hereby to mutual love, so does he fit us to
perfection and glory. 3 Col. 14


Use 1. And therefore, as he which will not be his brothers keeper, shall not
keep himself: so let us in the name there is that scatters and has plenty,
Pro. 11 Eccle 11. I.
and though we cast our bread upon the waters, yet after many dates we shall
find it again. Obs. 136. Surely Gods children in seeking the best blessings
obtain all the rest.


But wherein is it, that the Lord blesses Mordecai? he is better unto him,
then he did desire: his desire only was that Hester might be safe, and lo the
Lord uses him as a means for the safety of the King too; yea this is turned
about by the Lord as a means of his own further good. So^b^untifull is the
Lord to give us more then we desire: so when we seek the principal, Math. 6.
33.
does he cast upon us other blessings also.

Use 1. Let not then the wicked brag that they have more then their hearts
desire: Psa. 73 Psalm. 106 15 Psalm. 145.
surely though they have their desire, yet God sends leanenesse into their
souls: but the Lord will fulfill the desires of them that fear him, yea if
they ask wisdom, he will give them both wisdom, 1 Reg. 3.
and riches. Oh that we were wise to choose aright! that we would first seek
the best, that so Luke 10. 42
and no marvel if the wicked loose all that loose the best.

Well thus you see Mordecai, is the happy man, that delivers the Kingdom:
Obs. 137. Gods children the only ^aithfull subjects.
the righteous only are they that safeguard Princes: they are the only faithful
subjects: they only stand in the gappe to keep out Gods wrath: they only
hold GOD and his blessings to a sinful nation: none can be truly loyal but
only such. Eccle. 22 Eccle. 9 Moses. Exodus 32
For they obey for conscience and not by constraint: they are led by love and
not by fear. they only have hope of the reward, and therefore can bear the
burden with patience, they omely fear GOD and therefore can truly reverence
men.

Use 1. Behold here then the cause of the desolation of Kingdoms: Namely the
want of those that fear the Sea the policy of Satan in setting the world most
against these that so the wicked may be the contriuers of there own
destruction, How vain are Papists to boast How foolish is policy,

Surely let Princes secure themselves in the safety of And let Ezechiel be a
sign unto those As for Gods Children let them comfort themselves, Eecle. 12
though Amos must not Bethel: when all is peace, 7. Amos. 2. Reg 3. 13
yet Iehorem, shall seek to Elisha, When the Lord begins to root. And happy
is Kingdom where such Elishaes are. Yea more happy that will stay the Prophet
with her. Housoeuer it is wisdom is justified of her Children, nay as you
heard before, she shall be justified of her enemies. But how comes Mordicai to
understand the treason?

Surely the Lord will not hide from his Children what may concern their good:
Obs. 138. Gods children skillful in discovering of secrets.
their apprehensions are deep, and observations to purpose, their knowledge is
extraordinary to boult out mischiefs, their experience leads them to guess
shrewedly at men's purposes, by their gestures and countenance; their wisdom
enableth them by questions and conference to found the minds of men. Howsoever
it is. The thing was known to Mordecai. So happy are Gods Children by this
means to secure others: so does God try the wisdom of his Children by the
justice of such dangerous secrets, for the better approving and securing of
themselves.

So did our gracious King admirably find out the treason wrappe^d up very
closely in a most unlikely frame of words, and from a foolish sense gathered a
desperate practice.

Use 1. Which though it does not warrant preemption of extraordinary
revelations, nor such superstitious conceits muchlesse Yet it does that the
spiritual man discerns althings: not only concerning matters of salvation,
1. Cor. 2.
but even so far also concerning this life, Amos 3.
as Godliness is profitable as well for this as for that other, And therefore
as Princes may So may Christians Job. 33.
Namely in doubtful cases and extremities, to seek to such interpreters, who
can declare to man his righteousness, and discover his dangers* that so he may
avoid the one and embrace the other.

Well it pleases the Lord to give his servant Mordecai notice of the treason:
Obs. 139. Treason not to be concealed.
how does he now behave himself in ye discovery of this secret? Conceal it he
must not, lest he incur the penalty of the law, the safety of the Prince
requires no less: and the good of the offenders enioynes the same, that the
body being punished the soul may be saved: and the common wealth also shall
gain hereby as being much secured in the detection of such great mischiefs.

Which as it iustifeth the equity of our law, which makes So it discouers the
And hereby they hear, and much more what they conceal, assuring themselves,
that as their is a time to cover the infirmities of their brethren, from God
and men, so their is also a time to discover their sin, when the public good
requires it, and their private also will sort therewith.

Treason then must be discovered: but yet waril^ too: I must have a good ground
for what I report; lest I be found to accuse an innocent: and I must be able to
uphold the discovery with some countenance and reputation, least I be borne
down in the truth by the greatness of the offender

Behold here then the wisdom of Mordecai. He relates not the matter himself
to the King, least he might not be believed, or be out-faced by the countenance
of the Traitors: and the King might be enraged, Obs. 140. Treason to be
revealed in wisdom.
or dejected hereby: and so for this ill news might give him but sorry
recompense. But wisely he goes to the Queen, with whom he Mordecaies wisdom.
Particulars of Mordecaies wisdom herein.


1. He takes occasion hereby to have access to Hester: and so in wise sort to
renew his ancient acquaintance with her. Whereas otherwise if he had had no
other errant, his coming might either have smelt of malepartnesse, or of proud
ambition.

2. He procures hereby credit to the Narration when it shall be promoted, by
honorable and acceptable a personage.

3. In this his wisdom he renewes also his love to his beloved daughter, he
enuies not her advancement, and therefore will reveal the treason himself to
take away the thanks from her; but knowing that favor was mutable and
greatness jealous; therefore he makes Hester that she might take occasion
hereby, to perform her duty to the King: and also might by this means renew
his affections toward her. Yea Mordecai might safely have also a further reach
herein; namely to tire the sincere affection of his daughter toward him,
whether she would make this an occasion to his good and preferment, or rather
take the glory thereof unto her-selfe.

Use. 1. Whereby we are taught, as rather then to conceal treason to reveal
it our selves; yet if we may to use such for the acquainting of the Prince
therewith, as may procure more credit to the truth and less danger to our
selves: Let not hope of reward here make us to hasty, least the wrath of a King
being the messenger of death, it light upon those that are nearest thereto: Oh
how gracious is a word in due season? how does the author grace the narration:
whereby we may further learn, to get true favor to our persons, by being
gracious with GOD, and so shall we happily prevail with men. And yet, are not
to neglect the means of such as are in favor with men: so we use modesty, and
sincerity therein: Let us especially be careful, not to abuse them with
rumors and falcehoodes: though Princes for a time are delighted with these;
yet falce-hood will out and favor will change: and so bring shame upon the
suggestors, and reporters both.

Thus Hester is also acquainted with this mischief intended against her LORD.
What does she now? does she conceal it as being sick of her Husband?
discontent might have ministered cause, and revenge would have furthered the
mischiese. The incontinency of the King must needs breed iealosie, and
iealosie is the rage of a man, therefore he will not spare in the day of
vengeance; some would have tickled, at this occasion, to have been rid of a bad
husband, And lust here would have promoted the matter, by suggesting hope o
change, yea ambition too (by your leave) would have puffed up some such
Semiramis, that so she might reign alone. But gracious Hester has none of his
fuel; Romans 12.
religion has taught her to pass by wrongs, and to overcome evil with good:
and therefore no doubt she is glad by this occasion to approve herself unto
her Lord; and thereby also to put him in mind of the uncertainty of his estate,
and so to tender means of his reclayming and amendment, So ought a gracious
wife to respect the welfare of her husband, Obser. 141. A good wife ought to
watch ^uer her husband and to inform him of such dangers as are intented
against him.
and so did Abigail aduize her husband Nabal. So must they reveal unto their
husbands what they know concerning there estates as knowing that they are one,
and therefore both there good or evil does go together, and that especially
hereby, they keep themselves in Gods favor, and thefore though the husband
should take it ill, yet here is the comfort, the Lord commands it, and he will
turn the heart of he husband, as shall be best for both.

Which as it condemns those murtherous wives that do desperately seek the
life of their husbands either by direct engines, as poison, strangling, etc. or
by indirect means, as by faulse accusations, unreasonable braulings. etc. so
it does also condemn those, that flatter them in their sin, and sooth them
up in their wickedness, and for fear of displeasure dare not lovingly reprove
and admonish them thereof. And here also my wives learn for these instruction,
to discharge their duties unto their husbands in giving them notice of such
dangers, as they are subiectvnto, leaving the success to God, Ziba.
who will reward there faithfulness.

Thus Hester discouers the Treason unto the King, But does she enuiously
conceal the first author and so take the credit to her self? no it is said
she certifies the King thereof in Mordecais name, i. she signifies unto the
King that Mordecai was he first discouerer; that so the Prince might take
notice of his faithfulness, and God might use this as a means for the
advancement of his servant, in convenient time.

Thus ought the Saints of God to right each others: in acknowledging there good
parts, Obs. 142. Gods children ought to approve and promote each other in their
weldoing.
yea in promoting the same: especially they that are already promoted least
they should appear to doubt of the worth of their preferment, which being
communicated, if it be good is thereby much bettered and increased, which is
herein secured that it has more supporters: yea is the more honored, in doing
honor to others.

Use. 1. Where is then their religion that detract from each other, where is
their love, that think they do God good service in faulse accusations, and
wrong ^urmises, how far are these from ascribing unto the Saints what is
there due which take that from them which they cannot give them? Oh what folly
is that policy which seeks to advance it self by depriving of others, what
treachery that love which will ascribe to others what is none of theirs;crying
peace peace while it serves there own turn, but if a man put not in their
mouths they prepare warte against him, Mich. 2. 6.
Oh what shall become of them that justify the wicked for a reward, Esaias 5.
and take away the righteouesse of the righteous from him? The servant of
Christ Jesus is taught here an other lesson: Psalm, 15.
Namely not to slander his neighbor, nor falsely to accuse him, but as he
acknowledges GOD, so to give testimony to his gifts, that the good may be
encouraged, and ^OD may be gloryfied.

Lastly in that treasons, Obs. 143. Gods providence and wisdom most eminent in
the discovery of treasons. lesuits in the poulder tr^ason.
and most secret wickedness, are thus detected and met withal, this does
notably justify the divine providence in ouerruling such evils, and judging
the same, and magnifieth also Gods wisdom, in confounding the policy of the
wicked, who by their secrecy in evil, promise to themselves good success
therein, whereby growing confident, and insolent against the Lord who say they
shall see them? who can prevent them? they are justly met withal in their
security either their own, tongues shall fall upon them or the fowls of
Heaven, shall reveal the mischief, or the wisdom of the Saints shall
discover the same. All which did most notably appear in he discovery of the
Poulder treason, and so does exceedingly magnify the truth of Gods providence
therein.

Us. 1. Which as it justifies the truth of the word, that there is nothing so
secret, which shall not be manifested: so it is a notable lesson to all
clookers of sin, not to trust to such clokes of shame for hiding of sin,
but rather to consider, Pro. 28.
that as he that hides his sin shall not prosper in this life, by reason of
the hell of consicence attending the same, Number. 33.
or else, in that the Lord will find him our therein by some temporal
judgment: so shall he for all these things, come to judgment, Ecel. 11.
and then the secrets of all hearts shall be made manifest, that every one may
receive, according to his work: And when the sliest treasons, and horible
murders shall be wonderfully discovered, tremble thou Atheist at the providence
of God, Psa, 14.
and though thou say but in thy heart, that there is no GOD, yet remember,
that this thought of thy heart, shall one day be discovered, yea the actions of
thy life shall cast the dart of thine Atheism in thy face, and rejoice not,
Letter to the L. Mounteagle
O thou enemy in thy malice against the Saintst, boast not, that thou will do
them mischief, and they shall not know who hurt them: behold, the Lord is
their keeper, and he that touches them, touches the apple of his eye, and
can thou come so near God, and hope not to be met withal? Let this lesson
all sorts, to have the Lord always before them, so shall they either be kept
from running into sin, or if they fall, by the gracious presence of the LORD
be raised up again.

Thus have we heard, of the means and manner that God uses for the discovery
of this treason. Now let us a little further consider the treason it self:
And.i. Observe we the authors of it.

It is they were two of the Kings Eunuchs. Obser. 144. Traitors use to band
themselves together for the accomplishment of their mischief.


Behold how sin delights in company: especially treason will not be alone;
the fact is horrible, and therefore company must needs be had to appease and to
embolden to the mischief trembling conscience, The attempt is desperate, and
therefore many hands must join therein; that where one misseth the other may
hit, And the Lord herein has an ouerruling hand: that where one could keep
counsel, by company it shall be revealed, for that carnal wisdom might prove
it own confusion; do brethren in evil further each others punishment? so was
the multitude of conspirators in the Poulder treason a special occasion of the
discovery thereof, Conference between Hall and Garnet in the Tower.
Let sinners learn hear to take heed of ye multitude, let them not hope by
company in sin to carry it more closely, or accomplish it more desperately;
whatsoever may strengthen and countenance sin, because as repentance is
hereby hindered, security increased, so vengeance is justly hastened Surely as
fellowshippe in evil is a note of sins wisdom and confusion: so not to
communicate of each others goodness, is a mark of it unsoundness: And
therefore let not goodness dwell alone either in singularity or weakness, let
it not fear infection, Luke 23. 32.
nor cover it worthynesse, Heb. 10. 23.
but let those are converted, convert their brethren, and let not the
fellowship of the Saints at any hand be forsaken: but let us support one
another by love, Gal. 6. 1.
that grace may be the stronger: and let us take unto us him that is weak,
Ephesians. 4.
least we also be tempted, laboring to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, that so we may grow up together, As heirs of the blessing.

Thus we see the number of these Traitors. Now let us a little farther consider
of their condition; it is here said, they were

Eunuchs, that is, they were some honorable personages attending on the
prince, Obse. 1. ^6. Great ones usually actors in treasons, and why.
not gelded persons as their name may seem to imply: but because Eunuchs, did
sometime attend in such places, therefore it came to pass, that all which were
of any honorable employment about the Prince (whether they were gelded or no)
were called Eunuchs.

By which it appears, what condition of men are usually actors in treasons;
namely, not base and inferior persons, whose spirits are dejected, and hopes
lie groueling on the ground: But men of sort and quality, such as have aspiring
spirits, and therefore will be leaueling at the highest, and what more ready
then treason, to serve their ambition? such (I say) as by reason of their
credit and access have best opportunity, to committee such hidden mischiefs:
Yea such as go not without their disgraces and snubbes from jealous and
licentious Princes, and therefore are provoked to be And(which is the most
material of all) Such as have been employed by wicked Princes, in treacherous
and vile oppressions of the subject; and therefore by the justice of God, do
many times practice their lesson teachers, and such as by reason of natures
gifts and the abuse thereof are given up to commit all sin, even with
greediness; and therefore no marvel, if they by which they may hope to have
a protection for all the rest: And yet are herein met withal, by the divine
justice, who many times turns this sin to be pay-maister for all the rest;
as bringing to shame and confusion the Authors thereof.

Use* 1. Which as it condemns those, that determine of sin by the condition
of the person, implying that only base and ignoble mungrells do conceive such
monstrous sins, as for generous minds and heroical spirits it comes not
once into their thoughts to commit such outrage: whereas we see the school of
Rome has set down this as a mark of the most heroical spirit, to rise up
against the Prince; and experince has made it too apparent in the poulder
Treason: howsoever Popery would have daubed here generally the best privileges
of nature are condemned: as being the most desperate instruments of sin, if
they be not sanctified by grace. And therefore may wisely learn their lesson,
to season their gifts with good education and religion: that so they may be
kept within the bonds of obedience to God And Princes also may learn here
their lesson; as not to abuse their attendants. to the hurt of others: so Yea
all flesh may here learn it lesson: Mich. 7.
not to trust in a friend;not to put confidence in a Councellor. No not to
trust the wife that lies in the bosom* otherwise then to subordinate all to
God: and for his sake to renounce them all: so shall they be faithful unto us,
so far as shall make for our good, and though they be unfaithful, yet the
infidelity of men shall not make the faith of God of none effect.

But let us consider a little further of the name and office of these Eunuchs.
For their Names, they are called Bigthan and Teresh: by which it seems that
one of them, namely Bigthan was sent with others, Obs. 147. God makes
instruments of sin rods to punish the same.
when the King was in his cups, to convey Vashty the Queen to the presence
of the King. And behold he is now one of them that call the King to an account
for that his notorious wrong done unto the Queen. So just is the Lord to make
instruments of sin, weapons to punish the same: to the magnifying of his
providence and reformation of ye same, or else to make him more without excuse,
to his greater confusion: but of this heretofore.

The Office that the holy Ghost ascribes to these Eunuchs, though their name do
imply it to be diverse, yet both concur in this, Obs. 148. In greatest trust
greatest Treason.
that it was an Office of some trust: and thence we may learn not
unprofitably, that Treason is in trust. Those that are most in place of trust,
they prove many times the greatest traitors. because these, being Princes
creatures (as they call them) new molded to their bent, the more confidence is
hereby put in them, the less suspicion there is of them. Wher-vpon it comes
to pass, yt security is bred in the Prince, and God he is robbed of his honor:
the subject he is puffed up, and so provoked to mischief the Lord he avengeth
his glory in giving him up to his lusts, and the security of his master,
cries aim thereto.

Which as it condemns that complaint of flesh and blood, so it does sin is
the greater, by how much the more they were the better thought off.

And yet Princes, also are not to be excused neither: must trust: Princes to
prevent treachery.
That they may not be deceived by them: Let them make God their confidence, by
keeping themselves in the bounds of his providence: as walking faithfully in
their callings, and so bring good examples to their subjects, not being
causelessly jealous of them, nor estranging our selves from them: But using them
so, that they may rather see they have need of them, then that Princes have
indeed other need of their people, the what may as well concern their good:
tempering their love with Majesty, and their indignation with clemency. And
though they ought to despise none, yet not rashly admitting each one into their
service before they have good approbation of his zeal and loyalty, and therein
also to make some trial before they trust, especially concerning their person
or the good of their Kingdom: And when they trust, yet to keep such secrets
to themselves, as are not fit for them to know, nor safe for Princes to
reveal (I mean) these Mysteries of government, which extraordinarily, God
reueales unto them. And when they have trusted, yet not further to rely
thereon, Then considering they now sail (as it were) in another bottom, such
as at least is apt to leake, they be so far from remitting of their care, or
yielding to security (as the manner is) as that now rather they ought to have a
more vigilant eye unto the maine, and in all humility to cast their care upon
God. As knowing that the right end of the subjects employment by the Prince in
matter of trust, is not to take away the care of the Prince, as if then there
were no need, but rather to settle it more constantly on God: because as it
will be imputed unto the Prince for jealousy, if he will not trust his
subject: and therefore he must needs put some in trust least he discover fear
of his own estate, which does proceed from bad desert: So will it imply further
a distrust there, where there is no apparent cause, and so happily provoke to
give just cause of distrust.

And therefore seeing those whom he must use, he must also trust, and yet in
trusting of them, both give them occasion to think the Prince has need of
them, as also, that they are well conceived and approved off: least hereby
such might either grow to work upon their Princes secrets, to keep the state
in awe, and thereby to get the head; Very necessary it is, that as Princes be
wise, what they commit in trust, so they be not secure in the issue of it: but
rather watch dilligently over the trust committed, and to keep the bridle in
their own hands, by putting it wisely to God. Whereby it shall come to pass:
that the subject hereby perceiving that he is rather honored in the case
committed, then the Prince disburthend of the care of his calling, will more
faithfully behave himself to give sound contentment: And so the Prince being
more secured by the loyalty of his subject, will be more still provoked to
rest upon God: In whose hands seeing the hearts of all men are; therefore he
cannot better secure the issue of his affaies, then by resigning the same into
the gracious hand of God.

Thus we see who they are that intend this mischiese against y^ King. Obse.
146. Anger incident to Courtiers.
But what might the cause be that moved them thereto?

It follows: they Were wroth; somewhat had displeased them: either they were
not preferred according to their deserts and expectation, or they wanted their
stipend, according to their places, or they were offended for the diuorcement
of Vashty; or they were so full fed, they must needs be kicking. So apt are
such stallions to fume and champe the bridle: So truly is anger the complement
of Courtiers: as whereby they show their spirits and uphold their credits;
whereby they obtain their desires and put of their dangers: Whereby they dare
their enemies, and hold their friends. By it they justify their wrongs, and
pay their debts. Which as it is no warrant for mean ones to give the reyne to
this sin, because the greater flies will break through, when the lesser are
entangled. And if it were not, yet we must live not by examples but by laws:
so let even the greatest make this account* that the more they riot in this
sin without concealment, the deeplyer are they engaged in the sight of God:
and the more their sin serves there turn in this life, it does the more make
them indebted to it: and when they have not where withal to pay, they must lie
by it in hell, till they have answered the uttermost farthing. Thus we see
great ones will easily be provoked: Obs. 150. Anger the occasion of out ragious
sin and particularly of treason.
and some such cause there might be of this wrath of these Eunuchs, but
whatsoever the Sire was, the bastard is anger, and rage likely is the mother of
treason and outrageous sins, because as it banisheth reason, and so gives way
to all unruliness so ^it ends in malice, and malice will have blood; yea such
is the progress of this sin of anger, that it will not spare it self to
hurt another, yea none can be privileged from the furious man he makes no
difference of persons, all causes are a like.

Us, 1. Which as it condemns natures prophets, that determine anger to be the
whet stone to couradge, Obs. 151. Princes marks of treason and rebellion.
and so give way unto it as a passion of credit and no small advantage, so we
may learn to suppress the same, being fully persuaded, that as the wrath of
man cannot fulfill the will of God, so much more will it make us unserviceable
to men. The way to do this we have taught before.

Well these Eunuchs are enraged, and whom is it that they aim at? Surely no
meaner a person then the King: Kings are the marks for every one to shoot at.
They are fair marks that may be easily discerned, and many times they are
foul marks to betray Gods glory, and therefore he justly gives them up to be
betrayed of their subjects yea they make buts of their people, and so the
arrows sometimes rebounds on themselves, so does GOD transpose scepters
without the shedding of innocent blood so when conscience will not; even by
this fear of danger does the Lord keep wicked Princes in awe, that so they
may be serviceable to others, thought it tend to their further condemnation, so
does he make great one more inexcusable, that will build their nest on such
sandy foundations.

Use. 1. And therefore, as this may humble Princes, in the greatest high of
their happiness so it may comfort them to, that they have right in an other
happiness; because this present, is so uncertain and slippery. And seeing by
the ticklishnesse of the present, the Lord prouokes them to aspire to the
certain happiness, and yet so, as even by this tottering ladder they must
climb thereto; Oh let them learn to sanctify this their present estate unto
them, that it may so far be secured, as may further them to heaven: let them
give God the glory, and maintain peace among Men by promoting his Ghospel, and
in joining obedience to the same. So did he preserve good Elizabeth from a
world of treasons: so has he preserved our anointed from many conspiracies,
so great shall be the glory of the King in the salvation of the Lord.

Thus we have heard the sum of the treason, now let us further consider the
prosecution of the discovery thereof.

We have heard heretofore, that Mordecai was the man that had the first inkling
of it: he relates it wisely to Queen Hester, and Hester to the King: what now
does the King in this case? does he presently believe it though the reporter
were of credit? surely No: as Princes are not to be credulous, especially of
such reports, because they may wrong themselves in discovering a needless
fear, yea they may wrong the innocent, who happily may be misreported: yea
though he were guilty yet might they wrong him to, if they proceeded to censure
before the matter be thoroughly sifted: So even this heathen Prince keeps
decorum herein: so it follows. That after inquisition made when the thing was
found out.

Behold here the equity of this heathen Prince, Obser. 152. Sin not to be
punished before it be convinced. Genesis 10.
in a case of life and death so nearly concerning himself, and the
prevention whereof consisted in speed, yet is he not hasty to credit a report,
muchles to proceed against a suspected offender before the offense be
manifested and convinced* So does the Lord proceed in judgment: so is
innocence preserved, when only accusation goes not current; so is authority
when sin is thoroughly convinced: and the offender happily prepared to
repentance. Exodus 23.
Does our law condemn

Use. 1. By which we may learn, Leuit. 19.
as not to believe reports, without due inquisition; John, 7.
so to condemn such rash judgments, Act, 23.
which execute in the morning, and then fit upon him in the afternoon.
Festus. Pilatus.
I remember policy does aduize in these cases of treasons to strike while the
iron is hot if the offender be so mighty, as that he be able to out-dare
the law (as the case of ye Guise was under Henry ye third,) here says wisdom,
its good cutting him off first, and then declare the cause for justifying of
such execution. And surely if the offenses of such great ones be dangerous and
notorious, seeing the apparantnesse thereof is a sufficient conviction of the
same, it many not be evil policy by such authority, as we may privately
cut him off, especially if he be of power to prevent public justice. So
does God justly strike before the fault be published: and so may earthly
Princes proceed to execution, when the inquiry and discovery of the fact may
hinder the same, and endanger their estates. Only herein they must be
careful, not to pretend lust for a law, and to make their wills a rule of it
righteousness. This is a prerogative with belongs only unto God. As for
worldly Princes, they must dye like men; and therefore the lives of men ought
to be precious unto them, as they will answer an eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth. And therefore as suspicion must not blind them, or reports
misleade them, to call the life of their subjects into question; so when
reports come to them, Ierem, 41.
let them not be secure. It is good to fear Gedaliah loose his life, by
contemning the danger: And if raking up the ashes they discover the fire, and
so the fact prove clear and evident, let them secure themselves, and deliver
the innocent; by punishing the offender, according to ye quality of his sin.
So does this heathen Prince very maturely proceed to execution. The thing being
found out says the holy Ghost they were both hanged one a tree. A fit
recompense for Traitors, and a just fruit of their sin, whose end is death,
Obs. 153. Traitors are executed for their outrageous offenses.
and whose wages is damnation. And a very safe course to be taken especially
with such offenders, whose sparing as it does hazard the life of the Prince, so
it endaungers also their own souls, yea encourages the wicked, and
discourageth breeds confusion of laws and is indeed justice, and gappe to all
licentiousnes: laws and iniquity bridled, the wicked and God himself
glorified. So Adoni^ah being 1 Reg. 12.


Use Oh that Princes would look to it have they care to have compassion on
themselves, while though soole-hardines, or fond clemency, they spare such
desperate enemies that treason might hop headles and so loyalty might be
secured? Surely, though there is difference to be made in a multitude of
offenders: yet is the safety of the prince more precious then the lives of ten
thousand. And better it is, to cut of many rotten branches, then endanger the
root, and hinder the fruit. It is but cruel mercy, that hazards ye soul, and
very foolish pity to nourish a viper in my bosom, which hereafter may sting
me. But the King of Kings shall teach them true wisdom, that if they be wise
they will be wise to themselves. All the doubt may be concerning, these Eunuchs
whether they deserved this heinous punishment or no, Obs. 154. The intent of
treason discovered, is to be punished.
seeing they missed of their purpose, and were prevented therein. The King had
no hurt; and why then should they be touched?

Surely though purposes are sins in the sight of God: yet only actions may
seem liable to the censure of men. Who only can judge by the outside, and so
may proceed accordingly: how stands it then with equity that these men's purpose
is punished: especially seeing in other offenses the intent is not taken hold
of: so that the act by any means be hindered, or prevented: Indeed, if we do
consider sin in it own desert, so not only the act but the purpose, yea,
the very thought it self deserves eternal punishment: but if we measure sin
by the subject wherein it is, then seeing God has reconciled our persons unto
him in Jesus Christ and will remember our iniquities no more to punish them
euerlastinglv: so neither does he to any other end chastize them in this life,
then may make for the good of the sinner and the glory of his name.

And to this end serve the laws of men: Which intending the salvation of the
sinner in the inflicting of punishments: as they cannot reach to the thought
(which is only Gods prerogative) so neither do they otherwise fasten on the
purpose then for a greater good: usually they are confined to the outward
action, and so only censure that: and yet therein also, are so far ouerruled
by the condition of the offender, as to admit qualification for his peculiar
good: that if clemency be fitter for him, it is not to be denied, if severity
be necessary, yet with this intent; that by the destruction of the body, the
soul may be saved. 1 Cor. 5.


The intent then of the law being the good of mankind: hereupon it follows,
Reasons why the purpose of treason is to be punished with death.
that though other sins be only censured by the act, as Murder Theft etc.
Yet Treason is to be censured by the intent; Because though it has not taken
effect, yet being a sin so dangerous both to the committer and the Kingdom:
some such

Surely, by inflicting the punishment upon the intent: that so the intent being
met withal, the act may be prevented, and all hope cut off from being pardoned
for the act: seeing, the very intent discovered, is so deadly to the And does
not the general good necessarylie force this severity? seeing the suppressing
of the Prince, is the ruin of many thousands? yea threatens the destruction of
What should I tell you of the calling of the King, does he not represent the
person, and administer the office of God himself, who if he punish the thought
of the heart, as being his prerogative, why may not the Prince also punish the
intent, seeing he is Gods vice-ge^ent so to meet with sin as that the holy
purpose of the Lord in his ordinance might be best accomplished, to the good of
the sinner, and safety of government? And therefore seeing intent of treason
pardoned, does but give further breath thereto, because ambition is insatiable,
and such sinners otherwise incorrigible, then by taking them in the blade, and
so cutting them timely off. Is it not more then time to prevent such desperate
onsets by just seuerty, rather then to give way through impunity to farther
mischief? And shall the Traitor think he And what though he fail in the
execution of his mischief? shall the Magistrate therefore fail in the
execution of justice, seeing there was no good will wanting sufficient to
discover the daungerousnesse of the person; And may not the purpose of such
evils prove very hurtful to government? may it not breed Jealousy therein, and
imputation of some bad desert? may it not work desperateness in loose
governors and boldness in the like sins?

Let this be a lesson for preventing of such purposes, and the Lord give us
understanding in all things.

Thus are these rebellious servants justly met withal: Obs. 155. God usually
meets with treasons in this life.
And shall disobedient servants escape unpunished? had Zimri peace which slew
his master? did the servants of Ammon carry their treason clearly?

Surely the Lord is righteous and admirable in his justice, though some sins
especially are reserved to the eternal vengeance, yet he will punish this
sin of Treason even in this life, because it so nerely touches his Majesty,
and chalengeth his providence.

Use. And therefore let not Traitors hope to go unpunished, 1 Rex. 2.
though they escape at one time, Obser. 156. God punishes evil servants.
yet their sin will find them out in the end, 2 Reg. 11.
and Ioab shall be taken; when his iniquity is at ye full. And are not
disobedient servants here also justly met withal? yea surely, Iehezi shall
have aleprosie, and these rebellious servants do meet with a halter.

Use. 1. Which as it may lesson Masters, to watch over their servants, least
by disobedience they fall into these trobles, for which they are like to give
an account, though in the so let servants here learn to perform obedience for
conscience sake, that so looking for their reward from God, and not form man,
they may not be driven to such desperate courses. And as they must look for
such measure, if they break out into So on the contrary, let good servants be
assured, that the diligent shall stand before Princes, they shall not want even
plentiful recompense.

Thus the traitors are executed, and Ahashuerosh is preserved for the good of
the Church, Obs. 155. Gods Children not unthankful for such kindness as they
receive.
and who made the instrument thereof but poor Mordecai, and gracious Hester:
two servants of the most high God, do this good service to their Prince. And so
is Ahashuerosh abundantly recompensed for all his love to Hester: he has his
life given him for a prey: so do the wicked fare the better for the elects
sake, so do the Children of God recompense plentifully the good that is done
unto them. Ebedmelech the Black-a-moore shall have his life given him for a
prey: and the Sunamite shall receive her son to life for receiving the
Prophet, and Obea Edoms house shall prosper while the Arc remains there,
Godliness is never unthankful to the embracers thereof; her enemies fare the
better for her, and shall not much more her friends? she has the promise of all
blessings, and shall she not make them good? he preuailes with God, and shall
she not prevail with men? she brings peace wheresoever she comes, and in her
pleasure is life: riches and honor, be at her right hand, yea durable riches
and righteousness.

Why are then the children of God counted such trouble-houses, could the world
endure were it not for them? Oh let us let us learn to be let us take hold of
the Mordecaies service be buried in forgetfulness? No; Behold the providence
of God, in providing for his servant, Mark the care of the Prince that his
deliverance should be remembered. It follows.

And this was written in the book of days before the King: That is this
admirable deliverance was committed to perpetual record in the Chronicles of
the Kingdom:

Behold here the faithfulness of God, which forgets not the indeauors of
his children; Obs. 157. The Lord takes notice of the righteousness of his
servants, and causes the same to be commended to posterity.
he has a bottle to put their tears in, and a book of remembrance for them
that fear the Lord: He makes inquisition for blood, and so remembers it; he
causes the fact of his servant to be committed to perpetual record.

Use. 1. Shall we then doubt of the acceptance of our works; shall we not
expect a plentiful reward thereof? Will not the Lord avenge the blood of his
Saints? Will he not wipe all the tears from our eyes?

Oh that we could believe! How should we be increased? that we would consider
wisely how God records our wel-doings, what a spur would this be to provoke
us to go forward? What a comfort against the hard measure of the world? what
peace of comscience? What evidence of weldoing? Seeing the Lord makes our
enemies to record the same, yea to promote us thereby to a seasonable
recompense.

But what should move this profane Monarch to have Mordecaies faithfulness
and his preservation thus recorded to posterity? Is this intended as a part of
Mordecai his recompene? Or does he use this as a means to put him in mind
thereof? That so in convenient time he might accomplish the same? Surely though
it be not likely this proud Monarch had any such intent, because al is counted
but due, and thankfulness; here is a rare bird: yet no doubt but he both
provoke to take notice thereof, and so to prevent the like mischiefs: as also
confirm himself the better in the hope of future good success, and so
recreate himself at his leisure with the remembrance thereof. The light of
nature leads him thus far, and policy cries aim thereto: that memorable acts
should be recorded to posterity.

And may we not profitably learn hence to help our memories with such
faithful registers: Obser. 158. Records and outward mo^aments necessary for
the memorial and use of Gods blesings.
and so not only to bless God for the Act of writing and printing: but herein
especially to magnify his providence, that by this means, the word of truth
has been preserved, and purely conveyed unto us. Surely though the soul be
the register of the blessings of God, yet must the flesh use such means to
stir up the heart; as humbling the same, in that it needs these outward helps,
may thereby sanctify and continue the right use of God mercies, in the holy
remembrance and ye meditation thereof: let those boast of the spirit, which are
not clad with the flesh, and let such despise these helps, as have not a body
of ^inne to hinder spiritual duties. And seeing though the letter of the word
be not the power of it, yet ye power cannot be conceived, but by means of the
letter: let such despise the word written, Anabaptist
that desire not the power of it: and in the pride of their hearts will not be
confined within the bounds thereof.

And does not the spirit of God herein further teach us to record the blessings
of GOD to posterity; Obs. 159. The blessings of God are to be recorded to
posterity.
and to commend to, the generations to come the wonderful things that the
Lord has done for us? yea certainly, this shall be written for the generations
to co^^, and the people that are created shall praise the Lord. The Lord has
commanded great mercies to be commended to posterity, Psalm. 102.
and has appointed the monuments thereof to be preserved to all generations:
(...) 18.
so were the rod of Aaron, and the pot of Manna kept to this end, Exodus 14.
so were Alters erected, Heb. 9. 4.
and new names imposed, Exodus 16.
to put Gods children in mind of his mercies toward them: Genes 17. Genes, 32.
so did Samuel write the office of the King in a book, 1 Samuel 10. 25.
and laid it up before the Lord, y^ it might be a perpetual glass, Number, 2^. 14.
for the Prince to look his duty in: so are the memorable Acts of God, which
he did at the red Sea: and at the river of Arnon, written in a book. So does
Job wish that his words were written in a book, that so y^ equity of the cause
might remain for ever. Job, 19. 13.
So when the Lord will publish his will and have it commended to the use of
posterity, for our better assurance of the acco^plishment thereof, he commands
it to be written in a book, yea in a great volume. Esaias, 8.
Yea not only to a book has the Lord committed his blessings, Ierem. 36. 2.
but he has called also the times to witness the same, Exodus, 14,
he has appointed special days for ye perpetual memory of his mercies, to be
kept sollemnly throughout al generations: this care has ye Lord taken for the
remembrance of his blessings, as being worthy to be had in remembrance, and
profitable for us to prevent forgetfulness, the maine cause of profaneness,
Psalm, 78.
and whereby the blessings of God are taken away from us, and we exposed to the
burden of his Judgments. And shall not this care of the Lord for the
remembrance of his blessings be an heavy conviction of our unthankfulness
for the same? Shall God thus strive to put us in mind of his mercies? Shall he
cause us to record them in books to posterity? Shall he move us to set a part a
day for the memorial thereof for ever? And shall we not be stirred up by this
means to cleave unto our God and to root out the name of Amelecke from under
heaven? Who so is wise let him understand these things, to whom the arm of
the Lord has reueald them.

FINISH

