THE CHARACTER OF WAR, OR The Image of Martial Discipline: containing many
useful directions for Musters and Arms, and the v^ry first principles in
Discipline, the groun^ ^^^^^es, all the Military motions now used: Their use
(...) dem^nstration of their use, first by precept, then by example, Showing
how to do them, how to perform them gracefully, how to command them properly,
plainly, without distractions to the Soldiers. Containing many excellent
Policies and Stratagemes, many good Documents for young Soldiers, showing how
they must be qualified, what qualities best befits them.

A work fit for all Noble, Generous and good Spirits, that love Honor, or
Honorable Action.

By EDWARD COOK.

Exodus. 15.3. The Lord is a man of War: his Name is Jehovah.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Purfoot. 1626.

To the right Honorable and most Noble Lord Edward Lord Sackuile, Baron of
Buckhurst Earl of Dorset, and Knight of the Noble order of the Garter
THey that write upon any serious Subject (right Honorable and most noble Lord)
whether it be of Peace or War, commonly do dedicate their Books to Noble
persons: to the end, that what they have effected by Labor and Study, may by
their greatness be protected from Maledictions and Envy: and they chose such,
whose eminent virtues (exempt from Riualles) is of all admired, by all
observed, and withal beloved, where the choycest wits shelter their chiefest
works. Hence I take my imitation, and in all humility prostrate this my poor
labor to kiss your noble hands, not as any adition to your uncontrollable and
approved knowledge, but as a weak Fabric which only wants the support of
your much admired goodness.

In former time, if any were longheaded, as Pericles, crooked nosed as Cyrus,
foretopped with his hair growing upright as Alexander; he had favor showed in
all Courts, and in every company he came in: Such respect did they give to
their outward shapes, who it may be had not any of their Habitual virtues; Oh
then what love, what respect ought every one (in what degree or place soever)
to give you, that have the Habit of their virtues, only want their blemishes.

Pericles love to his Country. Cyrus (the elders) care of his Soldiers.
Alexanders virtues (not vices) are pregnant in your honor, the world sees it.
Demetrius, Nero, and Caligula, (not setting their Empire aside) are not to be
compared with your honor: yet let me lay Gold to copper, that the gold may
appear the more glorious.

Demetrius care was more for an Astrologicall Cloak (thereby to hang the world
on his back,) then for his Kingdom or people. But your honors care is for
the Kingdom, to do good to every member thereof, Mentally, Actually, to your
power.

Nero the Tyrants care was for new invented Garments (daily) to wear none
twice: your care is that every man have good Arms to grace the Kingdom daily.

Caligulas care was to wear Sacras Deorum vestes, to set forth the greatness
of his authority. But your care is the Habit of a Soldier, showing power in
your command that all may obey.

These Noble parts being eminent in your honor, are powerful inducments for
me to sue ever for such a Noble Patron, therefore to you, and only to your
honored self, I humbly dedicate this Book. The Book deserves more your
honors censure then praise; for like Phormio it seems to read a Lecture of
war (to an Haniball) who for it was reproved, but if I escape from your
honor vnchekt, I will impute it (not to desert in me) but to your honors
sufferance, usual Mildness, passing by my presumption. Thus commiting the
Book to your Noble patronage, you to the Almighties protection, and my self
to your honors command and service, I ever rest

In Field and out of Field your honors Servant EDWARD COOK,

To Captain Pert, Lieuetenant Millen, Lieuetenant Keneston, Ancient Gualter,
Ancient Clarke, Mr. Tho: Webster, Mr. John Foster Gentlemen, and to all the
rest of their place and office, in the Six Cautionarie, or trained bands of
Middlesex. ALSO, To the worthy Captain Gostock Mustermaister for the County of
Middlesex: And to all the suruiuing Founders of the Artillery Garden, and
Military yard.
THe Actions of virtue (worthy Gentlemen and Soldiers) should so much affect
the beholders, that they should presently not only admire them, but endeavor
to follow them. Plutarch in the life of Julius Caeasar.
Julius Caesar reading the brave acts of Alexander the great fell (says
Plutarch) a weeping, and was angry with himself, to think how Alexander a
young man (just about his age) had notwithstanding conquered the whole world,
whereas he as yet had done nothing worthy the name of a General: From this
Princely Emulation he fell to Action, and became so excellent, that Plutarch
himself paralells him only with Alexander. I make no doubt, but that setting
before your eyes the brave exployts of your Ancestors you have been moved to
practice Arms, by which you have gained great applause, (and worthy of it)
because you have done good service to your King and Country.

The greatest service that men can do, is to save their Country frem danger.
The Romans gave him a crown that saved one Cittyzen: then how many crowns
deserves you, that helps to save a number.

They used to make a Coin for his commendation with this inscription: The
Senate and people of Rome for Citizens saved.

You save the lives of men by teaching them the right use of their Arms,
whereby they save themselves from danger. Would to God that all would follow
you, as you do follow the virtues and Actions of the Romans and Grecians.

The Grecians were the first, that out of variety of actions and long
experience reduced the knowledge of Arms into an Art, and gave precepts for
the orderly moving of a battle, and taught, that the moments of victory
rested not in the hands of multitudes, but in a few men rightly instructed to
manage Arms, and trained up in the observation of the dicipline of the field.
In which regard they had Schools and Schoole-maisters called Tacticks, which
delivered the Art Military to such as were desirous to learn. Out of whose
Schools issued those chiefs of War in number so many, Captain Bingham.
in Skill so exquisite, in Valor so peerless, in all virtues beseeming great
Generals so admirable, that no Nation of Europe even to this day has been
able to match, much less to ouer-match their same and glory. The brave Romans
c^m^ far short of them: yet the Romans following their ordinances both have
kept in use, and also set forth in writing the rules of Martial policy or
discipline: And you have Schools wherein you teach this Martial policy or
discipline to such as are desirous to learn. The one is called the Artillery
garden, the other the Millitary-yard.

The first of these was erected by the Virtuous Gentlemen of London. The second
by you the no less virtuous Gentlemen of Midlesex: out of these two Schools
as out of the former, have issued men of worth taking their degrees: As
Captains, Lieuetenants, Ancients, and Sergeants, so that all the trained bands
in London and Midlesex, are furnished with able and sufficient Officers out of
both these Schools, to your honors that were the Founders.

I, the last in degree (of inferior officers) had my first egresse from the
Artillery Garden.

In that School I spent Four years complete, to gain the little knowledge
which I have, never presuming to show my skill, much less to contend with
others in it: until the Scollers of another School (Low-Country-like) banded
together for trial of skill, urged me thereunto. Then for the honor of my
School (put on by my own School fellows) I entered the List to play my
Scholars Prize: And I have now done it, but whether I have performed it ill or
well, rests not in me the Scholar to judge but in you the Masters of
Science, most skillful in the Art Military. Judge then and Censure,

Your Friend Edward Cook.

To the worthy Company and whole body of Noble Soldiers, serving in the Fifth
Cautionarie or Trained Band of Midlesex, otherwise called Captain Perts
Company.
WHere a general voice warrants an approbation (worthy Gentlemen and
Soldiers) there every service is a Duty. The truth of it concerns and inuites
me to write a peculiar Epistle unto you, and therein to extol your worth: And
none will discommend me for it, that either imitates your virtues, or would be
praised (as you) for worth. Your worth Implies your rare parts: your rare part^
(though many) may be Epitomized in Four.

1. Your pronesse of mind to bear Arms. 2. Your actiuenesse in all Millitary
motions. 3. Your Subiugated wills to obey your Officers. 4. Your Damon, and
Pythian like affection one to another.

The three first are rare, but the fourth and last is the most rare and
excellent; For as a Diamond fairly set in Gold, it gives luster to all the
rest, and makes me style you Philonida or Philonis, a band of friends, or true
friendship, or indeed the Holy band.

Plutarch tells of an holy band errected by one Gorgidas, Plutarch in the
life of Pelopidas.
which did consist of three Hundred chosen men, entertained by the state, and
kept within the Castle of Cadmea, called the Towns band, (as you the Kings
band:) This band was never broken nor overthrown before the battle of
Chaeronea, where they were all slain, found lincked together with cords of
silk arm in arm, Pikes sticking in their breasts. Philip King of Macedon.
Father to Alexander the great.
King Philip their enemy shedding tears for them, and causing them to be
buried together, who in death would not be parted.

Thus the loving Holy Band,
Fell by the Macedonians hand.
Each one dying for his Friend,
Keeping Friendship to the end.
From whose ashes does arise,
You that them does Sympathize.
Never to dissolve together,
Nor like God to live for ever,
For one by one, be sure to die,
Time takes away, time will supply.
And as he brought you to the Womb,
So back he leads you to your Tomb.
Yours in life and death, Edward Cook.

To his Brother in Law Thomas Chamberlain, a lover of Arms, and an expert
Soldier.
WHen I first made entrance into this work (you know worthy Brother) that
there was no speech made in the City or Subburbes, of Plague or Pestilenc: But
when I had almost finished it, the Plague began amongst us. Then was both
speech and complaint too in an incessant manner? So I least of. In^ited by you
in the heat thereof to finish it, (least dying and leaving it an abhortiue, it
should utterly fail and come to ruin.) But what auailed it me to write of
warlike ^tratagemes and Policies, to oppose, opugne, repel an human Enemy
in the field? when tht Lord God of Hosts great in power, (whom none could
resist) was entered the field, destroying Thousands on his right hand, Ten
Thousand on his left hand, and all the Kingdom in general, had not his mercy
exceeded his Justice.

Then it was for me not to write, but to pray: not to forcast where to fly
from the sword of the Lord, but how to submit my self to the sword of the
Lord, which when the Lord saw, he manifested his power to me, preserving me,
that I might hereafter trust in him, and declare his goodness to the Sons of
men.

Thus the Press of the Lord went forth, it took away whole families; it
continued many Months together in the Subburb in be City.

The City was almost desolate (yet not desolate) because she had a gracious
God with a fla^ming sword, purging, not consuming her? A blessed Savior
interceding for mercy not Justice: A King on earth (as Hezekiah) weeping and
praying in secret for her; calling upon his Lord ^pirituall and Temporal, on
all the Moyseses, and Arons in the Kingd^me to join with him in Prayer (as
they had in fasting) and to cry mightily unto the Lord, to spare this City,
the holy City, the City where his name was called upon.

Nay she had a careful Magistrate in her, whom divine providence did
preordayne to that place to do her good, S^r John Gore was then Lord Mayor of
London. And Alderman Heylyne, and Alderman Parkebust, were Shriefes.
who went in person to visit her, releining her relinquished members ready to
starve for want of food: Sending his two worshipful Brothers the Shrieues to
do it for him, if his Lordship was otherways employed.

These two good Samaritans came into the Suburbs among the poor Trinobantes
of Saint Sepulchers, inquiring their number, their estate, their wants, their
greiuances, finding them great (past their expectation) they returned with
melting hearts, condoling their misery, and informing the Lord Mayor of it,
who by them (and through their means) sent instantly a supply of Fourteen
Pounds for their relief: commanding information weekly to be given of their
wants, and they should be relieved. Which was done by me, and performed by
them, even till the sickness was mightily decreased, and our Gentlemen
returned home, so they left off: being seconded by M. George Allington Esquier,
(and one of the Masters of the Pipe office) who sent them Forty shillinges,
as formerly he had done at other times weekly. This money was truly
distributed, though it came not to my hands: The money that came to my hands
(from the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, and Churchwardens) was Twenty Five Pounds Ten
shillinges. So when all this was discharged, and the plague quite ceased, and
thanks rendered to Almighty God for our deliverance: I betook my self to
Penn and Paper again, to fininsh what before I undertook; which by Gods help
I have effected; and would not have published it to the world, had not some Low
Country-like forced, You brotherlike persuaded; Now if any good come thereby,
let such as reap it thank you, who would not let me rest till I had finished,
then printed it: If none at all, then let them blame me, not you, if not,
excuse me thus: he had a good intention, but he failed of the execution, in
this I rest: and resting rest

Your loving Brother, Edward Cook.

The Index or Table, briefly poynting out the several Contents of every
particular Chapter.
Of Arms and Men: And of the choice of Men for Soldiers Chap. 1. Out of what
Clymate or place Soldiers may be most Conuenyently taken: Chap: 2. Of what Age
Soldiers should be allowed, either for present service or Muster. Chap: 3 How
they must be armed. Chap: 4. What Exercises they must use when they want
Employment. Chap. 5: viz. Running, Leaping, Vaulting, and Swymminge. Why
Soldiers must use Runninge. Chap: 6. Why Soldiers must use Leapinge. Chap. 7.
Why Soldiers must use Vaultinge. Chap. 8. Why Soldiers must use Swimminge.
Chap. 9. Unto what young Soldiers must be disciplyned and how often trained
in a Month. Chap: 10 When Soldiers must be brought into the fieild for
Battle. Chap. 11. What the beats of the drum are, which Soldiers must Know.
Chap. 12 What the distances in fiiles and Ranks are which Soldiers must know.
Chap. 13. How a fiile and a Rank is distinguished for a Soldier to know.
Chap. 14 What the fiights are which Soldiers must be expert in. Chap. 15 What
the qualities are which befitt Martial Men. Chapter. 16. Of wisdom and
policy: The use of it: how it may be attained: with a breife Summary of
Stratagems and pollicyes pertynent for these times. Chap. 17 Of the use of
Faceinge. Chap. 18 The words of Command for it. Chap. 19 Of the use of
wheeling. Chap: 20 The words of Command for it. Chap 21. Of the use of
Countermarch and the words of Command for it. Chap. 22 Of the use of
doublinge. Chap. 23. Of the distances to be observed in Battle, Of their use,
and how to be Commanded. Chap 24. The words of Command by which the length or
depth of a Battle, may be doubled in place or number. Chap. 25. A platform
of Exercising for those that would; but are not exquisite. Chap. 26. The
Postures of the Musket in that form, as it was prescribed unto us by his
Majesty, and his most honorable privy Counsel. Chap. 27 The several
Postures of the Pike, abstracted from that Book which the Prince of Orange his
Excellency did allow of. Chap. 28.
Chapter the first. OF ARMS AND MEN.
WAR is my Subject, and therefore my first discourse shall be of Arms and
Men; because in them consists whatsoever belongs or appertains to War,
that is unto Land service As Cato (the singular and notable Author amongst the
Latins) does testify. Marcus Cato.


I am not ignorant of Vegetius definition: Vegetius Lib. 2. Chop. 1.
saying, that whatsoever appertains to War, is divided into three parts:
Horsemen, Footmen, and Navies. Horsemen to keep the playnes, Footmen to keep
the Hills, Cities, Champion ground, and also steep places: Navies to keep
the Seas and waters: But Vegetius implies herein both Land and Sea service; I
only (here) but Land service.

With Sea service I will not intermedle, with Land service (by Gods help I
will) and so I begin with Arms.

Arms does uphold Kingdoms, States, and Laws; Of Ames.
The first thought therefore of a Prince or State, that is resolved to put an
Army into the field, ought to provide Arms.

Arms are the security of their own Soldiers, the terror of the Enemy, the
assured and ordinary means of Victory.

The antiquity of Arms is all one with the beginnig of War. For when of
ancient times mighty men puffed with Pride, and led by Ambition, Captain Bing
ham in his notes upon Aelia^.
sought to bring under subjection their bordering Neighbors, they were forced
to fly to the invention of Arms, without which no victory could be obtained.
Since Arms have been taken up for defense also, Necessity the mother of Arts,
inuenting away to withstand Ambition.

Now Arms are Implicitly taken for Headpeeces, Gorgets, Curaces, Vambraces,
Gauntlets, Taces, Swords, Pikes, Muskets, Hargabuses, Petronells, Pistolls,
Frontlets, and Pectoralls for horses; with many other necessaries appertayning
and going under the name of defensive and offenciue Arms.

Of these a Prince or State ought to have store. For warlike Nations and
victorius have ever sought to have advantage of their enemies by advantage of
Arms.

This our Nation knows to be true, and therefore by continual suply of of
Arms they make way for new victories.

The next care of a Prince or State, is to provide Men.

All men are not fit for war, therefore there must be a choice of Men.

This is likewise premeditated upon in the thoughts of a Prince or State before
they undertake War: As is apparent by the ancient Romans, who had their
Muster Masters for the choice of their men, and their Tribunes and Centurions
to make them Soldiers. These taught their young soldiers the use of all their
Arms, and were present at their exercises;

Making them run, leap, vault, shoot, cast darts, fling stones of a pound
weight, foyne and thrust with the sword, and not to strike down wright: Such
as were expert, they rewarded, preferring them to places of desert, giving them
wheaten bread, (the inexpert) barley bread, keeping them from preferment until
they could do some thing as well as the best: Then they were preferred as
Soldiers for a Legion. This did the Romans.

Care then ought to be had (you see) in the choice of men and Arms.

The burden of which care does rest on the discreet and honest Muster-maister,
whom the Prince or State for some good cause does repose their trust in. And
therefore all his wits must be set on work for this service.



To this I answer, staturo and strength are both serviceable, but curage joined
to them is more auailable: Therefore currage is more to be regarded then
stature.

Vegetius Lib. 1. Chap. 5.
Marius (I confess) being Consul of Rome always chose young Soldiers of tall
stature, so that he would allow none for horsemen in the wings or front of his
Battle, but such as were Six foot high, or five and ten inches at the
least.

But then there was (says Vegetius) mor plenty of people, and more that
followed the Wars.

And now the Philosepher (with his saying) is justified: The longer the world
does continue, the lesser bodies it will produce.

Therefore let Muster-maisters do as they may, and rather choose for strength
then stature.

And that they are not herein deceived, they have Homer for witness, who
declares that Tideus was but small of stature, but yet of good courage and
stomach.

Then more requisite it is that Soldiers should be strong and valient then
huge and great.

If that all our Muster-maisters would choose thus, what strong, valiant
Soldiers should our State have. But either through negligence, or to curry
favor, or for want of knowledge, they do that as they may be ashamed of: But
to take away all excuses of want of knowledge, I will out of Vegetius show them
how they should choose them.

Let the young man therefore that shall be a Soldier not look drowsely, let
him be straight necked, broad breasted, Vegetius. lib. 1 Chap. 6.
let his shoulders bewell fleshed, let him have strong fingers, long arms, a
gaunt belly, slender legs, the calfe and the feet not to full of flesh, but
knit fast with hard and strong sinews: Finding these tokens in a Soldier he
may prove good.

For Pirhus would often say to his Muster-maisters, choose you good bodies, and
I will make them good Soldiers.

But well, say he have all these? and yet be of no occupation or science, shall
we choose him (may they say) why not?

Vegetius (I confess) would have none to be called to the wars but Smithes,
Carpenters, Butchers, Hunters of the Heart and the wild Boares: excluding from
the Camp, all Fishers, Fowlers, Pasturers, Lynnen weauers, and whosoever that
deals with any thing that belongs to womanish niceness.

But what is Trade to manhood; yet Vegetius Judgment is sound: For what men
are more beneficial to a Camp, then Smithes, Carpenters and the like.

A Roman Legion being as a well furnished City stored with all kinds of
Artificers: The strength of that Realm (and to say truth) the name of the
Romans lay in this choice.

Their many discomfeictures and damages by the enemy ( Vegetius imputes) to
their careless neglect of those men, and is bold to tell the Emperor
Valentinian in plain words,

That never sped that Army well in battle, whereof he that took the muster
was any whit negligent in allowing the Soldiers.

I forbear to speak more for fear of giving offense, and I proceed forward
to the next Chapter, to show out of what Clymate, Place, City, or Country,
young Soldiers should be chosen, or taken most conveniently.

CHAP. II. Out of what Clymate, Place, City or Country, young soldiers should
be chosen or taken most conveniently.
As Vegetius notes Lib. 1. Chap. 2.
THe temperatnes of the Clymate (says the learned) does very much avail, not
only to strengthen the body, but also the mind: and therefore they are of
oppinion that those people that are farthest off from the parching power of the
Sun are for their temperature the best of all to make Soldiers: for say
they, those Nations which be nigh to the Sun, parched and dried with over
much heat, have more wit indeed, but yet less blood within them. And for
this cause they dare not manfully and boldly stand unto it when they fight,
well knowing how little blood they have, and fear much therefore wounding:
Contrariwise, the people of the North whom the Sun burns not so near,
being more rash and unadvised, yet a great deal better blouded, are most
ready of all and desirous of war: What these men have approved I will not
altogether contradict, though I leave it to judgment.

Now it remains that you know out of what place, namely, whether out of the
City, or out of the Country you may most conveniently choose them.

Vegetius would have you to take them out of the Country, unless necessity
does otherwise constrayne you: and his reason is, that none ever douted but
that these common rude sort of people, were always fittest for the war,
being brought up abroad, using to take pains, abiding Sun-burning, passing not
for the shade, knowing never what Bathes meant, Vegetius. Lib 1. Chap. 3.
ignorant of dilicatnes, simple of mind, content with a little, hardened in
every part to abide and bear labor, least fearing death having least tasted
of pleasure. This is Vegetius judgment, which may hold in some, but not in
all; I pass it over.

True it is and must be granted that they of the Country who are farthest off
from the City have likely the ablest bodies to make Soldiers, and therefore
are fittest for the wars. But whether they have the best capacities to
conceive of Souldierie, is to be doubted? surely they have not, rather it is to
be expected from the^ of the City, or adjoining to the City, who have
commonly the ripest wits to apprehend, and to increase in Souldierie: But be
it as it will, neither of them are naturally borne Soldiers: the one may
incline to war more then the other, but the skill comes not without
industery and pains.

Plutarch says, that it is neither Eurotus, Plutarch in the ^ise of Pelopidas
nor the place betwixt Babix and Gnacion that brings forth valiant and
warlike men, but they are to be found in all places where youth is brought up
in the shame of vice and boldness to undergo perils for virtues sake;
Vegetius himself says, Vegetius. Lib. 3. Chap. 26.
that nature brings forth few valliant men, but diligence does make many by
good instruction and discipline, that in all places both cowards and hardy men
are bred: And that some Nations yields better Soldiers then other. Vegetius.
Lib. 1. Chap. 3.


Hence I infer, that City and Country may yield both good and bad Soldiers,
yet the one may as far excel the other in feats of war, as the other
excells in strength of body; Choose then your Soldiers out of City and
Country, Often exercise the one, for the is dull and hard to learn, make the
other strong, for he is active and may get strength: Let him learn to toil
and travel,
to run too and fro, to carry burdens, to abide the Sun and dust:
Vegetius. Lib. 1. Chap. 3.
let him fare hardly and homely, be kept far off from the allurements of the
City: and by this means, both the strength of his body and mind shall be
increased.

The next chapter shall show of what convenient age he should be, either for
present service or Muster.

CHAP. III. Of what age Soldiers should be of for present service: and about
what age young Soldiers should appear for Muster.
IF upon a sudden you are to raise an Army for expedition, my counsel is, that
you will make choice of such as are of mature age, about Eighteen, Twenty,
Thirty, Forty, and more, strong and lusty, able to abide heat and cold, and to
perform the duty of Soldiers.

Vegetius. 1. Lib.
But if after the Roman manner you will have young men to muster the time that
they must appear at muster must be so soon as they grow any thing to man's
estate: this will be when they are about the age of 14. 15. or 16. years: Then
not only more speedily, but also more perfectly all things are learned, the
sooner the better. For Vegetius says truly, that it is better that a young man
exercised should allege that his age to fight is not yet come, then that he
should truly lament that the same were already past. Let young men then be
exercised betimes, for it is readiness gotten by former practice that makes a
Soldier.


Having in the three former Chapters discussed at large of Arms and men, and
selected them forth to be made Soldiers: I will in the other 12. Chapters
following fit them with Arms, and times of exercise and discipline, that so
they may be desirous of the face of the enemy and be brought forth to battle.

CHAP. IIII. How Soldiers must be Armed.
Soldiers must be Armed in every kind according as they are divided.

The Dragons are light horse men, otherwise called Harqnebusiers Arms of a
Pikeman.
Soldiers are divided into two kinds: Foot, and Horse. The foot, again are of
two kinds; Pikemen, and Musketeirs.

The Horse men, again into two kinds; Curassiers, and Dragones.

The Arms of Pickemen are a Gorget, Curace, Headpeece, Pike, Sword, G rdle and
hangers.

Arms of a Muskateire.
The Arms of Muskateirs, are a Musket, a Rest, Bandeleires, Headpeece, Sword,
Girdle and hangers.

Arms of a Horseman Curassier.
The Arms of a Horseman Curassier, are a Gorget, Curace, Cutases, Pondrons,
Vambraces, a Left Hand Gauntlet, Taces, Cushes, a Caske, a Sword, girdle and
hangers, a case of Pistolles firelockes, Saddle, Bridle, Bitt, Petrell,
Crooper, with the leathers belonging to fasten his Pistolles, and his
necessary sack of carriage, and a good Horse to munt on.

The Arms of a Dragone (which has succeeded in the place of alight Horseman)
are a good Harquebus or Dragone, The Arms of a Dragon
fitted with an iron work to be carried in a belt, a Belt with a flaske
priming box, Key, and Bullet bag, an open headpeece with cheeks, a Buffe
coat with deep skirts, Sword girdle and hangers, a Sadle, Bridle, Bitt,
Petrell, Crooper, with straps for his Sack of necessaries, and a horse of
less force, and less price then the Curassiers.

As Soldiers were divided into two kinds, so are their Arms into two forts:
Defensive, and offensive.

Offensive Arms are such as they indeauor to wound and kill, Offenciue Arms.
withal as Muskets, Hargabuses, or Dragones, Pistolls, Pikes, Swords, and
Rapiers, etc.

Defensive Arms, Defensive Arms.
are such as they wear to resist the force and charge of the enemy; of this
sort are the Headpeece, Gorget, Curace, Vambraces, Gauntlet, and Taces, etc.

Defensive Arms are preferred before the Offenciue, Captain Bingham in Aelian.
in that they bring safety to him that bears them, whereas the other are
employed in anoying the enemy only. These Defensive Arms should be made
strong, fit, and with all comely: Strong to protect or anoye, fit, to sit
close to the body, and be manageable, comely to grace such as wear them.

When Soldiers are thus provided of Arms, let them be careful to wear them,
for by often wearing them, their bodies will be strong, and their Armor will
be no more cumbersome unto them, then the clothes on their back.

The Romans did so inure their bodies to bear Arms, Example. Vegetivs. lib.
1. Chap. 20.
(that as Vegetius does report of them) they would both wrestle and run races
in their Armor, and were so strong of body by continual use thereof that they
made nothing of it. But when field exercises through negligence and sloth was
given over, Armor began to grow heavy, because it was seldom put on.

Their bodies being weakened by idleness, they made suite to the Emperor that
they might wear no more Cataphracts, nor Corslets: Afterward that they might
lay away their Helmets, and so when they should go to fight against the
Goathes, being naked on their breasts, and having nothing for their heads, they
were oftentimes by the multitude of Archers vanquished and overcome: Therefore
let Soldiers still accustom themselves to wear their Armor, and when want
of Employments bids them cast them off, let them not forget to use exercise at
home, to keep their bodies still in strength: so when they shall reasume their
Arms again, their bodies will be strong and able to bear them.

The next Chapter shows what exercises they should use; when they want
employment.

CHAP. V. What exercises Soldiers should use at idle Times, when they want
employment.
BEcause Soldiers may want employment, and want of employment may breed
idleness, and idleness procure a stiffenesse in the joints: therefore they
must use at idle times such exercises as may put life into them, which may make
them strong and healthful, Vegetius. Lib. 3. Chap. 2.
for exercise is more available then Physicians.

The body by idleness ingendereth many gross and cold humors which will be
very painful to lazy Soldiers, but moderate exercise taken in time, will
not only prevent it, but when they are come, expelle them soon and give them
ease.

Therefore let Soldiers use exercise, and such exercises as have in them the
tokens of courage, and feats of actiuity.

As Running, Leaping, Valting, and Swiming.

The use of them follows in the 6. 7. 8. and 9. Chapters.

CHAP. VI. Why Soldiers must use running
THe ancient Romans did exercise their young Soldiers to running, that so with
greater violence they might set upon their enemies, gain the commodious places
from the enemy, or prevent them if they would do the like.

Vegetius. Lib. 1. Chap. 9.
For this cause (says Vegetius) they were often exercised to run, that so
being set out for Scouts, they might more chearefully go forward, more readily
return, and more easily overtake their Enemies when they fled.

We that do imitate the Romans in those things which be useful, do lovingly
incite our Soldiers at vacant times to use running, that so they may be the
better breathed, and the more able to help us when we call for it.

The enemy being too strong in shot for us, we command them to run,
that so we may join with him sooner; Thereby avoiding the inconvenience of
playing upon our battle, he having liberty to dispose of his shot as he
list himself.

The enemy seeking to gain some hill, or strong place by us,
we command them to run, that so he may be prevented.

The enemy flying, we command them to pursue him running, not in disorder; but
in good order, for their safety. Thus must of running, now of Leaping and the
use.

CHAP. VII. Why Soldiers must use Leaping.
Soldiers must use Leaping, for passing of deep places, that when such kind
of dificulties happen, they may go over without all manner of trouble.

Pompey the great excelled herein, touching whom Salust in this wise seems to
make mention.

With the lightest in Leaping, with the swiftest in running, with the strongest
he strove in casting the Bar.

Our gracious Sovereign (King Charles) as a second Pompey excels in this.

Thus much of Running, and Leaping, now of Valting and the use.

CHAP. VIII. Why Soldiers must use Vaulting.
Soldiers must use Vaulting to make them ready, nimble, and quick on
horseback.

The ancient Romans (says Vegetius) had horses of wood, Vegetius. Lib. 1.
which in winter was set in a house, in somer in the open field: Upon these the
young Soldiers were compelled to mount, at the first without Armor,
afterward with Armor; when being perfect, they could with swords and long
poles in their hands get up upon any side.

Let Soldiers then use vaulting to make them ready, nymble and quick on
horseback, that if it should so chance that they were unhorsed in battle,
they might with ease mount themselves up again and renew the fight.

Thus much of Running, Leaping, and Vaulting: Now of Swymming, and the use.

CHAP. IX. Why Soldiers must use Swimming.
Soldiers must use Swymming to pass over Rivers, for Bridges are not ever
ready. Likewise in retyring, or chasing, an Army, may be often times compelled
or constrained thereunto.

Vegetius. Lib. 1.
Sudden showers or great snowes (says Vegetius) makes the waters break out,
and by ignorance herein Soldiers are subject to danger, not only on the
behalf of the Enemy, but also for drowning and perishing themselves: for this
cause they must be expert in swimming.

The ancient Romans which by so many wars and contynuall perilles came to be
excellent in all war matters chose the field Campus Martius (says Vegetius)
hard by the River Tiber, that in the same when they had left exerciseing their
weapons, they might wash off all the sweat and dust: and when they were weary
with running, refresh themselves with swimming.

Thus much of the use of Running, Leaping, Vaulting, Swymming; The next Chapter
shows unto what, young Soldiers must be disciplined, and how often trained in
a Month.

CHAP. X. Unto what young Soldiers must be disciplined, and how often trained
in a Month.
YOung Soldiers must be disciplined in the right use of their Arms, in all
the beats of the Drum, in all military motions; To march well, to Face, to
Wheel, to Countermarch, to double Ranks and Files, to do all these either by
word of mouth, by motion of hand, or by any other mute sign.

Therefore if you would confirm their knowledge in these things, it is
requisite that they should be trained either once a week, (or at the least
thrice a quarter) for continual use of the thing brings perfectness.

The Latins have given us two words for an Army, Acies and Exercitus.

Acies is latin for an Army set in Battle Array.

Exercitus, is latin for an Army which is in exercise. This name denotes unto
us, that it should be ever in labor, and never out of practice.

An Army therefore that is out of Exercise does loose a Name.

Therefore we must train the oftener, and in our traynings at home, practice
that which may befall us in battle abroad.

This we learn from the Romans.

The ancient Romans did use to train their young Soldiers twice a day, their
old once, Vegetius. Lib. 2. Chap. 24.
and this they never mist what weather soever came. In fair weather they
exercised abroad, in foul, under couerts erected for that purpose: Thrice a
month the whole Army was brought forth to march; Their march was ten miles
from the Camp: The footmen Armed and furnished with all manner of weapons, the
Horsemen divided by troops, and in complete Arms: In which march they made
semblance of batel, the horsemen began first.

Sometimes they followed, sometimes they gave back, and forsing their horses
ran them upon the spur, not only in plain fields, but in strange dificult
places, in breaches, and gapes of ditches: sometimes the foot rescued the
horse, sometimes the horse rescued the foot, and both horse and foot did ascend
and run down high and steep places.

Thus were they practiced at home, in that which might befall them abroad: so
that hap what could hap to them in fight, these practiced Soldiers had
very well forelearned. No maruile then, though they were the conquerors of so
many Nations. And when they neglected this, that they were so foiled by
Haniball and his Carthaginians, four and 20. years they lay idle and were
weakened by pleasure and difuse of Arms: That in the second war of Carthage
(as Vegetius reports) they were by no means comparable Hanniball.

But after so many consuls lost, so many Captains slain, so many Armies cast
away: falling to their former exercise, they came at length to be Conquerours
again.

Oh England, England remember this? By a presumption of long security thou
did bring these things out of use.

But follow what thou have begun, and the the end will be Glory: practice War
in Peace and Peace shall be thy reward: August: de Ciuit. Dei. Lib 19. Chap. 12
for Wars end is peace. Be diligent in Trayning and instructing thy Soldiers
according as his Majesty has directed (every week) for three months
together, and every holiday after in every year; So thou shall abate the pride
of thy Sovereigns Enemy, making him vnwillng to come to handy blows, seeing
thee so expert: And withal, thou shall encourage the friends of thy
Sovereign, and retain still the name of a valiant victorious Nation.

Therefore coveting to be victorious, still practice Arms, and desiring Peace,
prepare for War, and so both will be effected.

The next chapter shows when young Soldiers must be brought forth into the
field for battle.

CHAP. XI. When young Soldiers must be brought into the field for Battle.
WHen they know the beats of the Drum, the Distances in Ranks and Files, a
Rank from a File, and a File from a Rank, being expert in all fights, and
having such qualities as befit Martial Men: then let them be brought forth
into the field for Battle.

For the knowledge of War will make them the more bold to fight: And when
they are perfect in it, they will not be afraid, but take pleasure to meet the
Enemy in the field; For we see by experience, that no man fears at any time
to do that which he persuades himself he has thoroughly learned.

And this may be concluded as a well grounded proposition, viz.

That as the well tried and exercised Soldier desires the battle, even so the
inexpert and ignorant will fear the same.

Then take with you Vegetius counsel: Never bring your Soldiers into the
field, till you have tried and proved what they can do.

The next Chapter shows what the beats of the Drum are, which Soldiers
must know.

CHAP. XII. What the beats of the Drum are Which Soldiers must know.
THe Drum has been of long use, and is now for great service: The beating
of which, each Soldier ought truly to understand in the right name.

The wisdom of the Romans was such, that when they would change their pace in
March, or inflame their Soldiers in fight, Read Garrads Art of War.
they did use a contrary sound: And as the sounds did vary, so likewise used
they variety of names to them: Some they called the Doricke and the Phrigian
sound, the one did inflame the Soldiers hearts; The other did make meek and
appease them. They had also the Aeolian, Iasan, and Lidian, and diverse others
which did serve to incite or cool the courage of Men. Which diversities of
sounds not only we, but most Nations do retain unto this day.

The Drum was first invented by Bacchus, The antiquity of the Drum.
from him it came into India, from India into Asia, from Asia into Aeurope, and
now is used of all European Nations: (As the learned Captain Bingham
reports) in his notes upon Aelians Tactticks. chap. 9.

The Soldier then ought to know by the Drum, 1. A Call. 2. A March. 3. A
Troop. 4. A Charge. 5. A Retreat. 6. A Battalia. 7. A Battery. 8. A Relief.


For when the commanders voice cannot extend to the hearing of the company, the
Drum denounces and expresses the same.

The next Chapter shows what the distances of Files and Ranks are, which
Soldiers must know.

CHAP. XIII. What the distances in Files and Ranks are Which Soldiers must
know.
THere be Five sorts of distances in Files (say sum,) and they be these that
follows: Distances in Fi^es.
The first is closest. The second is close. The third is order. The forth is
open order. The fifth double distance.
which is, Pouldron to pouldron A foot and a half. Three foot. Six foot.
Twelve foot.


There is five sorts of distances in Ranks say they: Distances in Ranks.
The first is closest. The second is close. The third is order. The fourth is
open order. The fifth double distance.
which is To the sword point. Three foot. Six foot. Twelve foot. Four and
twenty foot.


Although they be thus set down to be five in number, yet most Commanders
observe and teach, as most proper, only three. viz. Close: Order: and Open
order: Antiquity had no more, yet the rest must not be cashered or slighted,
for some times a commander must do that in a double distance, which cannot be
done in a single.

Therefore Soldiers are bound to know all distances in Files and Ranks, that
they may the better execute what their Captain commands.

The next Chapter shows how a File and a Rank is distinguished for a Soldier
to know.

CHAP. XIIII. How a File and a Rank is distinguished for a Soldier to know.
A File, is a number of men beginning at one leader and contynuing in order of
followers to the last man. A distinction of a Fi^e.
Aelian. chap. 4.

Or thus. A File is a sequence of men standing one behind another back to
belly, and consists commonly of Ten or Eight in depth. Suidas.
The depth is no other then a File, for Ranks stretch forth in length, Files
in depth.

A Rank is a number of men side to side, in a right line, stretching out in
length from one end of the body unto the other, and is termed the length
because it runs along the Front unto each wing Aelian. Chap. 7.

A distinction of a Rank.
Or thus, A Rank is a row of men standing one by another Pouldron to pouldron,
or shoulder to shoulder, their faces being directed all one way.

This distinction of Files and Ranks a Soldier must know, that when he is bid
to double Files, he may not Ranks, and when he is bid to double Ranks he may
not Files.

The next Chapter shows what the fightes are which Soldiers must be
expertin.

CHAP. XV. What fights they are which Soldiers must be expert in.
THe fights necessary for all Soldiers to be expert in are Six.

First, to fight advancing upon an Enemy.

This is when the Enemy appears in the vantgard, To fight advancing upon an
Enemy.
and they by two ranks a piece march from the body ten paces, and give fire at
the place appointed. Or when the first rank gives fire (marching still on with
the body,) and the nex rank passes through by their right hand, gives fire
standing still before them: And so still successively all the rest in order.

This is like the Lacedemonian Countermarch to gain ground.

Secondly, To fight retyring from an Enemy.

This is when the last Rank faces about to the right, gives fire, To fight
upon a march, retiring from an enemy.
marches up to the Front and places themselves before their File leaders.

But if you will maintain a set fight with the Enemy (to gain a better
ground) then it is requisite you teach them the Macedonian Countermarch, making
your File leaders to face about and stand, the rest to pass through by the
right hand, placing themselves behind their leaders, and so meeting your Enemy
in the Rear with your best men.

Thirdly, To fight Front and Rear with the Enemy.

This is when the middle men face about to the right, To sight Front and Rear
with an Enemy.
and all the Musketeers fall in the division between both.

Fourthly, To fight with both Flanks against an enemy standing.

This is when the outward File of each Flank is commanded to face, having
given fire: To fight standing both Plankes against an Enemy.
each File deuideth it self into two parts, one half marches up to the Front
and places it self in a right line before the first File of Pikes. The other
half marches to the Rear, and places it self in a right line behind the
bringer up of the same File of Pikes: the like does all the rest on the
contrary Flank, Captain Bingham, his exercise.
so continuing, half the shot will be in the front, the other half in the
Rear. Then do but face them to the right and left by division, and each
Flank will be a battle for the Enemy.

Fifthly, To give fire by Flanks upon the Enemy marching.

This is when both their outward Files next to the Enemy makes ready, To
fight marching both flanks against an en^mie.
faces to either hand, gives fire at command, stays till the rest of all the
Files be clear of them; Then marches up by the Pikes, till all the rest doing
the like, bringes them again to their first place.

Or when they give fire and stand, and being (as it were in two Files) the body
of Pickes marching, an officer comes, and gathers up the wings and ioynes them
again in equal front with the Pikes.

To fight against horse in a set battle for the purpose against an enemy.
Sixthly, To fight against horse in a set battle for that purpose.

This is when they countermarch their wings into the midst of the battle, and
are impaled round with Pikes, and so drawn forth on either side under the
shelter of them.

In these six fights your Soldiers must be very expert, that they may avoid
all confusion. And thus much shall suffice for the Twelve Chapters before
mentioned.


The next two Chapters declare what qualities they are which befit Martial men,
and how requisite it is for them to be wise and politic to preserve the
lives of their men, and how politic wisdom may be attained, with a brief
Summarie thereof.

CHAP. XVI. What qualities they are which befitt Martial Men.
THe qualities which befit Martial men are many, but I will at this time
treat but of Eight, and they be these, viz. Silence. Obedience. Secrecy.
Sobriety. Valor. Loyalty. Freedom from Bribes. Moderation in expense.

I begin with the first: Silence.

SIlence Silence.
was of such veneration amongst the Egyptians, that they made thereof a God,
which with them was called Harpocrates: and according to the Greeks Sigaleon:
him they portratured in the likeness of a young child, August. de ciuit. Dei,
li. 18. cap. 5.
who close to his lips held one of his fingers: sometimes they pictured him
without any face at all, all covered over with the skin of a Wolf, on which
were depainted as many eyes and ears as could be inserted thereon, signifying
thereby that it was needful to see and hear much, and to speak little, in
that he that speaks not, offends not. All this is to denote unto us the
excellency of Silence, which is commendable in all men, but especially in
Soldiers, who must rule their tongues and be silent, or else they will soon
perish and come to naught. Plutarch says that there is no danger in silence.
Plutarch in the life of Seneca.
Homer highly commends it in the Grecians, in his descriptions of their
fights with the Trojans. His words be these: The Captains marshall out their
troops, ranged in goodly guise,
And forth the Trojans pace like birds, which lade the air with cries.
Not so the Greeks, whose silence breathed flames of high desire,
Fervent in zeal to back their friends, on foes to wreake their ire.


And in another place speaking of the Grecians; You surely would have deemed
each one, of all that mighty throng
Had been bereft of speech, so bridled he his tongue.


Thus much of Silence. The next quality for a Soldier is Obedience.

Obedience Obedience.
is the Queen of virtues, and crowns her followers with the wreathes of
honor. It effects much with few, and gains the victory over multitudes.
Therefore let Soldiers obey their Commanders, for without Obedience nothing
can be done.

Paulus Aemylius being to observe the custom of the Romans,
and to make an Oration of thanks unto the people for choosing him Consul, in
his Oration told them, That if they had any trust or confidence in him, or
thought him a man sufficient to discharge his place, that then they should not
speak nor meddle in any matter that concerned his duty and the office of a
General, saving only that they would be diligent without any words to do
whatsoever he commanded, that should be necessary for the wars and service
they took in hand. Plutarch in the life of Aemylius 250.
All which (says Plutarch) the Romans obeyed, and by yielding unto reason and
virtue, came to command all other, and to make themselves the mightiest people
of the world. And indeed they were the most obedient to their Commanders of
any; insomuch as a certain Numidian asking young Scipio how he would conquer
Carthage, Scipio upon a hill pointing with his finger to his Soldiers below,
answered him thus: With these I will conquer Carthage; for if I should bid them
from hence cast themselves down headlong, know they will do it. How severely
the Consuls did punish disobedience in the camp, Examples of rigorous
punishment for disobedience.
may appear by the rigorous punishment which Manlius Torquatus did execute
upon his son Titus Manlius, commanding his head to be stricken off in his
own presence, for having passed his command in sallying forth to fight with
Genutius M^tius Captain of the Tuseulans, who gave him the defy and
challenge. Nothing auailing the poor Gentleman in having overcome and slain
his enemy, nor the whole Armies supplications and entreaties. The like rigor
used Posthumus Tiburtus against his son Aulus Posthumus, at his return from
his conquered enemy. All this to show the excellency of obedience, 1 Samuel
15.22.
which the Prophet prefers above s^c^ifice. Thus much of Obedience. The next
quality for a Soldier is Secrecy.

Secrecy Secrecy.
is a quali^ie appropriated to none but wise men; for a fool having heard a
secret, trauelleth as a woman with child until he have d^sclosed i; but a
wise man keeps it close in his breast, and when any goes about to commit a
secret unto him, he will seek all means to avoid it. King Lysimachus as he
advised and talked upon a time with Philippedes (the Comicall Poet) a friend
and familiar of his, he said unto him, What would thou have me to impart
unto thee of all that mine is? Even what it shall please you Sir (answered the
Poet) so it be none of your secrets.

Anacharsis, being invited one day and feasted by Solon, was reputed wise,
Plutarch in his Morals.
for that being asleep, he was found and seen holding his right hand to his
mouth, and his left upon his priuities and natural parts. Hence Plutarch
inferres this, That he had good reason so to think, because the Tongue required
and needed the stronger bridle to restrain it, being a hard matter to reckon
so many persons undone and overthrown by their intemperate and loofe life, as
there have been Cities and mighty States ruinated and subverted utterly, by
the revealing and opening of some secrets. Therefore let all men strive to
attain this virtue of secrecy;
especially Soldiers, for by their overmuch babbling, they may be an occasion
of the overthrow of themselves and others.

A strange accident did happen to the City of Athens, (which Sylla did
beleager) through the lavishness of certain unbridled tongues. Plutarch.
Certain old fellows being met in a Barbers shop within the City of Athens
(being blabs of their tongues) chatted it out in their talk together, that a
certain quarter of the City, named Heptacaleon, was not sufficiently guarded,
and therefore the Town in danger to be surprised, by that part; which talk of
theirs was ouer-heard by certain Espies, who advertised Sylla so much,
whereupon immediately he brought all his Forces to that side, and about
midnight gave an assault, made entry, and went within a very little of forcing
the City, and being Master of it all; for he filled the whole street, called
Ceranicum, with slaughter and dead carcasses, in so much that the channels ran
down with blood. A fearful example.

Plutarch says, That words have wings, and when they fly out they cannot be
recalled back again.

Symonides says, A man may repent many times for words spoken, but never for a
word kept in. The Kings of Persia did punish with death the lavishness of the
tongue. This made the Persians famous for secrecy.

Quintus Curtius reports thus of them, Alexander the Great, says he, wrought
all the ways he could, to obtain knowledge where Darius was become, and into
what Country he was gone, and yet could not get the intelligence; by reason of
a custom among the Persians, which were wont with a marvelous fidelity to
keep close their Princes secrets, in the uttering whereof, neither death nor
hope of reward could cause them to bring forth a word, there being (in those
parts) not any goodness looked for at any man's hands, that has not the gift
of secretnesse, whereof Nature has given a facillity in man. Thus much of
Secrecy. The next virtue required in a Soldier, is Sobriety or Temperance.

Sobriety is a great virtue, and greatly to be accounted of all men, Sobriety.
for it extinguisheth Vice in the cradle, and st^fle^h it in the ^eed. It is
the mother of health, and an assured medicine against all maladies, and that
which lengtheneth a man's life. Socrates by Sobriety had always a strong body,
and lived ever in health; whereas Alexander, by his drunkenness, dyed in the
flower of his age, though he were better borne, and of a sounder constitution
than Socrates.

All the greatest Personages of the world have been Sober.

So was Cyrus the elder, so was Caesar, so was Julian the Emperor.

Therefore let all Soldiers be sober, and embrace Sobriety, for it will make
them as Kings and Princes to govern their passions, and to bridle their
insatiate appetite. To Sobriety let them add Temperance.

Temperance Temperance.
is a rule that sweetly accommodateth al things unto Nature, Necessity,
Simplicity, Facility, Health, Constancy. Temperance will weane their souls
from the sweet milk of the pleasures of this world, and make them capable of a
more solid and sovereign nourishment. These two will highly advance them in
the favor of their General, and raise them in time to great preferment,
whereas drunkards and intemperate persons are contemned of all men, and no
matter of importancie to be committed unto them. Read Garrards Art of War^e.
The Turks are famous for their Sobriety. A certain Gentleman, at his return
from Constantinople, did declare unto the Earl of Salma, that he had seen
four miracles in the Turkish Dominions; which was, first an infinite Army
almost without number, consisting of more than four hundred thousand men:
Secondly, that amongst so many men be saw not one woman: Thirdly, that there
was no mention made of wine: Lastly, at night when they had cried with a high
voice, Alla, which is God, there continued so great a silence through the whole
Camp, that even in the Pauilions they did not speak but in a low voice. A
thing worthy to be admired and imitated, though from Turks. The next Quality
required in a Soldier is Valor.

Valor Valor.
is the greatest, the most generous and heroycallest virtue for a Soldier of
all other, it consists in the stoutnesse of his heart, in the resolution and
stayednesse of his mind, grounded upon the duty, the honesty, and justice of
the enterprise, which resolution never slacketh whatsoever happens, until he
have valiantly ended the enterprise, or his life. Here is Valor, let Soldiers
strive to be thus valiant: some do seek this virtue in the body, and in the
power and strength of the limbs. But they are mistaken, for it is not a
quality of the body, but of the mind, a settled strength, not of the arms and
legs, They term it.
but of the courage. This Valor is Philosophical, not altogether humane,
being an impregnable bulwark, a complete armor to encounter all accidents,
arming a man against his own adverse fortune, Peter Charron of Wisdom, lib.
3. page 499.
and making him to brook the constancy and virtue of his enemy, containing
Magnanimity, Patience, and other chief heroical virtues: All other helps are
strange and borrowed: strength of arms and legs is the quality of a Porter; to
make an enemy to stoop, to dasle his eyes at the light of the Sun, is an
accident of Fortune.

He whose courage fails not for fear of death, quelleth not in his constancy
and resolution, and though he fall is not vanquished of his Adversary (who
perhaps may in effect, be but a base fellow,) but of Fortune: and therefore he
is to accuse his own unhappiness, and not his negligence;
The most valiant are oftentimes the most unfortunate. Seeing it is so; Let no
man be disheartened, especially a Soldier, seeing he must be brought unto some
honorable enterprise, and therefore not to adventure, is cowardnesse, to
adventure on, valor, be the event what it will. Many are accounted valiant,
who have no spark of true Valor in them; such are all our Thrasonicall
Braggadoshes, Ragamuffin Rorers, who will quarrel with any man they meet with
for the Wall, and send their challenges abroad as oftentations of their Valor.
But such are not to be dealt withal, being but rash men, bastardly Valorous,
Peter Charron of Wisdom, lib. 3. page 500.
as they call it. True Valor, though it be Humane, is a wise Cowardlinesse; a
Fear accompanied with foresight to avoid one evil by another: and such men as
are thus valorous, will not venture their life upon any slight occasion. These
are wise and are to be commended; the other unwise, and are to be
discommended. Cato the elder, hearing many to commend a hare-braind fellow for
his Valor, wittily taunted the applausers thus: My friends (quoth he) I wonder
why you should esteem Valor so much, and Life so little. Plutarch against
heady Rashness speaks to this effect, and says; That when King Pyrrhus sent
his Herald unto King Antigonus; to challenge him to fight, Antigonus made him
this answer, That he made Wars as much with Time as with Weapons; and if
Pyrrhus were weary of his Life, there was enough open to put himself to death.
Thus you see how heady Rashness is to be contemned and avoided. But this does
no whit impeach Valor, for Valor executed in fit time and place, has
produced wonderful effects. Quintus Curtius says of Alexander, that he got
the Victory at Arbella, more by his own Virtue than by any Fortune; and that
with Valor and hardness more then through any advantage of ground. Plutarch
in the life of Cor^olanus.
Plutarch says of Cains Martius; That by his mere Valor and manhood, he
took the City of Corioles; and after was the cause of the Consul Cominius
victory against them, which came to the rescue of it. For the Volfes (fearing
the taking of the City) came from all parts of the Country to save it, and had
divided themselves into two parts, to hold the Romans play in two several
places.) Therefore Martius having taken their City, left the spoil thereof to
his obstinate Soldiers which stayed behind, and with a few that willingly
offered themselves to go, he went to aid the Consul Cominius against the
rest. When he came he asked him how the Order of the Enemies Battle was, and
on which side they had placed the best fighting men. The Consul made him
answer, that he thought the Bands which were in the Vaward of their Battle,
were those of the Antiates, whom they esteemed the warlikest men, and which for
courage would give no place to any of the Host of their Enemies. Then prayed
Martius to be set directly against them; the Consul granted him, greatly
praising his courage. Then Martius, when both the Armies came almost to join,
advanced himself a good space before his Company, and went so fiercely to give
charge on the Vaward that came right against him, that they could stand no
longer in his hands, he made such a lane through them, and opened a passage
into the Battle of the Enemies. The Romans prevailing against their foes,
besought Martius that he would return to the Camp, because they saw he was
able to do no more, he was already so wearied with the great pain he had
taken, and so faint with the great wounds he had upon him. But Martius answered
them, that it was not for Conquerors to yield, nor to be faint-hearted; and
thereupon began afresh to chase them that fled, until such time as the Army of
the Enemies was utterly overthrown, and numbers of them slain and taken
prisoners. The next morning betimes, Martius went to the Consul Cominius, who
highly commended him for his Valor, and proffered him many gi^ts, but M^rtius
refused all. Therefore the Consul did order and decree, that he should
henceforth be called Coriolanus, in lieu of the noble service he had done, and
for his Lion-like courage.

T^u^ much of Valor.

The next Virtue required in a Soldier is Loyalty. Loyalty.
Loyalty is a transcendent Virtue, and passes my power to express. It
consists in the faithfulness of Subjects to their Prince, of Soldiers to
their General, of one friend to another. For without faith no friendship. Faith
is the band of all humane society, the foundation of all Justice, and above all
things ought to be religiously observed. The Romans were wont to exact it from
their Soldiers by an oath, the fo^me whereof (in Vegetius time) did run thus:
Vegeti^^ ^^b. 2. cap. 5.
We swear by God the Father, by Christ his Son, and by the Holy Ghost, to do
all thing: valiantly which the Emperor or Prince does command us; we will
never forsake the war, neither refuse death for the Roman Commonwealth.
This shows what manner of man a Soldier should be, loyal and faithful, such
a one by nature, not by Art or obligation; therefore let all Soldiers strive
to attain this excellent virtue of Loyalty, which will so arm them against
all the temptations of the Enemy, as he shall never be able to make them
Traitors.
What Soldier would become a Traitor to betray his General or Captain into
the hands of his Enemy, if he did consider the penalty of the same; it may be
from him that sets him on work? I will instance it in the Argyraspides. They
love the Treason but they hate the Traitor. Plutarch in the life of Eumenes.
Plutarch in the life of Pausanias.
The Argyraspides were old Soldiers of Macedon, who did deliver their good
Captain Eumones alive into the hands of Antigonus, his deadly enemy. But
Antigonus, who set them a work, commanded every mothers son of them to be
slain in recompense of their Treason, (says Plutarch in the life of Eumenes.)
Treason is a horrid fact, and the justice of God will not let it pass
unpunished, be the committer never so great: I will instance it in Pausanias.

This Pausanias was General of the Lacedaemonians, when the Persians ouer-ran
Greece, and wasted all the Country before them, he received of Xerxes, King of
Persia, five hundred Talents of gold, promising him to betray Sparta: but his
Treason being discovered, Agesilaus his father pursued him into the Temple of
Minerua, called Chalciaecos, where he fled for Sanctuary, where he caused the
doors of the Temple to be mured up with brick, and famished him to death: his
mother took his corpse, and cast it forth to the dogs, not suffering it to be
buried, says Plutarch in the life of Pausanias.

These examples being set before their eyes, will not only make them to detest
Treason, but to become more faithful unto their Commanders.

Of all Soldiers none ever were more faithful to their Commanders than the
Romans, ye shall not read in any History of any faithfuller Soldiers than they
have been.

When their Consul Crassus was endangered by the Parthian Arrows, which flew
thick about his ears, they did compass him about, and brought him into the
midst of them, then covering him round with their Targets, they told him,
That never Arrow of the Parthians should touch his body, before they were all
slain, one after another, fighting it out to the last man in his defense.

Plutarch in the life of Otho the Emperor.
Plutarch reports a more admirable act of theirs than this. The Emperor Otho
(says he) was forsaken of all his Captains, who had yielded themselves to
Vitellus, the new Emperor, his Soldiers notwithstanding forsook him nor,
neither went they to submit themselves to their enemies the Conquerours,
neither took they any regard of themselves to see their Emperor in that
despair, but all jointly together went unto his lodging and called for their
Emperor; when he came out, they fell down at his feet; prostrated thus on
the ground, they did kiss his hands, with the tears running down their
cheeks, and besought him, not to forsake and leave them to their enemies, but
to command their persons, whilst they had one drop of blood left in their
bodies to do him service:


Then one of the poor Soldiers, drawing out his sword, said unto him, Know, O
Caesar, that all my Companions are determined to dye in this sort for thee; and
so slew himself.

These were faithful and loyal Soldiers, worthy to be remembered to all
posterities: They were constant to their friends, faithful to one another; not
refusing death for the Roman Commonwealth.

Let all Soldiers imitate them in faithfulness.

Faithful Soldiers are a Captains bulwark.

Caesar was safer in the Camp then in the Senate.

Thus much of loyalty.

The next quality required from a Soldier, is freedom from bribes.

It is a dishonorable thing for a Soldier to receive a Bribe; and it is the
more dishonorable, because the law of Arms does forbid it: wherefore does the
law of Arms strictly forbid it with a penalty to the same, but because those
men, whose nature is most prone to take bribes, are the most fittest to be made
Traitors? On them the enemy will lay golden books, to draw them to his
purpose, upon any occasion. Thus Xerxes dealt with Arthmius, Plutarch in the
life of Themisticles.
borne at Zelb^a, who by gold was to corrupt the Graecians, to make him way
into Greece. But Arthmius was thereupon noted of infamy, not alone, but his
children, with their posterity after.

Thus he dealt with Pausanius, General of the Lacedaemonians, Xerxes corrupted
Pausanius with 500 talents of gold to betray Sparta. Plutarch in his Morals,
and in the life of Pausanius.
to whom he gave five hundred Talents of gold, to betray Sparta into his hands:
but Pausanius, being too much gorged with gold, was mured up in a Temple, and
famished to death, as I have already declared.

Good reason therefore it is, that the law of Arms should so strictly forbid
the taking of b^ibes, seeing the whole Army may be endangered thereby. And the
law of Arms does likewise include all acceptance of gifts, as unlawful for
any to receive of a professed enemy, that is, or has been, or may be guessed
at to be hereafter, whether they be given him in lieu of his desert, or to
recompense him for his Embassage; he must not, I say, accept them of him,
forfeare of bringing himself into danger. Have not many bin brought into
suspicion by it? Have not some lost their lives for it? Read Histories, peruse
this example.

The Athenians sent their Ambassadors (who were Soldiers) to Artaxerxes, King
of Persia, to fulfill the desire of the King, Plutarch in the life of Pelopidas
page 302.
and to grant him peace: The King was so pleased therewith, that he entertained
them royally, and sent them back again with many gifts; but when they were
returned home, they were deservedly checked by their State and Communalty, who
had them all in suspicion; and some had much ado to clear themselves. Among
them was one Timagoras, who had received of the King of Persia, fourscore
milch Kine, for the peale, and other presents, with a great deal of gold and
silver, him the Athenians condemned to dye, and neither wealth nor friends
could save his life. This should make a Soldier to beware how he takes gifts
or presents from an enemy, lest he lose his life, or incur the ill will of
his Prince, or be of no repute among men.

What made Pelopidas to be so well reputed of among the Thebans? Plutarch in
the life of Pelopidas page 303.
but because he refused the gifts and presents which the King of Persia offered
him? What made Plutarch so highly to commend Manius Curious? but because he
refused the gifts which the Samnites sent unto him by their Ambassadors? This
Manius Curious was a Roman and had triumphed thrice, being the greatest man of
Rome in his time, having subdued the mightiest nations and people of Italy; and
driven King Pyrrhus also out of the same; yet himself dwelt in a little farm,
having a small patch of ground belonging thereunto, being therewith contented,
and manuring the same with his own hands: thither notwithstanding, after his
three triumphs, Plutarch in the life of Marcus Cato.
the Samnits sent their Ambassadors to visit him, who found him by the fire
side, seething of Parsnips, and presented him a marvelous deal of gold from
their State and Communalty; but Curious returned them again with their gold,
and told them, That such as were contented with that Supper, had no need of
gold or silver; and that for his part, he thought it greater honor to command
them that had gold, then to have it himself.

They who will immitate this man, shall inherit his commendations: I conclude
with this admonition to all Soldiers.

S. Trussell, in his Soldiers plea.
Let them not receive any thing from the enemy, either gift or letter, or any
such thing; no, though it be from their own fathers, without the license of
their General or Captains; if they do, they will be wonderfully suspected,
and in danger, not only of their credits, but also of their lives.

The next quality required in a Soldier, is Moderation in Expense.

Moderation in expense Moderate in expense.
is not only profitable, but commendable. Therefore let Soldiers be moderate
in expense, rather sparing than wasting.

The ancient Romans were commendable for this, the half of that which was
given them in the wars, they set apart by their Standards, there to be kept,
lest through excess and riot, or the getting of vain things, it might be
wasted by themselves or others; but being by their Standards they knew it safe.
This made them never to forsake their Standards, but rather stick to them: so
when they came home from the wars, they brought that with them that was able
to maintain them. The next Chapter shows what the wisdom and policy is
which ought to be in every Commander.

CHAP. XVII. Of Wisdom and Policy; the use of it; how it may be attained: with
a brief Summary of stratagems and policies, pertinent for these times,
divulged for such as have the command over thousands: I mean, for young
Commanders, not old Soldiers.
Wisdom and Policy is fit for every Soldier, Of wisdom and policy, the use
of it, and how it may be attained. etc.
but more proper for those Commanders before mentioned; therefore they must
study to get wisdom and policy, for it is the only means, next under God,
whereby they may preserve their own lives, and the lives of their Soldiers.
If a Captain be void of wisdom and learning, Martial discipline wants her
greatest stay; courage proves rashness, and policy will be but weakly
supported. Learning in a Soldier (says Vegetius) is an Armor of never
tainted proof, and a wounding Dart irresistable: Therefore let Soldiers, if it
be possible, study to attain to learning: learning is obtained by industry and
instruction, as policy and wisdom by experience.

The way to attain wisdom and Policy, Read Xenophons History of Cyrus
Wars. Read Frontines book of Stratagems, now extant, and commonly joined in
one volume with Vegetius. Read Plutarchs lives, the Turkish History, and many
others; especially the Chronicles of every Nation now extant in Engish.
is to be frequent in the reading of Histories; especially of such Histories as
are stored with worthy stratagems, and the brave exploits of worthy Generals:
There young Commanders shall find store of examples, and be taught to observe
every one of these particulars;

1 When they are to take a journey, and to make war with an enemy in his
own Country, they must by all means get advertisement, by intelligencers, of
all the difficult passages of the same, the shortness of the ways, the
turnings, the mountains, and all the rivers that are therein, lest in going
they suffer invasion of the enemy, to their detriment, or final destruction:
but being preadmonished, they are half armed, and prevent the danger with
little loss.

2 When they are prepared, and setting forth to march, there must be this
wariness and heed taken that it be not known or divulged abroad unto what
places they go, nor by what ways they mean to pass, for that journey is
taken in hand without fear, which the enemy does not so much as once suspect.

The two famous Soldiers of Rome and Greece, which shot like two thunder bolts
into the West and East, and filled the whole world with the fame of their
Victories, are renowned for nothing more then their celerity in doing and
preventing the very report of their coming.


They who would arrive at the Port of Victory, and by her gates enter the Tower
of Fame, must keep their intentions secret.

Old Metellus being importunated by an insinuating friend of his touching the
army, and setting forward of some expedition, answered him thus: If I will
(quoth he) that my shirt which i^ ne^^ my skin knew this my inward intent and
secret purpose, I would put it off and fling it into the fire

Vegetius lib. 3.
The old men of war (says Vegetius) had in then Legions the badge and sign
of the Minotaure, that as he was said to be hid in the innermost and most
secret place of the Labyrinth, even so the intent of the Captain should be
kept secret and hid, therefore it must be kept close, unto what places and by
what ways they mean to pass forth. But because Spies sent out on the other
party do either see or suspect which way they are intended to go, and many
times there wants not Runnagates or Traitors. In the next place it shall be
declared how these things at hand may be prevented and resisted.

3. When they are upon their march, they must send most trusty and fine witted
men, with the best tried horse, which must search the places through which they
must take their journey, before and behind, on the right hand and on the left
hand, lest the enemy go about to set an ambushment, and lie in wait to
deceive them.

4. When they have discried an Ambush, they must compass the same about
politikely; so it shall suffer more peril and danger than it went about to do.

5. When they approach nigh unto the enemy, they must be inquisitiue to know
what manner of man their adversary is, what his Companions are and Leaders,
whether they be rash and hasty, or wary and circumspect, whether they be
hardy, or fearful, cunning in the feats of war, or such as are wont to
fight at all adventure; whether they excel or exceed them in number of men, or
munition and fence of armor; whether they can do more with footmen, or
horsemen; with Pi^emen, or Musketeers; whether by night, or in the dawning of
the day, or in the (...) of repast, their custom be to assail their wearied
enemies. Then to debate and treat of their own power, what may be done in this
case; whether it be more profitable to prolong the urgent necessity of
battle, or to fight it out of hand. If they know themselves to have the better
Horsemen, the better Footmen, the better Soldiers, the better furnished in
many things, let them not defer the convenient and fit occasion of figh^ing.
But if they perceive their enemies to be the better, let them avoid the open
and set battle, for a few in number and weak in strength, oftentimes under
good Captains have obtained the victory, by sudden invasions and lying privily
in wai^, which they may do, taking time.

6. When they are resolved to adventure a set battle with the enemy, they are
first to sound the minds and dispositions of their Soldiers, whether they
stand affected to fight or no, (it being as they would have it) they must begin
to forecast how to get the Sun, the Wind and Dust, in the face of the enemy.
The higher ground likewise, to the intent the enemy may fight both against
them and the place; for these are not the least means of obtaining the
victory.

7. When they hope for victory through Footmen, against the Horsemen of their
enemies, they must choose ruff places, uneven, and full of hills. But if they
look to gain the victory through Horsemen, against the Footmen of their
enemies, they must choose such places as be indeed somewhat higher, but plain
and open, encumbred neither with woods nor sennes.

8 When they have cunningly incompast the battles of their enemies, they must
leave them some way whereby they may fly, for if a passage to depart away be
once opened, as soon as the minds of all do agree to run away; they are
slain and murdered like beasts. Neither is there any danger to pursue them,
when they have flung down their weapons and will fight no longer but being so
enclosed, that they have no way to fly, they fight stoutly, and become
desperately desperate, because they look for no safety or life; so you have
no odds at all, but are both indifferent alike. For they are as courageous and
as desperate to fight as you, rather more, by the occasion. Therefore young
Scipio's counsel is to be followed:
The way whereby the enemy may fly must not be fortified.

9 When they are not resolved to fight, but to depart away from the enemy, the
Soldiers must not know that they do it to shun battle, but they must be
brought in belief that they are called back for this policy: That the enemy
may be allured unto a more convenient place, that he may be the more easily
vanquished and intrapped by them. Vegetius lib. 3. cap. 21.
This they must not fail to do, (for Vegetius says) they will be ready to
fly, if they perceive their own Capaines to despair.

10 When their enemies does perceive their flight, then their care must be to
send some before to possess the places of greatest advantage which the enemy
does covet, that the rest may the better pass in safety, and the enemy be
frustrated of his purpose. Others behind must lie in ambush to entrap the enemy
who comes on with boldness, no whit suspecting this policy. The rest must be
preadmonished to be ever in readiness, lest the sudden coming of their
enemies make them fearful:

11 When they are in fear to be enclosed by the number of their enemies, they
must either seek some place of natural defense, or make the place so by art.
I will explain both by examples.

How to choose a ground to fight with an enemy, when you fear to come into
the champion to be enclosed by his number. Plutarch in the life of King
Ageslaus.
Agesilau^ being in Egypt, and having to do with a great multitude of
Egyptians, of whom he stood in fear of, to abide them battle in the
champion, by reason of their multitude, did thus: He brought his men into the
field. One while he made as though he fled, and enticed them to follow him;
suddenly again he would turn this way, and that way, in fine he brought all
this multitude into a strait sluice walled about on either side, with great
broad ditches full of running water, so that even when they were in the midst
of it, he suddenly stopped their passage with the front of his battle, which
he cast to the breadth of the sluice, and thus made the number of his fighting
men equal with the number of his enemies, who could never compass him in
behind, nor flank him on the sides.
This he did by choosing a place fit for his purpose.

How to fortify a pl ce by art.
The place may be helped by art, in case it be otherwise too open, and fit for
the enemy, that abounds in number, to incompasse them on every side.

So Caesar Caesar ^e bello Gall. lib. 2. 36. and lib. 3. 323.
being to fight against multitudes of Gauls, drew a deep Trench on both the
Flanks of his army, to secure it from the charge of the enemy. The like did
Sylla Plutarch. in Syla, and A^i^n. in bello Mitbridates.
against Archelaus, the General of Mithridates, in the battle of Orchomene,
and both of them so securing their armies from circumuention, became Masters of
the Field, and Conquerours of their enemies. Of latter times John Huniades the
Hungarian Turkish. Hist. 297.. 2.
King, being to fight against the huge army of the Turk, gained a noble
battle against them, by placing his army on the one side against a Fenne, and
enclosing it on the other side with his Wagons.

12. When they cannot prevail against the Enemy by strength, then let them
minister and breed causes of discord amongst their Soldiers; for no Army,
though it be very little, can quickly be destroyed of the Enemies, except it be
consumed with private dissentions and hatred within it self. This is practiced
to this day, and is tolerated by our chiefes of War, who prefer policy
before strength, therefore let it be followed. The old Spartan that had
conquered by policy, offered an Ox; but he that prevailed by force, offered
only a Cock; because the greater sacrifice of thankfulness, was due to the
gods from him, for the one; and the greater praise and reward was due unto him,
from the State for the other. But this is the greatest glory of all to drive
out the nail of their Enemies practice, with a stronger of their own, and to
blow him up in his own Mine. Policy against force deserves much, and
prevails often; but by Stratagem to prevail against Policy is ever
excellent. Behold it in this.

The Soldiers of Ferdinand, plotted with some of the French Garrison in
Gifon-Castle, near San-Seuerino, to betray the place unto them: the French
entertained the motion, and assigned an hour, and the manner, for the
execution: In the mean while, they acquainted the Governor. The Arragoneses
came at the time appointed; found a Port open, and enter; they were taken in
the trap; seven hundred, part horse, and part foot, were slain on the place;
the rest were taken prisoners. Thus Stratagem did prevail against Policy:
Stratagem and Policy are of great force, and in War may be lawfully used.

It is usual and allowable by the Law of Arms (says Sir Robert Dallington)
for a public and professed enemy to attempt that by stratagem, fraud, or
suborned treachery, Sir Rob. Dall. in his A^horisme, chap. 37.
which cannot be got by fine force without long time, uttermost danger, and
extreme charge, for this way the purchase is sooner made and at less rate.
Therefore let them use all stratagems and policies that may be to circumuent
and overthrow an enemy; let them upon fit occasion corrupt the enemies men with
money; let them by cunning means and fained letters cause the enemies
Captains to be suspected; Let them bring the General himself into more
dislike, if he be disliked of his Soldiers: So they may be rid of him by
policy, whom they could not be rid of by force. I will show you the events of
all these by presidents.

The first example of presiden^, showing how to corrupt the Enemies men with
money.
Monsieur Trimouille, Monsieur de Ligny, and John Jacques Triultio, being to
war with Lodowick Sforza Duke of Milan in the behalf of Lewis the twelfth
the French King, thought with themselves there was no quicker way to end the
War than to corrupt Lodowicks Soldiers with money. He had entertained many
Swissers into pay, and these Swissers were valiant men of their hands, but very
covetous, and easy to be corrupted with gold: therefore they sent privily to
the Colonels of the Swissers, profering them great sums of money to forsake
Lodowicke, or to betray him into their hands. They being tickled with these
proffers, stirred all the rest to mutiny, taking their occasions that their
pays were not performed at the just days that were promised. The Duke ran to
the stir in person, bringing forth unto them all his silver, plate and
vessels, desiring them to rest contented but till the money came from Milan,
yet they would not yield, but said they would depart suddenly into their
Country. The Duke not being able neither with prayers, nor with tears, nor by
infinite promises to pacify any whit their barbarous disloyalty, recommended
himself wholly unto them, to the end that at the least they would lead him to
a place of safety. But because they had contracted with the French Captains,
Guichiardin. lib. 3. page 108.
to go their ways, and not to lead him with them, being not willing to grant
unto his full demand, yet they consented that he should march away amongst
them, taking the habit of one of their footmen; and so, if he were not known,
to save himself by the help of his fortune. The which conditions being
accepted of him, for a last necessity, was not sufficient for his safety: for
that marching by direction, through the midst of the French Army, he was
known by the diligent espiall of such as were assigned to that charge; or
rather disclosed by the Swissers themselves, as he marched in a Squadron of
Foot, attired and armed in all points as a Swisser, and was by that means made
prisoner. Guichiardin. lib. 3. page 108.
Here you see the French Pistolets could do more than their men at Arms;
ouercomming him who styled himself the son of Fortune. From these acute and
politic French, we take our next president or example by fained letters to
cause our enemies Captains to be suspected.

Burbon and Triuultio the King of France his Generals, The second example or
president, showing how by cunning means and fained Letters, we shall cause
our enemies Captains to be suspected.
being besieged and very hardly distressed within Milan by the Emperor
Maximilian, devised this policy to free themselves: They sent a servant of
Triuultio's (who spoke the Swissers tongue perfectly well) with fained letters
unto the Captains of that Nation, then serving in Maximilians Camp, thereby
to make them to be suspected and doubted; the which fained messenger being
taken by the Sentinels and Watches, cunningly (like Sinon of Troy) humbly
beseeched them his life and pardon, and that he would deliver them certain
things, which he had to deliver to the Colonels and Captains of the Swissers:
the which being granted him, he drew out of his shoe the devised letters,
which he carried to cause a suspicion to grow upon these Captains: the which
being seen and read by the Emperor, holding for certain their contents to be
true, and mistrusting some treason, as they had before used unto Lodowicke
Sforza, raised presently his Camp, and withdrew himself with less constancy
and credit, then to his honor and reputation was convenient.

Here was a way made without a golden bridge: Here was a fetch fit for a
Carthaginian Haniball: from whom we take the last president or example, how to
bring our enemies General into further dislike, by adding fuel to the former
fire.

Haniball being in Italy did such hurt to the Romans, The third example or
president, showing how to bring a General into further dislike then he was in
before.
as they were almost at their wits end, not knowing what to do, nor what
Consul to choose: at length they sent against him Quintus Fabius Maximus, who
was both their Dictator and General; one both skillful and politic, and by
delay meant to prolong the War, so to have wearied Hanibals strength and
power out (for having increased his poverty by his long stay, spending his own
stock, he should at last have been forced of his own accord to have forsaken
Italy, to the great glory of this man,) who by policy and wisdom, might have
been said to have overthrown Haniball; for this he was despised of the
Romans, and counted a coward, and confronted by them: But Haniball most of all
feared him, and therefore craftily put this trick upon him.

^anibals crafti^esse against ^abius.
He commanded his Soldiers, when they came near any of Fabi^s lands, that
they should burn and destroy all round about them, but gave them charge in no
wise to meddle with Fabius lands, nor any thing of his, and did purposely
appoint a Garrison to see that nothing of Fabius should miscarry nor take hurt.
This was straight carried to Rome, which did wonderfully incense the people
against him, by the means of Metellus their Tribune, who made them an Oration,
in which he taxed him no more of Cowardlinesse, but of flat Treason, accusing
the Nobility and greatest men of Rome, saying, that from the first beginning,
they had laid a plot to draw these Wars out at length, only to destroy the
Peoples power and authority, having brought the whole Commonweal into the
state of a Monarchy, and into the hands of a private person, who by his
remissness and delays, would give Haniball leisure to plant himself in Italy,
and in time give open passage to the Carthaginians, at their pleasure, to send
Haniball a second aid and Army, and to make a full conquest of all Italy:
persuading the people therefore to take the Tyrannical power of Dictatorship
from him, and to put their affairs into the hands of Minutius General of
their Horsemen, who would and could tell how to bring them safely to pass: The
people were tickled maruellously with these seditious words, but yet they durst
not force Fabius to resign his Dictatorship, Plutarch in the life of Fabius
the Dictator.
though they bare him a great grudge, and were angry with him in their hearts:
Howbeit they ordained, that Minutius should thenceforth have equal power and
authority with the Dictator in the Wars; a thing that was never seen nor
heard of before. Now say; Was not this a brave policy of Haniball to bring
Fabius into such dislike at Rome? and Rome it self into such an uproar upon
it? Surely it was: and it had as good success as might be. Therefore having
sufficient presidents for these things, fear not to put them in execution,
when you see fit time. I conclude now as I began, that all these policies and
more, are to be attained with learning, and often reading of Histories, as by
all brave Commanders which ever were yet, may well be understood. And therefore
let no man think but a Soldier ought to be learned and read, the which joined
with experience, makes him a perfect man of War, and without this learning
and reading, a Soldier may haunt the Wars many years, and never attain to
the deep points of Soldiery; In Barrets art of War lib. 8. page 173.
the which by much reading and few years of experience, may be far better
perfected, as may be seen by Lucullus the Roman Commander, and many others of
other Nations.

Thus much of Policy, and of the qualities which befits Martial men.

The next eight Chapters following declares the use of Facing, the use of
Wheeling, the use of Counter-marching, the use of Doubling, the use of those
Distances which are to be observed in Battle, (naturally arising out of
Doubling) with the words of command for either.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the use of Facing.
IN exercise we commonly prefix unto our selves this method or order. First to
face and stand: Secondly, to face and march.

When we face and stand, Of facing and standing.
it is to show our Soldiers how they should defend themselves, if they should
be set upon, in Front, in Rear, in Flanks: by transferring their faces that
way to receive them closing, or sering themselves together at a convenient
distance, and bearing out a This is lively expressed in the Hollow battle
called Plaesium, where the Musketier are in the midst, the Pikes outwardly
Fro^ted every way and chargin^ ouer-hand to shelter the Musketeers. Apian in
the Wars of Siria, and Capt. Bingham.
multitude of Pikes every way upon them: (as that Phalange of Antiochus the
Great did) when Domitius, Scipio's Lieutenant encompassed it round with
horsemen and light armed. I cannot do amiss in relating the manner of it
unto you, it being so pertinent for my purpose, and so fit for the
understanding of the motion: Therefore out of Apian I will dilate it thus.

As soon as the horse and chariots, of Antiochus, were put to flight by the
Roman Horsemen, and by Eumenes his Phalange of foot being destitute of horse,
first opened and received the light armed (that had all the while fought in the
Front) into the midst of it. Then afterward again closed: And when
Domitius, Scipio's Lieutenant encompassed it about with horse and light armed,
which he might easily do, by reason it was thrust up in a thick This
Plinth^um was a great square battle full of men, and not the hollow Plinthium
spoken of in X^nophon. The depth o^ this Plinthium was 32. in depth. The light
armed in the midst.
Plinthium, it was driven to great distress: being neither able to charge the
enemy, nor yet to countermarch in so great a depth as it carried: It grieved
them much that their long experience nothing auailed them to annoy the enemy,
and that notwithstanding, they were subject to Arrows and Darts at all hands.
Yet bearing out a multitude of Pikes on every side of their square, they called
the Romans to come to handle blows, and still made a countenance, as though
they meant to charge, keeping themselves for all that within their Ranks, as
being footmen and heavy armed, and the rather because they had to do with an
Enemy on horseback. Besides, they were loath to break the thickness of
their battle; which form they could not now alter. The Romans also Durst not
approach them, and come to sword, fearing their experience in War, and
closeness of Array, and desperation. But running about here and there, plied
them with Arrows and Darts, whereof none was thrown in vain, falling amongst
a troop so closely put together, that they could neither avoid, and decline
any thing thrown, nor give a way, albeit they saw it coming. At last being
weary and irresolute what to do, they retired easily, with a threatening
countenance notwithstanding and in good order, and not delivering the Romans
of fear, who durst not yet come near, but sought to annoy them aloof; till
the Elephants placed in the Macedonian Phalange, being affrighted, and not to
be ruled by their governors, troubled all, and gave occasion of flight.
Hitherto Appian.

Whereby you may see how suddenly they did face, maintaining a Charge (as it
were) upon a stand; and when the Romans would not come to handy strokes with
them, they angerly, yet leasurely retreated: and when they were distressed,
made as though they would charge, holding out a multitude of Pikes every way;
to the amazement of the Romans, who durst not approach them. The like may be
done by our That is the Hollow square where the Pikes are without, and the
Musketeers within.
Battle, if it should be charged as that was. Thus much to face ane stand.

Now to face and march.

Off facing and Marching.
When we face and march, it is to show our Soldiers how we can upon
deliberation (as occasion serves) prevent the enemy from Falling on our right
or left Wing, by bringing it to some River, or such like place of strength for
succor, whereby the enemy can have no way to enco^passe it: which we do by
bidding them first to face, then to march to the place, afterward to face
again. And so they are reduced to the first posture, and the Front is, as it
was at the first. This we continually use in our Trainings at home, to make ou^
men fit for it in the face of the Enemy. Howsoever some may be ignorant in the
use of the motion, yet they cannot be unskillful in the motion it self, by
reason of the practice. No Battle can well be without this motion, especially
in the field, where the enemy does seek advantage. Let me therefore show you
some other excellent uses thereof, that it may be the beter esteemed, and the
oftener practiced.

This motion, as it is performed marching, The use of Facing, as it is
performed marching.
is of this singular use, not only to give an assault upon the adverse wing of
the enemy, but to fail any way off from the enemy, and suddenly again to turn
upon him with an even front to his front; that is, Pikes to his Pikes, Shot to
his Shot, whereby he is prevented from falling, either on the Flanks, or on
the Rear, coming on with one maine Body.

Many other uses it has, as partly this; To Captain Bingh^m in his notes
upon Aelian cha^. 25.
shun a dangerous ground on which an enemy has strewed, Calthrops, or laid
a secret trap, this was found practiced by Alexand. the great, when he fought
with Darius at Arbela; Arrian describes it thus Arrian lib. 4. and Alexand. 17.
(says he) Alexander having imbattelled his Army, to fight with Darius, had
intelligence, that Darius had strewed the ground betwixt the two Armies with
Calthrops; he commanded therefore the right Wing, which himself led, to turn
faces to the right hand, and to follow him, to the end to go round about, and
avoid the places that were strewed with Calthropes: Darius marching against him
to the left hand, disioyned his troops of horse, and Alexander taking the
advantage, and g^uing in quickly betwixt the spaces, put Darius to flight.

Here you see the event of it, and what a victory Alexander gained thereby. If
he had faced and stood still, what would it auailed him? Had he marched
fore-right, he had fallen upon the Calthropes, but by facing and then marching
upon it, he effected all.

First he avoided the ground where the Calthropes lay (by facing and marching
forth) then he reduced them again to their first posture, by facing them to
the left hand. Afterward (taking his advantage) he went on to the charge, and
so defeated the enemy.

Why Alexander made choice (only) of this motion, is not to be wondered at,
because necessity made him to make use of this motion when no other would serve.

Countermarch had bin ridiculous, so had doubling; wheeling had bin in vain:
nay, it was impossible for him to have wheeled, the ground being so scantie,
(between him and the Calthropes) his Phalange of so great a breadth, and the
enemy so nigh. Yet say he had wheeled (having had ground sufficient) he must
have been forced (having wheeled) to have faced withal, and marched further
out, then wheeled again, or else to no purpose; so have failed of his
expedition.

Thus you see how fit this motion served Alexanders turn, and by it may learn
to make like use of it, upon like occasion.

Another singular use of this motion is, to get the upper ground from the
enemy.

This was found practiced by Philopaemen, the Achaean General. When
Machanidas, the Lacedemonian Tirant, had put his left wing to flight, yet he by
this means restored the battle, and withal obtained the victory.

Polibius lib. 11. 634
Polibius describes the manner of it thus;

The fight being begun between Machanidas, the Lacedemonian Tirant, and
Philopaemen, the Achaean General, it happened that Machanidas had the better,
for he having put the left Wing of the Achaean Mercenaries to flight, followed
hard the chase; Philopaemen, as long as there was any hope, endeauored to stay
his men: when he saw them utterly defeated, he hasted to the right Wing, and
perceiving the enemy busy in the chase, and the place void where the fight
had bin, commanding the first A Merarchy consists of 2048 men.
Merarchies to turn their faces to the right ^^and, he led them on with high
speed, not yet breaking the order of their imbattelling, and quickly seizing
upon the forsaken ground, he both cut betwixt them that gave chase, and home,
and withal got the advantage of the upper ground against the left wing of the
armed, whereby he obtained the victory.

Captain Bingham upon the same motion, Aelian chap. ^5.
If Philopaemen had in this action used wheeling of his Battle, which only was
the other motion which would have served his turn, besides the troublesomnesse
of the winding about, he should have bin forced to have used two wheelings, and
so failed of the celeritie, which was at time requisite, faces were turned in a
trice, and he made himself master of the ground he desired, before he could
have wheeled once his Battle.

Besides to have Faced and stood still, had been to no purpose, but Facing and
Marching on was to some purpose, as you have heard.

Thus you see what Facing is; Of the use of Facing in general.
How it is the easiest of all Motions, but of no less importance or
necessity: How it may be done in a trice, though the Enemy come very suddenly
upon us: Though he encompasse both our Wings: Though he enuiron us round with
Foot and Horse, yet we may Face upon him, and make him resistance: How that
there is no Battle but has need of this Motion: So that when we find our
Enemies to encompasse our right Wing, we turn our Faces and Weapons that way
to receive them. To the left, when they come to charge us on that side: If on
both sides, then we turn Faces half to the right, and half to the left
hand. But being to remove the Battle from any of the Flanks, we cause Faces to
be turned to that Flank; so we lead on upon the Enemy, either to assault him,
or to prevent him where he would assault. Which if we cannot do, we make a
stand, and so receive him. All this I have expressed fully both by precept and
example. Now it remains that I show you four other things.

First, by what words of Command it may be done.

Secondly, in what order.

Thirdly, with which Leg coming forward.

Fourthly, how to reduce all this (by way of document or observation) shall be
declared in the next Chapter following.

CHAP. XIX. Observations for Facing; showing the manner how to perform the
action; with many other Circumstances appertaining to the precedent Chapter.
IN the precedent Chapter, mention was made of Facing. In this Chapter are
certain Observations positiuely set down for the exact performance thereof.

They are in number four.

The first observation is, for the motion of the Leg.

The second for reducement to its first Posture.

The third for distance to grace the Action.

The fourth for words of Command, either to Face and March; or to Face and
Stand; expressing their use.

Of these in order.

The first Observation.
First then observe that in Facing upon a stand, the Motion, must and ought to
be performed with the right Leg; that is, the left Leg must stand firm:
The right must either remove forward, or backward: Forward, when you Face to
the left hand; Backward, when you face to the right hand.

Be it to the right about, or to the left about, the left Leg stands firm;
only you move the foot upon the heel or toe: But in the March it is to be
done, How to Face Marching.
sometimes with the right Leg, sometimes with the left Leg: With the right
Leg, when it is to the left hand: With the left Leg, when it is to the
right hand; for you must gain ground, and not lose.

The second Observation.
In the second place, observe or take notice, how to reduce unto the first
Posture. This must be thus performed:

When you Face to the right, return back to the left hand.

How to reduce unto your first Posture.
When you Face to the left, return back to the right hand.

Having Faced about to the right, return about to the left.

Having Faced about to the left, return about to the right. For still the
contrary must be done. Observe it and forget it not.

The third Observation.
In the third place observe, or take notice, of the Distances appropriated to
Facing.

These Distances are of three sorts: to wit, Open Order. Order. Close Order.


The first for Exercise: The two last for Service.

No Captain must be so absurd, as to Face upon an Enemy (in open Order) the
Enemy coming to push of Pike.

The Grecians would never Face to receive the Charge of an Enemy, but in their
close Order.

Their close Order, was a foot and a half from file to file, and three foot
from rank to rank.

This we commonly use with Pikes. But our Musketeers are never to be closer
then the second Distance of three foot in square, because they are to have a
free use of their Arms. If then they be at a closer Distance, they will much
throng and trouble one another, and are subject to firing.

In the last place, observe how to give the words of Command, The fourth
Observation.
either to Face and March, or to Face and stand. That you may do it orderly,
and properly, I have fitted them to your mouth thus: Face to the right hand,
March. Words of Command to Face and March.

Face to the left hand, March.
Face to the right hand about, March.
Face to the left hand about, March.


Thus you may set upon your Enemy as you see advantage, or prevent him where he
would charge you to your disadvantage, or shun a dangerous ground prepared for
you, as Alexander did, when Darius would have intrapped him. Thus much to Face
and March, and of the words of Command for it.

Now to face and stand, with the words of Command for that Motion.

The words of proper direction for it are these. Words of Command to Face and
stand.


Face to the right hand. If you restore to the first Posture, you are to say,
As you were.
Thus if the Enemy have encompassed your right Flank, you are ready for him.

Face to the left hand. Thus if the Enemy have encompassed your left Flank,
you are ready for him.

Face to the right and left hand, by division. Thus if the Enemy has
encompassed both the Wings of your Battle, (being unable to avoid it They
face to the right and left, by division.
) you Face thus to resist him.

Face to the right and about. Thus if the Enemy have suddenly made his Approach
upon your Rear, you are ready for him, and resist him in an instant.

Middle men to the right hand about. This form is called Phalange Amphistomus,
described by Aelian chap. 38. And is of excellent use to resist the charge of
the Enemy, assaulting us in Front and Rear.

Observe the form of this Face, being ten in depth. This is the P^inthium full
of men.
The three last Ranks face about to the Right.
The three first Ranks in the Front stand as you do.
The Rest in the midst to the Right and Left, by division.
Thus if the Enemy have environed you about on all sides: On all sides you are
ready to resist him.

Plutarch in the life of Paulus Aemilius.
This was the last remedy of the Macedonian Phalange opposed against Paulus
Aemylius in his Battle with Perseus, which distressed the Romans, and had
gained the victory, had it not been broken for want of ground.

Thus much for Facing.

Now if in stead of Facing, you would command Charging, give the words thus:
Charge to the right hand.
Charge to the left hand.
Charge both to the right and left hand.
Charge to the Front.
Charge to the Rear.
Charge both Front and Rear.
Charge every way.


A Caution.
When you charge upon a stand, fall back with the right Leg.

When you charge to go on, come forward with the left Leg.

This is to charge Marching.

Thus much for this Chapter.

CHAP. XX. Of the use of Wheeling.
WHeeling is of the same use with Facing, both may be done upon the sudden
approach of the Enemy, whether he show himself on the right or left Flank,
or in the Rear of your Battle.

The excellency of Wheeling.
If he show himself in the right or left Flank, Wheeling will have the
pre-eminence of Facing, for it will oppose him with thy front, which are thy
best men.

If he show himself in the Rear, Wheeling will yet have the pre-eminence, and
oppose him there with thy fileleaders (or best men) as it did before in the
Flank

But Of the prehemincie of Facing over Wheeling.
if the enemy show himself in Front and Rear, or in more then these places
at once (suddenly to charge thee) Facing will then have the pre-eminence, and
Wheeling will do more harm then good. Therefore being in this straight, the
best remedy is to turn faces and so receive him.

But having sufficient place, and fit occasion to wheel, Captain Bingham in
his notes upon Aelian, Chapt. 25.
omit not this opportunity, but meet him with thy best men. For example whereof
I bring the Graetians: They coveting always to bring their best men, that is,
the fileleaders to fight; did thus,

In open order they chose to countermarch?

In close order having place to wheel their battle about, they did turn the
face of it against the enemy. If they could do neither of these, they came to
the last remedy which was turning of faces of every particular man in the
battle. This was the Grecians order, which shows the excellency of their
discipline: And therefore we are willing to follow them, being the Mirrours of
Arts and Arms. They were so perfect in these motions by their continual
practice and exercise, that few or none were ever comparable unto them.

In wheeling they would move as a ship (or some other body) carried about wholly
and jointly together, remaining vndisolued.

When they were to wheel to the right, they did first warn the right corner
file leader to stand still (as it were the hook of a doore-hinge) and the rest
they commanded altogether to proceed forward, and to turn about the same
fileleader like the door. They will not wheel, unless they be at an
unfitting order Pouldion to Houldion and then Ranks to the swords point a
distance not fit for that motion.


Thus was the battle wholly turned by them (as the body of a man) to the right,
to the left, or about to either, being carried about the corner fileleader, as
about a Center. This was a comely sight to look upon? would to God all would
do it as exactly as they But wishes are in vain, men will do as they list,
not as they should: a Some will neither observe the distance used by the
Grecians, no the distance appointed by our Tacticks, for the comely grace
thereof. This distance is three foot from file to file, and three foot from
rank to rank?

If this be not observed, the motion will want grace, the use of it will be
frustrated? the enemy will prevail against them: For how can those men fight
whose hands are tied, being thronged and pestred together, they are as it were
bound and tied, and can neither assault the enemy, nor defend themselves, but
are subject to be killed one of another. Therefore true distances, must be
observed. But of distances more hereafter. Faceing and wheeling are the
subjects on which I treat.

Now faceing and wheeling being joined together are of singular use? To prevent
the enemy where he would assault you: To give the assault on him, and to
circumuent him in taking of advantage of ground, Wind and Sun, it likewise
serves to strengthen the midst of your battle with the best men. By Wheeling
the Wings into the midst of the battle. In doing whereof you curtall the
depth, and extend the length, bringing more men to fight then you had before

Thus much of Wheeleing. The words of Command follows in the next chapter.

CHAP. XXI. Of the words of command for Wheeling.
THe words of command for Wheeling may be thus given.

Viz. Wheel the body to the right hand. The Use.
Thus if the enemy appear to the right Flank, you bring your best men to
fight against him:

Wheel the body to the left hand. The Use.
Thus if the enemy come to charge your left Flank, you bring your best men
against him: Wheel the body about to the right hand.

The Use.
Thus if the enemy appear in the Rear, you bring your File-leaders, that is,
your best men to fight.

Wheel the body about to the left hand. Thus you are reduced to your first
Posture. The Use


But it may be you would Face, then march; after Face again, then wheel. If
you would, it may be commanded thus: Face to the right hand. Face and March.
and march twenty paces.
Face to the left hand. and march twenty paces.


Then wheel to the left, and charge ouer-hand.

Thus you may gain the advantage of ground upon the right Flank: The Use.
you may assault your enemy on the left Wing with your File-leaders or Front,
you may gain the advantage of Wind and Sun, from the enemy: And presently
fall upon a charge.

It may be you would extend the length of your Battle by wheeling (by bringing
the Wings into the midst.) Then you may command thus.

Wheel the Wings into the midst of the Battle. Face to your Commander. Thus
the strength of your Battle lies in the midst; The Use.
it may be you would reduce. Then command thus: To the right hand about.

Then begin with the Bringers up, and say: Wheel your Wings again into the
midst of the Battle.

Then bid them Face to their Commander: after that.

Face to the left hand about. And so they are fully reduced as they were.

It may be you would know the way how to perform this Wheeling, for as yet
you are Ignorant. Then observe how to do it by this Instance which will
somewhat explain it unto you.

There be ten File-leaders in Front, The Instance.
five of them on the right Wing wheels forward to the left, transferring their
faces to the contrary Wing, their Followers moving with them, and standing
behind them as they did at the first, only they change their former ground, as
did the File-leaders.

The other five on the left Wing wheels forward to the right, meeting them in
the midst, face to face, having all their Followers (behind them) as the other
five. Then the Commander bids them Face to him: And so the countenances of all
the Soldiers are directed (or transferred) all one way. Thus you may perform
this wheeling; but action does better perform it than words.

This wheeling of the Wings into the midst of the Battalia, was used by the
Ancient Grecians, to make their Diphalange Antistomus, their Diphalange
Peristomus, their Hollow-wedge. The Figure of which is to be seen in Aelian,
with the description of them, Chap. 36. 40. and 41.

What Victories have been gained by this kind of Imbattalling, I have seen,
and read in a written Copy of Captain Binghams composing, to be diuulged
(shortly) for a public good, that is now but for a private use. This worthy
Captain was the man that did first show the Gentlemen of the Artillery Garden
how they should perform this kind of wheeling, which now they do most
exactly: And he will prove the use of it to be as profitable for Service now,
as heretofore with the Grecians, if we will but do what he shall advise. Thus
much of this Kind of Wheeling, and of the other Wheeling, which must not be
used when the enemy is upon you, but when he is aloof off. Now of
Countermarch.

CHAP. XXII. Of Counter-marches, and the diverse kinds thereof: with the manner
how they are to be made, and of their use.
COunter-marches are twofold: for either we Countermarch the Files or the
Ranks. And these either by changing of ground, or keeping still the same
ground.

If we Counter march by Files, it is to oppose the enemy appearing in the
Rear with our best men. If by Ranks, it is to bring one Wing into the place
of the other; or all our best men into the midst of the Battle.

If we Countermarch by Files or Ranks, to change our ground, we do it either
by the Macedonian, the Lacedemonian, o^ the The modern Countermarch standing,
is thus performed; The Fyle-leaders countermarch to the right, the next Rank
stands til they be past, then they follow: the like do all the rest,
transferring themselves to a new ground.
modern Countermarch which was invented for that purpose, and to be performed
standing.

If to maintain ground, then we do it by the Choraean Countermarch, which
makes the File-leaders to take the ground of the Bringers up, and the Bringers
up the same ground, in the which the File-leaders stood. The like in the Wings.

These Counter-marches, namely, the Macedonian, the Lacedemonian, and the
Choraean, are described by Aelian thus.

The Macedonian Countermarch Aelian chap. 20 of the Macedonian Crunter-march
by Fyle.
by File, is said to be, when the File-leader turns about his face, and all
the rest with the Bringer-vp goes against him on the right or left hand, and
passing on to the ground before the Front of the Battle; place themselves in
order one after another, according as the File-leader himself has turned his
face.

This Countermarch you see transferreth the whole File to another place equal
to the first, by taking the ground that lies before the Front, in lieu of that
it lost behind. It likewise makes Show to the enemy appearing in the Rear of
running away, but it is of excellent use.

Say that before thy Battle lay a River, The use of the Macedonian
Countermarch by Fyle.
and between the River and thee a fair plot of ground, higher than that thou
stand upon (the enemy appearing in the Rear, and compelling thee to fight)
the only way to oppose him with the best men, and to got this ground for thy
advantage, is this Macedonian Countermarch. This Countermarch was first
Invented by Philip King of Macedon, Father of Alexander the Great.

The Lacedemonian Countermarch by Fyle is, Of the Lacedemonian Countermarch
by Fyle, described by Aelian, chap. 28.
when the Bringer up turns his face about, and all the rest turning also
their faces, and proceeding forward together with their Fyle-leader, order
themselves proportionably in the ground which was behind the rear of the
Battle.

Or else, when the Bringer-vp turns his face about, and he that stood next
before him passiing by on the right or left hand, is placed again next before
him, and the rest following, are placed one before another in their former
order, till the Fyle-leader be first.

In this Countermarch you see, the proceeding is contrary to the former that
took the ground before the Phalange, or Battle, this takes the ground after.
In that the moving was from the rear to the front; in this from the front to
the rear. Captain Bingham in his notes upon Aelian chap. 28.
Aelian prefers the Lacedemonian Countermarch before the Macedoman, because
in it the Soldiers seem to fall on and charge, wherein the Macedonian they
seem to fly. There is notwithstanding, times (as Captain Bingham notes) when
it is better to use the Macedonian; As when you seek to gain some ground of
advantage: or in case you mean to march on and not to fight with the Enemy,
unless you be compelled, for the Macedonian continues still the march, and
staieth not: the Lacedemonian returns upon the Enemy, and so loses ground
in marching.

There is likewise times (say I) when it is more requisite to use this
Lacedemonian Countermarch, than any other.

As in case you have passed the ground which the enemy following seeks to
gain, and to charge you suddenly, the only way to possess it again, and to
fight with him with your best men, is thus to Countermarch; the Macedonian
here will do no good.

Ae^ian chap. 28.
The Lacedaemonians have another Countermarch, which bears the name, and that is
this; the Fyle-leaders begin the Countermarch, and every one in their Files
follow them orderly. This is no other then our modern Countermarch now in use.

The Of the Choraean Countermarch by Fyle, otherwise called Persian or Cretan.
Choraean Countermarch by Fyle, is said to be, when the Fyle-leader turning
about to the right hand, precedeth the Fyle, and all the rest follow, till the
Fyle-leader have the place of the Bringer-vp, and the Bringer-vp the place of
the Fyle-leader. This Countermarch (says Aelian) is called likewise Persian
and Cretan: Persian and C^etan (says Captain Bingham) because it was used
among the Persians and Cretans. Captain Bingham in his notes upon Aelian chap.
28.
Choraean also, for the similitude it had with the solelmne Grecian daunces
upon Stages, the company that showed themselves in such daunces being called
Chorus, who in their daunces ordered themselves into syles and ranks, as
Soldiers do in battle, and moving themselves to the brinke of the Stage,
when being straightned by the place, they could pass no further, they retired
one through the ranks of the other, exceeding not the bounds of the place, as
is done in this Countermarch:

The words of command for the Choraean Cuunter-march by Fyle.
It may be commanded thus; Fyle-leaders, Countermarch to the place of the
Bringersvp, and stand, and let your Files follow you, keeping your distance.

Or thus; Fyles, Countermarch, and maintain ground.

The Lacedemonian may be commanded thus; The words of command for the
Lacedemonian Countermarch by File delivered in Captain Binghams own words.
Bringers-vp, turn your faces about to the right hand: the rest, turn your
faces about, and beginning at them that are next the Bringers-vp,
Countermarch, and place your selves in your distances, before the Bringers-vp,
and one before another, till the Fyle-leader be first.

Or thus; Face all to the Rear: Bringers-vp stand; the next Rank, pass
through by their right hand, and place your selves before them, keeping your
distances; all the rest move with them, placing your selves one before another
till the Fyleleader be first.

When your men are perfects you need but say, The Lacedemonian Countermarch,
and it is enough.

This gains the ground lying after the Rear, as the Macedonian the
groundlying before the Front: Now the Macedonian may be thus commanded;
File-leaders, turn your faces about to the right hand; Words of command for
the Macedonian Countermarch by File, Aelian. chap. 28.
the rest of every Fyle pass through in order, one after another, and place
your selves at your distances, after your Leaders, turning your faces about,
and so stand.

Look what these Counter-marches do by Fyle, the very same they do by Rank
for like advantage.

The Macedonian Countermarch by Rank, takes the ground that lies on the
side of the contrary Wing, beginning to move at the corner of the Wing which
is nearest the enemy, seeming therefore to him to run away, because it
dismarcheth from him, as that of the Fyle did before.

The words of command for it may be these; The right hand corner File face to
the left; Words of command for the Macedonian Countermarch by Rank
the rest of each File pass through to the left, and place your selves orderly
behind your sidemen, keeping your distance.

The use.
This gains the ground lying on the side of the right Wing, farthest of from
the Enemy. The Enemy appeared to the left Wing B^ ^his Counter march you may
set the strongest part of your Battle against the Enemy, and apply the weakest
unto some River L^ke, Hill, or such like place, so that the Enemy cannot come
to encomp^sse it.

Of the Lacedemonian countermarch by rank.
The Lacedemonian Countermarch by Rank, takes the ground that lies on the
side of that Wing which is toward the Enemy, and brings the best Wing to be
foremost against the Enemy, coming still on upon him, without any show of
running away; and by these words of command may be effected; Words of command
for the Lacedemonian Countermarch by rank. The use.
Left hand corner File, where the Enemy appears, turn your faces to the left
hand; the rest of each Rank, turn your faces, and pass through to the left
hand, and place your selves before your sidemen, keeping your distances.

Thus when our forces are able to encounter the enemy, and we desire to bring
our best wings to fight; then we proceed after this manner to oppose him.

Of the Choraean Countermarch by rank.
The Choraean Countermarch by rank keeps the same ground the battle had at
first, and brings one Wing, into the place of the other, or else the Sections
to possess the place of the Wings, thereby to strengthen the midst of the
battle. These two may be effected, as the other, by several words of Command:

The first by this word of command, Words of command for the Choraean
Countermarch by rank.
Ranks to the right hand Countermarch and maintain ground.

The second by this word of command, Countermarch the Wings into the midst of
the battle.

The way to do it is this,

First they are to face to the right and left hand by division: Then to
Countermarch into the midst of the battle; After they are to face to their
Commander, and so the Countermarch is effected.

The use.
Thus we strengthen the midst of our battle with our best men; bringing them to
fight with the enemy, which is the end of Countermarch. Wherein
notwithstanding there is a Caution to be held, that if the enemy be very
near, that we cannot conveniently Countermarch, before he come upon us, we
forbear, lest we fall into disorder, and in disorder be easily defeated. In
which case the best remedy is to turn faces and so receive him.

As Countermarches are not to be done, unless the enemy be aloof off, so
neither can they well be done but at open order.

When then your files and ranks are at six foot, which is (your first
distance) Then you have sufficient room to Countermarch any way.

But in Countermarch observe this.

If the word be for the right hand, then step forth with the right leg, and
bring the left leg over.

If to the left, then step forth with the left leg, and bring the right over.

But if the Word be to the right, and maintain ground, then stand fast with
the right leg, and bring the left over. Thus much of Countermarching.

Now of Doubling.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the use of Doubling.
THere is two kind of Doubling, the one of Ranks, the other of fi^es. The
first does double the The length of the batell is the Rank, the depth is the
File Ranks stretch forth in length, Files in depth (says Suidas.)
Length, the second the Depth of your battle.

The Length of your battle may be doubled in Place or Number.

In Doubling of the length of a battle in place.
place, when every file does open, from three foot to six foot, which is your
open order in files. By this means the Front possesses double ground to that
it had before. There is another way to double the Front in place, as you shall
hear anon.

The Length of your battle is Doubling of the length of a battle in Number.
doubled in Number, when of twenty in a rank, it is made forty, and of
forty fourscore. So that you have twice as many men in the Front as you had
before.

This doubling of the Length of your battle by number, may be done upon fit
occasion, either in open order, or in order

In open order, by doubling of Ranks, by middle men doing the same. By
bringers up doubling the front either to the right or left hand at discretion.
In order by middle men doubling of the Front, either to the right or left hand
entire, or by deuission to both. Which does likewise double the length of a
Battle, not only in number but in place also, as Captain Bingham does
observe in his notes upon Aelian chap. 29. Chap. 29.


Two Causes are assigned for the doubling of the length of your Battle both in
number and place. The one to ouerwing the enemy. The other to avoid
ouerwinging.

Two ways you may avoid ouerwinging.

One is by making choice of such a ground, as may give you this advantage of
the enemy; That he can never compass you in behind, P^^tar^^ in the lives of
A^es^laus and S lla, page 630. and 478.
nor flank you on the sides. Now if you cannot find such a ground, use art.
Cast a trench upon each flank; or Wagons on either Wing. As Syila and
Huniades did, fearing to be encompassed by the multitude of their enemies.

The second way to avoid ouerwinging is, by placing of Aides in the Rear of
your Battle; or by laying them in Ambush aloof off, that so upon a word given
they may suddenly start out upon the Enemy, as Caesar made his to do at the
Battle of Pharsalia, where he put Pompey the Great to flight. These Aides must
be of the most chiefest Soldiers you have, with Officers appointed for their
conduct, as was used by the ancient Romans before and in Vegetius time,
Vegetius lib. 3. cap. 17.
who did always res rue many of these Aides, when their number was inferior to
their Enemies, their Battle less pitched, and they in danger to be
ouerwinged. But when they had plenty of fighting men, they by Doubling would
make their Battle equal in length and depth to their Enemies. So that they
could not break through or ouerwinge them.

Thus much to a^oid ouerwinging. And for the doubling of the length of a
Battle in pl^ce and number.

Doubling the depth of a Battle in place.
The depth of your Battle is doubled in place, when every Rank from the swords
point opens to three foot, from three foot to six foot, from six foot to twelve
foot, which is your double distance. The use of this is twofold.

First to employ a great deal of ground for your own advantage, making your
number seem more then it is. Secondly, to make way for the Canon shot, by
which the enemy afar of would annoy your flanks. Therefore you march at a
double distance.

The depth of your Battle is doubled by number, Doubling the depth of a
Battle by number
when of ten in File, it is made twenty, of twenty forty, and of sorry
fourscore.

The doubling of the depth of your Battle may be done upon fit occasion,
either in open order or in close order.

In open order, by doubling of Files: When Files double by Countermarch, either
to the right or left hand: Or when half the Ranks double the right or left
flank: When Ranks file by conversion, either to the right or left hand, which
is usually done at a double distance.

In order (or close order) by advancing of Files to the right or left hand: By
File-leaders drawing forth their Files (into one) or if you will both to the
right and left hand by division. Then both right and left hand File leads forth
together: so the body is drawn into two Files.

All these ways and more, may the depth of your Battle be doubled in place
and number, not to change the form thereof, or (if it be) to alter the
fashion, whereby your Battle may be made suitable to the ground upon any
occasion: which is not the least thing to be taken notice of.

Observe.

A large fronted Battle is unfit for a narrow place.

A deep narrow Battle for a Champion, is not so suitable.

This the Romans and Grecians knew full well, and therefore they would order
themselves accordingly, making a politic use of either, as they saw occasion.

It is reported of Manius Acilius the Roman Consul, that being to fight with
Antiochus the Great in the Straits of Thermopyles, because therein he could
march with his men no more then five in Front. He ordered all his Legions into
an Orthiophala^ is a deep P^lange commonly called a Heirs, having the Depth
much exceedi^^ the Length. Ae^^an. chap. 30. Appian in the war^es of the
Rom^nes with S^^ians.
Orthiophalanx, which was a kind of Battle in form of a Heirse, of far
greater depth than length. Thus being extended in depth (and but five in Rank)
he proceeded on, appointing Marcus Cato (one of his Tribunes) with a selected
band of men to fetch a compass about to seek some other passage: If not, to
scale the Rocks, and then to seize upon Antiochus Camp. And likewise he sent
Lucius Valerius (another of his Tribunes) wi^h a like band of men, to force the
Aet^lians from the Rocks on the other side, (he being to pass under them) that
so having gained the Rocks, they might further his passage, and annoy Antiochus
from thence wi^h missiue weapons. He himself led his Army in Front against
Antiochus in the manner before said. Now Antiochus having fortified the Straits
with a wall (where it was broad) stood there ready to receive him with his
Battle of Macedonians, far broader in Front than Acilius Army was. But when
Marcus Cato had gained the Hills, Antiochus was instantly struck into
amazement, and Acilius taking courage thereby, came bravely on, and forced
Antiochus to flight. Thus suting his Battle to the nature of the place, (and
yet making use of his men for his best advantage) he obtained a glorious
victory.

One example more out of Xenophons History, and so I will conclude.

^^nophon. lib. 4.
The Grecians which Cherisophus and Xenophon conducted out of Persia, were in
the Champaigne ordered into a square hollow Battle, every part of like
strength, with their baggage and loose multitude in the midst.

These Grecians when they came into the Country of the Carduchans and Colchans,
were otherwise ordered.

There was high Hills, huge steep Mountains, and but narrow passage. They
must now be Imbattelled (not in a hollow The P^aesium a square bat^l of men
^ollow in the ^ddest.
Plaesium) but in several Companies, and every Company into a single File,
every file having an hundred men a piece, ascending those steep Mountains,
and beating the enemy from thence, which stood thereon in battle array, doing
more with ten thousand men, than a King of Persia could do with twelve
Myriades, that is, twelve hundred thousand.

Thus the Grecians and Romans (Mirrours of Arms and learning) did always
shape their battle according to the proportion of ground, and being perfect in
the art of Imbattelling, did all things proper as they saw occasion. The like
must we. And thus much shall suffice for the doubling of the Length and Depth
of a Phalange or Battle. Now follows the Distances to be observed in them. So
the words of command shall follow for all in the five and twentieth Chapter.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the Distances to be observed in Battle. And of their use.
DIsorder is the confusion of a Battle, but good Order p^eu^nts ^^is
confusion. Therefore all Commanders, as much as in them lies, must study to
prevent this in time.

And this may be done by observing of Distance, for Distance is the rule that
squares all. Distance is to the battle, as the soul to the body. The Battle
may be called a body. Now take away Distance from this body, and it falls to
ruin for want of a soul.

Iphicrates the Athenian said, That in an Army of men, the light horsemen
resembled the hands, the men at Arms the feet, the battle of footmen, the
stomach and breast, and the Captain the head of the body.

See here a Millitary body proportioned to the body of a man: See how it
receives motion and life, Distance being the soul that makes it move. Care
then ought to be had in moving: now this care is effected by the observing of
Distances.

Three kinds of distances are mentioned by Aelian, Ae^^a^ chap. ^^.
for the opening and shutting of a Phalange or Battle.

The first are large distances of four Cubits, which amount to six foot.

The second are less, but of two Cubits, which amount to three foot.

The third are of a lesser kind, but of a Cubit, which amounts at the most
but to a foot and a half.

These are all one and the same, with open Order, Order, and close Order.

Open Order, is when every Soldier in the battle takes six foot both in File
and Rank, and marches with their Pikes shouldered. It is for ease in
marching, being likewise of great use going against a Fort or strong place of
the enemies, for it gives way to the Cannon shot, and is of singular use to
save your men. We use to march thus when the enemy keeps aloof off.

Order is when every soldier in battle takes three foot both in File and
Rank, and marches with their Pikes either advanced or Ported.

This is to prepare for skirmish when the enemy is near.

Close Order, is when every Soldier in the battle takes a foot and a half
in File, and a foot a foot and a half from the swords point, which is three
foot in Rank. And this is to endure the brunt of a Charge.

The first was used in Ancient times for march, Solemn pompes and shows.

The second for their fights only before they did Join.

Noted ^y Capt. B^ngham (...) Aelian chapter 11.
The third was the Sinaspisme of the Macedonians, so called, because therein
they Joined Target to Target, which they never used but when either they gave
upon, or received the charge of the enemy. The Targets so knit together,
served for a wall, as it were, to the whole Phalange; and by them the soldier
was defended from the Missiue weapons of the Enemy, and his body covered even
from the piercing of the sword.

This was formerly used by the Ancient Heroes at Troy, and reviued again to
new life, by Philip, King of Macedon, who first constituted the Macedonian
Phalange, and invented the distances of opening and shutting the same. From his
discipline (as the learned Captain Bingham observes) sprung these distances in
Aelian, Aelian chap. 11.
of which I have spoke.

And thus I have briefly declared the use of those distances which are to be
observed in Battle. The words of command for them may be these, viz. Eiles and
Ranks, open to six foot. Now they are at open order.

Ranks and Files, close to three foot. Now they are at order.

Files, close to a foot and a half. Now they are at close order.

Ranks and Flles, to your open order. That is, six foot every way.



Thus if your Battle be disioyned by too large distances, you may reduce it
to good order by closing. If it be thronged up, or pestered too close together,
you may amend all by convenient opening. Too much thronging binds the
Soldiers hands, and takes away the use of their weapons; and too far
standing asunder breaks the Battle, and makes a passage for the Enemy,
whereby he may enter. Therefore these three sorts of distances, to wit, open
Order, Order, and close Order, have been invented as the only means between
both, to amend all, and to fit our turn as we see occasion.

Thus much for Distances, of their use, and the words of command given for them.

The words of command for doubling of the length and depth of a Battle next
follows.

CHAP. XXV. This Chapter shows what the words of Command are, by which the
length and depth of a Battle is doubled, either in place or number; and
teaches a young Soldier how to perform the Motion.
IN the three and twentieth Chapter of this book, mention was made of the
doubling of the length and depth of a Battle, both in place and number, but
the words of command were referred unto this Chapter.

If then you would double the length of your Battle in place, the proper words
of direction for it may be this, (viz.)

Open your Files from your close order to your open order, six foot. The manner
of the Action is thus performed: The middle Leaders press upon their Flankers,
first, taking their distance commanded, having opened both ways, the rest of
the company on both Flanks, takes their distance from them: now sixteen men
are so extended, as they hold as much ground in breadth as would serve thirty
two men.

It may be commanded some other way, peculiar and distinctly from the other:
as, The word of command for doubling the length of a Battle in place
Files, open to the right hand to your open order, six foot.

Or, Files open to the left hand to your open order.

Files open to the right hand
The word being given to the right hand, the left hand File is not to move, but
stands fast, the next to the left hand Fyle, first takes the distance,
pressing upon the right hand, still opening by the right hand, till they have
taken the distance of six foot.

Files open to the left Hand.
The word being given to the left hand, the right hand Fyle must stand fast, the
rest must open to the left hand, still pressing upon the left hand Files, till
they are all in the distance and order commanded.

Thus by three distinct peculiar words of command, may the length of your
Battle be doubled in place, each of which you may make choice of as occasion
serves.

But if your Battle bear too great a breadth, by possessing too much ground,
then you may amend it by this word of command, (viz.) The two middle Files
close first, the rest mouer with them, both to the right and left hand, to the
distance named
Files, close to your order.

Or, Files, close to the right hand, to your order.

Or, Files, close to the left hand, to your order.

Files close,
If the words be, Piles close, without naming to any hand, then it must be
performed thus;

The two middle Leaders must close, the one to the left hand, the other to the
right hand, till they are in the distance commanded; then the rest of the
company must take their distance from them on either Flank, closing to the
middle Leaders.

Files close to the right hand.
If the word be, To the right hand, the right hand File moves not, but stands
fast; all the rest close to the right hand File, taking their distance one by
another from the right hand.

Files close to the left hand.
If the word be, To the left hand, observe like form; then the left hand File
stands fast, the rest of the Files close, and take their distance from the left
hand. Thus much of the words of command, by which the Battle is lessened or
doubled in place, The words of command for the doubling of the depth of a
Battle in place
thereby employing a greater or lesser breadth, as the word is given.

If you would double the depth of your Battle in place, the proper word of
direction for it may be this, viz. Open your Ranks from the Front to the
Rear, to your open order, six foot.

The manner of the Action is thus to be performed; The first Rank must stand
firm: the second Rank takes their distance first; all the rest must do the
like distinctly in order.

Now you take as much ground in depth for ten, as would serve very well for
twenty men.

If you would double the length of your Battle in number, The words of command
for the doubling of the length of a Battle in number.
that is, to make the front have twice as many Files, or persons in it as it
had before, then you may effect it by this word of command; Ranks to the right
hand, double.

Or thus, Ranks to the left hand double.

It is thus performed:

Every second Rank comes between the distance of the Rank before it, and
that either to the right or left hand, Ranks to the rig^^ hand double.
as the word is given, so that of ten in Rank, they become twenty in Rank,
and but five in depth, who before were ten in depth, because the Front is
doubled.

Or if you are minded to effect it by middle men, then the last five Ranks
must march up through the distances between the Files, till they come to be
even in Front, with the File-leaders, then they stand, having every one their
followers following them, as they had before, only now they are five in depth,
when they were before ten.

The word of command for it is; Middle men, to the right hand double your Front.

Or, being minded to divide your middle men, and so to double. Doubling of the
length of a Battle by middle men.


Then the last five ranks must turn their faces, the one half in their files
to the right hand, and the other half to the left hand, and so march forth
from both the Flanks, till they have gotten such a proportion of ground, or
distance, as is answerable to the order, the first five Ranks do stand in:
and then presently without attending any further commandment, they must turn
their faces again toward the front, and march upon both flanks till they
come even with the front.

The word of direction is, Middle men double your front to the right and left
hand by division.

Or, being minded not to divide your middle men, but to bring them up to the
front, entire to one particular hand. Then the five last ranks must face, then
march forth altogether beyond the skirts of the body, then face to the front,
and march up to join themselves in even front with the file leaders.

The word of Command to effect it maybe this, Middle men to the right hand
Entire double your front.

Or if you are minded after all this, to make use of your bringers up in the
front of your battle, then you may perform it, by this word of Command,
Bringers up to the right hand double your front.

The last rank you know are the bringers up: These being in the rear do
advance through the distances between the files: The length of a battle
doubled by the bringers up
And next after them the next rank: and so the rest successively till the
bringers up be in rank with the Leaders, and their middle men with the Leaders
middle men. Thus your front is doubled with your best men, being now but five
in depth, who were before ten in depth.

Doubl^ng of the battle in Depth by number.
If you would double the depth of your battle in number, that is, make some
files have twice as many men in them as they had before, you may effect it by
this word of Command, The word of Command for it.

Files to the right hand double.


Files to the right hand double.

It is thus to be performed.

The right hand file (which is the outermost file, on the right hand moves nor,
but stands fast, the next file to the right hand file, moves into the right
hand file, so that of ten in depth, it is now become twenty. Accordingly
every second File moves into their next file on the right hand.

Files to the left hand double.
The like order must be observed, if the word be to the left hand, the left hand
file must stand fast, and every second file is to move into the next file on
their left hand. Thus the depth is doubled by number.

But it may be, you would execute it by Countermarch as did the Macedonians.
Then the word of Command is, Double your files by Countermarch, to the right
hand. Aelian chap. 2^


This is performed when the next side files in several (as in the former
example the second, The first, thir^ fifth, seventh, ninth, are odd files, the
second fourth, sixth, eigth, an^ tenth, are even files.
and the fourth and the rest of the even files) Countermarch to the Rear
placing themselves behind the bringers up of the odd files, Aelian chap. 29.

It may be you would double the right flank with the left flank, to make the
Orthiophalanx, or heirse Aelian chap. 30.
battle, which proceeds by Wing, having the depth much exceeding the length.

The way to do it is by this word of Command, Half Ranks double to the right
hand.

Or, Ranks double the right flank.

It is thus performed.

Half the Ranks (for they are divided as it were into two parts) turns their
faces to the right hand, and marches into the spaces, betwixt the other Ranks,
and being within, they face as the rest: Thus the battle is brought into a
Wing.

It may be you would bring it into a file.

Then the word of Command may be this, Ranks file to the right hand.

Or, Ranks file by Conversion to the right hand.

It may be you would bring it into two files.

Then you may give the word of direction thus, Ranks file to the right hand.

Or, Ranks file by Conversion to the right (...) left hand.

It is thus performed.

Half the ranks falls back into the spaces behind the right hand men of the
right The right hand file precedes the right flank.
flank, The left hand file precedes the left flank.
and the other half into the spaces behind the left hand men of the left
Flank, doing that by division, which the former did entire by this word of
Command, (Ranks file to the right) but you must observe a double distance
between Rank and Rank, to do it, or it cannot be well done. We have another
way to do the former (which is) by drawing or leading forth of Ranks, this is
(as the other) new and vpstart. We have another way (by leading forth of files)
pristine or ancient, commonly used in former times both of Grecians and
Persians.

Xenophon Cyrop. l. 2. 56.
You shall read of Cyrus the elder, how he commanded thirty thousand men to be
drawn forth (out of A Phalange is a gross body of men brought into a battle.

Xenophon in his 4. book of the ascent of Cyrus the younger.


a Phalange) into a single file. And it was his custom when ever his soldiers
went to dinner, to bring them forth file by file, and into a Phalange or body
again at the sound of a horn or a word given.

You shall read of the Grecians, that when they were to ascend the Colchian
Mountains, they put themselves into several companies, and every company into
a single file, every file having an hundred men a piece, reducing again into a
body when they came to the top of them, where was room enough. This the
Grecians at that time did do. Which we Command thus.

Right hand file lead forth, the rest follow in sequence one behind another.
Thus many ways, may the Depth be doubled by Number, to alter or change the
form of a battle.

I am not ignorant that there are many more ways to do it.

For in the Artillery garden, this word of Command is frequent. (Advance your
files to the right hand) which is the doubling of the Depth. One file aduances
to stand before another, the second before the first, the fourth before the
third, or the contrary as the word is given.

This is the way to do it, and I will name no more.

All this variety of ways helps such as would be exquisite in exercising. I
say would; are not already. I presume not to teach any that knows more then my
self; Nor such as knows less then my self, yet scorns to be taught: but
such as knows little (it may be nothing) yet have a a desire to learn; To
such, I that know some thing, (to others but little) do impart that little
which I have. And in the next chapter will teach them how to exercise a company
as I my self have been taught in the Artilery Garden, or elsewhere, for I
have attained nothing but by pains taking, much cost, and reading.

But first observe my Method in Exercising.

My Method in Exercising, is not at this time to Intermeddle with new forms of
battles, various fights, sundry kinds of Inductions, and the like; But to
apply my self somewhat to that which has been delivered, practiced in former
times, agreeing with our modern discipline, and at this time in use, beginning
at the first principle of all, to order a company of men into a battle that
are at first confused one among another, and to do it by distinct words of
Command, whereby they may order themselves into a body, without help of a
Sergeant, taking their first distance of six foot in square both in file and
rank, in which we commonly use at the first to exercise our Motions in. All
this I mean to do, and the Chapter following will show it.

CHAP. XXVI. This Chapter shows a young Commander how he should begin to
order his Company: How to command the same properly by several distinct words
of Command: And to observe true Distance in every Motion: Whether it be to
Face, to Wheel, to Charge, to Countermarch, or double.
THus then he may Command (when the Company is unordered, intermingled one with
another, parted from their Arms, and lying in sundry places.)

Separate your selves. To your Arms. File and Rank your selves. Every
File-leader, know his place. Advance your Pikes. Shoulder your Muskets. Fall
into a body, and flank your Pikes with Muskets. Take your first distance six
foot both in File and Rank. Order your Pikes. Rest your Muskets. Stand Right
in your Files. Stand right in your Ranks. Mark your Directions. Silence. Face
to the right hand. as you were. Face to the left hand. as you were. Face to the
right hand about. as you were. Face to the left hand about. as you were. Ranks
to the right hand double. as you were. Ranks to the left hand double. as you
were. Files to the right hand double. as you were. Files to the left hand
double. as you were. Middle men to the right hand, Double your Front. Middle
men as you were. Middle men to the left hand, Double your Front. Middle men as
you were. Middle men to the right hand Entire, Double your Front. Middle men as
you were. Middle men to the left hand Entire, Double your Front. Middle men as
you were. Middle men double your Front to the right and left hand by division.
Middle men as you were. Bringers up to the right hand, Double your Front.
Bringers up as you were. Bringers up to the left hand, Double your Front.
Bringers up as you were. Now they must advance their Pikes, and so
Countermarch.
Ranks to the right hand Countermarch. Ranks to the left hand Countermarch.
Files to the right hand Countermarch. Files to the left hand Countermarch.
The second Distance is for Wheeling and charging.
Files close to your Order. Three foot in File and Rank. Ranks close to your
Order. Three foot in File and Rank. Wheel to the right hand. Wheel to the
left hand. Charging upon a stand, when their Pikes are advanced.
Wheel to the right hand about. Wheel to the left hand about. Charge to the
right hand. As you were. Charge to the left hand. As you were. Charge to both
by division, As you were. Charge to the Front, As you were. Charge to the
Rear, As you were. Charge to both by division, As you were. Charge, Front,
Rear, and Flanks, As you were. Open your Files to your open Order. Six foot.
Open your Ranks to your open Order. Six foot. Order your Pikes. March.
Shoulder your Pikes. March. Charge to the right hand. Marching and charging
from the shoulder, at o^ ^n then open O^de^
Do all this by the beat of the Drum. As you were. March. Do all this by the
beat of the Drum. Charge to the left hand. Do all this by the beat of the
Drum. As you were. March. Do all this by the beat of the Drum. Charge to
the Rear. Do all this by the beat of the Drum. As you were. March. Do all
this by the beat of the Drum. Beare-vp your Pikes and Countermarch to the
right hand. This was done by Captain Bingham in the Artillery Garden.
Beare-vp your Pikes, and Countermarch to the left hand. Advance your Pikes
marching. Keep your first Distance six foot in File and Rank. Port your Pikes
marching. Keep your first Distance six foot in File and Rank. Traile your
Pikes marching. Keep your first Distance six foot in File and Rank. Cheek
your Pikes from the traile. Keep your first Distance six foot in File and
Rank. Make a stand: Mark your Directions.
The right hand file lead forth, the rest follow in sequence one after another.

Lay your Pikes on the outside one of another. Recover (Marching) and advance
your Pikes. Stand. File-leaders bring up your Files into a body. Files open to
the right hand Open order. Six foot. Files close to the left hand to your
Order. Three foot. To the (...) A foot and a half. In F^le. R^nkes open
backward to your double Distance. Twelve foot. Ranks File to the right hand.
Ranks as you were. Ranks File to the left hand. Ranks as you were. Ranks
File to the right and left hand. Close your Ranks to six foot. Open your Files
to six foot.
Being reduced to your first Distance.

Order your Pikes. Lay down your Pikes. Take up your Pikes, and order.
Thus much for Exercising, and of the Postures of the Pike therein used. The
several Postures of the Musket follows in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Postures of the Musket.
THe Postures of the Musket are sundry and many. Some make 32. some 40. some
43. some more, some less. All which are for Military instruction in the time
of Trayning, and to make the Soldier most exquisite and perfect: But in time
of present service before the face of the enemy, or in fight, then all this
great number of Postures they reduce into three only and no more, viz. 1. Make
ready. 2. Present. 3. Give fire.
All the other, they wittily and properly sort into four kinds, or orders: To
be performed, Standing, Marching, Charging, and Discharging; (as is to be seen
in Captain Pantons Table,) all which must be observed. Thus much of them.

The Postures or words of Command which we must use in ordinary Training, or
daily exercising of Soldiers, agreeing to the Prince of Orange form, (and by
order from his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council) are these: March with
your Musket shouldred, and the Rest in your right hand. March, and with the
Musket carry the Rest. Sink your Rest, and vnshoulder your Musket. Poyse it in
your right hand, and let it sink into the left. In your left hand hold your
Musket, and carry your Rest with it. Take your Match in the right hand between
the second finger and thombe. Hold your Match fast and blow your coal: Cock
your Match. Try your Match. Guard your pan and blow your match. Open your pan.
Present. Give fire. Dismount your Musket and carry it with your Rest. Vncocke
your match, and return it between your fingers. Clear your pan. Prime your
pan. Shut your pan. Cast off your loose powder. Blow your pan. Cast about your
Musket. Traile your Rest. Open your charge. Charge with powder. Draw out your
scowring stick. Shorten your stick. Ram in your powder. Draw out your
stick. Charge with Bullet. Ram in your Bullet. Draw out your stick. Shorten
your stick and put it up. Bring your Musket forward with your left hand. Poyse
it in your right hand and recover your Rest. Shoulder your Musket. March and
carry your Rest with your Musket. Vnshoulder your Musket. Lay your Musket in
the Rest. Stand Rested. Your saluting Posture,] as you were. In the right hand
take your Match between the second finger and the thumb. Blow your Match.
Cock your Match. Try your Match. Guard your pan and be ready.


This last is the Sentinel Posture.

Th^s I have run over the Postures of the Musket, after the Low Cou^t^y fo^me,
first marching, then discharging, then c^a^ging, after standing. Adding three
more unto them, (because the charging with the bullet was left out:) which I
hope will give oftence to none.

As for the gesture of the body, hand and foot, to grace the Posture, I refer
you to the book expressing it by Figures; Or to ^^e A^tillery Ga^den, or
Military Y^rd, where it is done by some ^x^^^^^y: bu^ never to be obtained
without practice. You may likew^^^ ^egin where you please, for this form is
not so strictly ob er^^^ (...) the Artillery Garden.

B ca^^ ^ou had the Postures of the P^ke implicit, and not disti^^^ but mixed
with other kinds of Motions different from them; I will in the next Chapter
show them several, and concl^d^.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the several Postures of the Pike.
THe several Postures of the Pike (says Sargeant Trussell) are in number
twelve. Three are to be done standing, six marching, ^^d three charging.

The three which are to be done standing he expresses thus: Lay d^w^^ your
Pi^^. T^k^ up your Pike. ^^der your Pik^.


The si^ which are to be done Marching he expresses thus A^^ance your Pike.
Shoulder your Pike. Level your Pike. Slope your Pike. Cheek your Pike. Traile
your Pike.


The three which are to be done charging he expresses thus: Po^t. Charge over
hand. Charge at the right foot for Horse.


This is the brief Epitome of the Postures which that Gentleman took from
Captain Pantons Table: Captain Panton from the Book published by the most
Excellent Prince, the Count Maurice of Nassau, and I from both. So I end my
Book. Let God have the glory. Amen.

Exodus 15 3. The LORD is a man of War: His name is JEHOVAH.

FINIS.

