A BRIEF HOMIly, wherein the most comfortable and right use of the Lords
Supper, is very plainly opened and delivered, even to the understanding of the
unlearned and ignorant.

Made to be used throughout the Diocese of Lincoln, before every celebration
of the Lords Supper, in all such Churches and Parishes as have not a
sufficient hable Preacher allowed under the hand and authentike seal of the
Bishop there, and to be read by the Minister of each such place, so distinctly
and in such sort, that all which shall be then assembled, may well hear and
mark the same.

IMPRINTED AT London for Ralph Newberie, dwelling in Fleetstreete a little
above the Conduit.

An. Dom. 1580.

A BRIEF HOMILY, wherein the most comfortable and right use of the Lords
Supper, is very plainly opened and delivered, even to the understanding of the
unlearned and ignorant.
THat we do not come negligently to the Lords table, whereunto we now
prepare our selves, let us call these things following to our remembrance.
This Sacrament used according to the institution of Christ, consists of two
parts, that is, the outward signs, which are Bread and Wine: and the inward
thing, which is the body and blood of our Savior Christ, the true food of
our souls, which only nourishes us to eternal life. Now as man consists
of two parts, body, and soul: so the body feeds upon the outward elements
of Bread and Wine, but the soul feeds in deed, and truly, upon Jesus
Christ crucified. The outward eating by the instruments of the body, causes
all our senses, our hearing, our seeing, our feeling, our tasting, to help our
inward eating by faith, and by the same quickens, stirs, strengthens,
and increases our faith, that we may eat the body and blood of Christ more
effectually and fruitefully. For when the faithful Christian hears the
words of Christ's institution sound in his ears. Matthew. 26.26. Mar. 14, 22.
Luke 22.19. Romans 10.17
This is my body that is given for you, etc. This is my blood that is shed for
the remission of your sins. It stirs up his faith (for faith is by
hearing) to lay strong holdfast upon this promise, and in his heart, does
assure himself, that Christ died and shed his blood not only for the
redemption of the whole world generally, but for his also perticularly, and
that he undoubtedly, is partaker of that blessed work of our redemption. 1.
Cor. 11.24
When we hear these words. Do this in remembrance of me. Our faith is
assured that it is Christ's commandment, that we should use this Sacrament, to
call to our remembrance, the benefit of our salvation by the death of Christ,
and in heart and mind, at all times, but then especially, to show our selves
truly thankful to him, for the same. When our sight beholds on the Table,
the Bread and Wine by Christ's ordinance broken, and powered out, for us to
use, our faith is moved thus to think: as surely and truly, as my bodily eyes
behold upon the table of the Lord, the creatures of Bread and Wine, as the
outward part of his Sacrament, and see the same broken and powered out for me:
so assuredly do I with the eye of my faith, behold the body and blood of
Christ broken and shed for me upon the altar of the cross, and the same my
savior sitting now on the right hand of God the father, with the same body
and blood, now glorified: wherewith upon the cross, he paid the price of my
redemption. When we see the Minister offering to us the bread and the cup, and
we receive the same in our hand, and by our sense feel them inwardly in our
hearts, our faith is moved to have this cogitation. As truly as our Savior
Christ upon the Cross, by his body broken and his blood shed, wrought our
redemption, and offered the benefit thereof, to all that would believe
generally: so truly am I assured, that now in the use of this holy sacrament
by his minister, he offers the same to me particularly, to be applied to my
self. And as surely as my hand receives the outward creatures: so surely,
by my faith, do I receive Christ himself, and in my heart feel him, and
with my spiritual arms embrace him, as the only price, and means of my
salvation. When we eat of the holy bread, and drink of the reverend Cup,
and by our taste have sense of the sweetness of them, and feel them pass
down into our stomach there to rest, that they may be according to their
nature, means to nourishe and strengthen our body, and to continewe it in
life, our faith is stirred up by these senses thus to think. Even as
certainly, as my taste feels, the sweetness of Bread and Wine, and thereby
perceives in deed, that their operation, is to nourishe and strengthen my
body, and to quicken my natural spirits, which without such nourishment, would
perish: even so the taste of my faith and sense of my heart, does feel the
sweetness of Christ his body and blood broken and shed for me and all
mankind upon the cross, and perceives it thereby to be the only food of my
soul, without which, should perish both soul and body, eternally. And as
certainly as I feel with bodily sense that the bread and wine passes into my
stomach, and there according to their proportion feed, strengthen and quicken
my natural body and spirits: so assuredly do I with my inward and spiritual
sense, perceive the body and blood of Christ, and the whole benefit of his
death and passion to pass into the stomach of my soul, and bosom of my
heart, there through the strength of a true Christian faith, to be laid up,
wrought, and digested, as that only nourishment that keeps the life of the
soul, and preserves me, both soul and body to eternal life. They that will
Christianly and charitably, and in the fear of God, weigh and consider these
things, I trust, will not think, either that we make light account of the
external sacrament, or in our doctrine teach a single and slight manner of
eating of Christ by faith, as the favorers of ye Church of Rome do charge us.
And I appeal to the consciences of all them that follow their doctrine, whether
ever they were taught to take such sweet instruction and comfort, in the use
of that blessed sacrament, or no? These good fruits of that sacrament are much
furthered and increased by sundry other godly cogitations, which the
Scriptures teach true Christians to use in the administration of it. 1. Cor.
11. ver. 24, 25, 26.
The word of God teaches that the use of the external Sacraments, is a manner
of confession, whereby men acknowledge them selves before God and the world,
that they are Christians. Therefore the faithful receiver, when he comes to
the sacrament, thinks this with himself: I by coming to this place, protest
before God and his Angels, and before all the creatures of heaven and earth,
that in my heart, I detest the religion of Jews, Turks, Infidels, Heretics,
and all other that deny salvation to come by the death of Christ, and I
acknowledge my self unfeignedly, to be of the number of them, that hope to
have the favor of God, and to be saved by the mercy and passion of Christ
only. The word of God teaches that sacraments, Genesis 6. ver. 18. and 9. ver.
9. and 19. ver. 9, 11, 12. Romans 4. ver. 11.
are as it were seals to confirm the truth of Gods promises, and to
strengthen our faith. Therefore by this seal of the Lords supper, we assure our
selves, that we are partakers of all ye legacy, which Christ our savior in
his last will bequeathed to us, that is, that his body was broken upon the
cross for our redemption, and his blood shed for the remission of our sins.
The scriptures teach, Gal. 3. ver. 26, 27, 28. 1. Cor. 12. ver. 12.13.27. and
Io. 6. ver. 57. 1. Cor. 11. ver 18, 21, 22. Ephe. 3. ver. 17.
that in the use of the sacraments, through faith we be united unto Christ, and
ingraffed into his mystical body, so that we live now only by him, and
whatsoever is his, by the truth of his promise, is ours also. The word of God
teaches that the sacrament of the Lords supper is a link of unity, that
knitteth us together, as members of one mystical body, and therefore that we
ought to be joined in mutual love, and charity among our selves, and that it
is a foul reproach both to Christ our head, and to the whole body, if we hate,
hurt, or hinder one another. For by the use thereof, we confess that we are
all members of one body, all servants of one Master, all children of one
Father, all subjects under one Lord and king, and all partakers of one
redemption, all heirs of one heritage, and gift of eternal life. And in so
many linkes of unity, to be at discord among our selves, is in Gods
judgment, an heavy testimony against us, in the day of his wrath. Io. 1.
ver. 29. Heb. 9. v. 14 Io. 6. ver. 47 and Ephe. 3. ver. 17.
Finally, the word of God, teaches us, that the Sacrament of the Lords
supper, is our heavenly feast, in which the lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world, is offered unto us, spiritually to feed upon in our
faith, that by him (as I have before declared) we may be nourished,
strengthened, and preserved to eternal life. And therefore, that we ought to be
very careful, so to prepare our selves, that we may be worthy guests for that
blessed table. Wherefore I think it necessary, in a word or two, to teach
you, how Christians should prepare themselves, as worthy guestes, to come to
the Lords Supper. And how that may be done, S. Paul in general words,
briefly shows. 1. Cor. 11.28.
Let every man (says he) prove himself, and so let him eat of this Bread,
and drink of this Cup. The means therefore, to come worthily to it, is to
prove, and try our selves, whether those things be in us, which the worthy
guestes of that table, should have. First therefore, we must look unfeignedly
into our selves, whether we have an appetite, or desire to eat of that blessed
food, for a loathing stomach, never perfectly digesteth any meat that it
receives, but turns it to the hurt of the body. This appetite or desire
cannot be in us, unless it be wrought by the sharp sauce of severe repentance
for our sins, which we shall the better prepare, if we examine our selves by
the perfect rule of Gods justice in his law, and consider how far we are
from the same, and what danger hangs over our heads for the want thereof.
God says in his law: Deuteronomy. 6. ver. 5. and Leuit. 19. ver. 18. Matthew. 22 ver.
37, 39.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with
all thy mind, with all thy strength, and thy neighbor as thy self: that is,
we should love, we should hate, we should fear, we should hope, for nothing
but in God, and to his glory: we should think and muse upon nothing in our
mind and understanding, but that which may make to the honor and glory of
God: we should employ all the powers of our body and all our worldly gifts to
the same end: we should do nothing to any other man, which we would not
willingly, be content should be done unto us. If we examine our selves by this
rule, we shall see we be so far from that we should be, that almost we have
not one branch thereof in us, which will more evidently appear, if we will
try our selves by every particular commandment rightly and truly
understood. Seeing then we be so far from the justice of Gods law, the
curse thereof must needs be due unto us. Deuteronomy. 27. ver. 26. Gal. 3. v. 10.
For God says, Cursed is he whosoever keeps not all things written in the
Book of his law. In this manner if we examine our selves sincerely, we shall
thoroughly know, what we are in the sight of God, as well by the corruption of
our nature, as by the course of our evil and naughty life: we shall have
sense of our own sin: we shall hate and detest it: we shall from the bottom
of our hearts be sorry for it: with trembling minds, we shall fear the heavy
judgment of God against us, and so will be stirred up in us, that godly
appetite, and greedy desire to eat of that spiritual meat, which only can
satisfy our troubled conscience, and cure our repentant, and broken hearts.
But though the appetite, and desire be never so great, in vain he comes to
any table, that has no mouth to eat, nor strength of stomach to digest.
John. 6. ver. 47, 53, 54.
A true and strong Christian faith, is the mouth of the soul, and the power
wherewith we do receive and digest Christ Jesus crucified, as the food of
our salvation. We must look therefore to our selves, first whether we know and
understand the mystery of our redemption: that is, that the unspeakable mercy
of God, John. 3. ver. 16.
sent down the second person in Trinity, to take flesh of the blessed
virgin, to live in the shape of a most contemptible man in this world, and in
the end to suffer cruel death for the redemption of mankind. Secondly, whether
we feel in our hearts a strong persuasion that we also through the merciful
promises of God are partakers of the same work of our redemption. Mark. 1.
ver. 24. and 3. ver. 11.
For a true Christian must not only have a general knowledge, but also by a
firm faith, he must have a particular application of the same to him self.
Furthermore, as it is necessary to have, both a desire to eat stirred by a
sense and feeling of true repentance, and also an assured faith to receive and
digest this wholesome and comfortable medicine of our soul: Romans 6. ver. 1, 2,
3, etc.
so because God bestows not his mercy by his Son Christ in vain, or to
the end we should still continue in sin: we must further try our selves,
whether we feel an unfeigned desire to rise to a newness of life, and in
earnest study, hereafter to amend our former faults, and to frame our selves
to a godly and honest conversation, that God in us may be glorified, and the
mouths of the enemies stopped. Lastly we must examine our consciences, whether
we have a fervent and great desire to call to our remembrance the inestimable
benefit of our redemption, 1. Cor. 1. ver 24, 25, 26.
made by the price of his body and blood, and to acknowledge and confess the
same unfeignedly, before God, and the world, and to yield unto him, most
hearty thanks for the same, and the residue of his benefits, not at this
present time only, but ever hereafter, until the time of his coming. This is
the godly and Christian trial of our selves, which if we do use, by the grace
of Gods spirit working in us, we shall become, either worthy guestes, or much
more fit then otherwise we should be without such trial. Happily some will
think that this admonition, is a terror and torment to their consciences, to
fear men from coming to this blessed Sacrament, rather then an exhortation or
encouragement unto it. For if the danger, be in it self so great, 1. Cor. 1.
ver. 27.
as the unworthy receiver eats dampnation to himself, and the preparation
and trial so straight, as you have made it, it were better never to come to
it. For what one is there among a thousand that does in this manner try his
conscience? or if he do, he must needs feel so great want and imperfection,
either in sorrow for his sins, or in sense of Gods wrath, or in weakness
of his faith, or in the study of new life, or in the coldness of his charity,
or in his feblenesse to give thanks, and to set forth the glory of God, or in all these things, that he must needs be overwhelmed in conscience, and feared
to make himself partaker of these holy mysteries. But (dearly beloved) Let
not this fear shake our consciences, nor drive you back from this blessed
table. Psalm. 78. ver 39.
This examination and trial must be within the bounds of humane frailty, and
God in this, as in all other doings, for Christ his sake, will use his mercy
and clemency, for he knows our corruptions and imperfections, and will have
regard of our infirmities. Only let us not be secure, slack and negligent, but
feeling by this trial great want in our selves, let us with lowly, humble, and
confessing hearts, acknowledge the same, and say unto God. I am sorry (O Lord)
for my sins, but not as the grieuousnesse of them requires, augment (O
Lord) by thy spirit, the sense of thy wrath in me. I believe and know with
other Christians, that thy son has shed his blood for me, but increase my
faith, (O God,) and help mine unbelief. I desire to live according to the
calling of a Christian, but the flesh and the world makes this study cold in
me: therefore do thou strengthen me with thy blessed spirit. I know it is my
bounden duty to yield unto thee immortal thanks, as well for all other thy
benefits, as principally for the whole work of our redemption by the death of
thy dearly beloved son. But I feel this zeal to be so faint and feeble,
that it is nothing according to my duty, and for that cause, I lift up mine
eyes to the throne of thy mercy, and humbly desire thee, to pardon al my
imperfections, and to heal all mine infirmities. The sense and knowledge of my
weakness, may not fear me, from this holy table. For this heavenly feast, is a
medicine for them that be sick, a comfort to them that be penitent sinners, a
free and liberal gift, to such as be poor and have nothing of them selves.
John. 6. ver. 36.
Christ in this feast is given as meat, without which, we know, we must of
necessity perish. And he is given as life unto us, and therefore without him,
we can have nothing but death. The best worthiness, that we can bring to these
reverend and holy mysteries, is, that we confess our own unworthiness, that
thy mercy may make us worthy: that we despair in our selves, that thy grace
may comfort us: that we humble our selves, to the end thy goodness may raise
us up: that we accuse our selves, to the end thy son by his merit may
justify us. For though of our selves we are hable to do nothing: yet by him,
we shall be hable to do all things. These or like cogitations if we have in
preparing our selves, to that blessed nourishment of our souls: he that
breaks not a bruised reed, nor puts out smoking flax, will not cast
aside our infirmity, but will mercifully receive us. The sorrowful Father,
which with care for his son cried unto Christ. I believe Lord, Mark. 9. ver.
24.
but help mine unbelief, Though his faith, as it might appear, was very
weak yet obtained he his purpose at Christ his hand to have his son by
miracle healed. If our faith be but as a grain of mustard seed, Matthew. 17.
ver. 20.
yet it will much preuail with Gods mercy. The Apostles of Christ which were
admitted to his last supper, were notwithstanding weak, and touched with many
infirmities, although they were not altogether wicked and faithless, as Judas
was: they believed in Christ, they loved Christ, and they loved one another,
and yet at the very table of the Lord, they showed their weakness. Peter not
without some reproach of ye residue, preferred himself before the^ al, Matthew. 26.
ver. 33.
Though al other (says he) be offended by thee, yet will not I be offended by
thee. They ambitiously contended among themselves, which of them should be the
greater. I will not mention, that immediately after Supper, they through
timerousnes fled from Christ, and for the time forsook him, which was an
evident token, of the weakness of their faith, after the knowledge of his
doctrine, and experience of many and wonderful miracles. Yet it pleased the
great mercy of our savior, favorably to accept them, and to admit them as
singular instruments of his grace. We may not therefore, for our weakness, and
imperfection despair or refuse the comfort of that heavenly table, but rather
let us in all dutiful sort, approach thereunto, and pray most heartily (every
one of us al) that we may be fit and worthy guestes for the same, which God our
Father grant us for his sons sake, Christ Jesus our savior, by the working of
his most holy, and comfortable spirit, to whom be all honor, praise, and
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

