decorative border

FUNERAL TEARS.

For the death of the Right Honorable the Earl of Devonshire.

FIGVRED In seven songs, whereof six are so set forth that the words may be
expressed by a treble voice alone to the Lute and Base Viole, or else that the
mean part may be added, if any shall affect more fuinesse of parts.

THE SEVENTH Is made in form of a Dialogue, and cannot be sung without two
voices.

Invented by JOHN COPRARIO. Pius pie.

printer's device of John Windet (1584-1611) consisting of an old man receiving
gifts from the clouds; two doves at his feet bearing scrolls with the words
"Peace" and "Plenty"; and the motto "Thou shall labor for" or "For thou shall
labor" (McKerrow 282) FOR THOU SHALL LABOR PEACE PLENTY

AT LONDON Printed by John VVindet the Assign of Will^am Barley, for John
Brown, and are to be sold at his shop in S. Dunstons Churchyeard in Fleet
s^reet. 1606.

Vno Sol Mountioie tuus contentus ocello est,
Cuncta tamen cernit, nihil est oculatius illo.
Omnia qui vt videat magnus quae continet orbis,
Cernere te potuit toto nil pulchrius orb.
Iam tuus ah periit pulcher Sol, dulcis ocellus
Penelope, periit nec tamen ille tibi.
Qui Mortalis inexplendo te amplexus amore est,
Quid ni Coelestis te quoque factus amet?
To the Air
Even to thy sweetness pure benign, kind Air
That first embraced these tears, these I present.
Know them, though now transformed from Crystal fair
The appear to thee in Musical ornament:
Free passage to melodious pearcing sounds
Thine open bosom yields: grief owes to thee
Her groans, and sighs: through thy swift-healed wounds
Her shrikes are shot, and thine her clamours be.
Receive then cheerful Air these sad laments,
Though thou art but one Element, and she
That owes them, of all four the quintessence,
The Star of honor, and the sphere of beauty.
Go, hear her sing these farewels, thou will weep,
And mouelesse ever in thy regions sleep.
Sing Lady, sing thy Deu'nshires funerals,
And charm the Air with thy delightful voice,
Let lighter spirits grace their Madrigals,
Sorrow does in the saddest notes rejoice.
Fairest of Ladies since these Songs are thine,
Now make them as thou art thy self, divine.
The devoted servant of true nobleness. John Coprario.

In honorable memory of the Right noble the Earl of Devonshire late deceased.
NOe sooner had the Fates pale Minister
At the high command of stern Necessity
Seazd the terrestrial part of Devonshire,
And rendered his free Soul to Etern^tie:
But lo the imperfect brood of fruitful Fame
(That swarming thick as atom is buze in the air)
Ligh^ winged Rumors in right of their Dame
Claimed great Mountroyes name, with swift repair
Heauing it up to Fames high Cousistorie,
Where she with doom impartial register
All names to Eternal fame, or infamy,
And in her final judgment never errs.
You sacred seed of Mnemosine pardon me
If in this su^daine rapture I reveal
Mist'rie, which only ravished sprights can see,
And envious time did till this hour conceal.
In Crystal chair when starre-like shining Fame
Her state had placed, strait with confused noise
The thronging miscreates brought in Deu'nshires name,
Some figuring lamentations, others joys:
Some wept, some sobd, some howld, some laughed, some smild,
And as their passions strange, and different were,
So were their shapes, such heaps were never pil'd
Of Monstrous heads as now consorted here.
For some like Apes peer out, like foxes some,
Many like Asses, Wolfes, and Oxen seemed,
Like hissing Serpents, and fell Hydras some,
Rhinoceroes some by their armed snowtes I deemed,
Others like Crocodiles hang their sly heads down:
But infinite of humane form appear
Whose simple looks were void of smile or frown,
Yet somewhat sad they showed like skies vncleare:
In this confusion the great Registresse
Commanding silence seu'rallie gave leave
To all reports, and with mild soberness
Both partial, and impartial did receive.
First as accusers spoke ths busy Ape,
The envious bold Wolf, and the spiteful snake,
And diverse in the braying Asses shape,
But all their malice did one period make.
Deu^nshire did love* love was his error made,
That only against his virtues was opposed,
As if for that his honored name should fade,
Whose breast both virtue, and true love enclosed.
But now rise high my spright, while I unfold
What the humane speakers in defense replied:
To latter ages let this tale be told
Which is by fame for ever verified.
Did Mountioy love? and did not Hercules
Feel beauties flame, and couch him underneath
The wings of Cupid? or did ere the less
His sacred brows deserve a victours wreath?
Did not he free the trembling world from fear,
And dire confusion? who else could subdue
Monsters that innocents did spoil, and tear,
Or Saturnes ancient goulden peace renew?
Did Mountioy love? and did not Mountioyes sword
When he marched armed with palace dreadful helm
The rough unquiet Irish rebels curb?
And the inuading Spaniard ouerwhelme?
Loved he? and did not he nathlesse assist
Great Britains counsils, and in secret cells
The Muses visit? and alone untwist
The riddles of deep Philosophic spells?
Did Deu'nshire love? and loved not Deu'nshire so
As if all beauty had for him been framed?
For beauty more adorned no age shall know
Then hers whom he his own for ever named.
Let then base envy break, fond rumor sleep,
Black malice turn to doue-white charity,
Let Deu'nshire triumph, and his honor keep
Immune, and clear from dark mortaliie.
This spoken, Fame charged Zepherus to sound
His goulden trumpet, after whose smooth blast
These words she made from earth to heaven rebound,
Brave Mountioyes glory shall for ever last.
Then forth was brought aboss't book destined
For Kings, and Heroes, where with liquid gould
Deceased Deu'nshires name she registered
In charmed letters that can nere grow old.
Omnia vincit Amor, and nos cedamus Amori,
Scripsit; cuius erant nescia scripta mori.
Annuit huic fortis Mountioius, victus Amori
Cessit; cuius erunt nescia facta mori.
I. CANTO
^ Often thou have with gree -- die ear,
drunk my notes and words of pleasure
In af -- fections equal mea --
sure now my songs of sorrow hear,
since from thee my greefes do grow
whom a -- live I prisde so dear.
The more my joy the more my joy the more the more my woe.
Often thou have with greedy care,
Drunk my notes and words of pleasures
In affections equal measure,
Now my songs of sorrow hear.
Since from thee my griefs do grow
Whom alive I pris'd so dear:
The more my joy, the more my woe.
2 Music though it sweetens pain
Yet no whit empaires lamenting:
But in passions like consenting
Makes them constant that complain:
And enchantes their fancies so,
That all comforts they disdain,
And fly from joy to dwell with woe.
I. BASSO.
^

I. ALTO
^OFt thou have with greedy care with greedy care
drunk my notes and words of plea -- sure:
in affections equal mea -- sure,
now my songs now my songs of sorrow sorrow hear,
since from thee my greefes do grow,
whom alive I pris'de so dear:
the more my joy the more my joy, the more my woe, the more my woe.
II. CANTO
^O sweet flower, O sweet flower too quickly fa -- ding,
like a winter sun -- shine day:
poor pilgrim tired poor pilgrim tired in the mid -- way
like the earth it self half shading
So thy picture so thy picture shows to me,
but only the one half of thee.
O sweet flower too quickly fading,
Like a Winter sunshine day:
Poor pilgrim tired in the midway,
Like the Earth it self half shading.
So thy picture shows to me,
But only the one half of thee.
2 O dear Joy too swiftly flying
From thy loves enchanted eyes:
Proud glory spread through the vast skies,
Earth of more then earth envying.
O how wondrous had thou been,
Had but the world thy whole life seen.
II. BASSO.
^

II. ALTO
^O Sweet flower, O sweet flower too quickly fa -- ding,
like a Winter Sun -- shine day,
poor Pilgrim tyr'de in the midde way
like the earth it self, it self, half sha -- ding --
So thy picture shows to me only the one half of thee.
III. CANTO
^O O th'un -- sure hopes of men the brittle state
the vain conte^tio^s that vnlucki -- lie
often in midst of the race often in midst of the race fall ru -- inate.
And in their course long over -- whelmed be,
and swal -- lowed up, ere they the port could see.
O th'unsure hopes of men! the brittle state!
The vain contentions that vnluckilie,
Often in midst of the race fall ruinate,
And in their course long overwhelmed be,
And swallowed up ere they the port could see.
2 O women's fruitless love! unquiet state!
Too dear affections, that despightfully,
Even in their height of bliss prove desolate!
And often fall far from all hope of joy.
Ere they have time to dream on their annoy.
III. BASSO.
^

III. ALTO
^O The unsure hopes of men, the brittle state,
the vain contentions that un -- lucki -- lie,
often in midst of the race, often in midst of the race fall ruinate.
And in their course long overwhelmed be,
and swallowed up ere they, ere they the port could see.
IIII. CANTO
^ IN darkness let me dwell, the ground shall sorrow, sorrow be
the roof de -- spaire to bar all chereful light from me
the walls of marble black that moistened still shall weep,
my music my music hellish iarring soundes to banish friendly sleep.
Thus wedded to my woes, and bedded in my tomb
O let me dying live, O let me dying live, O let me dying live till death
does come till death does come.
In darkness let me dwell, the ground shall sorrow be,
The roof despair to bar all cheerful light from me,
The walls of marble black that moistened still shall weep,
My music hellish iarring sounds to banish friendly sleep.
Thus wedded to my woes, and bedded in my tomb,
O let me dying live till death does come.
My dainties grief shall be, and tears my poisned wine,
My sighs the air, through which my panting heart shall pine
My robes my mind shall suit exceeding blackest night,
My study shall be tragic thoughts sad fancy to delight.
Pale Ghosts and frightful shades shall my acquaintance
O thus my haples joy I haste to the^e.
IIII. BASSO.
^

IIII. ALTO
^IN darkness let me dwell, the ground the ground shall sorrow be,
The roof despair to bar all cheerful light from me, from me,
The walls of mar -- ble black that moi -- stned still shall weep,
My music hellish iarring sounds to banish friendly sleep.
Thus wed -- ded to my woes, and bedded in my tomb, and bedded in my tomb,
O let me O let me dying live, dying live, O let me dying live, till death
does come, till death does come.
V. CANTO
^MY joy is dead and cannot be re -- uiu'de,
fled is my joy And never may return.
both of my joy and of my self depriu'de,
far from all joy I sing and singing mourn.
O let no tender heart, O let no tender heart or gentle ear
partake my passions or my plaininges hear.
My joy is dead, and cannot be reuiu'de,
Fled is my joy, and never may return:
Both of my joy, and of my self depriu'de
Far from all joy I sing, and singing mourn.
O let no tender heart, or gentle ear
Partake my passions, or my plainings hear.
2 Rude flintie breasts that never felt remorse,
Hard craggy rocks that death and ruin love,
Those only those my passions shall enforce,
Beyond their kind, and to compassion move.
My grief shall wonders work, for he did so
That causde my sorrows, and these tears does owe.
V. BASSO.
^

V. ALTO
^MY joy is dead, is dead, and cannot be reuiu'de,
fled is my joy, and never may re -- turn,
both of my joy, and of my self depriu'de Far from all joy I sing, and
singing mourn.
O let no ten -- der heart, O let no tender heart or gentle ear, or gentle ear
par -- take my passions, or my play -- ninges hear.
VI. CANTO
^DEceitfull fancy deceitful fancy why de -- udst thou me,
the dead a -- live presenting?
My ioies fair Image carved in shades I see,
O false O false yet sweet contenting?
Why art not thou a substance like to me,
or I a shade to vanish hence with thee?
Deceitful fancy why deludst thou me,
The dead a live presenting?
My joys fair image carved in shades I see,
O false! yet sweet contenting?
Why art not thou a substance like to me?
Or I a sha^e to vanish hence with thee?
2 Stay gentle object, my sense still deceive,
With this thy kind elusion:
I die through madness if my thoughts you leave
O strange? yet sweet confusion?
Poor blisselesse hatte that feels such deep annoy,
Only to loose the shadow of thy joy.
VI. BASSO.
^

VI. ALTO
^DEceitfull fancy, deceitful fancy, why de -- lud'st thou me,
The dead alive presenting:
My joys fair image carved in shades I see,
O false, O false, yet sweet conten -- ting.
Why art not thou a substance like to me,
or I a shade to vanish hence with thee.
VII. CANTO A Dialogue.
^FOe of mankind, why murdrest thou my love
Oh where? Oh where?
poor wretched life that only lives in name.
That is true fame that is true fame which living men enjoy.
live ever, live ever through thy meri -- ted renown, renown
fair spirit shining, fair spirit shining in thy starry crown, thy starry
crown.
Canto. Foe of mankind why murderest thou my love?


Alto. Forbear he lives.


C. Oh where?


A. In heaven above.


C. Poor wretched life that only lives in name.


A. Man is not flesh, but soul, all life is fame:


C. That is true fame which living men enjoy.


A. That is true life, which death cannot destroy.


Chorus. Live ever through thy merited renown.
Fair spirit shining in thy starry crown.

VII. BASSO.
^

VII. ALTO
^FOr bear he lives in heaven above
Man is not flesh but soul, all life is fame:
That is true life, that death cannot destroy
live ever, live ever through thy me -- ri -- ted renown,
fair spirit shining, fair spirit shining, in thy starry crown,
It Is true, that whom the Italian Tarantula
Spider stinges
He sings, or laughs, or daunces till he dies,
Or spends his short time in such idle things
As the seuerer sort call vanities:
Music alone this fury can release,
This venomous rancour that the flesh does eat
Like envy which in death does seldom cease
To feed upon the honors of the great.
Well have we toyld in prosperous harmony
If we the envy poysned wounds do cure
Of spiteful adder-toongd hypocrisy
That speaks washed words, but works dark deeds impure.
If such prove past recure, suffice it then
We song not to brute beast, but humane men.
A Table of the Songs contained in this Book.
1. Often thou have 2. O sweet flower. 3. O the unsure hopes. 4. In darkness
let me dwell. 5. My joy is dead. 6. Deceitful fancy. 7. Foe of Mankind.
Quid mortuos mordes canis? nihil retro
Cernis, neque vides manticae quod in tergo est.
The dead why bit'st thou dog? thou art backward blind,
And do not see the bag thou bear behind.


