AN APPROVED Medicine against the deserved Plague.

Is any among you afflicted? Let him pray.

James. 5.13. JMPRINTED AT London, by Thomas Est, dwelling in
Aldersgate-streete, at the Sign of the black Horse.

1593.

To the honorable and virtuous Lady Scudamore, attendant upon her Majesty's
most excellent person in her privy Chamber, Anthony Anderson, Preacher of
Christ's holy gospel, Subdean of her Majesty's Royal Chapel, wishes all
honorable increase, and heavenly felicity.
ALthough (Honorable Madame) the matter herewith tendered, be of small worth, to
some men, and less esteemed with many, yet sure I am the right use thereof,
may aduaile more, then make account of it. If in the days of health and
prosperity, we thinck it duetifull to pray the Lord, to continue the same,
how much more ought we, in affliction and adversity, to practice sound
petition, which godliness has this riches, that the faithful by it in Christ
from God, does receive, both temporary good, and eternal comforts. We in this
Realm, are under the rod of affliction, and who does pray, but those which are
taught of God, to use it. Amongst the number of whom, for that in my
knowledge, with many others in Court, your Ladyship does daily use and desire
it, and my self for your good opinion and Christian kindness conceived and
bestowed on me, to you greatly bound, I am bold to patronize my poor
indeauors present, under your Godly protection, assured that both in Court and
country, it shall be the more in use, which undoubtedly will counteruaile their
pains, if they pray in faith. The cause moving this my boldness, to present
the Church here with, is, my duty to the same in general, and especially, next
to the most honorable Court, (whereof I am a poor membre, in her Majesty's
goodness,) to my comfortable charge at Stepney, a people of great import, for
Maryne service, cheefely zealous in God, loyal to her Majesty, well deserving
of the whole Realm, and now under the rod of this smart visitatio^, for whom,
I humbly beseech all them, which may or shall feel any comfort by this poor
tender, that in their fervent prayers, they will effectually comme^d us to the
Throne of Gods mercies in Christ. And to you good Madame, with the rest of the
honorable and godly Ladies and others at Court, I humbly commend me,
beseeching God, to grant us merciful deliverance of this his loving rod, that
we her Majesty's servants, may thither return to our bounden duty, as
apertaineth, and so humbly I take my leave.

August 1. 1593. Stepney. Your honors deuote in the Lord, Anthony Anderson.

To the humble hearted Readers, in the Lord.
THE Almighty GOD, the Lord of Hosts (as Father of mercies) dear brethern,
for many years past, has sweetly called us to unfeigned repentance, by the
Ministry of his holy word, but we have not hearkened thereunto. Wherefore
eftsoons and again, the same mighty God, does at this present, sommon us, by
his smart Preacher, Micah. 6.9.
the visiting rod. Whose increasing voice, cries to all in the persons of
many, thus. Oh sinful earth hearken and give ear: stop thy course, stay thy
race, turn thy self to me, receive my stripes with patience, and wisely
foresee the plague and hide thee. For he that sent me says farther unto thee.
Pro. 22.3. Zoph. 2.1.
O Nation not worthy to be loved, how yet, have I, loved thee? What should I
have done, that I have not done unto thee? I have given thee a wonderful
peace, an invincible protection, an heavenly doctrine, and the choice store, of
all earthy treasure. The gold of Ophir, Solomon sought after, 2. Chron. 8.18.
but the Indians gold, I have powered into thy lap, as unlooked for. A Prince
thou have, the holy wonder of the world. Else, ask the Islands which know not
God. Thy Realm and rest, is kept by me, the watchman thereof, and when soever
the enemy assaileth, I put him back, with great disgrace. The heavens do drop
the fatness, and the earth does make thee laugh and sing, what would thou
have more, but a continuance of that spiritual comfort, and corporal
pleasures which yet abide with thee, but be wise and consider, see how I now
begin to beat thee, beware therefore, repent in time, least I utterly remove,
Reave. 2.5.
thy Candlestick from thee, and then who will pity thy last dissolution?
Behold, and hear my rod, Micah. 6.9.
and me that sent it. I have made thee sick with striking, do not my percing
arrows, stick fast in thee? Psalm. 38.2.5.
Are not thy wounds putrified? Does not hasty death greatly devour thee? Mark
it well and the cause thereof. Thy sin is the cause, Micah. 6.13.
thy great sins, and they passing account. Oseas. 9.9.17
Turn therefore unto me that am in just anger coming unto thee with a mind
of revenge: prepare thee therefore to meet me, before the day of my decree
come forth. Psalm. 106. in all. Luck. 7.38. Joel. 2.13.
Come to me, not with Israells hypocrisy, but with Magdalens tears. Rent
your hearts, and keep whole your garments, for I cannot take pleasure, in that
bodily exercise, where the penitent spirit, speaks not for mercy. If any be
afflicted let him pray. Iam. 5.13.
If many be under the rod, let all come together, turn together, mourn
together, cry together and say: O Lord of Hosts, in the middle of thy wars
thinck upon thy promised mercies. We come, no more to fight against thee in
our sinful lusts, but to fall before thee, forsaking and confessing our
sins, sweet Lord have mercy. And let every of you, Esa. 1.5.6. Hos. 4.1.
Iero. 8.6.
from the top to the toe, (for you are sore from the head to the foot)
applying profitably the contrauersie to your selves, say: Our sins O Lord,
yea every man say, my sins, as our sins are the causes of this malady. Our
rebellions, presumptions, scorning, Atheistical, our Roman sins, our carnal
apetites, present, past, remembered, and forgotten sins. Sins without
remorse, without conscience, against all conscience, even when ye spirit
quaketh in dread: even the^ ye flesh burns in lust. Sins in Court
unbridled, sins in the Church not repented of, in the country not cared for.
Iero. 17.27.
The profanation of the Sabbath day, the abominations in the week day, no
truth, less trust, Hose. 4.1.2.
no faith to God, no love to our brethern, much fayll of loyalty to the
Prince, and small proof of due obedience, to her Magistrates. But a mighty
scorn of the Lords Preachers, through an utter contempt of his word.
Resolute, in league with sin, Esa. 28.
death and hell, and an absolute distrust, of Gods sure promises, either for
mercies, or Judgment. And what should I say more? Oh how many are the foolish
wise, which say in unpunished boldness, they have no God, Psalm. 14.1.
There is no God. Oh England, O people, why will thou dye? Say to thy self, Oh
Soul, repent thee of thy sin, Iero. 18.8. and. 26 3. Psalm. 91.4.7.
and God will repent him of the plague, will take thee into his protection, and
hide thee under his wings. They shall fall on both sides thee, but it shall not
come to thee.

But if thou will not hearken to this his voice, O flesh, (of what mould so
ever,) but still wilt pamper thy self in carnal delights, to a further
transgression, (which now ought to be feared) then fear, for he has not sent
this scourage for little purpose, and be sure that he has his storehouse
full, of final instruments, which can and will make quick dispatch. As
cleanness of teeth, barrenness of earth, Amos. 4.6.
brought of heaven, devouring worms, fiery feauers, burning botch, scowring
sword, revenging axe, haylestones and storms of fire, as of Sodom and
Gomorrah, to persecute, to pull down, to cast out, and into hell, all those
which forget God. Are the treasures of wickedness still in your houses, the
false balance, small waights, naughty wares, counterfaite lights, sweet
words, sour deeds? Eccle. 10.16.17
Do your heads eat for lust, and not for need, drinck to surfeit, and not for
thirst, send their proud servants, to bring, and never satisfied? Are the
daughters of Sion proud, as Esaias descryes them? Amos 4.1. Esa. 3.16. Ezech
13.18. Esa. 28.10. 1. cor. 9.26. and 14.9. Ier. 20.9. Micha. 3.12.
Be your Prophets chamber grooms, to lay pillowes, under sinful elbowes? or
do their tongues cleave to the roof of their mouths? or speak they to the
Clouds, or in the Air? or is fearful Jeremy, become an example? Oh for woe.
Ah Syon, thou plowed field, sometime, the beauty of the world? what is become
of thee? Oh England the present Bride, beware of widowhood, Psalm. 19.5. Cant.
6.1.
the Bridegroom is come out of his chamber, go forth to meet him. He is gone
into his beds of spiceries, shall be find store? Cant. 4.13.
He feeds of flowers, where be his Lillies? Oh thrice happy land, perceive
thy present happiness, prevent a futuer horror, pray for the life of thy
Princely light, and harden not thy heart, 2. Sam. 21.17.
being still daily called in mercy. 1. Cor. 11. Luck. 13.3.5.
For this sin, many are sick, and many are dead, let the Remainder repent,
least ye all likewise perish. And now my beloved, and important charge, To.
12.1.
I beseech you by the mercies of God, remember with me, Amos. 1.2. and. 3.4.
there is no plague but for sin, and the Lion roareth not, without his pray.
We are now under this growing plague with others, Zeph. 2.3.
let us repent effectually as others, which truly, Esa. 30.22.
seek the Lord, Cast our sins from us, and draw the Lords mercy to us.
Forget not what godly Sirach says, Eccle. 10.8.
because of unrighteous dealing, and wrongs, and riches gotten by deceit, the
Kingdom, is translated, from one people, Hab^. 2.9.
to an other. Woe unto the buylder which builds with blood. And bewise to
understand this. Goods evil gotten, are of no long continuance. Finally let
this sentence sommon you, before the last Tromp, sound for you. Go to now, Ia
5.1.2
ye rich men, weep and howl, for your miseries, that shall come upon you.
Your riches are corrupt, and your garments are moth eaten, your gold and silver
is canckered, and the rust of them, shall be a witness against you, and shall
eat your flesh, as it were fire. Ye heaped up treasures for the last days.
Behold: the hyer of your laborers, which have reaped your feelds (roomed your
ships) which is of you kept back, by fraud, cries, and their cry, is entered
into the ears of the Lord of Hosts. James, 5.1.2. etc. Lay your selves open to
the Lord, for all things are apparent unto him, Pro. 28.13.
but he will have thee to accuse thy self, that he may forgive thee. He that
hides his sins (says Solomon) shall not prosper, but he that confesses his
sins, and forsakes them, shall find mercy. Therefore take a good heart to
thee, bring repentance with thee, fall on your knees, 1. Tim. 2.8.
lift up pure hands, the whole in Church, in our great assemblies, the sick at
home, amids their children and families. Take these prayers (or such) into your
hands, send them heartily, up to God, in Christ our only Mediator, and fear
not to find mercy, with gracious deliverance, because, Pro. 50.15.
he has so promised, saying: Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I
will hear thee, and deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Math. 11.28.
And our savior Christ does tenderly inuit all penitent sinners thus. Come
unto me all you that travel and be heavy laden, and I my self will ease
you. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be always, all honor and
glory, one God everlasting. Amen.

A Prayer to God against the Plague.
WE prostrate our souls and bodies, before thy mercy seat, O Father of
mercies, and humbly confess, that we have most justly procured, thy heavy
indignation against us. We have hitherto, spent our time in wanton appetites,
and careless abuse, of thy singular bounties, but thou have in mercy, curbed
the bitte, and straytned the rain, of our unbridled affections, whereby we
begin to dread thy threatened Judgments. Our sins are as manyfold, as
manifest, (O Lord) we have daily heard ye word of our saving health, with ye
ear of grudge and contempt, either deriding or not caring, but never truly
repenting, at the cry thereof. Thine abundant blessings erthie, we have
greedely devoured, and by our wealth, have increased our wickedness But O
sweet Father have mercy, and pardon our sins, (even the whole tree, with
her braunching fruits,) which at this present, we heartely disclayme, and
wherewith, even the teeth of the whole Land, has been set on edge, namely
infidelity, incredulity, and all impiety. No faith, no truth, no mercy, no
knowledge of thee in our hearts, though great pretense of thy Religion in our
lips, but by falsehood, and cunning circumuention, one of another, by lying
lips, and decitfull tongues, vanity, has been tossed, one to another, pryuat
pilffrie, and open stealth, robbing at home, and rouing abroad, swearing,
forswaring, whorring and killing, oppressing, and deuoureing, to all our powers
and policies, even blood unto blood, passing by pleasure to pleasures, from
profit to pride, from pride to ambition, and in ambition, to inward contempt,
and outward disdain, each one of another. Our common peace by thee, has not
yet procured our Godly peace with thee, but rather we have taken occasion
thereby, to harden our hearts against thee, which mightily has drawn thee to
this great contrauersie with us. O Lord unbend (in mercy) thy bow of strength,
for thy steeled Arrows, stick fast in us, and our putrified wounds, bewray our
iniquities. Yea Lord that more is, if we by thee, turn not speedely to thee,
the wise in thee, do behold thy sharpened sword, with an outstretched arm,
drawn out against us. O Lord hear us, and heal us, for in this our
sickness and trouble (in our mediator Christ Jesus) we call unto thee. And
Lord it is high time, for our head City is sick, her Sister Cities groan
under this burden, their neighbor people are turned to their earth, and no part
is free, from the noisome pestilence. It flies by day, it walks in the
dark, it destroys at noone tide, and none can resist it, but only thou O
Lord, which sent it, even thou only (if thou will) can utterly restrain it.
O dear father forgive us wretched sinners, relieve us miserable wretches,
remember that we are but earth and ashes, yet in thy mercy thy dear children:
deliver us from death, and work life in us. Let this thy loving rod, rid
us, of our carnal rust, and quicken us with thy sanctifying spirit, open our
hearts to thy holy word, purge our consciences from all dead works, and rebuild
us fit, for thy holy service, give us patience in every adversity, an humble
and regardant eye, in all prosperity, fervent spirits to pray to thee, and now
to give thee no rest, till thou vouchsafe to have mercy upon us. Our Prince
thine holy Anointed, prays for us, her pote^tates, thy preaching ministers,
and sanctified people, mourn and lament. Thy wydows, and desolate Orphans,
yea thy small and tender Infants cry, lifting up pure hands, sweet Lord, (say
they) have mercy. And now O Lord both one and all, pouring out the tears of
our hearts unto thee, most humbly beseech thee, relieve us, release us, hear
us, forgive us, revive us, preserve us, protect us, deliver us from evil, and
receive us into thy everlasting favor, through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom
with thee and the holy Ghost, three distinct persons and one only our good
God, be all honor and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

An earnest prayer for the Queens most excellent Majesty.
O Lord God holy Father, infinitely wise, omnipotent, and abundant in mercy,
mighty in work, and just in revenge, which for the common converse, of all
men, have planted them plats, and put them under sovereign authority, through
which good government, they might most firmly, live and love one another, most
wisely ordaining each one, to have mutual need and occasioned intercourse one
with another* Sundry which Royal staves, of beauty and bands, eftsoons thou
have broken into shieuers, when by overmuch provocation and contempt, thy
awonted long suffering, has been abused: as thereby under a sparing
chastisement, to reduce them, or by a deadly blow, utterly to subvert them. O
Lord magnificent, by thee it is, that Kingdoms are, and Kings do reign.
Put down one, and sets up another, as, where, and when it pleases
thee, in all and every place, under the Coape of heaven. We thy chosen
children and people of England, magnify thy mercies, and praise thy power, for
giueing and preserving unto us, a most rare and pearelesse Queen, our
Sovereign Lady ELIZABETH, by whose sacred scepter, thy holy Church, this
common weal, and many other Nations and people have found, both celestial
blessings, and terrestrial comforts. The faithful Protestant from whersoeuer,
finds here a secure and fertile norcery. The wilful papist, sits under
his Vine, and the malcontent carnal, has long lasting favor, but every of
which by her, have from thee O Lord, thy gospel, to reclayme them, her
Scepter, to protect them, with a sweet rod, in sparing hand to refine them. Her
disloyal subjects at home, and her professed enemies abroad of all sorts, thou
have miraculously brought under, or to utter confusion. For the which we
render unto thee continual praise. And inasmuch O Lord, as our life, and the
light of the land thy golden Candlestick, is deadly darckned in the want of
her, Lord, still give us thy bountiful mercy, and therein preserve, her
Highness, long to reign over us. Increase, thy graces in her, her goodness
to us, to thaduaunce of virtue, and suppression of vice. Keep thine anointed
our Sovereign, from the treachery of dissembling subjects, and malice of the
foreign foe. Hide her under the shadow of thy wings, from the noisome
pestilence, and defend her against the hurtful sword: that our selves and
families, may live in peace, our land, may yield her increase, and that no
invasion, Psalm. 144.10.
may empeach us, or going out may daunt us, nor any crying be in our streets.

Dear Father grant her our Sovereign, a swift eye and speedy rescue, from
the subtle snare, of every wily hunter. Give her Lord, fast, and not faylling
confederats. Wise and faithful Counselors, loyal and loving subjects, and so
in thy mercy keep us from evil, that we provoke not, thy judgments, to
deprive us, of our chiefest comfort. Grant this O Father, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

The Preface.
MY Father having special care,
of Stepny his great charge:
Has made sweet prayers for their comfort
their hearts to God enlarge.
And I desirous of your health,
my brethren, Sisters all:
Have sent you these to train you up,
rather on God to call.
For th'health and wealth of our parents,
our selves and neighbors eke:
Pray we to God with one accord,
for so it is most meet.
And so my brethren fare you well,
with all my sisters dear:
God grant that we may give unto,
gods word attentive ear.
Antony Anderson, Junior.

A prayer for the infection of the plague. 1593.
O Lord our God omnipotent,
of mercy we thee crave:
Pour down thy truth most excellent,
that we the same may have.
And cease O Lord thy iry rod,
which does opresse us sore:
And give us true repentance Lord,
that we may sin no more.
Cease now O Lord thy heavy hand,
the Father we entreat:
And let us in our hearts thy word,
full often times repeat.
From thee O Lord we cannot fly,
Thy power does so excel:
But keep from us we thee beseech,
thy rod which is most fell.
But give to us O Lord of might,
the pardon of our sin:
And take thy plague from us O Lord,
that here of long has bin.
Give us O Lord thy holy word,
which always is most true:
And give us grace to praise thy name,
for praise to thee is due.
Remember blessed Lord thy flock,
which else is like to pyne:
And take from us that heavy clogge,
which loads us at this time.
Thy will be done O Lord of might,
as seems best to thee:
For thou will strike where thou think best,
no man a let can be.
When it shall please thy majesty,
to take this life away:
Receive our souls unto thy Throne,
to live with thee for aye.
O Lord preserve our noble Queen,
our realm and people both:
And keep us from the deadly fear,
of thine eternal wroth.
Grant our request O Lord of might,
for Christ his sake thy son:
And take away thy cruel plague,
that now is us among.
Finis
quoth Anthony Anderson, junior.


