WORK, MORE WORK, AND A LITTLE MORE WORK FOR A MASS PRIEST.

Reviewed and augmented by the Author.

With an Epistle of an unknown Priest remaining in London, sent to the
Author, excepting against five points therein.

With the Authors Answer thereunto: returned unto the Priest within twelve
days after the receipt of the Priests Execptions.

Numbers 25, 16, 17, 18, verses. The Lord spoke (...) Vex the Midianites, and
smite the (...) ^^ey trouble you with their wiles. LONDON, Printed by William
Jones, dwelling in Red-crosse-street. 1628.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND MY VERY good Lord, THOMAS Lord Viscount SAVILE,
Baron of Castle Bar.
Right Honorable,
KIng JAMES of late and blessed memory, knowing the mysteries of Popery better
then many of his predecessors, how by it God was robbed of his honor, by
Invocation of Saints, vowing to Saints, believing in Saints, sacrificing to
Images, adoring of a breaden god, and Relikes: and how Kings and Princes were
spoiled of their sovereignty, by the Popes exempting of all Clergy men from
obedience to them, and absolving their subjects from the Oath of Allegiance;
and how Inferior Magistrates were hindered in the execution of Justice, by the
doctrine of Aequivocation; and the common people inveigled and misled, to the
endangering both of their bodies and souls, by the doctrines of blindfold
obedience, and that faith and truth is not to be kept with heretics: he was
not only willing, all the time he did reign over us, that we should pray to
God, as we did in the days of Great ELIZABETH: That he would keep us from all
Papistrie: and that he would preserve us from the Pope, as well as from the
Turk; in as much as the Pope labored to dethrone Christ, as well as the Turk
did: but he required further of us, In the prayer to be made Nove. 5. in
remembrance of our deliverance from the Gunpowder* Treason.
That we should pray God to strengthen his hands, and the hands of his
Nobles and Magistrates in the Land, to cut off the Papists, and to root them
out of the Confines and limits of the Kingdom: protesting in one Parliament,
That he could not permit the increase and growth of Popery, without betraying
the liberties both of England and Scotland, and of the Crown in his posterity.
And in another, That his heart bled when he heard of the increase of Popery:
And that his grief was such, as if thorns had been in his eyes, and pricks
in his sides: avowing earnestly, That if he knew any way better then another,
to hinder the growth thereof, he would take it. Which courses and speeches of
his, argued no small dislike of Popery and of Papists also: though some of them
gave out in Germany, Mer^uri^^ ^^lo. Belg. ad An, 1623.
yea, and in S. Lucies Island, not long before his death, that he was turned
Roman-Catholike. Pur^h^^ Pilgrimage lib. ^. cap. 3. p. 831.
Now in as much, as the causes which wrought in his Royal heart such a
detestation of Popery, are the same still, (if not greater) which they were in
his time: I cannot but think, that Charles his son, our present sovereign
Lord and King, carries the same opinion of the same profession, and
professors, which his blessed Father did. And hereupon it is (Right Noble Sir)
that I being persuaded, it is the duty of every good subject (according to his
place and means) to labor the effecting of that which he conceiues his
Sovereign intends, for the preservation of Gods glory, and his own authority:
and for procuring the quiet and safety of his people; I have reviewed and
enlarged a little Treatise which I published in King James his time, wherein
many gross doctrines, and vile practices of the Papists are discovered: as
namely, that it is lawful to eat their God, to kill their Kings, to cozen
their neighbors, etc.

Which I humbly pray may pass in your Honors name, as a lasting testimony of
my unfeigned thankfulness unto your Honor, and to your Honorable father, by
whose only means (under God) I have what I have* for which, next unto God and
the King, I profess I honor you both: and will never forget to pray for you,
and yours: remaining always

At Your service, Alexander Cook.

TO THE READER.
REader, in this Pamphlet, among other things, thou shall find it proved, that
according to Popery, A man may eat his god with his teeth, as Homer. O^y^
lib. 9.
Cyclops eat Ulysses companions: and that a subject may kill his King, as 1
King. 16, 9, 10.
Zimri did his Master: and that one man may deceive and cozen another, as the
Joshua. 3. 9.
Gibeonites did Joshua. Besides, thou shall find it proved, that the Papists
make of no sins grievous sins; and of grievous sins no sins, or at most
but venial sins: Yea, thou shall find it proved, that the Papists make of
grievous sins rare virtues; and that their Pope (Saint Paul's 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
man of sin) takes upon him to forgive sins past, and sins to come.
Further, thou shall find it proved, that they equal the virgin Ma^ie unto
Christ in many respects; and prefer her before him in some respects: not
considering the truth of Haeres co^^^ Co^yridian^^.
Epiphanius speech, Par detrimentum verae Religioni afferunt, illi qui vilem B.
Virginem habent, and illi qui vltra fas eius gloriam adaugent: They are equally
to blame, who vilify the Virgin, and who deifie her. Thou shall find it
proved, that Papists profess more dislike of Protestants, then either of
Turk, Jew, or Infidel: and that they esteem of them no otherwise then of
reprobates, of whose salvation there is no more hope then of Lucifers. These
things, and some other of like stamp, thou shall find herein proved against
the Papists, out of their own Authors* which, if thou be a Protestant, may
help to keep thee from falling unto Popery: and if thou be a Papist, may
help to recover thee from Popery; which are the two only ends ^aime at in
suffering it to pass to the Press. And this is all that by way of Preface I
have to say unto thee, besides Farewell.

Go little book, make speed, apply the season,
Propound thy Quaeres with undaunted cheer:
Bid learned Priests and Cardinals speak reason 2 Pet. 2. 12.
.
The vulgar dare not read, but make them hear.
Yea give a challenge to the Triple Crown:
Bid them reply, or cast their bucklers down.
WORK AND MORE WORK FOR A MASS PRIEST.
SIr Priest, I pray you tell me of what Order of Priests you are; whether of
the Order of Aaron, or of the Order of Melchisedek: or of that rabblement
whereof the Priests of Baal were. St. Paul witnesses, that Heb. 7, 12.
Aarons Priesthood is changed; and that V. 23, 24.
Melchisedeks is such, as passes not from one unto another: so that (for any
thing I see) you must be of the rabblement of Baal.

2 Again, Sir Priest, I pray you tell me, what is the chiefest duty which is
required of you by virtue of your Priesthood, whatsoever: Is it to preach, or
to say Mass? Sunt infiniti, qui tantu^ celebrandis Missis, quas dicunt,
operamdant, et eius reicausa, sacerdotes sunt, proinde quasi in eaomne
consistat officium. There are in finite (as De Iu^ru^, lib.
Polidor Virgil says) who spend all their time, only in saying Masses, being
priested for that purpose; as though no other duty was necessary to be
performed by a Priest. Are you one of them? or are you a preaching Priest? If a
preaching Priest, I pray you what calling have you thereunto? and whether are
you bound of necessity to preach? I read in your books, that Ioh. de Combis in
Compend Theolog lib. 6. ca. 36.
Actus princicipalis Presbyterorum est consecrare corpus et sanguinem Christi,
The principal duty required of you, at the time of your priesting, is Massing:
and that Sa. in Aphons. verbo pradicare. et Orde.
Praedicare non est actus Ordinis sacri: Preaching is no act belonging to holy
Orders: and that, Azorius Instit. Moral. part. 1. lib. 7. cap. 7. 10. quar^^^.
if it so fall out, a man cannot both hear a Sermon, and a Mass on a
festival day, he is bound rather to hear the Mass, then the Sermon: because
to hear Masses, is sub praecepto, to hear Sermons, is only sub consilio.
Which being so, preaching (it seems) is a work of Superogation with you, it
is no necessary duty: You need not fear the Woe, that 1 Cor. 9. 16.
St. Paul feared, if he preached not the Gospel of God.

3 Sir Priest, I desire to know what benefit may be reaped by hearing of your
Masses, for saying whereof you set so many men on work. Your Predecessors were
wont to say, The signification of the Mass printed in English by Robert Wyer in
Queen Mary's days, Discip. Ser. 48. de schs. Raymundus in Sum. de 7. Sacramen
Tract. 3. fol. 91.
That a man does merit more while he does hear Mass devoutly, then if he
should give for Gods sake, so much ground and land as he could pass and go
over in the space of that same Mass: And Bernard de Busti. in Ser. de
sacr^ficio Missa. et Author of the English festival, Sermo de Corpore Christi.
That a man is never the elder, for the time that he spends in hearing of a
Mass: And Discip. loco supra citato.
That one of your Masses is of as much worth as Christ's passion on the Cross.
Now, and if this last assertion be true, I would gladly know, why Masseus de
vi^^ Ignatij lib. 2. cap. 12.
Ignatius the founder of the Jesuitical Order, did say, and cause to be said,
3000 Masses for the furtherance of that Order. Might not 300, yea 3, have
served his turn, seeing one Mass is of such efficacy and worth? You know the
saying, frustra sit per plura, quod sieri potest per pauciora. It is needless
to use two strings for a bow, if one will serve the turn.

4 By your doctrine, sir Priest, when your number is so increased, as that you
be able to make your part good against our noble King, you are bound in
conscience to rebel. For, Hinc infert vniuersa Theologorum et Iurisconsultorum
Ecclesiasticoru^ schola, (et est certum et de fide) quemcun ^ Principem
Christianum, si a Religione Catholica manifest deflexerit, et alios avocar^
voluer it, excidere statim omni potestate et dignitate, et ipsa vi iuris tam
humani tam divini, hoc ^ ante dictam sententiam supremi Pastoris et Iudicis
contra ipsum prolatam: et subditos quoscun ^ liberos esse ab omni iur amenti
obligatione, quod de obedientia tanquam Principi legitimo praestitissent: posse
^ et debere (si vires habeant) istiusmodi hominem tanquam Apostatam,
haereticum, ac Christi Domini desertore^, et Reip suae inimicu^ hoste^q, ex
hominu^ Christianoru^ dominatu eijcere, ne alios inficias vel suo exe^plo, aut
imperio aside avertat. At que haec certa, definita, et indubitata virorum
doctissimorum sententia. This Inference does the whole school of Divines, and
Canonists make, (and it is a certain inference, and to be believed as a point
of faith:) That if any Christian Prince whatsoever, shall manifestly turn from
the Catholic Religion, and seek to draw others from the same, he presently
falls from all Princely power and dignity; and that by virtue and force both of
the law of God and man: yea and that before any sentence be pronounced against
him by the supreme Pastor and Judge: And that his subjects of what estate or
condition soever, are freed from all bond of oath of allegiance, which at any
time they had made unto him as to their lawf^l Prince: and that they both may,
and ought, (if they have competent means and strength) cast o^t such a man
from bearing rule among Christians, as an Apostata, an Heretic, a Revolter
from Christ, and an enemy to his own State and Commonwealth: least perhaps he
might infect others by his example, or turn them from the faith by his
command. And this is the certain, resolute; and undoubted judgment of the
best Divines, says the Resp. ad Ed^ct. Reginae Anglia promalgat. 20. November.
Anno 1591 sect. 2. Nu 157 page 149.
Author of Philopater, who was either of Creswell, or Parsons, as W. W. in his
Quodlibers page 295. and in his book of gr^ue Considerations etc. page
one of the secular Priests confesses. And in Bellarmine we read, that Lib. 5.
de To. Ponr Cap 7.
Non licet Christianis tolerare Regem haereticum, si ille conetur pertrahere
subditos ad suam haeresin. It is not lawful for Christians to suffer an
heretical King to reign over them, if he go about to draw them to his
heresy. And that Lib 3. de Luiti^ Cap. 22.
siquidem potest fieri, ^^t haeretici extirpantur^ sunt procul dubio
extirpandi; si autem non possunt quia sunt sortiores nobis, et periculum est,
ne si cos bello ag^rediantur, plures ex nobis cadant quam exill^^, tunc
qui^soend^on est. If it can be without loss of Papists, that Protestants may
be rooted out, without all doubt they ought to be rooted out: But if it cannot
be that without loss they may be rooted out, because they are stronger then
Papists, and if the Papists did assail them, perhaps the greater loss would
fall on the Papists side, the Papists must let them alone. According to your
Divinity, there is nothing that excuses you from present blame, in that you
rebel not, but want of sufficient means. Which is confessed by Dominicus
Bannes, the chief professor of Divinity in Salamanctia in in Spain: for,
excusandi Anglicani et Saxonij fideles qui non se eximuni a potestate
superiorum, nec bellum contra alios gerunt: quoniam communiter non habent
facultatem ad haec bella gerenda contra Principes, et imminent illis grauia
pericula. The faithful in England and Saxony (says In 2. 2 Tho. 9. 12. Art.
2 Col. 467. edit. To. 1586.
he, meaning papists) are to be excused, in that they do not exempt themselves
from the power of their superiors, nor bear arms against them: because
Generals they have no ability to war against their princes, and great
dangers hang over their heads if they should attempt it. Now your priests
labor to increase your number, and so your means, do you not? And do you
not thereby labor to hasten Rebellion? Speak out priest, say the truth, shame
the Devil, and save the credit of your Religion if you can. See W. W. in his
Quodlibet^ page 304.
Is not your Religion and Treason so linked together, that you cannot play the
priests, but you must play the traitors also.

5 Men say, Sir priest, that your Convers. pa^* 2 Chap. 12. sect. 16.
Parsons commends those Rebels as sufferers for Religion, who were up in arms
against King Edward 6, in the 3 year of his reign; and for that insurrection
justly slain and put to death. Men say, that your Motive 1^^
Bristow, commends those Northern men who were put to death for Rebellion
against Queen Elizabeth, in the 11 year of her Reign, for Martyrs, yea
glorious Martyrs. And I am sure, that that Wilson as Mr. Copley says, cap. 2.
sect. 6. of his doctrinall and moral observation, page 12.
Catholic priest who set us out Anno 1608.
not long since (permissu superiorum, with the approbation of his superiors)
the English Martyrologe, and the Catalogue of the late Martyrs in England,
annexed thereunto: has registered therein, Garnet and Oldcorne, two of the
powder Traitors, for Martyrs. And so has Apol. pro Hen. Garneto printed Colon.
1610. cap. 6. sect. 6. p. 169.
Eudaemon the Jesuit in his Apology for Garnet. I find likewise, that In the
margent of his Preface to his motives.
Mr. Sheldon, a priest of yours sometimes, does witness, that one P: W. in a
public assembly, and in a public panagericall Oration made for Garnets honor
at Lovaine, prayed thus unto him: S. Henrice ora pro nobis. St. Henry pray for
us. And I find also, that Clemens the Iacobin, who killed Henry 3 of France, by
sheathing a knife in his belly, The state of the English fugitives, pa. 123.
runs in the number of Martyrs, and is entitled S. Clemens. And Guignard, who
was put to death for commending Clemens his fact as heroical: and tearming it
a gift of the holy Ghost, is See Resutation of Cottons letter to the Queen
Regent. page 14.
put into the Catalogue of Jesuitical Martyrs, printed by the Jesuits at
Rome. Does not this your commending of Rebels and Traitors, argue your
affection to rebellion and treason? If Kings admit of any strange rites in
religion, they must be murdered by your religion; for your Insticut Catho.
Tit 23. Nu. 13. page 163.
Symancta, in a book of his dedicated to Greg. 13, which was printed at Rome
1575: and Enchiridion Iudicum Tit. 21. Nu. 9. de Principibus page 70.
in another dedicated to Pius 5, printed at Antwerp 1573, commends the
Scythians for killing their King Scylen, propter exteras vitas, quia bacchan
alibus sacris externis initiatus erat: saying, they killed him iure ac merito.

6 You, Sir priest, hold it meritorious to kill princes. The Monk who poisoned
our King John, Job. Mo^or de gestio Schoforum lib. 4. cap. 3.
Regem perimere meritorium est: thought it a meritorious deed to kill him.
Thuanus Hist. lib. 79. ad An. 1584.
He that killed the prince of Orange in the year 1584, was so well schooled by
the Jesuits at Auspurge, and at Triers, and by a Franciscan at Towrs, that his
fact was commendable: and so fully assured by them, that if he were put to
death for it, in Martyrumnumero collocatum iri, he should be counted for a
Martyr: that after he had done the deed, he could not be persuaded that he had
sinned, sed potius ea meruisse vt recta in coelum tenderet: but rather that he
had deserved thereby to go straight to heaven. Parry who intended the murder
of our ever renowned Queen Elizabeth, was encouraged thereto by Arnauld in his
pleading against the Jesuits.
Hunnibus Cordreto a Jesuit, who told him that he could not do a more
meritorious work, then to kill a prince excommunicated by the Pope, and that
the Angels would carry him up to heaven. Yea Parry was encouraged thereunto by
Cambden. Annal. Anglic* ad An. 1585. page 386.
Campeius the Popes Nuntio at Venice; and by Ragazonius the Popes Nuntio at
Paris: and by See the letter in Stowes Chronicle ad An. 1584. andin Bilson of
the Supremacy, part 3
a letter from the Cardinal de Como, wherein his resolution was ascribed to
the motion of a good spirit: and wherein the Cardinal did promise him in the
Popes name, besides consideration in earth, reward in heaven. Iesuit^
Catechism li. 3. c. 4.
Squire also was wrought upon by the Jesuit Walpoole to kill Queen Elizabeth
Anno 1597, the Jesuit assuring him that the Act should be a goodly sacrifice
unto God. And upon like motion, viz: the meritoriousnesse of the work, was
Arnauld in his pleading against the Jesuits.
Barriere set on work by Varade a Jesuit, to kill the great King Henry of
France. And in a word, in Queen Elizabeth's time* Cambden Annal. Anglic. ad An.
1584 p. 354.
you divulged books, wherein you exhorted the Ladies about the Queen, to do
to her, as Iudeth did (to her immortal fame) with Holofernes, that is, to kill
her. Are not Papists rare Jewels, and much to be esteemed of by Kings and
Queens?

It is written by Theophanes, Codrenus, Zonaras, and others, that Greg: 2.
excommunicated Leo the Emperor, and persuaded the Italians to revolt from
their obedience unto him. The truth of which ( To 9. Annal ad An 726.
though it be denied by Baronius) yet is acknowledged by Bell. lib. 5. de To.
Pont. Cap. 8. and lib. 1. de Translat Impij To. Cap. 12. and by Binnius, To. 3.
Com. Notis in vitam Greg. 2. page 177. who highly commends the Pope for doing
so. Yea, its written by De vit. Pont. in Greg 3.
Platona, that Gregory 3. deprived Leo of his Empire: and that principally, for
that he went about to deface Images. Its written in your books, that In vita
Greg 7 Platina de vita Pont.
Gregory 7. deposed Henry 4. from the Empire, for commanding the Cardinals to
repair to him, to choose a new Pope: and Cromerus de rebus gestis Polon. lib 4
cognoscenti Azorio instit. Moral. part. 2. lib. ^1. cap 5.
Boleslaus the second of that name, King of Poland, for killing of a Bishop.
Its written in your C. 15. q. 6. Alius
books, that Pope Zachary deposed Childerik K. of France, for that he was not
so fit for government as Pip in was: and that Plat. in vita Bon^facij 8. and
Azor. loco supra citato* page ^66*
Boniface the 8. deposed Philip of France, for appealing from him to a general
Council. Its written in your own books, that Antonin. Hist. part. 3. Tit.
19. c. 1 sect. 3.
Innocent 3. deposed Otho 4, for that contrary to his oath, he invaded the
Churches patrimony, and our King John of England, Ioh. Mayor de gest. Scot.
lib. 4. cap. 3.
for that he sought not absolution at his hands, when the Realm stood
interdicted. Its written in your books, (...): in Sen (...) Cap: ad
Apostolicam de Sen^. (...) reiudicata.
that Innocent 4. deposed Frederike 2. for apprehending his Cardinals and
Bishops, as they were going to a Council called by him: and that See Car^^ius
de potest. R^^: Pont: ^i: 2. c: 19. Nu: 27
Gregory the tenth took the Eastern Empire from Baldwyn the second, who was
lawful heir to it, and gave it to Palaologus, who had no color of right to
it. And that Mass^^^ de V^bis Episc: lib: 6. in vita Ioh* 21 et Cle^: 6.
Clemens the sixth deposed Lewis the fourth of Bavaria, for holding opinion that
the Emperor might depose the Pope, and place another in his room. Its written
in your books, that Cr^merus de Gesti^ Polon* lib* 27.
George King of Bohemia was deposed by Paul the second for heresy: And that
John King of Navarre was deposed by Auton: N^bris: de bello Navarrens^ Cap: 1,
2, 3.
Julius the second, for favoring Lewis the twelfth of France, whom the Pope
had denounced a schismatike: and that our King Henry the eighth was deposed by
Saunders de Schis: Anglic: lib: 1. page: 108. ^dit: 1586.
Paul the third, especially for beheading the Bishop of Rochester: and Queen
Elizabeth for supposed heresies, by three of your Popes, one after another,
viz. by Pius the fifth, Gregory the thirteenth, and Sixtus the fifth. So bold
have your Popes been with Kings and Emperors de facto. But in as much as S^^o
in 4. sen^: dis^: 38. q. 2. Art 2.
you hold, that Factum Pontificis non facit fidei Articulum: your Popes deeds
make no Articles of belief: which I believe the rather, for that Silvester In
summa. verbo. votam. sect: ^ 5. quaritur.
confesses, he himself had seen the Pope do many things cum scandalo totius
Christianitatis, to the offense of all Christendom: there is another thing
which it concerns Emperors and Kings, to take knowledge of, (though these
facts of the Popes are alleged by Lib: 5. de Rom: Pont: Cap. 8.
Bellarmine, and Carerius lib: 2. de To: Pont. Potestate Cap. 39.
others, to prove the Popes right to depose Princes) and that is this. That in
your books it is written, your Pope has right, Platina in vita Greg: 7.
Imperia, regna, principatus, et quicquid habere mortales possunt, auferre, et
dare, to dispose of Emperors, Kingdoms, principalities, and whatsoever any
man living has. As (according to your learning) Tract: de Rom: Ecclesia^
primatu apud Bi^nium. To: 1. Conc: pa: 20.
he may aperire et claudere ianuas regni coelestis quibus voluerit, open the
gates of heaven to whom he list, and shut out of heaven whom he list: so he may
auferre, et confer regna quaecunque quibuslibet; take the Crown from any
Kings head, and set it on an other man's head at his pleasure. If an Emperor or
King be haereticus, vel schismaticus, vel fautor, vel receptator, vel defensor
Hereticorum vel Schismaticorum: an Heretic, or Schismatike, or favourer of
Heretics or Schismatikes. If an Azor: Instit: Moral: part: 2. lib 10. c: 2.
20. quaeritur. et cap: 8. 3. qua^ritur.
Emperor or King be a Mosconius de Maiestate Eccle: Militantis lib: 2. de
Imper. Reg. et Princip. part: 1. c: 2. page: 661.
Tyrant; and Ibid.
tenens Regnum contra formam iuris, et mentem Papae, dicitur Tyrannus: He who
holds his Kingdom contrary to the Popes Law, and the Popes liking, is a
Tyrant. Idem page: 660.
If an Emperor or King be a sacrilegious person, that is, such a one as goes
about to infringe the liberties, immunities, and privileges of the Church,
either by laying hands upon Ecclesiastical persons, or their goods: or taking
unto himself Azor: ^t Moscon: locis citatis.
Ecclesiastica iura, to be governor next under Christ of those particular
Churches, which are within his territories. If they despise Claves Ecclesiae,
the Popes Suspensions. Interdictions, Excommunications. If they forbid
Episcopos et Clericos suo officio fungi, popish Bishops or Priest to say Mass.
If they do homines excellentes sine causa perimere, hang priests who come into
their Kingdoms steal the hearts of the people unto the Pope: If they do banish
popish priests out of their Dominions: If they dissolve Societates aut
Congregationes ad sancte honest ^. vivendum, that is, Monasteries and Nunries:
Alberius in legebene a Zen^ne de Quadrat: prascript.
If they oppress or grieve populos sibi subiectos, their Subjects. Idem in
Dictionario verbo Para.
If they govern their Kingdoms negligenter, ignave, inepte, et inutiliter,
carelessly, and unprofitably. Moscon. lib. cita^ page 681.
If Leges contra Ecclesiae libertatem aut permittant, aut condant; they either
make any law against the liberty of the Church, or suffer any such Law made by
some of their predecessors, to stand in force. Glossa. in c. Si Papa. d. 40.
If they commit any sin, and will not be admonished, by your book learning,
they are but gone men, they have forfeited their estates into your Popes hands:
yea though there be no fault in them, yet for Carerius lib. 2. de potestate To.
Pont. Cap. 19. N^ 27.
publicum bonum, if it tend to the Popes profit, he may vncrowne them, and
bestow all they have upon such, who had no title in the world to any part
thereof, before the Pope gave them all. And does not this argue, that Kings by
your learning are worse then Copyholders?

8 You dubbe us with the name of Heretic, affirming that Bristow Metiu^ 3.
we most certainly are Heretics, and Motive 4.
to be detested as Heretics. Yea you say, Reply to Fulk Chap. 10. demand 46.
page 37^.
Whosoever is a Protestant, not so much as in any one point, x he is therefore
a damnable Heretic. You I ^orbid your Bishops, your Archbishops, your
Patriarchs, Azorius Insti^. Moral. part. 1. li. 8 Cap. 16: 13. quoeritur.
your Cardinal, (except they be Inquisitors, or Commissioners appointed by
your Pope to sit upon heresy) the reading, yea the keeping of any of our
books. You cannot abide that one good word should be spoken of us: For,
Epitheta honoris^^a, and omnia in laudem haereticorum deleantur: Let all
honorable Epithites, and whatsoever else in praise of Heretics, be blotted
out, I^dex lib. prohib. de Correctio. librorum sect. 2.
say you. If In Addi^ ad Eusebij Chr^nico^. ad An. 1521.
Vlrichus Hutten a Protestant be commended for Eques Germaniae doctissimus, and
Poeta laudatissimus, A learned Knight and excellent Poet. If Ibid. ad Aun 1525.
et a Beu^herifastis etc.
Frederike Dnke of Saxony, a Protestant, be termed illustrissimus,
saepientissimus, Christianissimus Princeps, an illustrious, wise, and Christian
Prince. If our Edward the sixth be found praised, as Ibid.
admirandae indoli^ adolescens, a Prince of admirable towardliness, there
shall Iudex. lib. Expurg. Hisp. page 93 et 148.
deleatur be set upon the places: in the next Impressions such commendations
must be put out. Yea, you cannot find in your hearts, that our bare names
should be remaining in any books, unless we be named Azor. Instit. Moral.
part. 1. lib 8^. 16, 17, quaritur.
per ignominiam et contemptum, with reproach and shame. And such is your further
hatred to our Princes, that you forbid the reprinting of such Dedicatory
Epistles, as learned men have prefixed before their books for the eternizing
of the memory of our Princes: witness hereof your Iuden Hisp lib. ^xpurg. Fol.
92. et. 150.
note of detrahatur, reijciatur, deleatur, set upon three several Epistles,
written by Hadrianus Iunius, and Johannes Serarius, to our la^ee famous
Soveraines, Queen Elizaheth, and King James. And so far are you from
approving of the keeping of a picture, either of Prince or people, that Azor.
lib. and cap. supra citat. (...) qua^rtur
you account it (though it be kept in a Closet) a great presumption, that the
keeper thereof smells of heresy. And such is your burning charity toward us
all, that you are not ashamed to profess Maldonat. Comment. in Ioh. 4. 9.
Certe p^riculosius est cum Hereticis, quam eum Samaritanis, quam cum Gentibus,
aut Mahumetan is agere: It is undoubtedly more dangerous to have any thing to
do with us, then either with the Samaritan or the Heathen, or with the
Mahumetans. And that Ibidem.
Nunc qui vere Catholici sunt, maiori odio Calvinistas, caterosque omnes
Haeriticos, quam Gentiles prosequnntur: They who are through Catholics at this
day, do more deadly hate Calvinists, and all other Heretics, then the
Heathenish people. Yea you are not afraid to adjudge us all to the bo^omlesse
pit of Hell. For certain it is, that whosoever in this new faith and service
has ended his life, is in Hell most certainly, says Motive 36.
Bristow. And Fieri nequit ut Lutheranus moriens salvetur, Geheunam evadat, et
aeternis ignibus eripiatur: si mentior, damner ipse cum Lucifero. Let me be
damned in Hell with the Devil, if any Lutheran be saved, if any Lutheran
escape Hell, says Resp^^ ^^^tationem (...) proposit. 8. page vltim^,
Costerus. And have we not great cause to love you.

9 Ipse iure priuatos esse haereticos omni debito fidelitatis, dominij,
obligationis, and obsequij quo illis quicunque tenebantur astricti: That
heretics are deprived by law of all fidelity, authority, bond and service,
which any man owes them, is (...) Greg. 9. li. 5. Tit. de haeret. Cap. vlt.
Symantha Iustit. Cathol; Cap. 45. Nu. 27. et 28.
current doctrine among you. Children; and servants, and subjects to
heretics, owe no duty to their parents, masters, or Soueraines. Per haeresin
patris efficiuntur filij sui iuris: if parents fall into heresy, their
children are left to their own discretion, Cap. citato (...) 28.
says Sym^ncha. The parents that become Heretics, loose the superiority and
dominion they have by law or nature over their own children, Answer to the
Execution of Justice, Chap. 5 page 115.
says Allen. Domino civili, quod in servum dominus habet privatur Haereticus,
Loco supra citato.
says Symancha. The very bond-slane (which is another kind no less bound to
his Lord and Master, then the Subject to his Sovereign, may depart and refuse
to obey his Master, if he become an Heretic: yea, ipso facto, he is made free,
Loco supra citato.
says Allen. Dominio politico quod habent Reges et Principes in suos subditos
et vasallos privati sunt Haeretici, Vbi supra.
says Symancha. Let no man mervaile that in case of heresy, the Sovereign
loses his superiority and right over his people and Kingdom, Ibid.
says Allen. Popish wives need not lie with their heretical husbands,
Catholica vxor haeritito viro debitum reddereno^ tenetur, quia ille incidit in
adulterium spirituale. Nu. 27.
says Symancha. They owe no conjugal duty or debt in the case of heresy,
Page 114.
says Allen, Such as have any thing put into their hands to keep, Symancha
Cap. tit. Nu. 27.
need not restore it to them of whom they had it, if they prove heretics. Ibid.
Keepers of forts and towns may surrender them into the enemies hands. Non est
dubiu^ quin potest quis eos licite defraudare. Res^l. quorundam casuum Not.
Anglice. Casus 4. 2. partis Cap. 2.
Popish Parishoners may lawfully defraud Protestant Ministers or their
Farmours, of their Tithes, by your learning. And this being thus, can you be
angry if Protestant Princes, and their subjects, who have wives, children,
servants, and money in other men's hands, do wish you all. Vltra Garamantas and
Indos, in the unknown world?

10 Bibl. sanct. lib. 2. Verbo Traditiones.
Sixtus Senensis reports, That the Jews are bound to rail upon all Christians
thrice every day: and to pray God he will root out all Christians, with their
Kings and Princes from under Heaven. Sixtus Ibid.
reports, That the Jews are commanded to account no otherwise of Christians,
then of Beasts. That they hold it lawful to spoil Christians of their goods,
and to bereave them of their lives; to pull down their Churches, to burn
their Gospel: yea, Ibid.
he reports, they belch out such blasphemies against Christ, as are fearful to
think upon, in no case to be spoken of. And yet Resolistio Cas^^um Not. Anglo
Casus 9. part. 30 Cap. 2.
I read you hold, that we are Acerbiores hosts Christi, et multo-magis detest
andi. more bitter enemies to Christ, and much more to be detested then they
are: and that Ensannel Sa. in Aphoris. verbo. Iudaeus.
Iudaein^^, sunt prohibendi celebrare ritus, aut reficere suas Synagogas: the
Jews ought not to be restrained from the use of their Religion, or from
repairing of their Synagogues: Yea, I read Relation of the Religion used in the
West parts of the world.
That your Pope licenseth them to have Synagogues in Rome, under his nose:
whereas we cannot be allowed to have a Chapel in any place where he swayeth.
Now I desire, that either some time, or reason, may be given, to justify your
justifying of the Jews before us: and your Popes suffering of them to profess
their Religion even before his face, denying us the use of ours in any corner
of the world. And the rather I desire some little satisfaction herein, for that
I Syman^ha I^sti^, Cathol. Cap. 35. N^. ^.
understand, all Jews are forbidden to come into Spain under any pretense,
unless presently upon their coming thither, they make it openly known they
will become Papists. He that comes in another manner, forfeits both his life
and goods, without any more ado: For it seems strange to me, that the Popes
whitest sons, should upon such penalties debar them access into Spain;
and that the Pope himself should admit them to come so near his Holiness,
and show them so much favor.

11 By your doctrine Sir Priest, Symanch. Instit Cathol. Cap. 45. N^. 13.
there is just cause to war against Heretics; by Heretics, you especially
meaning Protestants. By your doctrine, Allen against the Execution of Justice,
chapter 5.
there is no war so just, and honorable, be it civil, or foreign, as that
which is waged for the propagating of your Religion. By your Religion, Thuanus
Hist. lib. 42. ad A^n. 1568. page 877.
there can be no peace, yea there ought to be no peace made with Sectaries.
Ideni lib: 65. ad An: 1577. page: 152.
Sectaries, that is, according to your learning, Protestants, are more eagerly
to be pursued with fire and sword, then Turks. And Symanch: loco supra ^itato.
when war is once proclaimed, any private man may take, spoil, kill such
Sectaries, and burn their houses over their heads. Thus you. Professing
further. that Paulus Windek. in delib: de haeret: extirpand p. 414.
Quod nonnunquam Catholici cum Sectarijs transegerunt, eo fine fecorunt, vt
interea reliquis negotijs expediti, postea vnum hoc bellum contra Sectarios
administrarent, oninemque eius molem in ipsos converterent. When the Princes of
your Religion make peace with Protestants, they make it only for their own
advantage: as for example, to dispatch some by-businesses, which hinders them
from falling on the Protestants with their whole force. Now this being thus,
have not Protestants just cause to stand upon their guard, and to be suspicious
of all Treatises with popish princes; and jealous of all Truces and Leagues,
though sworn never so solemnly?

12 Your famous Bishop Symancha writes, Instit: Cathol: Cap: 45: N^: 14.
Haeretiis fides a privat^ data servanda non est: Faith made to an Heretic by
a private person is not to be kept. A private person may reveal an Heretic to
the Inquisitors, non obstante fide et iuramento, though he has bound himself
by an oath to the contrary. And Ibid.
Nec fides a magistr atibus data servanda est haereticis: Faith made to
heretics by the Magistrate, is not to be kept. For so some say, that your
Symancha says, proving his assertion by this, that in the Council at
Constance, John Huss, and Ierom of Prage were justly burned, albeit the
Magistrate had given safe conduct. And Apud Co^hlaum lib: 5. Hist: Hussicarum.
that your Pope Martin 5 writ to Alexander Duke of Lituaenia, b Scito te
mortaliter peccare, si seruabis fidem datam haereticis: Know thou sinnest
mortally, if thou keep thy oath with Heretics. And that your Divines in
France, An. 1577. Thuanuo Hist: lib: 42. ad An: 1568. page: 877. et lib: 63. ad
An: 1577. page: 123.
Aperto capite in concionibus; and evulgatis seriptis, ad fidem sectarijs
servandam non ohligari principem contendebant, allato in eam rem Con. Constant.
decreto, taught publicly both in the Pulpit, and by the press. That Princes
were not bound to keep touch with Sectaries, alleging to that end a Decree of
the Council of Constance. Now, and if oaths bind not (which in Swear unto me by
God, that thou will not kill. me, etc. 1 Samuel 30. 15.
old time were held the best security) what should we say, but farewell trust
with you?

13 It is generally reported you teach, Aman framing to d himself a true
Proposition, W. W. In his sparing discovery of the English Iesui^es, etc page
11. printed Anno 1601. and in his Quodlibe^, printed 1602. page 66.
when he is asked a question, may conceal as much thereof as he thinks good.
As for example. If one of you should be examined, whether if the Pope did come
in warr-like manner to invade this Realm: by force, he would take the Popes
part or the Kings: that man framing this answer in his mind; I will take the
Kings part, if the Pope will command me so to do; may give this answer
lawfully: I will take the Kings part; concealing the rest, and so delude the
Examiner. Nauar: in Manuali Cap: 12. Nu: 18. et P^t: Givvarain Compend: Navarri
Cap: 12. Nu: 18.
In like manner, if one of you having Horse and Money, should be importuned by
one of your honest friends, (to whom you are not bound by law to give or lend)
to give, or lend him Horse or money, you framing this Proposition in your
mind, I have neither Horse nor money, to give or lend: may safely swear, You
have neither Horse nor money; and keep the rest to your self, and so mock
your friend. Yea, it is generally reported that Nauar: lib: Catal: Cap: 21. Nu:
18.
you teach you may bluntly and absolutely deny some truths. For Confitens non
peccat mortaliter qui negat se admisisse peccatum mortale alias legitime
confessum: If a Traitor or murderer, have once lawfully confessed his Treason
and murder: if afterward he be examined, whether he ever plotted any treason,
or committed any Murder: he sins not mortally, though he deny that he was at
any time guilty of such crimes, say you. And if a man be examined of any fact
of his, whereof the Examiner (as he thinks) knows nothing: such a man may
swear he is innocent of such a deed, according to your learning. Which
appears by this See the proceedings against the late Traitors, printed An.
1606.
that Garnet the superior of your Jesuits here in England, having had
conference with Hall the Jesuit; being asked by the Lords of his Majesty's
Honorable Council, whether He and Hall, had conference together: he denied it
upon his soul, reiterating his denial, with many detestable execrations, till
he perceived that his fellow Hall had confessed it. In brief, according to
your learning, Soto Relect. Memb: 3. q: 3. pa: 306.
If one of you see Peter kill John, and come to be examined upon the point (if
no body else saw) he may answer, That he knows not, whether Peter killed John,
or no. And Sa: in Aph^ris: de testibus.
generally, if you be asked a question not iuridically, you may answer, That
you know nothing concerning it, provided you reserve in your mind, Which you
are bound to reveal. Now can such aequivocation by mental reservation, and
blunt denial of known truths, stand with plain dealing, Ecclus: cap: 37.
ver: 23.
truth and honesty. In your r vulgar Latin we read, Qui sophistice loquitur,
odibilis est. He that speaks aequivocally, is worthy of Tiburne. Wherefore you
had best look to it.

14. You commend a kind of blindfold and sottish obedience, Masfau^ de vi^:
Ignat. lib. 3. c. 27
which consists in the Inferiors submitting both of his will, and judgment, to
his Superior. You Ibid.
say, it is sancta, sapiensque stultitia: an holy and wise kind of sottishnes.
Ribera Comment. in Amos 6. page 269.
Omnes qui parent, ac presertim Religiosi homines, capite carere debent. 1. Non
suo, sed Rectoris sui concilio duci. All inferiors, especially Religious
persons, should be headles, meaning, they should be directed, not by their own
wits, but by their Superiors. For prudentia quidem, nonobedientis, verum
imperantis est. And it is not requisite in an Inferior, but in the Superior,
as Apud Massaeum loco supra citato.
Ignatius Loyola told a great Mounsier. By this the Inferior is brought to be
leeue, Ribadenera de vita Ign^tij lib. 5. Cap. 4.
Id rectum quodcunque sit a superioribus praescriptum. That whatsoever his
Superior bids him do, its right. And Ibid.
that he is bound to do that, ad quod superiorumpropensum cernit, tamet si
ille nihil precipiat: which he sees his Superior has a mind should be done,
though he command it not to be done. He that is blessed with this, Epistola
Ig^a^ij ae virtute obedientiae Nu: 16.
he listneth to the voice of his Superior as to the voice of Christ: Masfaus
lib: 3. vit: Igna^ij cap: 7
He delays no time by examining the reasons, of his Superiors command. But
Epistola Igna^ij Nu: 18.
sine vlla prosus disquisitione: without reasoning the case with himself, he
falls to his work. Regul: Societatis Jesuit: page 12. Edit. Lugd. 1004
If the Iferiour be writing and the Superior call him, the Inferior may not
stay the finishing of a letter, though it be begun by him, Igna^ij Epistola Nu.
18.
If his Superior command him to water a dry stick, set in the ground, till it
grow and bring forth fruit, the Inferior must water it so long. In vit.
Petrum part. 2. de Obedidieni^a.
If the Superior command his Inferior to fetch him a stone, which twenty men
are not able to carry, he must attempt it. Ibid.
If the Superior command his Inferior to cast his child into a River of
waters, or into an hot fiery furnace, the Inferior must cast him in. Yea, you
were wont to teach in plain terms, Ibid.
That Inferiors may not intendere in mandata Dei: sed patri su^ spirituali,
omnem voluntatem suam committere, qui illi per omnia obediens, non incurrit
peccatum apud Deum: heed what God commands: but he must refer himself
wholly to the guidance of his Superior, because in obeying his Superior in
all things, he is quit from sinning against God. Now I pray you, Is not this to
make Inferiors bondmen to men, contrary to the Apostles Counsel, 1 Cor: 7.
23? Is not this in effect to bind men (as the Rabbi. Selon. Iarch. in Deuteronomy 17.
See. Iyra in De^. 17.
Jews did) to believe, that the right hand is the left, and the left hand is
the right, if a Priest tell them so? Your Loyola, who was not ashamed to
Maffaus lib. 3. cap. 7. vi^. Igna^ij.
say, that in verba Romani Pontificis pr^cipu^ sacramento iuraverat, he had
bound himself by the solemnest oath to do as the Pope bad him: and your
Cardinal, who Bell lib 4 de Re. Po^t. cap. 5.
writes, that Si Papa erraret pracipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes,
teneretur Ecclesiae credere; vitia esse bona, et virtute^ malas, nisi vellet
contra conscientiam peccare. If the Pope should err in commanding vice, and
forbidding virtue, the Church was bound to believe, that vice was virtue, and
virtue vice: unless she was disposed to sin against conscience. Speak not
so far over herein, as in commending blind obedience, to every loggerhead
Superior, perhaps Ignat^j Epistela Nu. ^. de vertute obeditntiae.
both destitute of wit, and grace, for such Ragguls this blind obedience is to
be yielded. But I pass to another question, wherein I require satisfaction.

15 Is it not true Sir Priest, Conc. Lat. sub Iaeone 10. et Synod. Trid. Sess 4.
That by the late Orders of your Church, nothing must be published in print,
except it be first viewed, and allowed by men thereunto authorized? And does it
not thereupon follow, in your opinion, (as well as in Author of ths grounds of
the Old nd New Relig in his Answer to Mr. Crashaw concern. Roman forgeries.
some others of your fellows) that whatsoever comes now forth seems to be
approved by your Church? And if so, Have you any cause, Sir Priest, to take
your selves wronged, when you are charged with the opinions of this, or that,
particular man, who has written, since such order was taken by your Church? Or
any reason to think, rhat you have quit your selves well, when being charged
with readiness to Rebel, as soon as you are able to make your part good: and
with commending of Traitors, and the doctrine of Aequivocation: You answer,
that the proofs against you are not fetched from general Councels: or Decrees
of your Popes, but from particular persons? Remember, Sir Priest, that your
Churches viewing and allowing of particular men's opinions, makes them general.
And so that answer is proved idle.

16 By your doctrine, He sins not, who has probable reason for what he
does: For, Non peccat is, qui probabiliter licere existimat id, quod agit, Apol
pro Gar^eto Cap. 10 Nu. 2. p. 27^. edit. Colon. 1610.
says Eudaemon a Jesuit of yours. And Potest quis facere, quod probabili
ratione, vel authoritate putat licere. A man may lawfully do that, for doing
whereof he has either probable reason, or authority, says Sa. Aphoris. verbo.
dubium.
another of your Jesuits. Now by your doctrine he has probable reason for
that which he does, who has two or three grave Authors on his side. For, I see
not how, without arrogant temerity, a Catholic man can affirm, the practice
of Aequivocation (it being probable that men may aequivocate, because two or
three grave Authors say so) in time and place to be sinful, says the Chapt. 4.
Author of the Treatise of Aequivocation. Yea by your doctrine, he has
probable reason for that which he does, who has the opinion of one grave
Author on his side. For Qui consilio boni et periti viri aliquid efficit,
prudenter et been agit, quamuis re ipsa malum sit, quod eligit. He that does
any thing by the direction of honest and wise men, does both wisely and well,
though perhaps the thing be evil which he does, Ins^i^. Moral par. 1. lib. 2.
cap. 16. 2. quar^^r
says the Jesuit Anorius. And, In soro conscientiae, ad effectum non peccandi
sufficit cligere pro vera eius opinionem, quem merito consemus esse virum
idonea ad id scientia, et conscientia praeditum: It, is enough to clear us in
the Court of conscience from sin, if we follow his opinion, whom upon good
ground, we take to be a learned and a conscionable man, Manuele Cap. 27. Nu.
288.
says Navarrus. And this being thus, does it not from hence follow, that they
who take Creswell, and Parsons, and Bellarmine, and Bannes, for learned and
honest men, may put in practice, whatsoever one of them thinks lawful? Lib. 1.
de Rego Cap. 7.
May not they who think Johannes Mariana (who holds it lawful to poison
Kings) a learned and an honest man, poison Kings without sin? May not they
who think Garnet (one of the Powder traitors) a learned and an honest man, See
the preceedings against the late Traitors, printed 1606.
by his example, and by his approving of the Treatise of Aequiuocation,
aequiuocate with out sin? May not they who think Binetus a learned and an
honest men conceal without sin whatsoever is told them in confession, though
that concealing cost the lives of all the Kings in Christendom, yea in the
world: Test Casa^ bono in Epistola ad Frontonem Ducaeum, page 140.
they knowing that Binetus was of that mind.

17 You teach, g that the Word of God is partly written, Bellar lib. de verbo
Dei non scripto, cap. 2.
partly unwritten, and the written word you call Scripture, the unwritten
Tradition. yet you undertake to prove diverse of your opinions both by
Scripture and by Tradition: As for example, Praying to Saints, praying for the
dead, setting up of Images in Churches, and worshipping them when they are set
up, Christ's descention into hell: the virgin (...) perpetual virginity, etc.
Now I would know with what honesty you can allege Scripture for that which
you say is a tradition, or tradition for that which you say you have
Scriptures? Can one and the same truth be written and not written?

18 You teach, that Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo non scripto, cap. 8.
it was not meet all mysteries should be written in Scripture, Coste^a^ Apol.
pro 1 Par. Enchy n^ra Go^eru To. 2.
lest every ordinary person should come to the knowledge of them; and because
of the commonnes of them, contemn them. Now I desire to know, why the
mysteries of the Trinity should be written in Scripture, rather then those
mysteries you speak of, if there be such danger that ordinary persons should
attain to the knowledge of whatsoever is written in Scripture; and upon the
knowledge of them, should contemn them. Secondly I desire to know, why it
should be less meet, that the mysteries you speak of, should be written in
Scripture, then in the Fathers, and in your Catechismes? Ordinary persons are
as like to come to the knowledge of them by reading if not the Fathers, yet of
your Catechismes, wherein you discourse of them as large, as if they were
written in Scripture. Are they not, think you?

19 Men say you teach, that Ioh. de Rada par. 2. Th^^l controv. inter Sco^u^
and Tho. cout. 20. act. 2. conclus. 6.
Licet praeceptum prelati sit irrationale, and pro tali merito quandeque haberi
potest, tenetur tamen subditus illud obseruare: Though the commandment of the
superior be unreasonable, and may well enough be thought so, yet the Inferior
is bound to obey it. Men say, you teach, Bellar lib. 4. de To. Pon^. Cap 5. and
Car^ri^^ de potest Pont lib. 1 Cap. 13. Nu. 16.
Si Papa erraret pracipiendo vitia, velpro hibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia
credere vitia esse bona, et virtutes malas; nisi vellet co^tra consctentiam
peccare: that if the Pope should err in commanding vice, and forbidding
virtue, the Church was bound to believe (unless she would sin against her,
conscience) that vice was commendable, and virtue dispraisable. ^ar^l^le p^test
Paep: cap: 41. page: 341.
Men are bound, Papae sententiam' exequi, to put the Popes sentence in
execution, albeit they know it to be unjust. Any man Illaesa consceentia, with
a good conscience may execute the Popes unlawful mandate, by your learning.
Now I pray you, how agrees this doctrine with that of the Apostles, Acts 5. 29.
It is better to obey God then man?

16 Sir Priest, I read in your books, that your Pope is called Conc: Floren^:
Sess: vl^.
Caput totius Ecclesiae, An^^n Puecius in Orat: habit: Sess: 9. Conc: ^at: sub
Leone 10.
Pater Ecclesiae, Filiu^ Ecclesiae, Sponsus Ecclesiae, Grae^ser: Tot. 1.
defens: cap: 10. lib. 3. Beil. Col: 1450.
Matter Ecclesia: The head of the whole Church, the Father of the Church, the
son of the Church, the Spouse of the Church, the Church our mother. Now I
would know of you, how he can be the Church her self, and yet head of the
Church, and the Churches husband? How he can be Father to the Church, and yet
a son of the Church? How without committing incest, the father may marry his
daughter, the brother may marry his sister, the son may marry his mother?

17: I read in your books, that your Pope is not only called the Vicar of
Christ, and Successor of S. Peter but Did: 63. Ego ^udo vi^us. ^^nifacius
(...): Apostolus in Epist: ad C^^^ert. Ar^hiep: Caut: apud Baron: Annal: To: 9
ad An: 740.
S. Peter's Vicar, and Sacr^^: ^aer^m: To: Eccles: lib. 1. sect: 1. Gabriel
Patriarch. Alix^^. in admon^e. ^egatis a Cl^m. 8 data, quae habe^^r ad finem.
Annal Baron To. ^. Nu. 4. Thom. A^^tn. de Regimine P^^^ip l. ^. c. 10. (...) de
rempo^a Eccles. Mo^^eh. l. ^. c: 7. ^^atra de Offi^. Vicar^^ (...).
Christ's Successor in respect of the government of the Church. Now here I
desire to know two things of you: first, how your Pope comes to be S. Peter's
Vicar, seeing S. Peter himself is but a Vicar: and it is a rule in your Law, f
Vicarius non potest substi^^^^ Vicarium: A Vicar cannot substitute a Vicar
Secondly, how without blasphemy your Pope can be called Christ's Successor,
seeing he to whom another succeeds in office, does cease himself to bear
that office; as Act. 24.
Felix did cease to be Governor in Jury, when Festus came in place to be his
successor. I hope you do not think that Christ, who endures for ever, has
turned over all care of his Church to your Pope.

22 I read in your Gene^r: Chron: l: 4 ad An. 1551
books, that in the year 1552. your Pope was entitled by a certain
Patriarch called Siud, The Peter of our time, and the Paul of our days: and
that Baron: ad finem To. 6. Annal.
Clemens the eight was entitled by one Gabriel Patriarch of Alexandria,
Tertius decimus Apostolorum gloriosi Domini nostri Jesus Christi, and quintus
sanctorum Evangelistarum: The thirteenth Apostle of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and the fifth Evangelist. And that Genebrard approoved of the titles
which Siud gave; and Baronius of those which Gabriel gave. Now I desire to know
of you, why Genebrard should like that any Pope should be called the Peter of
our time, seeing Baron Annal. To: 11. ad An: 1009.
Sergius the fourth, being christened Peter, upon his election to be Pope, in
reverence to St. Peter, renounced the name of Peter, and took the name of
Sergius: and secondly, how Clemens the eight can with any wisdom be held the
thirteenth Apostle of our Savior Christ, and the fifth Evangelist, considering
there were seven Popes of his own name, and upon the point of 230 Popes of
other names before him. For I cannot hear that he was such an A perse, as that
he deserved these titles rather then any of his predecessors. And if all or any
of his predecessors deserved to be called Apostles and Evangelists, Gabriel (in
my opinion) failed in his Arithmeticke, when he termed him the thirteenth
Apostle, and the fifth Evangelist.

23 I read in your books, that the jurisdiction of your Pope is boundless:
His Dominion (as Christ's, Psalm: 72. 8.) is from Sea to Sea, and from the River
unto the ends of the world? Whereas the jurisdiction of the rest of their
Clergy has narrower bounds by much. Yet I read in Hist^: 3. (...) 6.
Eusebius of Chrytofersons translations, that in Traians time, Pope Clemens
governed the Church of Rome; and John the Evangelist the Churches in Asia. Now
I desire to know whether this does not argue, that Pope Clemens jurisdiction
was lesser then S. John's, seeing it is apparent hereby, that Pope Clemens
governed but one Church, and S. John many.

24 Leo 10. in (...) data To: S^ss: 11, Co^: Lat: An. 1516 quae habetur apud
(...) Io: 4. Cont: p: 639.
You teach, solum To. Pont. Conciliorum indicendorum plenum ius et potestatem
habere. That your Pope only has full right and power to call Councels. Now if
that be true, I desire to know how it came to pass, that he called none by the
space of a thousand years and upward to be kept at Rome, or some other place
in Italy France, or Germany: but all in the ^ast, as namely at Nice, at
Constantinople, at Ephesus, at Chalcedon, whither he could not go in person
partly for age, and partly for other lets. And why, he disliking both the
place, and the time, appointed for the fourth general Council, did not
appoint an other place, and an other time, but sent thither his Legates at the
Emperors commandment.

25 Bellar (...). Cont: Cap: 11.
You teach, that Counsels, which want your Popes approouement, are of no great
worth. Now, if such doctrine went for current of old, I desire to know how it
came to pass, that those Fathers who were pressed with the testimonies of
Councels not approved by your Pope, as namely, Athana^ius, and To. 6. l. 1.
cont. Maxim. in Arian. o^ l. 3. c. 14.
St. Austin: did never allege that circumstance in way of weakening their
credit: much less in way of making a Nullity of them.

20 I read in your books, Bellar lib. 1. de To. Pont, ca. 16.
that S. Peter had authority over all the Apostles, and that the Apostles
depend upon him, as upon their head and commander, who was to direct them, and
to go in and out before them, and to chastise them. I read likewise, that
after Saint Peter's death, your Idem lib. 2. de To. Pont. ca 13.
Popes succeeded him in tota ipsius dignitate and potestate, in all his
dignity and sovereignty. Now it is evident that diverse of the Apostles
survived Saint Peter; as namely, Baron. Annal. To. 1: ad An. 69. Nu. 34.
S. Andrew, and Sophron. apud Hieron: de script: Eccles: verbo Simon.
S. Simon surnamed the Canaanite, (not in regard of his Country, but of his
zeal, Chap. 6. 1^.
as St. Luke witnesses) and Ierom. de scrip: Eccles: verbo Johannes.
Saint John the Evangelist. Two of these, if not all three, lived till Traians
days, in which time Linus, Cletus, Cleme^s, sat Bishops at Rome. Now my
desire is to know of you, whether you think Linus, Cletus, Clemens challenged
any soveraigntie over Saint Andrew and Saint Simon the zealous, and Saint John
the Evangelist. Me thinks Saint John Ioh. 21. 20.
being the Disciple whom Jesus loved, Saint John being the person who was
allowed to Ioh. 13. 23.
lean on our Saviors breast at the eating of the Passover: St. John being
the man to whom our Savior Ioh. 19. 26.
commended his Mother at his death: S. John being such a one, as that his
wri^^ngs are received for Canonical: Me thinks (I say) ^aint John (not to
speak of the other two) should ^ot have been underling to these three Popes.
Me ^hinkes he should ^ot have depended upon them ^s on his head for direction:
Me thinks they should not have had that superiority over him, that they might
have chasti^ed him.

27 I read in your books, that an Archbishop and Cardinal of yours, called
Lib: de schism: Pont: iuter German: script: page: 703.
Francis Zabarell, who lived about the year 1400 confessed, that certain
flatterers of many ages before his time, and till his time, had persuaded the
Popes, quod omnia possent, and sic, quod facerent quicquid libere^, etiam
illicita, and sic plus quam Deus: they could do all things, and might do any
thing, were it never so unlawful, and by that means they could do more then
God. And to tell you truly, I do verily believe him. For I do find they were
told, they might dispense C. 15. q. 6. Antoritatem, in Gloss.
contra ius natural, against the law of nature: Extra de concess: praebend.
(...) posuit. in Glossao
contra vetus Testamentum, against the old Testament: and Ibid.
contra Apostolum, against the Apostle Paul. I find they were told, Extra de
translit: Episco: cap: Qunato, in Glossa.
De nihilo possent facere aliquid, they might of nothing make something: Ibid.
De iniustitia facere possent iustitiam, they might make wrong right: and Ibid.
in his quae vellent, ij^ esse pro ratione voluntatem, they might do as they
list, and no body might say, Ibid.
Domine, ^ur ita facis? I pray you sir, why do you so? I find some taught,
Toste Ioh: de Parisii, de pose^^ate Regis et Pepali cap: 23.
that Si homicidium Samsonis quod ex: se malum est, interpretamur quod in
stinctu divino fuit fanum, multo magis omne factum sanctissimi Patris
interpretari debemus in bonum: and siquidem fuerit ^ur^^m, vel aliud ex se
malum, interpretari debemus, quod divino instinctu fiat, If we impute the
slaughter which Sampson made of the Philistians to an inspiration of Gods
Spirit, much more are we bound to interpret in the best part whatsoever the
holy Father the Pope does: if it be theft, or any other thing which of it self
is evil, ( Dict: 40. Non ^os, in Glossa.
as for example murder or adultery) we must likewise impute that to the
inspiration of Gods Spirit. About the time Zabarel speaks of, it seems it
went for current, which is noted by a late Massonus de vrbis Episc: li: 3. in
vi^a Ioh: 9.
Historian, Episcopos Romanos ne peccata quidem sine laud committere, the
Popes could do nothing, were it never so mischievous, but it was commendable.
His geese were all swans: his vices were virtues. I read in your books,
Mosconius de maiestate Eccles: Militantis, lib. ^ cap: 4. page: 97.
that men are bound to worship him with Dulia: and that some have professed in
his hearing, Apud Anton: in sum: hist: part. 3. (...): 22. ca: 27. sect: 1.
that they worshipped him with Hyperdulia: and that in effect many have given
him Latriam. For to omit that some have affirmed he was Marcel: in orat hab:
sess: 4. conc: Iat: sub Leon: 10
alter Deus in terris, a second God upon earth. Ioh: Aug: Panthaeus Venetus in
Art and Theor ^ransinutat. Metal: ad Leonem 10 impress: Ve^^e: An. 1518.
Deus mortali^ in terris, et immortalis homo in coelis: a mortal God upon
earth, and an immortal man in the heavens. Baron. Annal. To. 7. ad An. 552.
That he has so much greater power then any of the Prophets, quanto
differentius prae illis nomen hareditavit, viz: Tu es Petra, etc: by how much
he has a more excellent name given him then any of them had, to wit, Thou art
a Rock. Some of you have given out, that he is, Mass. lib. supra ^itato ca.
1. p. 22
non Deus, non homo, sed vtramque, neither God, nor man, but both. Some of you
have styled him, as Ioh. 20 28.
Saint Thomas did our Savior Christ, with the titles of ^xtra. Ioh. 22. eum
inter in Glossa.
Dominus Deus noster, our Lord and God: and as Apoc. 19. 19.
Saint John likewise did, with Moscon. lib. citato page 26.
Rex Regum, Dominus dominantium, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Some of you
now write, Baron. Annal. To 1. ad An. 57. Nu. 29.
Christus omnem quem a Patre accepit potestatem transfudit in suos: Christ
passed over all the power which God the Father gave him, unto his, meaning your
Popes. Agreeably to others, who in former ages were not ashamed to tell the
Pope, that Puccius Ora^. hab. in sess. 9. Conc. (...) sub Leon^. 10.
Tibi vni, to him alone was granted all power both in heaven and in earth. Yea,
that there was in Popes all power super omnes potestates tam coeli quam terrae,
Steph. Patraecensis orat. hab. Sess 10. Conc. Lat. sub Laeone 10.
above all powers both in heaven and in earth. I need not to tell you of the
Bishop who put up a supplication to Pope Nicolas, in these words, Faexellus
hist. sicu^. lib. 8. c. 4
Miserere met, fili David. O son of David have mercy upon me: nor of the
Religious persons who came from Panormi and other parts of Sicily as
Ambassadors to Pope Martin the fourth, to crave his favor, who cried thrice
thus, Antonin sum. hist. part. 3. tit. 20. cap. 4. sect. 3
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis: O thou Lamb of God who
take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us: nor of him, who in way
of proving your Popes omnipotency, bids his Reader note, Varaldus in candelabro
aureo tit. de absolutione Nu. 28.
Quod in concesstonibus vtitur illo verbo, Fiat, quo Deuteronomy vniversum creavit
orbem: that your Pope in subscribing petitions, uses the word, Let it be, by
which God created the whole world: intimating, that as God, so your Pope by a
word of his mouth may do any thing: nor of them who against the coming of
Paul the third unto the City of Tolentonum in Italy, set this inscription over
the gates, See Morn^y de Ecclesia, cap. 8. and Moulius defense of the King,
chap. 25.
Paulo tertio, opt: max: in terris De^, To Paul the third, the best and
greatest God in earth. Now that which I desire to know of yo^^ is, what
difference in substance there is between many of these speeches concerning
your Popes, and theirs in the Acts of the Apostles, who applauding Herod's
Oration, cried amain, Act. 12. 22.
Vox Dei and non hominis, the voice of God, and not of man? And whether your
Pope be not as guilty as Herod was, who hearing with his own ears diverse of
these blasph^mous speeches, and perhaps all by report, did neither reprove them
upon his ear hearing them, nor cause them to be razed out of the books
wherein they are written, having knowledge thereof at the second hand.

28 I read in your books, that you have had many unlearned Popes, not much
wiser then the Gabri^l de Ba^a^^te feri^ 2. heb^^. 3. de pr^^^rat. confess.
Bishop, who examining one that was to be made Deacon, in stead of asking,
Quot sunt Sacramenta Ecclesiae? how many Sacraments are there in the Church?
demanded, Qu^t sunt septe^ Sacramenta? how many are the seven Sacraments? To
whom the Deacon answering, said* Tres* The Bishop replied, In quibus? What call
you them? And the Deacon told him, their names were, Thur^bulum* Aspersorum,
and sancta Crux. For of Iullus the second it is reported, that signing a
warrant, in stead of fiat, he wrote fi^tur. And constat plures e rum ade^
illiter atos ess^ ut Grammati^am penitus ignorent; It is well known that many
of the Popes were so unlearned, that they knew not their Grammar rules, says
Lib. 1. cap. 4. adver (...) edit. antiquis.
Alfons^s de C^stro. I read in your books, thatsome of your Popes were silly
creatures. You had one, whom your Ioh: An (...) Baldu^ (...) and ser. (...).
Canonists usually ^al* vnum pec^s, in ^o quod de mane fa^iebat gratia^^, and
de sere (...) a very Asser: for that in the morning he would grant many men
many kindnesses, and at night revoke them all again. I read in your books,
that you had one boy Pope of twelve years old, Clab^r. Rod^l. hist. lab. 5.
ca. v^t.
viz. Benedict the ninth: and a May pole-morrice-dancer Pope of Baron. Annal.
To. 10. ^d an. 955 (...) 3.
18 years old, viz John 12. alias 13. who made the Lateran a plain Stews, as
Hist. per ^^r^pum gest. lib. 6. cap: 6. and 7.
^^itpra^^us witnesses. I read Masson. de (...) Epis^: lib. 4. i^ Ioh: 11. al.
12.
that John 11. was a bastardly brat of Pope Sergius^ and that you had a See the
book^ entitled Pope Ioane.
whore Pope called Ioane. I read that you had N^^r omanticall Popes, such as
Platin: in (...) Silve^^^l.
Siluester the second, who gave himself to the devil both body and soul,
that he might attain the Popedom. Idem in vita Bonis: 7.
Thief Pope, such as Bo^^fac^ the seventh, who robbed Saint Peter's Church:
Sodomiticall Popes, such as Sixt^^ the fourth, Agripp^ de (...) cap: 64.
who built a famous stews in Rome: peri^red Popes, such as Onuph: addit: ad
Plat: in vit^ Gree: 12.
Gregory the twel^e. Ner^ticall Popes, such as Honorius the first, condemned
by the Act: 12. and 13.
6. and 7. general Councels for a M^n^th^lite. A^^^^sticall Popes, such as Leo
the tenth, Act: 7: in di^^nit: Synodi.
who called the Gospel a ^^ble. Bale.
Apostaticall Popes, such at those fifty, who as (...) lib: ^* sect: ^^*.
Ge^^brard writes, entered in, not by the door, but by a posterne gate. I
read that (...).
(...) Pontific^s videntur laborare vt quantum (...) ^^erunt supient^s and
sancti tantum (...) the latter Popes seem to strive* they may show thems^lmes
as very fool^s and (...), is the ^ncient Popes strove to approve their wisdom
and holiness to the world. Your (...) confesses, that the later popes,
Chro^^l, ad (...). Christi, 970.
(...) de ^ep* took little care how the world went* Ad Au: ^^26.
A pretate veterum de. ge^era^^runt, are grown out of kind. Your Re^^^. 4. de
p^^^state Pap^t (...) Conc. propos. 12.
Victoria professes, they are priscis illis maltis partibus in^eriores, far
worse then their first predecessors. And in In Formoso 1.
Platina I read, that virtus et integrit^^ defecit, virtue and integrity is
decayed in them: and in Ad. (...). 954.
Fasciculus Temporu^^, that Sanctitas illos dimisit, holiness has taken her
leave of them. Men of your selves write, Guicciar^ hist. lib. 16.
In Pontificib^^ hodie nemo sanctitatem requirit: optimi putantur sivel leuiter
boni sint, vel ^inu mali quam caeteri mortales esse soleant: At this day no man
looks for any honesty in a Pope: they are accounted excellent good Popes if
they have but a dram of honesty; yea, if they surpass not the wickedness of
other men. At this day the papacy is so dangerous, that (...) in vit^ Marcells
ad fine^ Platine.
Marcellus the second protested he did not see, quomodo qui locum hunc l.
tissimum tenent, salvari possunt, how a Pope can be saved. Your Saint A^^on.
hist par. 3. tit. 23. cap. 14. (...). 1^
Katharin of Sienna told Gregory the 11. that in Romina Curia vbi deberet esse
Paradisus deliciarum virtutum, in veniebat foetorem* infernalium vitiorum:
Whereas she looked to have found a Paradise of rare virtues in his Court, she
found in stead thereof a dunghill covered over with hellish vices* the stench
whereof she smelt to Sienna, the place of her dwelling, an hundred miles off.
And the Th^od^ricus de Niem (...) in advosa* ^rac* 4. cap. 8.
Virgin Mary told Saint Briget (as some of you say) that multi Pontifices sunt
in in^er^^, many Popes are in hell. And you know that Sylvaru^ lib. 1.
Ma^tuans counsel was:

Viver^ qui cupitis sancte, discedite: Roma,
Omnia cum lic^ant, non licet esse bonum:
He that desires to live honestly, let him bless himself from Rome: for a man
may be there any thing save honest* but honest he cannot be in any wise. Now
the question wherein I desire to be resolved by you, is, whether you think
indeed, that Luke 2^.
when Christ prayed for Saint Peter's faith, he prayed for the faith of your
unlettered Popes, sheepish Popes* boy Popes, swaggering whore-master Popes,
bastardly brat Popes, whore Pope, Necromantical Popes, thief Popes,
Sodomiticall Popes, perjured Popes, heretical Popes, Atheistical Popes, and
Apostaticall Popest For there is no question but Ioh: 1^. 4^.
Christ obtained always the things which he prayed for: and me thinks there
should be no question, but when our Savior prayed for Saint Peter's faith, that
it should not fail, by the name of faith, he meant a lively Christian faith,
which works by love, and which Rom 3. 2^.
embraces the promises of the mercy of God; which whosoever has, Ioh: 6* 17.
has assurance of eternal life* and if so, how is it credible that he prayed
for all these?

29 Your Sixtus. 5. caused you vulgar Latin to be corrected, and printed at
Rome in the year 1590. B^ron. Annul. To. ^. ad (...)* 23^ N^. 62.
The pains he took therein, as it seems, was wonderful. For not
withstanding all other his papal business, he Angelus (...) comment. de
(...). Vat^ca S. (...). 5. condita page ^^^
read over every word of the Bible before it was printed, and after too,
correcting with his own hands the (...) of the print. Then he published it,
and printed his B^^l before it in stead of a Pre^ace, signifying therein that
his good will and pleasure wa^, that this only should go for Authentical*
and that (...) impression^ in time to come, should be (...) to it, without any
change* without taking away* or adding so much as a letter* and that all former
impressions, yea and Manuscripts differing from this, should be of no credit*
and all this he required upon pain of the greater excommunication. Yet after
the death of Urban 7. Greg. 14. and Innocent 9. successors of Sixt^* 5. A^no
1592.
comes Clemens 8. and he sets out another Bible, differing much from that of
Sixtus in many material points; avowing that this Edition of his, is
(doubtless) better then any Edition whatsoever heretofore imprinted. Now that
which I desire to know of you, is, whether Sixtus erred in commending his
Bible, or Clemens in commending his Bible, or both of them in their several
commendations: for I think you will not say, commending books so different,
they both spoke truth.

30 Sir Priest, is not this of In Sym^: To: 2. operum Athanas: edit. Com^l^^.
Anno 1600.
Athanasius good Divinity, Filius a Patre soloest, nec factus, ne^ creatu^: The
Son is of the Father alone, not made, nor c^eated? If so, then I pray you tell
me, how without blasphemy Discip: de Te^p: fe. 111. Cassanaus Catal: glori^e
mu^di par: 3. confid: 3 fol. 4. Biel. lect. 4 (...). M^ss^.
you can say, Sacerdos est creator sui Creat^ris, A Priest is the creator of
his Creator? meaning Christ the Son of God.

31* Again, if it be current Divinity which the same I^^o supra ci^^to.
Athana^ius delivers, Christus Deus ex substantia Patris, homoex substantia
matris: Christ is of the substance of his Father as he is God, and of the
substance of his mother as he is man: Tell me where the wit of your John* 22.
was, when Horeb: Virg: (...) sancta f^ecles* fol: 68. edit: Paris. 1516.
he said, Rex fit ex pane, The King (meaning Christ, the King of heaven) is
made bread. And why you are not ashamed to retain in your Canon Law these
words, De conse^: d: ^. (...): 72. vtrum sub.
Corpus Christi and sa^gui^, expanis and vini substantia efficitur: The body
and blood of Christ is made of the substance of bread and wine.

32 If it be true which De Civit: (...), l. 1. 29.
Austin says, that God is nusquam inclusus, penned in in no place: and that
the great ^^rip. in Cyclop Act: 4.
Clyclops (when Ulysses told him, that the wine which he had in a bottle, was
the god Bacchus) did not without cause in a wonderment reply, what? A god in a
Bottle? I pray you tell me, why you pen up your Sacrament, which Allen de
sacrific Euch cap. 41. and Bristo Motive 26.
you acknowledge for your God, in a pixt or in a box? Of a be in a box, I
have heard much by many; but of a god in a box, I never heard but by papists.

33. If it be evident that they are no gods, whose priests keep their Temples
with doors, and with locks, and with harres, ^est their gods should be
spoiled by robbers, as Verse 17.
Baruch says in his 6. Chapter, which goes for Canonical Scripture with you.
If they, who cannot de^end themselves from thee^es and robbers, deserve not to
be reputed gods, as the Verse 56.
same Author says. If Hom. 56. in Genesis 31.
Chrysostom justly derided Laban, when he said: O excellentem insipientiam!
T^les sunt dij tui, vt quis eo^ furari possit? Non erubescis ^^cere, Quare
furatus es deos ^eos? O notable foole^rie! Are thy gods such gods as may be
stolen? Art thou not ashamed to say, Why have thou stolen my gods? Why should
not you and your fellows sir priest, be whoopt at* for holding the Sacrament
to be God, which for fear of stealing, Lindwood consti^. Pro^i^^. lib. 3.
Titulo de custodis Euch^r. (...) clausura, in c. digni^^imum.
you would not have hung over the high Alter under a Canop^^, but reserved in a
surer place, under lock and key.

34. If it be evident that they be no gods, which cannot be preserved from
rust and worms* which feel not when things which creep out of the earth ea^
them, as it seems by Chap. 6. v. 11. 19.
Baruch before mentioned: seeing it is the general doctrine of your Church.
Joseph. Angles ^lores. Quest: Theol: in 4. Sext: part: 1. q: de suscept: Euch:
ad 3. difficultat: 2. page: 96.
That worms may breed in your Sacrament: that brute beasts, hogs, dogs, mice,
choughs, etc. may eat (...). Are not you singular o^-caps, to hold the
Sacrament for your Lord and your God?

35 Ecuqem ^^m amentem esse putes qui illud quo v^^catur deum credat esse?
Think thou there is any man so mad, that holds that for his god, whereof he
eats? says Apud Cicer: l. 1 de Not. deorum.
Cotta. Quomodo quis sanae mentis deum nuncuparit id, quod vero Deo oblatum,
tandem ipse comedit? How can any man of reason think that to be god, which he
offers in sacrifice to the true God, and afterward eats thereof himself?
says Quaest. 11, in Levit.
Theodoret. And if this be true, do not you deserve to be sent to Bedlem for
eating the Sacrament, which you call your Lord and your God? Auerroes ( Espane.
de Euch adorat, lib. 4. ^. 3
they say) professed that he had travailed a great part of the world, and that
he had seen many men of different Religions, and yet he found not any,
Christiana deteriorem aut tam fatuam, worse or foolisher then the popish
Christian, Quia Deum suum q^e^ co^une, dentibue devorabant, because they tare
him with their teeth, whom they worshipped for their god.

36 The God of right believing Christians is 1 Ioh: 5. 20.
life it self, and gives life to others, even Ioh. 6.
everlasting life to them who eat him, as the Scriptures speak of eating him.
But your God is such a God, and your fashion of eating such an eating, as that
a man by eating your God after your fashion, may easily be poisoned. And I pray
you then, how can your God be reputed the God of right believing Christians?

That a man maybe poisoned by eating your God (that is, the Sacrament) after
your fashion, it is plain by diverse examples, For,

Victor 3. one of your popes, Fuit extinctus per venenum in calicem missum, was
killed with poison in the chalice, says In Chron: ad An 1005.
Polon^^, and Fas. ^c. Temp: ad An. 109^.
others.

Henricus Archiep. Eborac^^s. cum divine celebraret mysteria, hausto in ipso
calice (vt aiunt) ve^eno obijt: Henry Archbishop of York died (as they say)
of poison, by drinking of the Chalice when he administered the Sacrament, says
Hist: Augl: in vita Step^an: A^: 115. p: 122.
Matthew Paris.

Henricus 7. Imperator intoxicatus fuit sumendo Eucharistiam, Henry 7.
Emperor of Rome was poisoned in receiving the Sacrament, says Ad An: 1314.
Fasciculus Temporum.

Nuper Prior noster misericordia Venetijs veneno in calice sublatus fuit: Of
late a prior of ours in Venice was killed with poison put into the Chalice, says
See Moni^a Polici^^, impres^ Francofurt.
John Baptista Leo Ambassador to the Duke of Vrbinus.

37. A Apud Gui^mundum lib: (...) de Sacram.
Synod of your Bishops in Italy decreed, That when the true flesh of Christ and
his true blood appear at the celebration of the Sacrament in their proper
kind, both the flesh and the (...) should be (...) in the midst of the Altar
for special relikes. Now I would know of you* Sir priest, what reason you have
to make a relike of your god. Is it not enough for you to reserve Relikes of
Saint, but you must reserve Relikes of god, the sanctifier of Saints, yea God
himself for a relic.

38. I read that you Summa Angelica, verbo Missa Nu: 18. and verbo ^ucharistia,
sect. 3. Nu. 5.
prescribe, Si musca vel arenea cadat in calicem post consecrut^^nem, etc. If
either fly or spider fall into the Chalice after the words of consecration, so
that there be fear of poisoning or provocation to vomit; the priest shall take
sanguinem illum, and igne combur at cum alique stupa, vel p^mo lineo in ipso
madefacto, that blood, and burn it by the help of some tow or linen rods
dipped in it. Now whether it be poisoned or not poisoned, whether it be such as
will provoke vomit or not provoke vomit, as long as the species remains, it is
your God: And how then can you clear your selves from burning of your God.

39. I read you teach Conc: ^^id: Sess: 22. ^an. 1.
that in your Mass, Christ is truly and properly sacrificed by you: and
withal I read you teach, that Bellar: lib: 1. de Missa, cap: 1.
whatsoever is truly and properly sacrificed, if it be a live thing, it is
killed. Now I would gladly know of you, if this be thus, how you can excuse
your selves from killing of Christ: for Christ whom you sacrifice truly and
properly, as you say, is a live thing?

40. I read you teach, ^ellar: lib: 1. de Missa. cap: 12.
Perconsecrationem fit vt Christi corpus vere and visibiliter adsi^ super
mensam: that by consecration Christ's body and blood is truly and visibly upon
the Altar. Visibly, Alex: lib: 1. de Euch: Sacramen: cap: 37.
not merely in regard of the sp^cies under which they lie, but simply and
properly; yet I never met with papist hitherto, who durst venture his credit,
that if his consecrate host was shuffled with vnconsecrate hosts, or his
consecrated chalice set among unconsecrated chalices, he was able by sight to
discern which was his God? Dare you, Sir priest, venture a book offixe pence
price, that your sight will serve you better?

41 Your (...): in Hebr 1. 6.
Rhemists tell us, wheresoever Christ's person is, there it ought to be adored
of men and Angels. And upon that ground (I think) you imagining that he is in
the Priests hands at the elevation in the Mass, and in the Pixe which is
carried by the Priest when he goes to visit the sick; you bow or fall down
upon your knees adoring him. Now I would gladly know, why you bow not, or fall
not down upon your knees before every Communicant upon his receiving of the
Sacrament; seeing according to your doctrine, every of them receives his maker,
he is in every of their bellies.

42 I am told you teach, Bellar: lib: 4: de Euch: e. 16.
that there is no Transubstantiation, except he be a Priest who consecrates,
and Idem lib. 1. de Saca^: in genere. c: 27.
have an intent to consecrate. Yea, I am told that some of Ioh: de Combis in
compend: Theol: lib: 6 cap: 6.
you teach, that to Transubstantiation Non solumre quiritur intentio
consecrantis, sed etiam intentio istud Sacramentum instituentis: It is not
only requisite that the Priest have an intent to consecrate, but that Christ
have an intent also that he shall consecrate. Now seeing it is confessed by
diverse of you, that Pa^lus Langius in C^r n: Cib: ad An: 1514 Ioh: Franc: lroin
Thesan^o Foro Eccles: part: 3 do prohibis: and pran ijs. Nu: 57.
some have taken upon them the name of Priests, who were none: Bo^in Damou^
mani^. lib: ca: 5. Ni^: Plow: ^ract: de Euch:
some being Priests, have used the word of consecration, without intent to
consecrate; and osometimes Christ is not disposed the Priest should consecrate,
though he speak the words, Ioh: de Comb: loco supra citato.
and purposes to consecrate: I would know how any Papist can possibly know,
when any of your hosts are transubstantiated, and when he may safely adore it?
Because except there be Transubstantiation, he commits Idolatry in adoring;
adoring bread and wine the creatures in stead of the Creator?

43 Iram Iudicis placare nescit oblatio, nisi ex munditia placeat offerentis,
ideirco non Abel ex muneribus, sed ex Abel munera oblata placuerunt: prius
namque ad eum legitur, Dominus respexisse qui dabat, quam ad illa quae dabat:
No sacrifice is acceptable to God, except the sacrificer be acceptable; and
therefore it is, that God had not respect to Abel because of his offerings, but
he had respect to the offerings because of Abel: for it is written, that God
first respected the giver, before he respected the gift, says Lib. 23. Expos:
on Job. c. 31. cap: (...)
Saint Gregory, And if this be true, I would know how you can avoid the
acknowledgement of this paradoxe, viz. That God is better pleased with your
Mass Priest then with his Christ: or rather this, That God respects his Christ
for your Prists sake, and not your Priest for his Christ's sake; seeing your
Massepriests are the sacrificers, and Christ himself (according to your
learning) the sacrifice: especially this being considered withal, that your
priests, after consecration, (...) Miss^^.
pray God he will vouchsafe to look down with a merciful and cheerful
countenance upon the things offered, (to wit, Christ in your learning) and to
accept them, as he did vouchsafe to accept the offerings of his righteous
servant Abel. For it seems by this prayer, that the Priests presume more of
their own credit with God, then of their offerings, in that they desire the
gifts may be accepted at their request, and not they for the gifts.

44 It is plain by Scripture, that Abraham Isaak, Jacob, Moses, David, etc.
were holy men, and in great favor with God. For we read in Scripture, that
Abraham is termed the father of the faithful, Romans 4. 11. and the friend of
God, James 2. 23. that Isaac was the child of promise, Gal. 4. 28. that Jacob
was beloved of God, Mal. 1. 2. and prevailed with God, Gene. 32. 28. that God
speak to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his friend, Exodus: 33. 11. and
that there arose not a Prophet since like Moses, Deuteronomy 34. 10, that Christ was
David's Son, Math. 15. 22. and David a man after Gods own heart, Acts 13. 22.
But it is not plain by Scripture, nor by any ancient approved Author, that
your George, your Christopher, your Katharin, your V^sula, your Margaret, were
holy persons, and in great favor with God: yet you make special prayers to
these, and none to Abraham, Isaak, Jacob, Moses, or David: whereof I desire to
know the reason. For me thinks it is gross foolery, to neglect the old
approved Saints, and to dote and rely upon younger, of whose sanctity, yea of
whose entity, we have no certainty.

45 It is written in your books, Bernard de (...) in Mariah, part, 12. ser: 2.
de 10. ronat: Mariae, par: 1. Excellen. 6
that Maria apud Deum omnibus Sanctis potentior est, Maria sola plus potest
apud Deum impetrare, quam omnes Sancti in coelo: The virgin Mary can prevail
more of her self alone with God, then all the Saints in heaven beside. Yea, it
is written by Ludolphus, and Crysostome a visitatione, that velocior est nonnun
quam salus inuocato nomine Mariae, De vita Jesus par. 2. c. 68. fol. 257.
quam inuocato nomine Domini vnici Filij eius: men oftentimes find more
present help upon their praying to our Lady, then upon their praying to Jesus
Christ. And in Discipulus de Tempore we read, Lib: 2. de verbis Dominoe al
filiu^ ia Nupiijs, ca. 2. ser: 161. de Sanctis.
Nihil nos Deus voluit habere quod per manus Maria non transirit: Gods will is,
we shall have nothing which passes not by the virgin Mary's fingers. Now if
this be true, I would know why men should not pray to the virgin Marie only,
who is so gracious and omnipotent, and cease to trouble (if not Christ, yet)
the rest of the Saints, which in comparison of her are so graceless and
impotent?

46 I hear you say, Kellison in his Survey, lib: 3. cap. 12. nu. 17. The
Iapouians pray to their Saint Amida. D^ salutem Amida. Meffoeus sele^^ Epist ex
India. lib. 4. page: 209.
that when you desire our Lady and other Saints, to send you health, or to give
you grace, and to have mercy on you; your meaning is not other, then to desire
them to procure of Christ by their prayers and intercessions those benefits for
you. But here first I desire to know, if you mean no worse, why you speak so
harshly? Certainly the rich Glutton, Luk^ 16. 24. when he prayed, saying,
Father Abraham hiue mercy on me. had a further meaning, then to desire
Abraham to pray for him. And the Patriarch Jacob, when his wife Rache^ said
unto him, Give me children, or else I die, Genes: 30. 2. supposed she had a
further meaning in those words, then to desire him to procure her children of
God by his prayers, for else why was his wrath kindled against her for saying
so. Secondly, I desire to know, if you mean no other, why you tell us so many
tales of the Virgin M^ries descending from heaven to help her suppliants on
earth: and of other Saints personal and actual performance of such things as
were begged of them. It is written in your books, Caesar. Dial lib 7.
That a Priest having his tongue cut out by heretics, cap. 24. Discip.
upon his mental prayer to the Virgin Marie, lib. de mir^culis B. Virginis,
Ex^up 30.
had another put i^. The Virgin Marie, digitis ^ri (...), putting her finger
into the Priests mouth (it was well he bit her not) fastened him in a new
tongue. She helped him not with her prayers, but with her fingers.

47 In the same books of yours it is written, Caesar: Dial: lib: 7. cap: 25.
That the Virgin Marie prescribed physic to a boy with ascald head, who used
to pray to her: and that by laying her own hands on his head, she preser^ed
him from headache for ever. By physic, and other means then prayers, she
cured the boy of his infirmities. In the same books it is written, Discip:
lib: citat: Exempl: 35.
That a good fellow callad Peter, prayed to the Virgin Mary for help: and
that she appeared to him with Hyppolitus in her company, commanding
Hyppolitus to help him: which Hyppolitus did, not by praying for him, but by
binding up his sores with his hands Chirurgeon-like. In the same books it is
written, that an Abbess, who was with child by an officer of hers, Discip:
Exempl: 24.
prayed the Virgin Marie to help her at a dead lift, and to save her credit:
which the Virgin Marie did, not by praying for her, but by bringing two Angels
with her, who played the midwiues, helping her to be delivered of her child
instantly, and carrying it (by the virgin Mary's appointment) to an Eremite,
commanding him in the virgin Mary's name to keep it till it was seu^n years
old. In the same books it is written, Casar: Dial: lib: 7 ca: 35. and Di^cip:
Exem: 25.
that the virgin Marie saved likewise the credit of a whore N^nne called
Bea^rix, not by praying for her, but by personil supplying of her place in an
Oratorie; by the space of fifteen years together, whilst sh^e rann^ a
wooring after a whorem nger Priest, Annal: To: 6. al an: 449. (...): 39.
and no body knew show as missing. Your Cardinal Baroniu^ tells us soberly,
that Leo 1. having written an Epistle to Plavianus Bishop of Constantinople
against Entyches and Nestorius, he laid it upon St. Peter's Tomb, praying him
instantly, that if there were any error, he would amend it: and that after
certain days (it seems S. Peter took him to consider well of it) S. Peter
appeared unto Leo, and told him that he had amended it. Whereupon Leo su^ men's
Epistolam de sepulchro B. Petri, aperuit eam, and invenit Apostolica manu
emendatam: the Pope taking the Epistle away, and opening it, he found it
corrected with the Apostles own hand. Which story seems to argue, that when
Leo desired Peter to amend his Epistle, he meant more then to desire him to
procure it amended of God by his prayers.

48 Your Rhemists tell us, Annot: in 2, Cor: ^. 12.
that it is absurd to say, that the intercession of our fellows beneath is
more available then then the prayers of those that be in the glorious sight of
God above. Now if it be indeed absurd to say so, I would gladly know of you
why S. Paul, Rom: 15. 30. desired the Romans, and 2. Cor. 1. 11. the
Corinthians, and Ephesians: 6. 19. the Ephesians, and Col: 4. 3. the Colossians,
and 1 Thessalonians: 5. 25. and 2. These: 3. 1. the Thessalonians, and Hebr: 13. 18.
the Hebrews, all of them his fellows beneath, to pray for him; and desired
none of the Saints in the glorious sight of God above to pray for him. And why
S. James, Chap: 5. 16. advised them to whom he writ, that one of them
(beneath) should pray for another; and required them not to pray to the Saints
in the glorious sight of God above for help. Fcria 5. quartae Dominica^
Qu^drag: ser: 30. de suffrag^^^ mor^uorum.


49 Again, if it be absurd to say, that the intercession of our fellows
beneath is more amiable then the prayers of those that be in the glorious fight
of God above, I would gladly know why you tell us so many tales of souls
creeping out of Pugatory, craving the help of their fellows beneath; and not
one of any soul craving the help of any of the Saints in the glorious sight
of God above. Have not the souls in Purgatory so much wit, as to repair to
them for help, who are best able to help them Or are you of Leonard de Vtine
his mind, who holds, quod efficaciora sunt suffragia Ecclesia praesentis
facta pro aliquo in Purgatori^ existente, quam orationis Sanctorum in patria:
That the prayers of the Church millitant are more auailable for souls in
Purgatory, then the prayers of the Church triumphant?

50 Vergerius reports, Annotat in Indic: lib: prohib. An: 1559. page 9
that it is written in an Italian book, entitled, Flosculi S. Frar^isci, that
the virgin Marie by the merit of her virginity saved all women to the time of
S. Clare, as Christ by the merit of his passion saved all men till the time of
Saint Francis, in whose days S. Clare lived. And he further reports, that
whereas he answered that book, Discorsi supra li. Fioretti, de. S. Francisco,
it is, D.
his answer was condemned as heretical in three several Indices of books
forbidden, and so it is in the last of Clemens the 8. Now if his report be
true, I would know how you can save Cardinal Bellarmins credit, who denies
Praefat. cont. 7 To. 1.
that any Catholic did ever equal in any sort the virgin Mary unto Christ:
For as it is confessed in that book, that Christ saved men, so the Author
professes, that she saved women.

51 Ambrosius Catharinis in an Oration which he made An. 1546. in the second
Session at Trent, Act Cons. Trid. Impress. Antnery. 1546. fol. 57.
termed her Fidelissimam sociam Christi, Christ's most faithful fellow or
companion. And another great Papist did not stick to write, In Mar^ali lib: 1.
cap: 3. test Il^r^cu in catalogo ^^st: verit: col: 36. edit: 1608.
Fuit D^minu^ cum Maria, and ipsacum Domino in eod^m labor, and ^odem opere
redemptionis: Matter enim misericoraiae adiuvit Patrem misericordiae in opere
nostrae salutis: Our Lord was with Marie, and Marie with our Lord, in the same
labor, and in the same work of our redemption: for the Mother of mercy
helped the Father of mercy in the work of our salvation. Who fearing some
might reply on Christ's behalf, that it was written, Esaias 63. I have trodden the
winepresse alone, and of all the people there was not one man with me: in way
of preventing that, goes on thus: Verum est Domine, quod non est vir tecum, sed
mulier vna iecum est, qua omnia vulnera qua tu suscipisti in corpore, suscipit
in cord: It is true Lord that thou say, There was no man with thee, but
there was a woman with thee, which suffered all the wounds in her heart, which
thou sufferedst in thy body. Do not these speeches argue, that some
Catholics have equalled in some sort the virgin Marie unto Christ?

52. You apply that to the virgin Marie, which the Scriptures apply to Christ.
The Scriptures say, that Gen: 2. 15.
The seed of the woman (meaning Christ, the God of peace, Romans 16. 20.) shall
bruise the Serpents head: you Bernard. de (...) in Martialo, par: 12. ser: 2.
de corona^: Mari: Excellentia 27.
say, the virgin Marie bruised it. The Scriptures say; that Of his fullness we
all have received even grace for grace, Ioh. 1. 16. you say Discip: de T^g:
ser: de conceptio:
Vera^iter dicere possumus, ^am de matre quam de filio, etc. we may as truly
say, that of her fulness we have received grace. The Scriptures say, that Christ
did reconcile all things to himself, Coloss. 1. 20. and that he did redeem us
from our vain conversation by his blood, 1 Pet: 1. 18, 19. and you say the
same in effect of her. For you affirm that she was Bernard: lib: ^itat: page:
vli:
Redemptrix vniversi: Ibid.
Recuratrix perditi orbis: and that Stainhurstin Heb^^om, Mariana, printed 1609
p. 85. and 113.
per illam omnia in statum pristinum sunt restituta. The Scriptures say, that
Christ was given ad educendum claustro vinctum, to bring prisoners out of
prison, Esaias 42. 7. and you ascribe as much to her: for you pray to her thus:
Offic. b. Mar: Virg. post adu^^ ad vosperas.
Solue vinculareis. The Scriptures say, that Christ was that Lamb which takes
away the sin of the world, Ioh: 1. 29. and you seem to believe she can do as
much; for to her you use to pray, Ibid.
m^la nostrapelle, put away our evils; Heb: 7. 26.
meaning by evils, sins. The Scriptures note it as a prerogative of Christ's,
that he was without sin: and you tell us, that sicut Christus rede^ptor noster
sine originali extitit, ita reparatrix nostra Maria illi similis in hoc fuisse
comprobatur: Bernard. de Bu. sti in offic: de concept. Virg: die 6. lect 6.
she was like him in this. And does not this also argue, that some Catholics
have equalled in some sort the Virgin Mary unto Christ?

53 You give the Virgin Mary answerable titles to those which are given God.
For as God is called the King of heaven, Dan: 4. 34. so you call her In
Antiphona quae incipit, Salve Fegina.
the Queen of heaven. As God is called, the Father of mercies, 2. Cor. 1. 3.
so you call her, Ibid.
the mother of mercy, Costerus in perorat. ad Virg: ad finem Apol. 1. adu
Goma^um.
As God is called, the Author of all comfort 2 Cor 1. 3. so you call her
Stainhurst lib: citat: p. 155.
the fountain of all comfort As Christ Jesus is called our Hope, 1 Timothy: 1. 1.
so In Antiph. Salve Regina.
you call her. As Christ Jesus is called our Advocate, 1. Ioh: 2. 1. so you
call her. As he is called our Savior, Luke ^. 11. so she Bonauent in Cant: ad
iustar Esai. 22.
a Saviouresse by you As he a Mediator. 1 Timothy 2. 5. so she Idem in Cant. ad
instar illius qui ascribitur Aug^e^ Ambres.
a Mediatrix. As he a Redeemer, psalm. 78. 15. so she Bernu: de Bus^i in Mariali
p. vlt.
a Redemptrix. As he omnipotent, Math. 28. 18. so Bonauent in hy^no ad instar
illius Exo l: 15.
she. As he the morning star, Apoc. 22. 16. so Coster: meditat in hymn Aue.
she. As he our life, Ioh. 14. 6. so Antiph: Salve Regina.
she. As he our Lord, Ioh. 20. 28. so Passim.
she our Lady. As he our God, Ioh. 20. 28. so she our ^ips: de virg:
Aspr^colle, cap. 3. et 5. lib: ^. ep: 17 Epistol. a ^embo script: sub nom: ^eo:
10.
Goddess. As he a chief corner stone, Ephesians 2. 20. so Bonauen^: To. 6. in lib:
inscripto laue b. Virg: Mariae, p. 73.
she. As he the glory of his people Israel, Luke 2. 23. so g she. And as he
was assumed into heaven in body, Acts 1. 9. so was she Rhem. Annot. in Act 1. 4.
you say. And as the first day of the week is observed in a remembrance of
him, Apocalyp. 1. so the last day of the week is observed holy by you in
remembrance of her. For Sabbathum cuiusque hebdomadis Mariae sacrum esse, vix
est qui nes^iat, says i Ferreolus Locrius Mariae Augusta, lib. 6. cap. 23. and
Dies Sabbathi dedicata est gloriosa virgini Mariae, says Diseipulus de
Tempore, sermon. 164. And does not this also prove, that some of you Catholics
equal in some sort the Virgin Mary unto Christ

54 Fiunt in Ecclesiis processiones annuatim ad honorem Saluatoris in die
Palmarum, and similiter ad honorem matris suae in die Purificationis ad
correspondendum ad diem Palmarum: As upon Palm. Sunday you keep yearly a
Procession in honor of Christ; so answerably thereunto you keep yearly on the
day of the virgin Mary's purification, a solemn procession in honor of her,
as Bernardinus confesses in Mariali 6. part. ser. 2. part. 2. de visitatione
Mariae. And Statuit Ecclesia Officium particulare quod dicitur singulis diebus
ad honorem ipsius Virginis, These word^ are soft out in Edit: 1607. but they
are in the Edit: 1515.
sicut alind Officium ad honorem Dei: as you have set Service appointed for
every day to the honor of God, so your Church has appointed set service for
every day in honor of her, as the same man witnesses in the same place. And
whereas David and some other holy persons made Psalms in their days to the
honor of God, all which Psalms, except two, are recorded in holy Scripture:
did not a great Cardinal among you It was reprinted at Rome in Sixtus 5.
days, and since at Men^^ An: 1609 Io. 6. operum Bonaueut.
publish a Book, entitled Psalter ium B. Virginis, The Psalter of the blessed
virgin Mary? in which there are 150 Psalms, whose beginnings answer to the
beginnings of David's 150 Psalms; and eight other Psalms answering to eight
Psalms recorded in other places of the Bible, carrying the name of Esaias,
Ezechias, Hanna, Moses, Abacuk, the three children, and Zachary; besides one
much like to that which is fathered on S. Ambrose, and S. Austin, beginning, We
praise thee O Lord: and another like that of Athanasius Creed, beginning,
Whosoever will be saved; and all this to the honor of the Virgin Mary. Is it
not true, Sir Priest, that what David and other holy men in their psalms and
hymns ascribed to God, especially in the first verse of every their psalms
and hymns, that in this book of your Cardinals is ascribed to the virgin
Mary? Does not David in the first verse of his seventh psalm say, O Lord my
God, in thee I put my trust: and does not your Bonauenture in the first verse
of his seventh psalm say, O thou my good Lady, in thee have I put my trust?
Is not this the beginning of David's ninth psalm, I will praise the Lord with
my whole heart? and this the beginning of Bonauentures ninth psalm, I will
praise thee O Lady with all my heart? In the 16. psalm David says, Preserve
me O Lord: and your Bona^euture in his 16. Psalm says, Preserve me O Lady. I
will love thee, O Lord, says David in his 18. Psalm. but I will love the^ O
Lady, says Banave^ture in his 18. Psalm. The heavens declare the glory of
God, says Psalm. 19: 1.
David. The heavens declare thy glor^, says Bonaue^ture, speaking of the
Virgin Mary. The Lord is my light, says Psa. 27. 1.
David: Our Lady is my light, says Bonauenture. In thee O Lord have I put my
trust, etc. says Psa 31. ver. 1. 3. 5.
David: In thee O Lady have I put my trust; thou art my strength and my
fortress; Into thy hands O Lady I commend my spirit, says Bonauenture. Psa.
33. 1.
Rejoice in the Lord, Oye righteous: Psa. 34. 1.
I will always give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall be in my mouth
continually, says David. Rejoice in our Lady, O ye righteous; I will always
give thanks unto our Lady, her praise shall be in my mouth continually, says
Benauenture. Psa: 51. ^.
Have mercy upon me O Lord, etc. Psa: 54. 1.
Save me O God by thy Name; Psa: 92. 1.
It is a good thing to praise the Lord; Psa: 95. 12.
Come let us rejoice unto the Lord, etc. says David. Have mercy upon me O
Lady, according to the multitude of thy compassions put away mine iniquities;
Save me O Lady by thy name; It is a good thing to praise the Virgin Marie, and
to sing unto her name; Com let us rejoice unto our Lady, let us worship and
fall down before her, says Bonauenture. Psa: 98. 1.
Sing unto the Lord a new song, etc. Psa: 100. 1, 2.
Sing ye loud unto the Lord all the earth, etc. says David. Sing unto our
Lady a new song, for she has done marvelous things; Sing ye loud unto our
Lady all the earth, and for^e her with glad nesse, says Bonauenture, Psa: 102.
1.
O Lord hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee: Psa: 103. 1, 2, 3.
My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name:
My soul praise thou the Lord, etc. which forgiueth all thine iniquities, etc.
says David. O Lady hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee; my soul
praise thou our Lady, which forgiueth all my sins, says Bonauenture. Psa: 110.
^.
The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, says David. The Lord
said unto our Lady, good Mother sit thou on my right hand, says Boaauenture.
And to omit a hundred like speeches whereas David says, Psa: 150 v. vlt
Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord; Bonauenture says, Let every
thing that has breath praise our Lady. Esaias in his Psalm says, Chap: 12.
I will praise thee O Lord, etc. but Bonauenture in his Psalm says, I will
praise thee O Lady, Behold my Lady is my salvation, I will trust and not
fear; Declare our Ladies works among the people. Hanna in her Psalm says, 1 Samuel: 2. 1. 27.
mine horn is exalted in the Lord, etc. But Bonauenture in his Psalm says,
mine horn is exalted in our Lady; There is none so holy as our Lady, she
makes poor and makes rich, Deuteronomy: 32. 1. etc.
she brings low and exalts. Moses in the one of his two Psalms says,
Hearken ye heavens, etc. for I will publish the name of the Lord; but
Bonauenture in his psalm says. Hearken ye heavens what I will speak of our
Lady, Dan. (...) in the vulg: Lat:
etc. O all ye worke^ of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, etc. said the three
children in their Psalm; but Bonauenture says, O all ye works of the Lord,
bless ye our Lady, etc. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; and thou child
shall be called the Prophet of the Highest, said Luke 1.
Zachary in his Psalm; but Bonauenture says, Blessed our Lady the mother of
our Lord God of Israel; and thou Mary shall be called the Prophet of the
Highest. We praise thee O God, we acknowledge thee to be the Lord, said
Ambrose and Austin in their Psalm; We praise thee O Lady, we acknowledge thee
O Mary to be a Virgin, says Bonauenture. Whosoever will be saved, it is
necessary before all things^^ that he hold the Catholic faith, etc. said
Athanasius; but whosoever will be saved, it is necessary before all things,
that he steadfastly believe what concerns the Virgin Mary. And does not all
this prove, that some of you Catholics do in some sort equal the Virgin Mary
unto Christ?

55 Omnia quae Dei sunt, Mariae sunt; quia matter and sponsa Dei illa est: All
things which are Gods, are the Virgin Mary's, because she is both the spouse
and mother of God, says Chrysost^ a vis^ tat^t^. 1. de verb Dom: lib: 4. cap: 8
a great Rabbin of yours. And Tot creaturae seruiunt gloriosae Mariae Virgini,
quot seruiunt Trinitati: As many creatures honor the virgin Mary, as honor
the Trinity, Apud Bernard. de Bussi in Maria^^ part: 12, ser. 2. de coronat.
Mari. Excel. 10:
says another. Christ was willing (as Ibid.
some of your men say) Paterno principatui quodam modo principatum aquiparare
maternum, that his Mothers soveraigntie should in some sort equal the
sovereignty of God his Father. As it is a true proposition, Ibid.
Divine imperio omnia famulantur, and Virgo; All creatures, even the Virgin her
self, are subject to Gods command: so is this proposition true, Imperio
Virginis omnia famula^tur, and Deus: All creatures, and God himself, are
subject to the virgin Mary's command. Bern: de Busti part. 11. ser. 2. de
Assump: Virg: part. 1.
Duae Cathedrae, etc. Two Chairs of estate were prepared in heaven, the one for
Christ, the other for the Virgin Marie. And she sits by him (as Idem ser. 4. de
Assum: (...); 2.
you say) v^ genus humanum habeat semper ante faciem Dei Adiutoriun simile
Christo ad procurandum suam salute, that mankind may have always before God an
Advocate like to Christ. Were they no Catholics, in whom we read these? Or,
does it not manifestly herehence follow, that some of you Catholics have
equalled in some sort the Virgin Marie unto Christ?

56 You Gabriel: Bi^l: in exposit: Can: Miss: Le^: 80: Bernard. de Busti in
Mariali: par. 3 ser: 3. de Nominat: Mariae. Cassand: ^ousu^^. tit: de meri^.
and intercess: Sanct^.
teach, that whereas Gods Kingdom consists of Justice and of Mercy; God
retaining to himself the one half thereof, to wit, Justice, gave the other
half, to wit, Mercy, to his Mother. You tell us, Chrys^st: a visitat: To: ^.
lib: 1. de verbis Dom. ad filium in nup^ijs cap: 2
that velocior est no^nunqua^ salus memorato n^mine Mari^^, quam inuosato
nomine Domini Jesus vnici filij eius: Men may oftentimes be sooner saved by
calling on the virgin Mary then on Christ. You tell us, Berna: de B^^sti lib:
cit: part 9. ser: 2. Assimis: 2. Sedul: in Apolog: pro lib: conform: lib: 3.
cap: 17.
that Saint Francis his Friars who could not get into heaven by the help of
the red ladder, at the top whereof Christ stood, got easily into heaven by the
help of the white ladder, at the top whereof his Mother stood. Manuell of
prayers printed at Doway 1604 page: 304.
You wish sick folks to call upon the Virgin Marie, in assurance that she
will make their entrance into the Kingdom of heaven, when otherwise it might
be, through the divine justice of God, they could not enter in by reason of
their iniquities. And the like counsel you give to others who are in
extremity: for eum adolescens quidam Lutetia ad supplicium illud exquisitum et
horrendum fidei nomine duceretur, ac palo inspecto subinde exclamaret, Domine
Deus habe mis^rationem me^ magni quid^m nominis Theologus male in sidens,
identidem increpantis voce and gestu acclamauit; Dic, inquit, Maria M^ter
grati^e, Matter misericordi^e, etc. when a young man was to be burnt at Paris for
his ^aith, upon sight of the stake, cried, O Lord my God, have thou mercy upon
me; a great Divine of yours, who rode by on a mule, reprooved him sharply, and
bad him call upon the mother of grace and mercy, etc. as Consultat: tit: de
mer^is et inte^cess: Sanct: et lib: de officio Pij viri.
Cassander witnesses. Now this being thus, I desire to know how you can clear
your selves from holding, that the virgin Mary is more merciful then Christ,
and that you repose more trust and confidence in her then in Christ:

57 It is well known that you make mo prayers to the virgin Marie then to
Christ: Dowly in his Inst^. of Christ's Relig: chap: 8.
for she has ten Aue Mary's of you, for one Pater noster that Christ has. It
is well known Bernard. lib. cit part. 6. ser: 2. de ^isitat: Mari^^.
that your Preachers before their Sermons make their entrance, not with a Pater
noster to Christ, but with an Aue Maria to the blessed Virgin. For, Omnes
praedicantes exordium pro gratia impetranda a salutatione Angelica faciunt,
says Bernardinus de Busti: It is well known, that she has the honor of
receiving thanks before Christ: for upon finishing of your books which you
publish, you conclude with Greg: de Valen ad finem colloq. Monpele urtensis. at
alibi sup.
Laus Deo, and beatissimae Virgini, Deo item Jesus Christ: Glory be to God the
Father, and to the most blessed Virgin, and to God the Son: you giving
precedencie to the Virgin Marie before her Son, not remembering at all the
Holy Ghost. And does not this your so often praying unto her, and praying to
her before her Son, and rendering of thanks unto her before her Son, argue
that you honor her more then her Son?

58 It is well known, that you have more Churches and Oratories which you call
by her name, then by Christ's, Bernard. lib: cit part. 6 ser: 2. part 2. de
visitat Maria^.
Non est ciuitas, vel castram, seu vi^la, quae non habet Ecclesiam, vel saltem
Capellam aliqua^ ad honorem virginis Mariae: immo plures reperiuntur Ecclesia
et intitulatae, quam ad honorem Saluator is and Sanctorum omnium: There is not
a city, nor a castle, nor a grange house, which has not either a Church or a
Chapel dedicated to the Virgin Marie: yea there are more Churches dedicated
to the Virgin Marie then to Christ and to all his Saints. It is well known
she has more Holy days observed by you to her honor, then Christ to his:
for he (for any thing I can learn) has only these days observed as holy by
you, viz. his Nativitie, his Circumcision, his Ascension, and Corpus Christi,
as it is called: but Ferreol. Iocrius Maria Augusta lib. 6. cap. 1. etc.
she has her Feast of Conception, of her Nativitie, of her presentation in
the Temple, of her Annuntiation, of her Visitation, of her Purification, of her
Assumption, her Snow feast, as you call it, besides the Feast of her espousals,
of her Sorrows, of her Joys, and her weekly Saturday feast. It is well
known she has more presents and gifts bestowed upon her, then Christ has
upon him. For Erasm. in Colloq de Peregr. Relig. ^^g^.
you deck her Churches and Chappells, with gold and silver, and precious
stones: whereas Christ's are open to wind and weather. See D. Mortons
Protestants Appeal, lib. 2. cap. 12. fect. 1. 2. pa. 24^. in marg.
Where she has had by Offerings 200 pounds yearly, there Christ has had
some years but five marks. and some years not a penny. It is well known,
you go oftener a pilgrimage to her Image, then unto Christ's. For in Italy you
go by droues to her Image at Loretto; in Liguria you go to Savona; in Spain
to the mount Serrato; in France to the town of Clear; in the Low Countries to
Hales: and with us in England (when it was popish) you flocked to her Image at
Ipswich and Walsingham, as Prompt. Cath. in sesto ^at. B. Virg. p. 195*
Stapleton witnesses: whereas of such flocking to any of Christ's Images, we
neither read nor hear of. And does not this your intituling Churches with her
name, and observing of Holy days to her honor, and presenting her with such
gifts, and running of pilgrimage to her Image so far and so often, fortify the
former conclusion, that you honor her more then Christ?

59 Berna: de Busti in Mari^l. par. 6. ser: 2. de visitat. Mari^.
Statuit Ecclesia quod singulis diebus ter pulsentur campanae ad honorem
benedictae matris Dei, maxim de mane, et de sero, vt omnes ipsam immaculatam
Virginem genibus flexis adorantes venerentur, ac beatificent, etc. Your Church
has ordained that three times a day, a bell (which you call your Ave Marie
bell) shall be rung to put men in mind of worshipping the virgin Marie, of
recommending your selves to her, of that thankfulness which you owe to her:
but you have no ordinance for the ringing of a bell in such sort, to put men in
mind of worshipping Christ. Your Church has taught men to pray to the Virgin
Marie to command her Son: Ora Patrem, and iube Filio. Entreat God the Father,
and command God the Son, was Cassand: consultit^ demerit. and in^ercess:
Sancto. and lib. de officioa and viri. etc.
an usual prayer in many Churches: and so was,

O foelix puerpera,
Nostra pians scelera,
Iure matris impera
Redemptori.
And in your To. 6. Psalm. 35. page 48. 1. edit.
Bonauenture Ladies Psalter lately printed, Coge illum peccatoribus misereri:
Compel him (viz. Christ) to have mercy upon sinners, says Bonauenture
speaking of the Virgin Marie. And in another To. eodem page 466.
Treatise of Bonauentures making, called Corona B. Mariae Virginis, this
formal prayer is to be found: O Imperatrix, and Domina nostra benignissima,
iure matris impera tuo dilectissimo filio Domino nostro Jesus Christo, vt mentes
nostras ab amore terrestrium ad coelestia desideria erigere dignetur: O noble
Empress, and kind Lady, we pray thee use the authority of a mother, and
command thy Son and our Savior to turn our hearts from the love of earthly
things, unto the love of heavenly. Does not this your care to see her served,
and the soveraigntie which you give her over her Son, enforce that you
esteem of her more then of Christ?

60 You tell us, that Mariale lib. 1. cap. 2. test Il^yrico in catal. testium
verita^. edit. 1608. col. 36.
Solomon dicit, qui parum noverat de Maria, Prove. 18, 10.
Turris fortissima nomen Domini, ad ipsum confugiet iustus, and exaltabitur:
nobis au^em dicendum, Turris fortissima nomen Dominae, ad ipsam confugiet
peccator, and salvabitur: Solomon who knew little of the Virgin Marie, said,
The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous shall come unto it, and
be exalted: but we must say, The name of our Lady is a strong Tower, let the
sinner come unto it, and he shall be saved. You tell of a Discip. de Tep. de
mirac. b. virg. Ex^mpl. 57.
soldier who did never any other good deed* then saying of an Ave Marie when
he rose in the morning, and another when he went to bed at evening, who
gratia Virginis salvatus est, was saved by the grace of the Virgin Marie. And
you tell us of a Ibid. Exempl^. 97. et. Caejar. dial lib. 7 cap. 59. et Locrius
Mariae Augusta, lib. 6. cap. 23.
thief and murderer, who did never good deed, but that he fasted Saturday in
honor of the Virgin Marie, who for that was likewise saved. You tell us of an
Discip. loco cit. exemp. 96.
unthrift, who to get wealth by devilish means, renounced Christ, and yet
because he would not renounce the virgin Mary, was pardoned: and of a Exempl.
99.
graceless gentleman, of whom Christ himself complained as of one that
crucified him, who yet because he honored the virgin Marie by fasting
Saturday, sped well enough. You tell us of Exempl. 98.
one who should have been condemned by Christ, by reason of his
sinnefullnesse, who yet was absolved at the Virgins entreaty, for that he was
one of her servants: and of Exempl. 50.
another that was indeed condemned to hell by Christ; and yet reprieved by
reason of her importunity, and afterward saved. Do n^ all these tales
(ordinarily told in your pulpits) convince, that your forefathers labored to
persuade the people, rather to trust in the virgin Marie then in her Son
Christ Jesus? Multi videntur B. Virginem in maiore veneratione habere quam
Christum filium eius: many seem to honor the blessed Virgin more then her
Son Christ, says a (...). de Busti. in Mariali per. 6 ser. 2 de visitat.
Mariac.
great man of your Religion; imputing the cause thereof to their Magis ex
simplicitate mo^i quam scientia.
simplicity; but he might more justly have imputed it to your Doctrine; and
the rather, for that he adds in the same place, Quia honor matris redundat
in filium, Prove. 17. patientiam habet filius Dei de hac quorundam virorum and
mulierum simplicitate: Because the honor of the mother redounds to the honor
of the child, as we read, Prove. 17. the Son of God bears with the
simplicity of such men and women as honor his mother more then himself. For
does not this doctrine afford good encouragement for such practice?

61 I find in many of your Institutio Christiana ad initium Officij B. Mariae
Virg. Ledesma.
Catechismes, the second Commandment of the Decalogue left out quite: and in
I^desma Adrianus Iesuita, lib. de confess. Bruno in his Treatise of the Sacr.
of penance, cap. 12
some of your Catechismes, for Remember thou sanctify the Sabbath day, I
find, Remember to sanctify the Holy days. And in your Cap de 9. et 10.
praecepto.
Trent Catechism, I find the ninth and tenth Commandments so huddled
together, that I know not how it distinguishes and ranks them: whether it
makes, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, the ninth commandment, as
Ledes^a. Douly, etc. See Defense of the Censure* p 134.
some popish Catechismes do; or the tenth, as Instis. Christ. supra cit.
Discip. de Temp. ser. 143.
others do. My desire is you would give me a reason of leaving out the second,
and of changing the third according to your account, the fourth in ours; and
such nimbing of the 9, and 10. together, that you cannot agree among your
selves which is the ninth, which is the tenth.

62 You teach, that Radford in his Directory to the truth. chap. 16. p. 115.
to speak against your Pope is a most deadly finne against the first
Commandment of God: That Nauar. in Enchir^d* cap. 11. nu. 22.
to devise or to procure pictures to be devised by others, which may in any
sort be disgraceful to your Pope or to his Cardinals, or to any of your Popish
Hierarchy, is a sin against the first commandment. That Vincent Bruno in his
Treatise of penance, ch^p 10.
to keep books either of heretics, or for any other respect, forbidden by
your Church, is a sin against the first commandment. That Ibid.
not to detect a man infected with heresy, to whom he ought (that is, not to
detect a Protestant to the Inquisition) is a sin against the first
commandment. That Ibid.
to disswide or hinder any for entering Religion (that is, in your language,
from being a Monk or a Nun) it to sin against the first commandment. That
Brief form of confession added to Vaux his Catech. p: 225.
to set lights by, and not to regard the Ceremonies of your Church, is a sin
against the first commandment. That Polancus Iesuita in direct. confess. p 51.
he who is ignorant of the five commandments of the Church, sins against the
first commandment. That Method confess. in exposit. Decalogi, p 4. 1.
he who believes not undoubtedly your Popish Purgatory, sins against the
first commandment. That Method confitendi in explic. Decalogi p. 41. impress
Lugd. An. 1549.
not to believe whatsoever your Romish Church believes, is a sin against the
first commandment. That Extrcit^^ pietatis, etc. Edit. Colon. 1592. cap. de
method ^recte confitendi.
it is an act of infidelity or heresy to communicate in both kinds. And do
not you hereby bewray, that you make of no sins grievous sins?

62 Saint Paul speaking of concupiscence, which rebelled against the law of his
mind, Romans 7. 23. complained of his hard estate, that he could not rid his
fingers of it, ver. 24. terming it expressly sin, v. 17. yet your Sess 5. de
peccato orig. Act. 5.
Council of Trent denies, that concupiscence in the regenerate is sin: and
your Apparat. sac. verbo Patres antiqui.
Possevin thinks it not meet, that we, after the example of the Apostle,
should call it sin. Stealing for need is sin, as appears Prove. 30. 9: yet
with Bellar. lib. 1. de matrim. cap. 27.
you, stealing for need, is no sin. And do not these two instances bewray,
that you make of sins no sins? But your turning the commandments of God into
Eva^gelicall counsels, puts all out of doubt. For though it be a sin, not to
observe Gods commandments; yet according to your learning, it is no sin, not
to observe Gods counsels, Azo^instit. mor. part. 1. l. 4. cap. 9. 2. qua^ritur.
Nemo peccat si Dei consilia praetermittat: Vega de Iustif. lib. 14 cap. 12.
Intermittere consilia nullum peccatum est: Bellar. lib. 2. de monach. cap. 7.
Consilium si non seruetur, nullam habet poenam, goes for good divinity with
you. Now that you turn the commandments of God into counsels, it is proved by
this, that Resist not evil, etc. Love your enemies: Lend, looking for nothing
again: Pray for them which curse you: Let your communication be Yea, yea,
Nay, nay, If thy right eye cause thee to offend; pluck it out, and cast it
from thee. Take heed you give not your alms before men, to be seen of them,
etc. Be not careful: and care not for to morrow. If any brother have a wife
that believes not, if she be content to dwell with him, let him not forsake
her: and the woman that has an husband that believes not, if he be content to
dwell with her, let her not forsake him: are held by See Ioh. de Combis in
compend. Theol. lib. 5. cap. 70. et Iudolph. de vita Christi, part. 2. cap. 12.
et Azor. part. 1. lib. 5. cap. 2. et Bellar. lib. de matrim. cap. 12.
you, not commandments, but Evangelicall counsels. For upon this ground it
follows, that though a man resist evil, though he love not his enemies,
though he pray not for them who curse him, though his communication be more
then Yea and nay, though he pluck not out his right eye when it offends him,
though he give alms to be seen of men, though he be careful for to morrow,
though he leave his unbelieving wife who would dwell with him, etc. in all this
he stones not.

63 Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, is culpable of judgment;
and whosoever says Raca, is worthy to be punished by a Council, says our
Savior, Mat. 5. 22. yet unadvised anger, and Racaing of a man's brother, are
but venial sins with Ioh. de Rada 2 par. cont. Theot inter Tho. et S^otum,
con. 17. Act. 2.
you. Foolish talking and jesting, which are things not comely, says S. Paul
Ephesians. 5. 4. yet they are but venial sins with a you. Of every idle word that
men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof at the day of judgment,
says our Savior, Man. 12. 36. yet idle words are but venial sins with Az^r
instit. moral lib. 4. c. 9. 7. quaeritur.
you. Flattery, from which the Apostle clears himself as from a foul fault,
1. Thesse. 2. 5 is but a venial sin with Did. 25. vnum orarium.
you Drinkings.
Continual haunting of Tavern or Alehouse, noted by the Apostle as an
heathenish sin, 1. Pet. 4. 3. is but a venial sin with Did. 25. vnum
orarium.
you: no nor yet Bonauent. in centiloq. part. 1. cap 6.
drunkenness it self, which is condemned by the Apostle in the same place.
The provoking of wife and children to anger, which the Apostle forbids, Col. 3.
19. 21. is but a venial sin with Did. 25. vnum. orarium.
you. Though we read Psalm. 5. 6. that the Lord shall destroy them that speak
lies; yet lying, provided it be but in a merriment, is no more then a venial
sin with Bonauent. loco citato.
you. Yea some kind of perjury, and cursed speaking, though cursed speakers
be 1 Cor. 6. 10.
excluded the kingdom of heaven expressly, and perjury in general condemned,
Mal. 3. 5. are but venial sins with Did. 25. vnum orar^um.
you. If a boy rob his father but of little sums of money; if he steal pins,
points, bowls, or such small things from his companions, he sins but
venially in Azorius loco supra citato.
your opinion. Provided a man hear a Mass on the Sabbath day, he may spend the
rest of the day in hawking, in hunting, in skirmishing, in iusting, in
tourneying, in bowling, in carding, in dicing, in dancing, in going to plays,
or any such like idle exercises, and not sin at all, as Tolet. in sum. lib. 4
cap 24.
some of you say, or at Nauar. in Enc^i^^d. cap. 13. nu. 15.
most but venially. To manage a man's own estate wickedly by spending
wastfully, or sparing miserably: to play the glutton, to exceed in apparel,
to spend the time idly, to pray retchlesly, to brag of himself insolently, are
but venial sins with Azor lib. cita. 8. quaritur.
you. For one woman to call another woman whore, or thief, or what ever comes
first to her tongues end: for servants to miscall and rail one on another, is
but a venial sin with Tolet. in sum. lib. 5. cap. 9.
you. For a man in his fury or choler to play any impious or desperate part,
to revile God and his Saints, is but a venial sin with Azar lib. 4. ca 9. 7.
quaritur.
you. And does not this argue, your Religion to be a licentious Religion, which
of such practices make but peccadillos?

65 It is a foul sin for subjects to rebel against their Sovereigns, Romans
13. 1. yet you commend rebellion in subjects, W. C. in his Reply to F. Parsons
libel, printed An. 1603. fol. 66.
Your College of Jesuits at Salamanca in Spain, concluded the seventh day of
March, Anno 1620. That the Papists in Ireland might favor the Arch-traitor
Tyrone, idque magno cum merito, and speretributionis aeternae; very
meritoriously, and with hope of heaven. And in Lewis of Bavaria the Emperor
his days, they who rebelled against him, Marsil. Patav. defensor pacis, part.
2. cap. 26. p. 366.
were called by your predecessors, Ecclesiae filij, and vere fideles, your
Churches white sons and truly faithful; whereas they who stood with him,
were called Heretics and Schismatics.

It is a foul sin to use vain repetition in prayers, Math. 6. 7. Yet you
commend your Jesus Psalters, wherein you repeat one prayer 150. times.

To believe lies seems a foul sin: for God threatens such as he resolves to
damn, to send them strong delusions that they should believe lies, 2. Thessal.
2. 11. yet you hold the believing of lies to be meritorious in some persons.
For, Si rusticus circa Articulos credat suo Episcopo proponenti aliquod dogma
hareticorum, meretur in credendo, licet sit error: If a country follow believe
the Bishop of his Diocese preaching some heretical point against an Article
of his faith, he merits in believing him, says In sum. lib. 4. cap 3.
Tales. And do not these are instances prove, that you make of sins virtues:

66 You take upon you to forgive sins to commit: which is proved by this,
Caxton. in hist. Anglic. Job. Mayor. de (...) cap. 3.
that the Abbot of Swines-head absolved a Monk who acquainted him with his
purpose of poisoning King John with a pot of Ale, before the Monk poisoned the
King. And by the testimony of the Germans: for in their Gravam. Not. German.
gravamen 3.
grievances exhibited to Charles the fifth, they complained, that the pardoners
persuaded the people they could pardon noxas praeteritas aut futuras, both
faults past, and faults to come. And as much may be gathered out of Sigismonds
the Emperors words at the Council of Constance, who speaking against
dispensations, said thus: Ioh. Episc Chemensis Onus Eccles cap. 19. de
Indisposit. Romans Curi^, sect. 13.
Legimus Christum Petro potestatem duntaxat relaxandi peccata, non admittendi
dedisse: We read that Christ gave Peter only power to remit sins, but not to
commit sins. For it is plain by this, that the Peter's of his days took
upon them to dispense with such as had a mind to sin. But most directly is the
point proved by Cande^ab. auveun, tit. de abs^lut. nu. 28. Edit. Br^x^a. 1595.
Martinus Al^ensus Vivaldus, that great famous Spanish Doctor: for in him we
read, Quod Pap^ habet omnimodam potestatem in omnes Christi fideles, tam quoad
commissa, quam quoad committenda crimina absolvenda: That the Pope has all
manner of power over Christ's people, to absolve them as well from all crimes to
commit, as from crimes committed. And by our In his Meditation upon the Lords
prayer, page 58. 59.
most noble King, who protests that he has seen with his own eyes two
Authentical B^lls, both of them pardoning sin as well to come, as by-p^st.

66 You Gloss. is 32. q. 2 Quod autem.
confess, that Marriage was instituted by God in Paradise, not only for
increase^ mankind, but for preventing fornication. And yet you Azor. instit.
moral. part. 1. lib. 12. cap 6. 3. quaritur.
teach, that a solemn vow (by reason of the Churches constitution) makes a
nullity of marriage following after it. Now I desire to know, with what
honesty the Church can repeal or make void the institution of God by any
constitution of hers. For you know there is a text, Those whom God has joined
together, let no man put asunder. Your Extra. Ioh. 22. de voto et votiredemp e.
Antiq.
Glozer acknowledged, that admiranda res videtur esse ista, this might seem a
strange thing: but for satisfaction of such as thought it strange, he could
give no better answer, then that the constitutions made by the Church, are made
by your Pope; and that your Pope, not being a pure man (which I easily believe)
all was well enough. But cannot you give me a better?

67 You Tho. Aquin. comment. in Tit. 1.
confess, that he is more capable of Orders among you, who has kept two
whores, then he who has married one widow, or two wives. And if this be thus,
may we not say with another of your In cap. Quia circa Extra de Bigamis.
Glozers, Nota mirabile, quod plus habet laxuria quam castitas, Observe a
strange thing, whoredom has greater privilege then chastity.

68 You Bellar. lib. 2. d^ Monach. cap. 30.
confess, that your votaries break their vows of chastity if they marry, but
not if they keep whores. Now I would know of you, whether this does not argue
plainly, that your Votaries chastity consists in not marrying, and not, in not
whoring? Your Friars, your Priests may lie with a hundred Nuns, and keep for
all that their vows of chastity, if this be so.

69 By your Religion, Coster. in Enchir. cap. 17. de Caelibacu sacerd.
proposit. 9. proposit. 9.
It is less evil in him that has vowed chastity, to whore, then to marry,
Rhem. Annot. in 1 Cor. 7. 9
Marriage of them who have vowed chastity, is the worst sort of incontinencie.
See Hassen^uller histor Jesuit. ordinis, cap. 10. Eras^^. de ^ngu.
They sin more grievously by marying, who vowed chastity before, then if
they played the Sod^mites, or used the sin of best^alitie, according to your
divinity. Your Popes (as good writers witness) have been Co^nel. Agrip. de.
vanit. scient. cap 64.
erectors of stews, and Ibid. and Sansonius de gubernat. regn. and rerumpub.
lib. 11. cap. de Iud. Mareschallo, and Sultan.
have made great profit by the stews. Your Cardinals have been Peter Martyr
comm. in Iudic. cap 16.
frequenters of the stews: your Doctors have Harding Ans. to the Apolog.
Jesuits at Wisbitch, Sparing discourse. p. 13:
defended the stews: your Agrippa loco sup. cit and Gravam nationis German.
nu. 91.
Bishops have licensed Priests for a certain sum of money to keep whores:
and your Agrippa loco citato et Gravamen 96. natiae cuis German.
Officials for money have licensed married wives in their husbands absence to
play the whores. Adultery is reckned by Cap. ^th. Clevici extra de Iudicijs.
your men, inter minora crimina, amongst the peccadilloes. And as for
Fornication in Priests, D. 81. Maximilianus in Glossa.
Communiter dicitur, quod pro simplici fornicatione quis deponi non debet, cum
pauci sine illo vitio inveniantur: The common opinion amongst you is, that no
Priest should be deposed for it, because there are but few Priests who are
free from it. I am ashamed to speak of Johan. Casa. Nullus.
him, who in Italian verses commended the sin of Sodomie, though your Pope
made him Archbishop of Been ventum. Does not the rest prove your Religion an
unclean Religion, and that you have little cause to brag of your chastity?

70 Saint Paul, upon experience of some youngers widows looseness of
carriage, thought fit, that young widows should not be admitted unto any
Church office, but permitted to marry. Now I would know, why the Church of
Rome, which has so great experience of the looseness of their young votaries,
Monks and Nuns, should not think it fit to keep them out of Monasteries
and Nunneries, and suffer them to marry. Me thinks, it is a pretty note which
t Cardinal Caietan makes upon this place: Diditit ab experientia (...) non
conducere illis in venculis Viduis, nec conducere Ecclesiae huiusmodi
professionem. Vtinam hodie disceremus ab eiusmodi experientijs, an prosint ^o
venitis aetatis vtrius ^ sexus personarum solennia vota, tum sacrorum ordinum,
tum religi^sorum.

71 You tell us, Rhemist in 1 Cor 14.
That to pray publicly in Latin is most expedient, though the people who
join in prayer with him that prays publicly, understand not Latin. You
tell us, Ledesm de divin. Scripturis quavis lingua non legendis. Cap. 13.
that men may receive much profit by such prayers, though they understand them
not. Yet I cannot well see, but that as much profit may be reaped by seeing of
a Sermon, as by hearing of unknown prayers. Certainly I think no man can ever
persuade me, but that as much profit may be received by unknown prayers,
though a man be a thousand miles off, as if he were present, where such prayers
are made. Yet if you can give me any reason to the contrary, I would be glad to
hear it.

72 By your Religion, Tho. Aronder in Conc. Oxon test Lindwood constit.
provinc. lib. 5. tit. de haeret cap.
the Images of Saints are to be worshipped with Processions, Genu flexionibus,
inclinationibus, thurificationibus, deosculationibus, oblationibus, luminarium
accensionibus, and peregrinationibus, by kneeling unto them, by bowing the body
toward them, by incensing of them, (that is, sacrificing unto them, as Ibid.
Lindwood expounds the word) by kissing of them, by offering gifts unto them,
by setting up candles before them, by going in pilgrimage unto them. Now I
would know why you should not be held Idolaters for this, seeing sacrificing
to any thing but God only, has been always Exodus 22. 20. Austin de Civit.
Dei, lib. 10 cap. 4
reputed idolatry; and the burning of incense to any thing, has been always
held sacrificing?

73 I have seen a Horae B. Virg. impress. Parisan 4. An. 1526. fol. 62, 63.
prayer of yours, which (as the Rubricke says) was showed unto Saint Austin by
revelation of the holy Ghost; and of which you give out, that who wears it
about him, shall not perish in fire nor water, neither in battle, nor
judgment, nor shall die sudden death, nor be poisoned with venom. And I have
seen certain verses which Lib. 1. sac. Cer^m. cap. vlt.
your Pope Urban 5. sent with three Agnus Dei's to the Emperor of Greece,
running thus:

Balsamus, and munda cera cum chrismatis vnda,
Conficiunt Agnum quod munus do tibi magnum.
Font velut natum, per mystica sanctificatum,
Fulgura desursum depellit, omne malignum,
Peccatum frangit, vt Christi sanguis, and angit.
Praegnans servatur, simul et partus liberatur.
Dona refert dignis, virtutem destruit ignis:
Portatus munde, de fluctibus ^ripit vndae.
Balsam, The English is Ios. Halls in his disswasiue from Popery, prefixed in
his book entitled. The peace of Rome
and pure water, and chrysme liquor clear,
Make up this precious Lamb I send thee here.
All lightnings it dispells, and each ill sprite,
Remedies sin, and makes the heart contrite;
Even as the blood that Christ for us did shed:
It helps the childbed pains, and gives good speed
Unto the birth: great gifts it still does win,
To all that wear it, and that worthy bin:
It quells the rage of fire; and cleanely bore,
It brings from shipwreck safely to the shore.
Now I desire to know (not how your Pope can be excused from blasphemy, in
ascribing as much to his Lamb, as to the Lamb of God; for I know that passes
your skill: but) how your Church can be excused from sorcery?

74 Some of your Painters picture Christ and Simon of Cyrene carrying the
Cross of Christ jointly: but (as Concord. Evan. cap. 143.
Iansenius proves well) they carried it severally; Christ one part of the way,
and Simon another part of the way: whereby it appears it was far from a cart
load: yet you tell us of so many pieces of it, in so many places, as that you
cannot deny, but that at this day it would fraught a ship of three hundred
Tun. Now I desire to know, how it, being insensible, of less then a cart
load, is become a ship load; especially seeing for the first three hundred
years after Christ, no body discerned any growth of it, yea no body regarded
it?

75 Baron Annal. To. 3. ad An. 326 Nu. 52.
Some of your Crucifixes represent Christ nailed on the Cross with three
nails, some with four: of more nails then four, we neither read in your Lay
men's books, nor in your Clergy books: yet there are a number of nails showed
in diverse places, which are said to be of the nails wherewithal Christ was
nailed unto the Cross. Now I desire to know, how they being but four at
first, are come to so many now; especially considering both Ruffinus hist lib.
1. cap. 8. and Socrates hist. lib. 1. cap. 13. and Theodoret hist. lib. 1. cap:
18. testify, that Constantine made bridles of some of them: and an helmet of
the rest of them: and that De gloria Martyr lib. 1. cap. 6.
Gregory Turonensis, who relates the matter a little differently, affirms,
Helena her self to cast one of them into the Sea, to make it safely navigable.
Did that which she cast into the sea. spawne think you, that we have such a
fry of Nails?

75 You May 3.
keep a solemn feast in honor of the Cross whereon Christ dyed, though
Christ was most despightfully used thereon. Now I desire to know, why you keep
not rather a solemn feast in honor of the Ass whereon Christ rode into
Jerusalem, seeing he was Matthew. 21.
royally used when he rid upon the Ass?

76 You Bellar. lib 2. de Imag. cap. 27.
teach, that the Cross of Christ is to be worshipped ratione contactus,
because it touched the body of Christ. Upon which ground would it not follow,
think you, that if the woman who was cured of the bloody issue, Luke 8. were
living, she must be worshipped? and the multitude too, who at the same time
thrust him, and trod upon him? would it not follow, that Judas who kissed him;
and the other sons of Belial who buffeted him; and all the ground whereon he
trod both in Egypt and in Judea, ought to be worshipped in like manner?

77 I read in your books, that Allen in his defense of Purgatory, chap. 6.
Nothing can enter into heaven, which is not purified to the point: Nothing can
stand in Gods sight, that has any blemish of sin, any spot of coruption, any
remnant of infirmity. And I read likewise, that upon this ground you
maintain, that many men's souls go to Purgatory to be purified to the point,
that afterward they may have entrance into heaven. Now seeing you confess,
that Michael Episc. Mer^purg. in catech. conc. 11 de Symb* Apost.
men's bodies sin against God as well as their souls; and c that sin has
wrought in the body great filth and feebleness: I desire to know why you do
not maintain that men's bodies go to Purgatory to fit them for heaven, as well
as men's souls? Methinkes, it should be as unseemly to see a filthy, a feeble,
a corrupt body, as to see a sinful soul in heaven.

78 You tell us, that Bellar. lib. 1. de Purgat. cap 1.
Purgatory is only for those souls which are not perfectly purged in this
life: and yet you tell us, that Idem lib. 2 de Purg. cap. 2.
many men's souls, whose sins are forgiven in this life, go to Purgatory.
Now I would know, how these two tales can stand together. For as sin defiles
the soul, so forgiveness purges it. That soul, whose sins are forgiven,
is perfectly purged. And therefore if your Purgatory be only for such souls
as are not perfectly purged in this life; it seems to me, it cannot be for
those souls whose sins are forgiven in this life. But if you mean to give
me full satisfaction herein, you may not mock me, by distinguishing, that in
sin two things are to be considered, viz. culpa et poena, the fault, and the
punishment of the fault: laboring to make me believe, that though the fault be
remitted, yet the punishment remaining, there is matter enough for Purgatory to
work upon. For I would have you know, that I know well, it is the fault of
sin, and not the punishment of sin, which defiles the soul. Bonaventar. in
Centiloq. part. 2. sect. 2. Bellar. lib. 1 de amiss. great. cap. 14.
Omnis poena, in quantum poena est, iusta est, and a Deo: All punishment
considered as punishment, is just, and from God* And it is absurd to say,
Punishment is purged with punishment.

79 I read in your books, that your Pope for de livering of souls (...) of
Purgatory, prescribes sometimes no more but the saying of a Mass at such an
Altar in such a Church, or the saying of a Pater noster twice or thrice, etc.
Now I would know, with what justice God can keep him in such horrible torments
as you say are in purgatory, for the want of saying of a Mass, or two or
three Pater nosters, whom in mercy he meant to deliver upon the saying of a
Mass, or two or three Pater nosters? One of your Jesuits affirms
confidently, that Maldonat. (...) 2. de poenit. cap. de Indulg q. 6 page 202.
Deus esset profecto crudelissimus, si propter vnam Orationem Dominicam quae
non diceretur, animam pro qua fudit sanguinem suum detineret in tantis
tormentis: God might justly be reputed cruel, if for want of pattering over a
Pater Noster, he would keep any soul, for which he shed his blood, in such
torments as are in purgatory.

80 I read in your books, Viuald in can^^lab. aureo* tit. de satisfact (...).
17 edit. Brix An^o 1505.
Solum Deum nosse quae sit iusta poenitentia, that God only knows how long
any sin deserves to be punished in, purgatory; though (...) de Temp. ser.
15^. D.
some take upon them pre^isely to set down, that every sin deseru^s as many
years purgatory tormeuts, as there are days in seven years, viz. 2555. And
yet I read that your Pope grants Indulgences in this manner: Qui hoc vel illud
fecerit, liberabit animam vnam a Purgatori^: He that does this or that* shall
deliver a soul out of purgatory. Now I would know, how your Pope comes to
know, that souls are so near the time of their deliverie, that the doing of
this or that will suffice to make even for the remainder of their punishiment?
Or rather, whether you be not of my mind. that the Pope in granting such
Indulgences plays the K. And the people in making reckning of them play the
fools. The Jesuit above cited, Maldr. (...) supra citato.
disputing the question, An Papa vel Episcopi possint animas liberare a
Purgatorio, whether the Pope or the Bishops have power to deliver souls out of
Purgatory, resolves they have; provided, tantum pro illis suffragiorum
praescribunt, quantum necessarium est vt liberentur, sed tamen neque possunt,
neque debent vti hac forma, Qui hoc vel illud fecerit, liberabit animam vnam a
Purgatorio: quia nemo illorum scit quantum debeat poenarum illa anima quae
liberanda est, vt iudicare posset satis esse illud suffragium quod praecipit ad
liberandam illam: concluded thus, Cum autem hoc ignoret, non potest nisi temere
adcere: Qui fecerit hoe liberabit animam vnam; which is in effect as much as I
say.

81 I read in your books, that as in the old Law there was a Luk 20.
Treasury to keep money in for the use of the poor; so now there is in the
Church a Zecchius de Indulg. and Iubil^. cap. 1. (...). 6.
treasury to keep spiritual commodities in for the use of such, who having
their sins forgiven them, are yet liable to great punishments, either here or
in Purgatory. Which spiritual commodities are raised (as Bellar lib. 1. de
Indulg cap. 2.
you tell us) of the surplussage of Christ's sufferings; and of the surplussage
of other holy persons, such as Job, Elias, Elizeus, Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, and
other of the prophets, the Virgin Mary, John Baptist, etc. For Christ suffered
more then he necded; and many holy persons suffered more then their sin
deserved, Zecchius loco eitat. nu 5.
as you say: Bellarm. lib. de Indulg. cap. 4. ad (...) 4.
which, Ne inanes and sine fructu essent, left they should be thought to have
been suffered idly and to no purpose, are reserved for the use above said; and
are to be disposed by your Pope, whom you make the Solus Papa habet claves
huius th^sauri. Ioh. de Combis in compend. Theol. lib. 7. cap. 6.
one only Lord Treasurer thereof: he by his Indulgences may communicate more
or less of them to whom he thinks good. Now in as much as you confess
withal, that Christ's sufferings are of themselves sufficient to make
satisfaction for the temporary punishment of all men, as well as for the
eternal, and yet not exhausted: I would know, why the sufferings of the Saints
should be joined to them? and whether it be not absurd to hold, that any part
of Christ's sufferings were inanes and sine fructu, idle and to no purpose, as
holy men's? And how it came to pass that such a mass of treasure arising from
holy persons in the old Law, the Priests of that time could make no use of it,
but left it untouched for your Pope?

82 I read in your books, Bellar. de amiss. (...). lib. 6. c. 12.
that diseases of the body are temporal punishments of sin, and that Rhem.
Annot. (...) 2 Cor. 2. 11.
your holy mother the Church pardons exceeding often and much, all or great
parts of what punishment temporal soever, due or deserved, either in this
world, or in the next. Now if your Mother has power to do so, I desire to
know, why she cures not by her Pardons, the Ague-fits, the Strangurie, the
Stone, the Gout, wherewithal many of her children, her best beloved children,
her Cardinals, her Popes, are oftentimes afflicted.

83 I read in your books, Anton. part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 5. sect. 5.
that your Pope has power to empty Purgatory at once. And if the saying of a
Mass or a Pater noster will help to empty it, as you have borne men in hand
heretofore that it will; I would know how you can excuse your Popes from
unspeakable uncharitableness, and hard hearttednesse, in that themselves say
no more Masses and Pater nosters for Christian souls then they do, nor set more
of their Priests on that work. I do not doubt, but if such commodities would
redeem souls, the Carmelites should have no cause to brag of their
privilege, viz These. Carmel. impress Paris. 1601 test.
That none of them shall lie longer in Purgatory then the Saturday following
their death: Moulins in the defense of the Catholic faith, Artic. 21
for the Pope might deliver every man the same day he died.

84 I read in your books, Horae B Virg. ad vsum Sarum in 16. p. 206.
that your Bishops may absol^e from blasphemy, from heresy, from perjury, from
sorcerie, from Sodomitrie, from incest, from besti^li^ie, from murder, and
from such like sins: but they may not absolve him that strikes a Clergy man,
That falsifieth the Popes letters, That says Mass in an unhallowed place,
That buries an excommunicate person in the Church or Churchyard, etc. These are
Papal cases. The absolution from these is reserved to your Pope. Now I would
know, why they should be denied the lesser, to whom the greater is granted? It
is written, Six^. (...). Bibl. sanct. lib. 2. verbo Tradit^^ ne^.
Rabbini gravius plectendos esse eos aiunt, qui contradicunt verbis S^ribarum,
quam v^rbis Mesuicae legis: that the Rabbis say, They deserve more grievous
punishment, who transgress the ordinances of the Scribes, then they who
transgress, the ordinances of Moses. And does not this your reserving of
Papal ordinances to your Popes hearing, suffering ordinary Bishops to dispense
with the breaches of Gods ordinances, argue your kinship to the Jewish Rabbis*

85 They who knew your practices better then I do, have written, Eras^i.
scho^^is in Epist. ad Episc. Basil. de delectu ^iborum. nu. 29.
Qui gustavit ovum, trahitur in carcerem, cogiturque de haresi causam dicere:
qui totam diem Dominicam vacat temulentiae, scortis and aleae, audit bellus
hom^: Such as eat an egg on a fasting day, are imprisoned by you, and called
in question upon suspicion of heresy; whereas they who spend the whole Lords
day in drunkenness, in whoring, and in dicing, are accounted good fellows.
Gerson. 3 part. operum, Tit. de directione cordis consid. ^0.
Severius punitur quando que Monachus sine ^uculla incedens, quam adulterium
aut sacrilegium committens: A Monk walking without his cowle, is more
rigorously dealt withal, then if he were guilty of adultery or sacrilege.
And in general, Ibid. and Ferus comment. in Matthew. 15.
Gravius plectitur agens contrae vnum Papae decretum, quam delinquens contra
divinum praeceteptum et Evangelium: He who offends against the Popes law, is
more severely punished then he who offends against the law and the Gospel. And
does not this show, that as Matthew. 15.
the Scribes and Pharisees, so you make void the commandments of God for your
traditions?

86 I have a Horae B. Virg. secundum vsum Sa^^m, in 4 impress. Puris. An. 1526.
book of yours, wherein there are many pardons granted upon the saying of
certain prayers, some for scores, some for hundred of days; some for
hundreds, some for thousands of years: among which there is Fol. 66.
one for 1000000 years; and Fol. 144.
another promising as many years of pardon as there are bodies buried in that
Churchyard where the prayer is said, which may amount to a numberless number;
though perhaps not to so many as Pope Treatise of diverse matters concerning
London; Chap Of the whole Pardons of Rome, granted by diverse Popes.
Silvester granted to the Church of S. John Laterans, who at the hallowing of
it, granted so many years of pardon thereto, as there fell drops of water that
day, albeit never (...) rain then fell that day. Now I would know of you, why
any man should trouble himself with saying of those prayers which have petty
pardons of days, or some hundreds of years assigned them* Methinkes it were
enough to say that prayer which has to 1000000 years of pardon, and the other
Churchyard prayer, which com^ to a nemoscit, and to let the rest sleep in the
deck.

87 You Michael Epist. Mersp. in catech. (...) 60.
reach, that Auricular confession is necessary, to the end that your Priests
having power to bind and loose, to remit sins, and to retain them, may the
better know whom they should bind, whom they should loose; whose sins they
should remit whose sins they should retain. And indeed it is plain by
Scripture that Priests (as you call them) have Matthew* 16. Ioh. ^0.
equal power to bind and to loose, to remit sins, and to retain them. But
this is it that I marvel at and where in I desire to be satisfied by you; why
if confession be so necessary for the two foresaid ends, we seldom or never
^eare of any who come to be confessed, whatsoever their sins are, who are
bound by your priests, whose sins are retained; but that all (...) any loosed
all get absolutio^

88 Bell. lib 4. de poenitentia Ca. 4.
You teach that the works whereby you do make satisfaction to God, are poen^,
punishments: and withal Lib. cit. cap. 6.
you reach, That prayer is one of those works. And does it not thereupon
follow* that you hold^^ a punishment to pray? Again, if by praying to God, a
man may make satisfaction: why may not a man by praying his creditour to be
good unto him, satisfy his creditour? But if Creditours will not be so
satisfied; what reason have you to think that God will be so satisfied?

89 You Navar. in Man ^raelud. 9. nu. 8.
teach, tha^ innummerable sins are venial, that is, Rhem. Annot. Romans 1. 32.
pardonable of their own nature, De poenit. and remiss. Omnis v^riusque
sexus, in Glossa.
such as we need not make confession of, Azor: instit. mor. part. 1. l. 4.
cap. 8, 9. quaeritur.
such as for which a man deserves not to be called a sinner, Ibid. 6.
quaeritur.
such as make no breach of friendship between God and us; such as God
(according to Bonavent. in 2. d. 42. Act. 2. q. 2. ad vlt.
some of your Doctors) is not displeased with* Franc a Victor, in sum. Sacram.
de poeni^ 110.
such as may be pardoned in this life by a knock on the breast, by the Bishops
blessing, by the holy water sprinkle, by saying a Pater noster, etc. And yet
you tell us* that if these sins be not pardoned in this life, Bellar. lib. 2.
de Purg cap. ^.
the delinquents shall go to Purgatory, where the pain is so intolerable,
that a Discip de Temp ser. 160. 8.
good fellow who had lain there thirty years, having it in his choice,
whether he would lie there one day longer, or return to the earth, and be
bound for an hundred years together to walk upon sharp iron nails which
should pierce his feet, and to eat nothing but bread baked on the imbers, and
to drink nothing but vinegar mingled with gall, and to wear nothing but that
which was made of Camels hair, and to lie upon the bare earth, with a stone
under his head in stead of a pillow, made choice to abide all this rather then
to abide in Purgatory one day longer. Now I desire to know what the reason
might be, that God in the next world should torment his friends it so horrible
manner, whom he would have quit from blame in this world for a thing of nothing?

90 A Illyricus de sectis. etc. Papistarum, p. 219.
Gentleman of Germany paid a yearly annuitie out of his lands to a
Monastery not far from him, bequeathed by his father, to the end that the
Monks therein should pray for the deliverance of his fathers soul out of
Purgatory. Now in process of time, the Gentleman understood that the Monks
of that Monastery bragged much of certain Indulgences which they had lately
procured, affirming, that whosoever would buy them of them, might deliver out
of Purgatory what soul soever they desired. Hereupon the Gentleman pretending
great care to free his fathers soul from Purgatory, made offer of a good
large sum of money, upon condition they would make him good assurance that by
those Indulgences his fathers soul should be indeed delivered. The Monks
swear he need not doubt hereof, for it was certain he should be delivered:
yet for his better security, they procure it to be confirmed under the seal
of their Monastery and of their Order, and cause it to be subscribed with
their own hands, and the hand of their General, that by the purchase of those
Indulgences his fathers soul was undoubtedly delivered out of Purgatory. With
these assurances the Gentleman departed. And when the Monks, upon his fathers
Anniversary day came unto him for their Annuity, he denied the payment,
because his fathers soul was delivered by the Indulgences which they sold him.
With which answer the Monks were discontented, and complained of the Gentleman
to the Bishop, who gave judgment that the Gentleman must continue the payment
of the Annuitie: to which judgment the Gentleman refused to stand. My desire
is, you would deliver me your opinion, whether the Bishop had better reason to
give such a judgment, or the Gentleman to refuse the judgment?

91 A Illyricus loco citato, and Lavaterus de spect^is part. 2. cap. 13.
Country fellow was wont in merriment to say, That he was verily persuaded
there were but a sew souls in Purgatory, or rather none at all. For which he
was at length called in question by the Inquisitors. Now he confessed that he
had, often said so, and thought he had good proof for it. For (quoth he) you,
and such as you are, teach us, that none go to Purgatory but penitent
Christians, who have not in this life fully satisfied for their sins. And you
teach us withal, That every Mass delivers one soul (at least) out of
Purgatory: and that the first-Masse of every Priest delivers fifteen souls:
and that innumerable souls are delivered by Indulgences. Now we all know,
that in every village and town, there are more Masses said every day, then
there dies penitent Christians. And how then is it possible that there should
be any souls in Purgatory? Was not this case prettily argued?

92 Chemnit. in Ex^m. part. 4. tit. de Indulg.
Tecelius the Pardoner bragd he could forgive sins to come and past.
Hereupon a Germain Gentleman procured of him a pardon for a sin to come; and
afterward robbed the Pardoner as he passed through a Forest, professing that
that was the sin for which he procured the pardon which he bought of him.
Did not the Gentleman serve the Pardoner right?

93 You Bellar. lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 2.
define your Church, to be a company of men professing one faith, under one
head, to wit, the Pope. Whereupon it must needs follow, (must it not think
you?) that when you have no Pope, you have no Church. Now after the death of
every Pope there is a time wherein there is no Pope. Your Chair stands empty,
sometimes many days, sometimes many years. And does it not thereon follow,
that after the death of every of your Popes, there is a time wherein you have
no Church?

94 You brag as much of the name of the Church, as the Ier. 7. 4.
Jews of old did of the Temple of the Lord. At every other word (almost) the
Church is in your mouths. And if you champion Rat. 3.
Campian lie not, Audito Ecclesiae nomine hostis expalluit, We no sooner hear
of the name of the Church, but our hearts fail us. Now I pray you of all
loves, tell what you mean by the Church, when you say Gretser. ^ract. de
agnoscend. Script. Canon. cap 4. col. ^888.
the Church is Iudex omnium controversiarum, Judge of all controversies: and
that Infallibilitas verbi Dei ex Ecclesiae testimonio pendet, The
infallibility of the word of God depends upon the Church: and that we must
hear the Church. Are you of Gretzers mind, who Idem lib. citat. cap. 6. col.
1905. et defens. Bellar. lib. 3. cap. 10. col, 1450.
says, that in these particulars, Per Ecclesiam intelligimus Romanum
Pontificem, By the Church we mean the Pope? If so, much good do you with your
Church, I had rather be of a poor Chappelrie, then one of your Church.

95 It is said, that all your Priests take this oath: Bulla Pij 4. sup forma
pro^fess. fid. constit. 30 in summa constit sum. Pont. a Greg. 9. vsque ad
Six^^^ 5.
Ego N. sacram Scripturam iuxta eum sensum quem tenuit and tenet sancta matter
Ecclesia, cuius est iudicare de vero sensu and interpretatione sacrarum
Scripturarum admitto; nec e^m vnquam nisi iuxta vnanimem consensum Patrum
accipiam and interpretab^r: that is, I such a one, do take the holy Scripture
in that sense, which my holy mother the Church, whose duty it is to judge
which is the true sense of Scripture, has taken it, and takes it in: neither
will I ever take it in other sense then such as the Fathers give thereof with
one conset. Now if you do so, I would know how you can clear your selves from
perjury, seeing it is plain, you sometimes take and expound Scriptures in
that sense, which never Father gave of them. As for example, Mica. 7. v. 8, 9.
which Bellar. lib. 1. de Purg. cap. 3.
you allege for Purgatory: for no Father did ever so expound it. Sometimes
you take and expound them in that sense which is contrary to some Fathers; as
when Idem lib. 1. de Purg. cap. 7.
you expound the words in 24. of Prove. v. 16. of falling into sin: for, Non de
iniquitatibus, sed de tribulationibus loquitur: The text speaks not of falling
into sin, but of falling into adversity, says Austin de Civitate Dei, lib.
11. cap. 31. Sometimes you take and expound them in that sense which is
contrary to all the Fathers, which we find to have interpreted them; as when
Ioh. de Paris. tract. de potest Regia and Papali. cap. 3. S^apleton. Antidos.
in Evang. Io^. cap. 10
you take Christ's words, Ioh. 10. 16. which he spoke of one Shepherd, to be
meant of your Pope, and not of Christ himself: for the Vide Rainold. Apolog.
Thesium nu. 24.
Fathers say, that by one Shepherd, Christ meant himself.

96 I am told, Sym^^ch. instit. Cathol, c. 23. tit. de Eccles. nu. 5. Apolog.
Staph. adver. Illyr. fol. 82. 83. Pigh. Hierarch. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 5 Hos. lib
3. de a^thorit. sac. Script.
you commend the Collier, who being asked by a Devil, as he lay on his
deathbed, or by a Cardinal, as he was travailing on the way, how he believed;
returned answer, As the Church believed. And being asked, how the Church
believed, replied, As he believed: Vouchsafing no other answer, but, I
believe as the Church believes, and the Church believes as I believe. Now if
this be true, is it not true also, that Laico-papismus nihil aliud est quam
merus idiotismus, The Divinity of Lay-papists is nothing else but foolerie?
Certainly Lib. 5. cap. 20. ad^^iorum iudicia confugiun^ etc.
Lactantius laughed at them as fools, who being asked a reason of that which
they believed, could give none, but rested in their forefathers judgments,
quod illi sapientes fuerint, illi probaverint, illi sciverint, quod esset
optimum: because (forsooth) they were very wise, they approoved of that which
they held, they knew what was best to be holden: concluding, that such did
seips^s sensibus spoliare, and ratione abdicare, show themselves idiots.

97 It is written by the Watson in his Quodlib. p. 100 and Sparing discourse.
Secular Priests, that when Sixtus 5. conventing the General of the Jesuits
before him, demanded why he and his Order called themselves Jesuits: and
receiving answer, that they did not call themselves so, but Clerks only, of
the society of Jesus: and that the Pope replying, said; But why should you
appropriate unto your selves to be of the society of Jesus, more then other
Christians are, of whom in general the 1 Cor. 1, 2.
Apostle says, Vocati sumus in societatem Filij eius, We are called into the
society of Jesus? The Jesuits General made hereto no replication. Now my
desire is, you would supply what was wanting in the General of the Jesuits:
for me thinks the Popes answer does convince the Jesuits to be as faulty in
raking upon them in special to be of the society of Jesus, as if they had
taken upon them to be named Jesuits of Jesus. Which was held altogether
unlawful in former, as well as in these later times. For, nuns dicimur
Christiani a Christo, and in Paradiso appellabimur Iesuani a Jesus: We are here
on earth called Christians of Christ, whereas in heaven we shall be called
Jesuits of Jesus, In Mariali part. 7. ser. 5. de parturit. Maria, part. 4.
fol. 25.
says Bernardinus de Busti. And, Ratio quare dicimur Christiani a Christo, and
non a Jesus Iesuani, est, quia rem signatam hoc nomine Christus, scilicet
vnctionem, nobis communicavit, sed rem signatam nomine Jesus, non communicavit
nobis, Interpretatur enim Salvator, cuius effectus viz. salvare, ipsi soli
convenit. Ipse enim vt dicitur in Evangelio, Salvum faciet populum suum, etc,
ac si diceret, ipse solus and non alius: The reason why (here) we are called
Christians of Christ, and not Jesuits of Jesus, is this, says Constit.
Pr^vin. l. 1. tit. de consuetudine* Huius autem.
Lindwood: Christ has communicated to us what is signified by his name Christ,
viz. unction, but he has not communicated unto us what is signified by his
name Jesus: for Jesus signifies a Savior; and it is his property to save,
and no man's else, as the Scripture witnesses.

98 It is written, Amauld in his Pleadings against the Jesuits, and Azor.
instit. moral. part. 1. lib. 12. cap. 21.
that the whole Order of your Humble Friars were put down in an instant by
Pi^s 5. Anno 1570. for that some of them would have murdered Cardinal
Borrhomaens. See Sedulius comment. in vitam S. Francis. cap. 3 nu. 8.
And all the Friar Minorites were banished out of Apulia by Frederick 2. for
that they persuaded the people to put in execution the Popes commandment.
A^or. lib. cit. cap. 5.
And the whole Order of the Templaries, for suspicion of impiety, were spoiled
of all they had by Clement 5. approouement. Now I would know, if you and your
fellows had bin so served for your Powder Plot, what reason you could have
rendered against such procceeding with you; seeing it is an old said saw, Pares
culpa, pares poena, They who sin alike, ought to be punished alike.

99 Our noble King reports, that his Mother sent word to the Archbishop who
did baptize him, Premonition to all Christian Monarchs. p. 33
to forbear to use spittle in his baptism: For she would not have a pockie
Priest to spit in her child's mouth. Your Cardinal Bellarm. Apolog. pro Resp.
sua ad lib. Iacobi magna Bratanniae Regis, cap. 7.
answers, Non est credibile eam caeremonia^ a Catholica Regina fuisse
prohibitam: It is not credible that the Queen his Majesty's Mother required
him to forbear that ceremony. And his only reason is this, Non est verum ea
caeremonia salivam Presbyteri in os infantuli inspui, It is not true that the
Priests spittle used in baptism, is put into the child's mouth. Yet we read
in Guide de mome Rocherij, Possevi^ Appar. sacer. verbo Guido.
who lived 250 years ago, that Sacerdos mittit digitum in aures eius
[baptizandi] and ponit de salive in ore eius: and signat quod baptizandus debet
habere aures apertas ad audien du^ verba Dei and documenta fidei: Manipulus
Curatorum cap. 8. de annexis baptism. Impress. Lov^^^ij Anno 1485.
postio salivae in ore signat, quod debet esse promptus ad respondendum and
loquendum de fide, quia loquutio fit mediante saliua: The Priest puts his
finger into the ears of him who comes to be baptized, and spittle into his
mouth: the putting of his finger into the ears, signifies that the party to
be baptized should have his ears always open to hear the word of God; and
the putting in of spittle into his mouth, signifies, that he should speak
roundly and readily of faith, because spittle helps speech. Now good Sir
Priest tell me, how your Cardinal can be cleanly excused for calling in
question the truth of so great a Kings report, so well grounded, not only on
the certainty of the fact* but also on the authority of their good Master of
Ceremonies for the thing de iure.

100 Again, our noble King writes, Premonition, etc supra citat. page 111.
That the title of Cardinal, Priests and Deacons, is restrained only to the
Parish Priests and Deacons of Rome. And your Cardinal Bellarmine answers,
Apolog. supra citata, cap. 4.
Non est verum, nomen Cardinalis ademptum alijs and solis Romany reservatum*
nam vsque ad hanc diem Ecclesia Compostellana habe^ suos Cardinales: That is
not true which our King writes, for the Church at Compostella has her
Cardinals to this day. De maiestate Eccles. militantis, lib. 1. part. 1. c. 5.
Impress Venet. Anno 1602.
Yet we read in Mosco^i^s Vicar general to the Archbishop of Bononia, that
Pius 5. in suo diplomate, Anno 1568, penitus hoc nomen in omnibus alijs
Ecclesiis praeterquam in Romana extinxit, and folummodo Cardinalis nomen
competere voluit Cardinalibus S. R. P. a Papacreatis: Pius 5. by his Bull
bearing date 1568. cried down the name Cardinal in all other Churches but in
Rome; decreeing that such only as are created by the Pope Cardinals of the
Church of Rome, shall be called Cardinals. And does not this argue your
Cardinal an audacious Prelate, who seeks to outface at once two of his
betters, a learned King in his own book, and a late Pope in his own Bull?

101 Cardinal Bellarmine affirms, Praefat. in cont. 7.
Nefac apud eos [Protestantes] quenquam creari Episcopum nisi vnius saltem
vxoris virum: The Protestants hold it an heinous offense to make any man a
Bishop, who is not at least the husband of one wife. Yea, he affirms, that
Nulli apudeos [Protestantes] continent: Lib. 2. de Monach. cap. 9.
No man (neither of the Clergy, nor of the Lai^ie) among Protestants lives
continently, that is, according to his meaning, unmarried. Yet to omit the
single life of many Laiks, As Grindall, Whitgift, Bancroft, and now B. Abbots
all Archbishops with above 20. other Bishops unmarried.
it is well known that the more part of our Bishops since the reformed times,
were and are unmarried men. Deserves not your Cardinal, for these Cardinal
lies, to be rewarded with a whetstone?

102 You See Bell. lib. 1. de Clericis c. 1^.
tell us, That if the Priests of Moses law abstained from their wives in their
several turns, wherein they served at the Altar: (which you take as granted)
much rather ought the Priests of the New Law, who are to serve at the Altar
every day, abstain always from wives. But seeing the high Priest, who
(doubtless) abstained not from his wife always, Exodus 30. 7, 8
served at the Altar daily; I would know how you can prove it to me plainly,
That the Priests of Moses Law in their several turns wherein they served at
the Altar, abstained from their wives. And if Lib. 1. adver. lovinian.
Ierom be your best proof; then, seeing Ibid.
he says, That the Priests of Moses Law abstained from wine and strong drink,
as well as from their wives; I would know, why your Priests should not abstain
always from wine and strong drink, as well as from wives?

103 You Bell. lib. 1. de Cler. c. 21.
tell us, That every man has the gift of Continency, who will. But seeing S.
Paul witnesses, 1 Cor. 12. 11.
That God distributeth to every man severally as he will (proper gifts) and 1
Cor. 7. 7.
accounts the gift of continency for a proper gift: and that our Savior Matthew.
19. 11, 12. speaking of Continency, affirms, that all men are not capable of
it: I would know how you can accord your doctrine with the Apostles, and with
our Saviors. If you tell me, Conc. Trid Sess. 24. Can. 9.
That Deus id recte petentibus non deneget: God will not deny the gift thereof
to them who askeit of him aright: I desire to know why S. Paul; who
(considering the times) was so desirous that men should live unmarried, did not
rather persuade them who could not contain, recte petore, to pray aright for
the gift of it, then 1 Cor. 7. 9.
to marry: and whether you think that every man may obtain the other proper
gifts, such as that of prophecy, and of speaking strange languages, and of
healing: if he will, and do recte petere.

104 You all affirm, That all the Apostles were continent from their wives,
after they followed Christ; and we deny it. Now thus Largue for us, and
against you: Saint Peter begat of his wife, after he followed Christ, a
daughter called Petronilla. Ergo all the Apostles were not continent from their
wives, after they followed Christ. Alfonsus* Villegas in the life of
Petronilla, May 31. translated out of Spanish into English, and printed 1610.
The Antecedent of which Argument, is proved thus: Saint Peter had a daughter
called Petronilla, borne in lawful matrimony, who was so fair and
beautiful, that Count Flaccus a man of great account in Rome, and of an high
lineage, doted on her, Anno Christi 98. which was about 68 years after Peter
began to follow Christ. For he began to follow Christ An. 30. Ergo S. Peter had
a daughter called Petronilla, begotten by him of his wife after he followed
Christ. The consequence of which argument is proved thus: Petronilla in the 98
year of Christ, could not be so fair and beautiful, that a man of honor and
worth could do^e on her, unless she was begotten by her father of his wife
after his Apostleship. For in that year, viz. 98. if she had been begotten by
her father before his Apostleship, she had been 68. years old, past
fairness, past beauty. Ergo Saint Peter had a daughter called Petronilla,
begotten of his wife after he followed Christ. Answer Priest, and deny not the
Legends of thy Church, and I will burn all my books but my Bible.

105 You all affirm, Rhem. Annot. in Tit. 1. 6.
That if the studious Reader peruse all antiquity, he shall find all not
able Bishops and Priests of Gods Church to have been single, or continent from
their wives, if they were married before they came to the Clergy. And we deny
it. Now thus I argue for us, and against you, in this. If by antiquity it
appear, that some notable Bishop had two sons by his wife; to the elder of
which he spoke thus a little before his death: (...), Nazianz carm.

(...); de vita sua, Edit.

Nondum tot anni sunt tui, Paris. an. 1611.
quot iam in sacris
Mihi sunt peracti victimis, etc.


The years of thine age are not so many as the years of my Priesthood, etc.
Then the studious Reader perusing antiquity, may find, that all notable
Bishops lived not continent from their wives, whom they had married before they
came to the Clergy. For how could a notable Bishop have the elder of his two
sons by his wife, of fewer years then he had bin in priesthood, unless he
begat him and his younger brother after he was in the Clergy? But the
Antecedent is true. Ergo the consequent. That the Antecedent is true, is proved
by this, That in antiquity we find Gregory Nazianzen and Caesarius were
brethren, sons of one Gregory, a notable Bishop, by his wife Nonna; and that
Gregory Nazianzen was the elder, to whom his father Gregory said as is
abouesaid.

106 Rhem. Annot in Math. 3. 14. and 1 Timothy 3. 2. (...) Tit. 1. 6.
You all affirm, It was never lawful in Gods Church to marry after holy Orders
and that there is not one Authentical example thereof in the world. And we
deny it. Now thus I argue for us, and against you, in this: If it were the
custom of the Greek Church in old time to suffer their Priests, and Deacons,
and Subdeacons to marry, then once it was lavvfull in Gods Church to marry
after holy Orders: and (doubtless) once there were many Authentical examples
thereof in the world. But it was the custom of the Greek Church in old
time, to suffer their Priests, and Deacons, and Subdeacons to marry. Wherefore
it was once lavvfull in Gods Church to marry after holy Orders, etc.

That it was the custom of the Greek Church in old time, to suffer their
Deacons and Subdeacons to marry, it is so apparent by the 10 Canon of the
Council kept at Ancyra, that your De Iustitia and iure l. 7 Qu est. 6. Ar^. ^.
pa 728.
Soto confesses, Negart non posse, it cannot be denied. That it was the
custom of the Greek Church in old time to marry, it is so apparent by Did.
31, c. Ali^er.
these words of one of your Popes called Steven.

Aliter se orientatium traditio habet Ecclesiarum:-aliter huius Sanct^^ Roman^^
Ecclesiae: Nam carum Sacerdotes, Diaconi, ^t Subdiaeoni in matrimonio
copulantur: istius autem Ecclesiae nullas Sacerdotum licentiam habet con^ugium
sortiendi: The tradition of the Greek Church is different from the tradition
of the Romans Church: for, their Priests and Deacons, and Subdeacons may marry:
whereas no priest in the Romish Church is permitted to marry. That 1, 2 q.
primi Quodlibera test Scto loco oitato.
Caietan one of your Cardinals, audenter ait, qu^d etiam post susceptos
ordines quondam ^sacerdotibus liouit matrimonio copulari: confidently affirms,
That in old time even priests might marry after their Ordination Yet if you,
Sir Priest, know better then Soto, and Caietan, to ^lude their proofs; speak
out that the world may take notice of your wit. But take heed of the In Did.
31. (...) Aliter.
Glosses answer, though it be approoved by Cardinal Confess Petrikuvia cap. 56.
Hosius: expound not In matrimonio copulantur, i. copula vtuntur: as though
Stephen had meant no more then that the Clergy in Graecia had lived after
their Ordination with their wives whom they had married before their
Ordination: for, which is observed by one of your Greg. de Valentia. lib. de
Calibaiu, cap. 4.
Grande Jesuits: I^^a interpretatio Glossa non satis videtur Textui
con^entanea: nam vt patet ex Antithesi; quam ibi facit Stepha^us proeodem ille
a^^epit Matrimonia copul ari et fontiri coniugi^m. As sorti^^ coniugi^^, inire
m^trimonium est. Ergo et matrimento (...) That exposition seems not suitable to
the (...) by the opposition in Stephene speech it is evident Stephen meant the
self same thing by in (...): and by, sortiri coniugtu^. But by sortiri
coniugin^(...) he meant to marry. Wherefore by, In matrimonio (...), he meant,
to marry. Besides, the Glosses exposition gives a deadly blow to your former
asse^tion: viz. That all notable Bishops and Priests lived continent from their
wives whom they had married before they came to the Clergy; for if in
matrimonia copulari, signify copulate viu^tur; they lived not contine^t from
their wives

107 You have set us out o^ diverse times, diverse Indices lib. prohibiterum.
Indices or forbidden books, of which I have seen three, One made by the
Inquisitors of Rome, and printed Anne 15^9. by the commandment of Paul 4.
Another, made by the Deputies of the Council of Trent, and printed Anno 1564.
by the commandment of Pius 4. A third, enlarged by Sixtus quintus, and
reviewed and printed An. 1594. by the commandment of Clemens the 8. In the
first of these Editions, I found forbidden, Litera ^.
Abdiae de vitis 12. Apost. Ibid.
Itinerarium Petri per Clementem* Lit. O.
Opus imperfectum in Mattheum. Lit. N.
Nicolas Cabasila. Lit A.
Almaricus, Lit G.
G^lielmus de sancto Amore, Lit. 1.
Iacobus Alman consra Thomam de Vio, by whom is meant Cardinal Caietan; and
Ibid.
Ioh. Casaepoemata. But I cannot find any of them either in the second or
third Editions. Again, in the first Edition of these Indices, I found
Desiderius Lit. D.
Erasmus Roterodamus p^nced in the rank of writers, quorum libri and scrip^
^mnia prohibentur, whose books and writings (of what argument (...) Religion
or humanity) are absolutely forbidden. And I found in the same rank
forbidden, Litera N.
Nilus Thessalonicensis, Ibid.
Nicola^^ Clemangis, Lit. B.
Beatus Rhenanus, and Lit. V.
Vearious Zasius. Yet in the two latter Editions of the Indices, I found all
these removed out of the first rank into the second, which are not so severely
censured as those in the first. And in the last of Clemens 8. I found a Lit B.
Append.
Catechism of Charanza Archbishop of Toledo forbidden, which was History of
the Con^cel of Trem, l. 8. page 750.
approved by the Deputies of the Council of Trent, upon perusal and relation
made, that nothing worthy of censure was found in it. Now I desire to know the
reason of all this shuffling; why Abdias, ^tinerarium Petri, Opus imperfectum,
Cabasila, Almaricus, Gulielmus de S. Amore, Alman against Caietan, and Cas^
poemata, which were forbidden in the first Edition, are left out in the later
Editions; seeing the leaving of them out argues allowance of them. And, upon
what consideration all Erasmus works were forbidden, seeing Versio novi Testam.
some of them were approoved by the Bull of Leo 10? r Pr^^fix. version^ novi
Test. per Erasm.
And why Nilus, Clemingis, Rhenanus, Zazius, and Erasnius, were removed out of
a worse rank into a better; s Ioh. Casa Areh. Benerens* in tota venetorum
ditione Pauli Papit I^^gatus, etc. Vergerius annot. in Indicem Romans impress.
1599.
seeing that argues great diversity of judgment in Popes? And by what
authority Charanz^es Catechism is forbidden, which was approoved by the
Council of Trent? I hope your later Popes will not disanull what the Council
of Trent established: and I hope they dare not justify the books cried down
by Panlus quartus, especially Iohannis Casa poemata, which were written in
commendation of the sin of Sodomie, though the writer was Archbishop of
Beneventum and the Popes Legate throughout the whole estate of Venice; nor yet
Abdias, whose lives of the Apostles, fabulis similiores sunt, quam verae
narrationi, are more like to tales of Robin Hood, then to truth, in De^ script.
Ecclesiasti^u, verbo Abdias ^abilonius.
Bellarmines opinion.

107 As you have ^et us out diverse Indices of forbidden books; so you have set
us out diverse Indices libroru^ expurgandorum.
Indices of books which stand in need of purgations, and must be purged before
they can be used: of which I have seen four: the Belgicke, published by Anno
15^6. after the original thereof p^inted by Plautin, anno 1571.
Iunius: the Spanish, by Anno 1584. at Mudil. in Spain.
Quiroga: the Neopolitan, by Anno 1588* at Venice.
Gregory Capuccinus: the Romine, by Anno 1607. at Rome.
Fr. Joan. Maria, Master of the Popes Palaces. In one or two of these
purgatory Indices, order is taken that these and such like propositions shall
be razed out of the Indices and margents of S. Austin, S. Ierom, S. Hilarie,
S. Chrysos^ome, and Epiphanius, viz. Ex quibusdem Ind^^^bus Frobeni ^nis in
opera Aug. desendae sunt subie^^ae propositiones Quiroga. lib. citat fol. b.
Index Belgicus ^ol. 8. etc.
Eucharistiam non esse sacrificium, sed sacrificij memoriam: The Eucharist is
not a sacrifice, but a commemoration of a sacrifice. fides sola iustificat:
Faith only iustifies. Imaginum vsus prohibitus: The use of Images is
forbidden. Machabaeorum liber Apocryphus: The book of Machabees is Apocryphal.
Matrimonium omnibus concessum qui continere non volunt: Marriage is free for all
who will not live unmarried. Peccata venialia damnant: Venial sins are
damnable. Sanctorum invocationem praeuenit Johannes: Saint John prevented
invocation of Saints. Ex Indicibus in opera Hieron. delenda subiecta
pnopositiones Qu^oga. fol. 106.
Adorare statuas vel imagine^ ^ultores Dei non debent: Religious persons should
not adore statues or images. Fides sola iustificat: Faith only iustifies.
Opera non iustificant: Works do not justify. Opera si iustificant, Christus
gratis mortuus est: If works justify, Christ dyed causlesly. Apostoli omnes
aequales: All the Apostles were equals. Opera omnia commixta sunt alique
errore: Our best actions have some want. Oration pro viuis valet, non pro
mortuis: Prayer profits living men, not dead men. In Indice Hilarij deleantur
sequentia. Quiro^ ga, fol. 110.
Alients meritis and operibus nemo iuvatur: No man is better for other men's
merits and works. Meritum hominis nullum: Man has no merits. Non ex meritis
salus: Salvation comes not by merits. Ex Indice in Chrysostomum delend^
subiect^^ propositiones, idem, fol. 138.
Apostolorum doctrina facilis, Scripturae diuinae omnibus volentibus peruiae
and faciles: The holy Scriptures are plain and easy for every man. Confitenda
Deo peccata, non homini: Confession is to be made to God, and not to man. A Deo
solo omnia petenda: We must pray for all things to God only. Ecclesia non
super hominem, sed super fidem adificata: The Church is built not on Peter, but
on Peter's faith. Fide sol^ iustificari: Faith only iustifies. Coram Imaginibus
procumbere quanta stupiditas: It is a great foolerie to kneel before Images.
Iustus nec in operibus confidat, quantumcunque bonis: Let not a good man trust
in his goodness, be he never so good. Mandatis Dei addere, diaboli est
consuetudo: It is the devils practice to add unto Gods commandments. Martyrs
colere Pseudo-Christianos: False Christians worship Martyrs. Prophet as omnes
vxores habuisse: All the Prophets had wives. Punire pios post mortem
impossible: It is impossible that godly men after their death should go to
Purgatory. Sacerdotes etiam Principibus iure divino subditi: Bishops are
subject to Princes by Gods law. Sine Scriptura divina nihil asserendum: Nothing
is to be taught without warrant of holy Scripture. Scripturarum lectio omnibus
necessaria: It is necessary all men should read the Scripture. Scriptur as
legere, omnibus, etiam mundanis, praeceptum: Every man, even laymen are bound
by commandment to read the Scriptures. Ex anni^at. in Epiphan. deleantur
scquentia. Quiroga fol. 66.
Creaturam non adorari: Creatures are not to be worshipped. Mortuis vivorum
preces non prodesse: The prayers of the living do not help the dead. ^ See
Quiroga, fol. 7. et Ind. impress. Kom. 1607. fol. 47. but especially
Capu^^ciuis fo. 167.
Imagines damnatae: Images are condemned. Sanctinon adorandi: Saints are not to
be adored. Yea, in these Indices, order is taken, that these and such like
propositions shall be razed out of the Indices and margents of certain Bibles:
viz. 1. Levit. 21. 5.
Sacerdos n^n redat barbam: Let not a priest shave his beard. 21. 13
Sacerdos virginem ducat v^orem: Let a priest marry a virgin. 25. 18.
Praecepta Dei cust^dienda: Gods precepts are to be kept. Exodus 20. 4.
Sculptilia prohibet fieri: He forbids the making of graven things. Deuteronomy 4. 2.
Verbo Dei nihil addendum aut detrahendum: Nothing is to be added or detracted
from Gods word. 1 Cor. 10. 14
Idololatria fugienda: Idolatry is to be avoided. 1 Samuel 7. 3. and Math. 4. 10.
Illi soli seruiendum: Him only shall thou serve. Deu. 12. 8. 32
Faciendum quod Deus praecipit, non quod nobis rectum videtur: We must do what
God commands us, and not what seems good in our own eyes. Psalm. 27. 1. and 61.
3.
Salus et spes nostra Deus: God is our salvation and our hope. Psalm. 62. 8.
In Deo spes ponenda: Our trust is to be reposed in God. Psalm. 96. 9.
Adorandus Deus: God is to be worshipped. Psalm. 119. 18
Optat doceri a Deo: He wishes that he might be taught of God. Romans 3. 4.
Omnis homo mendax: Every man is a liar. 1 Cor. 1. 30
Christus iusticia nostra: Christ is our righteousness. Exodus 15. 2.
Deus sortitudo nostra: God is our strength. Eccle. 7. 22.
Omnes peccatores: All men are sinners. Acts 17. 24
Non in manufactis templis habitat Deus: God dwells not in temples made with
hands. Ier. 17.
Maledicti confidentes in homine: Cursed are they who put their trust in men.
Habak. 2.
Iustus ex fide viuit: The just man lives by faith. Mat. 23. 10.
Doctor Ecclesiae Christus: Christ is the master of his Church. Math. 17. 5.
Christus dilectus audiendus: Christ the well-beloved is to be heard. Mat. 19.
17.
Mandata Dei obseruanda: The commandments of God are to be kept. Luke 8. 48.
Fides saluat: Faith saues. Act. 20. 34. and 1 Cor. 4 12
Laborat manibus Paulus: Paul wrought with his own hands. 1 Timothy 1. 9.
Lex non just, sed impio data est: The law is not given to the righteous man,
but to the ungodly. Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
Respectus personarum non habendus: There ought no respect of persons to be
had. Heb. 9.
Christus pro nobis mortuus: Christ dyed for us. Apoc. 19. 10. etc. 22. 9.
Angelus non vult adorari: The Angel would not be adored. Ioh. 11. 26.
Credens Christ^, non morietur in aeternum: He that believes in Christ, shall
never die. Act. 15. 9.
Fide purificantur corda: Hearts are purified by faith. Ephesians. 2. 8.
Gratia Christi salvamur: We are saved by the grace of Christ. Romans 11. 6.
Gratia Christi salvamur, non operibus, alioquin gratia non est gratia: We are
saved by the grace of Christ, and not by works, else grace were no grace. Mat.
15. 9.
Hominum mandata docens, frustra Deum colit: In vain they worship God, who
teach for doctrine men's precepts. 1 Cor. 7. 1, 2
Homini bonum mulierem non tangere; propter fornicationem tamen habeat
vnusquisque vxorem suam: It is good for a man not to touch a woman; but for
avoiding of fornication, let every man have his own wife. 2 Samuel 22. 7
In infirmitatibus inuocantibus Deum salus: There is a help for them who pray
to God in the time of trouble. 2 The. 3. 10
Qui non laborat, non manducet: He that will not labor, let him not eat. 1
Cor. 10. 25
Manducet Christianus quicquid vendi solet in macello: Let a Christian eat
whatsoever comes into the shambles to be be sold. Romans 9. 13.
Miseranti Deo tribuenda salus: Our salvation is to be ascribed unto Gods
mercy. Phil. 2. 13.
Operatur in nobis Deus and vel. le and perficere: God works in us both the
will and the deed. Prove. 16. 6.
Misericordia purgantur peccata: By mercy iniquities are forgiven. Ioh. 14. 13.
Petentes in nomine Christi obtinemus: We obtain what we ask in Christ's name.
Heb. 1. 3.
Purgatio peccatorum nostrorum facta per Christum: The purging of our sins is
wrought by Christ. Though these be in sense and meaning in the current of the
text it self, and most of them formally, even in so many words, (as appears
by the marginall quotations) yet by commandment of your Church, they are to
be blotted out of the Indices and Margents of such Bibles as you allow men to
keep. Now I desire to know, what greater harm these propositions set down in
the Margent and Indices of your Bibles are like to work, then the same which
are read in the current of the Text? And why, if you fear any danger by them,
you purge not the Text from them, as well as the Margent and the Indices? And I
desire to be satisfied in like manner, what greater mischief might happen by
suffering the propositions found in the Indices and Margents of the Fathers,
then by the matter in the current of the Text, whereunto they have reference?
And why, if any mischief be feared, the Text of the Fathers is not purged, as
well as the Margents and Indices?

108 There was printed at Bononia in Italy, Anno 1590. a book entitled, Liber
conformitatum vita B. ac Seraphici patris Francisci, written by one Bartholomew
Pisanus, and published by one Jeremy Buc^hius, of which book it is affirmed in
the Title page, that it is liber aureus, a golden book. In this golden book
so lately set out, I read, that Copia Litera a Pisano gratiali Capitulo
directae ad initium lib. Conformitat.
Christus ipsum Patrem Franciscum sibi per omnia similem reddidit et conformem:
Christ made Friar Francis like and conformable to himself in all respects: and
that Lib. 3. conformitat. 31. fol. 303. col. 3. and fol. 306. col. 4.
In monte Alverna, Franciscus cum Deo and Domino Jesus Christo vnius spiritus
efficitur: In the mount of Alverna, Friar Francis was made one spirit with God
the Father and his Son Christ Jesus. And, that Friar Francis said the words
of Christ, Math. 25. 40.
Quod vni ex minoribus meis fecistis, mihi fecistis: That which you have done
to one of these my little ones, you have done unto me; were spoken by Christ,
ad liter^^.
literally, and specialiter.
particularly of his Friar Minorites. And that Lib. 3. conformitat. 31. fol.
300. col. 2.
B. Franciscus titulatus fuit titulo Jesus Nazare^us Rex Iudaeorum: Friar
Francis had the tittle of Jesus of Nazareth king of the Jews given him. And
that Lib. 1. fruct. 1. fol. 13. col. 2.
Nemo fuit minister and servus Christi vt Franciscus, and ipsius perfectus
imitator: Christ had never such a servant as Friar Francis; there was never any
man who imitated Christ in so perfect manner as Friar Francis. Lib. 1 fruct. 9.
fol. 112. col. 4.
Similis B. Francisco and suo Ordini non est inventus, qui servauit ad literam
legem Excelsi: There was never such a person heard of as S. Francis and his
order, who kept Gods law literally. Lib. 2. conformit. 17. fol. 228. col. 1. et
conformit. 25. fol. 272. col. 2.
B. Franciscus totum Evangelium ad literam obseruauit: Saint Francis kept the
Gospel literally. Nec apicem vel vnicum transgreditur, nec iota: He brake not a
tittle of it, nor a jot. These fooleries and blasphemies are in that book,
and no dele set upon them. Yea though it was wont to be held an heresy to say,
Director. Inquisit. part. 2. q. 8. test Capuc^in^ in E^chiria. Eccles. fol.
236.
Quod B. Franciscus est ille Angelus, de quo dicitur in Apocalypsi, Vidi
alterum Angelum habentem signum Dei viui: That S. Francis was that Angel, of
whom it is written in the Revelation, I saw another Angel which had the seal
of the living God: yet so much is written in this book in these words, Lib 3.
conformit. 31 fol. 300. col 4. et fol. 301. col. 1.
Quod prophetia Apoc. 7. fuerit ad literam de B. Francisco, diuinitus Domino
Bonauenturae Cardinali fuit ostensum; and no dele set upon them. Though it was
wont to be held an heresy, at least an error, to say, C^pueci^^s lib. citato.
Quod B. Franciscus semel in anno descendit ad Purgatorium, and extraxit jude
anima^ illorum qui in hac vita fuerunt de Ordine suo, seu de Ordinibus per eum
institutis, and ducit ad paradisum: That S. Francis went once a year down to
Purgatory, and brought thence all the souls of them which in this world were
of his Order, or any other Order instituted by him, and carried them to heaven
with him: yet so much is written in this book, in these words, wherein Christ
is brought in speaking to Friar Francis thus; Lib. 3. conform. 31 fol. 306.
col. 2
Sicut ego in die obitus mei ad Limbum accessi, and meritis ac virtute
stigmatum passionis meae, omnes animas quas inveni extraxi, sic volo quod and
tu, vt sis mihi conformis in morte, sicut es in vita, in die Natalitij tui
vadas quolibet anno ad Purgatorium, and omnes animas trium Ordinum, scilicet,
Minorum, sororum S. Clarae, and Continentium 3 Ordinis quos ibidem inveneris,
in virtute and efficacia tuorum stigmatum eruas, and ad gloriam Paradisi
perducas; and no dele set upon them. That it was wont to be held an heresy to
say, Capuc. lib. cit.
Quod nullus potest damnari qui deferat habitum B. Francisci: No man could be
damned who wore the habit of Saint Francis: yet it is written in this book,
that Christ revealed it to Friar Francis; Lib. 1. fruct. 9. fol. 130. col. 4.
Quod nullus qui moreretur in habitu eius esset damnatus; and no dele is set
upon it. Though it was wont to be held an error, Caput. lib. cit.
Quod Ordo B. Francisci in perpetuum durabit; Though Saint Francis Order should
continue till doomes day: yet Agnoscente Sedulio lib. 2. Apolog. pro S. Franc.
cap. 10. p^. 114.
that is in this book, and no dele set upon it.

In other of your books we read, that the virgin Mary promised a young man
marriage, saying, Casarius dial. 7 de S. Maria, cap. 33. Discip. de mirat. B.
Virg. Exempl. 27.
Ego ero vxor tua, accede ad me and da mihi osculum; and coegit eum: I will be
thy wife, come and kiss me; and she compelled him to kiss her. And
afterward, when the youth was ready to take horse, she held his stirrup, and
bad him get up. We read, Caesar. dial. cit. cap. 51. Discip lib. cit. Exem.
59.
that she came to another youth, who served her very devoutly, c^llumque
brachijs suis stringens dedit illi osculum, and halsing him about the neck
kissed him. We Caesar. dial. cit. cap. 35. Discip. lib. Cit. Exem. 25.
read, that she in an Oratory supplied personally the place of one Betris an
arrant whore, by the space of fifteen years together, vvhilest Betris the
whore ran up and down after a vvhoremaster Priest, so that no body knevv
in all that time that Betris was missing. We Vincent. Spec. hist lib. 7. cap.
86 Discip. lib. citato. Exemp. 24.
read, that to save the credit of an Abbess who was with child, she came
unto her with two Angels attending her, commanding the Angels to play the
Midvviues; and to carry the child in her name to a certain Heremite, vvilling
him to keep it for her till it was seven years old. We See Fox Act. and
Monum. in Edw. 4. ad Aun. 1484. page 667. Edit. 1610.
read, that she came to the Cell of one Alanus, and was so familiar with
him, that she not only espoused him to her husband, but also kissed him, and
opened to him her pappes, and povvred great plenty of her own milk into his
mouth. We In the life of S. Catharin, written in Italian by D. Cate^inus
Senensis, and translated into English by John Fen priest printed Anno 1609.
part. 2. cap. 16.
read, that S. Katherin entreated Christ to take away her heart, and to give
her a new heart: and that one day Christ came and opened her side sensibly
with his hand, and took out her heart, and so went his way, leaving her
indeed without an heart; and that she notvvithstanding being in prayer, lift
up her heart to God in prayer: and that as she was going homevvard, Christ
met her with a heart in his hand, who opening her side, and putting the heart
he had in his hand into her body, said these words, Lo dear daughter, as I
did the other day take away thy heart, so do I now in stead of it give thee my
heart; and so closing up the wound which was made in her body, went his way.
We Gold. Legend in the life of S. Dunstan.
read, that S. Dustan took the Devil by the nose with a pair of tongs of
iron burning hot; or English Martyrolog. Sep. 7. printed Anno 1608.
with a pair of pinsers by the upper lip, and held him fast. We Antoni^.
hist. part. 3. tit. 23. cap. 4. sect. 6. seu Canus loc. com. li^. 11. cap. 6.
read that S. Dominicke caused the Devil to hold him a candle so long, till
the Devil burnt his fingers, and fell on roaring. We Discip. ser. 110. de
Tempore. S.
read, that the devils for fear of holy water, ran so fast out of a sick
man's chamber, that alter in alterum impingebat, one of them crowded another,
and trod on their fellows heels for haste. We Discip in Promptuar. Exempl.
lit. E. exempl. 16. and Tractat. de horis Can^^. cap. 25.
read, that S. Brice saw the Devil get a good knock on his pate by the wall
which was behind him, whilst for want of paper to write the Friars faults in,
he labored to stretch out a paper with his teeth, as shoo-makers do their
over-leathers: for the paper rending, the Devils head (ere the Devil was
aware) flew backward, and hit upon the wall. We Petr. de Natal. in Catal Sanct.
lib. 6. cap. 20.
read, that S. Margret caught the Devil by the hair, and cast him to the
ground under feet, and that she set her right foot upon his neck, and kept
him there as long as she thought good. We Idem lib. 3. cap. 131.
read, that S. Iuliana caught hold of the Devil, and bound his hands behind
him, and whipped him with the chain that was about him, and dragged him after
her along a street, making him a laughing stock to all the boys in the town,
and at last cast him into a iakes. We Id. lib. 8. c. 70.
read, that one S. Niceta served the Devil much after the like manner, tying
him up in a dunghill. And Id lib. 8. ^. 20. and golden Legend in the life of
Lupe or Low.
that one S. Lupus shut up the Devil so close in a basen of water, that the
Devil howled and brayed, but could not get out, till S. Lupus let him out. And
Discip. de mirat. B Virg. Ex^m. 58
that S. Peter did drive away the Devils with a great key he had in his hand.
We Gabr de Bara^le^^, feria S. Heb^ 6. An (...) vit^s possint salvari.
read, that S. Zeno following a woman with a train gown, saw many devils
lying and sleeping on the skirts of her gown: and that as she was passing
over a dirtie channel, upon holding up of her skirts for fear of miring, the
devils fell into the filthy channel; whereat other devils, who followed on
foot, and S. Zeno, laughted heartily. We read in your books Gold. Legend in
the life of S. Blase, and Leonard de Vtino, ser. 64 de S. Catharina. Sexto.
that God promised S. Blase, whosoever desired his help for the infirmity of
the throat, should be healed. And Golden Legend in the life of S. Roche.
that God promised S. Roche, whosoever prayed in the name of Jesus to him,
should be preserved from the pestilence. And Leonard. de Vtino loco citato.
Pet. de Natal. lib. 6. cap. 120.
that God promised S. Margaret, whatsoever woman with child prayed to her in
time of her travel, should have safe deliverance. And Pet. de Natal. lib. 12
cap. 111.
that God promised S. Leonard, whosoever in prison desired his help, should be
set at liberty. And Antonin. h^st. part. 1, tit. 8. cap. 1. sect. 38. Pet. in
Catal. lib. 10. cap. 105.
that God promised S. Katherine, whosoever called upon her in any necessity,
he should be heard. And that he promised as much to those who called upon Pet.
in Catal. lib. 5. cap. 137.
the 10000 Martyrs, upon Idem lib. 5. cap. 106.
Onuphrius the Heremite, upon Engl. Festival printed 1521.
S Erasmus, upon Pet. in Catal. lib. 10. cap. 16.
S. Venerandus, upon Idem lib. 10. cap. 61.
S. Venerand^, upon Idem lib. 4. cap. 81.
S. George, upon Horae B. Virg. ad vsum Sarum fol. 77.
S. Christopher, upon Legend. (...) in vita (...).
S. Cadoc, upon Gold. Legend in her life.
S. Marth^, upon Pet. in Catal. lib. 8. cap. 70.
Nice^a, upon Pertiforium ad vsum Sarum October. 9.
S. Denis, etc. We read in your books, that d Judas the traitor flew his
Father, and lay with his mother; and because the fiends might not draw out his
foul by his mouth, which had lately kissed Christ's mouth, his belly burst, and
then the fiends, took his soul, and carried it to Hell. We Engl. Festival in
the life of S. Mathias.
read, that this Judas has certain play days, in which he comes not in
Hell; Gold Legend in the life of S. Brandon, and Pet in Catal. lib. 6. cap 117.
as namely every Ladies day, and every Saturday afternoon till Evensong be
done on Sunday. And Ibid.
that some of the Angels which stood not in the truth, were never adjudged to
Hell, but to sit as birds in a tree, and to sing Mat^ens and Evensong, and all
such survice as Christian men use to sing. Pet. in Catal. ib. 1 cap. 25.
We read, f that S. Barbara baptized her self in a well of water; and that
flying from other fathers fury, she had passage made her by God through a
great rock, which opening it self, received her in the foreside, and let her
out on the further side: and that a Shepherd who discovered this Barbara unto
her father who pursued to kill her, was turned into a stone, and his flock of
sheep either into stones, or into Locusts. We read, Gold. Legend in his life.
that S. Patrick caused a stolen sheep to bleare in his belly who had stolen
and eaten it: and that he prevailed so far with God, that no Irishman
should abide the coming of Antichrist. We read, Discip. de mirac. B. Virg.
Exempl 57.
that a Soldier who had no other good property, but that he said one Ave
Mary in the morning, and another at night, was saved by the means of the
Virgin Mary. We read, Gold. Legend in his life.
that S. Macarius is commended for that he repented six months for killing
of a flea. English Festival, de S. Thom. Episc. Cant.
That Thomas of Canterbury. is commended for wearing louzie breeches. That S.
Francis is commended Antonin. hist. part. 3. tit. 24. cap. 2. sect. 8.
for gathering worms out of the way, that they should not be trodden on: and
^isan conform. lib. 1 fruct. 10. Lib. 2. Confor. 13. fol 140. col. 1.
for calling all manner of beasts, wolves, asses, etc. his brethren: and Vide
Canum loc. com. lib. 11. cap. 6.
for taking lice off beggars, and putting them on himself. We read, Engl.
Mart^^^ log. lanuar. 16.
that S. Henry of of Denmark is commended for that when little worms crept out
of an Ulcer in his knee, he took and put them in again, saying, Go into your
inheritante where you have bin nourished. And Sedul. lib. 3. Apolog. pro. S.
Franc. cap. 2. nu. 2 p. 132.
that Friar Ruffin was commended for wishing that he might stink on his
deathbed, and be cast out without burial, that the dogs might eat him. These
and ten thousand such tales as these, which are partly ridiculous, partly
blasphemous, many of them (in your own opinions) false, are read in your
Martyrologies, Legends, Service books, etc. Now that which I desire to know,
is, why you have not Indices to purge your Martyrologies, your Legends, your
Festiuals, your Vincentius, your Antoninus, your Caesarius, your Discipulus,
your Peter's Catalogus Sanctorum, and such like, from these ridiculous
fooleries, and blasphemies, and falsities, as well as you have to purge Bibles
and other good writers, from much good matter contained in them?

110 You Campian Rat. 5
brag much of the Fathers, as though they were all as wholly on your side, as
any of your later Popes* and you invey much against us, as contemners of the
Fathers. You would make the world believe, that Douly in his Instruction of
Christ Relig. Chap. 8.
we despise all the Churches Doctors, and ancient Fathers: that Hills Quartern
of Reasons Reason 10
we make no more account of the Fathers, longer then we can wrest them to serve
our turn, then we do of Bevis of Hampton nor Adam Bell. That Sebast Plaskiues
in profess. Cathol. Rat. 7.
we make indeed no more account, of the holy Fathers, then we do of the Turks
Alcoran, or Es^ps Fables. That Bristow motive 14.
it is well known to such as hear our Sermons, ^r be in place to hear us
talk boldly and familiarly together among our selves, we are not afraid
plainly to confess, that the Fathers were all Papists. Th^^ Answ to M. Charks
preface page 30.
though the ancient Fathers referred all their controversies to the trial of
old Doctors who lived before the controversies began, Ibid. page 23.
and that you are willing to do the same; yet Ibid page 30.
we do fly the means of trial. Bishop in his 2. part against M. Perkins
title of Repentance, page ^14.
We in no one point will be tried by the judgment and consent of antiquity.
But mark (Sir Priest) what I say; I am of Medulla Patru^ in Athanasio cap. 15.
page 140.
Scultetus mind, That that great light of Cambridge D. Whitakers spoke nothing
but the truth, when in his answer to Campian he avouched, Patres in maximis
iudicijs toti sunt nostri, in levioribus varij, in minutissimis vestri: The
Fathers in the maine controversies are wholly ours; in the lesser, some ours,
some yours; in some trifles yours. Yea I am of the same mind with that other
great light of Oxford D. Rainolds, who in his Cap. 8. sect. 6. in fin^.
Conference with your Heart, solemnly protested, that in his opinion, Not one of
all the Fathers was a Papist. And if you dare put your self on the ancient
Fathers (which you may not do by your booke-learning, for it is the present
Church, that is, your present Pope, and not the ancient Fathers, who by your
book learning is the sole Judge of all controversies;) but if you dare put
your self on the ancient Fathers to be tried by them, for the discovering of
your vanity in bragging, and clearing of us from your unjust calumniations, I
will name you thirty several points of doctrine, taught by you, denied by us,
for proof of which, I am very confident you are not able to name one Father,
no not one Father, who lived within a thousand years after Christ. And the
doctrinall points I mean are these, 1 You teach, that the vulgar Latin is to
be preferred before, at least equalled with the Hebrew and the Greek 2 That it
is not meet and expedient, especially at all times, that the Bible should be
translated into the known languages of the common people. 3 That the holy
Scriptures, though truly and Catholikly translated, may not indifferently be
read of all men, no not of any other then such as have express license
thereunto. 4 That the holy Scripture, even where it seems most plain, is yet
so hard and obscure, that it stands in need of a set Interpreter, who may open
unto us the meaning of it. 5 That it is lawful to make an image of God the
Father. 6 That Latria may be given to ^mages. 7 That there are seven
Sacraments, and neither mo nor fewer. 8 That the Communion cannot with any
reason be called the Lords Supper. 9 That it is unlawful for the common people
to communicate in both kinds. 10 That it is unlawful for the common people to
receive the Communion with their hands. 11 That a woman may baptize. 12 That on
a fasting day a man may eat at noon, yea at eleven or ten of the clock before
noone. 13 That on a fasting day* besides a noon dinner, a man may take his part
of a good banquet at night; he may eat apples, pears, plums, raisins of the
Sun, figs, sweet-meat, and three or four ounces of bread withal. 14 That
all such are exempted from fastings as are under 21 years of age, and above
60; all that are sick or sore; all women with child, all that give su^^e, all
beggars that go from door to door, all M^ons; ^arriers, Wrights, Carters*
Husbandmen, and (almost) all Handicrafts men. 15 That a Priest sins more
grievously if he marry, then if he play the fornicatour abroad, or keep a
whore at home. 16 That a man who has vowed chastity, is not guilty of
breaking his vow by whoring, but only by marrying. 17 That a man may vow to go
on pilgrimage to Jerusalem, without his wives consent, and perform his vow.
18. That the name of Pope is to be appropriate to the Bishop of Rome only. 19
That the Bishop of Rome only is by right to be called Universal. 20 That the
Rome. Church is the Lady of all Churches. 21 That the Church of Rome is the
Mother of all Churches. 22 That the Church of Rome fundata est a solo Demino,
was founded by Christ only. 23 That out of the Church of Rome there is no
salvation. 24 That without your Popes leave, no man may preach to the Heathen.
25 That none may discutere de fide, determine a point of faith, but your Pope.
26* That the Princes of the world must kiss your Popes feet, but no other
Bishops. 27 That a notorious offender may be absolved from his fault, before
any penance be performed by him, or so much as enjoined on him. 28 That if a
poor woman's Hen be sick or lost, she may procure a Mass to be said for her.
29 That the Popes or Bishops blessing will purge a man from venial sins. 30
That Holy bread works like effect. These points (I say) are taught by you. And
yet for all your craking of the Fathers, you are not able to name the Father
within a thousand years after Christ, of whom you learned them, no not one of
them: if you can, show your skill; if you cannot, confess your impudency.

11^ You ^rag much of the unity that is among you. You would make all the world
believe, that Bellar. lib. 4. de N^tis Eccles. cap. 10.
Nunc omnes Catholici toto orb dispersi, de omnibus dogmatibus ^idelidem
sentiunt: All Catholics dispersed through out the whole world, are of one
opinion in matters of faith. That Hills Quartern of Reasons Reason 3.
Whosoever they be, or in what place or region soever they remain in all the
world, if they be Catholics or Papists, they have all one says, one heart,
and one soul. But if this be true, I desire to know how it came to pass, that
Iacobus A^^^ain a Doctor of Paris writ against Cardinal Caie^an? why Soto the
Spaniard writ against Ferus* and Medina a Spaniard in defense of Ferus against
Soto Why Guli^mius Occham our countryman writ against Pope John 22? Why
Nicolas de Tadisco, best known by the name of Abbat Panermitan, writ a book
pro Concilio Basilien si, in defense of the Council at Basil. Why Sigebert a
Monk of Gemble, writ one book against an Epistle of Gregory 7. and another
against an Epistle of Paschalis 2. Why Fisher B. of Rochester writ a book
against James Faber, and Marcus Grande vallis another: and why Iodochus
Clychtove^s writ against Grande vallis; and Fisher against Clyctovens. Why
Alexander Carerius an Italian writ a book de potestate To. Pont. adversus
impios politicos. meaning such as Bellarmine. Why Turrian writ against Pighius.
Why Ecchius ^alled upon Taulorul: Why Catharin writ against (...). Why Soto
writ against Catharin. Why The book was printed at Rome 1593. fatente Pass
vin^ in apparat. sac. verb. Cornel Ians^n.
Didicus Castillns writ against Iansenius. Why your Seminaries, writ so many
bi^ing books against the Jesuits* and the Jesuits so many biting books
against your Seminaries. Proceeded these books from men of one faith, one
heart, and one soul? Or will you deny that they who writ them were Catholics?
Or that the matters about which they contended were matters of faith, or
bordering thereupon? The men run under the name of Catholics in all your
books. And if the points about which they contended do not concern faith,
why are they so earnest in censuring one another? as for example, why does
Archbishop Catharin charge Cardinal Caietan with such opinions touching the
Epistle to the Hebrews, In his book entitled Annota^iones f^atris Ambros.
Catharini in exerpta quada. ^ de commentar. Cardin. Cai^tani dogm Impress.
Paris. per Colin. 1535. page 3.
qua pijs auribus horribilia, as are horrible to be heard; and with such
opinions concerning the Sacraments, Page 154.
qua nova and foeda, and ^mnino Catholic i^ auribus abso^a, nec ferenda, as are
new and filthy, and not fit to be heard or tolerated by Catholics: and with
such opinions concerning the plurality of wines, as are Page 196.
prophanissiun^, most profane: and with one opinion touching marriage between
persons of different Religion, which is Page 225.
implum and irrationab^^e, both wicked and unreasonable: and with another
touching the Resurrection, which is Page 286.
irrationabilis and contra Scripturam and in digna us cadat in mentem
Christianam, an unreasonable opinion, contrary to Scripture, and unworthy of
any Christian: and with other expositions of Scripture, Page 298. 299
Qua nouum and infandum dogma introducunt, and multa falsa and incredibilia:
whereon follows one new and grand paradox, besides many lesser falsities and
incredul^ties. Yea, why does Catharin charge Ca^^^an with words touching the
Godhead of Christ, Page 104.
quae^ani^elfe ^^orribilia and omnium sententia detestanda, which are
apparently horrible, and by common consent to be detested? and with another
opinion, of which he says thus, Page 106.
Hanc ego procul dubio vt haereticam and detestabilem toto spiritu pronuncio, I
do with open mouth proclaim that this opinion is heretical and detestable.

Again, if there be such unity among you, as you brag of, why forbid you
Iudex. Clem. 8, litera A.
Mas^as Commentaries upon Joshua? Ibid. lit. D.
Didacus Stella his Commentaries upon Luke? Ibid. lit. 1.
Ferus Commentaries upon Matthew and John? Ibid. lit. C.
Claudus Espencaeus his Commentaries upon Titus? Lit. 1.
Iame^ Faber his Commentaries upon the Evangelists, and S. Paul's Epistles? Why
forbid you Lit. B.
Charanza Archbishop of Toledo his Catechism? Why forbid you Lit. A.
Catharinus his two questions de verbis quibus Christus sanctissimum
Eucharistiae sacramentum confecit? Why forbid you Lit. B.
Baptista Cremensis works? Why forbid you Ibid.
Beatus Rhenanus his Scholies upon Tertullian; and his Epistle de primatu
Petri? Why forbid you Lit. O.
Onus Ecclesiae? and Lit. S.
Stephen Gardiners book, de vera obedientia? Why have you purged already
Confer the Edition 1551. with the ^ditions 1576. and 1586. and 1610. and the
truth of this will appear.
Guitmundus de Sacramento, who lived ad an. 1070; and This is confessed by
Possevin in Apprat. sac. verbo, Tho. Aquin.
Tho. of Aquin his sum of Divinity, who lived ad an. 1240; and See edit.
Francofurts 1581, and compared with that An 1502.
Ioh. Petrus de Ferrarijs his practica, who lived ad an. 1414, and Bernardinus
de Busti his Mariale, who lived in Sixtus 4. his days, about the year 1470?
Why have you purged already Cardinal Contarenus his works? and Sir Thomas
Mores works? and Vives his Commentaries upon S. Austin de Civitate Dei? Why
have you given direction for the purging of Bertram de corpore and sanguine
Domini, who lived about the year 870? And for the purging of Antonius
Rampegolis, or Rampelogis, Sixth. Senens. Bibl sanct. lib. 4.
a great stickler in the Council of Constance, An. 1414. against John Huss?
and for the purging of Antonius de Rosell^s, who lived ad Ann. 1467? and for
the purging of a special book, entitled Ordo baptizandi, cum modo visitandi,
printed at Venice, Ann. 157^? In G^eg. Capuccin sol* 186. b. Qui roga Ind.
Help. verbo. Ordo bap eizands, fol 249.
this book last mentioned, your Priests were enjoined to ask these two
questions of him that was sick, Credis non proprijs meritis, sed passionis
Domini nostri Jesus Christi virtute and merito ad gloriam pervenire? Do thou
believe that thou shall go to heaven by the virtue and merit of Christ's
passion, and not by thine own merits? Credis quod Dominus noster Jesus
Christus pro nostra salute mortuus sit, and quod ex proprijs meritis vel alio.
modo nullus possit salvari, nisi in merito passionis ipsius? Do thou believe
that our Lord Jesus Christ dyed for us? and that no man can be saved by his
own works, or by any other means then by the merit of his passion? And upon
the sick man's answering, that he believed so, your Priests were enjoined to
tell him further, Non^e it desperandum vel dubitandum de salute illius, qui
suprapositas petitiones cord crediderit, and ore confessus fuerit: There is no
cause to despair, no nor to doubt of his salvation, who believes with his
heart and confesses with his mouth the truth of the above named questions.
Capuccinus and Quiroga locis citatis.
Yet t by order from your Church, all this is to be blotted out.

Again, if there be such unity among you, as you brag of; how (I pray you)
comes it to pass, that lib. 1. de verbo Dei. cap. 10.
Bellarmine holds, Tobith, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, the 1 and 2 of
Maccabees, to be Canonical Scripture? seeing Arias Montanus holds them to be
Apocrypha, saying in the title page of his Interlineall Bible, printed by
Plantin at Antwerp, Anno 1584. Huic Editioni accesserunt libri Grace scripti,
quo, Ecclesia Orthodoxa Hebraeorum Canonem secuta, inter Apocryphos recenset:
In this Edition have you the books written in Greek (meaning Tobith, Judith,
etc.) which the Catholic Church following the Hebrew Cannon, reckons among
the Apocrypha. How comes it to pass, that Epist. ad Dorpiu^ pro Mor^ae Eras^^.
Sir Thomas More, Lib. 2. de verbo D^i. cap. 2.
Bellarmine, and many others of you, deny that the Hebrew and the Greek are
wilfully corrupted either by Jews or Heretics; seeing our Preface to the
English Reader set before the Bible printed at Doway, Anno 1609.
Dowists tell us, that your vulgar Latin is more pure then the Hebrew or the
Greek those Editions being foully corrupted by Jews and Heretics, since the
Latin was truly translated out of them? How comes it to pass, that in Spain
it runs for current. Azor. institut. moral part. 1. lib. 2. cap. 13. page 104.
That the Cross of Christ is to be worshipped with Latria; and that yet in
France that doctrine is not liked? How comes it to pass, Navarrus ad Capus.
No^ it. Notab. nu 84. de Iud.
that at Rome no man dare teach, That a Council is above the Pope; and that
yet no man dare teach at Paris, that the Pope is above a Council? How comes it
to pass, that your Dia^ogue between a ^^cular Priest and a lay Gen^leman, page
97.
Jesuits in Scotland permitted the Catholics there, to go to Church with
Protestants: and yet your Jesuits with us in England, would not permit your
Catholics here to go to Church with us that are Protestants? Do not b some of
you teach, That we are justified by the righteousness of Christ inherent in
us, and not imputed to us? and yet do not others of you, as namely e Cardinal
Contarenus, and Controv. 2.
Albertus Pighius teach flat contrary, even that which we teach, viz. That we
are justified by Christ's righteousness imputed to us, not inherent in us? Do
not Rhem. in Romans 3. 28.
some of you teach, that we are not justified by faith only? and yet is it not
confessed by Adver. haer. lib. 7. verbogra. haer. 3
Alfonsus de Castro, that Claudius Guillaua^us a learned Papist was of opinion,
that we are justified by faith only? Do not Rhem. in Romans 8. 38.
some of you teach, that no man can be sure of his salvation, without special
revelation? and yet did not the same Comment. in 2 T^m. cap vlt. conciliatione
2.
Claudius Guillandius maintain the contrary, and Catharinus too, both in and
after the Council of Trent? Alfons. d Castro lo^o supra citato.
Did not Michael Baius, who was one at the Council of Trent, and Deane of the
University of Lovaine, and died in the year 1589. teach, Nullum est peccatum
ex natura sua veniale, sed omne peccatum meretur poenam aeterna, There is no
sin which is venial of its own nature, but every sin deserves eternal
death. And that, Omnia opera insidelium sunt peccata, and Philosophorum
virtutes sunt vitia: All the actions of infidells are sins, and all the
virtues of Philosophers, vices, And that, Liberum arbitrium sine gra^ae Dei
adiu^orio, non nisi ad peccandum valet: Freewill without the help of Gods
grace, can do nothing but sin. Pelagianus est error dicere, quod liberum
arbitrium valet, ad vllum peccatum vitanaum: It is a Pelagian error to say,
that by the power of free will, a man may avoid some sin. Omne quod ^git
peccator, vel servus peccati, peccatum est: All that is sin which is done by
a sinner, or by him that is servant to sin. Ad rationem et definitionem
peccati non pertinent voluntaria: It is not necessary that sin should be
defined to be a voluntary action. Prava desideria, quibus ratio non consentit,
and qua homo invitus patitur, sunt prohibita praecepto, Non concupisces: Wicked
lusts, whereunto reason gives no consent, and such as man falls into against
his will, are forbidden by the commandment, Thou shall not covet. Definitiv^
haec sententia, Deum homini nihil impossible praecepisse, falso tribuitur
Augustino, cum Pelagij sit: This defin^tiue sentence, viz God commanded no man
any impossible thing, is fa^sly fathered on S. Austin, for it was Pelagius, not
S. Austins. Nemo praeter Christum est absque originali peccato, hinc beata
Virgo mortua est propter peccatum ex Adam contractum omnesque eius afflictiones
in hac vita, sicut and aliorum iustorum, fuerunt vltiones peccati actualis vel
originalis: No person besides Christ is exempt from original sin; the virgin
Marie died by reason of original sin; and all the afflictions which she
suffered in this li^e, befell her as then befell to other good men, viz. as
punishments either of actual or original sin. Satisfactiones l^boriosae
iustificatorum non valent expia^e de condigno poenam temporalem restantem post
culpam condonatam: The painful satisfactorie works of such as are justified,
do not condignely satisfy for the temporal punishment remaining after the
fault pardoned. Did not (I say) Michael Barus your Deane of Lovayne teach these
doctrines, and above 70 more, much like unto these, all which are condemned by
The Bulls are extant in Possevin. Apparat. faeverbo. Michael Ba^us.
Pius 5. and Gregory 13. as partly heretical, partly erroneous, partly
suspicious, partly temerariou, partly scandalous, partly offensive? And are you
not ashamed to brag of your unity? Me thinks your unity is like that of the
Madianites, who thrust every man his sword into the side of his fellow.

112 You brag much of the commendation that S. Paul gave unto the Church of
Rome in his Epistle to the Romans, and Rhem. Annot. before the Epistle to
Roman. page 38.
say It is much to be noted. And is it not as much to be noted what
commendations God by his Prophets gave unto Jerusalem, Theodoret hist lib. 9.
cap. 9.
the mother of all other Churches? Is it not as much to be noted, how God by
his prophets affirmed, 2 Chronicles. 6. 6.
that he chose Jerusalem that his name might be there, and 2 Chro. 7. 16
that for ever? How God by his prophets affirmed, Psalm. 1, 214.
that he meant to dwell there for ever, because he had a delight therein? 2
Chro. 7. 16.
His eyes and his heart should be on Jerusalem, perpetually* Jerusalem should
be called Zach. 8. 3.
a Citiy of truth and the mountain of the Lord of hoasts, the holy mountain.
Do not these commendations surpass those which were given by Paul unto the
Church of Rome in his Epistle to the Romans? And if the Jews now, have no
occasion to brag of the commendation given to the Church of Jerusalem of
old, why should you stand so much upon it, that S. Paul in his time, gave
commedation to the Church of Rome in his time? May it not be, that as Esaias 1.
21.
Jerusalem, of a faithful City became a harlot: so Rome, since S. Paul's time,
of a virgin, is become a strumpet? Many virgin Churches ^ost their virginity
soon, as you may see by Egesippus words recorded in Hist. lib. 3. cap. 32. and
lib. 4. cap. 22. Ruffino ^^terprete.
Eusebius. Again, was not the Church of Corinth as much commended, if not
more, by S. Paul in his Epistle written to the Corinthians, as the Church of
Rome in his Epistle to the Romans? The 1 Cor. 1. 5. 7. 8
Apostle writes of the Corinthians, that they were rich in Christ, in all kind
of speech, and in all knowledge, that they were not destitute of any gift:
affirming further, that our Lord Jesus Christ will confirm them to the end.
Which he writ not of the Romans. Of the Romans continuing in that fame and
renown of faith, for which he commends them, he speaks nothing: and yet the
Church of Corinth has lost her maidenhead; and why not Rome? If the natural
branches, the Jews, notwithstanding all their promises: and the branches of the
same Oliue-plant with the Romans, I mean the Corinthians, notwithstanding all
the commendations which S. Paul gave them, be cut off, be deceived: what
reason have you; who hold of Rome, to please your selves with conceits of I
know not what dry Summers, because Saint Paul commended your predecessors?

113 You brag, that the faith which you profess at this day, is the same with
that which the Apostle commended in the Romans in his days; and yet though
the Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans, wherein he commends the Romans faith,
comprehends all kind of doctrines, and handles them very fully and exactly, as
Prafat. Epist. ad Romans
Theodoret witnesses, and the Annot. before the Epist^e to the Romans, page
389.
Rhemists confess; he speaks nothing therein of the Popes Monarchy, of his
power to judge and determine all causes of faith, of his calling of Counsels,
of his Presidentship in councels, of his right to ratify their decrees, to
decide causes brought him by Appeals from all the coasts of the world: of
censuring Kings, by deposing them; and their Kingdoms, by interdicting them:
he says nothing herein of his right to bind Bishops, Metropolitans and
Patriarchs with an oath to be his faithful subjects: to give Church Livings
and Offices to whom he list: to break the bands of all Councels with
dispensations. He says nothing of the Mass, of the real presence, of
Transubstantiation. He says nothing of the vows of poverty, of obedience and
chastity. He says nothing of Images, of the Cross, of Pilgrimages, of
Iubiles, of Pardons, of Purgatory, of praying to the dead, or for the dead.
He says nothing (I say) no not a word, not so much as in show, for the proof
of these, or any such doctrines as these, whereon ye stand most in these
days: but on the contrary, in many places he speaks directly against many of
your now-doctrines, against many of your present positions. As for example,
whereas you both in books and windows paint God the Father in the likeness of
an old man, and Bellar. lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 8.
defend it as lawful: The Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans teaches, that
it is unlawful, To. 1. 22, 23.
calling them fools, who turned the glory of the incorruptible God, to the
similitude of the image of a corruptible man. Secondly, whereas Rhem. Annot. in
Heb 11. 21 and in Apoc. 19. 10.
you teach, that religious worship is due to creatures, to Angels, to men, to
Images, to Crucifixes, etc. The Apostle in this Epistle Rom 1. 24, 25
shows how grievously they were punished by God, who worshipped and served the
creature, forsaking the Creator; implying therein, that it is not lawful to
give religious worship unto creatures. Thirdly, whereas you Rhem. Annot. in
la. 2. 21.
maintain, that the doctrine of faith only justifying, is an old heresy: the
Apostle in this Epistle teaches it for a Catholic doctrine; Romans 3. 28.
for we conclude (says he) that a man is justified by faith without the works
of the law; which is all one to say, a man is justified by faith only.
Fourthly, whereas Rhem. A^^ot. in Romans 5. 14.
you teach, that the virgin Mary was free from original sin; the Apostle in
Romans 5. 12.
this Epistle writes, that in Adam all men (and by consequent the virgin Mary)
sinned; what exception have we but Christ? Fifthly, whereas Rhem. Annot. in
Romans 1. 31.
you teach, that some sins are venial, that is, pardonable of their own
nature, and not worthy of damnation: the Apostle in this Epistle teaches
contrary, Romans 6. 23.
saying, The wages of sin (meaning every sin) is death. Sixthly, whereas
Rhem Annot. in Romans 6. 23.
you teach, that everlasting life is a stipend: the Apostle in this Epistle
teaches it is a gift, The gift of God is eternal life, Romans 6. 23.
says the Apostle. Seventhly, whereas Rhem. Annot in Romans 1. 7, 8.
you teach, that concupiscence is no sin; and besides, Non licet nobis it a
loqui, etc. Posse^in. Apparat. sac. verbo: Patres antiqui.
that we may not safely call it sin: the Apostle in this Epistle, ldem ibid.
by your own men's confession, Rom 6. 12.
calls it sin. Eighthly, whereas Censura Cole^. dial. 3.
you account it heresy to teach, that a justified man cannot keep the whole
Law: the Apostle in this Epistle stands guilty of this heresy, for speaking
in the person of a justified man, To will is present with me, Romans 7. 18, 19.
says he, but I find no means to perform that which is good: for I do not
the good thing which I would, but the evil which I would not, that do I.
Ninthly, whereas Rhem. Annot. in Heb. 13. 16. and 1 Cor. 3. 8.
you teach, that good works be meritorious, even so meritorious, that the
joys of heaven are a thing equally and justly answering to the time and weight
of our works: the Apostle in this Epistle teaches, Romans 8. 18.
that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory which
shall be showed unto v^. Tenthly, whereas Rhem Annot. in 1 Cor. 9. 27.
you cry out against the certainty of faith, calling it an unhappy
security, presumption, and a faithless persuasion: the Apostle in Romans 4. 20.
this Epistle commends the faith that is free from doubting, Romans 8. 38, 39
professing that he was assured, Neither life, nor death, nor any creature, was
able to separate him from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Eleventhly, whereas Antonin. sum. Theol. part. 3 tit. 13. cap. 6 sect. 16.
you teach, that Christ is upon every of your Altars: the Apostle in Romans 8. 34.
this Epistle teaches, that since his rising he is at the right hand of God.
Twelfthly, whereas Rhem an Act 10. 2.
you teach, that works done before justification, deserve of congruitie at
Gods hands the grace of justification: the Apostle in this Epistle teaches
flat contrary, Romans 8. 7, 8.
saying, The wisdom of the flesh, (that is, a man unjustified) cannot please
God. Thirteenthly, whereas Extra de maiorit. et ^bid. vnam sanctam.
you teach, that every creature must be subject to the Pope, and that the Pope
is subject to none: the Apostle in this Epistle Romans 13.
exhorts every creature to be subject to the higher powers, meaning by the
higher powers (as the Agnoscente Bellar. lib. 3. de. Lai^^, cap. 3.
circumstances show) the civil Magistrates, and not the Pope. Fourteenthly,
whereas you Bonisac. 8. in c. quanquam de ^ersibus in b.
teach, that the Clergy is and ought to be free from whatsoever impositions
of the civil Magistrate, and that by the laws of God and man: the Apostle in
this Epistle Romans 13. 7.
persuades every Creature, the Clergy as well as the Laity, to pay tribute
and custom to the civil Magistrate. Fifteenthly, whereas Rabadineira de vita
Ignatij Loiola, lib. 5 cap. 4.
you teach, that inferiors must do whatsoever superiors command them, though
it be against their consciences, unless they have plain reason for their
refusal: the Apostle in this Epistle requires, Romans 14. 5.
that men be fully persuaded in their minds of the lawfulness of that which
they do; meaning they should not only forbear the doing of that which went
against their consciences, but whereof they doubted in their judgments.
Lastly, whereas Rhem. in Romans 14. 23.
you teach, that some actions only of the Infidells are sins: the Apostle in
this Epistle affirms, that all the actions of the Infidells are sins,
saying, Romans 14. 23.
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Now that which I desire to know, is, why
the Apostle (if the faith of our Romish Church now, be the same that it was
then when he writ to the Romans) spoke nothing of the principal points of
your now-faith; but many things for us, and against you?

Your Confess. Petviko^ia, cap. 48. de sacram. Paenitent^e, fol. 127.
Cardinal Hosius, to prove satisfaction, alleges these as the words of Saint
Paul, Romans 6. Exhibeamus membra nostra servire institiae in satisfactione: Let
us exhibit our members to serve justice unto satisfaction. And your Ans. to
Iuels Apology, par. ^. cap. 16. fol. 117.
Doctor Harding for proof of the same point, alleges these as the words of
S. Paul, 2 Cor. 7. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit, making perfect our satisfaction in the fear of God. Both of them
putting the word satisfaction in place of the word sanctification, used by the
Apostle. Was there any great sanctity showed by them in this? or rather, are
they not bound to make satisfaction unto the Apostle for this their bad
dealing, think you?

Your Bishop Gardener ( D. Fulk in his defense of Translations against Martin,
Answ. to the preface, nu. 4.
some say) to prove the carnal presence which you maintain against the truth
and us, alleges these as the words of the 110. Psalm, Escam se dedit
timentibus cum, He gave himself for meare to them that feared him. Was ^ ere
any fear of God in your Bishop to add the word se, himself, of himself to
the text, think you?

Your lib. de Imag. cap. 12.
Cardinal Bellarmine, to prove that holy things may be religiously worshipped,
alleges th^se as the words of God, Exodus 12. 16. Dies prima eri sancta, and
septima eadem religione venerabilis: The first day shall be holy, and the
seventh day with li^^e religion shall be venerable; descanting upon them thus,
Hic vides pro eodem ac^ipi rem sanctam, and religiose venerabitem, yet the word
religiose is not in the text, but the word festiustate. Now I pray you, was it
not irreligiously done of your Cardinal, to chop into the Text the word
religiously falsely?

Your Epist. ad Alboinum de Caelibacu Eccles. Col. 75. qu^^ hab^tur ad finem,
To 2 defer. Bell. per Gretserum.
Bernaltus a Priest of Constance, writing in defense of Gregory 7. his
prohibition of Priests marriage, affirms, that S. Peter commanded even the
Laity (1. Pet. 3.) vt parcant vxoribus suis, ne impediantur orationes earum,
that they should forbear companying with their wives, lest their prayers
should be interrupted: whereas in Saint Peter there are no such words as vt
parcant vxoribus, they should forbear companying with their wives. Did not
this Priest of yours deserve to be accompanied with whores, who forged this
Text to prove, that a man may not keep company with his wife?

Your Lib. supra cit. cap. 58 de spe and orat. fol. 189.
Cardinal Hosius, and your Loc. com. lib. 7. cap. 3. fol, 232.
Bishop Canus, in way of prooving that we may believe in Saints, allege the
words of Saint Paul to Philemon, Gratias ag^ Deo meo, audiens fidem quam habes
in Domin^ nostro, and in omnes Sanctes: I give thanks to my God, hearing of the
faith which thou have in the Lord Jesus, and in all Saints; leaving out the
word charitatem, love or charity, which the Apostle coupled with the word
fidem, faith: meaning, love or charity should be referred to the Saints, as
the object of it; and the word faith to the Lord Jesus, as his object. Was
there any love or charity in these toward the Apostle, who suppressed the
mention of that love toward the Saints, which he commended in Philemon? or is
it safe, I do not say to believe in, but to believe such saints as these, who
cite the Scriptures so divel-like, leaving out, as the devil did Math. 4. what
made against him?

Your Sess. 11. To. 4. Conc. Edit. Binniana, page 639.
pope Leo 10. affirmed in the Council of Lateran, that Christ ordained Peter
and Peter's successors to be his Vicars; who by the testimony of the book of
Kings, must needs be so obeyed, that he who obeys them not, must dye the
death. In what book of Kings, I pray you, find you this? for there is no such
testimony in those books of the Kings which are in my Bible.

Your Lib. 1. de Parg. cap. 3.
Cardinal Bellarmine (to return to him again) in way of prooving Purgatory,
alleges these as the words of the Prophet Esa, Chap. 4. 4. Purgabit Dominus
sordes filiorum and filiarum Sion, and sanguinem emundabit de medio eorum,
spiritu iudicij and combustionis: Our Lord shall purge away the filthiness of
the sons and daughters of Sion, and shall wipe away the blood from the midst
of them with the spirit of judgment and burning. Yet in the vulgar Latin
(which he is bound by oath to follow) the words lie thus; Si abluerit Dominus
sordes filiorum and filiarum Sion, and sanguinem Jerusalem lauerit de medio
eius in spiritu ardoris and iudicij. Why (I pray you) did he change the word
abluerit into purgabit, and the word lauerit into emundabit, and the word
ardoris into combustionis? was it not for that the words abluerit and laverit
and ardoris, suite not so well with fire, which you maintain to be found in
Purgatory; as the words purgabit, emundabit and Combustionis do? or what else
was the cause that he varied from his Text? And how can you excuse him from
perjury?

This same Lib. 4. de Christ. cap 11.
Cardinal of yours, in way of proving that Christ brought souls out of
Purgatory when he descended thither (as you dream) after his death, alleges
these as the words of Zachary, Chap. 9. 11. Tu autem in sanguine testamenti
tui eduxisti vinctos tuos de lacu in quo non est aqua: But thou by the blood of
thy testament have brought out thy prisoners out of the Lake wherein there is
no water. Yet in the vulgar Latin it is not eduxisti, have brought forth, but
emisisti, have sent forth: which will not afford the like conclusion.

Again, this Lib. 2. de Iustif. cap 3.
Cardinal of yours, to prove that inherent righteousness is the formal cause
of our justification, alleges these as the words of S. Paul, Tit. 3. 5. Cum
apparuit benignitas and humanit as Saluatoris nostri Dei, non ex operibus quae
fecimus nos, sed secundum suam misericerdiam saluos nos fecit, etc. When the
bountifulness and love of God our Savior appeared, not by the works which we
had done, but according to his mercy he saved us, etc. Yet the Apostle says
not barely, Not by the works which we had done; but, Not by the works of
righteousness which we had done: excluding our good works, our inherent
righteousness from justification. And your Cardinal unrighteously leaves out
the word righteousness.

Your Vicar general to the Archbishop of Bononia, called De maiessate
militantis Eccles. l. 1. de Patriarch etc. par. 1. cap. 8. p. 227. edit. Vinet.
16 ^ 2.
Isidorus Mosconius, to prove that all Bishops owe extraordinary obedience to
your Pope, alleges these as the words of Cyprian, lib. 4. Epist. 9. Episcopi,
vti qui Apostolicae ordinationi subiacent, etiamei hanc reuerentiam debent, vt
singulis annis Apostolorum liminibus sese repraesentent: Bishops as persons
subject to Apostolical Ordination, owe this reverence to the Pope, that every
year they visit Rome. But I cannot find this in any edition of Cyprian.

De Tradit. part. 3. tit. de cultis Sanct. fol. 197.
Bishop Peresius, and the Antidagma Co'on. tit. de Invocat. sanct. fol. 36. b.
Praebendaries of Colen, to prove Invocation of Saints, allege these as the
words of S. Austin, de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 22. Hoc vsu ab initio traditum
tenemus, vt extra orationes quae in altari fiunt, etiam Deo dilectos sanctos,
contemplatione ^vnionis and communionis, quam cum Christo and nobiscum habent,
cum timore and deuotione erga Deum compellemus, at que vt pro nobis intercedant
invocemus. But I cannot find this in any Edition of S. Austin.

Your Lib. 2. s^nt. d. 11 a.
Peter Lombard to prove that every man has a good Angel to protect him, and
an evil. Angel to tempt him, alleges these as the words of Gregory, Quod
quisque bonum Angelum sibi ad custodiam deputatum, and vnum malum ad exercitium
habet. But I can find no such words in any Gregory's works, not in Naztau^^^,
not in Nyssenus, not in Gregory the Great.

Your Ta. 2. de Satraemen. cap. 83.
Wildensis disputing about Transubstantiation, alleges these as the words of
Lib 2. de corp^re and sanguius Domint.
Austin, Nec credendum est quod substantia panit vel vint remanent, sed panis
in corpus Christi, and vinum in sanguinem convertitur, (...) qualitatibus panis
and vtni remanentibus: Neither must we believe that the substance of bread and
winer emaineth, but the bread is turned into the body of Christ, and the wine
into his blood, the qualities of bread and wine remaining only. But I can
neither find such words, nor any such Treatise among S. Austins works.

The same To. 2. de Sacra. cap. 22.
waldensis prosecuting the same argument, alleges these as the words of Eeda
in a Treatise de mysterijs Miss^e: Ibi forma panis videtur, vbi substantia
panis non est: There the form of bread appears, where the substance of bread
is not. But I can neither find these words, nor any such Treatise among Bedaes
works.

Your lib. 1 de Purg cap. 6.
Cardinal Bellarmine, for proof of Purgatory, alleges these words of S.
Austin, de Civitate Dei, lib. 21. cap. 24. Talei constat ante iudicij diem per
poenas temporales, quas eorum spiritus patinntur, purgatos, aterni ignis
supplicijs non tradendos: It is certain that such men being purged with
temporal pains which their souls suffer before the day of judgment, shall
not be committed to the torment of everlasting fire* But there are no such
words to be found in the printed copre at Fr^b^rge Ann. 1494. nor in that of
Antwerp, 1576, nor in that of Paris 1586. nor in that of Basil. 1596. nor in
any written copy that I can hear of, either in the University Libratie at
Oxford, or elsewhere.

Your Pro^miall Annot before the Bible transla^ed by them into English, printed
1609.
Dowists to prove Tobith Judith, etc. Canonical, allege Council. Florent:
Instruct. Armen. Decret. 7. But there is no such Decree to be found in any
Edition of the Councels.

Lib. de To. Pon^. part. 1. cap. 1. page 23.
Isiedorus Mosconius the Vicar general spoken of before, to set out the
greatness of his Pope, tells us in sober sadness, that in Gonc. Nic and,
tempore Constant. mag. fuit terminatum, quod soli Romans Pont. nomen Pater patium
competeret, and Papa nomen alijs non con^t^ir^: It was decreed in the Council
of Nice, in the days of Constantine the great, that the title Father of
Fathers, should be given to the Bishop of Rome only, and that no man should be
called Pope but he. Yet there is no such Decree to be found in any Edition of
the Councels.

The same Ibid. page 23.
Monsieur, handling the same Argument, tells us* that In Council. Africae
legitur, quod to nomine Principis Sacerdotum solumm, ao Papa vteretur: It is
read in one of the Councels in Africa, that the Pope only should be called
Prince of Priests. Yet there is no such thing to be seen in any of the
Councels of Africa, which are in any Editions of the Councels.

Your Opuscul. contra cr^^tes G^^c^ram.
S. The of Aquin, to prove that your Pope has an universal Soveraigntie over
the whole Church of Christ, affirms, that in the Council of Chalcedon it was
decreed thus, si quis Episcopus pradicatur infom^s, liberum habeat potestatem
appellandi ad (...) Episcop^^ ^ntiqu^e Rome, quia habr^^us (...) loco Dei sit
ius discernendi Episcopi triminati inf^miam, secundum claues a Domino sibi
d^tas: If any Bishop be defamed, let him appeal freely to the Bishop of Rome,
because we have Peter for a father of refuge, and he alone has right with
freedom of power in the stead of God to judge and try the crime of a Bishop
defamed, according to the keys which the Lord did give him. But there is no
such to be found in the Council of Chalcedon, in any Edition of the Councels.

This In 4. sent. d. 24. Act. 2. q. 3.
Saint of yours, to prove that one Bishop is subject to another Bishop, etiam
iure di^in^, by Gods law, alleges these as the words of one of the Councels
kept at Constantinople, Veneramur secundum Scripturas etc. sanctissimum
antiquae Romae Episcopum primum esse and maximum Episcopor^m: We define,
according to the Scriptures, that the most holy Bishop of Rome shall be the
first and greatest of all Bishops. But that any Council of Constantinople did
define, that by Scripture the Bishop of Rome was the greatest of all Bishops,
it is not to be found in any Edition of the Councels.

Your Lib. 1. de Conc. cap. 19. and lib. 2. cap. 11.
Cardinal Bellarmine, to prove that your Popes Legates sat as Judges in the
general Council of Chalcedon, tells us that Ipsi sententiam definitiuam
proferunt in Dioscorum nomine Papae and totius Concilij Act. 3. his verbis,
Sanctissimu^ ^c beatissimus Papa caput vniversalis Ecclesiae* Leo, per nos
Legatos suos sanct a Synodo consentiente, Petri Apostoli praeditus dignitate,
qui Ecclesiae fundamentum, and petra fidei, and coelestis regni Ianitor
nuncupatur, Episcopali dignitate Dioscorum nudauit, and ab omni sacerdotali
opere fecit extorrem. They in the name of the Pope and the Council, delivered
the definitive sentence against Dioscorus, even in these words, Action 3. The
most holy and blessed Pope Leo head of the universal Church, by us his Legates,
with the consent of the holy Council, being endowed with Saints Peter's power,
(who is called the foundation of the Church, and rock of faith, the Porter of
heaven gates,) has deposed Dioscorus from his Bishoppricke, and restrained him
from all priestly functions. Yet there is no such definitive sentence to be
seen in any action of the Council of Chalcedone, wherein Leo is called Head of
the Universal Church, or said to be endowed with Saint Peter's power; or
wherein Peter himself is called the foundation of the Church, or Porter of
heaven gate.

Cardinal Bellarmine alleges the Council of Chalcedon, to prove lib. 2 de
Romans Pont Cap. 13.
the Popes Monarchy in general: and in particular he alleges it, to prove,
lib. 2. de Conc. Cap. 16.
That the Pope is head of the whole Church; and, Cap 17.
above general Counsels, etc. Yet he himself knew well enough, Lib. 2 de
Romans Pont. Cap. 18.
That the Council made a Canon, for the advancing of the Bishop of
Constantinople, contrary to the Popes liking: and that the Bishops thereat
would not revoke it, though his Legates labored it earnestly; yea, and he
himself also. Now I desire to know, whether it be credible, that Bellarmine
could indeed be persuaded, that that Council held the Bishop of Rome to be
an abso^ute Monarch, the head of the whole Church, a^boue general Counsels,
etc. which stood at defiance with the Pope: passing a Canon, contrary to his
liking? and maintaining it against him, notwithstanding all that he could do
to repeal it. In my conscience, Bellarmine contrary to his conscience,
alleged the Council of Chalcedon wittingly falsely, for the Popes supremacy.

The same Cardinal alleges Cyprian to prove, Lib. 2 de Romans Pont. Cap. 16.
the Popes Monarchy: and that Lib 1. de Conc. Cap. ^1.
he is Judge of all Controversies: and Lib. 4. de Not. Ecclesiae, Cap, 10.
that the whole brotherhood of Christians is to yield obedience to him: and
that the ancient Fathers held it always a note of the true Church to live in
friendship with him: and Lib. 4. de Romans Pont. Cap. 4.
that the Church of Rome cannot err. Yet he himself knew well enough, that
Lib. 2. de Conc.
though Cornelius Bishop of Rome with a Synod of all the Italian Bishops
decreed: k Lib. 4 de Romans Pout. Cup. 7.
That such as had been baptized by Heretics, should not be rebaptized: and
that Pope Stephen decreed the same afterward: requiring the observation of it
upon pain of excommunication: yet Cyprian held the contrary, and defended his
opinion stiffely, charging Stephen with error, pernicious error therein;
giving him many disgraceful words, such as, proud fellow, and peevish; making
no reckning of his threatenings, nor yielding to him so much as an hair
breadth. Now I desire to know, how Bellarmine could think it probable, that
he who took up his Pope so roundly, and vilified him so bluntly, and esteemed
of him so lightly, could be persuaded, that the Pope was absolute Monarch, an
infallible Judge of all Controversies: such a one, to whom all Christians
should cap and crouch: and with whom they should live in love. And if the
Church of Rome could not err, I am more then half afraid, that Bellarmine
knew his testimonies to be wrested: that in fighting against us, he fought
against his own conscience likewise.

It is acknowledged by Papists, that Suarez. in 3. part. Tho. q. 59. Art. 6*
sect. 6.
Qui opinantur animas hominum non iudicari in morte, nec praemium, nec poenam
recipi, sed reservari in abditis locis vsque ad iudiciu^ universal;
consequentrer dicunt, eas non purgari donec facta est generalis resurrectio.
They who are of opinion, that the souls of men receive not judgment of good,
or evil, at the time of their death; but are reserved in hidden places to the
day of doom: must by necessary consequent be of opinion, that such souls are
not purged before the day of doom: and by a second consequent, they cannot
hold popish purgatory. Yet Cardinal Bellarmine, who Lib. 1. de sanct. beatit.
Cap. 1.
knew well enough, that Tertullian was one of them who held, that all the
souls of the just are sequested in a by-place till the day of doom, where
they neither see God, nor enjoy blessedness: Lib. 1. de purg. Cap. 6.
alleges Tertullian for proof of popish purgatory: and though he Lib. 1. de
sanct. beatit. cap. 1. and 5.
knew likewise that Lactantius was one of them who thought, that the souls
both of just and unjust are in one place till the day of doom: yet Lib. 1. de
Purgat. cap 6.
he alleges him also for proof of his popish purgatory: Yea he alleges
Origin for his purgatory, Ibid.
though he himself Lib. 2. de Purgat. cap. 1.
knew, that Origens purgatory was for good and bad; out of which the bad, as
well as the good, should pass in tract of time into heaven: whereas bad men
go not to popish purgatory, but to hell directly, out of which there is no
redemption. Now I would gladly know whether in these allegations Bellarmines
hand and heart went together: or disagreed rather, as harp and harrow.

Seeing by the Church is meant the whole company of faithful peoople: I
desire to know, why the Papists in their common talk Ecclesia significat
principaliter Congregationem vniversalem fidelium, et inde dicitur Catholica:
i. vniversalis, nomen tamen istud vulgaris vsus restrinxit ad* Clerum. Gerson
3. part operum de Relig. profectione.
did appropriate it unto the Clergy only: And seeing in their common talk
they did appropriate it unto their Clergy only, I desire to know, why R^em
Annot. marg. Ephesians. 5. 23.
they should be angry with William Tyndall* for that in his translation of the
Bible, he translated the Latin word Ecclesia, not Church, but Congregation?
They having beguiled the people, and brought them into ignorance of the word,
making them to understand by it, nothing but the shaven-flocke: was there not
reason See Tindill in his Answer to Sir Tho. Mores Dialogues, Anno 1530.
that he should avoid that word, and use another equivalent to it?

By Scripture, any man professing Christian Religion, may be accounted
Religious. And why then do you Papists appropriate the name Religious to your
votaries only? Alciat. Comment. in Cod. Justin. de summa Trinitat et fide
Cathol.
Why are not you ashamed to say, Per summum abusum quilibet Christianus dicitur
Religiosus: It is a great abuse to call every Christian by the name Religious?

Seeing the word spiritual, is given in Scripture to all who have the Spirit
of God, as namely, 1 Cor. 15. and 3. 1. why have you popish Priests
appropriated that unto your selves,? Why should you only, and not the rest of
Gods people, be called spiritual men?

Seeing Lands and Living are expressly called by the Apostle carnal things:
as namely, 1 Cor. 9. 11. and Romans 15. 17. How comes it to pass, that the Lands
and Livings belonging to Monks and Friars, are ordinarily called spiritual
things?

You have a new Gamester, who has Anno 162^,
lately set us out az diminitiue book, in 32.
with this inscription: The Gagge of the new Gospel, containing a brief
abridgement of the errors of the Protestants of our times, with their
refutation by express texts of their own English Bible: with this Motto
subscribed, By thine own mouth I judge thee noughty servant, Luke 19. 22. Now
the first error where withal this youth charge us, is: That we maintain,
the Scriptures are easy to be understood. And yet he himself in his preface
to the Catholic Reader, Page 7.
would make his Reader believe, That our condemnation i^ so expressly set
down in our own Bibles, and is so clear to all the world, that nothing more
needs thereto, but only that he know to read, and to have his eyes in his
head at the opening of our Bible. Which argues plainly, that even in his
opinion, The Scriptures are easy to be understood: otherwise, besides
knowledge to read, and the having of his eyes in his head when he reads, it
were requisite he should have his wits about him* And may I not therefore say
to him, Thou art in excusable e m^n, whosoever thou art that iudgest, Romans 2. 1.
for in that thou iudgest another, thou iudgest thy self, for thou that
iudgest do the same things? Let him clear himself, or rather confess his
foolerie in this, and ere long I will do him the favor to set before his eyes
his fopperie in the rest.

FINIS.
Here follows the Letter of an unknown Priest, remaining in London, sent to
the Author, excepting against five points in this book.
To Mr. Alexander Cook at Leeds in Yorkshire.
MAster COOK, with the like desire of your spiritual good, as of mine own, I
address this brief letter unto you, in stead of larger answer to your book
now twice augmented: which in the first Impression you call: Work for a
Mass Priest: in the second, More Work for a Mass Priest: and in the third,
Yet more Work for a Mass Priest. All which shows your zeal against the
Roman Church, against the Sacrifice of Mass, and all the Roman Catholic
religion: but neither disproueth the same which you so hate, nor proves your
contrary opinions to be grounded in truth. Neither do you herein observe any
form or good method of doctrine, whereby to discuss which is the true Church
of Christ, what assurance of truth it has, nor how necessary it is, that
every one, which desires to be saved, must be a living member thereof: and
therefore no marvel that no Catholic has hitherto bestowed labor and cost
to answer in print your confused trivial objections. Which of how little
importance they are, and upon how silly surmises, you impute errors to the
Catholic Religion, may sufficiently be conceived by examination of a few of
them: For example, all proceeding from one spirit. See then, dear Sir, your
faults committed in your first objections; and so I shall suppose you will be
as loath to have the rest discussed, as I hold it superfluous to proceed
further in confuting them.

First, our noble King reports (say you) that his mother sent word to the
Archbishop who did baptize him, to forbear to use spittle in his baptism; for
she would not have a pockie Priest to spit in her childs mouth. Mark, I pray
you, four manifest untruths in these words. For His Majesty could not, at the
time of his baptism, know what message his mother sent to any man, but only
has heard since what some other has reported: therefore it is a manifest
untruth to say, His Majesty reports that, which he cannot, and therefore
does not report.

Secondly, it is incredible that the Catholic Queen would forbid the
ceremony of spittle, which holy Church uses.

Thirdly, it is doubtless a wicked lie, to say, that she called the Archbishop
a pockie Priest.

Fourthly, she could not say, and consequently would not say, that the Priest
spitteth into the childs mouth. For the spittle is not spit into the child's
mouth, but is gently put to his mouth with the Priests finger; which ceremony
holy Church uses, amongst others, by imitation of Christ's example, putting
spittle and dust upon a blind man's eyes, and putting his finger into the ears,
and touching the tongue of a deaf and dumb man whom he cured.

To these four, you add three more untruths in your first objection, against
the worthy Cardinal Bellarmine: first, you untruly translate his words, where
he says: Non est verum, ea ceremonia salivam Presbyteri in os infantuli
inspui: which words in true English are these: It is not true, that by that
ceremony the Priests spittle is spit into the childs mouth: for which you
would make him to say thus: It is not true, that the Priests spittle used in
Baptism is put into the childs mouth.

Secondly, you untruly charge him to deny that spittle is put into a childs
mouth, for he denies it not to be put, but to be spit into the mouth of the
baptized.

Thirdly, you untruly conclude that the Cardinal calls his Majesty's report
into question, which he does not, but their report that told his Majesty so
incredible a thing.

In your next objection you untruly charge the same renowned Cardinal
Bellarmine to contradict both our noble King, and Pope Pius Quintus. For
neither does he name our King in those words which^your self here cite,
saying only in general: Non est verum, nomen Cardinalis ademptum alijs, and
solis Romany reservatum: It is not true that the name of Cardinal is taken
from others, and reserved only to Romans. Neither does he contradict the
Popes decree, the tenure whereof declares, that the eminent and proper title
of Cardinal belongs to the only Cardinals College of Rome, and not to any
other Church. Nevertheless, the name Cardinal in a less dignity, and less
authority, is given to other Ecclesiastical persons in the Church of Toledo:
whose Archbishop, and also the Archbishop of Compostella, are ordinarily
Cardinals of Rome.

In your third objection you charge the same gracious Cardinal with a lie, for
saying: Nefas est apud Protestants quenquam creari Episcopum, nisi vnius
saltem vxoris virum: which he reports as their general practice according
to their common doctrine, not allowing the vow and obligation of single life.
And albeit some of your Bishops do not marry, yet they do not bind
themselves from marrying. And the far greater part have taken wives, the rest
hold it unlawful to vow perpetual chastity.

In your fourth, you charge all Catholics with untruth, for saying, that all
the Apostles were continent from their wives, after they followed Christ; which
is clearly gathered by our Saviors words, naming wives amongst other things,
which his Apostles had left for his sake. Against which clear testimony you
oppose improbabilitie, as you imagine, that Saint Peter's daughter could not be
beautiful at the age of sixty eight years, to wit, in the ninety eight year
of Christ. But perhaps there is an error in the number, and for ninety eight
should have been written the sixty eighth year of our Lord: and then she was
but thirie eight years of age. Also she might be fair and beautiful at sixty
eight years of age, which is more reasonable to be supposed then to deny the
plain assertion of the Gospel, Mat. 19. 27*
that the Apostles left all things for Christ's service, and namely their wives.
By the way also observe, that Saint Peter's daughter dwelt and died in Rome,
where Count Flaccus a Roman desired to marry her; which is a sign of Saint
Peter's residing there sometimes, besides many more evident proofs and
monuments testifying the same.

In your fifth objection you would prove that all notable Bishops did not live
continent from their wives whom they had married before Priesthood, by the
words of Saint Gregory Nazianzen, bringing in his father in a verse, saying
thus unto him: Nondum tot anni sunt tui, quotiam in sacris mihi peracti sunt
victimis; Thou have not yet so many years as are passed with me in holy
sacrifices. Which must either be understood in some other sense, then of the
years of Saint Gregory's age, or else it should be contrary to his clear
affirmation, saying in his funeral oration, that himself was borne before his
father was either Priest or baptized. And so being reasonable to interpret his
verse by his proof, this instance will not serve your turn. But it shows
evidently, that his father was a sacrificing Priest. And such are Mass Priests
whom you so contemn, because we offer the holy sacrifice of Mass.

And this may suffice to show by example of your five first objections how
feeble and frivolous the rest also are. And therefore Mass priests are
employed in better works then to lose good time in answering your idle
questions: And your self may be better occupied in seeking the true Church,
and the infallible authority thereof, and so returning into the same, may save
your soul, which I wish you to do with all my hears. From London this Feast
of Corpus Christi. 1623.

Yours to serve you in Jesus Christ, Th. Bl. a Mass Priest.

Now come we to the answer of the said letter, returned unto the Priest
within twelve days after the receipt thereof.
SIR Mass Priest, I received the letter which you (as you phrase it) addressed
unto me, in stead o^ larger answer unto a book of mine, entitled: Yet more
Work for a Mass Priest. In which letter you tax me in general, with
confusion of matter, with want of form and good Method; with proposing feeble,
and frivolous, and trivial objections, and idle questions; with imputing
errors to your Catholic Religion upon silly surmises; with failing in proof
of my own opinions, and disprooving yours: All which I pass over as words of
Course, holding opinion; That general and naked accusations of adversaries,
deserve not so much as general and naked denialls: the rather, for that you
show a great deal of simplicity, and ignorance, in the particulars, wherein
you undertake to let me see my faults committed: for I take it no breach of
charity, to think, that he has nothing to say for proof of his general
assertions, who says nothing to purpose for proof o^ his special.

Now that you have nothing to say to purpose for proof of your special
accusations against me, I doubt not to make it plain to your own self,
though forestalled with prejudice. For thus at the first rush you bring me in
saying: Our Noble King reports, that his mother sent word to the Archbishop who
did baptize him, to forbear to use spittle in his Baptism, for she would not
have a pockie Priest to spit in her childs mouth. And presently you cry:
Mark, I pray you, four mainfest untruths in these words: yet the proofs
you make thereof are ridiculous: for in way of proving the first, thus you
argue; His Majesty could not at the time of his Baptism know what Message his
Mother sent to any man, but only has heard since what some other has
reported. Therefore it is a manifest untruth to say, His Majesty reports,
His mother sent word to the Archbishop, etc.

Which Argument of yours is brainelesse; for it presupposes, that no man can
report any thing from the report of another. No man can report any thing which
was done about the time of his Birth, and Baptism; much less before he was
baptized, and borne. If this Argument of yours be good, I cannot report what
lascivious talk passed between an English woman, and Aeneas Sylvius (who not
long after was poped, and called by the name of Pius 2.) in an Inn at
Strawsburgh, where they casually met: I cannot report, how he wished her, when
she went to bed, to leave her chamber door vnbolted, promising he would come
and lie with her, as indeed he did: she proving with child upon that nights
meeting: I cannot report, that this Aeneas Sylvius committed the bringing up of
that child thus begotten, to his father, wondering that his father was not glad,
that by it (though got in whoring) he was made a grandfather: for at the time
of my Baptism, I knew no more of this, then his Majesty at the time of his
Baptism knew what Message his Mother sent to any man. Only I have heard since,
what some other, or rather, what Aeneas Sylvius himself has Epist. 15
Genitori de suo filio, inter opera Sylvij, impress. Basil. page 510, 511.
written hereof.

At the time of my Baptism, I knew not that any man had written, Ioh. Raulins
ser. 31. de poeni. tentia, impress. Paris. 1514.
Qui sunt Romae, et prope loca in quibus habentur magnae Indulgentiae, and vbi
sunt mag^^a peregrinagia, quia prope remedia habent, communiter sunt pessimi:
That they who dwell at Rome, and near unto such places where large Indulgences
are granted, and whereunto there is greatest resort of Pilgrims, are commonly
the worst people, because they have so present remedies. I knew not at the time
of my Baptism, that any man had written, Molinaeus test Gregorio Capuccino in
Enchirid. Eccles. impress. Venetij* 1588.
Quam periculosum Principi habere Consiliarios Papisticos: It is very dangerous
for Princes, to have popish Counselors. I knew not then that any was so evil
conceited of the Romans, that they should write, Salvianus Massil. Episcopus
de gubernat. Dei lib. 6.
Vbi Romani, ibi vitia: where Romans come, there is roguerie enough. Only
since I have heard, or rather read so much in others. And therefore if your
Logic be good, I cannot report these things: he, who (though I told them)
should say, I did report them, should say a manifest untruth. But if this be a
gross conceit (as doubtless it is) you must acknowledge you did me wrong, yea
your self wrong, in charging me with untruth: for saying, Our Noble King
reports, etc. though he knew not at the time of his Baptism what Message she
sent to any man, etc. for therein you belied me, and bewrayed much weakness in
arguing.

But perhaps you have quit your self better in proving the second untruth
wherwithall you charge me.

Truly never a whit: for you gather the untruth wherewith you charge me, from
those words, wherein I report from our Noble King, That his Mother forbad the
use of spittle in Baptism: and your only reason to convince me of untruth
therein is, for that (as you say) it is incredible the Catholic Queen would
forbid the Ceremony of spittle which holy Church uses. Which answer first
presupposes, that he is chargeable with untruth, who reports any untruth from
another: else how can I be charged with untruth, who am the reporter only
from another man what was said? Secondly, this presupposes, that holy Church
uses to put spittle into their mouths who are baptized: else, why should the
practice of holy Church be mentioned to prove that a Catholic Queen would
not forbid such a Ceremony? But these are false suppositions; for which
concerns the first: That every man is not chargeable with untruth who reports
an untruth, it is plain by Scripture, wherein many untruths are truly
reported. As for example, Genesis 37. 33, Moses truly reports that Jacob said, A
wicked beast had devoured his son Joseph: though indeed it was untrue that a
wicked beast had devoured Joseph. Secondly, that holy Church, your holy Church,
uses not to put spittle into their mouths who are to be baptized, all your
books, which speak of the Ceremonies used in Baptism at this day, generally
do witness: but especially your Cardinal Bellarmine; for he says
expressly, Apolog. pro (...) sua ad magnae (...) Brit. Rege^, cap. 7^*
that solum aures and nares saliva tanguntur: the ears and nostrills only are
touched with spittle in Baptism. Neither he, nor any other writer in this
age, knew of any spittle, which was put into the mouths of such as were to be
baptized. And therefore the second untruth, which you would fasten on me,
returns upon your self, accompanied with Arguments proceeding from a little
head.

And so will the third untruth wherewithal you charge me, return likewise:
for it consists in this, that I say, Our noble King reports, his Mother said
she would not have a pockie Priest to spit in her childs mouth. Which, as you
say, (but prove not) is doubtless a wicked lie. For to suppose it were a
wicked lie (which I believe not) what is that to me? It is true I say, Our
noble King reports it. If there were an untruth in it, yet I should be innocent
of it. But why Sir Mass Priest, are you so confident, that it is doubtless a
wicked lie, she called him a pockie Priest? I hope you doubt not, but that your
Church, notwithstanding her holiness, has had many pockie Priests: and
perhaps she knew more by him then either you or I: Sure I am, that his
Majesty's grandfather (who as some of you say was a Catholic) hanged him
within a few years after for an arrant Traitor: And if an arrant Traitor, why
not a pockie Priest? And if he being a Catholic hanged him; why might not she
(though a Catholic) call him pockie Priest?

The fourth untruth wherewithal you charge me is, That I say our noble King
reports, his Mother said, the Priest spitteth in the childs mouth; for she
could not say so, and con^equently would not say so, say you: whereof you give
this reason, viz. That the spittle is not spit into the childs mouth, but is
gently put into the childs mouth with the Priests finger.

In this, Sir Priest, you show your self a young Priest, and one of little
skill in your Pontificalls, and of small practice in your profession: for at
this day, and in those Countries, there is no spittle put into any child's mouth
by any manner of way, as before I noted: though if it were as you say, my
credit is no way tainted by this, for I only relate it as from our King, in
whose book you may find it.

Here by the way you take occasion to tell, how your holy Church uses this
Ceremony by Imitation of Christ's example, putting spittle and dust upon a
blind man's eyes, and putting his finger into the ears, and touching the tongue
of a deaf and dumb man whom he cured.

Which note you might more honestly have passed by, then made, considering it
bewrays a great deal of foolerie in your holy Church. For is it not foolerie
to use your spittle in baptizing, because our Savior Christ with his spittle
made a kind of clay, by which he miraculously cured a man that was blind? Is
it not foolerie, to touch with your spittle the ears and nostrills of such as
are to be baptized; because our Savior Christ touched the ears and the
tongue of one whom he cured of deafness and dumbness with his spittle? Is
your spittle answerable to his spittle? Is there any wisdom, in applying that
to spiritual uses, which he applied only to corporal? to do that
ordinarily, which he did only once extraordinarily? to do that to every one,
which he did to one only? To omit, that notwithstanding your show of
imitating him, you neither use Clay in Baptism, nor touch the tongue of the
baptized, as he touched the tongue of the dumb. Methinkes this your imitation
is Apish: certainly you have no warrant for it from antiquity: the holy
primitive Church knew no such Ceremony in Baptism. Wherefore I subscribe to
him who said, Your spittle is fitter for the Spittle, then for the Church. And
let this serve for answer unto the first four untruths which you thought you
did see, but did not see, in the first words of my first objection as you call
it.

To the four former untruths, you say, I have added three more against
Bellarmine. The first whereof is, that I untruly translate his words, making
him say thus: It is not true, that the Priests spittle used in Baptism is put
into the childs mouth: Whereas he says no more in true English then: It is
not true, the Priests spittle is spit into the Childs mouth.

But this is one of your fooleries, and no untruth of mine: My translation of
his words is answerable to his meaning; for he fansied no difference between
spitting in, and putting in of spittle: He knew no use of spittle for any
part, but for ears and Nostrills. Solum aures and nares saliva tanguntur,
says your Cardinal.

And the answer which I make to this supposed untruth, may seem to clear me
from the next untruth, wherewithal you charge me: If so be there be any
difference between the one, and the other, which my wit serves me not to see.
For, secondly you say, you untruly charge him to deny, that the spittle is put
into a child's mouth, for he denies it not to be put* but to be spit into the
mouth of the baptized. For, if solum aures et nares tanguntur saliva, then
spittle is neither spit in, or put in.

The third untruth against Bellarmine wherewithal you charge me is, I untruly
conclude, the Cardinal calls his Majesty's report into question, which he
does not, but their report who told his Majesty so incredible a thing.

To which I answer, That his Majesty reporting all that I report from him,
without any intimation, that he had it by information of others, (though no
doubt he had it from others) your Cardinal answering thereto says, Non est
verum etc. Its not true etc. Which argues your Cardinal calls his Majesty's
report into question, and no other persons: for there is no mention in your
Cardinals words of any third person. And so of the seven untruths wherewithal
you charge me, you have not proved one.

In my second objection, as you call it, you say: I untruly charge your
Cardinal with contradicting both our Noble King and Pope Pius Quintus. And
first in way of proving, that your Cardinal did not contradict our Noble King,
you tell me: that he names not our King in the words I cite, saying only in
general: Non est verum, nomen Cardinalis alijs ademptum, ac solis Romany
reseruatum. It is not true that the name of Cardinal is taken from others, and
reserved only to Romans.

In rendering which reason you show your self a strange man, in that you
require to the contradiction of one another a particular naming of the person
contradicted. You affirm I made seven untruths in my first instance; I say,
not naming you, but speaking in general, yet answering you: Non est veru^,
etc. It is not true, that I made seven untruths. Do not I* for all the
generality of my speech, contradict you? Now such is the case of our King, and
your Cardinal; our King says, that the title of Cardinal, Priests and
Deacons, is restrained only to the Parish Priests and Deacons of Rome: your
Cardinal answering thereto says, Non est verum, etc. Does not your Cardinal
contradict his Majesty, though he name him not? I am sure he denies that to
be true, which his Majesty affirms to be true, and is not that to
contradict him?

In way of proving that I untruly charge your Cardinal with contradicting the
Popes decree, you tell me: That the tenure of your Popes decree declares that
the eminent and proper title of Cardinal belongs to the only Cardinals
College of Rome, and not to any other Church: Nevertheless the name Cardinal
in a less dignity, and less authority, is given to other Ecclesiastical
persons in the Church of Toled^.

But the words cited in my book, are too pregnant to be avoided with such a
watrish distinction, of eminent, and less eminent Cardinals. For the Author
having noted that some Churches, besides the Roman, had certain Prebends
which were called Cardinals, as namely, Compostella, Ravenna, Millan, and
Naples: and there were two sorts of Cardinals, viz. Papae, and Episcoporum;
some made by the Pope, some by Bishops; does thereupon take occasion to make
mention how Pius quintus in su^ diplomate hoc nome^ in omnibus alijs Ecclesiis
praeterqua^ in To. extinxit, and solu^ Cardinalis nome^ co^petere voluit
Cardinalibus S. R. E. a Papa creatis. By which is plain, Pius 5. cried down
all Cardinals which were not of the Popes making, and by consequent which were
not Cardinals of the Church of Rome; He decreed that none but Cardinals of the
Church of Rome, should be called so in proper, or improper sense.

In the next instance, which you call my third objection, you say I charge your
Cardinal with a lie, for saying: Nefas est, etc. The Protestants hold it an
heinous offense to make any man a Bishop, who is not at least the husband of
one wife. But you clear him not from lying. Only you tell me, that he
reports that, as the Protestants general practice; according to their common
doctrine, not allowing the vow and obligation of single life: meaning, he so
said of Protestants, because they generally teach, that it is not safe to vow
to live unmarried.

Which is a poor defense of him, for it is one thing to teach, that it is not
safe to vow to live unmarried: and another thing to say, that of necessity a
man must marry. We teach, Clergy men may marry, they need not vow against
marrying: but we teach not, that Clergy men must marry. This was Vigilantius
error, if Ierom misreport him not: from which we are cleared by your Masters
of Rhemes, Annot. in 1 Timothy 3. 2. and by our practice, for, as I have noted in
my book, we have at this present, and had heretofore, many wiue-les Bishops.

Neither makes it any thing to your purpose, that the far greater part have
taken wives; and that all hold it unlawful to vow perpetual chastity, for
that is not the point wherewithal Bellarmin charge us, and for which his
charging of us, I think he deserves the Whetstone.

In my fourth Instance, you say, I charge all Catholics with untruth, for
saying, That all the Apostles were continent from their wives after they
followed Christ. Wherein you say truly, for indeed I charge them so. But you
cannot answer my Argument, whereby I convince them of untruth. Only you say,
that perhaps Petronilla (upon whose age my Argument is grounded) was but
thirty eight years of age, and not sixty eight, as I say, when Count
Flaccus, doted on her for her beauty, there being an error in the number: but
to prove an error in the number, you neither give reason, nor cite Author,
which argues your Answer is conceited.

Oh, but if I may believe you, your Catholic assertion is clearly gathered
by our Saviors words, naming wives among other things which his Apostles had
left for his sake. And therefore my Argument though probable is not to be
believed.

The Apostles left their houses, as well as their wives; for they left all,
says Saint Peter, Mat. 19. 27. yet they kept their property in their houses
still: else how is it written Math. 8. 14. That Jesus came to Peter's house: and
Ioh. 19. 27. That John took the virgin Mary home unto him: and that Matthew
Luke 5. 29. made our Savior a great feast in his own house, even after it is
written of him, that he left all and followed Christ* Now, if they might keep
their houses, notwithstanding their leaving all, why not their wives also?
unless you can show they were more strictly tied to their houses, then to
their wives.

Again, the forsaking of all, and in special of wives, whereof our Savior
speaks Math. 19. 29, is such a forsaking, as is required of all Christians:
for our Savior having told his Apostles what reward they should have for
forsaking all: he goes on, showing that not only they, but all such as leave
their wives for his names sake, should be bountifully rewarded. But you dare
not say, that all Christians are so to forsake al, as that ever after they must
live continent from their wives.

Thirdly, the forsaking of all, commended by our Savior, implies forsaking of
brethren, and children, as well as of wives, Math. 19. 29. And yet it binds
not men to refuse (when occasion serves) performance of Offices and kindness
to their brethren, and children. And why then should it restrain men from
performance of husbandly Offices and kindness to their wives, in time and
place?

The truth is, men are not bound to forsake all, except they cannot keep them
with performance of their duty to God: they are not to forsake the lawful use
of such things as they have, unless the enioyment of them may hinder them in
Gods service. Now what can living with a man's wife, hinder a man in Gods
service, seeing the bed is undefiled? Heb. 13. 7.

In my fifth objection (as you call it) I would prove, you say, That all
Bishops did not live continent from their wives whom they had married before*
Priesthood. And in this you speak truly. But to my Argument fetched out of
Gregory Nazianzens discourse in verse of his own life, to prove my assertion,
you answer weakly. For to the words which I allege, importing plainly: that
Gregory Nazianzen had not lived so many years (much less Caesarius his
younger brother) as his father Gregory had lived a Bishop: you answer only,
That he clearly affirms in his funeral Oration, That himself was borne
before his father was either Priest or baptized, which you can never prove. He
made one Oration, at the funeral of his father: an other, at the funeral of
his brother Caesarius: a third, at the funeral of his sister Gorgonia: a
fourth, at the funeral of his friend Saint Basil. Do me the favor to write
me out the words, wherein he so clearly affirms that which you say, and let
me know in which of these funeral Orations I may find them. In the mean, I
rest persuaded there is no such thing. In which persuasion I am the more
confident, To. 6. de ha^re. Ca. 40.
because S. Austin witnesses, that even in his time, the Catholic Church had
many both Clergy men, and Monks, who lived with their wives like married men.
And we read, Socrat. Hist. lib. ^ Cap. 8.
it was agreed upon in the first Nicen Council, That it should be left to every
Clergy man's choice, whether he would forbear, or keep company with his wife
to whom he was married.

And thus, Sir Priest, you have my Reply to your Priestly Answer: which I
desire you to weigh with indifferency, if you have any fa^^lty in this kind of
Controversiall (...), whereof I find no show in this your Answer. Else* you
may think your own thoughts, and follow your own courses; and do well to
leave these disputes to quicker wits, and to such as have been trained up in
these studies: for doubtless, by such scribblements as this you sent me, you
will never give any of your own friends, nor any of my opinion, any
reasonable satisfaction. And so vvishing the salvation of your soul, with
like affection you seem to vvish mine, I rest,

Yours, so far forth as you are Gods and the Kings: ALEXANDER COOK.

FINIS.

