THE MIRACVLOVS AND HAPPY Union of England and Scotland; by how admirable
means it is effected; how profitable to both Nations, and how free of any
inconvenience either past, present, or to be discerned.



LONDON Imprinted for Edward Blount.

1604.

To his loving Countrymen.
IF Events be the certainest and least suspected Counselors as they that
cannot look but like themselves: for their sakes I hope to be accepted, and
for their sakes to have so much of the privilege of an historian as to be
allowed to speak truth; which if it carries no other then it own beauty, call
it not a fault, since thereby I give you proof I desire not to steal your
opinions with inticements. I have delivered you the last Time, and This; that
out of the experience of both, you may frame the succeeding. I have spoken them
truly, because it is fit you should see them in their nakedness, for to judge by
them is to know them without colors. Lastly I have touched, (though not near
to the life) the admirable happiness of this Island in our Prince; A Prince whose
virtues give luster to his authority, and that authority to his actions; so as
he needs not the pruiledge of his fortune, since all his performances are able
to stand upon their own force, needing neither countenance nor power to give
them reputation. Amongst his virtues I have showed his vprightnes, that
lighted by that great example, you may be free from all partialities. Thus
have I performed the duty I owe to you, and my Country, I know honestly: if
you think so my reward is the fuller. Free I am from hiding a corrupted will
under another pretense; And as I have finished this epistle without mingling it
with salutations or excuses, so have I passed through the bounds of my
purpose, wooing no one but all, and all without any other advocate but truth,
the colors under which all honest spiritts and good Common-wealthes-men ought
to venture themselves. And so not doubting but the same mind that is truly
inclined to the good of his country will allow my intent and pardon my errors,
I rest.

The humble servant of all true Patriottes.

The miraculous and happy Union of England and Scotland; by how admirable
means it is effected; how profitable to both Nations, and how free of any
Inconvenience, either past, present, or to be discerned.
THe end of knowledge, is acknowledgement, for since we can look upon nothing
that is not derived from God, and that bears not a testimony of his power
and goodness, gratitude must follow understanding, if not to recompense, yet
to witness the feelings of his benefits. From this consideration (loving
Countrymen) I have presumed to offer you this Treatise. We have all fealt, I
doubt not the mercy of God in this late happy and admirable alteration, and I
hope not alone fealt it with our bodies, but our minds; for to have so great a
benefit, from so great a power, rewards the mind with such a satisfaction as
earth cannot give. What you have thought, pardon me though I presume to
speak, since my end is not to challenge any superiority, but to prevent (if my
end may be as happy as my purpose) the incident diseases of human
prosperity. My project is then the greatness of this blessing, and not alone the
blessing, but to oblige us the more; the consideration by what unexpected
means, and how much beyond either the common course of things, or the strength
of man it is effected. Next how free it is from all the inconveniences incident
to the common alterations or augmentations of Empires: and lastly since it is
above the course of nature, or the ordinary disposition of things, being full
of profit without either danger or former hazardes, that like adiuine and
supernatural blessing we entertain and use it. Thus far goes the scope of
my intent, destinating my labors to be the servants of your memory, for which
I desire no other recompense, but your own happy and just proceedings, taking
the adventure of your acceptance, and leaving unto you the glory of so great an
action, as the due of those progressions that are performed with just and
unspotted minds.

This realm having a long time labored in the prevention of dangers, and
enjoying an outward rather then inward peace, like a body that fetches all
the health from Physic, and was of late years come to that weakness, as in
a short space had she continued in her course her preuentions had proved
vain. For the advantage of others disagreement was by agreement taken from us,
our treasure spent, our soldiers of experience consumed, the subjects purse
emptied, and in fine, like a ship that had thrown out her goods to save her
carcass, we floated with our lives rather repriued then saved.

In the mean time, and in all this time, this realm resisted none of her
griefs by a natural course, which is by her own strength, but being rather
feathers then wings, neither the glory nor profit was hers, but our blood and
treasure, was the medicine of our suspected constitution.

It is necessary I bring you thus far back (good Countrymen) as well because
man knowing nothing in his original, cannot judge singlie; but by coupling
contrarieties, sees the difference by the effects: as also feeling your
prosperity and from whence it comes, you may loose the sight of no part of
this blessing. Now may you perceive the nature of it, and the greatness, that
from a weakened and almost breathless state, is come to be the most opulent,
strong and entire Empire of the world. What shall we call it? no natural name
can express it, it is a miracle; Take up thy bed and walk. It is a miracle
in the cure, it is no less in the means; for if the marriages of Princes, the
issue of Princes, the prayers of men, the plottes of our Enemies, or the
Iealosies of greatness, could have hindered it, England had not been happy. We
had yet labored under the burden of a torn and dismembered kingdom. How
much the resisting these impediments, passes the common course of nature every
Judgment may easily discern: but we have yet but half the sight. A midst all
these courses swaied by Ambition, and unjust Iealosies, behold our Prince,
provoked by all means; and by some where his patience might be called in
question, suffering all, enduring the plots of his enemies against his right,
his person against their malice, he withstood all their hates with his love,
his love to this his country made him suffer his wrongs, and where the hot
ambition of some Princes, would easily have covered the inuading of this
Kingdom, under the revenging of his wrongs, and the fear of filling it with
the horrible effects of civil wars was a curb to his just mislikes, choosing
himself to feel wrong, rather then they should.

Surely if we consider this truly, we shall find the obligation we are bound
in to the divine power, no less strong here, then in the rest. For if the
resisting wrong be a warrant of nature to the simplest creatures, and that
there is nothing more opposite to every disposition; how much more in Kings,
unto whom God has given both power and authority to judge and punish injuries
and wrongs? So that for the good of this land, he has not alone resisted the
prouocations of flesh and blood, but a liberty, for a more pleasing color and
stronger excuse, no Prince ever had to make war upon another. Thus you see
the strange and miraculous passages of former times, from how admirable
proceedings your safety is derived, but behold another part of your blessing.
You buie not your peace, your plenty, your strength, your happiness, no it is
given you, for whereas your safties abroad might have bin purchased, with a
Prince that might have line heavy upon you at home, and by exactions have but
excha^ged your burdens from your shoulders to your hearts, you are blessed
with one, that in his whole life, has approved the happiness of the subject and
the flourishing of his Kingdom to be his chief contentments. For otherwise,
who would have endured the slander of a just title, the death of his friends,
the plots against his person, but he only that valueth justice and a common
preservation above any human provocation, or ambitious enticements.

We have now heard how much we are blessed and by how strange and
extraordinary mean, and more, that we enjoy all this without any
inconuenince, either passed or to be discerned. Let us then examine what the
alteration and augmentation of this kingdom has done. Insomuch as all changes
are Earthquakes to a State, shaking the very foundation of government; and
augmentations and increases, are never unaccompanied of present dangers, and
future burdens. To examine this by history, behold the Auntients, where for
the passing of simple laws, the whole body of the commonwealth, labored
between life and confusion. And in those changes where reformation and
amendment bare the name, yet did they never alter without hazard, the medicine
being as dangerous as the disease. How different is this from ours, where the
Axeltree or uphold of our commonwealth being changed, we rather heard of it,
then fealt it; or if we fealt it, it was the comfort of it. What vproare was
there? what confusion? what surfeit of the former government brake out (the
inseparable accident of an Interraigne) what factions? what misorders of
discontented and desperate persons? but on the contrary as men expecting a
wonder, a general quietness possessed the whole land, and as it were inspired
with the age to come, gave over the care of their own mislikes to the general
redresser, and all the different humors nourished either by former griefs, or
this long expected day, grew in an instant to be turned to the general good,
and to prepare an entertainment for the elected both by God and man, both by
his title and virtues. In a word, never was Prince received with so general
an applause, nor was there ever Prince that deserved better of us: for laying
by the justness of his own title, the remembrance of his sufferings (which to
another nature would have been accounted an earning of this kingdom) the need
we had of him, the testimonies given to the whole world of his abilities for
government, laying by these considerations, he has been yet content to
acknowledge the love of his subjects; and not alone to acknowledge it in
words, but to assure them of it, he has not respected his private gain,
beyond their profits: To this end has he abolished Monopolies and other
prerogatives of the Crown, rather then to let his subjects feel any
greeuance, though he might have kept them without any color of mislike, being
to him inheritances no exactions. But his love to us will not permit excuses,
but on all sides shows he will perform the office of a King, without
mingling it with the Iusts of man. But this is but one; on all sides appear
actions of the same quality; how has he of late, to give us yet more
testimonies of his love, taken offenders of the highest nature out of the hands
of Justice and given them mercy? Whereno excuse, no private petitions, no not
where mercy it self (being governed by her own nature) could have entreated
it; For our sakes they live, and for our sakes, against the rules either of
law, justice, or policy. Let us behold these parts with a true
consideration, and we shall find never people had so infinite blessings laid
before the^. For whereas it has bin too common amongst some Princes, to esteem
handsome colors good payment for subjects: our Prince, has not only not held
them good enough for us, but even just reasons, if they have any way seemed to
concern him more then his subjects, (though that which concerns him, must
them) have bin laid by and not respected. To be short, never was there Prince,
that avowed al his actions to be grounded upon a more upright judgment, which
does not only represent us this great blessing of ours more fully, but with
all disburtheneth us of all iealosies of partiality. For he that in all
questions between himself and the subject, has not spared himself, cannot
between man and man be partial, since all partialities are begotten by
self-loue. By this we may clear the doubt of English and Scottish, since he is
King of both, he is father of both, and (being equally charged by the King of
Kings with both) owing unto both one duty, he will give unto both one
affection. But least I be called into question for a proof, behold his former
government, where his vprightnes had that hand with him, as neither the
generality, nor the custom, could make him yield to the common defense and
nourishing factions by names, ever protesting him highest in his opinion, that
was owner of a good life, as well as a great name. So that to be known for an
honest man, was more then to bear the surname of Steward. He that knows in
how contrary a course the example of that kingdom might have nourished him, and
how the customs of their Clannes had brought this integrety to the suspicion
of a vice, will ask no more instances for clearing all suspicions, that
foreknowledge shall never bar merit. For since he defended his youngest years,
from the most received vice of his country, we must expect in this riper time
the habitual possession of this Regal virtue.

Now to the increase of Empire, which though it carries the face of the
happiest alreration, yet being an alteration, can hardly escape defects. For
not only the nature of all human accidents approues it, all things being
delivered to us co^mixt, we being not to be trusted, either with good or ill
alone, separated, such are our frailties and weakness, presumption or despair,
growing mighty if fed with either fortune single. But more particularly to
illustrate the inconveniences of the increase of kingdoms, the common examples
are either by power or ambition in one body, or by necessity compelled to
offend defensiuely in another: Both are by conquest, whose violent effects
leave for ever an equal mistrust both in Prince and subject, an humor of that
fatal operation, as nothing but blood and oppression follows. What shall I
say now of our increased dominions, that have made us terrible to the world
without any terror to our selves: But so happy and excellent means are the
long disioyned parts of this Kingdom, brought to an inseparable imbracement.
And if the long received Axiom of policy shall be believed (that kingdoms
must be maintained by such means as they were gotten) unto what an excellent
necessity are we tied? marriage was the means, a friendship of that high
nature, that God himself daineth to be a witness of this indissoluble knot;
we must maintain it with the nearest resemblance, that is by a constant
friendship and love. Verily I believe it impossible for man to think, how so
infinite a blessing to both sides could have been accomplished, by any other
so easy and even conditions. For neither side sought others friendship, by
coming past the bounds of the reputation of a nation, there were no threats,
no violence, no swords drawn of neither side. So that as if God would provide
to satisfy even our most distempered and sick affections, least such sparks
might inflame this great action, neither nation can charge other with needing,
or yiedling, or giving way to other. So are they met, so are they prepared as
they shall scarcely need either time or custom the vniters of flesh to assist
their incorporating, since they are by the divine wisdom, so knit together, as
it resembles a new creation. When we shall have beheld on all sides the
cleerenes of this benefit, how all things answer one another, and all without
the least sign of any inconvenience or danger, what place is left for
suspicion? or if not for suspicion, was there ever any benefit possessed so
entirely? who is there now that shall bring in questions of separation and be
believed? since we may easily determine all such differences, arise out of the
malignity of such dispositions, not the cause. It is most true if you will
(happy Countrymen) that the streams of the common wealth and people run
contrary (for flourishing states have commonly dissolute inhabitants, poor
countreies honest people) this is because we borrowe our behauiours from our
fortunes not discourses, being good or bad, according to the flood or ebb of
our estates. But if you will be owners of this happiness, you will proceed with
more advised considerations, and judge of your Counselors as well as Councels.
If they tell you of the poverty of Scotland, examine whether our wealth shall
not come from the addition of their Kingdom, for at once we receive from them
the stopping of our vnnecesary wars, and the use of traffic. How infinitely
have we been consumed in the upholding the low countries, which we were
enforced to use for a stillt to uphold the body of our state. Shall not a
natural limme, nay another body, that does not only rescue us, but becomes
us, be thought worthy of entertaining? There is none of us that worn with the
travails of the world and time, but would buy a new strength and youth at any
rate: Be now ashamed to be taken with this self-love, or else value the new
youth and strength of our commonwealth. Since gratitude and the knowledge of
benefits, comes from the looking back upon former times, let us not be ashamed
to remember times past: How was the wealth of our land decayed? how full of
doubt stood we? with what Prince or state durst we enter league, that was able
to be our enemies? nay to such a state we were come, as we were as much
afraid of peace as wars, and durst trust neither. At once to be delivered of
these, without feeling any alteration but the ease, what does it not deserve?
Without feeling any alteration, for what has hapened in this change that we
can complain of? Wars are ceased, peace is entreated on all sides,
oppressions are abolished, in the mean time, the Prince exercising al those
virtues that may make the subject happy, his Justice, his mercy, his
liberality, his benignity. And whereas even the best Princes, have thought it
sufficient to exercise certain general virtues, who is there that could
demand particular favors of any kind, and has been sent away empty? Truth
cannot be flattery, and that which so many can wittnes ought not to be
suspected. Not alone the deseruers of him have tasted of his bounty, but the
assisters of the government past, have found it as sure a plea to be able to
prove, they served his predecessor loyally, as those nearest unto himself.
What shall we gather of this? but that this Kingdom is beheld of him, with
the same care that his others are, and that the servants of it are as dear to
him. A rare example of equity, since in the succession of Princes we see
nothing more ordinary, then that the favor of the servants dies with the
master. After this assurance to doubt his partiality, and that the number of
his ancient attendance will rob the English of places and employments, cannot
come but from a mind, that speaks his own vices in another name. For since
we cannot Judge the thoughts but by the actions, and that all his actions have
been found of another nature, from whence issue these suspicions but out of
their own bosoms? Shall it be thought an answer that the old servants of
his Scottish Government have been rewarded? the same mind would have
pronounced ingratitude if they had been unrewarded. For who is he that
censureth honestly, and houldeth not this an argument for our encouragement,
who being in the beginings of our times, cannot know him but by his usage of
others, who having spent for him in a time of less expectation, and so less
to be suspected, their youths and strengths, how could any indifferent
judgment hold them unworthy of rewards? It has then rewarded us in them, for
the example has given us encouragement, which is the very food of the soul,
and the greatest provocation of virtue. Shall we yet doubt and desire more
assurances? behold every man that has not had a more capital fault, then the
being a stranger to him, holds the same place he possessed before? from the
highest to the lowest, yea even the servants of the person and house of the
last Prince are his. An unusual satisfaction and so to be esteemed, and an
action of a Prince, that cannot suspect that in another, that he finds not
in himself.

Can there now be such another testimony of his uprightness, when by the
changing the administers of this state, by another disposition, would have bin
thought so important a part, as he should by the alteration not only have
rewarded others, but assured his own person. But from the general consent of
his entrance, has he framed the rest of his proceedings; he found us then,
joyful, loyal, loving subjects, and according to that demeanure has he used
us: which if we do not acknowledge, and acknowledge in making the same use of
his actions to us, we are unworthy of so happy a government. But yet says some
body, how can it be that the number of that nation shall not shorten the
benefits of the English? If they brought men without a kingdom it were an
objection, or if men under this Prince must not bring somewhat besides a
petition. They have a Country of their own that yields so much plenty, as
their plenty breeds their want; for concerning the necessaries for man's life
no country is better furnished: and for wealth, the happiness of their latter
government has given such testimonies of increase, as already they possess
enough both to defend themselves and to free their country from the imputation
of sterility. But this is not all, the number of able men is not a
discommoditie, for how comes it (think you) that all the Princes of
Christendom think well of our friendship, but because we have many able men:
So that either it must be confessed, envy is better food then safety, or else
that two offices in one hand is not so important, as two kingdoms under one
Scepter, under one Law, becoming one body. Neither does the commodity of so
many able men end thus, but as it brings reputation and safety from abroad,
so ease and wealth at home. For when this multitude of able men shall
disburthen the officers of their too much business, they shall not excuse
vnder-briberies by their over many emploiments, and so shall the poor subject
escape paying fees upon fees, and sometimes double and trebble briberies.

By this time it is apparent, that neither the poverty nor multitude of our
connection can be prejudicial, since it is proved they will be the only
instruments of our enriching; and that this multitude brings a happy
necessity for the redressing the griefs of the greatest part of our people.
Let us then come to the beholding this happiness together, which since we
find so infinitely full of blessings as the sharpest sight cannot discern any
inconvenience or future peril, what shall I call it? but a divine and
miraculous blessing of God. Now should we bring unto this great benefit our
sick and corrupt affections, though never so well covered under the names of
foresight or prevention, shall we not worthily deserve punishments answerable
to our favors? Let this learn us (good countrymen) our duties to the
Commonwealth, whether we ought not to bring our bodies, but to carry our
minds, for to bring private driftes to the public business, is an impiety of
the highest nature. What shall we say now to their imaginations that hold our
unity most profitable if it were inseparable, but if the Kings issue should
fail, say they, and several titles disvnite us, then would their
neighborhood be more dangerous: for by our incorporating being grown more
rich, they would be more able to affront us. How do these strive to bury
benefits with suspicions? they have forgot who ended our wars without
miserable conditions, who has enforced Ireland to lay down arms, who has
made us capable of foreign leagues without buying them, but beholding all
these and many more both defenses and benefits as things past, and now in their
own possessions they are as weary of their assisters, as they were of their
fears. Or else being people of such a condition as find most contentment in
troubled and doubtful states, because settled and flourishing are the lights
that discover ill affected and ill disposed persons, they desire to shroud
themselves still in the darkness of confused and perplexed governments. But
to answer their objection without them, how unlike is this to the English
style, that lately durst not think beyond one life, and now out-runneth four,
and by Gods grace many more. And are there four between this fear and us,
and is it yet a fear? It is no prevention but an impious forecast; for to
provide beyond probability, armeth our imaginations against the will of God. A
strange office for man to undertake, since if it were a part of his
appointment, Heaven and Earth, and all their generations, reuolutions and
changes, and even God himself were idle and unnecessary powers. But still we
insist upon our wealth and their enriching, which either we mistake or
understand not. For if we have the advantage of wealth we shall hold it, for
since they neither can nor will demand any thing but by way of commerce or
traffic, the long and great concourse of trading to the chief city of our
Island, will suck up still the greatest part of our weath. But might it be that
their wealth would be increased, the public good purchases not loss but
profit, for by the dispersion the state finds the people more able and more
industrious, from whence arises the increase of traffic to the subject, and
of custom to the Prince, the most honest and easy way of enriching the Kings
coffers. Not unlike unto this objection is the mislike that they would lay upon
the disposition of the people that because they have in times past given way to
their private mislikes and drawn private quarrels to multitudes; that wealth
unto such natures being like oil to fire, might draw their fewds from a
spark to a flame, and so inwrappe us in an unnecessary war. But they are
much deceived in the general operation of wealth that suspect that, since if
there be any quality in riches more then our opinion has forced, it this that
it ordinarily makes ill men good citizens. For it is not the goodness of
laws, their integrity, nor good effects in general, that makes all men
observe them, but that their wealth has no other defense, so do they love
Justice and her observations, out of their own particular, there being no way
to make them conceive that foundation of equity (suum cuique tribuere) to
yield every man his own, except they have of their own to make the instance.
But were these probable, are we not to provide first against those that
threaten us nearer? is not the first and most weighty consideration of a States
man to prevent the invasion of foreign enemies? and can there be any other
course for them, then by our leaving matter of -coffeehouse amongst our
selves. Against outward invasions nature has cared; we are environed by the
sea, and so knit together both by religion, language, disposition, and
whatsoever else can take away difference; as unless we breed disagreeing
affections, we are indissoluble. Neither can we nourish these unless we will
contradict Heaven it self. Behold how we are joined, God, Nature, and Time,
have brought us together, and so miraculously if we observe the reuolutions of
time, as me thinks the very words after the consummation of a marriage, shall
not be improperly used, Those whom God has joined together, let no man
separate. Unto whose judgment now, will not these objections seem light, if
wayed with this consideration. Laws and policy can fight and overcome
inward inconveniences, the wisdom of the Statist, is above any of these
discommodities, especially in Monarchies, where civil matters are easily
redressed by reason of the absolute power of the Prince, and that the people
are not strong enough to favor their own imperfections if they come in
question. But against outward invasions invited by inward divisions, there is
no cure but prevention, for being once on foot, wisdom may see the fault, but
arms must determine it. To assure you this is no idle warning, let us both
examine the states of our neighbors, their dispositions, their former actions,
and then what is likely to leave matter of coffeehouse and division amongst
us. First for France were it one man, former favors might warrant us, but
kingdoms can dispense with ingratitude, therefore we must forget their
distress, and look for the common disposition of their prosperity, which
has ever leueld at the keeping us down.

To this end have they always held correspondence with Scotland, which they
have used for their only refuge, to escape the English preparations. So that
if we shall close this past their entrance; we have taken away their first and
safest defense. For now all questions must be decided within their own
entrails, where how so ever they speed, they must be loosers; for though the
events of arms be doubtful, yet the deciding place is certain of loss. Now
for Spain unto whose ambitions we have ever been an impediment, both in our
aides to France, and the Low Countries, though we feel not the gratitude of
these, yet must we provide against the mislike of the other. For by most
natures revenge is preferred before recompense, as the more profitable
quality: therefore must we provide not only against their ambitions, but
mislikes, which double excitation nothing can pacify but our own strengths.
But it may be the iealosies between Spain and France will clear these
dangers; let us not borrow a defense out of their humors, when we may have one
of our own, nor can we trust to it, since hopes and fears do equally quench
contentions, so that if they have no other impediment but themselves they will
(questionless) respit their own mislikes, until they have taken order with
us. In the mean time we search not enough the Spanish policy, who begins
his attempts thorough divisions and factions, which if he epsy, he
prosecuteth dangerously, for by his strength in Rome and the West Indies, he
searches all kinds of dispositions, which if not sound, he makes at his
devotion. To make perticulars sound, we must begin with the general; when we
have laid our foundation strong, and past the shaking of our enemies, we take
away the prouocations both of the Temptor and Tempted against their religion,
let our religion be opposed, in respect of whose strength and reputation we
ought to be more then moved, since our unity in bodies to our already united
minds, will make the reputation of our religion so strong, as they that put on
the adverse, for fear and in policy, shall neither shame nor fear to use
their own consciences.

Shall we see now out of what matter our enemies can work dissension, there
is neither ambition nor coffeehouse amongst our great men, nor burdens upon
the people, laws have their due course, and purge the veins of the
commonwealth, from unnatural stoppings and corruptions. It can then be no
other, then in the disposing of our new body, from which we may take the
beginning of the happiest Empire that ever was. Plato to illustrate the
strength of friendship borrows so much of Poetry as to tell a tale that the
body of man was first round, and whilst he enjoyed that form was doubly
furnished of all the Organes and abilityes of man, after, abusing his strength
the Gods divided him and left him but the half of that he was; but yet with a
power (as findding the other half which is a perfect friend, not differing in
resemblance) he might again enjoy his first strength and happiness. England
has found her other half, she is now doubly furnished with the strength of a
Kingdom, she has four arms, four legs, two hearts (made one) two powers,
and double forces.

What can make us now so unnatural, as to doubt of our restored strength? or
by what rule will suspicion be tried? If laws and ordinances be called and
rightly called the soul of the commonwealth, they must not be begotten by
ourappetite: for then they can neither be divine in their operation nor
eternal in their continuance; if we confess it, and appeal to Judgment,
Judgment tries all things of this nature by the consent of these three
unvariable rules, namely Conscience, Reason and Example, as those that give
laws their true essences. For conscience reconcileth our humane laws to our
divine, in so much as all laws that take not them for a pattern, cannot be
honest, and so not durable. Reason shapeth them against all assaults which
cannot be without making them profitable to all.

Lastly Example assisteth the weakness of Reason with the sight of former
successes, in so much as the strength of human reason, is but to devise and
cannot without trial ariue any nearer the end then probability. Then to
examine it by conscience: Is there not a necessity of mutual help imposed
upon man? and have we freed our selves of infinite troubles and is there not a
duty belonging to the means? Does a Nation not differing in any part from our
selves, full of strength, able men, of so important a situation, offer her
self with open arms to embrace us, and can we think of another entertainment
besides a loving and even embracement? If the offenses or violences of
Kingdoms, allows us, first to overcome, then to subject and tie them with
thraldom, does love, freeness, amity, brotherlike regard require the like
usage? either we were wrong before, are now, or confound merit and injuries.
In a word, were there no other motive but our Prince, who would not be ashamed
to refuse such a Medium. since his blood is of both nations his mind so just
to all nations, and that his virtues have already confuted all objections: what
conscience is there that hasteneth not to this combination, not only for a
quiet as compelled, but for joy as the due of so noble and glorious a
performance.

Now let us see the trial of reason, this Island is happily come within the
circle of one Diadem, not by conquest, nor by weakness, nor for protection, but
are drown together by the virtue of an united blood, and made one man's
Kingdom by the happy conjunction of the royal blood of both nations. And is
that blood grown one, and shall not the Kingdoms grow one? It is reasons
office, not only to bring the will and the desire together, but by the way to
examine the will, from what right he desires, how justly, and to what end. By
this means all parts have satisfaction or else the reason disclaymeth the
employment. We shall never get reason then to go of this errand, for we have
no right to the holding it by a divided title, nor is there justice in covering
an vnequality in a title, nor has the end, any other soundnes then the devise
of some sick affection. For if there were some great difference in our powers,
power might sway it, and reason would make the weaker yield to necessity: if
the Prince were either by blood or affection of one side, the other were to
light, but having neither strength nor right to a superiority, how can it
belong unto us? Now if this be apparent, were it in our power to bind them to
us, by some vndername, how stands it with the policy of a state to leave so
many Idle men, for since our industry has ever an eye upon our own good we
must either interest them in the gains, or we must expect cold endeauours.
For nature has given us abilityes for our use and preservation, which though
our reason persuades us to use for the common good, yet never for the common
good without including our own particular. But it may be it will be answered,
let their industries be spent upon their own soil, and so shall ours and we
will crave nothing from them. Who sees not in this answer either a wilful
or ignorant folly? that forgetting their neernes, the danger of their
mislikes, the gappe for seditions and plotts to get entrance, we reckon them as
a people that concern us not. No, no, they must have a hand in our business,
our peace is theirs, our flourishing theirs, our success of all kinds theirs,
in so much as if they be not thus far interessed in these, and their loves so
fastened to us, as to overcome all temptations, we must expect none of these,
so shall they or we, if we prevent not all enticements be wooed; since foreign
forces are too weak to craze our strong constitution without evil Iarres.
Lastly if we look for presidents and examples to strengthen our resolutions,
never were two Kingdoms invited by so strong and forcible means to become
one, and rejected it. Contrariwise, Spain and France were never absolute
Monarchies until the first of seven Kingdoms became one, and Normandy and
Britain were annexed to the crown of France; which before were under other
lords. The dividing a Kingdom into petty principalities prepares it to be
swallowed by a more united power. So stands Italy at this day, that lives
not by her own strength, but by the Iealosies of her neighbors: yet was she
once Mistress of the world, and so would be again (says one of their
authors) were she reunited and under one scepter. But why seek I foreign
examples when we have one of our own so near us? Wales is Englished, a
country whose riches did not woe us, nor her power, nor the fertility of the
soil; but the discommodities that we might receive by them whilst they were
held as Aliens, being matter to feed discontented or ambitious plottes, this
was the furthest and only advantage we expected, which since it lay within the
power of our incorporating to cure, and that nature had performed half the
work, with the alliance of countries so nearly knit together upon one
continent, we performed. Success has followed, a warrant for the like
occasion, but this is more like us then that, a greater provocation, we differ
not in language (a sign that God ever meant to have us one Kingdom;) and for
the other conueninences of our match, as power, wealth, largnes of territories,
reputation of a Kingdom, ability in men, there is no comparison. That the
world is possessed by many lords, and that the great empires that grew in her
minority, crushed themselves with their own weight, cannot in one reason be
better comprehended (me thinks) then that the difference of situation,
clymate and disposition, could not give power, to the imperial country, to
naturalize her conquests, they could not make them themselves. For it is laws
and customs and evenness in capicity of offices and dignities, that can make
countries love one another truly, for so they do as it were beget one
another, and become flesh of flesh, and bone of bone. For want of this it has
been in the power of private men, to shake an Empire, that could not have
moved a Kingdom, and for want of this, have Empires been enforced to hold
subjected countries by garrisons, and by cruelties ways, so disagreeing from
nature, as their authority has depended merely upon fortune, and an external
reputation, which never indureth a distemper without a downfall, nor is ever
sick without destruction. For recouerable diseases are only in natural
bodies, which these being opposite to, must depend only upon force. In the
mean time, how much the expense of treasures, and the continual doubts we
have of such countries exceeds the advantage, we may easily discern, if we
behold but Spain, whose many dispersed Kingdoms have been such a burden to
them, and have drawn them, into so many inconveniences, as his West Indies,
and great increase of possessions lately annexed to that crown, have not bin
able to defend him from the extremest wants, insomuch as his designs have
oftener stood still for want of money and men, then many smaller Kingdoms. Had
it been now think you in his power to have made them all Spanish and within
the limits of one continent, upon the condition to have called all Spain, and
but one nation, would he not have thought it an excellent exchange? Doubt it
not since he had at once been delivered of those charges and suspicions, that
make his possessions a pain, and weakness rather then a strength, being like a
monster of nature that having a body without blood enough, has his limbs
withered and feeble being a great bulk, drowned in his own proportion. All
forced gouerments must be momentary in so much as they leave out the will and
desire of man, which only can beget continuance. For an instance behold nature
her-selfe, who drives at none of her ends tirannically, but emorapping her
driftes in the natural desires of her creatures, has her purposes effected
not as hers, but as their own. So must the advised Politician proceed, if he
intends to give either a goodly or substantial form to his workmanship;
for though man can enforce other creatures beyond their wills, yet the will of
man, having reason to direct it which has a freedom and eminency in her
nature, must therefore be wrought by persuasions, not enforcements, the only
means to bring her to obedience, and to yield to the directions of others. I
have gone thus far beyond my purpose (loving countrymen) to free you of all
suspicions, insomuch as the soul of man, is no sooner cured of any great
infirmity, but there remain certain dregs behind of doubts and
suspicions, which I hope these few considerations will clear, not as they are
mine, but as they are truths, though at this time, (unto an adversary) I
cannot complain of my weakness, for being the champion of right I doubt not
of the success of David.

You have now then the sight of this great blessing, which approaches you so
full of infinite happinesses, so pure and vncommixt with the common fortunes of
the world, as you may lay by all thoughts, but such as are apt to prepare you
fit to receive so gracious an assurance of Gods favor, and of gratitude though
not answerable, yet answerable to your powers. In the mean time behold the
goodly time before you, so clear and calm as there is not so much as matter
for clouds or storms left to breed on, (the original of the happiness of a
commonwealth) for then only are the inward motions of government made
perfect, when there arises neither fears nor dangers from abroad, since those
times are often so miserable, as they are not only forced to make use of the
diseases of the time and people, but also to praise them, the forerunner of the
downfall of a state. Which you shall easily prove if you search the ruins of
the ancient Empires, where (toward their end) vices went for virtues, and the
greatest corruptions were the greatest merits. But our State is of another
nature, it cannot grow old and doat, because it had no infancy or youth; we
builded not our foundation out of a little, and increased it after by the
sword, we are no purchasers, but inheritours, and inheritours of a State, that
comes to us strong and flourishing, so do we want those shifts and
by-courses, which come in with necessity, which make such states in time suffer
shipwreck both by just and natural reasons. For having gotten by oppression,
it stands with Justice that they loose so: and it is infallible, that people
gotten up by indirect means, though the present gain makes them insensible
of it, yet it leaves in them the example of the corruption; and being like
creatures bred out of putrefaction, they live no longer then there remains
such matter to feed on, but are after overthrown by some adverse power, or else
turning head upon themselves, are the authors of their own destruction. But you
freed of all these, shall have a happy leisure to view over your own inward
parts of the Commonwealth, and being hindered by no new doubts, may search,
medicine and heal, all old griefs, which not alone the time permits, but the
Prince warrants, aleach chosen by God to make a new time settled in an instant,
such as the power of Justice and an upright distribution, another testimony of
Gods gracious favor unto us. For being strangers though not by birthe, yet by
personal knowledge, and the commerce of stran gers, warranting almost a
partiality to our countreimen, it is only the work of such a King, to alter
nature by the force of wisdom. So has his just proceedings wrought upon us,
that neither side, being able to charge him with leaning more to one side then
another, neither side has cause to mistrust him, another door at which
Partiality often enters. Will you know now what we have escaped? the being
begotten by a diseased father, for this time being the father of the
succeeding, had it constitution been corrupted by partiality, the after-ages
would for ever have felt it, which would have been so much the more dangerous,
because as in natural bodies, hereditarie diseases are above the skill of the
Physician, so would these of the Statesmen. But ours that is to be directed by
a Prince so infinitely endued by the graces both of God, Nature and Fortune, we
may assuredly expect actions answerable to such a concurrance of virtues. To
that height of felicity are you then arrived, as not only you shall enjoy
your country without fears, your estates without hourly impositions, and your
lives without wars and hazards, but as if you exchanged these for their
contraries, your country shall yield you peace, and by peace infinite
contentments, your estates shall increase daily, and you shall not buy your
own industries of strange impositions and taxes: and wars that had wont to
divorce you from your parents and wives, and by presses violently pull you from
your own quiet courses, to sacrifice you to the distempered and troubled age,
to quench the fire of foreign ambitions that threatened us, shall no more have
any such power over you. But your time and determinations shall be your own,
and your hopes shall not be frighted with fears. Prepare then minds fit to
enjoy so many happinesses, and minds fit to be governed by so sincere and
just a Prince, whose very entrance amongst us has had that virtue, as to drive
away all threatening calamities that hung over our heads. Let it not be
forgotten since the remembrance of passed perils is sweet, and not only sweet
but profitable, for it inuiteth us to the acknowledgement. And since we cannot
better testify our thankefullnes to God, then in the offering our obedient
hearts to the means he chose for the expressing this his wonderful and
gracious favor unto us; let us begin our contentments from him, who like the
Sun has dispersed and consumed our doubts, and like the Sun draws
nothing from beneath, but to yield it down again with more virtue then he
received it.

FINIS.

