A WARNING FOR Worldlings,

Or a comfort to the godly, and a terror to the wicked.

Set forth Dialogue wise, between a Scholar and a Trauailer. By Jeremy
Corderoy Student in Oxford.

He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
those that diligently seek him. Heb. 11.16. AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas
Purfoot, for Lawrence Lyle, and are to be sold at the Tygars head in Paul's
Churchyard. 1608.

To the Right Honorable, Thomas, Lord Ellesmere, Lord Chancellor of England,
and one of his Majesty's most honorable privy Council; Grace, and Peace.
WHen as (right Honorable) I had finished this my short Dialogue against
Atheism: Considering the malice of certain godles men, who with scorn
traduce such books which confute their error; As also the blind zeal of
others, which think books of this kind not fit for these days, I thought it
very necessary to shroud my self under the protection of some Honorable
person, Who for his authority might bridle the malice of the one, and for his
daily experience in the estate of this Realm, might satisfy the other. In
these respects, none seemed to me so fit as your Honor, who for your
authority can and do daily punish the outrageous dealing of Atheists. And by
reason of your dailye experience in your Courts of Star Chamber and
Chauncerie, You cannot but see how necessary such books are for these times.
For, albeit it be a great means to deter Atheists from heinous offenses, to
pun^sh severely malefactors (in which respect your Honor do daily God and
your Prince great service, and your Country great good:) Yet it cannot be
unknown unto you, that by manifest and evident proof to make known unto all
men; that there is a God who will judge all men according to their works, is
the cheifest means to restrain men from offending. For it cannot be, that he
which is fully persuaded that there is a God who will punish those that do
evil, and reward those that do well, should be careless how they live: Much
less without fear, daily commit heinous sins, and continue therein all their
days. As in this present age so great a number do, as never the like in
former ages, which is an evident proof, that there are now more then ever
there were, (though they profess not in words) who think in their hearts there
is no God. Most necessary therefore it is, to plant this Doctrine in the
hearts of men, that there is a God who as he made all things, so continually
he governs all things, unto whom all men must give account of their
doings. Presuming therefore on your Honors wonted favor to all Scholars, and
the great need of books of this kind for these times, I am bold to crave
your Honor to patron this my small treatise, wherein (I hope) you shall do
that which is grateful to God, and encourage me and others with comfort to set
forth the glory of god; and bind me always to pray for your Honors good
suecesse, in all things you take in hand.

At your Honors service, Jeremy Corderoy.

To the Reader.
I DOUBT not (gentle Reader) but that there are many more scrupulous, then
rightly zealous; who think it not convenient, that any question should be
made, whether there be any God or no, (because as they say) there are very
few, who doubt of it, and the very calling of it in question, breeds
scruples in the minds of those, who made no question of it before. True it is,
that if there were no more Atheists in these days, then do in words deny God;
Fit it were, we should be silent in this point. For few or none there are, who
now in words deny God, and the very persons of such men, who in plain terms
deny that there is any God, have been in all ages, even amongst the heathen so
odious, that their hateful opinion has done but little harm either to the
Church, or Commonwealth. But the Scripture forewarneth us of a more dangerous
kind of Atheist, who will not in words deny God, but by their deeds, Tit. 1.16.
as the Apostle says. They profess that they know God, but by their deeds
they deny him. And in another place speaking of them, says, 2. Tim. 3.5
that they have show of godliness, but they deny the power of it. They have a
show of godliness, because in words they make profession of Religion, but they
deny the power of it. For they will not in their deeds yield reverence and
obedience unto it. These are they, of whom the Apostle says, that they will
privily bring in damnable heresies, 2. Pet. 2.12.18.
and that many shall follow their damnable ways, that in speaking swelling
words of vanity, they shall beguile with wantonness, through the lust of the
flesh, the^ that were clean escaped from the^, which were wrapped in error.
That is, deceive eue^ those which were not entangled in those errors of
doctrine, which in the time immediately going before, the Apos. forshewed would
take hold on most me^, termed the latter days. 1. Tim. 4.1
These Atheists who now in these days abound, termed the last days, 2. Tim.
3.1 2. Pet. 3.3.
as the last and dregs of Satan's vomit, so the worst of all evils that ever
came unto the Church of God, do with greater pride contemn godliness (though
after a covert manner) then ever any of Satan's crew since the world began. 2.
Tim. 3.4
Who because they love their pleasures more then God, as the Apostle says of
them. Therefore of set purpose they seek by all means possible to abandon al
thought of God and his knowledge: and albeit they cannot choose but see that
there is a God which governs all by the creation of all things, in heaven and
earth, their continual preservation, the motions of the heavens, the orderly
course of all things in the earth, yet they seeing it, endeavor not to see it,
and perceauing it, will not take notice of it, least they acknowledging a God,
should by consequence be constrained to forgo their entirely beloved plesures.
This love of pleasures, and settled resolution to enjoy all the pleasures and
commodities of this present life without co^trolement, causes the knowledge of
God to be so hateful unto them, as the light of the Sun was unto the eyes of
that hell-hound Cerberus delighting and used to darkness; so that when Hercules
endeavored to draw him to the light, he shut his eyes, and by all his might
shunned the light: so these hel-hounds used to the works of darkness, and
delighting therein, do shun all the means that might bring the^ to the true
light of their souls: and if any Hercules do endeavor to draw them to the
light, they will by all might and maine draw back, and shut their eyes against
the truth, non persuadebis, etiamsi persuaseris, ye shall not make them yield
to the truth, though you convince the^. Nay, they will hate even the persons of
them who strive to bring them to the truth. So true is that of the Prophet
David, Psalm. 35.
they will not understand, that they might do good, Tom. 10. de verb. Apost.
sermon. 13.
and that of S. Augustine, Impia men's odit etiam intellectum ipsum, and
homonimium mente peruersus timet intelligere, ne cogatur, quod intellexerit,
facere. A wicked mind, hates even understanding; and a man of a perverse
mind, fears to know to do well, least his knowledge constrain him to do
that which he knows ought to be done. This is the cause why that saying of
the Prophet was never more generally true, then in these days He that
refrayneth from evil, Esa. 59.15
makes himself a prey. For whosoever will not run with them into that
excess of riot as they do, they take for an enemy, and by all means spoil
him, if not of his goods fearing the law, yet of his good name, and make him as
odious as may be: because the godly care of such men in refraining from sin,
is (as they take it) a kind of reproof of their lewd life and il conversation.
Whosoever duly without partiality considers how daily this il brood of me^ do
multiply and increase, cannot but with grief be moved, if he has any spark
of christianity in him. Hooker. lib. 5. sect. 2.
Diverse causes hereof there are, as a learned and judicious man has showed,
namely: First, our overmuch patience toward the^ wherein (to use his words) the
zeal of Babel toward the glory of God, has exceeded the zeal of Sion.
Secondly, our dissentions do strengthen them in their error. And thirdly, the
impreparation of many, and inability to give a reason of the grounds of our
religion, because they imagine no man will call them in question. Unto which
causes, I would I might not justly add another, namely the corrupt life of
some, who have consecrated themselves to the service of God, yet dare not open
their mouths against corruption in manners, but only busy themselves in
matters of doctrine, least they should here Medice cura teipsum: or that of the
Poet.

Iuuenal. satyr. 2.
Loripidem rectus derideat, Ethiopem albus.
Quis tulerit Graccos de seditione querentes?
Quis coelum terris non miseat, and mare coelo,
Si fur displiciat verri, Homicida Miloni?
Clodius accuset moechos, Catilina Cethegum.
Let him that is straight footed, deride him that haulteth, and he that is
fair, a black-more. Who can endure to hear the seditious Gracchians to
complain of sedition? who can with patience endure to hear Verres a famous
thief, reprove a petty thief? or Milo a famous murderer, to reprehend man's
slaughter? or that infamous Clodius, should accuse those who are incontinent?
or that one traitor, should accuse an other of treason? Wherefore most dearly
beloved brethren, to you I speak especially, who have separated your selves
from other men, to set forth the glory of God: though this matter also
concerns every Christian in particular; Yet to you I speak, who are not
stained with the contagious infection of this wicked brood, whose garments are
white: so that you may freely beseeming your persons, reprove the deformity of
others. Whose sincere and godly conversation, do add authority, weight, and
credit unto your reprehensio^s. If hitherto you have endeavored to be as
simple as Doves in judging, and interpreting the best of all men, supposing
every one to be as religious as they speak: yet now since we are forewarned,
that in these days many shall make a show of godliness, yet are most ungodly;
be as careful to be as wise as Serpents. Consider your calling, consider that
the Lord has made you watchmen to foresee evils, and to give warning of them.
Consider what the Lord says unto you; Ezec. 3.18.
If I (says the Lord) shall say unto the wicked, thou shall surely die, and
thou give him not warning, nor speak to admonish him, that he may live: the
same wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy
hands. Ier. 48.10.
Consider what the Prophet says, Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently. The Lord has forewarned you of these ill kind of men. Give
warning unto others, that you may save them, and your own souls. Follow the
example of our predecessors, who in the time wherein error of doctrine did
abound, then especially did strive for the truth. Now likewise, let us in the
time wherein we are forewarned, that corruption in manners should abound,
contend against ungodliness in manners. For what avails us to know that God
above all things is to be honored, if we honor him not? Our knowledge of the
will of God without our obedience unto it, is to our greater condemnation.

Learned Reader, expect not any curious composition in this treatise, or nice
terms: For you know that the nature of a Dialogue requires familiar speech:
And secondly (but especially) I endeavored to speak to the understanding of
the meanest capacity, being desirous (as much as in me lies) to profit all men.

Yours, IER. CORDEROY.

A DIALOGVE Between a Trauailer, and a Student in Oxford.
Trauailer. OH my most kind and ancient friend, although I have been now long
out of England travailing in many Countries, and now posting home to see my
Parents (as duty binds me) yet lighting in the company of Oxford men, as I
came from London, I enquired of my old acquaintance in Oxford, by whom I
understood, that you remained still a Student here, as I left you. Ancient
affection and kindness constrained me to stay my have, and abide one day with
you to renew our old acquaintance.


Student. Sir, for this your exceeding great kindness, I hold my self much
bound unto you, and am most heartily glad to see your safe return after so many
years absence, and I pray you persuade your self, that you are a most welcome
guest to me.


Trau. I thank you most kindly, but good Lord, how are you altered since my
departure? pale, lean, thin, and I fear as poor in purse as in body: for I
understand by those Oxford men, with whom I came from London, that you are not
as yet preferred to any living.


Stud. True, I am not: but even in the same estate, as you lest me, what that
was, you know, very mean.


Trau. I was sorry when I heard it, but more sorry to see it, and to tell you
the truth, the especial motive which caused me to come now unto you, was to
give you better advise, and to put you in a better course, to provide for your
self. For the course which hitherto you have taken, your own experience can
tell you, that it will little avail you. You have now studied divinity many
years in Oxford, you have preached diverse times, as my self can testify;
your life and conversation I dare boldly affirm, is without exception; you
are conformable to all true discipline; it has cost you and your friends many
pounds, since you came first: but to what purpose have you taken all this
pains? and bestowed all this cost? what reward have you? I pray tell me, did
ever any Patron offer you any living?


Stud. Yes truly, I have been offered a living without suit, and also upon
suit, but I must needs say, upon reasonable conditions (as the Patron thought)
but such, as I may not enter into with a good conscience.


Trau. Conscience? yea, this conscience is it, which marreth, al, this is it
which hinders you from all preferment. And if you will still stand upon
conscience, here may you study until moss grow to your heels before any
living worth the taking be freely without condition offered you, silly
Scholar! borne to pine thy body in study, and waste thy goods in vain!
think not that men of this age are so simple, as to give that freely, which
they may lawfully sell dearly.


Stud. Though I never shall have any preferment bestowed on me freely, yet will
I not despair of Gods goodness in providing for me. Howsoever, I am resolved
(by ye grace of God) never to use any indirect means to be preferred. And
whereas you say yt Patrons now are not so simple, as to give that freely, which
they may lawfully sell dearly: I marvel how they may lawfully do that,
which cannot be done without shipwreck of a good conscience.


Trau. Good conscience? tush man, think you that they are afraid of any
bug-beares? what should they be afraid of?


Stud. Of what? even of ye heavy wrath of God upon themselves, Leuit. 27.28.
and their posterity. Does it seem a small thing to profane that which is
consecrated to the setting forth of Gods honor? if any Christian think this,
he is far worse than an Infidel, who otherwise stand not so much upon honesty.
The Romans had this law, Sacrum qui clepserit, Cicer. lib. 2. delegib.
raepseritue, parricida esto. He which clippeth, or takes away that with is
consecrated to holy uses, let him be punished as a Parricide. Decad. 1. lib. 5.
Liuie records, that the Romans sent a present unto Apollo at Delphos; by the
way, the Legates lighted upon Pirates, who take the Romans with their present
intended to be given unto Apollo. They carry them home to Lyparas, where the
custom was to divide that which by piracie they had taken: That year, one
Timasitheus was chief Governor, who demanded of the Legates whence they were,
and whither they intended to sail? and understanding that they were messengers
sent with a present consecrated unto Apollo, moved with reverence; he deals
with his Citizens to forgo their booty, because they were holy things
consecrated unto Apollo. The Citizens, though they lived by robbery, yet made
conscience of things which were consecrated to holy uses were contented to
forgo their commodity: yea, moreover they send with the Legates, men of war
to protect them until they came to Delphos. These heathen men, though they
erred in ye knowledge and true worship of the true God: yet their deeds show
their sincere affection toward God as far as they knew, of whom in charity
we ought thus to think, that had they known the true God, and his right
worship, they would have been much more zealous for his glory. Whose sincere,
though erroneous, affection, shall in the day of judgment condemn the iugling
and fraudulent dealing, with sacred things, of many which know the truth, and
profess ye name of Christ. Ios. 6.19. Acts. 5.3.4.5.
If Ananias and Saphira were so fearfully punished, for retayning but a part
of that which themselves, of their own private good, had given to holy uses;
how much less can they hope to escape ye punishment of God, who invade the
Goods of the Church, consecrated to holy uses, which were never their own?


Trau. Alas poor Scholar, I pity thy credulous simplicity: But come, where
may we sit and talk freely, I would not be heard, and you shall promise me
faithfully, that what I speak unto you, you shall not disclose unto any man,
nor call me in question for that which in secret for good will I shall advise
you.


Stud. Doubt you not of that, I will be secret. Come let us go into my study,
there no man can hear us. I will lock my study door, no man shall interrupt
our talk.


Trau. Now we are in secret, I am bold to utter my mind for your good, if you
will not be obstinate in your fancy against all reason and continual
experience. In reason no man ought to take in hand any thing, but to some good
end and purpose, whereby in the end he may reap some pleasure or commodity:
now I would gladly know of you, to what end you spend your years in vain
speculatio^s, spend your body in continual reading and meditation, spend
continually your money, with small hope ever to recover your charges again,
and in the mean space, defraud your self of those pleasures which others
enjoy, debar your self of such preferments, which usually men of meaner desert
obtain. That this course you take is not good, I appeal to your own
experience, who have lived here long with a thin diet, barely apparelled, and I
doubt also, somewhat in debt to. Yet now as far from hope of mending your
estate (except you alter this course) as you were the first day you came.


Stud. Indeed if I made pleasure or profit the principal end of all my
labors and studies, I must confess, as now ye world goes, I take a wrong
course: but being a Scholar, my principal end is to obtain learning, and
herein I study to approve my self to God, in laboring diligently in my
vocation, in setting forth his glory, in doing good to all men according to
mine ability, and endeavoring to keep a good conscience in respect of my self.
These things a scholar ought to aim at, and not at riches, pleasures, and
preferment.


Trau. Gods glory? a good conscience? tush, are you in earnest, and speak
seriously?


Stud. Yes truly,


Trau. Good Lord! this it is, to be mued up in a study all the days of a man's
life, sign it is you have little experience in the world. Had you been abroad
as I have been, experience would have taught you, that God, Conscience, and
Religion, have bin things invented by the Politicians of this world, to keep
men within the compass of humane laws, for fear of future punishment after
this life, whom otherwise, no fear or punishment in this life only, could
restrain from breaking all laws. The little regard they have in observing the
Religion which in words they profess, does sufficiently show, what account
they make of it, as long as religion hinder not their profit or pleasures, they
are contented to make show of reverence unto it; but let religion forbid them,
such pleasures or commodities as they affect, they will make no bones to
violate all religion. The base estimation they have of those that live
religiously, does bewray their inward thoughts; for albeit in your presence
they highly commend godliness and zeal, yet secretly behind your backs, they
account them fools, who practice it: and with many privy nippes they deride
them.


Stud. Albeit I have not bin much abroad, so that out of experience I can say
little, how men practice that in their deeds which in words they profess, yet
I make no doubt but that at this time, and this age, there are more wicked me^
who deny God by their deeds, whom in words they profess, then ever were since
the world began. For albeit, there have been always ungodly men, yet at one
time they abound more then in other. The Scripture foresheweth us, that in
these last days corruption of ma^ners should abound, 2. Tim. 3.1. 2. Pet. 3.3.
and 2. Pet. 2.
as error in doctrine was prophesied should come immediately after the time of
the Apostles, termed the latter days by the Apostle, 1. Tim. 4.1.
the truth of which prophesies the woeful experience of our forefathers can
testify: of the one, I mean the greatness of error in doctrine; of the
other, corruption of life and conversation: we who now live, cannot but
acknowledge it to our grief, your self perceive it, and find it true. Even
by this, yt all things come to pass according as the word of God foresheweth
should come to pass. I gather an infallible argument, that the word of God and
Religion is not any invention of man, but that all things are disposed by the
hand of God: otherwise who can foretell many years before, what afterward
shall come to pass. Only God the disposer of al things can tell us what shall
come to pass. Who therefore foresheweth us what evils are to come, and when, yt
we might know, yt there is nothing which comes to pass, but by his
disposition: as also, that being forewarned, we might be the better armed and
encouraged to withstand them, since we know that they come not by chance, but
by the ordinance of God for our good, if we patiently endure them, and manfully
withstand them. As for the proud disdainfulness of godles men, who esteem
those fools, that sincerely endeavor to live a godly life: I do not much
marvel at it, for in reason they cannot have any better opinion of them,
presupposing that, which they falsely presume, yt the whole felicity of man is
confined within the compass of this present life: that the soul dies with
the body; that after this life, there shall be no judgment, no heaven, no
hell, no happiness, no reward for virtue and godliness: no torment for
lewdness of life and ungodliness: that man is born by chance, and also dies
by chance. They who thus think, cannot but esteem those fools (as Lactantius
very well observes) who whilst they expect future joys after this life, Lib.
7. cap. 5. de diuino, praemio.
do let pass present pleasures and delights: and whilst they expect
happiness not seen, do forgo present worldly joys which are seen: whilst
they endeavor to avoid evils to come, they run into present evils. This
seems madness and foolishness to worldly wise men. But notwithstanding this
wrong conceit which Worldlings have of godly men, no reason it is, that godly
men should indeed become fools, either to please fools, or to seem to be
wise. If the question be well discussed, who are the wisest, whether they who
enjoy all the pleasures of this world without respect of divine and humane
laws? or they who abstain from voluptuous living, and forgo pleasures, and
commodities, in respect of divine and humane laws? it will easily appear who
are the wisest. Yea God himself has pronounced of the wisdom of worldly men:
that it is but vain. But of the other wisdom, Ps. 94.11. 1. Cor. 3.20. Pro.
16.16 Pro. 2.12. Job, 28.13
God says, that It is better than gold and silver: that It keeps those that
have it, from evil: and that it delights the soul. And Job speaking of the
excellency of it, says, that Man cannot know the price of it. This being so,
little cause have any to be discouraged from well doing, because fools take
them to be fools. Now, whereas you say that Religion is but the invention of
certain politic me^, to restrain men from offending, and to keep the simpler
sort in obedience for fear of future punishments after this life, herein you
much mistake the matter: for were it only a subtle device of men, and not a
truth, it would soon be descried for a forgerie, and come to naught. For
common experience proves (which also a great Politician, Gamaliel I mean,
does not only acknowledge, but also set it down, for a most sure grounded
truth, and proves it by former examples) that the counsail^ and devise which
comes not of God, Act. 5.38.
will come to naught. Now yt there is a God which rewards the just, and
punishes the wicked; all men, all Nations have and do acknowledge. Begin at
the first borne in the world, Cayne and Abell, there was then no common wealth
to govern, so that they had no cause to dissemble a Religion. Genesis 4.3
Yet they acknowledge a God, and they sacrificed unto God. Come from these two
first borne men, and go through all Nations that ever were, and are to this
day, and you shall find that saying of a heathen man Cicero (who knew not God
a right) to be most true. That there is no Nation so barbarous, but does
acknowledge a God. For God has revealed himself unto men many ways,
sometimes by visio^s, sometimes by dreams, sometimes by his wonders, sometimes
by his revelations, and written word: But most generally to all men without
exception, Romans 2.15
By his written law in the hearts and consciences of all men. By virtue of
which written law in their hearts, al men naturally know good from bad: That
the good is to be embraced, that evil is to be avoided. That the good and
righteous man is worthy of reward. That wicked and evil men are worthy
punishment. That truth is to be embraced. That error is to be eschewed,
insomuch that no man can pretend any excuse, when he does evil, since all men
have a natural light, whereby they may discern good from bad. As we may see
amongst all heathen people, who albeit they err in the manner of worshipping
God, yet in that, every Nation throughout the world, have their several
Ceremonies, Rites, Sacrifices, and peculiar manner of worshipping their Gods:
they show in general, that God is to be worshipped: they err not, In pietatis
affectu, sed in religionis delectu as one says, in ye they make laws, appoint
punishments for evil dooers, and rewards for those that do well. They show
that piety, justice, and honesty is to be embraced. Nay they show that not only
man punishes wickedness, but yt there is a God, that regards the doings of
men, as we may see in those Mariners which carried Jonas, ^^nas 1.5.
who of all men most commonly least fear God or men; yet when God stirred up a
tempest, they being in ieopardie of their lives, each of them called unto his
God, though they knew not ye true God, yet that they were in the hands of such
a God who had power to save them, or east the^ away, they all knew; else would
they not have prayed unto him; Nay further they acknowledged, that that
dangerous tempest was raised up for the punnishment of some of their sins, and
in that they erred not. Verse. 7.
These men had not the law of Moses to instruct them, but only the light of
nature the effect of the law of Moses written in their hearts. Romans 2.15
Likewise in the Acts of the Apostles, when Paul with his company suffered
shipwreck, being cast into Melita, where the inhabitants were barbarous people,
Act. 28.2.
who never had been instructed either by the law of Moses, or by the Gospel,
yet they showed the law of Moses in effect written in their hearts, they
entertained miserable Paul and his company with great humanity and courtesy.
Nay further, they showed that calamity, misery, and punishments, come not
unto men, by chance, but by the ordinance of God. For when as they saw a viper
take hold on Paul's hand, they make this conclusion, that Paul was a wicked
man: Who although he had escaped drowning, yet God would not have him escape
vengeance. Furthermore, unto this natural knowledge of good and evil, God has
joined and engraven in the minds of all men, a conscience. Which as a
Schoolmaster reprooueth and corrects us, if we do any thing contrary to
reason, being the light of our minds, or omit any thing pertaining to our
duty, and also on the other side does reward us as it were with the oil of
comfort and gladness, insomuch, that there is none so bad, but if at any time
he has done well, he feels in himself a joy and a comfort, for that he
has done well, and as long as he continues in well doing, his hopes are
always comfortable. But when he does evil, Vide Iuuenal. satir. 13. and Ovid.
lib. 1^ Eleg. ad Brutum.
in the doing he is fearful; and when we have done and finished our
enterprises, then especially does our consciences torment and vex us: so that
albeit as one says, Seneca.
Scelus licet quandoque tutum sit, nunquam tamen est securum: A heinous deed
may be done without danger, but never without fear. Terror of conscience is
incident unto all men great and small, no man can be free from it, no not the
mightiest Monarkes that ever were. Alexander the great, who feared no humane
punishment, when he had killed Clitus, was so formented with the grief of
conscience, ye for the space of three days he refrayned from all company and
comfort, and would have pined himself to death, Sabellicus lib. 6. Ennead. 4.
if his captives had not forced in upon him into his Tent, and with great
importunity persuaded him to take comfort. Nay (which is more strange) Nero
Emperor of Rome, who would acknowledge no God, nor cared for any humane law,
after he had privily dispatched his Mother Agrippina, Tacitus. Suetonius.
Z^philin.
was always tormented with fearful dreams in the night, so that oftentimes
he would start out of his bed, and by day time he seemed to hear terrible
blasts of trumpets sounding in his ears: and albeit he removed from place to
place, hoping to be out of the hearing of that fearful noise, yet whither so
ever he went, it continually pursued him, so that from the time he caused
Anicetus to dispatch his mother, he lived in continual fear day and night,
always mistrusting those that lived about him, suspecting treason against his
person when no man thought him harm. This conscience God has placed in the
minds of men as a continual watch over our secret thoughts and doings,
Calvin. Instit. li. 3. ca. 19. sect. 15
with draws us before the judgment seat of God when we do amiss, and gives
testimony against us that we have offended and deserved punishment. This
conscience planted in us by the finger of God, is a bridle unto us, to
restrain us from offending even in secret and in the dark, when no man can
accuse us; it puts us in mind that good is to be done, and evil is to be
avoided; that to do well deserves reward, and to do evil deserves blame and
punishment: though no man sees us, it gladdeth our hearts and fills them
full of good hopes, but makes the hearts of those that do ill, timorous,
mistrustfull, suspicious, and always expecting some ill or other, since by
their offenses they have deserved it. This knowledge of good and evil, and
this conscience is that which restrayneth men from offenses, and not the
devises of Politicians. If all the Politicians in the world should bend their
wits to keep men from offending, it would be to small purpose. Were it not that
God has deeply graven in the hearts of all people in the world, that evil is
to be avoided, and that good is to be embraced. And this is so general in all
men, that never there was any man so absolutely bad, who albeit he did that
which was ill, yet would set down this as a ground, that evil was to be
embraced, and good was to be eschewed: nor ever any so bad, but if he knew he
had done ill, condemned himself therein as worthy of blame and punishment.
Religion therefore is not the invention of Politicians (as you falsely imagine)
but the work of God in the hearts of all men. In vain should all the
Politicians in the world conspire together to deceive men: for deceit and
falshoode by the confession of all men, will soon bewray it self.


Trau. Well, you abstain from evil for fear of punishment, and you apply
your selves to do well for hope of rewards: yet you who thus precisely live
to please God, as you say, are above all other men contemned, wronged, and made
the of-skowring of the world; and these things you must patiently endure too,
or else you loose your reward. But they whom you account most wicked, live in
continual prosperity, Psalm. 73.
and have more than their heart can wish, as your own Prophet does confess.
If indeed there were a God (as you vainly suppose to your great hurt) who so
highly esteemed virtue, and so greatly hated vice; then without doubt he would
presently reward those who observe his law and endeavor to please him: and
contrariwise, presently punish those who contemn him, then would there be more
godliness in the world, and less wickedness.


Stud. I perceive you think you have spoken wisely, seeing you speak this so
confidently. I marvel God took not your advise in these matters. But least
you should over please your self in your error, I will make manifest unto you
your foolish surmised wisdom. Whereas you require (that God should presently
reward ye godly when they have done well; and presently punish the ungodly
as soon as they have done evil; supposing, that hereby would follow greater
piety and less ungodliness; this course were to take away all godliness and
piety. For albeit it be not altogether unlawful to have respect of future
reward for well doing, and also abstain from doing evil for fear of
punishment, God promising the one, and threatening the other, yet to make this
the sole, or principal end of doing well and avoiding evil, is not to obey
God for love of him, whom above our selves and all other things we ought to
love: but to obey God for our own commodity, and to prefer our selves
before God. Now if God should always presently reward godliness, and
presently punish wickedness, considering the infirmity of man as now it is in
his corrupt nature, such is his weakness, that he would obey God, not for the
love of God (as Satan falsely accused Job Job. 1.9 10
) but for his blessing sake: such mercenary love (in truth) is no sincere love,
nor accepted of God for a virtue, but rejected for a vice. Secondly, you are to
consider, that the justice of God is a perfect justice, no way defective: which
it should be, if he should take that course in rewarding godliness, and
punishing vice, with you would prescribe him. For as the godliness and piety of
the good, die not with them when they depart this life, but oftentimes their
virtues, piety, and good works, do more good after their departure out of
this life, then in their life time, as the goodly and learned writings of godly
men, who lived in ancient times, do now instruct many in ye way of truth, and
convert many unto godliness of life; so that albeit they are long since
departed out of this world, yet they continue still in doing good, even to the
worlds end: So on the contrary, wicked me^ who in their life time lived lewdly,
and corrupted others by their ill conversation, leave behind them after their
death the seeds of their wickedness, whose infectious contagion successively
remain in others, perhaps to ye worlds end, so that impossible it is to reward
the one or the other according to their desert in their life time, since the
effect of their doings are not finished until the worlds end. And this was the
reason that Dives being in hell, Luke 16.
desired leave to go and admonish his brethren whom in his life time by his ill
example he had corrupted: not for any love to them, but least they continuing
in their lewd life corrupted by him, his torments should be increased. Thirdly,
it cannot stand with the goodness of God, presently to punish sinners so soon
as they offend; for in God there is perfect patience, who gives time and
leisure to repentance. Romans 2.4.
Many in their youth have been vitiouslie given, who in their latter days,
become notable members of ye Church and Common wealth, whom if God should have
cut off in their youth, we now should have wanted many a notable instrument of
his glory. Paul at the first was a persecutor of those that professed Christ's
name, but afterward, who may he comp^^ed with him? S Augustine in his youth,
was none of the best: yet what notable monuments has he left behind him to the
great good of all the Church. Infinite are the examples that may by brought to
this purpose. Fourthly, in requiring that God should presently reward the
godly, and punish the wicked in this life, you require that which is
impossible. For virtue, piety, and godliness, cannot be prized with any
earthly blessing, they are of greater value then all the gold, and silver, and
precious stones in the world. The true love of God and our neighbor, justice,
patience, and such like, are spiritual graces, and cannot but with spiritual
blessings be rewarded. So on ye contrary, the breach of Gods law, and
ungodliness, deserve greater punishment, than man in this life is able to
endure; so that the just reward promised to godliness, and the due punishment
threatened unto ungodliness, cannot be performed in this life, since the glory of
the one exceeds the capacity of man living in this mortal life: and the
extremity of the other exceeds the ability of any man living in this
mortal body of ours. God therefore who does al things in his just order and due
time, has appointed their seasons, when they both shall be rewarded. Wherefore
you are not to determine of these matters, but leave them to the judgment of
God.


Trau. What tell you me of the judgment of God? I tell you in plain terms,
(upon your former promise of secrecy) I am fully persuaded, that there is no
God.


Stud. I pray you abstain from these abominable speeches.


Trau. Tush, first prove them abominable speeches, then term them so. I am a
reasonable creature, I will believe nothing contrary to force, experience, and
reason.


Stud. Sense, experience, reason, and especially Scripture do prove it.


Trau. Scripture? I believe not one word in it. Prove it by reason, then must I
needs acknowledge it, but I know this fancy is altogether against reason.
Except therefore you prove this by reason, in vain you shall heap testimonies
out of the Scripture: for if I d^d believe there were a God, I would believe
the Scripture; and if I did believe the Scripture, I must needs believe there
is a God.


Stud. This your hateful opinion would seem very strange unto me, but that ye
Scripture fore shows, 2. Tim. 3.^
that in these last days there should be many of this detestable imagination
as now your experience abroad in the world does manifest unto you, that there
are many such: but to the point. Will you acknowledge without cauelling, what
Sense, Experience, and Reason will prove?


Trau. Yes, I will always willingly yield to these.


Stud. Albeit in excepting against the Scripture, you debar me of the
greatest and chiefest means whereby the Majesty of God is lively set forth,
yet to prove there is a God, I require no more tha^ those principles with you
yield to; Sense, Experience, and Reason. Now before I come to prove this
matter, suffer me to ask one or two questions of you. If you should stand on a
Mountain by the sea side, and behold a Ship sailing in the sea, in a great
tempest amongst many dangerous rocks, if you saw her sail directly to the
harbor, skilfully avoiding every rock lying in her way, on which the violence
of the wind, and rage of the waves would drive her, and break her in pieces
were it not, but that by winding this way, and that way, she avoided from
them: Though you saw no man in the ship, would you not think that there were
some man who guided the stern, whereby she passed all those dangers, and came
safely into the harbor?


Trau. Yes, I must needs think so, otherwise the ship would be carried
whither so ever the wind and waves would drive her, and be ouerturned by the
waves, or beaten in pieces on the rocks.


Stud. One question more, and then I will come to ye matter in question: think
you, yt you have a soul in your body?


Trau. What an absurd question is this. How otherwise could I talk with you? I
have all my senses; this question is questionless.


Stud. But yet for all this, Act. ^.38
you never saw your soul, nor can well describe unto me what a thing it is.


Trau. What if I never saw it, nor can descibe it: shall I therefore, doubt
whether I have a soul or no? her operations in me, do show and prove that I
have a soul. Many things be of that nature, that they cannot be seen, G^^.
4.3
yet are no more to be doubted of, but that they are, than whether the things
which we see with our eyes, are or no: as the wind we see not, yet our sense
does feel it, my voice you see not, yet you hear it; we see not sweet or ill
savors, yet our sense shows us, that there are such.


Stud. Were it not but that the Scripture teaches me, yt God punishes those
who regard not to know him, with a strange grosnesse of understanding in
spiritual matters, and gives them over to a reprobate sense, 2. These. 2
10.11.12.
that they should not perceive, that which they see: I should much marvel at
you and the like men. Is it not strange that you can gather by consequent of
reason, that of necessity there must he a guide in ye ship which sayleth in
the sea, because he sayleth to the harbor, avoiding all dangers wc might
annoy her, which dangers she could not possibly avoid, except she were guided
by some having reason and skill how to direct and guide it. And also
acknowledge that you have a soul in your body, which, what it is, you cannot
sufficiently describe, only because it manifests it self unto you by her
operations in you: so that no way you can doubt, but yt you have a soul, whose
substance you never saw: and yet seeing the admirable order and course of all
things in ye world continually guided and preserved in an order far passing
the capacity of man; doubt whether there be a God which made, guides, and
preserves al things. Herein you are far worse the^ heathen me^, who albeit
they were never instructed by the word of God, yet by the continual and
orderly course of the heavens, and by the seasonable fruits of the earth, all
of them coming in their due times and seasons, did gather that there was a God
which moved the heavens in such order, and caused all things here on earth, to
observe their certain course. Therefore now I must deal with you, as with a
heathen man (since you except against Scripture) and by things seen prove
the invisible power, wisdom, and goodness of God: who, that all men might be
without excuse, made the world: that all men seeing the infinite hugeness, the
great diversity, and the orderly course of all things in it, and enioy-the
commodities of all things therein, might acknowledge h^s infinite power, admire
his wisdom, and with thankfulness laud him for his exceeding blessings. If
you will yield to sense and reason, you must of necessity acknowledge, that
the creation of the heavens, earth, and variety of al things contained therein
cannot be effected but by a divine power far exceeding the power of all the
Monarkes since the world began. If you consider the admirable order of all
things created in heaven and earth, wherein every thing is placed in his
dignity, you cannot but with wonder admire the admirable wisdom of the
disposer.

And (to enter into the particular consideration of it) consider first the
blessed Angels, who as in dignity they come nearest God their maker: so
according to their dignity, they are placed in a most blessed place. Man, in
dignity next unto the^, being a creature consisting of two different natures,
his soul of a heavenly substance, his body made of ye earth: though by reason
of the union of the soul with the body, he lives here on earth, yet (as
Hermes terms him) is he a divine creature, and according to his spiritual
substance, has his conversation in heaven, meditating on the glorious majesty
of God his chiefest felicity, desiring fully to enjoy his presence, who has
so far dignified him, that for his only sake, he created all the world, and
man for his own glory: to this end has he given man reason to consider of
all his works, senses to behold them, and a tongue to magnify his goodness
for these his excellent blessings: next unto man consider the heavens
themselves, the greatness and compass thereof, the number of the Stars, and
their variety, their continual and orderly motions without ceasing or
weariness, whose virtues and influences no tongue can express, so necessary
for all things living here on earth; that if they should but stay their
motions, and but for a small time cease to send down their influences and
virtues, al things here on earth would fade and come to naught. Infinite is the
number of the stars and planets in Heaven, their virtues so necessary, that
if you take any of them away, his defect would hinder the operations of the
other. For proof of this, I will instance but in two of them. Whose virtues
are known so necessary, that without the^, all the rest would serve to no
purpose, there is none so simple who knows not, nor any so impudent as durst
deny, that if the Sun were taken out of the number of the Planets all the rest
both of stars, and planets would loose their light, and consequently their
operations, all trees and herbs which grow on earth, cease bearing fruit, and
quickelye come to naught. Take away the moon, besides that, the comfortable
guidance which Trauilers by night have by the benefit of her light, would be
wanting, all trees and herbs also on the earth, would soon wither away
through the heat of the sun, for want of her mo^stenning. Nay, suffer them to
have their being in heaven, only stay their motions, all things on earth would
come to nothing. For the Sun wheresoever he stayed, would skorch all things
directly under him, and dry the^ to powder, the Moon wheresoever she stayed,
would putrify al things under her, and bring the^ to rottenness. The like may
be said in particular of every star in heaven: for if there were not a
necessary use of every one of them, the^ would it follow, that God had made
some thing in vain: the which you know is against a ground and principle in
philosophy, and therefore needs not any farther proof. Next unto these,
consider the decent order of the elements, which as they are in dignity one
more excellent than another, so according to their dignity are they placed one
above another, this I know you are not ignorant of, being a matter agreed upon
by all Philosophers. Lastly, consider al things here on earth, how they in their
dumb language do set forth the glory of God: and here first consider the sea
most wonderful to behold, and most profitable for all mankind, wonderful to
see how his mighty waves seem to threaten the ouerflowing of all the earth:
yet by the only appointment of God, is limited his course and bounds, the
which he cannot pass: but as rebuked by the shores his appointed limits,
retourneth back to his channels again. Then the great commodity thereof
appears in the varietiy and unspeakable number of fishes in it, which as a
common treasury for all sorts of people, rich and poor, yealdeth fishes in
variety unspeakable, in number infinite, free without money, in so plentiful
manner, that notwithstanding all nations continually night and day, take out of
it unknown store of fish, yet there remain such plenty, that there is no
sign that any have been taken out of it. Lastly, consider the manifold
variety of fowls, beasts, plants, and herbs, wherewith God has enriched
the earth all for the use of man: observe the provident order with God has
appointed in causing springes of water (without which man cannot live) to issue
out of high mountains in the land, and channels to conueie them into the Sea,
otherwise would they drown the whole land: and herein observe a maruailous
wonder, that notwithstanding all the rivers in the world do empt themselus
into the Sea, and have done so ever since the world began: yet at this time,
is the Sea no fuller than at the beginning: to speak of all particulars which
God has created here on earth, not only for ye use of man, but also for his
delight, were to undertake that which no tongue can express or pen describe;
therefore I leave them to your particular consideration. Now if you should
behold a goodlye house, curiously builded, adorned, and garnished with all
things which may delight the beholder, with fit and convenient rooms for all
necessary uses, with conduits of water into every room where it might need,
all things as well composed as wit and art can devise, could you imagine that
such a house were composed by chance? reason would constrain you to confess,
that the composer and builder thereof, was endued with great skill, art, and
wisdom: how much more should you (when you behold the great fabrike of the
world) confess the great power and wisdom of God, were you not given over
into a reprobate se^co? Now to create all these things, and place them in so
wonderful order, does far pass all humain power and wisdom; but
continually to preserve and continue al these particulars perpetually in their
motions, virtues, and order, is a matter of greater wonder, all the Monarks of
the world cannot create one hair. Painters may paint the world with all
things in it, but they cannot give them life and motions, they can instill no
virtue into the^, in this prouide^t preservation of God in preserving al things
in their proper and several natures, consider first his general providence over
al things in the world; the^ a more especial care of man above all things in
the earth; and lastly, his especial care over his elect.


Tra. Nay, stay first, let me except against that which you have spoke of the
creation of all things for the good (as you say) of men: you have ranged
through heaven and earth, and can find nothing amiss. I pray you tell me, is
it for the good of man, that oftentimes thunders, lightnings, and tempests,
break forth, whereby not only houses are ouerturned, but also men and cattle
are destroyed: oftentimes the sun skorcheth the earth, and frosts so extrea^ly
nip the fruits of the earth, that by such unseasonable weather, men and beasts
are hunger-baned.


Stu. Before I answer this point, let me see your strange fashioned Rapier.


Tra. O sir, I perceive you seek digressions.


Stu. Noe truly, I mean to answer your objection.


Tra. Then lo sir, I marvel not that you admire it so much, I think you have
not seen the like; this Rapier I bought at Bilbo in Spain, his maker was the
skilfullest man in his art in all Spain, by the opinion of his countrymen,
mark the curious inamelling of him, feel his lightness, you may run him
double against the wall, and it will never be the worse, this Rapier I am
persuaded has not his fellow in all England.


Stu. Indeed it is curiouslye wrought, and it should seem the woorkeman
thereof had great skill, but he had not the skill to keep it from rusting:
for me thinks, it begins to rust in one place.


Tra. Is that the fault of the Cutler? I hope you are not so ignorant, but that
you know all iron is subject to rust, no art be it never so exquisite, can
prevent this; you know it is a general position in Aristotle, that all mixed
bodies are subject to corruption, because they are composed of the elements
consisting of contrary qualities.


Stu. You say right, the rust of this Sword comes by the fault of the iron,
and not of the maker of this Rapier. I marvel that you can so easily see
whence these faults, corruptions, and evils proceed, and yet accuse God as the
Author of them: you free the Cutler from the fault, that this rust begins
to eat this Rapier, you ascribe the fault to the nature of the metal whereof
it is made, and herein you say truly; when it went out of his hand it had not
this fault, and I marvel that you cannot as well free God from being the
Author of those evils, which before you recited, for God made all things as
free from faults, as this Cutler this Rapier; these evils proceed from the
things created, and not from the creator.


Tra. Yea, but if God be omnipotent and good, then had it been a part of his
omnipotency and goodness, so to have made things, that there should have
been no imperfection in them; as for example, if God had made the metal of
this Rapier so perfect, that it should never have gathered rust, and that
being once a Rapier, it should never break, nor any way decay, his
omnipotency and goodness would have been greater than now it is: what builder
of a house will not make it as durable as he can? what builder of a City does
not make it as strong as he can, that it might not be subject to any decay?
How much more should God exceed in prouidencie and goodness to men, and make
all his creatures of such perfection, that they should no way have any
imperfection in them, if he be of that omnipotency as you would make him.


Student. Sir, you must understand that particular things are made for the
general good of the universal, and parts are made for ye good of the whole.
As for example; Man is not made for the use of his hands, eyes, legs, or any
of his members: but his hands are made for ye use of his whole body, his eyes
to direct ye whole body, the legs to bear the whole body: no member is made
for the use of it self only. Now if the imperfection of particulars in that
they are subject to corruption and decay, make more for the good of the whole,
then if there were no imperfetion in the^: then it becomes the maker of the
whole, more to respect the good of the whole, then the particular, and make
particulars subject to corruption for the good of ye whole, and to persist in
your own examples; does ye builder of an house respect particulars in ye
regard of the whole? does he not cut down many a tree for the building of
this house? does he not dig out many a stone out of the earth? does he not
break him into many pieces until he be fit for his building? do not builders
of a City the like? they will hew in pieces and break goodly trees, and great
stones for the good of building: and why should it seem strange to you, that
God should make particulars subject to corruption for the good of the whole?
Now this rapier being a particular of the whole, was not made for his own
sake, but for the general use of man. And more good arises out of this, yt he
was made subject to rust, corruption, breaking, and marring, than if it should
be made (as you would have it) eternal; and that for many manifest reasons.
First, God who created all the world, he and all the particulars in the world
for the use of man, foreseeing the fall of man, and that he would degenerate
from that goodness wherein he created him; in his justice, against the
disobedience of man, provided this as a punishment for his transgression, that
he should earne his living with ye sweat of his brows. Necessary therefore
it was, that he should provide something whereon he should labor. Now, if God
should have made this so perfect in all respects, yt it should never take rust,
or any way be subject to decay; if our apparel were of such metal, that it
would never wear out; if our houses were such, yt they would never decay; if
our land would never bring forth weeds, but always good corn of his own
accord, as you would have all these and all other particulars to be of such
perfection as being once created or made, they should ever endure. Then hereby
you would take away the justice of God against the sin, and the disobedience
of man against God: who for his transgression has appointed this labor on
these particulars to keep these things in reparation, and that by his labor
herein, he might get his living by the sweat of his brows. Secondly, if these
particulars which are made for the good of the whole, were not subject to
alteration, if houses, apparel, and such like, would never decay being once
made, infinite inconveniences would follow thereby. For notwithstanding they do
now decay, yet (ye world being so full of people, which also God foresaw, and
therefore provided for it accordingly) you see what daily complaints the poor
sort of people do make, that they are out of work. The Carpenter, Mason,
Tailor, and such like trades men, who are over charged with wife and children,
how much less should these poor men according to the ordinance of God, get
their living for themselves, and their household, if houses once made would
never decay, if apparel, and such like necessaries for the use of man, should
never wear out. So that you may see, that these things being made for the use
of man, and not man for them; God has made them more beneficial for the use
of man in making the^ subject to change, than if he had made them durable for
ever. Thirdly, God knowing the weakness and infirmity of man's corrupt
nature, that as water, if it stand still, it will corrupt and gather
putrefaction, but if it be always running, it continues pure: so the mind of
man, if it be idle, it will bring forth corrupt fruit; but if it be busied on
honest labor, it is free from corrupt and lewd thoughts, and free from evil
works. Therefore God appoints men to labor on mutable and changeable
metal, that their labor should never be at an end, necessity constrayning
them thereunto, else would they be idle, and being idle, would wax wicked.
Thus God who first appointed labor unto man for his transgression, turns it
into a great blessing, that whilst men continue laboring painefully in their
vocation, they are free from occasions of sin, and God blesses their labors
both with te^porall and spirtuall blessings; temporal, as health and wealth,
whereas contrariwise, they yt are idle are neither healthy, nor wealthy. With
spiritual blessings in this world, as with good thoughts, good conscience, and
many other graces of the mind: and in the world to come, God in Christ will
reward them, because they have walked according to his ordinance, painefully in
their vocation. Concerning the other part of your Objection, that oftentimes
thunder, wind, tempest break forth, and unseasonable weather, to ye great hurt
of mankind: You must consider, that the things which God created for man, have
a double use, a principal, and a secondary use: the principal use of the^
all, is to profit man according to their manifold and several virtues given to
them of God in their first creation. Psalm. 11.
The secondary use of them is, to be instruments of Gods justice against man,
if he disobey his Maker, contrary to their natures and properties in their
first institution. That as man, who was made to obey his maker, begins to
disobey him that made him, and degenerate from his principal end whereunto he
was created to glorify God his Creator. So these things which were created for
man's use, should degenerate from their principal and primarie use, to afflict
man for his disobedience, and be instruments of Gods justice against the sin of
man. This secondary use of these punishments even the heathen people who knew
not God, App^um li. 1. de civilly bello Romans
did always acknowledge as profane histories and Poets do every where
testify. I need not exemplyfie this unto you out of Liuie, that the Romans
custom was, if any sudden tempest arose, if lightning and thunder, if
infectious of ye air, or other diseases were engendered and came to pass,
straight way after their manner, they sought to appease the wrath of their
Gods, acknowledging that these calamities proceed from the wrath of God.
Likewise the Grecians they acknowledged these accidents to be the special
punishment of God for the offenses of men, as you may see in Poets; when as the
whole Navy was stayed at the I Will Aulis, Agamemnon the General sends to
Calcas the Priest, to know wherein the Gods were offended, and what might
appease their wrath? understanding the true cause of it, and that they should
not appease the wrath of their Gods, except he sacrificed his Daughter
Iphiginie, he spares not his daughter to appease their ire. When Pharao was
punished with Lice, Frogs, hailestones, and his cattle and people with
mortality, then he acknowledged the power of God, then he desired Moses yt he
would pray to God to take away those plagues from him. But as soon as the
plagues were removed, straight way his fear of God was gone. Take not
exception against this testimony, out of the scripture, since profane histories
testify this same. Here you see an other great commodity arises unto mankind
by these things which you call evils; For by these extraordinarye punishments,
men are moved to fly unto God for succor, yea even wicked men, who otherwise
in their security never think on God, but continue still in their wickedness.
When Jonas fled by sea from the presence of God (as he thought) and God stirred
up a great tempest, then the Mariners prayed to their Gods, then they prayed
seriously, and from thyir hearts without hypocrisy. Otherwise in prosperity,
they seldom, carelessely, and for fashion or custom sake, repeat ye words of
ordinarye prayer without thought of God. Now, though these evils as you term
them are grievous for the present time, yet considering the profit they bring
unto man, as namely, they cause men to fly unto God, and seek succor and aid
at his hand, they cause us to pray sincerely, heartily, and ardently unto God,
they cause us to enter into examination of our former life, wherein we have
offended God, and moved his wrath against us, though these things seem
grievous and fearful for the time, yet cannot they properly be termed evils,
considering yt profit which they effect in man. Pills and potions are
unpleasant and for the time cause those that take them to be sick, yet no man
will term them evils; we seek to the Physician for his advise, and although
we know that which he prescribes will be bitter and unpleasant, yet we refuse
them not, we acknowledge our selves beholding unto the Physician, who prescribes
them unto us, and great reason we should do so, for by physic though
unpleasant, we recover health being impaired, and also preserve our bodies
least they fall into diseases, and should not we acknowledge our selves bound
unto God, and be grateful unto him, for these gentle remembrances, which you
falsely call evils, who when we have forgotten our duty toward him, by these
unexpected and fearful thunders, tempests, infection of the air, strange
diseases and such like, are put in mind of ye wrath of God against our sins,
that we might repent and amend our lives, wc, who so neglects, heapeth up to
himself a heavier wrath against yt day of judgment, because he regards not
the gentle corrections and remembrances of the Lord. A fourth use of these
fearful thunders, storms, winds and tempests, infection of the air, strange
diseases, and consuming pestilence, 2. Peter. 3. verse. 3.4.
is to confute such as you are, for it is prophesied of Saint Peter, (and
verified by you, and a great many else,) that in the last days there will come
mockers, which will walk after their own lust, and say, where is the promise
of his coming, (namely Christ's coming to judgment) for since the fathers
died, all things continue alike as from the beginning: such is the nature of
the wicked that if God extraordinarily show not his power sometimes by
punishings, but still continue his blessings, they think that those blessings
which they enjoy, come not of the goodness of God, but by course of nature;
but when some fearful extraordinarye event come to pass, they are
constrained to acknowledge that there is a God above, that which they call
nature, able to do things above and contrary to nature, causing oftentimes
scarcity of fruits when the whole year before has been seasonable, and
contrariwise great plenty and store, when it has been an unseasonable year.
Now, albeit some particular have sustained harm either by thunder, lightnings,
tempests, or such like extraordinary event: yet has it been for the good of
the whole, that others seeing ye seueritye of God and his extraordinary work,
with fear and reverence might acknowledge his great power, yet no particular
who have sustained losses by such events, can iustlye complain against such
punishments, because no man ever sustained more then his sins deserved:
unjustly therefore you call these events evils, since so many and great good
effects are wrought by them, you may call them mala paenae, which indeed are
not evils, but the execution of Gods justice.


Tra. Yea, but you shall not thus shift me off. I will directly prove there
are evils in the world, properly termed evils, which if I do, it follows
that there is no such God as you imagine, for God (as you say) is omnipotent,
and in him is the perfection of all goodness: either therefore God would take
away all evils in the world, and cannot; or else can, and will not; or neither
will, nor can take them away; or lastly, can and will. If he would and cannot,
then is he not omnipotent, and therefore no God: if he can and will not, he is
not as good as may be, and therefore no God. If he nether can, nor will, then
is nether omnipotent, nor most good. If he can, and will, then should there be
no evils in the world; but there are evils as the sins of men, which (as you
say) God hates; if he hates them, why does he suffer them to be? Nay, which
is far worse; why are they, who most sincerely think there is a God, and
therefore seriouslye observe his will and commandments? yet of all men are most
miserable in this world, most afflicted, most contemned, and vilefied, as the
experience of all ages can testify: and on the contrary, they who have been
most wicked, have above all other men lived most prosperouslye all their life
long. What an excellent man was Cato, who all his life long continually labored
to expel vice out of Rome, yet what a miserable life lived he? always hated
and oppugned by the cheifest men of Rome, and after his death was no way
honored according to his worth, although he had spent his whole life* only in
seeking to do his common wealth good. What a notable man was Pompey, for his
heroical mind and noble virtues surnamed the Great, who even of his enemies
and men of other nations was acknowledged to be a man of excellent virtues.
Yet, especially in his latter days, what a troublesome life lived he? What an
unworthy end had he? and after his death no ways graced. On the contrary,
base and vicious Licinus, a notarious flatterer, Barbar to Augustus, was
dearly beloved of the Emperor Augustus, graced by the Senators of Rome, all
his life lived most happily, and after his death was dignified with a
maiesticall tomb: Insomuch that Beroaldus i^steth at it, Marmoreo Licinus
tumulo iacet, at Cato paruo.

Pompeius nullo, credimusiesse deos. Licinus a vicious base flattering Barber,
laeth in a maiesticall tomb. Virtuous Cato lies in a little tomb, great
Pompey has none at all: and can we think there are Gods? What a noble minded
Roman was Brutus, who spent his whole life in defense of the liberties of his
country, sustained the hatred of all wicked Tyrants: yet at length was he
ouerthrown by Caesar, an an far worse then himself, though he confidently
expected the aid of his Gods having a good cause on his side, the defense of
his country, but all in vain, and being deceived of his expected aid,
falls on the point of his sword, crying out, Ista Iouem haud latent, quinque
est horum causa malorum accusing Jupiter that he saw all his miseries, yet
helped him not; nay, that he was the cause of all his miseries, Contrariwise,
what a monster was Dionisius the tyrant, who delighted in wickedness and
iested at the gods? Who, when he had robbed the temple of Proserpina at
Locris, sailing prosperously home to Syracusa, said to his fellows, do ye not
see my companions, what a prosperous sailing the gods have given to us
Churchrobbers? and being flesht herein, afterward sailed to Peloponesus, and
came into the Temple of Jupiter, where Jupiter was clothed wi^h a cloak of
cloth of gold, gybing at him, took off his cloak of gold saying, that it was
too cold for winter, and too heavy for summer, and put his own cloak on him
made of woll: saying, that that was warmer for the winter, and lighter for the
su^mer, fit for all seasons of the year: also he took off from Esculapius his
golden beard, saying it was not sit the sun should be bearded, since his father
was always painted without a beard; afterward he took out all the Gold and
Silver, and vessels of the temples, and sold it in the market: when he had
received the price of it, then he made proclamation that whosoever had any
vessels pertaining to the temples they should within a certain day, restore
them to the temples again, because it was not lawful for to profane that
which was consecrated to holy uses. This Monster lived forty years
prosperously, died not unfortunately, and left his kingdom to his Son
peaceablelye, which by lewd means he usurped. You know what Diogenes was wont
to say of Harpalus (a notorious thief, and most prosperous) that he was a
great argument against the gods: meaning that if there were any gods, or if
they had any care what was done here on earth, they would never suffer such a
notorious thief to live so long, and so prosperously. If these examples be
not sufficient, read Plutarch, of the lives of the most famous Graecians and
Romans, read, Boccace de casibus illustrium virorum, where you shall find
always the better man he was, the more oppositions he had in all his life.
Now, least you should take any exception against these examples taken out of
profane histories, as you term them, I will prove this also out of the
scripture: in the time of Job, great was the prosperity of the wicked. Job. 21.
The wicked live and waxes old, says Job and grow in wealth, their seed is
established in their sight, their houses are peaceable without fear, and the
rod of the lord is upon them, their cattle increase and prosper, they send
forth their children like sheep, and their sons dance; they take the tabret
and harp, and rejoice in the sound of the Organs: they say unto God, depart
from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: who is the almigh ie
that we should serve him? or what Prophet should we have if we should pray unto
him? Likewise in the time of David, such was their prosperity, that he
confesses that he was greatly moved at it. My feet had almost slipped, Psalm.
73.
when I saw the prosperity of the wicked, they are lusty and strong, they are
not in trouble like other men, they are full of pride, and cruelty, their eyes
stand out with fatness, they have more then their heart can wish, they air
licencious, and speak wickedlye of their oppression, they talk
presumptuouslye, they set their mouth against Heaven: Does not this matter so
far move the Prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 12.
that he does expostulate the matter with God, why it should be so: saying, O
Lord, if I dispute with thee concerning thy judgments thou art just: Yet let me
talk with thee concerning thy judgments. Wherefore do the way of the wicked
prosper, why are they in wealth that rebelliouslie transgress? thou have
planted them, and they take root: they grow and bring forth fruit; thou art
near in their mouths, but far from their hearts. Does not the Prophet
Habakuk the like? Hab. 2.13.
Wherefore (says he to God) do thou behold the transgressors, and hold thy
tongue, when the wicked deuoureth the man that is more just then himself? Were
not the worst men the happiest me^ in the time of the Prophet Malachie? Malach.
3.15.
they openly professed, that it was in vain to serve God. And they show (in
mine opinion) a good reason for it: For say they, The wicked are blessed, even
they that work wickedness, are set up, and they that tempt God, are delivered.

Now tell me, what master of a family, having good and badde servants in his
family, would frown on the good, and speak friendly to the wicked? afflict
the good, and deal roughly with them? and grace the badde, and deal friendly
with them? yea suffer them to enjoy their hearts desire? If a mortal man
qualified with ordinary honesty, will not do this; can you think, that if there
were a God who respected what is done one arth, would suffer these things? Thus
you see I can if need be, play the Divine.


Stud. But to the dishonor of God, the Devil, by whose spirit you speak,
taught you this: who also used the scripture, but to a badde purpose. Spiders
even of the best and sweetest flowers get matter, good in it self, but being
infected by their ill breath, is turned into poison: so such as you are, gather
out of good flowers ye word of God, good matter, but by the infection of your
ill spirits, you turn it to worse then poison. But to let this pass, you
instance by many examples, that there are many evils amongst men, and hereon
you thus conclude: Either God would take away all these evils out of the world,
and cannot; or else can, and will not; or neither can, nor will; or can, and
will. If he would and cannot, he is weak, and therefore no God. If he can, and
will not, he is envious, which cannot be in God. If ^e neither can, nor will,
he is both weak and envious. But weakness nor envy cannot be in God, if there
be any; for if there be a God, he must needs be omnipotent and most good, or
else no God. If he can and will, how comes it to pass that there are so many
evils amongst men? First I grant that there are evils, and properly, evils the
sins of men, which God could take away, and therefore no weakness in him:
but he does not, not of envy toward mankind, but for his greater good: and
this is the reason why there are so many evils amongst men. For in yt there are
evils, both ye glory of God, and the good of men, is made more manifest: so
that it neither stands with the glory or goodness of God, to take them away,
but to suffer them to be. Now, to make this manifest unto you, give me leave
to prove, first that God is not ye author of evils: secondly to show whence
they spring. For the first point, that God is not the Author of these evils;
God, who is goodness it self, whose property is to communicate his goodness
to others, made the whole world that his creatures might participate of his
goodness. Unto the perfection whereof, it was behoouefull yt there should be
diverse degrees of different natures. He has made four degrees of things ye
are in the world. The lowest degree whereof, has only his being without life,
without sense or motion, without reason: and of this kind are the four
Elements, Fire, Air, Water, and the Earth. Of the second degree, ^re those
things which beside their being have life; as trees, flowers of the field,
which sometimes grow and increase, sometimes die. A third kind are they which
besides their being, and life, have also sense, motion, able to move from place
to place, as beasts, fowls, fish. The fourth and highest degree have besides
these things before mentioned, reason, and wisdom: and in this degree of
creatures, are only men and Angels. In these four degrees are comprehended
al ye creatures that God has made, and all these were created good. Now, evils
have no place among the things created, neither can it, because it has no
essence or being in it self, but is a defect of that good which should be in
things created, by the default of the creature, and not of the Creator. As
blindness is a defect of the eyes, sickness an indisposition and
disproportion of the four Elements with their qualities with should be in the
body, whereby the members of the body are not able freely to execute their
functions. Yet because evils serve for the greater commendations of those
things that are good; and things good, do more apparently show their goodness by
comparing them with evils, as sickness once tried, makes health to be more
grateful unto us; meats are then most sweet unto us, when we have been
long hungry; the light more pleasant unto us, and better welcome after much
darkness, heavy, and gloomie weather. Therefore although God does not cause
them, yet he hinders them not, but suffers them to have a kind of
dependancie on his creatures, for the greater good of the universal: yet thus
far he hinders evils to be; that they break not out, but when, and where he
list: else would the malice of ye Devil and wicked men quickly bring all
things to naught: he governs, and guides them for his own glory, and good
of his own elect: for he would no way suffer them to be, except he used them
to good purpose; for the punishment of the wicked to show his justice, and for
the furtherance and behalf of his elect. This being shown, ye God is not the
author of them, and that they have no being amongst all the works of God, but
are blemishes and defects of things created; it now follows to show you the
first original cause from whence they came, which was the free will of man
wilfully disobeying his creator, who had this excellent gift bestowed on him,
that he had an ability, free will, and power either to obey his maker; or if he
would, disobey him: in obeying his maker consisted his felicity; in
disobeying, his misery and woe. All the sins in the world (which only can
properly be called evil, excepting the disobedience of the Devil) proceed
from the free will of man. There is no cruelty, no adultery, oppression,
hatred, malice, or in a word, no sin, but proceeds from the free will of
man. But you say, why does God suffer cruelty, oppression, and wrong, as that
heroical Brutus, or sincere Cato should be continually oppugned all their
life long? And why does God suffer Dionisius and Harpalus, and such mo^sters to
live so prosperously? To the first I answer, that if God should have suffered
no oppressor of his common wealth to have lived in Brutus his time, how should
Brutus have showed his virtues, in withstanding Tyra^ts? if there had lived no
wicked and lewd person in Catoes time, Cato could not have bin so virtuous. Who
so will take away al wickedness, by consequent takes away virtue; for virtue
consists in rooting out vice: where there is no wrong done, there can be no
patience showed; where there is no resistance, there can be no victory; and
where there is no victory, no crown. Again, God suffers wicked Dionisius,
Harpalus, and such like, to live here on earth happily, that in ye day of
judgment they might be without excuse; Romans 1.18 Psalm. 17.14
and this is their portion of joys which ever they shall have: so that we
need not envy their short felicity, considering the everlasting pains they
are to endure. And albeit such be their monstrous behahauiour, that they
deserve not the happiness of one day, yet such is the exceeding goodness of
God, that he will have even ye worst of his creatures to have a taste of his
goodness; even Satan and all the wicked spirits of hell had a taste of Gods
goodness before they fell from the good estate wherein God created them. There
is no wicked man so absolutely bad, but that at some time or other, has at the
least some show or shadow of some virtue or other: now such is the love of God
unto virtues, that he will bless with temporal blessings even the shadows of
virtue. Again, he suffers such wicked monsters to live, for ye good of his
elect; that they seeing the deformity of vice in the^, might be moved the more
seriously to detestation of vice, and to a more ardent love of virtue.
Furthermore, he suffers such wicked creatures to live, for ye exercise of the
good: to manifest their hearts, whether they will oppose themselves against
vice, or be drawn away unto ungodliness by their entisements. Lastly, he
suffers such monsters to live, to manifest the hearts of his elect. For to
try their hearts whether they love him sincerely, or no. For a true natural
son cannot see his father dishonored, but he will be moved at it, and
oppose him self against those that dishonor him; and no true elect of God can
endure to see God dishonored by wicked men, but he will bend himself against
them. The Lord himself says, that he will send false Prophets amongst you, to
try your hearts, Deuteronomy. 13.3
whether ye love him, or no. Whether we will stick unto his word, or be
carried away by ye false persuasion of wicked seducers, or lewd livers. To this
end God stirred up many enemies against the children of Israel even to try
their hearts, whether they would trust in ye help of God, or seek indirect
means to bring themselves out of troubles. Deuteronomy. 15.11.
To this end God (who could have made, that no man should have needed ye help
of other men) sends the poor amongst us, commanding us to relieve the^, to
try our hearts whether we more regard our wealth, then his commandment. Ps.
129.2.
For albeit God knows all the thoughts of men's hearts long before they are,
yet because he has appointed a general day of judgment wherein he will
judge every man according to his works, Ier. 17.10
he will stir up such occasions unto all men, whereby by their works they
shall manifest what is in their hearts, that he may reward every man according
to his works. Now, whereas you say that he is an ill master of a family, who
having good and bad servants in his house, will grace and do good unto the
bad, and deal hardly with the good, and frown on them: your Comparison
holds not, because the duty of man is prescribed unto him what he ought to
do; reason, the laws both humane and divine, do bind us to do good,
especially to those that do well, and punish those that do ill: and who so
does not this offends. But you must consider, that God is above all law. If
he of his bounty will bestow his blessings on the wicked who deserve them
not, if he cause the sun to rise as well on the wicked as the just, he
offends not: may he not do with his own what seems best unto himself? he
may show mercy to whom he will without breach of law or justice. Again, if
he lay afflictions on ye good, their sins deserve more punishment, then ever
any suffered affliction here on earth. What if he send trouble on the^ to try
whether they will murmur against him, or with patience endure those things
which they know comes on them by the appointment of God? is he therefore
unjust, who by these means makes their patience and other virtues to shine
more gloriously?


Trau. In this your answer, to free God from being the Author of sin, which
is only and properly evil, you lay the fault on the free will of man, who
willingly does disobey the will of his Maker. But I take this for no answer:
for if God who (as you affirm) foreseeth all things, and is omnipotent, and
able to prevent all evils to come. Why did he give man free will the which he
knew he would abuse to his dishonor, and his own hurt? Why did he not make
him so firm, that he should not have been able to sin?


Stud. As well might you find fault that God made man, as that he gave him
freewil: freewill and reason are the greatest gifts under the sun; whereby
only man excels all other creatures; whereby he is made able to do those
things which are acceptable to his maker. If you take away freewill, so that
man should not be able to transgress the law of his Maker; Wherein should he be
any whit better then fire, which naturally burns and can do no other? Zanch.
lib. 5 cap. 1. These. 2. de natura Dei. Muscul. in locis com. tract. de li. arb.
Pet. Mart. in loc. com. tract. de lib. arb. sect. 23
or from the sun, which naturally shines, and can do no other? take away
free will, and you take away al virtues. The excellency of free will consists
in embracing virtues, and eschewing, and resisting evils. Take away free will
from man, and you take out of man the image of God. For as God cannot be
constrained; so neither the free will of man, no creature has power to
co^strain it. Take away free will from man, and you take away the means of
attayning to ye joys of heaven: no man can truly believe, nor virtuously
live but by free will. Ioh. 8.36.
God has given man free will to dignifie him; for by the means of free will,
man in some sort abtayneth everlasting bliss. For albeit no man is able to do
any good work without the special grace of God, Aug. lib. 50 homil. 14. Tom.
10. lib. de great. and lib. arb. c. 17. to. 7. tom. 10. de verb. Apost. sermon.
13. Bed. in Ep. ad Romans ^.3. in fin. cap.
yet man is not herein merely passive; as a sword with then only cutteth, when
man strikes with him, but is no agent or doer of himself: but when the will
of man is persuaded by the operation of ye holy Ghost to work those things
which please God, he does it willingly, and uses his natural faculties, Bar.
m. 2.2. Tho. Aqui. quaest. 10. art. 1. and se^uent. Perkins in his reformed
Catholic, in the point of free will.
for the performance of it, he labors and takes pains in it, although the
holy Ghost be the principal and efficient cause of every good work, without
whom no man can work any good work, yet is it Remota causa, a remote cause,
from which, actions usually take not their name and denomination. But commonly
a proxima causa from the nearest cause of any effect. The Sun cannot give
light except God continue him in his natural virtue: Vide Keker man. lib. 1.
de causis subordinat. syat. logicae. sol. 144.
the fire cannot give heat except God give and continue in it his virtue so to
do. God is the primary cause of these virtues, yet we say not, (when the
Sun shines, or the fire heateth) that God gives light, or God heateth. But
the sun gives light, and the Fire heateth; so man by free will believes in
Christ, and by a godly conversation endeavors to make his election sure, but
by ye working also of the holy Ghost.


Trau. Well. I grant that free will is an excellent quality in man: but why did
God give Adam a law which he knew he would not keep, but through his free
will break it? had it not been for this law, all things had been well.


Stud. Why, do you think it reason, that when God had bestowed on man free
will, whereby he had power either to honor his Maker, or dishonor him at his
will; That Adam should be left free without punishment, if he would (having
power to do it) be ungrateful to God, or dishonor his Maker? Is it ill to
be bound to do well having power absolute to perform it, as Adam had? Do
Princes ill, who make good laws for their common wealth, which they know will
sometimes be broken? The laws which Princes make for the good of their common
wealth, are very many in number. Some very hard to be observed: the weakness
and frailety of men since the fall of Adam is now very great: yet you cannot
justly find fault with Princes, for making many good laws, (without which a
common wealth cannot stand) though they know they will be broken: much less
can you justly find fault with God, who gave but one law to Adam, and such a
law as was very easy to be observed: neither was he hindered with any frailty
as we are, but was endued with excellent graces whereof we have not as yet
tasted. Besides this, as God foresaw the fall of Adam, so did he provide in
his mercy, and not for any desert of man, a remedy for it, even his only
begotten son Jesus Christ for a redemption for our sin, that we by
repentance and faith in Jesus Christ, might attain remission for our sins.
Neither would God have suffered Adam to have fallen, but that by the consequent
thereof, he intended of his goodness to turn it to the greater good of
almankind. Had not Ada^ fallen, many excellent virtues which now appear in
man, could not have bin, they could have had no place or use in the state of
innocence, fortitude and courage, patience, love of our enemies, compassion,
contine^cy and such like, are excellent virtues. All these have no place in ye
state of innocence. How can fortitude and courage be shown, where there is no
resistance? Now, the children of God show their courage in resisting ye il
practices of wicked men, and resisting temptations. How can patience be showed
where there is no wrong done? now the elect of God suffer patiently many
oppressions, yea they pray for their oppressors, that God would give the^
repentance, they patiently endure hunger and thirst, poverty, sickness, and
such like. How can the excellency of love and charity be shown, if we had
no enmies, whose wrongs and injuries through charity we pardon and forgive?
How could pity and compassion be showed, if there were none in misery, or
needed our help? how could abstinence be showed, if there were no alluring
baits in the world; or our unbridled lusts did not tempt us to do that which
we should not do? Reason it was, that Ada^ should have some matter wherein he
should show his obedience to his Maker, and acknowledge Gods soueraintie over
him, with could not he, except he were bound to some duty or other. Again,
had not Adam fallen, where could Gods justice in justly punishing wickedness,
appear? his mercy could have had no matter wherein it might appear, as now it
does, in pardoning offenders, in delivering the afflicted out of misery. How
should the greatness of Gods love toward men be known, who spared not his
only beloved Son to redeem man being fallen, for whose sake, we shall
obtain not an earthly paradise, but the everlasting kingdom of heaven, far
exceeding the happiness of Paradise? In these, and the like respects, the
Fathers term the fall of Adam a happy fall; not that Adam did well in
disobeying God. But for the event, because God of his mercy has turned this
fall and disobedience to man's greater good, making sin which in it self is
bad, to serve for ye greater setting forth of his own glory, and the good of
man. As a cunning Painter uses black coulors being the worst and vnpleasantest
coulors in themselves, in the fairest pictures, the more to set out the
pleasantness of other coulors; and more beautiful does yt picture seem,
wherein there are degrees and diversities of coulors one better then another,
then any picture made only of the purest white: so yt you see, that without
reason you blame God for giving Ada^ a law with he knew he would break; and in
not hindering him to fall, though he could have hindered him. Adam only justly is
to be blamed, who wilfully offended. God made Adam of that excellency, that
besides the great felicity he gave him, gave him also ability, yt without
difficulty, he might have continued therein. God now permits sins which
he could hinder; yet he does not hinder them, not for yt he likes or
allows of them, but for the greater good of his elect. For when as any of his
elect are overtaken with sin, their fall does make them know their own
weakness, and how frail they are of themselves without the special
assistance of God: if God should not sometimes withhold his assisting grace from
his elect, and leave them to their own strength, but continually uphold them
from falling, they would wax proud, and ascribe that unto themselves, which
proceeds from the special assistance of God, thinking that in that they
persisted in integrity, it were by their own proper power, and not by the
special grace of God. Wherefore Augustine says, I dare confidently affirm,
that it is good for the elect of God, sometimes to fall, that thereby they may
be humbled, and that they might acknowledge their own weakness, and seek
unto God by hearty prayer, for his especial assistance. Besides this, they who
have been overtaken with sin, by knowing the frailty of man, are more prone
to have compassion on ye like infirmities in their brethren. Virg.
Haud ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco, says Dido. They that have felt
the smart of grief, are more easily moved to have compassion on such as are
in grief and misery, the^ they that never felt any. Again, by falling now and
then, and feeling the torments of a guilty conscience, they are made more
careful and heedefull, how they afterward walk; and they make more ardent
prayers unto God, for his assistance, then before they did: thus you see, that
the name of God is to be praised, who gave so notable a gift unto man as free
will, and that it stands with great reason, that Adam should be by some law
bound to honor his Maker, though God knew yt he would not observe it, and that
the fall of Adam though he was faulty only therein, having full power and
ability not to have fallen yet by the grace and goodness of God, it is turned
to be a happy fall; because thereby, both the justice of God, and his mercy
do most gloriously appear, and also many excellent virtues by sonsequent
thereof, do now appear in man, which in the state of innocence, could have
no place. God did well therefore in not hindering Adam to do that which by his
free will he would do: but Adam did ill in eating the forbidden fruit, having
full power to forbear it, and bound by the law of his Creator to the contrary.


Tra. Well, say all that you have spoken be true, yet your assertion of the
especial providence of God over his elect, concerning his special care over
the^, is so palpably false, that the histories of all ages, the experience of
all men do convince you most evidently, and because you shall not deny this, I
will first prove it out of the Scriptures, then out of other histories: you
cannot deny but that Jacob was an elect of God, how was he driven for fear of
his life, to forsake his natural country, and his parents, to live in
servitude under an unjust master: and after many years of servitude being not
able any longer to e^dure it, was fain to entreat his wicked brother Esaw a
reprobate, as you hold him to be, and live at his devotion. Contrariwise Esaw
a wicked person lived at home, at ease, and pleasure, never knew what servitude
and hardness meant; is this the especial care over his elect? you cannot deny
but that Joseph was an elect of God. Was not he even in his childhood hated of
his own wicked brother, some of them meant to take his life from him, all of
them agreed to sell him to strangers of far countries, never to be hard of
again, being carried away as a bondslaue. How was he wronged by false
accusation, imprisoned as a malefactor, though he was none; his brethren in the
mean time who did him this wrong, lived at ease and pleasure? How does the
especial care of God here appear? David was an elect you cannot deny, a man
according to Gods own heart, how was he hunted from place to place, constrained
to flee to his enemies, and there feign himself mad to save his life,
constrained to live in wildernesses, in holes and caves, and yet there not
secure? but as a Fox still pursued, hated, and reviled of the wicked. But what
need I give instance in particulars? Do not your Apostle reckon up the misery
of Christians? in general? that they were scorned, whipped, put in bands,
Hebr. 11.
and imprisoned, some stoned to death, some cut a sunder, some wa^dred in
wildernesses in sheep-skinnes, and goate-skinnes, for fear of persecutions,
destitute of necessaries, oppressed, and evil entreated; hiding themselves in
caves, and dens. Now, if you read profane Histories as you term them, how
full are they of the miseries of Christians? what eager enemies of the
Christians were the ten Persecutors before Constantine the great? what unheard
of torments were invented, only to torment the Christians? how does the
Emperor Julian insult over them? who gave leave to all men to use the^ as bad
as they list. And when any Christians made complaint of any wrong done unto
them, he would turn the^ away with this answer, You are not to mislike the
wrongs which are done unto you; for happy are ye, when men revile you, and
persecute you: if one strike you on the one cheek, you must turn the other:
scorns, gybes, and floutes, were all the comfort and remedy they could get.
Nay, now amongst Christians who are more scorned, derided, vexed; who suffer
greater wants; who oftener troubled with diseases and infirmities of the body,
then the sincerest men. Strange it is, how you with a bare conceit of an
especial care of God over the best men, are carried against the common
experience of all former ages, by the testimonies of all records divine and
profane, against your own expetience which show the contrary, and cannot be
brought out of your error. If to be tormented, hated, reviled, persecuted,
pinched with penury, troubled with many diseases, and weakness above other
men, be to be in the especial favor of God, and to be under his special
protection: let me be but of his especial favor; for most manifest it is,
that the estate of the Godly, is worse then the ungodly.


Stud. Strange it is to see your grosnesse, who so speak, as if our souls
died with our bodies, as if there were no judgment to come; as if hereafter
neither the just should be rewarded, nor ye wicked suffer punishment: but that
you may understand the grosnes of your error, in imagining that in ye God
sends tribulation on his elect, it proceeds of the want of care over them,
supposing that far better is the estate of ye ungodly, then ye godly in this
world, judging by the outward appearance, and not according to truth For albeit
the godly in this world are hated, despised, persecuted, and aff^icted of the
ungodly, yet even in this world (notwithstanding these evils which commonly
happen unto them) if comparison be made of the miseries of the ungodly and
godly, you shall find manifestly, (if you examine them dulye) that far greater
are ye miseries even in this life of the ungodly, then are the miseries the
godly, for the goly even in the midst of their miseries, are full of joy and
hope: but the vngdoly are vexed continually with the surfeit of their pleasures:
And as the godly seriously and without hypocrisy, do endeavor with their
whole heart to please God: so their sincere conscience continually gives them
an assured hope of the love God in Christ, and makes the^ confident, so that
neither tribulation, nor anguish, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness,
nor peril, nor sword, nor life, nor death, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, can separate them from the
love of God. They are assured, that as long as they continue in the true fear
and worship of God, they are under ye especial protection of god, that no
creatue can harm the^, they know that all things, even afflictions make for
their good: this their assured hope, is not a vain confidence: but is so
certain, and true, and confirmed by continual experience, that the wicked and
heathen people do acknowledge it to be true. Number. 23.8.20.21.
Wicked Balaam, who was most willing to have cursed the people of Israel,
confessed unto Balack that he had no power against them, because they
continued in the fear of God, and therefore advised Balack (if he would
prevail against the^) to cause them to sin, Number. 31.16.
then should he prevail against them This did the wife of Haman and his wise
counselors being heathen people, acknowledge that if Mordecay were of the
seed of the Jews, Ester. 6.13
that he could not prevail against him, acknowledging gods special
protection over the Jews, who relied on no humain force or defense, but
trusted only in the protection of God. This did Rahab a heathen, acknowledge
that no people was able to withstand the Jews, because the God of heaven gave
them victory against their enemies, Joshua. 2.
so that all the nations round about them, were in fear of them. This did
Achior a heathen acknowledge being taught by examples of former ages, that as
long as the Jews the people of God, continued in the fear of God, no people
was able to prevail against them, and therefore advises Holophernes, first to
enquire and search out, whether the Jews had forsaken ye law of their God or
no, before he went against them? if they had, then might he set upon them
safely, for then their God would give them over in to his hands, Iudeth. 5.
and he should prevail against them; but if they had not forsaken the law of
their God, he advises him to pass by them, and not meddle with them, least
their God should defend them, and then he should be put to shame and
confusion: but proud Holophernes conte^ned his advise, and God defended them,
because they had not forsaken his law; so that according to the words of
Achior, he was confounded. This point Achior proved by many former examples
to be true, unto Holophernes; And Rahab also unto the spies which came into
Caanan: All which events came not to pass by chance, but by the ordinance of
God, who before these things came to pass foreshewed the people of Israel,
that if they continued in his fear, and observed his laws, Deu. 11.25
he would put a fear into the hearts of all the nations round about them: So
that, no nation should be able to withstand them, which according to his promise
always fell out so true, that their enemies were driven to confess the
goodness of God toward them. Now, albeit God does so protect his elect, that
no Nation, or any enemies shall prevail against them; yet does he not in this
world set them free from all adversities, but lays many troubles on them, not
because he delights to see the^ in trouble, but because the nature of virtue
(in which he would have them to excel) is such, that it cannot be shown, but
in courageously and patiently enduring and resisting evils, as also, because
such is the corrupt nature of man, that if he should continually be blessed
here on earth with temporal blessings, he would degenerat from all virtue and
goodness. Which point heathen people by the light only of nature and daily
experience have always acknowledged this to be true: and therefore held this
for a true ground, that adversity was the occasion of al virtues. When
Cleomenes therefore was demanded, Plutarch.
why the Lacedaemonians did not utterly destroy ye Argiues who often rebelled
against them, since it was in their power to have destroyed the^ oftentimes,
made this answer, that we might have some to exercise our youths, signifying,
that the virtue of their City could not stand without an enemy: so likewise
when the Romans had the Carthaginians at that advantage, that it was in their
power utterly to destroy it, great debating there was in the Senate, whether it
were convenient it should be destroyed. The wiser sort held it was convenient
for their common wealth, to have enemies; else experience showed them, that
they wolud contend one against another with vices: but notwithstanniding it was
decreed, ye Carthage should utterly be destroyed. Aug. li. 1. de ciuit. Dei.
Which being destroyed, they having no enemies, they fell at strife amongst
themselves, which was the ruin of their state. And Liuie reports of the
soldiers of Hannibal, who were such, that as I think, never were better
before them, nor since: yet these so valiant soldiers, lying in garrison but
one winter at ease in Capua, where there were great store of victuals, he says
of them, that they came into Capua more valiant then men; but went forthmore
effeminate then women. And Eusebius speaking of the great persecutions wherein
many Christians perished by cruelty of the persecuting Emperors: but at length
God gave them an Emperor, who favored them so, that for a little space, they
enjoyed prosperity. But, says he, in this little time of prospety, more
Christians perished by the vices of prosperity, then by the cruelty of the
persecutors. Since therefore such is ye nature of virtue, that it cannot be
virtue, without opposition, and such is the nature of men, that they will soon
be corrupted with worldly pleasure. God has so ordained, that his elect
through many tribulations (show therein their virtues and graces which
otherwise would be obscure and lay hid) should enter into the kingdom of God.
This being the ordinance of God, his elect knowing this his will and ordinance
for their good, do willingly embrace the^ as tokens of his good will, and with
joy endure all tribulations, which it pleases God to lay upon, they know he is
good and loving to those that serve and trust in him, and that he watches
over them to do them good, they know that the son of violence shall not be
able to touch them without his special permission, who never permits him,
but when it makes for their good; they have not their eyes fixed on Tyrants yt
wrong them, but on God who uses them as his instruments for their good, though
for their pain and grief. This caused David when he was reviled by Simei, 2.
Sam. 16.10.
with patience to let him go unrevenged, acknowledging, that God caused him to
revile him, that he might be humbled and brought to repentance for his former
sins. This caused the Apostles when they were beaten for preaching of Christ,
to go away rejoicing, because they were thought worthy to suffer for the name
of Christ. Act. 5.41. Heb. 11.24.25.26.
This caused Moses to refuse to be called the son of Pharaoes daughter, and
to choose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the rebuke of Christ, greater
riches, then all the treasures of Egypt. No tribulation or persecution can dant
the hearts of the elect: they are afraid of no evil tidings, but are
confident and bold, because God is their protection. The spirit of God reigns
in them, who causes in the^ continually joy and peace: though all the world
should bend themselves against them, the peace of conscience which they enjoy
causes them to be afraid of no evil tidings, but their hearts stand fast and
believe in the Lord, mistrustfull fear has no power over them. Clean
contrary is it in the wicked, Ephesians. 2.2. 2. Tim. 2.26.
in whom Satan reigns, and leads them after his own will. Though they
have all worldly felicity at will, yet do they not enjoy them: but their
wealth, honors, dignities, and pleasures be unto them, as are the pleasant
apples, and pleasant river to Tantalus, the more to augment their hunger and
thirst: they are never contented with them, nor satisfied. Yea, Satan stirs
up in them vehement affections which never suffers them to be at rest, and
tormenteth them with their own lusts and desires. This, both histories
profane and divine, Plutar. in the life of Pirrus.
and daily experience do prove unto us. Plutarch reports of Pirrus King of
Epire, that his kingdom seemed far too little for his desires, and therefore
he could not be quiet, but must seek means to enlarge it, though with the
danger of his own estate Which ambitious humor, Cineas an excellent Orator and
his chief Counselor perceiving, endeavored to alter his determination, and
finding him alone, demands of him, why he would seek to conquer Italy (for
that he knew was his first resolutition) since already he had sufficient. O
says he, it would be a great enlargement for my dominions, if I had Italy,
then it were but a little cut over to Sicilie. That being gotted (says Cineas)
will you then be contented? O says he, if we had these, it were easy to
obtain Carthage. But what if you had Carthage to? what would you do then? Why
then (said he smiling) we would live at ease, we would eat and drink, feast,
and be merry with our friends. But (says Cineas) if that be all the cause, you
will enterprise these matters which cannot be obtained without great wrong and
hurt unto others, and loss of your own subjects. Why do you not now take your
pleasure and ease, and feast, and be merry with your friends? This you may do
now, nothing hinders you. Although Pirrus could give no reasonable replye to
this, yet is he so far from yielding to reason, that he was displeased with
Cineas, because he discovered his folly, having no intent to be altered from
his purpose, though most vnreasoble; but afterward, proceeding in his purpose,
and having gotten some part of Italy, and some part of Cicilie, at length,
with grief and reproach lost all again. Ahab a King, who wa^ted nothing but a
contented mind; see his troubled passions, though he had a great deal more
then sufficient, yet is not quiet, he must have Nabothes vineyard, which might
not law fully be had: and being denied his unlawful desire, what joy takes
he of all his kingdom besides? because he cannot have this one vineyard, he
returns home heavy and in displeasure, he falls sick for grief, 1. King.
21 4.
and casts himself upon his bed, refuses comfort, refuses meat. He never
could be in quiet, until by most unlawful means, perjury, and murder, he
obtained his desire; and having obtained his desire, what ensued, but
repentance and grief of mind, and utter destruction to him and his wicked
posterity: who seems to be in greater prosperity then ambitious Haman, who
bosted of his own honor wherein he was with his King and Queen above all the
Nobles of ye realm, boasts of his great riches and promotion; but yet
confesses withal, that he took no delight in all these, Ester. 5.13
because Mordecay the Jew did not rise up and reverence him. See what a little
trifle can mar all the mirth of the wicked, unto whom God gives not the gift
to enjoy that which they have. Eccl. 5.18.
Who might seem to be in better estate then Amnon who was a Kings son, on
whom no outward calamities fell? But yet his wicked mind marred all his
fefelicitie. He falls in love with his sister Thamar so extremely, that he
falls sick with love, pineth away with grief of mind, refused to take any
food, he will obtain his wicked purpose, or else pine to death, so violently
is he carried in his affections: but afterward having obtained his unlawful
lust, then he hates his sister more then he loved her before, 2. Samuel. 19.15.
thus are the wicked carried without reason or measure to desire that which is
unlawful, and when they have performed and satisfied their unlawful lusts,
they then begin to late to condemn their follyes with grief and vexation of
mind; therefore are the wicked by reason of their violence and inconstancy in
their affections, Psalm. 35.5.6.
compared unto dust in the wind, and the Angel of the Lord persecuting them,
the persecuting Angel of the Lord, even Satan driving them violently too and
fro, they never have rest or quietness. Consider the unquiet thoughts of the
covetous person, Eccle. 31.1
he lies waking in the night, when others take their rest, and pineth
himself with careful thoughts, he casts in his mind many unlawful means
how to become rich, he spares no labor and pain, yea, goes barely, feeds
sparingly on course victuals, that he might be wealthy: and when he has riches
more then sufficient, he is then more troubled then before, least his own
servants deceive him, and on the night season when he should take his rest, if
but a dog bark, or a mouse stir in his chamber, he is straight ways
troubled, then he thinks that some thief is come to take his life and goods
away; if his head do but ache, the^ is he more troubled with grief of mind, then
the headache, for fear he should die and leave all his riches; thus with labor
and pining care he gets his riches, possesses them in great and continual
fear, and when he dies, departs from them with great grief and vexation
of mind. These torments of a covetous man, the heathen men well observed, and
Poets have notably described them. Plautus. Horace. Iuuenal.
Heathen men saw that their minds were ever troubled, but they could not
reach to the principal cause thereof, they knew not that the judgment of God
was the cause of it, they ascribed it to second causes, as to the reason and
conscience of men: both which constrains men to acknowledge yt they ought to
do well; and when they do ill they condemn themselves, and they cannot deny
but yt therefore they have deserved punishment, and consequently with fear
they expect it. This point the miserable life of Richard ye third King of this
Realm does notably prove: who, from the time he murdered his brothers sons
to obtain the kingdom, never enjoyed one happy hour, but continuallye was
vexed with fears and suspicions, mistrusted all men, persuaded himself that
he was hated of all men (for so he deserved) therefore from that time, he
went always with his hand upon his Dagger, ready to entertain him that set
upon him, fearing every hour co^spiracies against him, and often in ye night
would leap out of his bed, and flee to his Weapons, when no man thought him
hurt. Lastly, if you will believe one well experienced in ye miseries of a
wicked mind; Mark how Dionisius the Tyrant of Sicily describes them: who,
when as Damocles his flatterer highlye commended his felicity whom all the
kingdom of Sicily stood in awe of, to show how far Damocles was deceived in
his opinion, caused a notable banquet to be set before Damocles, and caused a
Sword to be hanged over the head of Damocles, by a small hair, which when
Damocles beheld, he was so stricken with fear, least it should fall on his
head, that he could eat none of the dainties set before him, but desired to be
absent from such a feast. Hereby Dionisius signified unto him, that although it
seemed a glorious matter, to have all Sicilye to bow unto him, yet because he
by wicked practices had obtained the Kingdom, he daily and hourly feared some
evil or other, so true is that speech of Job concerning the wicked, Job. 15.21
and 24.23.
a sound of fear is in his ears, and though men give him assurance to be in
safety, yet his cies are set on their ways, ye supiciously observe the
countenance and doings of all men, still mistrusting some mischief to be
working aganst them. Wherefore the estate of the wicked in this world is very
well compared unto ye raging of the sea, Esaias. 57.20.
which never is at quiet, one wave breaks it self against another, the
motions thereof casts up nothing but dirt and mire: So the contrary passions
of the wicked, bandeth themselves one against another, and all of them bring
forth the filthiness of an evil mind, trouble and vexation, noisome and
hurtful to themselves and others: and albeit many of them are very worldly
wise, who by their devises and worldly policies, seek to establish themselves
in a happy estate; yet are all their devises very well compared to ye house of
a Spider, Job. 8.14.
who (as a learned writer says) by wasting his own bowels, spinneth his web,
and passing curiously composeth it, yet a little puff of wind casts it and
him down: So albeit many wicked men excel in worldly policy, so that their
cunning devises seem to excel the skill of the spider to entrap flies, though
they spend themselves in compassing their skillful devises, yet are all their
devises no stronger then a spiders web, to withstand the judgments of God,
when it pleases him to blow upon them, and bring their devises to naught.
Yea, their own devises entangle themselves, Proverb. 5 22. and cap. 12.3.
and work their own overthrow. And albeit they wickedly think not so, yet
indeed they themselves are the executioners of gods judgment against their
own sins, by their unbridled lusts. For manifest proof hereof, consider the
drunkard, does he not by his inordinate drinking, bring diseases on himself,
cause his own name to stink before all men, and wast his goods and bring
himself and those that depend on him to beggary? now, to infect with diseases,
and to defame and bring any man into hatred of all men, to spoil a man of his
gods to his undoing is to punnish, and all these dru^kards do unto themselves
therefore are they they themselves ye executioners of gods judgments against
themselves, though they think not so: the glutton likewise by ouercharging his
stomach, causes many crudities in his body which inge^der many diseases, by
which diseases their bodies are tormented, and their minds infected with many
noiso^e lusts, both made unable to do any good: the incontinent person sins
against his own body, mispending that which continues life: and consequently
falls into such loathsome diseases as cannot be with modesty named, so that
many of them live not out half their natural days; or if they live, they
live in reproache amongst men, and the best end of them, is beggerie. I need
not reckon up the vexations of covetous men, or the proud ambition man never
contented in his estate, or any other vicious man, since there is none so
simple but may easily discern this, if they well consider them. For most true
is that saying of Saint August. that every inordinate affection is a punishment
to it self; with kinds of punishments are best known to those who are troubled
with such inordinate affections: these inseparable punishments annexed to every
vice, come not by chance, but by ye ordinance of God, even to this end, that
they who will not embrace virtue, for the love of virtues, and the comforts that
proceed of them, might be by the torments that accompany vices, driven from
their vices, to the love of virtue. Thus if you well way the estate of ye godly
and ungodly in this world, you shall find, that far happier are the godly
even in this life, then the ungodly. For albeit it is most true, that ye wicked
have bestowed on them, more wealth, health of body, honors, and worldly
commodities, then are bestowed on ye godly, yet Satan who rules in them, and
their own inordinate affections, turn these blessings of God to their greater
vexation. Contrariwise, albeit the godly have many tribulations laid on them,
yet suffer they less vexatio^ in these, then do the wicked in their greatest
prosperities. Nay further, the godly rejoice in tribulation, knowing ye such
chastisements are tokens of Gods favors, who not only foreseeth all things,
but also disposes of al things, with whose goodness it cannot stand, that
any thing should happen unto those that seriously obey him, which make not for
their good. This undoubted persuasion of the faithful, causes them with joy to
endure any tribulation, which it pleases God to lay on them, and to be
contented with any estate wherein God has appointed them to live in, knowing
that that cannot be bettered, which he has appointed to be done: and
therefore they murmour not at any thing that betide them, nor seek unlawful
means to alter their estate, though it be very base and mean. As much
therefore as contentment of mind, is better the^ coffeehouse of mind, so
much better is the estate of the godly in this life, then the estate of the
ungodly. Ungodly men I confess, abound in wealth, honors, and prosperity; but
none of these do make men better, or virtuous: the faithful for the most part
want these temporal blessings, but God enricheth them with better blessings,
be makes them excel in virtue, which makes ye possessors thereof good, and
of greater estimation and value, then all the earthly treasures in the world.
Wherefore you see how far you are deceived, in saying that the estate of ye
godly in this life, is so miserable by reason of so manifold afflictions, which
happen unto them, that it were better not to be at all, then to be so
miserable: God never lays greater tribulation on any of his elect, then they
are able to bear: impossible therefore it is, yt there should be any man so
miserable, as that it were better he had never been borne.


Trau. Nay, that is not true, which I can manifestly prove even by the
authority of Christ himself, whose words you are^ bound to defend. Does not he
say of Judas, that better it were he had never been borne? here you have
ouer-shot your self.


Stud. True, he says so of Judas, but in saying so, he neither contradicts
my position, nor proves your opinion: he speaks not there of the misery of
affliction; for Judas then was in no kind of affliction (of which kind of
misery you affirm that it were better not to be, then endure, which I deny)
but he speaks of the miserable estate of an obstinate and impenitent sinner.
You must therefore consider, that there is a double kind of misery; Miseria
culpae, and miseria afflictionis. I grant that ye miserable estate of an
impenitent sinner is so badde, that it were better not be, then to be such a
one. This makes nothing against my position, but to suffer the misery of
affliction, be it never so great, is better then not to be at all. For you
know that it is a position amongst all the learned, that Ens and bonum
couuertuntur. Whatsoever is, or has a being has some degree of goodness; but
that which has no being, can have no part of goodness: and therefore it is
better to be miserable in afflictions in this world, then not to be at all.


Trau. But this reason also proves, that it is better to be in the miserable
estate of the wicked, then not to be at all. For the wicked have a being, yea
Satan himself. Therefore it is better to be wicked, yea a Devil, then not to
be at all.


Stud. True it is their simple being is better to be, them not to be at all,
in respect of the whole; but not in respect of themselves. For their being does
more set forth the glory of God, and further the good of ye elect, the^ if they
were not. How could ye justice of God be known, if there were no wicked men,
or ill spirits on whom his justice might be executed? How could the love and
goodness of God be sufficiently known in protecting his elect from Satan and
wicked men, Vide Aug. lib. 3. de. li. arbitr.
if there were no such, which made opposition against his elect and chosen?
therefore there is good use of them unto the whole. But in respect of
themselves, it were better (through their own default) that they had never bin:
and therefore Christ our Savior says not simply of Judas, that it were better
he had never been borne; but it were better for Him, that he had never been
borne. For if it had not been good either in respect of himself, or of the
whole, that he should be borne, he should never have been; for God creates
nothing but to some good purpose. But our Savior says of Judas, that it had
been better for Him, that he had never been borne, as it may be said of all
the wicked, in respect of themselves, it had been better they had never been
borne, by reason of the everlasting torments which by their just desert, they
are to endure. But necessary it was, that there should be a Judas, and wicked
men. For, who but a wicked Judas would ever attempt the betraying the Son of
God, into the hands of his enemies? who, but wicked men would hier for money
false witnesses to accuse our Savior Christ and of malice and envy put the
innocent to death? These are necessary executioners of the will of God, though
they do these things not to fulfill the will of GOD, but moved thereunto, by
their own ill affections, and draw on themselves such miseries, that it were
better for them, that they had never been borne.


Trau. Well, say that these words are to be understood of sin, and not of
the misery of the afflictions which ordinarily come unto those whom you call
the elect of God. I am sure you will not deny, but that Paul was one of these
elect: and yet he says of himself, and generally of all those that profess
Christ, that in respect of the miseries of afflictions which happen to the^ in
this world, they be of all men most miserable: which directly proves my
assertion, and clean overthrows all that you have spoken.


Stud. Nay, you wrest the words of Paul to your purpose, contrary to their
sense, concluding, that without exception, which he affirms with exception:
saying, 1. Cor. 15.19.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we were of all men most
miserable: which is a most true speech; out of with you would conclude, that
which is most false. For as S. Paul says, if our hopes in Christ were bounded
in the limits of this present life, surely none so miserable as a true
Christian, on whom for the most part, greatest afflictions fall. But this hope
in Christ alters the misery of afflictions which falls on them, as a
pleasant sauce alters the taste of harsh meats, and causes that which in
his own nature is very unsavory, to seem very pleasant and sweet. Take
away this pleasant sauce, and harsh and unpleasant meats, will be offensive to
our taste: and take away hope in Christ from a true Christian, and he will be
of all creatures most miserable: this hope makes sower afflictions seem
pleasant. For he that is a true Christian, knows ye all afflictions come by
the appointment of God; he is persuaded of the goodness of God, who lays no
affliction on any of his elect, but for their good, either to exercise their
patience and other virtues, to repress their lascivious natures, which
otherwise in prosperity would grow vicious: or to stir up in them their hearty
and zealous prayers, who otherwise would carelessly and seldom think on him,
or seriously consider and remember that he is the gouerner of all things. Or if
in particular they cannot conjecture the cause why God afflicts them: yet
they undoubtedly know, that God will turn them to their good; and therefore they
willingly and joyfully embrace them. They know that their corrupt nature need
such medicines to keep them in the true obedience of Gods will: therefore are
such afflictions welcome unto them. They know yt God receaueth no son, Heb.
12.6.
but whom he corrects: and that they are bastard sons whom he corrects
not. Wherefore with joy they endure them as special notes, and arguments of
Gods love toward them. Thus you see that far happier is the estate of the
godly even in this life, then the estate of the ungodly. For the godly enjoy
sincere gladness of heart, even in the midst of tribulation: but the wicked
in their greatest iollitie have fears and mistrustfulnesse which mar their
mirth: they have (as Job says) a continual fear sounding in their ears, 2.
Corin. 5.12.
they rejoice in the face, but not in the heart: it is never sincere. The
reason hereof is, because God as a loving and careful father over his children,
has appointed unto every man in particular, a Tutor or Schoolmaster
continually to watch over him, (I mean, has placed a conscience in every man)
who not only shows him, and continually advises him to embrace that which
is good, but also when he has done well, does glad him with preasent delight,
in that he has done well; and also fills him full of good hopes to be
rewarded for his well doing: so that there is no man, but feels this in
himself when he has well done a rejoicing that he has done well, and that
his good hopes are increased, as I said before. But contrariwise, this
conscience disswadeth us from doing evil, and if we disobey him, he lays
before us the judgment of God: No man can deny his doom, but is constrained to
confess, that he which evil does, deserves punishment, himself being judge:
Hence springs fears, mistrustfulnesse, and a continual expectation of
punishments due unto his offenses. Wherefore most unhappy is the estate of the
wicked, who in this life never enjoy any sincere joy, but such as is mixed with
fear, and in the life to come, are to endure unspeakable and endless
torments. But most happy is the estate of the godly, who in this world, even
in the midst of their tribulation, enjoy great and sincere joy, knowing God
continually to watch over the^ for their good, expecting always perfect and
everlasting joys in the life to come.


Trau. True, in the life to come they must look for it, for in this life, they
have but cold comforts: but this to come, is a mere fancy. For if you will
believe Scripture or reason, the soul has an end of being when the body
dies, and dies with the body, which being so, what need any man fear future
punishments? or why should any expect any joys after this life, since after
this life, we shall have no life or being?


Stud. Whereas you say that the godly have but cold comfort in this life, you
so say, because you never had any taste of the comforts of the children of God;
and therefore you cannot judge of them. Whereas you say, that the life to come
is a mere fancy, because as you say, the soul dies with the body, you
speak against both Scripture and reason, how soever you pretend the contrary.


Trau. Nay, but I will prove it plainly out of the Scripture, and by manifest
reason too.


Stu. I pray let us hear your reasons.


Tra. First, I prove it by plain testimony of the Scripture, and first out of
Ezechiel. Cap. 18.20
The soul that sins, the same shall die. Again, Ec^. 10.19
Solomon says, that The condition of the children of men, and the condition of
beasts are even one, as the one dies, so the other dies: for all have one
breath, and there is no excellency of man above the beasts. Now if they both
die alike, how can it be, that the soul of man should live when man dies? I
am sure you will not say, that beasts have souls, which live, or have any kind
of being after they die. Now if you reply, that albeit beasts have not, yet
the souls of men have a being after they die: then is not that true, which
Solomon affirms. That there is no excellency of man above the beast, and
that they both have one breath alike; which, being so, why should I either
fear torments after this life for living ill, or expect any rewards for that I
have lived well? Now, besides these evident testimonies of the Scripture, I can
also prove this point by manifest reason, and grounds of Philosophy, as first.


Stud. Nay, pray let me first answer your testimonies out of the Scripture;
then propose you humane reasons.


Trau. Be it so.


Stud. Concerning your first authority out of Ezechiell. The soul that shines
shall dye, by dying you understand a seasing or leaving off, of having any
further being; as when a beast dies, his life cease to have any further
being, in which understanding you much mistake the meaning of ye words: for by
dying, there is nothing else me^t but that that soul which sins shall be
rejected out of the favor of God, unto everlasting torments, which is therefore
termed a death, because the love of God, is the true life of the soul, which
love and favor being separated, and taken away from the soul, the soul is
truly said to die.


Tra. But this answer cannot stand, if the words of Solomon be true. For he
says plainly, that there is no excellency of man above beasts, and that
their breath is all one, and that they die alike; but if man has a soul which
lives everlastingly, capable of eternal blessedness, then there is an
excellency in man far above beasts, then they die not alike. Where, if you will
not deny flat scripture, and deny the opinion of him who was the wisest man
that ever was, or ever shall be; You must acknowledge, that a man dies like a
beast, and have both one end, one no better then another.


Stud. Sir, you must consider that comparisons hold not in all things, and
therefore you must not extend and stretch them farther then wherein they are
compared. Solomon in those words speaks of the condition of me^ and beasts,
according to the outward show, which by our eyes and senses we can discern,
and no farther he extends his comparison: which words, so far are most
true. For in respect of their bodies, their condition is both alike, they both
are made of ye earth, they both continue their natural life, by the benefit
of the air, their breath is in their nostrels, and as their bodies are made of
the earth, so they return to earth again when they die: all their vegetative
and sensitive faculties, do then end when they die. In these things the
conditions of man and beast are all alike: but above al these things, God has
endued man with an intellectual spirit, a spiritual soul, which as it was
not made of the earth so it returns not to the earth when man dies, as his
body does, which was made of the earth, but being a spiritual substance
created of God, of no material substance, is no way subject to mortality, but
always has his being in a more perfect manner after it is separated from the
body. Solomon does not compare beasts with man in this respect: For this soul
of man is not subject to ye view of the eyes of men. The soul is not a
corporal substance, but a spiritual substance; and therefore cannot be seen
with our bodily eyes: to see, and to be seen, is only proper to corporal
bodies, composed of elements, the soul being not of this kind, it comes not
within the compass of this comparison, which Solomon makes between the
condition of men and beasts, since his comparison is only in matters visible;
and herein I confess they nothing differ.


Trau. Well sir, I cannot hinder you from gathering a meaning of Salomons
words, contrary to their sense. Solomon was wise enough to express his own
meaning. He says plainly, that there is no excellency in man above beasts;
you say the contrary. Here you stand not to Scripture, and yet you would have
me believe Scripture. I for my part have great reason to set by the opinion of
Solomon, because he was the wisest man that ever was, or ever shall be; and in
matters of difficulty, we ought to give credit to wise men.


Stud. It is well that now you urge the authority of the Scripture, if in show
it seem any way to favor your error; and now you have reason to believe
Solomon, because he was the wisest man that ever was: but if Scripture, or wise
men be against you, you will stand to neither.


Trau. Nay, say not so; though I yield not to the authority of Scripture, yet I
ascribe much unto the opinion of wise men.


Stud. This I doubt you will deny again.


Trau. Never.


Stud. Then stand to your words. Now I will show you evidently by the very words
of Solomon, that he compares man and beast, but only in things visible, and no
further: so that it is not my bare conjecture what he means, but his own
words do sufficiently manifest this to be his meaning: here take the Bible,
read the words going next before those you have alleged, or hear them read.
Solomon speaking in the verse before of the condition of men, says, To see to,
they are as beasts: for the condition of the children of men, and ye condition
of beasts are even one. Now the words going before ye testimony you allege,
do manifest wherein he compares them. Verse. 18.
Namely, To see to, and he gives instance in things visible, as dying, and
breathing: and thus far, and herein they are both alike. Now, to understand a
doubtful text, the best way says Augustine is to consider that which goes
before, and that which follows, which if you had observed, you would never
have alleged these words of Solomon for your error. Now, to put the matter
out of all doubt, that Solomon acknowledges the immortality of the soul,
hear his words, speaking of the death of man, and what follows, he says, ye
dust returns to the earth whence it came, Eccles. Cap. 12.7.
and the spirit returns to God that gave it. Here he speaks distinctly of
the body and soul of man: of the body, as he affrmed in the words which you
alleged, that it dies and returns to the earth, as do ye carcasses of
beasts: but ye soul does not so, it goes to God, who gave it. Now, Solomon
was the wisest man that ever was, as you acknowledge, and in matters of
difficulty, we ought to give credence to the wisest men, and this you will
stand to, acknowledge now your error.


Trau. Solomon only affirms this, he gives no reason for it. Now, if wise
men vary in opinion, and some of them give reason for their opinion, and some
only affirm, showing no reason; I will believe those who show reason, more
then the bare assertion of any. You know Aristotle was an admirable wise man,
whose learning all men justly admire and reverence, who also concerning this
point, has written three books, and by many reasons discourses of this
matter, and has labored much in searching of the truth herein, yet he
affirneth the contrary: therefore you must pardon me if I dissent from Solomon,
who has not labored so far in this matter as Aristotle has.


Stud. It is well, as long as Solomon seemed to deny ye immortality of the
soul, he was the wisest man that ever was, or shall be, and then you had great
reason to believe him: but now it is proved, that he taught the contrary; now
you have found a wiser the^ he. Salomo^ now is not to be believed, because he
only affirms the immortality of the soul, but by reason proves it not; as
though wise men would affirm any thing without any ground of reason. In that
he only affirms it, you imagine, that he had reason so to do, else you
deny him to be a wise man. But I doubt not, but that Aristotle will be of as
small authority with you, ere we have done. I pray therefore let us hear your
reasons out of Aristotle.


Tra. It is a position in Aristotle, that whatsoever has a beginning, has an
end; but the soul has a beginning, therefore it has an end. A second reason
is this, every natural form is corruptible with that whereof it is the form,
as Aristotle says, Phisicorum. 4. text. 17. but the soul, or life of man, is
the natural form of man. As Aristole affirms, lib. 3. de anima, text. 17.
Therefore when man dies, his soul also dies with him. Both the mayor, and
the minor are the very words of Aristotle, and I conclude directly ex
praemisis. A third most evident reason I take out of the eight book of
Aristotle, denatura animalium. cap. 1. where he says, that the life or the
soul of a man in his childhoode differs nothing from the life of beasts but
the life of beasts are not immortal, therefore the soul of man is not
immortal. A fourth reason I gather out of Aristotle, Lib. 1. Diuinorum. text.
35. Lib. 2. D^ anima. text. 7.
that no eternal thing can be part of a mortal thing, but the soul of a
man is a part of man, as Aristotle affirms, therefore the soul of man cannot
be immortal.


Stu. Many excellent Philosophers have searched into the nature of the soul of
man, beesides Aristotle, and written of it, who give excellent reasons to show
the immortality of it, as Hermes Tresmagistus. Plato. Plotinus. Zenophon.
Plutarch. Seneca. and many Poets and heathen men. Why should you reject the
reasons and opinions of all these notable men, and stick only to Aristotle?


Tra. Because I like his reasons best.


Stud. It is a strange thing that you should refuse the authority of the
scripture, and the opinion of all other excellent, wise, and learned
Philosophers, and stick only to one. But if Aristotle fail you in this
point, will you then confess, that to deny ye immortality of the soul is
absurd, against the authority of the scripture, and opinion of all the learned
in all ages?


Trau. Yes, I may well enough, for I know Aristotle is very clear in this
point.


Stu. Well then, now I come to answer your reasons out of Aristotle, and first
before I answer in particular to any of your reasons, I must tell you this in
general, that Aristotle does not in his three books de anima, speak of the
substance and essence of the soul of man, but of his faculties, powers, and
operations, in which respect ye soul is said to be the natural form of man,
and actus corporis: as for the substance and essence of the soul, because it
is a spiritual substance, and not a natural faculty of the body, therefore
it pertayneth not to natural philosophy to handle it. This I speak not upon
conjecture, but Aristotle himself in plain terms tells you this, in his
second book de anima, the second chapter, the last words of the chapter. Now
the^, if you will believe Aristotle him self expounding himself, you must
understand whatsoever he says in his three books de anima, to be spoken of
the vegitable, and sensible life of men and beasts, and not of the
intellectual, and reasonable soul of man; and he gives a reason why in those
books he speaks not of it, because says he, the intellectual and reasonable
soul or life of man, is a certain divine substance subsisting of it self,
separable from the body, and in this respect, not actus corporis, not the
natural form of the body: and the better to illustrate his meaning, he
compares the soul of a man in the body, to a Mariner in a ship. As a
Mariner is of a different nature from the ship, subsisting of himself: so is
the soul of man in the body, of a different nature from the body, of a far
more excellent nature subsisting of it self. As the Mariner gives motion
unto the ship, and directs it this way, and that way, whither so ever it
pleases him to sail: so the soul of man, guides the body whither it
pleases him to go. As the Mariner has a vigilent care and love to his
ship, to see to it, that it take no harm, and repayreth the decays of it:
so the soul cares for the good of the body, causes it to decline from those
things which are hurtful for ye body, and by his sensible and vegitable
faculties, daily repayreth the decaying body. As the Mariner does not decay
with his ship, but is safe and sound, though his ship leake, or by reason of
age rotte away: so neither is the soul of man any whitte the worse, though his
body decay and turn to corruption. This in general might suffice to answer
all which might be brought out of Arilio les books de anima: but because you
shall have no cauil, I will in particular answer every one of your arguments.
This is your first argument. Whatsoever has a beginning, has an end. But ye
soul of man has a beginning, therefore it has an end. I grant your whole
sillogisme to be generally true without exception, in things whereof Aristotle
makes this general Maxim; Namely in things natural, composed of the four
elements, but the reasonable and intellectual soul of man, is not a natural
thing composed of the four elements, as Aristotle himself confesses,
therefore this position of Aristotle, Whatsoever has a beginning has an end,
makes nothing against the immortality of the soul, albeit it has a
beginning. Your second reason is this. Every natural form is corruptible with
that whereof it is a form. But the soul of man is the natural form of man,
therefore when man dies, the soul dies also. To this I answer, that the
reasonable soul of man may be considered 2. ways, either according to his
essence, or according to his operations, powers, and faculties: his operations
also are of 2. kinds, whereof some are such, as the soul exercises without
any instrument of the body, as his intellectual powers, as for example; the
soul of man judges of truth and falsehood, discourses of the natural causes
of things, and by the effects of things searches into the causes of things:
it discourses of celestial matters and things invisible: these and the like
operations ye soul uses without any aid or help of the body, and these
remain still with the soul, though the body perish: other faculties the soul
exercises in the body, and by the aid of the body. In the body, when it
gives life unto the body by his sensible and vegitable faculties; and in
respect of these his faculties and operations, the soul is truly said to be
the natural form of man, and these sensible and vegitable operations of the
soul, dye with the body. True therefore is your Mayor Proposition, that every
natural form dies with ye whereof it is the form; but this is nothing
against the immortality of the soul, because ye soul is not properly the
natural form of man in respect of his substance, but only in respect of some
of his faculties, because by his faculties it gives life to man. But if you
respect his essence, it is a spiritual substance separable from the body,
without impeachment to his being; and in this respect it is not the natural
form of man, Arist. lib. 2. de anima. c. 1. vlt. verb. capitis.
as Aristotle himself does confess: so that Aristotle being your judge, your
argument is of no force. Your third reason is this, The soul, or life of man
in his childhood, differs nothing from the life of beasts; but the lives of
beasts are not immortal, Ergo. I confess, both the Mayor, and Minor, to be
most true in that sense as Aristotle speaks them, but not in ye sense
whereunto you wrest them. Aristotle speaks in that place not of the essence
of the soul, Li. 8. de not. anim. ca. 1.
whether it be corruptible, or immortal, but only of the operation of man's
soul in his childhood; which as he says, differs then nothing from beasts,
which is most true. Nay, I say further, in this respect beasts are to be
preferred before children. Children know not what is good or evil for the^, but
beasts naturally know what is good for them, and what is ill for them, and
they choose the one, and refuse the other. But this assertion makes nothing
against the immortality of the soul. Neither had Aristotle any intent to
speak of it in that place, Lib. 1. diuinarum.
as ye circumsta^ce of it will manifest unto you, if you look into it. Your
fourth reason is this, No eternal thing can be a part of a mortal, Lib. 2. de
anima. ca. 1.
or a corruptible thing, but the soul of man is a part of man: therefore it
cannot be immortal. Both Mayor and Minor are Aristotle's I confess, I
distinguish therefore of the soul; if you respect his own nature, as a thing
subsisting by himself, it is not a part of ma^s body; but if you consider his
operation in giving life to ye body, it is a part of man's body, and is, as
Aristotle says, actus corporis, and the form of the body. Now, that the soul
according to his essence, is not a part of the body of man, but only in respect
of his faculties and operations, Aristotle himself plainly confesses in many
places, as in his first book de anima, he says, that the intellectual life,
or soul of man, is contained in no part of man's body, and that he is separable
from the body without any diminutio^, or hurt to his essence. This affirms he
also in his second book de anima, in diverse places. And in his third book de
anima, he says, that the intellectual part of the soul of man, proceeds
not from ye matter of the body, as all natural forms do: and therefore by
consequent it is eternal, and not subject to corruption. Aristotle therefore
himself being judge, the intellectual soul is not a part of the body, but
only in some respect; as by his operation it gives life unto man, with he not
only affirms; but also explayneth his meaning by fit examples, by the example
of a Mariner, which gives motion to the Ship, and directs it, but is no
part of the Ship: and by the example of a seal, which causes a certain
form in the wax, but is no part of the wax; You may bruise the wax together,
and mar the form imprinted by the seal, without any hurt at all to the
seal: so may the body of man turn to corruption, whereunto ye soul gives a
natural form by his operation, yet without the hurt of the essence of the
soul, because it is a divine substance subsisting by it self, separable from
the body, by the confession of Aristotle himself. Thus you see, your reason is
of no force, by the opinion of Aristotle on whom only you rely. Now, because
I will not be beholding to you for your four reasons out of Aristotle against
the immortality of the soul, I will requite you with four more out of
Aristotle, to prove the immortality of the soul; and if need were, I could
double them, since in this point you rely so much on him. My first reason out
of Aristotle is this; God and nature (says he) makes nothing in vain, but
the soul of every man, naturally desires to be immortal, to live continually
in everlasting happiness; therefore is it immortal: else this natural desire
of the soul, of being everlastingly in happiness, is made in vain, which
Aristotle denies. Other living creatures appetites, run on those things
which presently they love and like; their imaginations run not on pleasure to
come, they conceive not of any felicity after this life, much less do they
desire it, for they know it not. God has given to every creature such several
appetites and desires, as are agreeable to their several natures: the Horse
desires not to fly, as God has not given him means to fly: the fish
desires not to walk on ye land, or live on the land, as God has not given him
means to walk, neither is able to live out of the water; neither beasts,
fowls, or fishes, desire to abound in riches, gold, or silver, since they have
no use of it. Generally, God indueth no creature with any natural desire of
ye, whereof he is not capable. Now then, since God has endued the soul of
every man with a natural desire of continuing immortally in everlasting
hapines, therefore he is capable of it, according to the opinion of Aristotle;
who holds this as a sure ground, that God and nature has made nothing in
vain. My second ground out of Aristotle for the immortality of the soul is
this, Whatsoever substance is not composed of the four elements, is not
corruptible, (for as he says, the cause of corruption proceeds from ye
contrariety of the elements whereof they are made) but the soul is not
composed of the four elements: therefore the soul is not corruptible, but
immortal. Both the Mayor and Minor are Aristotle's, therefore according to
Aristotle, the soul is immortal. My third reason which I take out of
Aristotle, is this, The intellectual and reasonable soul of man, is a divine
substance, which has his being separable from the body, whose essence is not
contained in any part of the body, and may be separated from the body as a
thing incorruptible, says Aristotle: whence I make this sillogisme, whatsoever
is a divine substance separable from the body, and incorruptible. Howsoever the
body of man perishes is immortal, but Aristotle says, yt the soul is a
divine substance contained in no part of the body, separable from the body, as
an incorruptible thing from a corruptible. Therefore according to Aristotle,
the soul is immortal. My fourth reason which I take out of Aristotle is this:
That substance whose operations depend not of the body, his essence depends
not of the body, but the operations of the soul of man depends not of the
body, but of the spiritual and divine substance, whose essence is separable
from the body; therefore it perishes not with the body. Both ye Mayor and Minor
are Aristotle's, wc Aristotle proves by the example of the eyes of old men. If
(says he) an old man had ye eye of a child, he would see as clearly as a
child, hereby signifying, that the soul of man does not impair with the body,
as in diverse diseases it is manifest. When as the body is most weak, the
faculties of the mind are most strong; then the mind and soul of man most
sharply understands any thing and is most iuditious, then his desires are
most vehement, and his love to goodness, and mislike of sin is most ardent:
then that natural inclination, and desire of being everlastingly in felicity,
do most show it self. Which natural affection and appetite of the soul were
in vain, if the soul of man were not capable of immortality, which is a thing
flatly denied by Aristotle, that God should give any natural desire to any
thing in vain. Besides these and many more arguments with I could bring out of
Aristotle, there are diverse other reasons which might be brought for ye proof
of this point, as that it cannot stand with the justice of God, that the soul
of man should perish with his body, because as there are many who have
seriously worshipped him and have passed their lives agreeable to his will, yet
worse has betide them, then has happened unto those that have dishonored
him: so contrariwise, many in this life have lived most lewdly, yet have spent
all their days in great prosperity, enriched with great wealth, and dignified
with great honors. Wherefore necessarily it follows, yt there must be a life
to come, wherein the one is to be punished, and the other rewarded. It cannot
stand with the mercy of God, that the soul should perish with the body, since
he made man ye excellentest creature in ye world whom he loves above all
creatures, for whose sake he made all the world, and endued him with more
special graces then all creatures, even in a manner equal to Angels: and when
he fell from ye excellency wherein he created him, spared not his only begotten
Son to redeem him from misery: and yet for all this, if you consider man in
this life only, whether you respect the manifold diseases incident to his
body, or the infinite vexation of his mind, he is of all creatures in the
world (Devils excepted) the most miserable. Now, since it so fares with him in
this life, it cannot stand with the mercy and goodness of God, but to appoint a
better place, and better life, where his goodness and mercy to man, may be
showed. It cannot stand with the honor and glory of God, that that creature
should ever perish, the which he has made to behold and consider his
everlasting and maruailous works, and to participate of his everlasting
goodness, as to this purpose he has made men and Angels. And therefore of all
the creatures under heaven, has made the countenance of man to look upwards,
his eyes rolling fit to turn every way; his neck flexible to look round
about, that with facility and ease, he might contemplate and behold all the
works of God, both above him, about him, and under him. He has endued him with
reason, to consider and discourse on the excellency of them; and only unto man
a tongue, to express the power, wisdom, and goodness of God, and to glorify
him for the goodness which he imparteth to his creatures. Now, if the
reasonable soul of man, made to glorify God should perish, then ye chiefest
instrument of Gods glory should perish; but it cannot stand with the glory of
God, that the chiefest instrument of his glory should perish. Therefore it is
against al reason, that the soul of man should perish with the body. It cannot
stand with natural reason, that the soul of man should perish with the body,
because the soul of man has not his beginning from the substance of the body,
as ye lives of beasts have their beginning out of the matter and substance of
their bodies; and therefore it dies with their bodies, because the beginning
thereof came from a corruptible cause. Their bodies are corruptible, because
they are composed of contrary qualities, as your friend Aristotle confesses:
But it is not so in the soul of man. The soul of man is not made out of the
matter of his body, as Aristotle also confesses, but is a divine substance,
which came from God. And here by ye way, suffer me to show you, yt your
Aristotle agrees in this point with the Scripture: When as God made the
beasts, sowles, and creeping things, he said, Let the earth bring forth every
living thing according to his kind: Genes. 1.24.25.
and in the words following, it is said, G^d made the beasts of the earth. But
when God comes to make man, he speaks after another manner: saying, Let us
make man, where ye holy Ghost speaking to ye weakness of our capacity:
signifies, that man is of that excellency, that that God, even the Trinity,
took consultation in making man. Let us make man. When he made other
creatures, he says only, let this or that be, and it was done: but when he
comes to make man, he shows to what dignity he ordayneth him, and
whereunto he makes him, even like unto himself. The soul of man (which is
properly man, according to that speech in ye Scripture: Genesis 2.7. 1. Cor. 15.45.
Man was made a living soul) is the very image of God. As God is infinite, and
knows all things; so is the soul of man made infinite, to receive all
knowledge. He never knows so much, but is capable to know more. Secondly, as
the will of God is infinite; so is ye will of man made infinite, not tied to
will this or that, but whatsoever it pleases, it cannot be constrained to will
any thing. Thirdly, as God is infinitely good; so is the soul of man capable
of infinite goodness: nay it never cease, until it attayneth it. Make man a
King, he is not satisfied, but his desire enlarges it self farther. Make him
a Monarke, he is not contented, he will desire more. Make him Lord of all the
world, yet is he not contented: The reason hereof is, because these things may
be bettered. So that as the natures of the elements are, they never cease
until they come to the place of their proper eleme^t. The fire never cease
tending upward, until it be above the element of the air; nor the air, until
it be above the water; nor the water ever cease to fall downward, until it
come to ye bottom of the sea; nor any part of the earth, until it come unto
ye center of the earth, if it were not hindered. So the soul of man never
cease until it come unto God himself, from whom it came. No finite
goodness can satisfy it, but only that wherein there is no defect, which only
is God himself. Fourthly, as God is eternal, so the natural desire of the
soul is, to be eternal in happiness, and to live everlastingly. Fifthly, as
God rules all the world, and every creature therein, and gives life unto them
and motion: so the soul of man gives life unto all the body of man, and
motions unto every member thereof, and rules ye whole body according to his
will: nay further, man (according to that authority which God has given him)
has authority over all the beasts of the field, fowls of the air, fishes of
the sea, and all earthly creatures to rule and use them at his pleasure, as a
petty God on earth. Sixthly, as God rules all the world, yet can he not be
seen, nor comprehended what he is: so the soul rules the whole body; yet can
it not be seen, nor rightly by humane reason be comprehended what it is.
Seauenthly, as God is in the world, but is not contained in any part of the
world; so the soul of man is in the body of man: but is not contained in any
part of the body, as your Aristotle says, but by his reasonable and spiritual
faculties discourses of things far distant from ye body, he is with a trise
discoursing of matters in foreign countries, and in the twinkling of an eye
at home again. He is considering on things on earth, and in a moment he
mounteth up to heaven; he is not wearied, or payned with the greatness of the
journey. There he discourses on spiritual invisible and divine matters, of
the majesty of God, of his infinite wisdom, power, mercy, and justice: of the
felicity and eternal happiness of the Angels: all these and the like
operations, ye soul uses without any aid of the body. Now in all things
created, there are two things to be considered the essence of the things and
their operations. There can be no operation of any thing whereof there is no
essence: no more the^ there can be any accident without a subject. But you see
even by the opinion of Aristotle, that the soul h^th peculiar operations unto
himself, no way depending on the aid of ye body. Therefore the soul is a
several substance, differing from the substance of the body, w^ose operations
are divine, and therefore their subject the soul, must needs be divine. But
how now man? what muse you on so steadfastly? how do you now like Aristotle?


Trau. I cannot tell what to say to this point; it is hard for Aristotle or any
humane reason well to determine what the soul is, it is so strange a thing.


Stud. You say right, in divine and spiritual matters therefore, you might do
well to believe divine testimonies. If you would but read the Scripture and
believe it, your mind would be easily settled in this point, and all others,
necessary for man to know, in it there can be no error.


Trau. The Scripture? no error in it? nay, the Scripture was it, that first
drove me to these opinions. For I find in it so many falsehoods and untruths,
so many absurdities, so many unreasonable things, that he is a senseless man
that perceaueth it not, and a fool that believes it.


Stud. It is your manner, to be confident in your opinion, be it never so
absurd. But show either any untruth or absurdity, or any unreasonable thing
contained in the Scripture, and I will be of your opinion, that no credit is to
be given to the Scripture.


Trau. Will you stand to your words?


Stud. Yes truly.


Trau. Well, then I will show you diverse plain and evident untruths. God said
to Adam, when he placed him in Paradise, in that day that thou eatest of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall dye the death, and in the next
chapter following, Moses says, that he did eat of the forbidden fruit, and
dyed not, and says further in the 5. chapter, Verse. 5.
that Adam lived nine hundred and thirty years. If he dyed not, that day
wherein he did eat of the forbidden fruit. But lived many years afterward,
and begat children. Then that is not true, that he should dye the same day,
that he should eat of the forbidden fruit. If he dyed that day that he did
eat of the forbidden fruit: Then the other cannot be true, that he lived so
long, and begat children, then tell me which of these two are false. The second
untruth I take out of the 4. chap. of Genesis. When Caine had slain his
brother Abel. God says unto him for his punishment, a vagabond and a runnagate
shall thou be in the earth. And yet in the same chapter it is said, that Kain
dwelt in the East side of Eden, and builded a City. If Caine were
ahoushoulder, and builded a City. How was he a vagabound and a runnagate,
both these cannot be true: Tell me which of them is false? A third untruth I
gather out of the whole scripture which is this, large promises of health,
wealth, and prosperity, unto those that keep the law of God. And
contrariwise, many curses against the wicked: Yet if the scripture be true,
they which in the Scripture are renowned for piety and holiness were most
afflicted, and the wicked most abounded in prosperity. The like we see in our
days true for the most part. Now tell me whether these promises have been
truly performed or no. A fourth untruth I take out of the book of Judges,
Iud. 10.13.
where God says to the Israelites, that he had many times deliu^red them out
of the hands of their enemies, but when they were once freed, then they would
forsake him again and fall to Idolatry: Therefore he gave them this flat
answer, when they cried unto him in their troble, that he would help them no
more. Yet for all this, he did help them afterward. How can this agree? God
would help them no more, and that God did help them again, both cannot be
true. Now for absurdities in the scripture, this is one especial.


Stud. Nay pray, before you proceed further, let me answer these which you
call falshoodes and untruths.


Trau. Yea, pray answer the^ if you can.


Stud. Josephus records that Sedechias King of Israel (who had no intent or
purpose to obey the will of ye Lord) Lib. 10. cap. 10. et 11. anti.
sought rather how is cavil with the words of the Prophets, which were sent
unto him, then either to know or observe the will of the Lord, so that when as
Ieremias the Prophet prophesied yt he should be carried away captive to Babylon
except he repented, and obayed the will of the Lord: And Ezechiell also
prophesied that he should be made captive unto the King of Babylon, and led
away into captivity, but he should never see Babylon. Sedechias comparing the
words of these two Prophets together, it seemed to him, that there was a
contradiction in their prophesies, yt one prophesying that he should be
carried away captive to Babylon: the other prophesying that he never should see
Babylon. Both these could not be true (as he thought) and if either of them
were false, both of them might be false, and therefore he believed neither of
them: but continued still in his wickedness, until he indeed, he was carried
away captive unto Babylon, according to the prophecy of Jeremy, but he never
saw Babylon, according to the prophecy of Ezechiell. Jeremy. 39.7.
For the King of Babylon caused his eyes to be pulled out of his head before
he was brought unto Babylon. Such is ye judgment of God against the wicked,
2. Pet. 2.19.
that they (who have no purpose to obaye the will of God,) shall not understand
the words of God, yea the word of God which is to others a light in darkness,
to guide them the right way, is hidden unto them, nay it is a stu^bling block
unto them, Ioh. 7.15.
if aeny man will do his will (says our Savior) he shall know of the
doctrine whether it be of God or no, them only God teache^h the right way, who
fear him, and intend to keep and observe his commandments. The true
understanding of the word of God, is a secret, res^rued as a peculier thing
only for such, Psalm. 25.12.14.
as in sinceretie fear the Lord, as the Prophet David says. And therefore when
as our Savior spoke in the presents of the malicious Scribes and Pharisees,
he spoke in parables, (for the pearls of God pertain not unto Dogs and
Swine) but he causes his disciples to understand them in private. Saying,
Math. 7.6. cap. 15.26.
unto you it is given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but unto
the^ (that is to ye wicked and malicious) it is not given. I do not marvel
therefore to see you, as a corrupt stomach which turns even the best meats
into corruption, and matter of diseases, with sound stomachs you turn into good
nutriment: so turn that which is most true in it self, unto falsehood and
absurdities; being carried away with a prejudicial conceit, more willing to
cavil with, then to understand the word of God. Now that these are not
untruths which you have alleged, I will by the grace of God make most
manifest. The first, with seems unto you to be untrue, is, in that God said
unto Ada^, that he should die the same day that he should eat of the forbidden
fruit, but the Scripture testifies, that he died not the day that he did eat
of the forbidden fruit, but lived nine hundred and thirty years afterward.
In these words there is no contradiction or falsehood, as you imagine: yt which,
that you may the better understand, you must know, that there are three sorts
of lives, and three sorts of deaths: three sorts of lives, as first, the
corporal life which is the conjunction of body and soul, in which union, the
soul gives all vegitable and sensible faculties unto the body, his
intellectual, and reasonable faculties, he exercises without the body.
Secondly, the spiritual life, whereby we live unto God, when as we being made
the temples of the holy Ghost, live a sanctified life unto the honor of God. A
third kind of life is that spiritual life, which after this life, the Saints
of God live in the presence of God in fullness of joy and happiness. Likewise,
there are three sorts of deaths; a corporal death, when as the soul
departs from the body, leaving neither sense, nor motion in the body.
Secondly, there is a spiritual death in this life, when as the spirit of God
departs from us, or is not resident in us, without whose presence and aid,
we cannot but fall into all kind of wickedness: neither can we have any motions
of godliness, wherein consists a spiritual life. A third kind of death, is
after this life, when as a man is cast into hell body and soul, there
everlastingly to endure torments unspeakable. Now true it is, Adam died not the
first kind of death, which is the separation of the body and soul, ye same
day he did eat of the forbidden fruit, as it was not meant he should: but he
died the second kind of death, which is a reiection out of Gods favor, wherein
the happy life of man consists; and that God denounced unto Adam the second
kind of death, and not the first. S. Ambrose proves out of the words of the
text, God says not to Adam, what day thou eatest of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil thou shall die. (says S. Ambrose:) but thou shall die the
death; by saying thou shall die the death, he imports more, then if he had
said, thou shall die. For in saying, thou shall die The death, he signifies,
that he should die ye death of all deaths, ye greatest death of all others,
even rejected out of the favor of God: and that he died this kind of death the
same day he tasted of the forbidden fruit. I need not stand to prove, since
the thing is manifest: so that there is no contradiction in the Scripture in
this point, but the fault is in your misco^struing it: he died ye same day he
tasted of the forbidden fruit, the second death; and the same day also, was his
body made subject to death, which before by ye favor of God was immortal:
and this mortality of the body, was the consequent of the second death. To
live, is to enjoy those things which in themselves are good and pleasant.
Arist. Eth. li. 9. c. 9. But Adam immediately after his transgression, lost
those things which in themselves were good and pleasant: therefore he died
immediately after his transgression: Which positio^ of Aristotle fitly agrees
with our common speech. When we see a man heavy and dumpish without any
courage, we say, that he has no life in him: and of men in misery we say,
such a life is no life. He dyed therefore the same day, though he lived in
the body many years after. If you like not Ambroses interpretation, consider
what the Scripture says, 2. Pet. 3.8.
that a thousand years are as one day with the Lord. But Adam dyed within the
compass of a thousand years; therefore he died the same day, a day being
taken for a thousand years with the Lord. Now say, that Adam never died either
in body or soul; yet you cannot justly say, that there is any falsehood in
those words of the Scripture, which you have alleged concerning the
punishment of Adam: for these words. Thou shall die the death, the same day
wherein thou shall eat the forbidden fruit: are not a prophecy what should
come to pass; but a commination annexed to a precept, to deter Adam from
breaking the commandment. Now you know that he, who has authority to make
a law, and appoint punnishments for the breakers thereof: reserueth always a
power unto himself, to mitigate those punnishme^ts which it plesed him to
appoint for the breakers of his law: in mittigating whereof, he offends
neither the law, nor equity. The primary and principal intent of good Princes,
in appointing grievous punishments for offenders of their laws, is especially
to defer and fear their subjects from transgressing their comandements. They
intend not principally their punishment in those comminations, but especially
use them as means to keep the^ in obedience unto their law: wishing rather
their obedience then their punishments, so ye punishments denounced in
co^minations, are not always intended to be executed unto ye utmost extremity:
But so far forth, as they may defer subjects from breaking the laws, which
in duty they are bound to observe. But see how Satan rules your malicious
heart and tongue, if God should in rigor without mercy have utterly destroyed
Adam presently upon his offense, both body and soul. Then would your clamorous
mouth have been open, to declaime against the rigor of Gods judgments: but
now because he uses mercy in his judgments, there is no truth in his
words: because he treatneth severely, but deals mercifully, refrain your
blasphemous tongue, least you taste of his judgments without mercy. Concerning
your second contradiction (as you imagine) that Kain was a housdweller, and
built and lived in a City, and therefore that was not true which God said
should happen unto him, that he should be a runnagate, and a vagabound. First,
the word in ye original which is translated a ru^nagate; does as well signify
an unconstant and variable minded man, or a man of a troubled and fearful
mind, always mistrusting and expecting some evil to happen unto him, and that
Kaine was such a one, the very building of his City does argue. For before
this sentence of God, against the heinous sin of Kaine, Kaine, nor any else
ever fortified themselves with walls or Cities, which was an argument, that
they never feared invasion of men or beasts. Secondly, yt Kaine built a City
and dwelt in it, is a weak argument, that he was no vagbo and, for although
Moses presently after the sentence of God against Kaine, Shows where he built
a City and dwell: yet he sets not down when he built this City. Moses
briefly sets down that, which was done after many years, it was usual
the^, that men lived Eight or Nine hundred years. Now it may be that Kain was
a vagabound for the space of Five Hundred years, and after builded this City,
and this is not my mere conjecture, but Josephus records, that Kaine wandered
into many countries, before he built this City. Thirdlye, these words, Thou
shall be a vagabond, is a judicial sentence: in which sentences, always what
shall be done unto the offender is not set down, necessarilye to be executed:
but what his offense deserves. As we see daily in the execution of
malefactors, the extremity of the sentence of the Judge is sieldome performed,
but in compassion mitigated.


Trau. Well, but yet you will not deny, but that Kaine builded a City.


Stu. It cannot be denied, for the plain words of the text affirms it.


Trau. If he did, I pray tell me how many Citizens he had? what Masons and
Carpenters he had? If you will believe the Scripture, there were not then in
all the world above Five or Six men. Therefore, for Kaine to build a City,
seems an absurd thing, since then, there were no people to inhabit it.


Stud. He that has a desire rather to cavil with the Scripture, then to
understand it, shall for his irreverent usage of it, and his infidelity, have
this punishment, that he shall never understand the Scripture. I believe the
Scripture, yet am I not bound to believe that there were in all ye world but
five or six persons when Kaine built his City: for the Scripture says not
so, neither in any probability was it so. The Scripture indeed mentions no
more, but it follows not thereon, that then there were no more. Moses only
briefly names those of principal note; but that there were then many more,
it is more the^ probable. Josephus records that Kayne built this City about
his latter days, as it should seem by the usual time that men then lived,
when he was about some seaue^ or eight hundred years of age. Now, in seven
or eight hundred years, Kaynes children and his childrens children might very
well grow to a very great number, sufficient to inhabit a City. Therefore if
you consider the matter duly, you may know, that it cannot seem that Kayne
should not build a City, for want of people to inhabit it, as you without
probability gather. Now, concerning your third untruth, which you would gather
out of the Scripture, in that, God promises all manner of blessings
spiritual, and temporal, to those that keep his commandments: and
contrariewise, all manner of punishments against those that break his laws:
and yet the Scripture testifies, that they which were most godly, suffered
most affliction, and they which were most wicked, especially prospered and
enjoyed greatest happiness here on earth, as also daily experience teaches
the same. For answer whereof, you are to consider, yt the promises of temporal
blessings are promised co^ditionally, if they keep the law; but none ever yet
kept the law. Therefore, no man can in right challenge them to be performed
unto them. Secondly, you are to consider, that when ye Lord promised the land
of Canaan, wealth, health, and worldly prosperity, the land of Canaan, nor
health, wealth, and prosperity is properly and principally to be understood
and meant; but figuratively under ye name of these earthly blessings,
spiritual blessings are principally understood. The reason why God uses the
names of these earthly blessings, to express these spiritual blessings unto
men, which he principally intends unto them, is, because that as these
spiritual blessings exceed the capacity of mortal men: so there are no
sufficient words sufficiently ta express ye excellency of them. Therefore God
uses the names of earthly blessings best known unto men, to signify unto
the^, those blessings, which as yet their weakness cannot conceive of. Now,
that these earthly blessings promised to the obseruers of the law, are not
principally meant, but spiritual blessings under their names, and that ye
Saints of God, expected spiritual blessings under ye names of these blessings.
It is manifest by diverse places of ye scripture, David was borne in the land of
Canaan, and lived in the land of Canaan the land of promise, yet he
acknowledged yt he was a stranger therein, Ps. 39.14.
saying, that he was a stranger and a soiourner here, as all his forefathers
were. How was he a soiourner in Canaan where he was borne, except he expected
an other Canaan, which he acknowledged to be his own country? And in the 27.
Psalm. 13. David says, I should have fainted, except I had believed to see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. Canaan could not be that land
of the living where he hoped to see the goodness of the Lord: for as well in
Canaan, as in other lands all men dyed, so that it could not be termed the land
of the living. Likewise ye Apostle to the Hebrews says of the Saints of God,
cap. 11.10.40.
that they looked for a celestial Jerusalem* they received not the promises of
these earthly blessings, for God provided better things for them: even the
joys of the kingdom of heaven signified under these earthly blessings, and
principally intended. Lastly, it is manifest by the very words which God uses
in these promises, that under the name of the land of Canaan, the kingdom of
heaven is meant. For in Genesis 13.15. the Lord says, that he will give the land
of Canaan unto Abraham and his seed for ever: which cannot be understood of
the land of Canaan; for this world shall not endure for ever, and long since
his seed lost the possession of it. Therefore it must needs be spiritually
understood.


Trau. You say principally intended. Then also earthly blessings, and earthly
punishments were also intended, though not principally; but sure these are not
performed. For albeit the iustest man cannot challenge any iotte of these
promises, because (as you say) they do not perfectly fulfill the law: yet they
more deserve them, then those who nothing regard Gods commandments. But
experience proves, that the iustest commonly taste least of these blessings,
and the wicked are least punished.


Stud. True it is, that God promises rewards to those who keep his laws, and
denounces punishments against those who break his law. But the performance of
these, are not done according to the fancy of men, but by the ordinance of
God. The portion of punishment appointed for the godly, are performed in this
life; but the portion of their blessings principally intended them, is
performed in the life to come. Contrariwise, the portion of the joys of the
wicked, is performed vnsually unto them in this life; but their torments
principally intended, in ye life to come. Therefore it is said, that Judgment
begins at the house of God. 1. Pet. 4.17.
And this course God has always observed. Great were the sins of the
children of Israel, when they committed fornication with the daughters of
Moab: Numb. 25.
yet nothing in comparison of the sins of the Moabites; yet God begins in
punishing the Israelites, and afterward punissheth the Moabites. Numb. 31.
Great were the sins of the Israelites in ye time of Esaias the Prophet: but if
their sins were compared unto the sins of the Assirians, they were but
small: Yet God begins in punishing with the Israelites. Nay, he uses the
wicked Assirians to punish the Israelites, Esaias. 10.
and afterward, punishes the Assirians. In the time of the Prophet Ezechiell,
the children of Israel provoked ye Lord to pour out his wrath on them; so
that he spared neither young nor old, save them who mourned in secret for the
abominations that were committed amongst them. Ezech. 9.4.6.
In punishing the rest, he gives this commandment, that the destroyers
should begin punishing at his sanctuary: first punish his Priests, and those
that were nearest unto him. This ordinance of God, is the cause why the iustest
men are soonest punished, and this proceeeth from the especial care of God
toward his elect, to put them presently in mind that they err, least they
continue in sin. Hose. 2.6.
He does hedge them in with a hedge of thorns, so that they shall no sooner
offer to depart from him, but they shall be pricked with one punishment or
other. As for the wicked, who are incorrigible, he deals otherwise with them,
since they contemn his spiritual graces, and regard them not, but greedily
desire all worldly pleasures, notwithstanding their wickedness, because they
are his creatures, he will of his mercy, have the^ to enjoy some part of his
blessings: these earthly blessings which they so greedily affect, he bestows
on them, are all the portion of joys which ever they shall have, and therefore
it is said, that God fills their bellies with the hid treasures of ye earth,
which treasures are termed their portion. Ps. 17.14.
All their joys are confined wihin the bounds of this present life. Psalm. 73.
They are lifted up on high whilst they live on earth: but suddenly they are
cast down to hell: This point our Savior Christ plainly shows in that
Parable of Dives. When Dives desired some mitigation of his torments in hell,
he had this answer. Son, Luc. 16.25
remember that thou in thy life time receauedst thy pleasures, and likewise
Lazarus his pains. Now therefore he is comforted, and thou art tormented.
These things come not by chance, but by the disposition of God, so placing his
blessings, as they may best beseem his goodness, and the good of his
creatures, of his mere bounty he ladeth ye wicked with temporal blessings,
who nothing regard his spiritual blessings. Again, he bestows his
temporal blessings on the godly, but most commonly sparingly, not because it
is with him, as it is with earthly princes, the more they bestow, ye less they
have; it is not for want of store of blessings: But first considering the
fragility of man's nature, whom abundance of earthly blessings will corrupt, as
experience of all time do make proof. Therefore to keep the^ in his
obedience, he uses this sparingnesse of his temporal blessings. Secondly, he
does not bestow abundance on the elect, because it becomes not the persons
of them, whom he has appointed to be as Patterns and preachers unto others
of patience, temperance, sobriety, continually to live in pleasures, to fare
delitiously, to court it out in gorgious apparel; to teach patience, it had
not been so effectual in Job, only to have made a long speech in the
commendations of patience curiously penned, as in deed to suffer the loss of
al his substance, his children, and to be tormented in his body. It could not
beseem John ye Baptist a preacher of repentance, to fare deliciously every
day, or brave it out in costly raiment. Not the words only, but especially the
deeds of the children of God, must be Sermons unto others, to draw them unto
virtue, and godliness. Now, many virtues be of that nature, that they cannot
well be shown in continual earthly felicity, as valor without an enemy,
patience where there is no wrong done, or no adversity happen, prudence and
circumspection to prevent evils, if no fear of evil ever happen. Wherefore
albeit godly men enjoy less worldly pleasures in this present life then ye
ungodly; yet are not the promises of God false, but you misconster the true
intent of them, not knowing that under the name of these blessings mentioned in
the law, especially spiritual graces are intended, as Jerome, Gregory,
Ambrose, and all the Fathers affirm: which spiritual graces, are always in
this life performed unto the elect of God, so far forth, as they are fit for
their vocation, on some more, on some less* none of them want a sufficientcy
of them to bring them unto everlasting life. As for temporal blessings, which
are not principally intended, they are so far forth performed unto ye elect
(though none of them ca^ in right challenge any, since none fulfill the law) as
they may be means toward ye obtaining of those spiritual blessings
principally intended the^. In that the wicked abound in all earthly blessings,
it proceeds of the long patience, and mere mercy of God. But the evils
threatened against them in the law, shall come on them, when they have ended
their wicked race. Now, conterning your fourth reason, to prove falsehood in
the scripture: God affirmed that he would help the Israelites no more: Yet
contrary to this, it is afterward affirmed* that he did again help the^: in
these words there is no co^tradictio^ as you imagine. The which yt you may
plainly see, you must consider the double state of the Israelites. First their
estate whilst they were Idolaters and grievous Apostataes from God. In this
estate and as long as they so continued, God pronounces that he will not help
the^ any more. Afterward, the Israelites repented them of their wickedness,
and cried for the mercy of God, and in this penitent estate, he helped them.
This misconstruing of the word of God, proceeds of your ignorance and
rashness, they who are not well studied in ye scripture, may not take upon
them to censure places of ye scripture, for many places are very hard to be
understood, the which to meddle with is presumption, for those that are not
well exercised in divinity, if you had known that general rule which is
set down in the Eighteen of Jeremy, where the Lord says, Ezech. 33.14.15.
I will speak suddenly against a nation or a kingdom to pluck it up, aend to
root it out, and to distroye it. But if the nation against whom I have
pronounced turn from their wickedness, I will repent of the plague that J
thought to bring upon it. And again, I will speak suddenly concerning a
nation or kingdom to build it, and plunt it. But if this nation or kingdom do
evil in my sight, and hear not my voice, I will repent of the good that I
thought to do for them, when as the Lord help the Israelites, whom he said he
would not help, ye Lord was not changed, who always determines to bless those
that do well, and punish those who do ill. But the Israelites were changed,
his promises of blessings and threats of punishments in things temporal, are
always with exception and so to be understood, though in every promise of
blessings, and threatening of punishment, the exception be not specified, as
without exception it was pronounced of Niniueth, yet forty days, and Niniueth
shall be^ destroyed, Iona. 3.4.
yet was it not destroyed, because they repented, yet the exception of
repentance is not mentioned. So likewise, when as the Lord had afflicted the
Israelites by the Assirians, until they were brought to repentance, the Lord
says, Nahum. 1.12. 2. Kin. 25. Ier. 5. and 39 Iere. 18.
though I have afflicted thee, yet will I afflict thee no more. Yet
notwithstanding afterward did he afflict them by the Babilonians, because
they continued not in the worship of God. The promise was general, that he
would not afflict them any more, yet was it to be expounded according to that
general rule mentioned in Jeremy. Thus you see that these places (as also
there are many more like unto these) which seem to be contradictions at the
first view, out of which, men of perverse minds willing to wrangle, may pick
matter enough to please their wayward humor, and easily deceive themselves and
others. God so tempering it, that it should be a stumbling block to me^ of
perverse minds. But a light and a comfort to those that are of an humble
spirit, desirous to know the truth. Thus much concerning your contradictions in
the scripture. Now, pray what are those absurdities which you speak of in the
scripture.


Tra. You say, that if there be any absurdity in the Scripture, you will not
believe the Scripture. I pray tell me this, Is it not absurd, that one man
should be punished for another man's fault? Does not the Scripture teach you,
that God will punish the sin of the Fathers, upon his children? is this
equity? is not this absurd? Again, the Scripture teaches you, that no man can
be saved but by faith in the merits of Jesus Christ: and yet it cannot be
denied, but that many thousand thowsands never heard of Christ, both before the
law given to Moses, and in the time of the old Testament, and also since the
time of the Gospel. Does God create men to damn them? is this equity? is not
this absurd? Of all the people in the world, he chose only the Jews before the
coming of Christ. Since his coming only they shall be saved, who believe the
Gospel: but to many thowsands the Gospel has not been preached; and how
should they then believe it? is not this cruelty, to condemn men for not
believing the Gospel, of which they never heard? pray answer me this.


Stud. Before I answer your first objection, that God does not justly in
punishing ye sins of the Fathers upon their children; Tell me, if a snake
should sting any of your children, and escape, if you should afterward find yt
snake with his young ones, would you only kill the old snake which stinged your
child, and let go his young ones, or else kill them all?


Trau. I would kill them all.


Stud. But the young snakes were guiltless, they never did harm unto any:
this is cruelty, to kill the innocent with the hurtful.


Tra. But they may do harm, and will also if they be suffered to live, it is
their natures so to do, they cannot alter their hurtful nature.


Stud. See how partial you are in judgment, you justify your self in doing
that, which in God you account injustice and cruelty. You think you have
reason for your doing, yet you carp at the majesty of God. Yea though he does
not as you do, destroy the young snakes which never did harm, God does not
punish any that are harmless, but only punish the wicked sons of wicked
parents. For it is not said as you repeat the words, that God will visit the
sins of the Fathers, upon the third or fourth generation, whether guilty, or
guiltless; but it is added, on them that hate him. The children which hate
God, are not guiltless. Neither are you to understand under the name of
punishment, any kind of punishment, but only temporal punishment. For no
sinner is damned for the sin of his father: for this punishment of eternal
damnation, no man shall suffer for any man's fault, but his own: the soul that
sins, Ezech. 18.
shall die. Furthermore, God does not punish with temporal punishments the
wicked sons of wicked parents, with greater punishments for the sins of their
Fathers, then their own sins do justly deserve. But in this respect God is
said to punish the wicked sons of wicked parents unto the third and fourth
generation, because God apointeth unto every nation, city, and family, a time
to continue, before he powers out his wrath upon them, until they have filled
up that measure of sins, and grown so obstinate in sin as God has
appointed, then no longer to suffer them. So that if the father of a wicked
son had not sinned, God would longer have deferred the punishment of his
wicked son. The way for parents to have their posterity to continue long and
prosper, is to abstain from sin: for in sinning, they hasten the ruin of
their posterity. Furthermore, in this punishing of the sins of the Fathers
upon ye children, unto the third and fourth generation; not only the son, but
also the Father is punished too. When God afflicts the son, the father is
grieved oftentimes more then the son, to see his son in trouble, vexatio^,
or tormented with diseases, or suffer loss of goods, and live in misery.
Examples hereof, we have both in profane, and divine histories: David wished
that he had died for his rebellious son Absolon. And Appian in his history of
the civil wars of the Romans, in the fearful times of proscription
shows, what great care parents had toward their children, venturing their
own lives to save their sons. God in punishing the sins of the Fathers
upon the children; not only hereby calls the sons to repentance; but also
the Fathers: and this is the reason, that God punishes the sins of the
Fathers upon the children, no further then unto the fourth generation; because
usually, no father lives longer then that he may see any of his posterity,
after yt fourth generation. After this fourth generation, no affliction laid on
his posterite, can bring him to repentance. For repentance cannot be but in
this life. Seeing therefore, that such are the ardent affections even of wicked
parents toward their children, that they as much, yea oftentimes more desire
to see their children to live in prosperity, then themselves, (God knowing
their inordinate love, that they love their children more then God himself.)
He therefore threatens wicked parents yt he will punish their children for
their sin: that if for love or fear of him, they will not abstain from
sin, yet they might fear to offend God for love of their children; and the
more to incite fathers unto godliness, he does promise good fathers, (that is,
such as unfeignedly do their endeavor to live according to Gods commandments)
that he will bless their children to a thousand generations, in them that fear
him. This being so, you unjustly accuse God of injustice in punishing the
sins of the Fathers upon their children: since these temporal punishments do
not exceed the desert of their own proper sins. Nay, if you well consider
this manner which God uses in punishing the sins of the Fathers upon the
childred, you shall find that God deals most mercifully herein. For first, in
ye God prolongeth his punishment, he gives time and space to the father to
repent, which if he do, neither father, nor son suffers punishment.
Secondly, in this kind of punishing, God calls both father and son to
repentance: but especially the father, in a more fit time to repentance, then
if he should presently lay some temporal punishment on him, as soon as he
offends: for more headstrong are men in their youth to take their pleasure in
sin, then in their old age; they will fulfill their lusts then, though they
smart for it. But in older years, their affections are not so vehement; then
are they more considerate in their actions, and fitter to receive correction.
If God then call them to repentance, they will not be so unruly. Wherefore
most unjustly you term this kind of punishing, absurd and unjust dealing. Now,
concerning your second absurdity, which you would gather out of the Scripture,
because the Scripture teaches us, that none can be saved, except they believe
in Christ: Of whom, many before the law given to Moses, and in the time of
the old law, and since the time of the Gospel never heard of; and that before
the time of the Gospel, God chose only the nation of the Jews, rejecting all
other people, and since only the believers: and out of this, you conclude, God
to be cruel and unjust, to create me^, and then condemn them for not
observing the law of Moses, of which they never hard, and for not believing in
him, of whom they never hard. For answer hereof, you must know, that God
saves men after two manner of ways, ordinarily, and extraordinarily. Now,
when as the Scripture teaches us, that none can be saved except they believe
in Christ, it is to be understood only of those me^: unto whom yt ordinary
means of salvation have been revealed, except the fault be in themselves, that
these means were not known unto them. Wherefore Children, who are not capable
of these ordinary means, are saved without this actual faith in Christ.
Neither shall any being of years and discretion, ever be condemned for not
believing expreslye in the merits ot Christ, if he never heard of Christ. If
his ignorance be such, as by his diligence he cold not come to the knowledge of
Christ. Neither shall any of the Gentiles to whom the law of Moses was not
known, be condemned for not observing the law of Moses, and yt many men were
accepted of God, before either Moses, or ye law given to him was ever hard of,
it is most manifest; as Abell, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, and
many thousands more. Who although they had not the written law of Moses, yet had
they a law nothing differing from the law of Moses, even ye law of reason and
conscience, with was written in their hearts, yt ground of with law our savior
mentions, affirming, yt in substance, it differs nothing from the law of
Moses. Mat. 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do ye unto the^. For
this is the whole law and the Prophets. This compendious and short Bible we
have always about us, written in our hearts; by ye which if we square our
actions, we shall never do amiss. By the direction only of this law, (I
exclude not the internal operation of the holy spirit in the hearts of men:
For without it, though we had all the directions unto godliness in the old
and new testament by heart, yet it would nothing profit us) all the godly men
before the law of Moses pleased God, who always believed the redemption of
mankind, by the seed of ye woman, being taught this, either by tradition from
Adam and their forefathers, or else by special revelation. For the goodness of
God (no doubt) in reueling those things which pertayned to their salvation, was
no less before the time of Moses, then after the time of Moses unto the
Prophets. Nay in probability God then more vsuallye by special revelation
directed those that worshipped him, because they had then no written law to
direct them, as we now have, and that this mystery of salvation by the seed of
the woman, was known unto the^, their sacrifices which they offered unto God,
do easily show. Wherefore most false is that which you say, that God chose
only the nation of the Jews, and rejected all people else. I confess that
the Jews held this for a truth, that only the circumcised could be saved, and
all other damned, Act. 10.34 35.
of ye which opinion also was ye Apostle Peter until he was better instructed,
But it was only a tradition of their elders, their law taught them not this,
they were commanded not to join league or familiarity with the people of
Canaan, but destroy them. But after all the Canaanites were destroyed, they
thought it unlawful to have any dealing with the uncircumcised, and herein
they erred. True it is, that God chese of all the nations in the world, only
the Jews, but to what? not to salvation, for many of the Gentiles were elected
to this, as well as the Jews: but to be Priests and instructers to the world,
to be examples and guides to worship God, to all people. For as Aaron and
his Sons, amongst the Jews, were separated from other tribes, to be holy
unto the Lord, and to be priests and instructors to their brethren: So the
whole nation of the Jews were separated from all other nations, to be priests
unto all nations, and to be, as the Apostle says of them, Rom 2.17 18.19.
guides of the blind, and as lights to them which sit in darkness, instructors
of them which lack discretion, and teachers of them which are unlearned. So
that this choice of the Jews out of other nations, is not to be understood of
choice to salvation, as if God excluded all other nations from salvation; but
only of their pre-eminence above others: on whom he would show greater favor
the^ unto other nations, in giving them his written laws, which as a Candle
might lighten the darkness of their understanding: other nations might well
be said to sit in darkness, inco^parison of the Jews, 2. Pet. 1.19.
because they wanted this light of the written word of God, and that this their
choice, was only a choice of prehemine^ce above other nations, the very
words which God uses in choosing them, makes most manifest. If (says the
Lord to the Jews) you will hear my voice indeed, Exodus 19.5.6. 1. Pet. 2.1.6.
and keep my covenants, then shall ye be my chief treasure above all people,
though all the earth be mine, ye shall be also unto a kingdom of priests, and
a holy nation. Now, in saying that they shall be his chief treasure: God
insinuates also, that other nations are his treasure, But the Jews his chief
treasure, and that upon condition too, If they in deed keep his
commandments. And further, he shows to what purpose and duty he chooses
them: To be priests unto him, to set forth his glory by them to all nations:
And this is the reason why always (when they offended God) he used for their
punishment, Tobit. 1 3.
to give them into ye hands of their enemies, and scatter them amongst the
nations, that the nations might learn of them the knowledge of the true God.
When they had them in captivity, and the^ were the Jews most fit to teach
others, both by their life and doctrine, when by captivity they were humbled:
and this kind of punishment was so usual, that the heathen people observed it,
as it appears by the advice of Achior to Holofernes, Saying, Iudit. 5.18
that God used to give the^ into the hands of their enemies to be led
captives, if they offend him; and if you examine this matter well, you shall
find, that no nation under heaven have ever been scattered abroad into so many
countries, nor so often, as have bin ye Jews, whereby it came to pass, that
the knowledge of God was spread abroad throughout all lands. So that, (as the
Apostle says,) By the fall of the Jews, Romans 11.11.12.
salvation came to the Gentiles, and riches to the world. Furthermore, God did
not so give his written law unto the Jews, as that he excluded any from ye
knowledge and benefit of it, but whosoever would, of what nation soever he
was, might be partaker of this benefit as well as the Jews; and this point,
that the Jews should not exclude any from the knowledge of the law of Moses,
is expressly set down in the law of Moses, Exodus 12.48.
the words are these. If a stranger dwell with thee, and will observe the
passover, let him circu^cise all the males that belong unto him, and then let
him come and observe it: and he shall be as one that is borne in the Land.
Which Gentiles, albeit they might not celebrate the passover with the Jews,
except they were circumcised (according to the law before mentioned) yet might
they come into the utmost part of the temple to worship: and their prayers and
oblations were no less accepted of, then were the prayers of the Jews. Which
is hereby manifest, in that Solomon, when he had built the temple, amongst
other petitions which in his prayer he makes to God, prays to God, that if
any stranger come from a far country, 1. King. 8.41.42.43.
which is not of the people of Israel, and pray unto him, that God would grant
their petitions in whatsoever they ask: In which prayer of Solomon, this is
especially to be noted, that he prays to God to hear the prayers of the
Jews, with condition, if they take heed to observe the laws of the Lord. But
praying for the Gentiles, he adds no condition of observing the laws of God.
The reason hereof is, Pet. Mart. in Reg. 8.41.
because the Jews had his written laws; and therefore they ought to do their
endeavor to obey them. But the gentiles had not; and therefore this condition
of observing his laws was not added. Now, you must know, that Solomon prayed,
being directed by the spirit of God. The Gentiles therefore, were more likely
to be heard in their prayers then the Jews, because no exception of obtaining
is added in their prayers: as in his prayer for the Jews. Now, that ye Jews
admitted all men of what nation so ever they were to come and dwell amongst
them according to the forementioned law, it is most manifeh in the Acts of the
Apostles, Ex. 12.48. Act. 2.5.4
where it is said that there were dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews which came to
worship at Jerusalem, out of all nations under heaven. Who were termed
Jews, not because they were borne Jews, but because they were borne of Jewish
parents, and not only such strangers who were descended from Jews, but also
Gentiles, as Romans, and other Prosilites, who were converted from Gentilisme
unto the Jews religion. Furthermore, Act. 2.10.
they were especially commanded to use strangers kindly. Nay further, Deuteronomy.
23.7.8. 2. Sam. 24.18. Joshua. 15.63.
their law commands to admit strangers to dwell amongst them, and that many
of the Gentiles dwelt amongst them, mention is made in diverse places of the
Scripture. Besides this, the Gentiles which dwelt a far off, resorted unto the
Jews to be instructed, and to worship at Jerusalem, 1. Kin. 10. Math. 12.42.
as the Queen Sheba with a great train with her; the chief governor of
Candaces Queen of Ethiopia; Yea diverse Kings gave great revenues to the Jews
to pray unto God for them. Yea, not only the Gentiles came unto ye Jews, to
learn the knowledge of the true God, but also the Jews willingly remained and
dwelt amongst the Gentiles, by whom the Gentiles learned the knowledge of the
true God: as it is manifest, when Cyrus gave leave to all the Jews to return
to their Country, many of the^ would not, but chose rather to dwell amongst the
Gentiles, the^ return, and that the Jews had Synagogues almost in every
nation, Act 13.1. Act. 14.1.
(where they taught all comers their religion.) It is most manifest in very
many places of the Scripture, and their double diligence in making Proselites,
and converting others to their religion, not only our Savior Christ notes,
but also the heathen people ascribed unto them, as a fault. Our Savior says
of them, Ye compass sea and land to make one of your profession, Math. 23.15.
and when he is made, ye make him twofold, more the child of hell, then your
selves. For though they used extraordinary pains to win men unto their
religion, yet herein they marred all. First, in that they more urged their own
traditions, then ye word of God. Secondly, they lived so lewdly, that many of
their well disposed conuerts took offense thereat, and returned to their
Gentilisme again, and thereby became twofold, the children of hell more then
they were before. 2. Pet. 2.14
For better it had been for them never to have known the way of truth, then
after they had known it, to turn from it, This double diligence in making
Prosilites yt heathen reproved in them, because they were herein so violent,
that they rather constrained men, then persuaded them to be of their religion,
as the Poet says: Ac velut, te Iudei cogemus in hanc concedere turba^. Horat.
li. 1. satyr. 4. Iuuenal. satyr. 14.
Now, besides this knowledge which the heathen had of God by the means of the
Jews, God used many other means to instruct them, sometimes instructing them
by him self, as he did Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; Sometime by the ministry of
Angels; sometimes by dreams, as Pharao, and Nabucodonoser; sometimes by means
unknown unto us. For who knows how Melchisedek came to ye knowledge of God,
who not only knew God, but also was a Priest of the high God? Now, being a
King, and a Priest, we cannot imagine, but that he endeavored to make his
subjects of his religion. And it is absurd to think that he alone knew God. Who
knows by what means Henock and his sons came to the knowledge of God above
other men? Whose sons were termed for a long time, the sons of God, Genesis
5.22. Genesis 6.2.
because their father Henock lived so innocently, and so godly amongst wicked
persons, that he seemed rather to be a God, then a man. How came Ietro to be a
Priest of the most high God, and to think him a Priest without people, whom he
taught were absurd. No doubt, but the Ninevites had a kind of knowledge of the
true God, else would they not have repented in sackcloth and ashes, at once
preaching by a stranger. Though the Gentiles erred herein, in thinking that
there were many Gods; yet they thought that there was one chief God above al
ye rest, whom they feared above the rest: and that they all stood in fear of
that one God above ye rest. It is manifest by diverse places of the Scripture,
this God whom they feared above the rest, was termed by ye Gentiles, the God
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, before the time of Moses; afterward, they termed
him the God of the Jews. For proof hereof, ye may remember, that when King
Abimilech had taken away Abraham's wife, the God of Abraham comma^deth him to
restore her again. Genesis 20.
He worshipped other Gods, on whose protection he would have relied and
detayned Sarah still, if he had not feared the God of Abraham above all the
rest of his supposed Gods. The fear of this God made Abimilech to desire to
be in league with Isaac. Genes. 26.28.
For the profane people found this by experience, that God blessed those that
were at league with them, and that no man prospered, or prevailed against them.
Laban was an Idolater, and put his trust in many Gods, yet when the God of
Jacob commanded him to desist from his malicious purpose against Jacob, he
obeyed for fear, Genes. 31.24.
and not for love. When David pursued after the Amalekites, who had taken his
two wives prisoners, and could not find the^; in searching for them, he
finds an Egiptian boy, one of their company: This youth was brought up in
theeuing, and robbing; he would by no means confess where his company was,
except David would swear unto him by God, that he would not kill him, or deliver
him to his master. When David had sworn unto him, then without fear he
conducted them to the Amalekites. 1. Sam. 30.15.
This youth (who^ Galuin commenting upon that place, calls half a beast for
his ignorance) had a greater and more religious estimation of an oath taken in
ye name of God, then very many who now profes the name of Christ. He thought
that no man would be so impious, as to abuse the name of God. Infinite it were
to reckon up all the proofs with make for this purpose Wherefore you see how
far you are deceived to think that God chose only the Jews to salvation,
and rejected all the nations else in the world; and since the Gospel none
saved, except they believed the Gospel, though they never heard of it. We may
not think so, for (as the Apostle says) he is a God as well of the Gentiles,
as the Jews. Romans 3.
And he ever had his elect throughout all the world amongst all nations
whatsoever. It is said of the Sodomites, Genes. 13.13.
that they were exceeding wicked. Insomuch, yt when the Scripture would
express sinners in the highest degree, they are compared to the Sodomites:
Esaias. 1.10.
as Esaias termed the most wicked Jews, Sodomites. Likewise does Jeremy, Lame^.
4.6. Ezech. 16.48.
and Ezechiell. Yet in this so wicked a city, even at the time she came to
the height of her abominations, God had his elect in it, Lot and his family;
and in the time of Noah, when me^ were so exceeding wicked, that it repented
God, that he had made man. Yet even then, had God his elect amongst them, even
Noah, his wives and his sons, (...). 8. Genesis 7.1. 2. Pet. 2.5.
yea God himself gives testimony of Noah, that he was a righteous man, and he
was not only righteous himself, but he was also a preacher of righteousness
unto others. Now, if God had his elect in this so abominable a City, and in
so abominable times, surely, we may not but think, that he had many more of
his elect in other places, and at other times which are not noted of any
extraordinary impiety. And albeit it cannot be denied, but that many of the
nations lived in great ignorance; yet it cannot be denied also, but that God is
as well ye Creator of the ignorant, as the wise; and that he has a fatherly
care over al mankind, and bears with their weakness, Psalm. 103.13.14.
considering of what mettle they are made. And that on whom he has bestowed
little, he will require but little. And that he uses great compassion on
these silly ignorant souls. Which is most manifest by his answer unto Jonas,
who murmured against him for sparing ye Ninevites, replied, Jonas. 4.11
Should I not spare Nineveh that great city, wherein are six score thousand
persons that cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand? Yea
such is the exceeding goodness of God, that those sins which we commit of
ignorance, he does not impute unto us, and this was the cause why Christ our
Savior prayed for those who ignorantly crucified him, (being seduced by the
malice of the Scribes and Pharisces, and Elders; taking him not to be the
Messiah, but to be a seducer of the people) saying, Luke 23.34
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. God uses a different
judgment according to the difference of men, they that have received the
knowledge of the law and the Gospel, John. 5.45
he will judge according to the law and the Gospel; Romans 3.19
Romans 2.15
they who never heard of the law or the Gospel, Reu. 20.13
he will not judge them thereby, but by their consciences. Vide Dionis. Carth.
in Heb. 11.6 Perkins in his tract of conscience
To these men the ignorance of the law and the Gospel is not sin, but a
consequent of sin, as learned men hold, if they know not what is commanded
in the law or the Gospel; if they do it not, to the^ it is not imputed as
sin. For as S. James says, To him that knows how to do well, Iam. 4.17.
and does it not, to him it is sin.


Trau. Now surely, if ignorance be a cause why God will not impute my sins
unto me, I am sorry that ever I saw the Bible; I am sorry that ever I went to
Church, or heard Sermons: and hence forward, I will never come to Church any
more, (keeping my self out of the compass of the law) and I will do my best
endeavor to forget all that I have learned. For (if there be a God that will
judge me) by this means I shall have the less to answer for.


Stu. See how you gather out of my words, that which I affirm not. I say not
that ignorance is the cause why God will not impute those sins which we commit
of ignorance; but that God in his mercy will not impute them. Whereas you say
that you are sorry that ever you saw the Bible, came to Church, ar heard
Sermons: Indeed you have great cause to be sorry, except you make better use of
it; and better it were not to know the will of God, 2. Pet. 2.21.
then knowing it, not to observe it (as I have said before) the knowledge of
it, is eitheir a savor of death unto death, or a savor of life in all men.
Whereas you say, you will do your best endeavor hereafter to forget that you
know, Therein you do as foolishly, as if a man knowing that he is to pass
through a dangerous way, full of stumbling blocks, would blindfold hsmselfe,
least he should see what he might stumble at. To bring you out of your error
therefore, When I say that God has compassion on the ignorance of me^, and will
not deal extremely with them, who of ignorance offend, I understand not al kind
of ignorance. Divines distinguish of ignorance, One kind of ignorance they call
vinsibilis, which by diligence may be avoided. The other inuinsibilis, which
by no diligence can be avoided. The former kind also is of diverse sorts one
more pardonable then ye other. The ignorance, which comes by the imhecilitie
of nature, which is the ignorance of those, whom we commonly call Innocents,
and ye ignorance wc comes by reason of the difficulty of the things to be
understood, or by the small means to attain to the knowledge of things to be
known, is most pardonable, yet sins they are, else God would not have appointed
sacrifices for them. But affected ignorance voluntarily used, is most
dangerous: and he wc uses it, is no less culpable of his own damnation, then
he which voluntarilye abstayneth from food and pineth himself to death, is
guilty of his own death. For as ye one is appointed as a means to continue ma^s
life, so ye other is appointed as a means to obtain life everlasting. And as
we are to labor for the one, so also for the other, otherwise are we guilty
of our own destruction. As for the other kind of ignorance, which Divines call
inuinsibilis, such as by no means can be avoided, is not taken for a sin,
but a consequent of sin (as I have said before.) So that the heathen who never
by any means could hear of Christ, offend not, in not believing in Christ
expressly. Yet in yt they naturally know that there is a God, and that he is a
rewarder of those that do well: By consequent they acknowledge his providence,
and by consequence hereof, they believe that God has a means to save their
souls, though the means thereof be unknown to them. To this their general
belief in God, I add unto their natural knowledge of God, the internal
operation of the holy Ghost, whereby they are brought, as to know God by
discourse of reason, so to love and obey God by the inspiration of the holy
ghost. Now, albeit the knowledge of these hethen men, be in comparison of the
knowledge of those, to who^e the law and the gospel have been revealed, but as
smoke in comparison of the brightness and light of a burning torch, and as a
bruised reed in comparison of ye great Cedars of Libanus in strength. Esaias.
42.3. Vide Caluinu^ in hu^c locum. Perkins in his reformed Catholic. Point. 16.
Yet god in his great goodness in Christ, will not break these bruised
reeds, nor quench this smoking flax. God respects not so much the degree of
perfection in these men, as the sincerity of their affection and love toward
him, who would worship him in truth, if they knew the truth, differing not
from those of knowledge in affection, but erring only in the circumstance of
worshipping God. When David persued after the Amalekites (who had taken his
two wives prisoners) in persuite after them, two hundred of his men were so
tired, that they were not able to pass over the river Besor, therefore David
left them behind, and with the rest passed the river, ouertooke the Amalekites,
prevailed against them, and took all their spoil, then he returned to those
two hundred men, which he left behind, whom he would make partakers of the
spoil which he had taken from the Amalekites. 1. Sam. 30 22.
But (as the text terms them) certain wicked men withstood him, Saying, that
it was not reason, that they who struck never a stroke against their enemies,
should participate of the spoil. Notwithstanding David endued with ye spirit
of God, divided the spoil equally amongst all his soldiers, accepting the
endeavor of the weakest, as much as the strength of the strongest. So shurely,
God accepts of that which men have, and not exacteth of them that which is
beyond their ability, they according to their ability do their endeavor to
please him. As for their other defects, he for Christ's merits pardons, thus
much concerning your supposed absurdities. Now let us hear your manifest
falshoodes in the scripture, or else if you can except against any thing that
has been spoken, reply.


Trau. Replye? Why by such interpretations you may make any thing true. If
these places are thus to be understood, why are they not in plain terms so
easily set down, that every man might understand them, does God delight to
make men err? But because you shall not hereafter thus wind out of matters; I
will now instance in such plain and evident places of the scripture, that you
cannot deny without impudency, but that they are most false, since in your
self you have by experience proved the^ to be so, the places are these, where
Christ says; Ioh. 15.
Verily I say unto you, if you ask any thing in my name of my Father, Math. 21.
he will give it you; and in an other place ask what you will, and it shall be
given you; and in an other place, all things whatsoever you ask, not in
doubting, ye shall receive. I must believe that I shall have them, else I shall
not receive the^. And hereupon, when I lived here in Oxford, in very mean and
base estate (yet I confess, I never bore a base mind) it greiued me much, I
was very desirous to be advanced. Therefore at that time thinking those words
of Christ true, in a blind simplicity, I prayed long and often, to be in better
estate. But for all my devotions, I was never the better. When I saw that, I
began a better course to provide for my self, and used such means whereby now
I am in good estate, and I mean to better it. Had I not taken this course
here in Oxford, I might have yet been praying and believing, and never the
better. And if you will not believe me, believe your own experience. This
being so; why should I take that for truth, which all men by experience in
themselves and others have always found to be most false.


Stud. Whereas you say, that by interpretations I may make any thing true: it
is not so. No interpretations can make that which is indeed true to be false,
or yt which is false, true. Words cannot alter the natures of things, and make
truth, falsehood; or falsehood, truth. Whereas in scorn you demand, whether God
does delight to make men err, because many things in the Scripture are hard
to be understood. You are to know, that God has appointed a general day of
judgment, wherein the deeds of all men shall be judged, in the presence of men
and Angels. And therefore before hand has so tempered things, that all men in
their deeds might show what they are. When the Lord gave the land of Canaan
unto the children of Israel, he might have destroyed all the Cananites, when
he brought the Israelites first into the land. Judge. 3.
But he did not, that by those Cananites which were left alive in the Land,
Deuteronomy. 15.
the hearts of the Israelites might be manifested: To try whether they would
be drawn to Idolatrye: To try whether they would enter into league and
familiarity or no with the Cananites, the which was precisely forbidden them.
So likewise, God could have made the scripture in all places so easy, that it
should nor need any interpreter. But he has not, to try the hearts of men.
These hard places of ye scripture, they who are of an humble spirit, seek to
understand with humility and reverence. Because god has commanded them to
read ye scriptures, and make it their study, that out of it, they might know
what is his will. All they therefore, who are desirous to obey his will, will
read his word, yt they might know what his will is, revealed in his word,
that they may do it, and observe it. If they meet with any difficult place to
be understood, they will not presume to censure it, or as you, and the like,
draw it to an absurdity: but acknowledge yt weakness of their capacity. They
learn out of the Scriptures, that many things there in contained are not
written for every man's understanding, but are reserved unto their due time, in
which God has appointed the^ to be understood, as many prophesies both in the
old Testament and the new. Dan. 12.9.
The understanding whereof is not known before the things prophesied of are
performed. That men comparing ye events of things with the former Prophesies,
might see that things come not to pass by chance, since such events were
foretold, that they should come to pass many years before they fell out.
Therefore they make use of those things which they understand. As for those
things with pass their understanding, they reverence, and not censure them.
Now, whereas you condemn the scripture of manifest falsehood, because you have
not obtained by you prayers, whatsoever you have asked; because it is said in
the Scripture, ask what you will believing, and ye shall obtain it. The
promise is most true, but by you much mistaken. For this promise is made only
unto the true believers. Now, many there are who vaynelye persuade themselves,
that they are true believers, who indeed are not. Who pray after their manner,
but not as they should, and they obtain not. And no marvel, for the promise
pertains not unto such men. Wherefore to show your error in construing these
promises; You are to consider many circumstances requisite to obtain that which
you pray for. The first and principal is, that that which you pray for, you
seriously without hypocrisy, intend to use unto the glory of God. Secondly,
many things are required in the person which prays. Many things, in the
things prayed for, or the persons for whom we pray for, and in respect of
God, to whom we pray. In the person which prays, first, he must be in
charitte, he must forgive all men, else he obtains not, except you forgive
men their trespasses, Mat. 6.15.
my father which is in Heaven will not forgive you your trespasses. Ia. 1.6.7.
He must pray in faith not doubting, not that he shall receive every thing
without exception whatsoever he asks (for this cannot stand with a true
faith.) But that God is able and will perform any thing which we ask of him,
so far forth, as those things we ask shall be behooueful for us and fit for
our calling and place wherein God has appointed us to live in. Again, if we
look that God should harken unto our prayers, we may not be stained with
gross and heinous sins. Esaias. 1.15.
For the prayers of the wicked are an abomination unto the Lord. Yea their
prayers are turned unto sin. He must lift up pure hands unto the Lord; 1.
Tim. 2.
He must not be cruelly minded, or hard hearted. For it is said, yt he which
shuts his ear at the cry of the poor, he shall cry and not be heard.
Prou. 21.
He must not be of an obstinat and stubborn mind, but ready and willing to
obey the commandments of the Lord. For it is said, Pro. 28.9.
he that tourneth his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be
abominable. But the prayer of the just avails much. 1. Pet. 5.
Just they are esteemed, who have a serious endeavor without hypocrisy, to
follow and obey the commandments of God; though they fall Seven times, yea
many times a day. These and the like are required in the persons which may
obtain that which they ask for. So likewise, many things are to be considered
in the things we pray for. The things for which we pray to God, are in general
of two sorts, either they are good things which we desire to obtain; Or else
they are evil things from which we desire to be freed from. Again, ye things
which are good, are of two sorts. Either they are simply good, such as cannot
be abused; As faith, hope, charity, forgiveness of sins, eternal life: Or else
they are in part good, such as may be well used, or abused unto ill purposes.
Of this kind are the natural gifts of the body and mind, as the strength of
the body comelines, and beautifulnes, sharpness, and quicknes of wit,
learning, eloquence. Of this kind also are they, which the Philosophers call
bona fortuna, as riches honor, and promotion, and such like. The former kind
of good things which are good in themselves, we may absolutely without
exception pray unto God for, yt he would bestow the^ on us. The latter kind of
good things, which are such which may be used unto ill purposes, we may not
absolutelye pray for without exception. But so far forth as they may be
means and furtherances toward the obtaining of the former kind of good
things: so that if any man prays for thief latter kind of good things without
exception, (as namely, if the obtaining of the^, may stand with the glory of
God, his providence whereby before the foundations of the world, he has
appointed unto every man such graces as are fit for ye persons of such estate,
wherein he has appointed them to live.) He prays not as he ought to pray,
neither has he which prays thus without exception for these kinds of good
things, any promise in all the Scripture, that he shall obtain them. As for
the former sort of good things, whosoever prays for the^ without exception in
a true faith, has even at the time of his faithful prayers, as much as will be
sufficient for him, to bring him to eternal life. For whom God once loves,
he loves for ever; and on whom once he bestows these kind of graces, (with
Divines call gratum facientes) he always continues them until they enter
into the joys of heaven. Now, as ye things with are good, are of two sorts, for
which we must pray for after a different manner: so likewise the things which
are evil, (from which we desire to be freed from) are of two sorts. And
likewise we must make a difference of them in our prayers. The things which are
evil, are either absolutely evil, or evil in part: Absolutely evil, are all
manner of sins; evils in part, are al manner of evils of punishments; as ye
subversion of Countries, Cities, diseases, loss of goods and such like, It is
our duty to pray unto God, that he would free us from sin, and this we may
pray for without exception. As for the other sort of evils, which are termed
mala poenae, evils of punishment; we may not pray for to be delivered from them
but with exception, because these evils are great means, to keep us in true
humility, in a true acknowledgement of our own weakensse and infirmity, to
keep us in continual fear and worship of God. They cause us to pray unto
God heartily for his aid, and in a word, they are very great means to bring us
to ye kingdom of God. 2. Cor. 12.^.
This was the cause that when as Paul prayed unto God, that that messenger of
Satan which was sent unto him to buffet him, (least he should be high minded,
or be exalted above measure,) he obtained not his petition, for it was not
convenient for him, but received this answer of God, that his grace was
sufficient for him, and that his power is made perfect through weakness.
Lastly, in respect of God, we are to consider his providence, we are not to
expect that we should obtain any thing which he has in his providence
disposed of otherwise. An obedient son may pray for his father lying sick,
that God would prolong his days; but oftentimes he obtayneth not his good
desire, because God in his providence has determined yt his father should the^
end his days. These and the like conditions necessarily being required in ye
persons who pray, and the things prayed for, it is no marvel, though you
prayed often, and yet obtained not, Iam. 4.3.
because you prayed for those things, which you would spend on your lusts, you
respecting nothing Gods glory in those things you prayed for, but your own
advancement. Nay rather, your prayer was a murmuring against God, and not a
prayer. For you were disco^tented with your mean estate, and (to use your own
words) if God would not advance you, you would provide for your self. Al men
naturally desire to be in high estate, and if every one of us might by prayer
obtain whatsoever we list, we would be all at the least Kings. But this cannot
stand with the ordinance of God, nor with the general good of all mankind, as
necessary it is for a common wealth, that there should be different degrees
and states of men, as it is for man's body to have diverse members of diverse
functions. If all the members should be the head, where should be tha stomach
to nourish the head? If all should be the stomach, where should the head and
the hands be, to provide meat for ye stomach? The Ploughma^ is as necessary
for ye common wealth, as the noble Councellor; the one cannot be without the
other. This being so, whosoever murmureth at that estate wherein God has
placed him, does more offend, the^ that member of the body which refuses to
do his function, because it is not placed in a more eminent place. Besides
this, it may be also, you were not in perfect charity with all men, or yt you
were stained with some grievous sins. And if it were so, then even your
prayers were an abomination unto the Lord, much less might you look to
obtain your desire.


Trau. O Sir, this is a good doctrine. If the prayers of those who are out of
charity with some one or other; or whose lives are spotted with a few crimes,
be an abomination unto God. (as you shall find the most part of men to be
faulty herein, if you duly examine their lives) better it were a great deal,
that the most part of men should not pray at all unto God. For their prayers
are an abomination unto God, and do displease him. What is this else, but to
dissuade men from praying when they have offended?


Stud. Surely, whether most me^ be out of charity with some one or other, and
their lives stained with crimes, I know not; but if it be so, then I would
exhort such men being out of charity, or stained with grievous sins, rather
to abstain from prayer, until they seriously without hypocrisy from their
heart, forgive all men, and also should seriously repent them of their sins,
with a full determination to leave them of, and if they have taken any thing
from any man by forged cauillation, or oppression, that they make restitution
of it, if it be in their power, else they will be so far from obtaining their
petitions, Psalm. 109.
that their very prayer will be turned unto sins.


Trau. What, will it not be sufficient for a man to pray in faith, in charity,
after he has repented for all his sins: but he must necessarily make
restitution, if he have taken other men's goods, which in extreme right he
ought not to have had? this is a point of your preciseness. For I have heard I
know not how often, that to pray in faith, and charity, is sufficient; and that
by repentance, a man is cleansed from all his sins. And therefore I take
exception against this restitution, being not necessary, because it is a point
that somewhat touches me in particular.


Stud. Why you in particular?


Trau. I will tell you why, (since I have begun to open my secrets upon
promises of your fidelity and secrecy.) When I departed from Oxford, I went to
teach a young Gentleman in the Country, whose Father was very old: with whom
I practiced the counsel of Tyresias, Hor. satyr. 5. lib. 2.
and of Dauus so cunningly, that I quickly insinuated my self into great
favor with the old man, in so much, that he thought no man was so fit to
train up his young son, as my self. The which when I perceived, I pretended
that I intended not to stay long with him, but provide some spiritual living,
(but I meant nothing less.) For that would be a continual stay unto me: in
staying with him, was but a point of folly. For when his son should come to
years, then should I be cast off, to shift for my self. When the old
Gentleman suspected that I watched opportunity ^o be gone from him, his desire
to keep me was doubled. Many offers he made me, but (to be short) at length
we agreed upon this; that I should have my life in a certain Farm, after the
estate of one man, (who then had interest in it) should be void. After this
conclusion, my old Master shortly dyed. He being dead, I got the counterpane
of the title whereby this Farmer held his Farm. The which I showed to a very
cunning Lawyer, desiring him, to find some defect in it, if he could. The
which when he read it over, he told me, that the title indeed was very
sufficient; notwithstanding, he could pick certain quarrels against it, and
make a pretty show that it was not good. I requested him to do his best
endeavor in the matter, and I would fee him well. I was the bolder to attempt
this, because then there were two certain hungry fellows, who were in some
distress, by reason they feared my young Master would not retain them in his
service as his Father did: These men I knew were men of large consciences, and
therefore the fitter for my purpose. These men I brought into favor with my
young Master, because I knew that these fellows would swear any thing for my
sake. To omit many circumstances, I put the Farmer in suit for his living,
pretending that his title was not good. Before the matter came to pleading, my
Lawyer advised me in my ear many things, which accordingly I performed. And
this I will tell you in your ear, by a little fee, and mediation of friends, I
secretly got the Farmers Lawyer more my friend then his Clyents; yet he pleaded
very eagerly, and used many words, but not directly to the point, as I know he
could, and would have done, had not I otherwise before seasoned him. So that by
this means, and the favorable oaths of my forenamed seruingmen, the Farmers
title seemed not good. The Judge did his duty, he could not but judge secundum
allegata, and probata: By this means I got my Farm. But when I came to turn
out the Farmer, his wife and children, they with his neighbors made such an
outcrie on me, with vilde terms, that it somewhat amazed me. I knew before I
put the Farmer in suit, that I should do him wrong in putting him from his
Farm; but it then never moved my conscience to think on it. But when I had
done it, then as an unwholesome meat after a man has eaten it, it often rises
in the stomach, and vpbraydeth it: so when I had done this fact, often the
remembrance of it did yrke me, especially as often as I came in sight of the
Farmer, or any of his. So that I often then desired God (for then I was in a
staggering opinion, sometimes doubting whether there was a God or no, and
sometimes fearing, least there should be a God that would punish me) heartily to
forgive me my fault, and diverse times then by fits heartily repented. Now sit,
say that I did in this fact offend God and man, I am now guiltless. For in
respect of God, I am free from this sin, because I have repented it, and at
what time soever a sinner repents, God forgiueth him his sin. In respect of
men, I offend not in possessing of the Farm. For the Judge rightly according
to the form of law, and proofs brought before him, pronounced sentence on my
side. And therefore I justly possess it, according to law. This being so, I am
not bound either by law or conscience to make restitution, since in possessing
it, I offend now, neither God nor man.


Stud. It is a strange thing, to see how you sooth your self in your own
sins, and how far Satan has blinded you, that you should not take the right
means to salvation: you detain other men's goods, and yet you do offend
neither God nor man. Not God, because you have repented for ye sin. Not man,
because you possess it by right of law. Why, do you think that any kind of
repentance is accepted of God, but a true repentance? or that we may possess
any thing with a good conscience gotten by the abuse of law, as you have
gotten your Farm? it is said, that Judas repented, yet he was rejected of God.
He repented seriously without hypocrisy, he repented even from the bottom of
his heart: He acknowledged his fault before the high Priests, and Elders. Mat.
27.
He restored back the money ill gotten, of his own accord, but all this was in
vain. For as God gives unto Nations, Countries, and Cities, their set time
and space to repent, which time, if they let slip without repentance, though
afterward they break these hearts with grief, yet is not their sorrow
accepted. So likewise, he gives to every man a set space to repent, which if
he neglect, though he be afterward grieved, and after a sort (as Judas)
repent, yet their grief is no true repentance, nor accepted of: Neither can
they truly repent, because it is a gift given to those, 1. Sam. 2.25.
who truly love and obey God, which no wicked person does. Romans 1.24
And albeit we may not by the rule of charity, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
judge any particular man a reprobate, or one yt has ouerpast the time of
repentance as long as he has breath in his body, yet that there are many men,
who have run on so long in their wickedness, yt God has rejected them many
years before the time of their death, we may without breach of charity think,
as it is manifest by the words of our Savior Christ, weeping for Jerusalem.
Oh, Luke. 19.42.
if thou had known at ye least even in this thy day, those things which
pertayned to thy peace! but now are they hid from thine eyes, because thou
knew not the time of thy visitation. This signified our Savior Christ in
that Parable of the Figtree, Luc. 13.6.
which only cumbred ye ground in the vineyard, and brought forth no fruit: and
therefore should have been presently cast out, but that the dresser of the
vineyard obtained three years space, to try, whether by manuring it, it might
be brought to bring forth good fruit; if not in that space, it was to be cast
out. When Esaw had for a small portion of meat sold his birthbright,
afterward he could not inherit, but was rejected, and though he sought it
with tears, Heb. 12.17.
yet he found no place for his repentance; a bare grief, though it be from
the bottom of the heart, Mat. 3.8.9.10.
is not a sufficient repentance; but there must be also an amendment of life.
Luc. 13.3.
And this is the cause why Daniell exhorted Nebuchadnezzar (who by cruelty and
oppression, had spoiled many of the poor) to break off his sins by
righteousness, Dan. 4.24.
and by mercy and liberality to the poor, that by that means, he might make
restitution of that he had unlawfully gotten. And if you will see ye pattern
of a true repentance, consider the example of Zacheus, who before his
conversion to Christ, was infamous for wrongful dealing. But when he repented,
then to redeem his faults committed against men, he gave half his goods to
the poor, and if he had taken any thing from any man by forged cauillation,
he would restore him foure-folde. Luc. 19.8.
For albeit we cannot by this means satisfy for our sins before God, yet by
restitution of unlawful gotten goods we may, and ought to satisfy men. And
that we ought to do this, we are expressly commanded so to do, in the sixth of
Leuiticus: Where it is said, that if any man by robbery or violence, or any way
wrongfully detayne any thing from his neighbor, he must restore the
principal, and add the fifth part unto it, unto the party defrauded. And
likewise this precept is repeated again more plain, and more general for all
trespasses, in the fifth of Numbers. This therefore, is not a trick of my
preciseness, as you imagine; but besides these plain and evident places of ye
Scripture, the learned Divines, both ancient and late, Protestants, and
Papists, have ever held this to be a true Doctrine. And least you should
imagine that I feign this, here is S. Augustine, I will read his own words
concerning this matter, Enchirid. c. 70. and 75.
Cauendum est, ne quisquam existimet infanda illa crimina, qualia qui agunt,
regnum Dei non possidebunt quotidie perpetranda, and eleemosinis quotidie
redimenda, in melius quippe est vita mutanda: and per eleemosinas de peccatis
praeteritis est propitiandus Deus, non ad hoc emendus: vt ea liceat semper
committere. Nemini enim de dit laxamentum peccandi, quamuis miserendo deleat
iam peccata facta, si non negligatur congrua satisfactio. And in the words
following, I remember he says, that many in his time were in that error, that
they thought they might continue sinning, so they daily gave alms. Against
whose error, he in that place purposely writes. Also in his Epistle to
Macedonius he thus says: Si res aliena, cum reddi possit, non redditur, non
agitur poenitentia, sed fingitur: and nisi restituatur ablatu^, non remittitur
peccatum. So that by his opinion, except restitution he made of unlawful goods
(if they may be restored) it can be no true repentance, but a fayning of
repentance, and ye God remitteth not the sin, except restitution be made. Only
he excepteth, that if ye goods ill gotten, be spent before the time of
repentance, so that the offender is not able to make restitution; then an
unfeigned grief, with a faithful endeavor to make satisfaction, is accepted
with God. Lib. 4. destinct. 14.15.16.
Here could I reckon up many Fathers to this purpose, but because their
opinions are for the most part set down in the Master of the Sentences, I
refer you to read him. With these agree all the best writers, Salon in 2. 2.
tom. q. 62 Pet. de Ar. lib. de err. Grec. c. 17. Als. de Cast. li. de here is. in
verb. restitutio. Cordub. lib. 1. quest. 41.
as Calvin, Brentius, Borrhaius, Medina, Salon, Petrus de Aragon, and many
more. To these may be added the Council of Turone.


Trau. Let Scripture, Councels, Fathers, Protestants, Papists, say all what
they can, they can never conclude, that of necessity I must make restitution,
or else be damned.


Stud. Why, what is your reason?


Trau. Because I have learned this rule, that no affirmative precept binds
any man always to perform it. Obligat semper sed non ad semper. Whereas
negative precepts bind us always ad semper. As for example. I am commanded to
give alms to the poor, to pray always; yet am I not continually bound to be
giving. For it is impossible for any man to have so much goods, as that he may
be always giving. Again, I sin not, if I be not always praying. For God
aloweth me the night to sleep, and take my rest; he aloweth me a time to take
my food, and be merry, and a time to do my wordly business. Now, in negative
precepts it is otherwise, I must always observe them; I must never kill, never
bear false witness, never commit adultery. Now sir, that I must make
restitution, or else my repentance is no true repentance, nor will be accepted
of; you bring for proof of it, only affirmative precepts out of the Scripture:
on which, your Council of Turone, your Fathers, your new Divines, both
Protestants and Papists, ground their opinions. The ground of all their
opinions being grounded on an affirmative precept, do not necessarily conclude
that which they intend: which being so, I will hold my Farm, I will hold my
hold, I possess it by law. I had rather be tied to observe all the
commandments of God besides, then this. You must pardon me in this point.


Stud. It is a strange thing to see how subtle men are, to bring themselves to
condemnation, and what wiles they can invent, that the word of God shall not
take hold on their offenses. But to answer you; It is true indeed, that
Divines have such a rule, that affirmative precepts bind us always to observe
them; but not at all times. And that negative preceps do bind us always, and
at all times to observe them. But it pleases you to remember no more of the
rule, then will make for your purpose. You will not take notice of that part of
the rule, which makes against you. For it is added in the rule of affirmative
preeps, that albeit affirmative precepts do not bind you to do at al times
that which is commanded, as to pray night and day without ceasing; or
continually to give almez without intermission: yet do they necessarily bind
us to observe them, when occasions, time and place require them to be done;
when charity requires the performance of them. Observe you these conditions of
the rule, and you shall not offend. You have time and opportunity to restore
your unlawful gotten goods, the rule of charity requires it: Therefore you
even by this rule, ought to have restored it before this time. And because you
seem to esteem rules in expounding commandments or precepts; it is a
general rule, that he which commands, or forbids that which is of less
importance, much more commands or forbids that which is of greater
importance in the same kind. As for example, in the tenth commandment it is
said, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing that is his. Surely God who forbids us to covet
these things of our neighbor, much more forbids us in these words the
unlawful possession of our neighbors goods: if we may not covet them, much
less may we have them, if we only covet them in our minds, we only offend
God; but if we unlawfully take them, we offend God and man. Thus you see, that
in possessing your Farm unlawfully gotten, you break both affirmative, and
negative precepts. For if you may not covet any thing which is your neighbors,
much less have them; then by necessary consequent, you ought to restore it
again.


Trau. Tush, say I do not restore it, will you conclude me to be a reprobate?


Stud. No. For God may give you a true repentance, and move you to make
restitution.


Trau. Nay, say I thus die, never intending to restore it: Will you conclude
that I am damned? if every one who die in sin shall be damned, the^ Christ
died in vain, who died for the sins of all men; this you will not hold.


Stud. Surely the Scripture teaches me, that he which willingly refuses the
means of salvation, shall never obtain salvation. A true repentance, is a
necessary means to be reconciled to God; therefore without it, no man can be
saved: the Scripture is most plain in this point. The Lord says in Ezechiell,
Chap. 33.14.15.
When I say to the wicked thou shall die ye death; if he turn from his sin,
and do that which is lawful and right, if he restore the pledge, (mark what
here is required, he must restore the pledge to ye poor, which was willingly
delivered him by the owner, and not by wrong taken from him, as you got your
Farm) and give back that he had robbed (to got by fraud is a kind of
robbery, and the worst kind) and walk in the statutes of life (it is not
sufficient to abstain from evil, but he must do good) he shall live and not
die. By these words the Lord shows, after what manner he will judge all men,
that they who truly and unfeignedly repent, that is, satisfy men for the
wrongs done unto the^, as much as in them lies, and heartily desire pardon of
God for their offense, shall be saved. But such as make no satisfaction unto
men for wrongs done unto them, being in their power to do it, shall be damned;
whatsoever vain pretenses they make of repentance. Vide Caluinu^ in 3. ad.
Heb. verse. 13.
For no true repentance can be without a sincere love of God: No sincere love
of God, can be without a readiness and a willingness of mind to obey gods will;
Math. 5.23.24.
Which is, first, to be reconciled to our brethren, and satisfy the wrong done
unto him, if we can, before we ask pardon for our sins of him. If any man
flatter himself, that God will pardon him, notwithstanding he has not a
willing mind, and do not his endeavor to be reconciled to his brother, and
satisfy him for his wrong done unto him. He makes God a liar, who cannot lie,
and he shall find, (but too late,) that that which he foresheweth, he will do,
and will indeed perform. And furthermore, mark well after what manner God
will judge all men: Unto the merciful men god will say, I was hungry,
thirsty, naked, and in prison, and ye refreshed me, clothed me, and ye
visited me. For, in that they did these things to the distressed members of
Christ, they did it unto him. But unto the unmerciful he will say, I was
hungry, thirsty, naked, sick, and in prison, and you refreshed me not,
clothed me, nor visited me. Hear mark well his judgment on the unmerciful
men. He condemns them, because they gave not of their own unto other men
needing their help; if he will condemn those, who have less sinned, much
more will he condemn those, V^de interpraetes in Luc. 16.25.
who have more grievously sinned: For his judgments are just. Now these
testimonies which I have alleged, are prophesies foreshewing in what manner
God will judge all men, and all prophesies in the scripture shall as truly be
fulfilled, as God is true. I conclude therefore that he which restores not his
unlawful gotten goods having time, occasion, opportunity, and ability, cannot
inherit the kingdom of God.


Trau. Why, pray did Christ dye in vain? shall all be condemned who fulfill
not the commandments? If they shall, I shall have fellows enough to go to
hell with me: For you hold, that none ever fulfilled the commandments.


Stu. What a strange question is this, to ask whether Christ dyed in vain? I
marvel what you think of the death and passion of Christ? It should seem,
that you think that Christ therefore suffered, that men might more freelye
sin. This is to make Christ to approve sin, beware of this error. He suffered
to a clean contrary end, that we being freed from the bondage of Satan, and
the rigor of the law, might serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days
of our life, Luke 1.74.75. 1. Pet. 2.24.
and be not deceived in this point also. You must know yt the benefit of
Christ's passion does not extend it self to all kinds of sinners; Psalm. 103
17.18. Romans 8.1. Mat. 19.28
But only to such, who doing their endeavor to keep the commandments of
God: Yet notwithstanding are overtaken with sin, who stumble and fall into
sin, Pro. 24.16
but not willingly lay still in sin, and not unto those who willingly
continue in sin. Nay, they who know Christ, and his doctrine, if they
endeavor not to live according to his doctrine, that is, endeavor not to live
godly, they are so far from enjoying the benefit of his passion concerning
the life to come, as that it were better for them never to have known it, then
after they have known it, 2. Pet. 2.21
to turn from the holy commandment given them. And upon this reason our
savior said unto the man who had been diseased Eight and thirty years, Ioh.
5.14.
when he had cured him; Behold thou art made clean, sin no more, least a
worse thing happen unto thee. Signifying thereby, that the more graces we have
received of the Lord, if we, (notwithstanding we have received them) continue
in our wickedness, shall be guilty of greater damnation, then if we had never
known or received his graces. So that you may not imagine, that Christ came to
free us from the observation of the moral law, or suffered for the sins of
men, that they might the more freelye sin without danger of damnation. But if
you will believe Christ himself: he requires in his disciples greater and
perfecter observation of the moral law, then did the Scribes and Pharisees
require of the Jews, Mat. 5.17.20.
and without all question a serious endeavor to observe the moral law, is so
necessary to salvation, that without it no man can be saved. For albeit,
repentance and good works be not primary causes of our salvation: Yet are they
secondary causes, and means of our salvation; Mat. 5.20. Ier. 26.3. Luke 13.3.
and as there is a necessity of the primary causes to our salvation: So also
there is a necessity of the ordinary means to salvation, without which no
man can be saved. Though indeed I must confess, Act. 3.19. Ioh. 5.29. Arist.
phis. 8. text. 5. et Metaph. 5. c. 2. q. 9. secu^d. Fo^se. et 8. phis. c. 5. et
Metaph. 12. Vid. Kek. f. 147. tractatu de causis.
that there is a greater necessity required of the primarie causes to
salvation, then of the secondary causes or means: Because God, who is the
prymary cause of our salvation, is tied to no secondary means. But he may and
does save many without either actual faith or repentance, after an
extraordinary manner: as the children of the faithful, dying before the
years of discretion. But secondary causes have no force, without the aid of
the primary cause. No man can have a true faith or repentance without the
operation of the grace of God. The wicked may be sorry for that they have done;
They may believe that their sins shall be forgiven; But except they have the
spirit of regeneration, whereby their persons are first accepted of God, and
whereby they first love God; such repentance and faith are not accepted of God.


Tra. You confess then, that God can and does save many without actual faith,
and actual repentance, that being so, it does not follow, that necessarily I
am a reprobate, though I dye with the intent never to restore my Farm again.
And surely, if there be a God, his mercy is greater then his justice, as you
all teach. I will rely upon his mercy, if he call me to judgment, and not on
my repentance and good works. I hope to be saved by that extraordinary way
of saving whereof you speak, in which neither faith nor repentance is
required. And indeed, I now remember you acknowledge that one of the thieves
which were crucified with ch is it, was saved after this manner.


Stud. Albeit, God saves many men after an extraordinary manner, because he is
not tied to ordinary means: Yet he saves after this manner only those, unto
whom the means of ordinary salvation has not been revealed. Many both in
the time of the old law, and also since the time of the gospel have lived
where they never hard of the doctrine of Moses (for some of them lived before
the time of Moses) and some since the time of the passion of Christ, Perkins in
his reformed Catholic. Point. 16.
have lived where the gospel of Christ was never preached. So that they could
not have that explicitam fidem required in the word of God: Hooker. lib. 5.
sect. 22. Luke 11.31.32.
Yet God of his goodness by extrordinarie means has wrought in their hearts,
that they know and obey him: on whom, as he has bestowed but a few Talents:
so he requires not much of them. Others there are, who are not capable of ye
ordinary means of salvation, by reason of the weakness of their capacity; or
because they are borne deaf, and so continue to their lives end: or infants
dying before the years of discretion. Beda. in Ro^. 3.31.
Last-such as unto whom yt means of salvation are not revealed, eue^ until
their dying day, so late, that albeit they knew them, yet had they not time to
execute them. These and ye like, God of his mere mercy saves, without
ordinary means. But if any unto whom, the ordinary means of salvation are
revealed, Aug. lib. 80 quest. c. 76. tom. 4.
do presume to be saved, notwithstanding they neglect the ordinary means of
salvation, which is a serious endeavor to live according to the commandments
of God: If they continue in their sins, and do not endeavor to shake them
off, but presume upon the mercy of God, that he will be merciful unto them,
though they wilfully continue in their sins. They shall be sure above all
other men, to be cast out of the favor of God. Deuteronomy. 29.19.20. Iud. 4.
For he does protest, that he will not be merciful to such men, but will bring
all the curses mentioned in the law, upon them. No man can be saved but by ye
Passion of Christ, Heb. 5.9. Ambros. in Apoc. 16.15
and the benefits of his Passion extends it self no farther, then to those
that do their endeavor to obey his doctrine. Calvin. in Heb. 3.13. Theophilac.
Beda in Ioh 5.29.
No man can be justified without a true faith; but where there is not a
readiness, and willingness to obey Christ's commandments, there is no true
faith. Therefore without this willingness and endeavor, no man can be saved.
Our Savior Christ says, speaking of the resurrection, and the general day of
judgment, that all men shall rise out of their graves, Vide Musc. in hunc loc.
They that have done good, unto the resurrection of life: and they that have
done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation. Here in this judgment,
mark what kind of men are saved; Hieronim. Hugo Card.
Christ says, They that have done good, although no man's good work be of that
perfection, that for the^, any man can be justified; Calvin. in 2 Cor. 5.3.
Reu. 20.6. Mat. 5 20. Psalm. 103 17.18. Romans 8.1.
yet except he have some measure of inherent righteousne, unless he has
endeavored to do good, he shall never be clothed with the righteousness of
Christ: none shall enjoy this benefit of Christ's righteousness, but only true
Christians, who live not after the flesh, but after ye spirit. Hence I
conclude, that you cannot expect salvation after any extraordinary manner,
because the means of ordinary salvation has been revealed unto you long
since; and this grace God bestows on no man in vain: for either the
knowledge of them works salvation, or condemnation: nor you cannot expect
salvation after the ordinary way of salvation, except you use those means
ordained thereunto. Whereas you say, that ye mercy of God is greater then his
justice; and therefore you rely upon his mercy, and not on your works and
repentance. If you respect the mercy and justice of God, as they are in
himself, his mercy is no greater then his justice. For in God there is nothing
greater or less, but all things in the highest perfection: But if you respect
his mercy as he bestows it on his creatures: so his mercy is far more large
then his justice, all his creatures have tasted of his mercies, but not all of
his justice. The holy Angels never felt his justice. Your self has enjoyed
many of his mercies a long time, but as yet, have felt little of his justice.
Albeit his mercies in this respect be greater then his justice: yet yet does he
bestow his mercies after a different manner according to the different quality
of his creatures, as also his mercies be of diverse kinds, some spiritual, and
some temporal. His spiritual blessings, as eternal salvation, he bestows
only upon those, who truly believe in Christ, and consequently, seriously obey
the will of God, so far forth as they know his will. But you believe not,
nor endeavor to live as the word of God directs you. And therefore although
you may, and are partaker of his temporal blessings: yet you cannot be capable
of his spiritual blessings, as long as you continue in this damnable estate.
As for your example of the thief, who (as you say) was saved without works:
First, it is not true, In the first Dialogue concerning good works.
he was not saved without good works, as else where I have proved Secondly, if
it were so, your case and his are not alike. The means of salvation were not
revealed unto him, but even on the day he was crucified: yet as soon as he
was converted, he presently showed forth works. But to you the means of
salvation have been known many years since, yet you contemn them. Therefore
cannot you expect but the justice of God in the day of judgment, and not
mercy.


Trau. So sir, I am then by your doctrine a reprobate, except I restore my
Farm again.


Stud. By my doctrine? why say you so? It is the doctrine of the learned
Divines both old and new that ever wrote. Protestants, and Papists agree in
this point, and they all ground their opinion on the word of God.


Trau. Well sir, I am a reprobate, and I say you are a Puritan. Unlock your
Study door.


Stud. Nay, pray be not offended with me, I have sincerely told ye truth,
that whilst you have time, you may repent.


Trau. Repent? Unlock your Study door, or else I will break it open.


Stud. Nay, I may not imprison you.


Trau. Is this your kind entertainment?


FINIS.

