THOMAS CORIATE Traveler for the English Wits: Greeting.

From the Court of the Great MOGVL, Resident at the Town of ASMERE, in
Eastern INDIA.



Printed by W. Iaggard, and Henry Fetherston.

To the Reader.
THree years (poor Countrime^ that have not trauaild)
And some odd days; in Odde-combs grace and yours,
I have enricht my feet (though something grauaild)
With measuring millicents of Towns and Towers.
And yet I swear, my head is nothing full,
But rather empty of such things as fit
One that makes nothing of the Great Mogul,
But far beyond, or wide, as far as it
Is from my Od-combe. Mean to travail still,
Till I have equald in some seven years more
The Wise Ulysses; for of him, my will
Wants naught in wit, but seven years and some score
Of foolish days; of which, I hope to spend
Ten millions more: For all my life shall be
Endeard to that most loved; most fortunate end,
And to bring honor, to my Land and Ye.
But do not long for me too soon; or doubt,
As does my mother; who does wish, I hear,
To have me there, though in a shitten clout;
Though I not tred out my Vlyssian years.
For who can purchase wisdom? Ten years? No.
Before I get it, I will go, and go.
His Parallel with Erasmus.
Erasmus did in praise of folly write;
And Coryate does, in his selfe-praise endite.




Lo here the wooden Image of our wits;
Borne, in first travail, on the backs of Nits;
But now on Elephants, etc:
O, what will he ride, when his years expire?
The world must ride him; or he all will tire.
To THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir Edward Phillips, Knight, and Master of the
Rolls, at his house in Chancery Lane, or VVanstead. From the Court of the most
mighty Monarch, the Great Mogul, resident in the Town of Asmere, in the
Eastern India, Anno 1615.
Right Honorable,
I Am persuaded, that if ever any accident worthy of admiration ever happened
unto your honor in all your life time, it will be the receiving of this present
Letter, from me out of the Eastern India: yet perhaps it will seem unto you
so wondrous, that I believe you will doubt whether this be the true
handwriting of your once Odcombiam Neighbor, Thomas Coryate. But your Honor
may soon very infallibly and apparently perceive it to be true; partly by the
form of the style, which is just answerable to that manner of speech that you
have heard and observed in me, sometimes in my Linsie-woolsie Orations; and
sometimes in my extrauagant discourses: and partly by the testimony of the
bearer hereof, M. Peter Rogers, Minister at the time of his being in India, to
the English Merchants resident at the Court of the most puissant Monarch the
great Mogul, at a town called Asmere; whose comfortable and sweet company I
enjoyed at the same Court, about the space of four Months.

Now, though there has itched a very burning desire in me, within these few
years, to suruay and contemplate some of the chiefest parts of this goodly
Fabric of the World, besides mine own native Country: yet never did I
think it would have broken out to such an ambitious vent, as to travel all on
foot from Jerusalem, so far as the place where I wrote this Letter.

Howbeit since Fortune, or rather (to speak more properly, in using a
Christian word) the providence of the Almighty, (for Fatuus est, S. Augustine
says, qui faro credit) has so ordained, that I should securely pass so far
into the Oriental world, with all humility upon the bended knees of my heart, I
thank my Creator and merciful redeemer, Jesus Christ; (whose Sacrosanct
Sepulcher I have visited and kissed, terque quaterque in Jerusalem) and do very
much congratulate mine own happiness, that he has hitherto endued me with
health, (for in all my travels since I came out of England, I have enjoyed as
sound a constitution of body, and firm health, as ever I did since I first
drew this vital air) liberty, strength of limbs, agilitie of foot-manship,
etc.

Neither do I doubt, but that your Honor it self will likewise congratulate
the felicity of our Sommersetshire, that in breeding me, has produced such a
traveler, as does for the diversity of the Countries he has seen, and the
multiplicitie of his observations, far (I believe) out-strippe any other
whatsoever, that has been bred therein since the blessed Incarnation of our
Savior. Yea, I hope my general country of England, shall one day say, that
Odde-combe, for one part of the word, may truly be so called: (for Odde-combe
consists of two words, odd, and comb, which latter word in the old Saxon
tongue signifies besides the vertical point of a cocks head, the side of a
Hill, because the east side of the hill whereon Od-combe stands, is very
conspicuous, and seen afar off in the Country Eastward) for breeding an odd
man, one that has not his peer in the whole kingdom to match him.

Three years and some few odd days I have spent already, in this second
peregrination, and I hope with as much profit (impartially will I speak it of
my self, without any ouer-weening opinion, to which most men are subject) both
for learning four Languages more, then I had when I left my Country: viz.
Italian, Arabian, Turkish, and Persian; and exact viewing of diverse of the most
remarkable matters of the Universe; together with the accurate description
thereof, as most of my Countri-men that are now abroad. Yet such is my
insatiable greediness of seeing strange countries: which exercise is indeed
the very Queen of all the pleasures in the world, that I have determined (if
God shall say Amen) to spend full seven years more, to the end to make my
voyage answerable for the time to the travels of Ulysses; and then with
unspeakable joy to reuisite my Country; which I will ever entitle
(notwith-standing all the goodly Regions that I have seen in my two
perambulations) with the style of the true Canaan of the world, that flows
with Milk and Honey. Only wish me good success, I beseech your Honor, as I
will from my heart, to you and all your family; hoping to salute you after the
final catastrophe of my exoticke wanderings; when you shall be in the great
climacterical year of your age; you being about fifty three, if my conjecture
does not fail me, when I took my leave of you: a thing very likely by the
merciful goodness of God. For your Father, that was my godfather, who
imposed upon me the name of Thomas, lived more then eighty years.

Honorable Sir, take it not, I beseech you, for a discourtesie, in that I
write nothing in this Letter of my past travels. I am certain, that a Letter
which I have written to M. Whitaker, your learned and elegant Secretary,
wherein I have compendiouslie discoursed of some of my observations in Asia,
will quickly come to your hands, at least if he remains still in your
service: therefore it would be superfluous to have repeated the same things.
Duty joined with the recordation of the manifold benefits, and singular
favors I have received from you, has enjoined me to send this Letter to your
Honor, from this glorious Court of the Mogul; wherein seeing I relate not the
singularities I have seen in those Oriental Regions, I will desist to be
farther tedious; humbly recommending your Honor, and virtuous Lady, your
well-beloued Son and Heire-apparant, Sir Robert, (to whom I have written a
few times also) and his sweet Lady; M. Martin also, M. Christopher Brook, whom
I thank still for his no less elegant then serious verses: M. Equinoctial
Pasticrust of the middle Temple, M. William Hackwell, and the rest of the
worthy gentlemen frequenting your Honorable table, that favor virtue, and the
sacred Muses, to the most Heavenly Clientele of the eternal Jehovah.

Your Honors most obsequious Beadsman, Thomas Coryate.
From the Court of the great Mogul, resident in the Town of Asmere in the
Eastern India, on Michaelmas day, Anno 1615. I beseech your Honor, to speak
courteously to this kind Minister M. Rogers for my sake: for he ever showed
himself very loving unto me.



Most dear and beloved Friend, Master L. W. animae dimidium meae.
From the Court of the most Mighty Monarch, called the Great Mogul, resident in
the Town of Asmere, in the Oriental India. Anno 1615.
Cordial salutations in the Author of Salvation, Jesus Christ: where I writ
unto you last, I remember well; even from Zobah, as the Prophet Samuel calls
it (2 Book 8. chap. ver. 3) that is, Aleppo, the principal Emporium of all
Syria, or rather of the Orient world; but when, in truth I have forgotten, for
I keep not coppies of my Letters, as I see most of my Contrymen do, in
whatsoever place of the world I find them: Howbeit, if my conjecture do not
much fail me, I may affirm that it was about xv. months since, about a month
after I returned unto Aleppo from Jerusalem, after which time, I remained there
three months longer, and then departed there-hence in a Carauan into Persia,
passing the noble river Euphrates (the cheifest of all that irrigated Paradise,
Genesis 2, 10.
wherehence, as from their original, the three other rivers were derived) about
four days journey beyond Aleppo: on the farther side of which, I entered
Mesapotamia, alias Chaldea, for the Euphrates in that place disterminateth
Syria and Mesopotamia. Therehence I had two days journey to Vr of the
Chaldeans, where Abraham was born, Genesis 11.28.
a very delicate and pleasant City. There I remained four days, but I I
could see no part of the ruins of the house, where that faithful servant of God
was borne, though I much desired it. from thence, I had four days journey to
the River Tigris, which I passed also; but in the same place where I crossed
it, I found it so shallow, that it reached no higher then the calfe of my
leg: for I waded over it afoot. Now I well perceive by mine occular
experience, that Chaldea is named Mesopotamia, for that it is enclosed with the
foresaid rivers. Traiecto Tigride, I entered Armenia the greater: After that,
Media the lower, and resided six days in the Metropolis thereof, heretofore
called Ecbarana, the summer seat of Cyrus his Court, a City eftsoone mentioned
in the Scripture, now called Tauris, more woeful ruins of a City (saving that
of Troy and Cyzicu^ in Natolia) never did mine eyes behold: when I seriously
contemplated those (...), the doleful testimonies of the Turkish deuastations,
I called to mind Ouids verse.

Ludis in humanis diuina potentia rebus.
And that of Hesiod, (...).
From that, I had two days journey to a City that in Strabos time was called
Arsacia in Media the higher, now Casbin, once the royal seat of the Tartarian
Princes, ^ days journey from the Caspian sea. From Casbin, I had ^^ days to
Spahan in Parthia, the place of residence of the Persian K. But at my being
there, he was in the Country of Gurgistan, ransacking the poor Christians there
with great hostility, with fire and sword. There I remained months, and so with
a Carauan traveled into the Eastern India, passing ^ months and odd days,
in my travel betwixt that (through part of the true Persia, and a large tract
of the noble and renownd India) and the goodly city of labor in India, one of
the largest Cities of the whole universe. For it contain that the least xvi.
miles in compass, and exceeds Constantinople it self in greatness: but a
dozen days before I came to Lahore, I passed the famous River Indus, which is
as broad again as our Thames at London, and has his original out of the
Mountain Caucasus, so much ennobled by the ancient both Poets and
Historiographers, Greek and Latin; which Plato for curiosity sake, in his
trauelles of these parts, went to see. It lies not far from that upon the
Confines of Scythia, now called Tartaria: My self also conceiving some hope of
seeing it before my final farewell of India. I had almost forgotten one
memorable matter to impart unto you: About the middle of the way, betwixt
Spahan and Lahore, just about the Frontiers of Persia and India, I met Sir
Robert Sherley, and his Lady, travailing from the court of the Mogul, (where
they had been very graciously received, and enriched with presents of great
value) to the King of Persia's Court; so gallantly furnished with all
necessaries for their travails, that it was a great comfort unto me to see
them in such a flourishing estate. There did he show me to my singular
contentment, both my Books neatly kept; and has promised me to show them,
especialy mine Itinerarie, to the Persian King; and to interpret unto him some
of the principal Matters in the Turkish tongue, to the end, I may have the
more gracious access unto him after my return thither. For through Persia I
have determined (by Gods help) to return to Aleppo. Besides, other rarities
that they carried with them out of India; they had two Elephants, and eight
Antlops, which were the first that ever I saw: but afterward, when I came to
the Moguls Court, J saw great store of them. These they meant to present to
the Persia^ King. Both he and his Lady used me with singular respect,
especially his Lady, who bestowed forty shillings upon me in Persian money; and
they seemed to exult for joy to see me, having promised me to bring me in
good grace with the Persian king, and that they will enduce him to bestow some
Princely benefit upon me: this I hope will be partly occasioned by my book,
for he is such a iocond Prince, that he will not be meanly delighted with
diverse of my factious Hieroglyphics, if they are truly and genuously
expounded unto him. From the famous City of Lahore, I had twenty days
journey to another goodly City called Agra, through such a delicate and eeuen
tract of ground, as I never saw before; and doubt whither the like be to be
found within the whole circumference of the habitable world. Another thing also
in this way, being no less memorable then the plainness of the ground; a row
of Trees on each side of this way where people do travel, extending it self
from the towns end of Lahore, to the towns end of Agra; the most incomparable
show of that kind, that ever my eyes suruaied. Likewise whereas there is a
Mountain some ten days journey betwixt Lahore and Agra, but very near ten
miles out of the way on the left hand: the people that inhabit that Mountain,
observe a custom very strange, that all the brothers of any family, have but
one and the selfsame wife; so that one woman sometimes does serve 6 or 7 men:
the like whereof I remember I have read in Strabo, concerning the Arabians that
inhabited Arabia felix. Agra is a very great City, and the place where the
Mogul did always (saving within these two years) keep his Court; but in
every respect much inferior to Lahore. From thence to the Moguls Court I had
ten days journey, at a Town called Asmere, where I found a Cape Merchant of
our English men, with nine more of my Countrymen, resident there upon terms of
Negotiations, for the right worshipful Company of Merchants in London that
trade for East India. I spent in my journey betwixt Jerusalem and this Moguls
Court, 15. months and odd days: all which way I trauersed afoot, but with
diverse pair of shoes, having been such a Propateticke, (I will not call my
self Peripatetick, because you know it signifies one that makes a
perambulation about a place, (...), signifying to walk about) that is, a walker
forward on foot, as I doubt whether you ever heard of the like in your life:
for the total way betwixt Jerusalem and the Moguls court, contains two
thousand and seven hundred English miles. My whole perambulation of this Asia
the greater, is like to be a passage of almost six thousand miles, by that
time that in my return back thorough Persia, afterward also by Babylon and
Niniuie, I shall come to Caico in Egypt, and from that down the Nylus to
Alexandria, there to be one day (by Gods help) imbarqued for Christendom; a
very immense dimension of ground.

Now I am at the Moguls Court, I think you would be glad to receive some
narration thereof from me, though succinctly handled: for I mean to be very
compendious, lest I should otherwise preoccupate that pleasure which you may
here after this reap by my personal relation thereof. This present Prince is
a very worthy person, by name Selim, of which name I never read or heard of
any more then one Mohammedan King, which was Suliam Selim of Constantinople,
that lived about 80. years since; the same that conquered Jerusalem, Damascus,
Aleppo, Caico, etc: adding the same to the Turkish Empire. He is 53. years of
age, his nativity day having been celebrated with wonderful pomp since my
arrival here: for that day he weighed himselffe in a pair of golden Scales,
which by great chance I saw the same day (a custom that he observes most
inuioablie every year) laying so much gold in the other scale as
cou^teruaileth the weight of his body, and the same he afterward distributed to
the poor. He is of complexion neither white nor black, but of a middle
betwixt the^: I know not how to express it with a more expressiue and
significant epitheton then Olive: an Olive color his face presents: he is
of a seemly composition of body, of a stature little unequal (as I guess
not without grounds of probability) to mine, but much more corpulent then my
self. The extent of his Dominion is very spacious, being in circuit, little
less then 4000. English miles, which very near answers the compass of the
Turks territories: or if any thing be wanting in geometrical dimension of
ground, it is with a great pleonasme supplied by the fertility of his soil:
and in these two things he exceeds the Turks, in the fatness (as I have
said) of his Land, no part of the world yielding a more fruitful vein of
ground, then all that which lies in his Empire, saving that part of Babylonia,
where the terrestrial Paradise once stood: whereas a great part of the Turks
Land is extreme barren and sterill, as I have observed in my peregrination
thereof, especially in Syria, Mesopotamia and Armenia; many large portions
thereof being so wonderful fruitelesse, that it bears no good thing at all,
or if any thing, there Infelix lolium et steriles dominantur auenae.

Secondly, in the conjunction and union of all his Territories, together in one
and the same goodly continent of India, no Prince having a foot of land within
him. But many parcels of the Turks Countries are by a large distance of seas
and otherwise divided asunder. Again, in his Revenue he exceeds the Turk and
the Persian his Neighbor by just half: for his Revenues are 40. millions of
Crowns of six shillings value, by the year: but the Turks are no more then
fifteen millions, as I was certainly informed in Constantinople; and the
Persians five millions plus minus, as I heard in Spahan. It is said that he is
uncircumcised, wherein he differs from all the Mohammedan Princes that ever
were in the world.

He speaks very reverently of our Savior, calling him in the Indian tongue,
Ifazaret Eesa, that is, the great Prophet, Jesus: and all Christians,
especially us English, he uses so beneuolently, as no Mohammedan Prince the
like He keeps abundance of wild Beasts, and that of diverse sorts, as Lions,
Elephants Loepards, Bears, Antlops, Unicorns; whereof two I have seen at his
Court, the strangest beasts of the world: they were brought hither out of the
Country of Bengala, which is a kingdom of most singular fertility within the
compass of his Dominion, about four months journey from this, the midland
parts thereof being watered by diverse channels of the famous Ganges, which I
have not as yet seen, but (God willing) I mean to visit it before my
departure out of this Country, the nearest part of it being not above twelve
days iourny from this Court. The King presents himself thrice every day
without fail to his Nobles, at the rising of the Sun, which he adoreth by
the elevation of his hands; at noone, and at five of the clock in the evening:
but he stands in a room aloft, alone by him self, and looks upon them
from a window that has an embroidered sumptuous couerture, supported with two
silver pillasters to yield shaddowe unto him. Twice every week, Elephants fight
before him, the brauest spectacle in the world: many of them are thirteen
foot and a half high; and they seem to iustle together like two little
Mountains, and were they not parted in the midst of their fighting by
certain fire-workes, they would exceedingly gore and cruentate one another by
their murdering teeth. Of Elephants the King keeps 30000. in his whole
Kingdom at an unmeasurable charge; in feeding of whom, and his Lions, and
other Beasts, he spends an incredible mass of money, at the least ten
thousand pounds sterling a day. I have rid upon an elephant since I came to
this Court, determining one day (by Gods leave) to have my picture expressed in
my next Book, sitting upon an Elephant. The King keeps a thousand women for
his own body, whereof the chiefest (which is his Queen) is called Normal. I
think I shall here after this, send another Letter unto you, before my
departure out of this Country, by a worthy man, which is the Minister and
Preacher of our Nation in this place, one M. Peter Rogers, a man to whom I am
exceedingly obliged for his singular offices of humanity exhibited unto me.
Pray use him kindly for my sake; he understanding, that there is a certain
young Gentleman, called Master Charles Lancaster, that serves the M. of the
Rolls, entreated me to desire you to recomme^d him very kindly unto him. Our
Cape-Merchants name is M. William Edwards, an honest gentleman, that uses me
with very loving respect. Dear M. L. VV. conueigh these twoe letters that I
have sent to you, to the parties to whom they are directed: my poor mother and
mine uncle Williams. You may do me a kind office to desire him (with such
convenient terms and patheticall persuasions as your discretion shall dictate
and suggest unto you) to remember me as his poor industrious peregrinating
kinseman, nearest unto him in blood of all the people in the world; to remember
me I say, with some competent gratuitie, if God should call him out of the
world before my return into my native Country. I pray you if he be living,
and does use to come to London as he was wont to do, that you would deliver my
Letter to him with your own hands, and not send it unto him. You may remember
to relate this unto your friends, that I will now mention as a matter very
memorable; I spent in my ten months travels betwixt Aleppo and the Moguls
Court, but three pounds sterling, yet fared reasonable well every day;
victuals being so cheap in some Countries where I traveled, that I
oftentimes lived competentlie for a penny sterling a day: yet of that three
pound I was cousened of no less then ten shillings sterling, by certain lewd
Christians of the Armenian Nation: so that indeed I spent but fifty shillings
in my ten months travails. I have been in a City in this Country, called
Detee, where Alexander the Great joined battle with Porus, K. of India, and
conquered him; and in token of his victory, erected a brass pillar, which
remains there to this day. Pray remember my humblest service to the right
Honorable, your Master of the Rolls. Si superatque et vescitur aura
aetherea, nee adhuc crudelibus occubat vmbris. And to Sir Robert Phillips, once
my Mecaenas, but how affected to me at this time I know not: pray tell them
that I mean to write to each of them before my departure out of India:
remember my duty also to their right virtuous Ladies. About four years hence
look for me, but not before. For if God grant me life and health, I mean to
make it a voyage of full seven years before I come home, whereof three are
already spent. Commend me also I pray you to M. Martin, though at a man's house
in woodstreet, he used me one night very peruersly before I came away: but
you see that my being at Jerusalem does make me forget many injuries. Commend
me likewise to Master H. Holland, and Inigo Jones: at this time I have many
Irons in the fire; for J learn the Persian, Turkish, and Arabian tongues,
having already gotten the Italian (I thank God) I have been at the Moguls Court
three months already, and am to tarry here (by Gods holy permission) five
months longer, till I have gotten the foresaid three tongues, and then depart
herehence to the Ganges, and after that, directly to the Persian Court.

Your assured loving Friend till death, Tho: Coryate.

From the Court of the Great Mogul, resident at the Town of Asmere in the
Eastern India, on Michaelmas day. Anno 1615.
I Do enjoy at this time as pancraticall and athleticall a health as ever I did
in my life: and so have done ever since I came out of England, saving for three
days in Constantinople, where I had an Ague, which with a little letting blood
was clean banished, the Lord be humbly thanked for his gracious blessing of
health that he has given unto me. I was robbed of my money both gold and
silver (but not all, by reason of certain clandestine corners where it was
placed) in a City called Diarbeck in Mesopotamia, the Turks country, by a
Spahee as they call him, that is, one of the horsemen of the great Turk; but
the occasion and circumstance of that misfortune, would be too tedious to
relate. Notwithstanding that loss, I am not destitute of money I thank God.
Since my arrival here, there was sent unto this King one of the richest
presents that I have heard to be sent to any Prince in all my life time: it
consisted of diverse parcels; one being Elephants, whereof there were 31. and
of those, two so gloriously adorned, as I never saw the like, nor shall see the
like again while I live. For they wore four chains about their bodies all of
beaten gold: two chains about their legs of the same; furniture for their
buttocks of pure gold: twoe Lions upon their heads of the like gold: the
ornaments of each, amounting to the value of almost eight thousand pound
sterling: and the whole Present was worth ten of their Leakes, as they call
them; a Leak being ten thousand pound sterling: the whole, a hundred thousand
pounds sterling. Pray commend me to M. Protoplast, and all the Sireniacall
gentlemen, to whom I wrote one Letter from Aleppo, after my being at Jerusalem;
and another I intend to write before my going out of Asia. Their most elegant
and incomparable safe conduct that they have graciously bestowed upon me, I
have left at Aleppo, not having made any use of it as yet, neither shall I in
all my peregrination of Asia: but when I shall one day arrive in Christendom,
it will be very available to me. I have here sent unto you the copy of
certain facetious verses, that were lately sent to me to this Court, from one
of my Countrymen, one M. John Brown, a Londoner borne, now resident with
diverse other English Merchants, at a City in India, five hundred miles from
the place where I abide, called Amadauers, about six days journey from the
Sea: who understanding of my arrival at this Court, and of my tedious
pedestriall peregrination all the way from Jerusalem hither; understanding it I
say, by Latin and Italian Epistles, that upon a certain occasion I wrote to
some of that company, made these pretty verses, and sent them me. You may read
them to your friends if you think fit, and especially to the Sireniacall
gentlemen; for they are alegant and delectable. The superscription of his
Letter was this: to the painful gentleman, M. Thomas Coryate: The title
within prefixed before the verses, this;

To the Odeombian wonder, our laborious Countriman, the generous Coryate. The
Verses.
What though thy Cruder travels were attended
With bastinadoes, lice, and vile disgraces?
Have not thy glorious acts thereby ascended
Great Britains stage, even to Princes places,
Led on in triumph by the noblest spirits
That ever deignd to write of anies merits?
If then for that they did advance thy fame,
How will they strive to add unto thy glory,
When thou to them so wondrously shall name
Thy weary footsteps and thy Asian story?
No doubt more ripe (as nearer to the Sun)
Then was that first that in the cold begun.
Then rest a while, and to thy task again,
Till thou have thoroughly trod this Asian round,
Which yet so many Kingdoms does contain
As Dackon, where the Diamond is found;
And Bisnagar, Narsinga: and if you be
Not weary yet, in Zeilan seek the Rubie.
Then could I wish you saw the China Nation,
Whose policy and art does far exceed
Our Northern climes: and here your observation
Would Nouelists and curious Artists feed
With admiration. Oh, had I now my wishes,
Sure you should learn to make their China dishes
But by the way forget not A goodly Province in India, three hundred miles from
hence
Gugurat,
The Lady of this mighty Kings Dominion:
Visit Baroch, Cambaia, and Surat,
And Amdauar; all which in my opinion
Yield much content: and then more to glad ye,
We Will have a health to al our friends in A kind of wine used in that part of
India.
Tadee
Then cross to Arab, He means Arabia foelix.
happiest in division;
But have a care (at Mecca is some danger)
Lest you incur the pain of circumcision,
Or Peter-like, to Christ do seem a stranger.
From thence to Egypt, where the famous Nile
And Memphis will detain your eyes a while.
This done, at Alexandria seek your passage
For Englands happy shores, where How and Mundy
Will strive to make your travels out-last age,
So long as stand their Annals of our Country.
For Mandeuill will come of thee far short,
Either of travel, or a large report.
YEt one Postscript more by way of a Corollary, and so with the same, being
the fourth and the last, I will add the final vmbilicke to this tedious
English-Indian Epistle. I have written out two several coppies of these
verses, and included them within the Letters, which I have entreated you to
distribute for me, but so that the Letters are not sealed upon them; only they
lie loose within the Letters, therefore they are subject to losing, except you
have an extraordinary care of them. Wherefore I entreat you to deliver that to
mine Uncle with your own hands, if he be in London, or to conueigh it to him
by such a one as will not lose that loose paper of verses. The like care I
desire you to have of that to my mother, and to send it unto her by some other
man then a Carrier, if you can iet with such an opportunity: for in truth I am
afraid the carrier will lose the enclosed paper. Pray take advice of some of
the M. of the Rolls his people that are to ride to Evil. Pray remember my
commendations with all respect to M. Williams the goldsmith and his wife; and
to Benjamin Johnson, and to read this letter to them both: likewise to mistress
Elizabeth Balch, if she continues with your Lady.

One appendix more and so an end. There happened betwixt the day of the writing
of this Letter, and the day of the sealing of it up, a memorable occurrent not
to be omitted. We received news at this Court the ninth day after the
writing of this Letter (for nine days it was unsealed) being the eight of
October, of the arrival of four goodly English ships, at the haven of Su^at
in India, and in the same, of a very generous and worthy English Knight, a
dear friend of mine, Sir Thomas Row, to come to the Court with some mature
expedition, as an Ambassador from the right worshipful company of London
Merchants that trade for India: he comes with Letters from our King, and
certain selected presents of good worth from the company, amongst the rest, a
gallant Caroch, of 150. pounds price. Also there came with him 15. servants, al
Englishmen. Forty days hence at the farthest we expect ((...)) his arriual at
this Court. This news does refocillate (I will use my old phrase so well
known to you) my spirits: for I hope he will use me graciously, for old
acquaintance sake.

TO THE HIGH Seneschall of the right Worshipful Fraternity of Sireniacal
Gentlemen, that meet the first Fridaie of every Month, at the sign of the
Mere-Maide in Bread street in London, give these: From the Court of the great
Mogul resident at the Town of Asmere, in the Eastern India.
RIght Generous, Iouiall, and Mercuriall Sirenaicks; I have often read this
greek Proverb, (...) that is, one hand washes another, and in Latin, Mulus
mulum scabi^, one Mule scratcheth another; by which the Ancients signified,
that courtesies done unto friends, ought to be requited with reciprocal
offices of friendship. The serious consideration hereof, does make me to call
to mind that incomparable elegant safe conduct, which a little before my
departure from England, your Fraternity with a general suffrage gave me for the
security of my future peregrination, concinnated by the pleasant wit of that
inimitable artizan of sweet elegancy, the moytie of my heart, and the quondam
Seneschall of the noblest society, M. L.VV.

Therefore since it is requsite that I should repay somewhat for the same,
according to the laws of humanity: Such a poor retribution as I sent unto you
from Aleppo, the Metropolitan City of Syria, by one M. Henry Allare of Kent, my
fellow-pilgrime therehence to Jerusalem; I mean a plain Epistle, which I
hope, long since came unto your hands. I have sent unto you by a man no less
dear unto me then the former, one M. Peter Rogers, a Kentish man also, from
the most famigerated Region of all the East, the ample and large India:
assuring my self, that because I am not able to requite your love with any
essential gratulations, other then verbal and scriptall, you will as lovingly
entertain my poor Letters, being the certain manifestation of an ingenious
mind, as if J should send unto you the mineral riches or drugges of the noble
Country.

Think it no wonder I pray you, that I have made no use in all this space
since I left my native Country, of the superexcellent Commeate; for I have
spent all my time hitherto in the Mohammedan Countries, and am like to spend
three years more in these Musselman (as they call them) Regions of Asia, after
of Europe, before J shall ariue in Christendom. For this cause I left it in
Aleppo, with my Countrymen, there to receive it from them again, after that I
shall have ended my Indian and Persian perambulation: and therehence to carry
it once more to Constantinople, and that by the way at Iconium, Nicaea,
Nicomedia, and in the country of Natolia, a journey of forty days. From that
finally through the heart of Greece, by the Cities of Athens, Thebes, Corinth,
Lacedemon, Thessalonica, and to the City of Ragouze, heretofore Epidaurus, so
sacred for the image of Aesculapius in the country of Sclauonia, once called
Illyricum; from thence J have three days journey to the inestimable Diamond
set in the Ring of the Adriatique gulf, (as once I said in the first harangue
that ever I made to Prince Henry of blessed memory, translated since my
departure from London, from the terrestiall Tabarnacles, to the celestial
habitations) venereous Venice, the soueraign Queen of the Mare superum: if the
great Jehovah shall be so propitious unto me, as to grant me a prosperous
arrival in that noble City, I will there begin to show your safe conduct,
and to decantate, yea and blazon your praises for the same: and after in every
other place of note, until I shall arrive in glorious London, communicate it
to the most polite, with that the Cities will yield, thorough which my
laborious feet shall carry me, it would be superuacaneous to commemorate unto
you the almost incredible extent of Land I trauersed from Jerusalem to the
Court of the great Mogul in India, where I now reside; with the variable
Regions and Provinces interiacent betwixt them, and the manifold occurrences
and observations of special work in this vaste tract: for it would be such a
fastidious discourse, that it could not be well comprehended in a large sheet
of paper: but M. VV. I hope will not fail to import unto you in a few
compendious Relations, which I have acquainted him with, in a particular Letter
to himself: of which, if I should have written again to you, it would have
proved Crambe his Cocta. The Gentleman that brings this Letter unto you, was
preacher to the English Merchants conversant at the Court of the aforesaid
mighty Monarch in the Town of Asmere in this Eastern India: and in diverse
loving offices has been so kind unto me, that I entreat your generosities to
entertain him friendly for my sake, to exhilarate him with the purest
quintessence of the Spanish, French and Rhenish Grape, which the Mermaid
yields; and either one in the name of you all, or else the total
universality of the one after another, to thank him heartily, according to
the quality of his merits. Farewell noble Sirenaicks.

Your generosities most obliged Countreyman, ever to be commanded by you, the
Hierosolymitan-Syrian-Mesopotamian-Armenian-Median-Parthian-Persian-Indian
Legge-stretcher of Odcomb in Somerset, THOMAS CORYATE.

PRay remember the recommendations of my dutiful respect to al those whose
names I have here expressed, being the lovers of virtue, and literature; and so
consequently the well-willers (I hope) of a prosperous issue of my
designements, in my laborious pedestriall perambulations of Asia, Africa, and
Europe.

Written with mine own hand, at the Court of the Great Mogul Shaugh Selim,
resident in the town of Asmere, in the vmbilicke of the oriental India, the
eight day of November, being wednesdaie. Anno Dom. 1615.

IMprimis, to the two Ladies Varney, the Mother and the Daughter, at Boswell
house without Temple Bar.

2. Item, to that famous Antiquarie, Sir Robert Cotton, at his house in the
Black Friars. Pray tell him that I have a very curious white marble head of an
ancient Heroes or Gyant-like Champion, found out very casually by my diligent
peruestigatio^ amongst the ruins of the once renowned City of Cyzicum,
mentioned by Cicero in his second Oration (if my memory does not fail me)
against Verres, situate in a peninsula of Bythinia, in the goodly country of
Natolia, near the Sea Propontis: to this head will his best antiquities
whatsoever veyle bonnet.

3. Item, to that courteous, sweet, and elegant-natured and nurtured gentleman.
M. William Forde, Preacher to our Nation at Constantinople, if you happen to
meet him in any part of England; one that deserves better of me then any man
in all this Catalogue: for of him I have learned whatsoever superficial skill
I have gotten in the Italian tongue: pray reduplicate my commendations unto him.

4. Item to M. George Speak my generous and ingenuous countriman, the Son
and heir apparent of Sir George Speak in Sommersetshire: him you are like to
find in any Term, either at the middle Temple, or in some Barbers house near
to the temple.

5. Item, to M. John Done, the author of two most elegant Latin Books,
Pseudo martyr, and Ignatij Conclaue: of his abode either in the Stra^d, or
elsewhere in London: I think you shall be easily informed by the means of my
friend, M. L. W.

6. Item, to M. Richard Martin, Counselor, at his chamber in the middle
Temple, but in the Term time, scarce else.

7. Item, to M. Christopher Brook of the city of York, Councellor, at his
chamber in Lincolnes Inn, or near it.

8. Item, to M. John Hoskins, alias Acquinoctial Pastitrust, of the city of
Hereford, Councellor, at his chamber in the middle Temple.

9. Item, to M. George Garrat; of whose being you shall understand by Master
Done aforesaid.

10 Item, to M. William Hackwell, at his chamber in Lincolnes Inn.

11 Item, to Master Benjamin Johnson the Poet, at his chamber at the Black
Friars.

12. Item to May. John Bond my countreyman, chief Secretary unto my Lord
Chancellor.

13 Item, to M. Doctor Mocket, resident perhaps in my Lord of Canterburies
house at Lambeth, where I left him.

14 Item, to M. Samuel Purkas, the great collector of the Lucubrations of
sundry classical authors, for the description of Asia, Africa, and America.
Pray commend me unto him and his (...) Master Cook, by the same token, that
he gave me a description of Constantinople, and the Thracius Bosphorus, written
in Latin by a Frenchman called Petrus Gillius: which Book, when I carried
once in an afternoon under mine arm, in walking betwixt our English
Ambassadors house in Pera, on the opposite side to Constantinople, and the
Flemish Ambassadors house, I lost it very unfortunately to my great grief, and
never found it again.

15 Item, to M. Inigo Jones, there where Master Martin shall direct you.

16 Item, to M. John Williams the Kings Goldat his house in Cheapside.

17 Item to M. Hugh Holland, at his lodging, where M. Martin shall direct you.

18 Item, to M. Robert Bing at Yongs ordinary, near the Exchange.

19 Item, to M. William Stansby, the Printer of my Crudities and Crambe, at his
house in Thames street: also to his childlesse wife.

20 Item, to all the Stationers in Paul's Churchyard; but especially those by
name, Mast. Norton, Mast. Waterson, M. Matthew Lownes, M. Edward Blount, and M.
Barrat, etc.

God bless the^all, and me too, that I may one day after the final
consummation of my fastidious peregrinations in the world, see and salute them
all in health and welfare.

Per me Thomam Coryatum Odcombiensem.

PRay remember my very humble duty to my Lord Bishop of Bathe and Wells,
generous M. Doctor Montacute; and tell his Lordship, that before I return
toward the Persian court out of this Oriental India, I resolve (by Gods
permission) to write such a Letter unto him (after I have thoroughly surueighed
so much of this country as I mean to do) as shall not be unworthy to be read
to the Kings most excellent Majesty. You are like to hear news of his
Lordships abode in Kings street, near Westminster.

A Distich to the Traveler.
All our choice wits, all, see, thou have engrost:
The doubt yet rests, if they or thou have most.
FINIS.
To his Loving Mother.
BY this present Letter, I am like to minister unto you the occasion of two
contrary matters; the one of comfort, the other of discomfort: of comfort,
because I have by the propitious assistance of the omnipotent Jehovah,
performed such a notable voyage of Asia the greater, with purchase of great
riches of experience, as I doubt whether any English man this hundred years
have done the like; having seen and very particularly observed all the
cheifest things in the Holy Land, called in times past Palaestina; as
Jerusalem, Samaria, Nazareth, Bethlehem, Jericho, Emaus, Bethania, the Dead
Sea, called by the Ancients Lacus Asphaltities, where Sodom and Gomorrha once
stood; since that, many famous and renowned Cities and countries; Mesopotamia,
in the which I entered by the passage of the river Euphrates, that watered
Paradise; in which the City of Vr where Abraham was borne; both the Mediaes,
the higher and the lower. Parthia, Armenia, Persia, through al which I have
travailed into the Eastern India, being now at the Court of the great Mogull,
at a Town called Asmere, the which from Jerusalem is the distance of two
thousand and seven hundred miles; and have traced all this tedious way afoote,
with no small toil of body and discomfort, because that being so exceeding
far from my sweet and most delicious Native soil of England, you will doubt
perhaps, how it is possible for me to return home again: but I hope I shall
quickly remove from you that opinion of discomfort, (if at the least you shall
conceive any such) because I would have you know, that I always go safely in
the company of Carauans from place to place. A Carauan is a word much used in
all Asia: by which is understood a great multitude of people traveling
together upon the way with Camels, Horses, Mules, Asses, etc. on which they
carry Merchandises from one country to another, and Tents and Pauillions; under
which instead of houses they shelter themselves in open fields, being furnished
also with all necessary provision, and convenient implements to dress the
same: in which Carauans I have ever most securely passed betwixt Jerusalem and
this Town, a journey of fifteen months and odd days: whereof four wanting
a Week, spent in Aleppo, and two and five and od days spent in Spahan the
Metropolitan City of Persia, where the Persian King most commonly keeps his
Court: and the occasion of my spending of six months of the foresaid
fifteen, in those two Cities, was to wait for an opportunity of Carauans to
Travail withal; which a traveler is not sure to find presently, when he is
ready to take his journey, but must with patience expect a convenient time; and
the Carauan in which I traveled betwixt Spahan and India, contained 2000.
Camels, 1500. horses, 1000. and odd Mules, 800. Asses, and six thousand
people. Let this therefore (deer Mother) minister unto you a strong hope of my
happy return into England.

Notwithstand all these lines for provision for your Funeral, I hope for to
see you alive and sound in body and mind, about four years hence; and to
kneel before you with effusion of tears, for joy. Sweet mother, pray let not
this wound your heart, that I say four years hence, and not before; I humbly
beseech you even upon the knees of my heart, with all submissiue, supplications
to pardon me for my long absence; for verily, I have resolved by the favor of
the supernal powers, to spend 4. entire years more before my return, and so
to make it a Pilgrimage of 7. years, to the end I may very effectually and
profitably contemplate a great part of this worldly fabric, determining by
Gods special help, to go from India into the country of Scythia, now called
Tartaria, to the City Samarcanda, to see the Sepulcher of the greatest
Conqueror that ever was in the world. Tamberlaine the Great: thither it is a
journey of two months from the place I now remain: from that I mean to return
into Persia; and therehence by the way of Babylon and Niniuy, and the Mountain
Ararat, where Noah's Arc rested, to Aleppo, to my Countrymen. From that, by the
way of Damascus, and once again to Gaza in the Land of the Philistims unto
Cairo in Egypt: From that down the Nilus to Alexandria: and therehence
finally, I hope to be embarked for some part of Christendom, as either Venice,
or etc. After mine arrival in Christendom, I shall desire to travel two
years in Italy, and both high and low Germany, and then with all expedition
into England, and to see you (I hope) with as great joy as ever did any
Trauailer his Father or Mother, going in that manner as I do like a poor
Pilgrim. I am like to pass with undoubted security, and very small charge:
for in my ten months travails betwixt Aleppo and this Moguls Court, I spent
but three pounds sterling, and yet had sustenance enough to maintain nature,
living reasonably well, oftentimes a whole day, for so much of their money, as
does counteruaile two pence sterling. But least I be over tedious unto you, I
will here make an end. etc.

I will now commend you to the most blessed protection of our Savior Jesus
Christ; before whose holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem, I have poured forth mine
ardent Orisons for you, to the most sacrosanct Trinity, beseeching it with all
humility of heart, to bless and preserve you in a solid health, etc.

Your loving Son, Tho: Coryate.

To his loving Friend, Thomas Coryate.
TOm Coryates Shoes hang by the Bells
At Odcomb, where that Bel-Dam dwells
who first produced that monster:
Monster of men I may him call,
In that he is admired of all,
else might he me misconster.
His head does run the wilde-goose chase,
Swifter then horse of hunting race,
or Hare that Hound runs after:
He pickes up wit, as Pigeons pease,
And vtters it when God does please:
O who can hold from Laughter?
To see him in a Morning Sun,
In his rough Lambeskin and bare gown
the Scuttle hole ascending:
Would make a horse his halter break,
To hear him vomit forth his Greek,
with all the Ship contending.
On Christmas day he drunk in jest,
Coniur'd a storm out of the East,
in clambring up the cradle:
Before, the wind was wondrous fair,
Now forced to ride in Gebraltar,
withouten horse or saddle.
But Asses there a hideous band,
Thom-as discovered from the Land,
His Book is not without them:
At Toms return there will be sport,
In Country, City, Town, and Court,
Those Asses round about them.
Who lives his Leaves for to unfold,
At his return, I dare be bold,
will wonders find far stranger,
Then was his conflict with the Jews,
Or entertainment at the Stews;
or lying in the Manger
Amongst the horse at Bergamo,
Or begging of the poor, I tro;
these were but toys and bables:
Of Drums, Guns, Trumpets, he will tell,
Of haling Ships, of Pirates fell;
of Tacklings, Masts, and Cables.
With Starboord, Larboorde, Helm Alee,
Full, Come no near: it is done quoth he,
who at the Helm does stand.
War-no-more, cries an angry Mate;
Oh Odcombe, these be terms of state,
Not usual on the Land.
Oh learn this Tongue I thee beseech,
For it is not beyond the reach
of Because my Brother C^^riate called the Sailers Leaden pated Fellows. I
say, it is not beyond their reach to learn this Language: not that I call him
Leaden pated, for the world knows he is capeable of far worth or Languages:
being now adding Italian, to his excellent Greek and Latin.
Leaden pated fools:
A Marine Language made, I say,
Among ourselves, which till this day
was never taught in schools.
Confront your Academies all,
Of Brazen-nose and Penbrooke Hall,
of learned not the least:
Challenge the chief in our behoof,
And make the proudest spring his loofe,
or send him South South-east.
There let us leave them for a time:
Now to the subject of my rhyme,
Tom Tel-troth simply witty:
Neither Tom Dingell, nor Tom Drum,
Tom Fool, Tom Piper, nor Tom Thum,
the scorn of Town and City.
But Tom of Toms, admired most;
More then a Goblin, or a Ghost,
A Phairy, or an Elfe;
Whilst he amongst his Friends abides,
Your Gizards at your Whitsontides, Gizard is in Scotch a merry Mummer.

no merrier then the himself.
Friar Tucke, Maid Marian, and the rest,
You Bag-pipes loud that loodle best,
making the valleys ring:
You and all country clownes give place,
To Odcomb of esteemed grace,
even vice-toy to a King.
Who for his mirth and merry glee,
Is raised to higher dignity,
then ere was English wight;
So honored since his coming out,
He must no more be earm'd a Lout, Termed a Lout, having a reference unto the
Princes verses, who held all men guts and Louts that were not Travelers.

but styled a Trojan knight.
Where he has writ of Toombs, of Stones
Of Marble Pillars, dead men's bones,
with Palaces of pleasure:
Of Gates, of Turrets, Churches, Towers,
Of Princes, Pesants, Knaves, and Whores;
alas for time and leisure.
For to repeat what he has writ,
Whilst I am in this riming fit,
plain, simple, vnrefinde:
Of this no longer must I stay,
Be merry Mates, and lets away,
whilst weather serves, and wind.
FINIS.

