CORYATS CRAMBE, OR HIS COLWORT TWICE SODDEN, AND Now served in with other
Macaronicke dishes, as the second course to his Crudities.

LONDON

Printed by William Stansby 1611.

CERTAIN VERSES WRITTEN UPON CORYATS CRVDITIES, WHICH SHOULD Have been
Printed with the other Panegyricke lines, but then were upon some occasions
omitted, and now communicated to the WORLD.
Incipit Ben. Ionson.
To the London Reader, on the Odcombian writer, Polytopian Thomas the Traveler.
WHO ever he be, would write a Story at
The height, let him learn of Mr. Tom Coryate;
Who, because his matter in all should be meet,
To his strength, has measured it out with his feet.
And that, say Philosophers, is the best model.
Yet who could have hit on it but the wise noddell
Of our Odcombian, that literate Elfe?
To line out no stride, but pas'd by himself?
And allow you for each particular mile,
By the ^cale of his book, a yard of his style?
Which, unto all Ages, for his will be known,
Since he treads in no other Man's steps but his own,
And that you may see he most luckily meant
To write it with the self same spirit he went,
He says to the world, let any man mend it,
In five months he went it, in five months he pend it.
But who will believe this, that chances to look
The Map of his journey, and sees in his book,
France, Sauoy, Italy, and Heluetia,
The Low Countries, Germany, and Rhetia
There named to be trauell'd? For this our Tom says:
Pies on it, you have his historical faith.
Each leaf of his iournall, and line does unlock,
The truth of his heart there, and tell's what a clock
He went out at each place, and at what he came in,
How long he did stay, at what sign he did ^nne.
Besides he tried Ship, Cart, Wagon, and Chair
Horse, ^oote, and all but flying in the air:
And therefore how ever the traveling nation,
Or builders of Story have often imputation
Of lying, he fears so much the reproof
Of his foot, or his pen, his brain or his hoof,
That he dares to inform you, but somewhat meticulous
How scabbed, how ragged, and how pediculous
He was in his travail, how like to be beaten,
For grapes he had gathered, before they were eaten.
How feign for his venery he was to cry (Tergum o)
And lay in straw with the horses at Bergamo,
How well, and how often his shoes too were mended,
That sacred to Odcombe are now there suspended,
I mean that one pair, where with he so hobled
From Venice to Flushing, were not they well cobled?
Yes. And thanks God in his Pistle or his Book
How many learned men he have drawn with his book
Of Latin and Greek, to his friendship. And seven
He there does protest he saw of the eleven.
Nay more in his wardrobe, if you will laugh at a
Jest, he says, Item one suit of black taffata
Except a dublet, and bought of the Jews:
So that not them, his scabbes, lice, or the stews,
Or any thing else that another should hide,
Does he once dissemble, but tells he did ride
In a Cart twixt Montrell and Abbeuile.
And being at Flushing enforced to feel
Some want, they say in a sort he did crave:
I writ he only his tail there did wave;
Which he not denies. Now being so free,
Poor Tom have we cause to suspect just thee?
No: as I first said, who would write a story at
The height, let him learn of Mr. Tom Coryate.
Explicit Ben. Ionson.
Incipit Johannes a Grandi-Bosco.
THE Orbs Almutez of this age have been
(Beamed with the graceful light of heavens Queen)
Ascending Stilbon in his doubled house,
Sweet Aphrodite, and he that slew the Nempe Apollo Smintheus.
Mouse.
Ye Germane wits, Hence, Smith, and Noortwicks Lord,
Lipsy, and Hortisbon, you can afford
(Of Rome and Athens you two paragers)
Me testimony, and the Scaligers.
With, what all you through negligence omitted:
This English Ilerma has us now befitted;
Who (...)
Unto whose praise no Muse that ever said no!
No more shall mine. A happy Alluding to that of Pindar. Olymp. (...) never
fitting so literally as the authers shoe (perserued like Epins^nideum. Corium,)
fits it.
foot had he
In shoe, that Lunata planta in Martial, and that of Iuuenal Sat.7. Appositam
more lunans subtexit alut^e: Witness that the Roman nobility, and of the best
sort had their Crescents on their shoes expressing a C. the single for our
Authors name.
Lunatique most sure had be
In Antique Rome, when judgment both and guerdon
Concurred: his like, fore Jove, was never heard on.
And Somerset, hereafter Odcombe steeple
Shall be Tom's Pyram: nay all Odcombe people
No more in him that from the (...)Baron of Odcombe,(...).
Heath was named,
But him, that all his countrymen has shamed
In's worth and wit, shall now for ever vaunt them:
Eternally thy Manes too shall haunt them,
Till with lustration they have explane,
The non-supply of thy wants Coryate.
Compared by many they are to Odysscus,
Were not comparisons too odious:
I could compare Th^ssalian Apulee,
Thou (...) Anacreon.
Ros^ loode deseru'st as well as he.
I could compare? alas I find no such
In him, in the Ithaqu^, Caesar, nor so much
Of others praise as thou have taken; both Muse
Do sing thy name, and merry Cornamuse.
That smothred name these Calends new broke out,
With trumpet summons us from all about,
As 'twere to do ^^^ were ^^ Mart. wherein such as had been faulty in
Fornacalia, did their deuoires (as the multitude of brave spirits do now at
this feast, to prevent weak stomachs from reiection of Crudities^ ^eslus.
Quirinus sacrifice,
Too long omitted; now thy Frontispice
Pictures that feast; the Muses it deferred
For thy desert. Well ere thou be enterr'd,
The Beams in Court reflecting from thy plain
(There as a mirror shall thou be ^bsern'd)
Shall make Castilio's traveling abstain,
Hopeless to have the palm thou have deserved,
Or hopeless have it. Thy example Tom,
Will cause our sharpest (...) Han desperate of equalling him.
heads to stay at home.
Explicit Ioannes a Grandi-Bosco.
Incipit N. T.
Certain Anacreonticke verses praeambulatory to the most ambulatorie Odcombian
Traveler.
COryate, Coryate,
Though it was my hard fate,
Not to know thy decre pate,
Before it was too late
To sing thy praises:
Yet now I Will call a Muse,
(Which of them thou shall choose)
To sing thee and thy shoes,
Which Fame vp-raises.
No Muse of the Horse hoof'd-spring,
Because thou had no such thing
As a Horse, but on foot did bring
Thy self and thy wit too.
Whence thou saw not The statue of Jupiter being found in Rome was set up
for the image of S. Peter, the keys being put into his hand in steed of the
thunderbolt: as it is there now to be seen.
Jove like a Pope,
Nor Dian's veil made a Cope,
Nor to Loretto crope.
Nor the goddess Cotytto
(Yet made gobled Crudities,
Or cobled rudities:
O how well brued it is
For the traveling members!
With wise Observations
Of several nations,
And rare indagations
Raked out of th'embers.
But thou will see e're long
Whether Romes walls be strong,
Or may be sacked by a throng
Of warlike Brittons.
Yet sure thou need'st not go
To coasts or countries more,
New fashions for to know,
Unfit or fit ones.
For thy Businesse-face who looks over,
Will say, thou now trauel'st more
With thy wit then thy feet before,
Floreat, Floreat.
In nobile mobile Par Calceorum Th. Coryati
It Is you alone O cobled shoes,
That caused have these much a-does.
You have bin sung by many a Poet,
And your good Master would have more yet.
It Is not his sailing to strange lands,
From Dover cliffes to Cahee sands,
That makes his journey so admired:
By you alone all brains are fired.

And haddocks feed as well as he.

Whose foremen make them go like dragons.

What does belong to a Gondalo.

That escaped fairly from the Jew.

Have been like threatened by a Bore.

To hang up rags from whence drop lice.
N)
With horses lie at Bergamo.
If this be so, what is then the news?
Only the story of his shoes.
O shoes, no shoes, but monstrous leather,
Enchanted aganst wind and weather!
Not made of any common hide,
But of one necromantifide
Of some Oxe-hide in Styx long drenched,
Or that had some A warlike engine otherwise called a Mortar, usually quenched
with wet Hides.
Granada quenched.
At least (of lice he was so full)
Of some rebellious Irish Bull.
Or if that their Antiquity
Require a further pedigree;
Perchance (they were so loving fellows)
That they were made of Vulcan's bellows.
Or of that leather bag I find in
Homer, Ulysses kept the wind in.
Sure I am they were so patched
With Theseus ship they may be matched,
Of whch a doubt at length did grow
Whether it were the same or no.
Had they endured more think you,
Had they bin worn by a Perdu?
Or if they heretofore had bin
Made for some wandering Capuchin?
So might they have proved sandale shoone,
And lasted more by many a Moon.
Yet was it well I needs must say,
They lasted five months on the way.
Though they can now no more be mended,
Yet may their praise; else God defend it.
Great pity 'twas they brake in sunder
Before they had made a nine months wonder.
Quod se necauit Seneca si nomen tulit:
Coryate tute nomen a coriotenes.
De futuris eiusdem T. C. Peregrinationibus infinitis.
NOui qui peregre totum prope circuit orbem,
Stultifer aque domum naue reucctus erat.
Non Thomas sic noster: is omne quod hactenus egit,
Nimirum pedibus pene peregit iter.
At nunc longinquas solers scrutabitur oras,
Et quae diuer so, littora, sole calent.
Romanam nihil est vrbem, Papamque videre,
Anglos saepe videt Roma, videre cupit.
Pendens art tuum viset (Mahomete) sepulchrum,
Vel Monacho instructus fraud doloque magis.
Incensus Zelo Solymas rimabitur ipsas,
Ex tot reliquijs si quid adbuc veliqui est.
Et Christum quoniam agnoscit Prestera Iohannem
Inuiset Thomas, and (si opus) erudict.
Lunae cultores, Persas, and Solis adibit,
Et Sophi ipsorum, sed magis ipse Sophos.
Laetemur tantis eius conatibus omnes,
Ille typis rediens omnia, nempe, dabit.
Mactc esto Coryate: peregrinantior (opto)
Sit fortunatus Spiritus iste tibi.
Non solum Antipodes: ipsas, audentior, vmbras
Si potes infernas vise: reuise tuos.
Si chartis demum mandes quid agatur in Orco,
Tu peregrinator solus in orb clues.
Explicit N. T.
Incipit Laurentius Whitaker.
(The ensuing verses of these three Authors were made since my book of
Crudities came forth.)

Course Music played upon the Odcombian Hoboy, to attend the second course of
Coryats Coleworts, and dittied to the most melodious Comicall air, borne and
brought up in the Septentrionall suburbs, which the vulgar call, The Punks
delight.
^ Veil bonnet ijgging Festiuals, of British land ^ and others, you proudest
Tuscan Carniuals, and ye ^ French Bals their brother: Dutch A most ingenious
sport used in the low Countries by Citizens, where in they use shooting with
Crosbowes at a thing made like a Geay.
Pappigcay, and A kind of drunke^ Dutch ^aire held on Sundaies and holidaies in
afternoones in Summer time, both note^ unhappily omitted in the Authors text,
which is their proper place.
Carmas gay, ^ in season after Easter, with Frow and Punke, ^ All reeling
drunk, both Boore and Burgomaster.

Ye Churchales, and ye Morresses,
With Hobbyhorse advancing,
Ye Round-games with fine Sim and Sis,
About the Maypole dancing;
Ye nimble joints,
That with red points,
And ribands trick the Bridal,
Look up your pumpes,
And rest your stumpes,
For you are now down cried all.
Your Coryphee, great Coryate,
The The Corybants were certain mad Priests, and had their names of (...) of
going upon their heads (which sometimes they used: a term not improper to our
Author, because he in going upon his feet, went truly upon his head also, for
he went upon that which contained his wit, and conveyed to him the matter of
his observations.
Corybant of Odcombe,
Now crested has his witty pate
With no mad but a sad comb
Of Doctorship, Viz at the University of Royston, where he proceeded a
Caelarean Doctor.

And will not trippe
To Market Cross, or Alehouse,
But has been made
More sage and stayed,
By th'Oracles of a Our Author being a Grecian, would needs vary from the
Trojans, therefore whereas they in their trauails received an Oracle from the
knawing of Mice (as the knowing Author well knows the story, ^^^ he would
needs have an Oracle also but from the biting of smaller.
louse:
A learned louse at Heidelberg
That bad him fall to writing,
Which came to him from Viz. in an old pair of shockings which a Prussian of
Koningsberg gave him, wherein inhabited some or aculous v^rmine.
Koningsberg,
To warn him of the biting.
Of his vile crew.
Which to eschew,
And put him into clothes,
He must to Court,
Write and make sport,
So now he has done both these.
Then wail not Odcombe for thy loss,
Though Coryate be removed,
His triumphs acted on thy Cross,
Are in Pauls-yard approved.
Nay all pastimes
Named in my rimes,
Shall stoop to Odcombes standish,
Which makes more glee
Then any three
Of English or outlandish.
An Encomiasticke scrap or fragment thrown by a charitable hand into this new
Bing or Almesbasket made by the Author to receive the Relics of the Crudities;
which fragment is quick, for though it creepes not, yet it thus speaks to the
Author.
AS at grave Senate-feasts begun with beef and mustard,
Ended with Pippin-pies, with Florentine and Custard,
The courser off all is in the hole of the Alms basket
By officers laid close, till suitors come and ask it;
So in thy Pilgrim feast of lushious Crudities
Dishes of biting beasts, and shirtlesse Nudities,
Some Panegyricke scraps of Court and country speeches,
(Which whilom thou were wont to show out of thy breches
And with tough Crudities could hardly be digested)
Be in the Almes-basket now of new Calues-skin invested:
Which dry meat none ca^cal; for there is one scrap a moist one
The shel filled with May dew, thou did present at Royston.
Yet not thy feasts nor scraps are made much to be tasted,
Nor shall their Title leaves on doors or posts be pasted,
But as brown pasts hard baked fill room, and few do taste them,
So having taken thy books, and in some odroome placed the^,
Let gentle gallants work their wills: never ask thou whether
They have taken pains to read or taste of both or either.
Explicit Laurentius Whitakerus.
Incipit Richer for books.
Observe Reader that the worthy Gentleman which is the Author of these verses,
and who graced me with singular lines upon my Crudities, even as good as any
upon my book, does for certain considerations conceal his name and his time,
and in steed thereof expresses only an Anagramme of it, even that before
named.

To the most notable Tom Coryate, the very Primrose of the Authors of this
present year 1611. (the saucy Almanacke-maker only excepted.)
IF, who fly praise, praise only follow those,
How got you so much Tom? that write in prose,
To be set out in verse, and made so dear
As Cooks with dainty sauce make homely cheer?
But well, since your great work set forth of late,
Has made you famous unto every state:
Of these small gleanings let no more be said,
But if the like of them were never made,
Nor never shall by any mortal brain,
That is not weight with yours just to a grain.
Again to the most royal Phoenix Doctor, and fluent Orator. M.T.C.
YOu have Harangued in English, Tom, so fully,
That men do parallele you now with Tully.
And M.T.C. which his name signify,
As aptly to your name they now apply.
See see, in placing letters you do sweat,
And letters do conspire to make you great.
As silliest Trojan fighting with Achilles,
To your brave answer, so your foe-mans bill is;
For there was never found in paper scrolles,
Nor yet in close or patent Parchment Rolls
Any like yours, it may be a precedent
To all your Clerks of Christendom and Kent.
O happiest child of Winchester alive,
Thence leapt out Doctor by Prerogative.
Explicit in Anagram Richer for Books.
Incipit Antonius Washborne.
SInce Doctor Coryates Crudities came forth
Parboyled in his Oratory broth,
Since these Orations in Tom Odcombes brain pan
Decocted were, what lyricke tongue refrain can
To taste his pickeld wit, and pandred art,
Seen and allowed in City, Court, and I mean in the country.
Cart?
Till now no Orator arose like Best
That ere declaimde at Coach-booh, boat, or feast,
Till now no traveler allowd to lie and cogge
Did ever write a book worth casting at a dog.
Explicit Antonius Washborne.
Incipit William Rich.
William Rich of the middle Temple, in the commendation of (his learned
countryman) Mr. Thomas Coryate of Odcombe, both Traveler ^^^^ and Orator.
Wonderful Coryate, that bring'st two impressions
Sooner to us, then Time two Quarter Sessions,
That writ'st as thou have trauell'd, with such speed
As hackney horses, hounds, or hunters feed:
That writ'st and trauell'st, as there were a strife
Between thy hands and feet for death or life.
Well did high Odcombe boast her pride of thee
When thou to Evil went in iollity,
And led'st an army forth with bows and gunnes
To swill their VVhitson-Ale, and crack their Bunnes,
Where thou, on Cross advanced, did spend more wit,
Then man would think thou could recover yet.
But thou have more, though much of the same mint
Men here may read, and wonder at, in print.
What will they say, when with thy Crudities
Thy twice boild Colewort here shall simpathize,
And the great unbegotten (God knows what)
Which thou will bring us next, that, yet, is at
The far Jerusalem, all in one volume?
They cannot choose but then erect a column,
^^^ travels Trophaees shall be hung
^^^ thy works in Ballades sung.
Explicit Guiliclmus Rich.
A PETITION MADE TO THE PRINCE SHORTLY AFTER THE DEATH OF THE Last Archbishop
of Canterbury, concerning the Printing of the Book of my TRAVELS.
To the High and mighty Prince, HENRY Prince of Walls, Duke of Cornwall and
Rothsay, Earl of Chester, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, etc.
The humble Petition of Thomas Coryate.
FOr as much as that great The Archbishop of Canterbury.
Oecolampadius of England, even that refulgent Lamp of Gods house, has lately
lost his light, the snuff thereof being fallen down into the Socket, and so
consequently is extinct for a time; that Lamp which should have given luster,
and lent her light unto my poor Hodaeporicall lucubrations as the Sun does
to the Moon, by the Eclipse whereof they are now dimmed, and lurk in a kind
of darkness more the^ Cimmerian; My thrise-humble and thrise-suppliant suite
unto your Highness is this, that you would graciously vouchsase to cherish and
maintain the scintillant embers of my diminutiue Lamp by infusing into them
the quickening Oil of your Gracious indulgence; by virtue of which, my Candle
which is now hid under a Bushel, may gather strength, and be elevated even to
the conspicuous and eminent places of this Kingdom, and disperse abroad her
coruscant light to the illuminating of the caliginous understandings of my
traveling Countrymen.

Your Highness suppliant and humble Petitioner, Thomas Coryate
the Od. combian Traveler.
CERTAIN ORATIONS PRONOVNCED BY THE AVTHOR OF THE CRVDITIES, TO THE KING
QVEENE, PRINCE, LADY ELIZABETH, AND THE DVKE OF York, at the delivery of his
Book to each of them.
This Oration following was pronounced to the Prince in the Privy Chamber at
S. James upon Easter Monday last, between six and seven of the Clock in the
afternoon.

MOst scintillant Phosphorus of our British This was the ancient name of
Sicily, so called, Quasi (...) that is, having three promontories, namely
Pelorus, Pachynus, and Lilybaeum. As for our British Island, I therefore call
it Tri^^cria, because it has three Promontories also ^s ^^^^^ had, viz. That
of ^^^ in ^^^ ^ll. Kant^um in the East, even in that part which we commonly
call Kent, and ^^^ or O^^ss in the ^^^^^ part of S^alland. Con^^en in ^^^^^.
Trinacria, Even as the Christalline deaw, that is exhaled up into the air out
of the cauernes and spungie pores of the succulent Earth, does by his
distillation descend, and disperse it self again upon the spacious
superficies of his mother Earth, and so consequently fecundate the same with
his bountiful irrigation: So I a poor vapor composed of drops, partly
natural, partly literal, partly experimental, having had my generation
within the liquid Walls of this farre-decantated Island, being drawn up by the
strength of my hungry and high reaching desire of Travel, and as it were
craned up with the whirling wheel of my longing appetite to survey exoticke
Regions, have been hoysed to the altitude of the remote climats of France,
Sauoy, Italy, Rhetia, Heluetia, Alemannie, and the Netherlands; and being there
in a manner inuolued for a time in the sweatie and humid clouds of industry
capital, digitall, and pedestriall, did distend the bottle of my brain with
the most delectable liquor of Observation, which I now vent and shower down
upon the young and tender Plants sprouting out of the same earth from the which
like a poor Mushrome, I first ascended. With this May dew of my Crude
collections (May I may well call it, because in May I first undertook my
Journey) I have now filled this new-laide Egge-shell, not doubting of the like
effect in your Highness the radiant Sun of our English Hemispheare, that the
great Phaebean. Lamp has over a natural Egge-shel produced by a checkling
Hen, and filled with the Pearly juice of the watery clouds, which is to
eleuate it to a far more eminent height then its own desert can mount it
unto, and so by your Gracious irradiation to make it conspicuous and
illustrious. Yes, (which is more) I wish that by the auspicious obumbration of
your Princely wings, this senseless Shell may prove a lively Bird, whose
bill with length and strength may reach and peake the very Mountains of
Arabia, and there nestle, increase and engender, and so breed more Birds of
the same feather that may in future time be presented as novelties unto your
heroycall protection. In the mean time receive into your indulgent hand (I
most humbly beseech your Highness) this tender feathered Because the Book was
bound in Crimson Velvet.
Red-breast. Let his Cage be your Highness study, his perch your Princely
hand, by the support whereof, he may learn to chirp and sing so loud, that
the sweetness of his notes may yield a delectable resonancie Vltra Garamantas
and Indos.

DIXI.

TO THE KING IN THE CHAMBER OF PRESENCE AT ROYSTON THE SECOND Day of April
being Tuesday, about eleven of the Clock in the Morning.
IT were no marvel if the like should happen unto me (most invincible Monarch
of this thrice renowned Not Quasi (...) but Quasi Al be one in regard of the
happy Union of England and Scotland
Albion, and the refulgent Carbuncle of Christendom) speaking unto your most
Excellent Majesty that did once to Demosthenes that thunderbolt of Athens,
when he spoke to Philip King of Macedone, even to be as mute as a Seriphian
Frogge, or an Acanthian Grasshopper; since the very Characters imprinted in the
forehead of a King are able to appall the most confident Orator that ever
spoke, much more my self the meanest Orator in your Majesty's Kingdom, whom
if I should compare to a Frogge as having crawlen many leagues by water, or to
a Grasshopper as having hopped many miles by land, why should I wonder if by the
gracious aspect of your resplendent Excellency, words, speeches, and Orations
should be drawn from me, since by the very inarticulate sound of Amphions
Harp, stocks and stones, mountains and valleys were said to dance
Lauoltoes and Roundelayes? But what talk I of ayrie speeches? Why do I
mention expatiating Orations? The Persians (as the ancient Historians do make
us believe) were wont to present their Kings with real gifts and anniuersarie
oblations. I being no Persian borne, but intending er long by the propicious
indulgence of the celestial powers to be borne upon Persian ground, do offer
unto your Majesty a farregrowne bnt a home spunne present, made indeed of
course Wool, but plucked from the backs of the glorious Palaces, the lostie
cloud-threatning towers and decrepit mountains of France, Sauoy, Italy,
Rhetia, Heluetia, Alemannie, and the Netherlands; spunne into a thread by the
wheel of my brain, the spindle of my Pen, and the Oil of my industry in
my native Cell of Odcombe in the County of Somerset, and now wouen into a piece
of Raw cloth in the Printers Press of the most famigerated City of London.
The lists of this Cloth are the Verses at both the ends of my Book. In the
beginning whereof some of the most singular and selected wits of your Majesty's
triangular Monarchy do combat in the listes of Helicon and Parnassus; and in
the end my Fathers Ghost alone does diuerberate the enthusiasticke air of
Pierian poesy. But I glory not so much in imitating the Persian vassals, as in
following the trace of our English Merchants, who returning from foreign and
remote Nauigations, do bring home in their Vessels many uncouth and
transmarine commodities; but herein I differ from them. For they bring home
their rarities in their Ships. But I have brought home my Ship and her
farre-fetched lading in My-selfe. My Ship (My dread Sovereign) is my Book,
which I brought home swimming in the liquid Ocean of my brain. She is now
rigged, and trimmed, and ready to hoyse Sail; your Majesty's favor will be
unto it both like a pleasant gale of wind in the Poupe to make it bear Sail,
and like a wel-fenced docke and secure haven of tranquillity, where she may
ride at Anchour in a Halcedonian calm, and shoot off her Ordinance against
the Critical Pirates and malignant Zoiles that scowre the surging Seas of this
vaste Universe.

DIXI.

TO THE QVEENE IN THE PRIVY GARDEN AT GREENEWICH, THE FIFTH Day of April
being Friday, about five of the Clock in the afternoon.
MOst resplendent Gem and radiant Aurora of Great Britains spacious
Hemisphere, think not this appearance of mine to be other then natural,
though contrary to the course and order of nature, my self who am nothing but
a foggie vapor and an obscure relic of darkness; do presume to approach
so near unto your Maiesticall Presence, when as all cloudie fogges and
obtenebrating Mistes are by the glorious appearance of Rose-fingerd Aurora
abandoned and put to flight. Now as amongst dark clouds and mistie
conglomerations diverse strange shapes are represented, sometimes of Mountains,
sometimes of men fighting in the air, sometimes of Ships, sometimes of great
beasts, as Mules, Camels, and such like: So in my self and this which I now
offer unto your most Excellent Majesty most of these shapes, nay even all of
them and many more are most lively and perspicuously presented unto your
Gracious eyes. If your Royal fingers will but deigne to unclose this poor
Itinerarie, there shall they discover the Snowie tops of the Alpine mountains,
the eminent skie-menacing Turrets of many renowned Cities and magnificent
Monasteries, my self combating with the Veneti^n Jews with my tongue, the
Wormacian Boore with me with his Halbert, yea (which is more) the shape of a
Camel your Maies^ie may perceive in my poor self, who (as Camels use in the
Countries that breed them) am come home out of foreign Regions, laden with
outlandish novelties and farre-fetched commodities; which not packed up in
Cords and Canuas, but bound up in Paper and Velvet, I most humbly present unto
your Majesty's Royal hands; the glittering resplendencie of whose favor will
add such grace and luster unto my silly Merchandise bought with the nimble
industry of my legs, brain, and fingers, that as my legs were
indefatigably current through those Kingdoms wherehence my Ware is fetched; so
my Ware it self being the lawful begotten issue of my legs, may be
irrefragably current through those Kingdoms whereof your Majesty is justly
styled Queen; through that also where your Majesty first drew your vital
breath, and all others where the name of Coryate the Traveler and Odcombe his
natalitiall Parish shall be known to posterity.

DIXI.

TO THE LADY ELIZABETH HER GRACE IN THE HOUSE OF THE LORD HARRINGTON at Kew,
the seventh day of April being Sunday, about Noone.
MOST Peerless and Gracious Princess, the true attractiue Adamant of this
famous Island, in who sename, sex, and heroical disposition me thinks I see
our great Queen ELIZABETH revived and resuscitated unto life from the very
bowels of her grave: Give me leave I most humbly beseech your Grace as a poor
Traveler out of the roundnesse of my heart as the circumference, and the
soundness of the same as the center and meditullium thereof, to present to
your Graces lily-white hands the Raw Travels of my Head and Toes, faithfully
written by my industrious Fingers as they were truly trodden by these laborious
Feet of mine which with all nimblenesse yield true obedience to their
commanding head. Let not my Title of Crudities (most Princely Lady) any thing
dismay your Grace, as if it were like pot like potled, like lips like
lettice. For the inventory of my Books freight being a miscellanie of things
of diverse kinds both in prose and verse, will (I hope) give your Grace a full
contentment, though the Title thereof does not seem to promise so much.
Vouchsafe then I beseech your Grace to receive this leuidense, rough, scabrous,
and vnplaned work into your Graces smooth hands, where I hope it will receive a
secure protection against all the malignant bitings of virulent tongues. And so
with all lowliness and submission of duty, I most humbly kiss your Graces
FOOT.

DIXI.

TO THE DVKE OF YORK HIS GRACE AT SAINT JAMES THE DAY BEFORESAID about five of
the Clock in the afternoon.
MOst glittering Chrysolite of our English Diadem, in whose little yet most
lovely, Gracious, and elegant body do budde most pregnant hopes like fair
blossoms of great fortunes and greater virtues: Within whose velume great
Liuies praises of Romes ancient Worthies are inuolued and infolded. Lo, I here
present unto your Grace the fruits of my furious Travels; which I therefore
entitle with such an epithete, because I performed my journey with great
celeritie, compassed and achieved my dessignes with a kind of fortune not much
unlike that of Caesar, Veni, Vidi, Vici. I came to Venice, and quickly took a
survey of the whole model of the City together with the most remarkable
matters thereof; and shortly after my arrival in ENGLAND I overcame my
adversaries of the Town of Evil in my native Country of Somerset, who
thought to have suncke me in a bargain of Pilchards as the wise men of Gotham
once went about to drown an Eele. Vouchsafe with grace and favorable aspect,
and with the blandishments of your benign nature to ripen these my CRVDITIES,
that being distilled through the Limbecke of your debonaire Grace, they may
prove comfortable, medicinable, or any other good thing else that tends to
enable all those generose Spirits that attend upon your Gracious person; my
self in one only strain of ambition, and no more, differing from them all,
even in this present suite that I make unto your Grace, namely that you would
be pleased to dignifie and style me with the Title of your Graces Traveler
in Ordinary.

DIXI.

AN OTHER ORATION MADE TO THE SAME THE TWENTIETH OF MAY LAST Past at Saint
James, concerning the Election and Installment of him into the thriseNoble and
illustrious order of the Knights of the Garter.
AS those representative beasts of Wood and Stone carved by the curious hand
of Daedalous statuaries, and laid under the magnificent concamerations of
Churches and Palaces, do seem grievously pressed and crushed under that
massy fabric which is imposed upon them; or as that laborious Porter, whose
brawnie shoulders like a hard paued Cawsie give gentle passage to all ponderous
Trunkes and Cloke-bagges, does groan under the press of his cumbersome
carriage, and is forced to send forth in sweat the liquid superfluities of his
porous carcass. So the poor carcass of my crased brain having lately
disburdened it self of the plumbeous weight of my elaborate Crudities, does
now as it were groan under this heavy and close-bound load laid upon it by
your Grace; bound not with Cords or Ropes, but with a Garter, that Royal
Garter which so decently and gracefully enuironeth the Left Leg of your Right
Gracious Person. This Garter having held the sinews of my brains fast tied,
your Graces command has been the launcing instrument to make the blood
thereof, which is my invention, to spirt and spinne out in these muddie
streams; and this preponderating burden has squeezed out of me poor
Coryate, as out of the Porters Corium, these sweatie distillations of my
fatigated brains; which distillations I have measured out into three Bottles
or Gallipots, and for orders sake (because I am to speak of an Order) have
thus ranked and collocated. In the first shall be put the Etymology of the
most famigerated and far decantated word of Garter; In the second, the
memorable foundation of this magnificent Order; In the third, the resplendent
dignity of the illustrious Knights and companions of it. For the Etymology, I
may fetch it out of the French or out of the Greek. In the French (as those
that are intelligent in the language have informed me) it may seem to be
fetched from the word Garroter, which is, to fetter or manacle, emblematically
implying that it fettereth, chaineth, and linketh together all the associates
of it in love amongst themselves, and in loyalty to their Prince. In my second
Etymology borrowed from the Greek idiome, I may call it Garter, quasi Carter,
of (...) signifying the head, and (...) to preserve; because that as an
ordinary garter bound about the head of any plebeian when he would give his
members repose, mitigateth the ach of the head, and makes him sleep in case
and quiet; So this Regal Garter making as it were a circle in the persons of
the circumstant noble Subjects that be of this sublimious society, does even
inring, colligate, and bind close the head of his most Excellent Majesty, and
the temples of his head, which are the Splendidious Prince his Highness and
your Gracious self, to give you all -- Tranquillam and placidam per membra
quietem. And thus have I euacuated the first Bottle of my distillation. In my
second infusion I promised the first institution and primarie foundation of
this nobilitated Society, and that was at the famous City of Bordeaux in
France by that most renowned King EDWARD the third, who having first trampled
upon the French Flower de Luces with the English Lions, has made ever since
the one to rampe and stamp, the other to be nourished and flourished in the
same field or Co^te of Arms. The year was 1348. So that it may for venerable
antiquity hold his rank above all the Orders of Christendom, above that of
the Annunciada of Sauoy, of the Golden Fleece of Burgundy, of the Alcantares
or Calatrauaes of Spain, or of that of Saint Michael, or of the Holy Ghost in
France: And for that of Saint Michael the reason is most evident and eminent,
because French Saint Michael does but on foot like a Pedant trample upon his
Dragon. But English Saint George does on Horseback like a Caualier
pessundate a Dragon no less direful then the other. And this is the liquor of
my second Bottle. For my last infusion, it shall not need any curious
sublimation or extraction, to make the persume odoriferous. The whole Europaean
Territory is abundantly possessed with the renown and Splendour of this
Princely Order. What Prince is so illustrious, what Potentate so potent, what
Monarch so highcrested, that does not esteem his Celsitude conspicuously
signified, his Majesty Royally dignified, and his Sublimitie gloriously
magnified by being condignely qualified with the resplendent honor of the
English Garter? To be silent of the rest of the Heroical Nobility of this our
Island that either have been aunciently possessed, or be now recently invested
into it (betwixt whose persons and their Order there is a reciprocal
contribution of honor and dignity, they nobilitating their Order, and their
Order them) if nothing else were added to make it transcendently Noble, it had
enough of this that your Graces Princely Leg is inringed in the Garter, your
Honored shoulders environed with the Collar, and your Noble breast
condecorated with the rich Image of worthy Saint George on Horseback. Unto
which most magnificent society though my poor self can not give a nights
lodging to a thought so ambitious as to aspire to; my traveling Legs being
kept to their vocation with Garters of an other kind, and my bitten and beaten
shoulders being destinated to Collars of a different matter; yet have I this
day showed my dew affection to do service to that Noble society, and
principally to your thrise-noble Grace, as a beggarly Alchymist, a fragrant
Apothecarie, or an honest Yeoman of the Bottles; all which Bottles having now
emptied, I will here stop both them and mine own speech, and conclude with
that Loyal, ancient, elegant, and to this purpose pertinent apprecation, Saint
George for England, Saint Denis for France, Sing Honey soit qui mal y pense.

DIXI.

AN ANSWER TO THE MOST SCANDALOVS, CONTVMELIOVS AND HYBRISTICALL Bill of
JOSEPH STAR of Evil in the County of Somerset Linen Draper, wholly
conflated and compacted of palpable Lies, deceitful prestigiations, injurious
calumniations, cluding cuasions, and most fraudulent tergiuersations.
THE CONTENTS.
My Answer of a certain Bill exhibited into the Chancerie against me shortly
after my arrival in England from beyond the Seas, by Joseph Star of the
Town of EVIL in the County of Somerset Linen Draper, whereby he hoped
either to have nullified or qualified the Debt of a hundred marks due unto me
from him according to his Band upon my return from Venice. This Answer being
commanded by Authority to Print, I have thought good to insert it in this
place, though my Plaintiff has not as yet given me his consent to publish the
same, which Answer follows.

MAy it Please your Lordship to be advertised that my antagonist, my crastie
and versute adversary Joseph Star has composed such a Bill as no Christian
whatsoever (except he has a very cauteriate conscience, or has been brought
up amongst the inhumane Garamants, the barbarous Getes, the inciuill Goths or
Tartars) would do the like. For it is nothing else but a cinnus, a rabble, a
rhapsodie, a miscellanie of diabolical falsehoods. Diabolical I may well call
them, because they proceed from the suggesting instigations of that (...) that
arch liar the devil. Therefore to the end I may with the more perspicuitie
and plainness overthrow, pessundate, and annihilate all these fained
objections, I hold it expedient to answer each particular Sigillatim, as they
follow in order, and that with as much Laconical brevity as may be, avoiding
that Battalogia that he has used in his tedious Bill.

Observe Reader that because I could not take occasion to be so conceited in
answering the first part of his Bill, the matter containing only a relation of
the first original bargain betwixt my adversary and my self; I have
therefore excluded the former parts of my Answer, and do here express only
the later part thereof, as being a little better handled (according to the
opinion of some critic) then any part of the rest was, even this.

Well may I apply to STAR Ciceroes speech against Marcus Antonius, Miror eum
quorum facta imitetur, illorum exitus non perhorrescere. I marvel that Star
is not afraid lest he should make such an end, that is, die such a death as
they do whose example in lying he imitateth. He coaceruateth and conglomerateth
a mere farrago of lies. Also he traduceth me about the smalnesse and
commonnesse of my Voyage, as having been out of England but five months. Can
he justly call this a smaland common Voyage to pass almost two thousand miles
by land? to expose ones body to such a world of iminent dangers both by Sea and
Land as I did? to pass those stupendous mountains of the snowie Alps? to
dispatch my journey with such a compendious celeritie? to perform it with such
a dispendious disadvantage to my estate? and after the consu^mation of my
travels to be thus opposed by a Vilipendious Linen Draper? to walk above the
clouds over hills that are at least seven miles high? For indeed so high is the
mountain Senys I passed over, which disterminateth Sauoy and Piemont: the
danger whereof is such, that if in some places the traveler should but trip
aside in certain narrow ways that are scarce a yard broad, he is precipitated
into a very Stygian Barathrum or Tartarean lake six times deeper then Paul's
tower is high. Continually to stand in fear of the Alpine cutthroates called
the Bandits? Being entered into Italy, to pass through that carnificina, that
excruciating and excarnificating torture of the Spanish Inquisition, which is
more cruel then Phalaris his brazen Bull, or the exquisitest torturs that the
Sicilian tyrants were wont to inflict upon offenders? These dangers and many
more I was exposed unto, and like to be circumcised in Venice amongst the
Jews for maintaining the cause of my Savior and Redeemer against their
refractarie obstinacy, as that Honorable and completly accomplished Knight
Sir Henry Wotton our Kings Leager Ambassador in Venice, that was an eye witness
of the conflict betwixt them and me, can testify. At last being as desirous to
see my native country as Ulysses after his ten years travels was to see his
Ithaca, which is so dear unto me that I prefer the very smoke of England
before the fire of Italy, I walked alone asoote with one only pair of shoes
through many fierce and warlike nations betwixt Venice and Flushing in Zealand,
having my throat like to be cutneere the City of Worms in Germany, and my
body to be turned into worms meat only for pulling a poor cluster of
Grapes in a Vineyard. These perils being considered I hope your Lordship will
say I have as hardly gotten my money as poor laborious Brickmakers eight pence
a day for making Brick. Wherefore most humbly beseeching your good Lordship
upon the prostrate knees of my heart to have a Christian commiseration of my
estate that have undergone such a multitude of difficulties and calamities for
the getting of this little wages (little I may well call it in respect of my
great travel) and to exclude mine adversary out fo your Court of Chancerie,
that by the ordinary course of the Common Law I may recover my money, which I
hope no man in the Christian world (except he be partial) but will say I have
well deserved.

(...) (...) Dominationis tu^e humillimus supplicissimusque Orator Thomas
Coryatus Peregrinans.
Your Lordships most humble Orator Thomas Coryate the Traveler.

AN INTRODVCTION TO THE ORATIONS ENSVING, WHEREIN IS DECLAred the occasion of
the first making of the said Orations.
IT happened in the year 1606. that the Church stock of my natalitiall Parish
of Odcombe being exhausted and spent saving sixteen shillings, some of my
friends of the Parish, amongst the rest the Church wardens solicited me to set
abroach my wits, and invent some conceited and plausible matter, to the end to
draw some great company of good fellows together for the benefit of our Church
of Odcombe, seeing they knew that I was well acquainted in the country.
Hereupon I resolved to muster up out of the Parish one hundred choice and
ablemen, as were fit to bear arms in the field, and by a time limited, even
the VVhitsonday following about six of the clock in the morning appointed
them to meet me at Odcombe Cross. Which they did according to my
appointment, being furnished with convenient munition for a kind of warfare.
For some of them had muskets, others Caliuers, some Partisans, some Halberts,
with diversity of other weapons. Likewise we had good Martial Music and
military officers. I my self being their Captain, was mounted upon a goodly
milk-white steed, unto whom that verse of Virgil which he made upon Queen
Didoes horse, might be well applied. Stat Sonipes, ac frae na ferox Spumantia
mandit. And having put my whole centurie into a convenient order, marched
forward with them toward the town of Evil three miles distant from Odcombe,
being met by the way by the Oppidanes of Evil, that consisted of two cohorts,
one Masculine and another Faeminine, which incountred us like a company of
Amazones, and aftert here had been some two or three volleyes of shot
discharged on both sides with a pretty kind of velitation or light skirmish,
we descended a hill called Henford, and entered the town. In the market place
whereof nere to the Cross, we had one skirmish more, but vmbraticall and
imaginary. Then I ascended an eminent and conspicious place about the Cross,
where was erected a kind of Canopy, under the which I aduanded my self alone,
and after the warlike Music was ended, having two or three times brandished
my nakedsword, I spoke this Oration following to the Euillians, and at the
least two thousand people more, that then flocked together to the town of
Evil from many parishes of the country round about.

FRiends and Confoederates, if ye marvel for what cause we Odcombians only
of all your other neighbors whatsoever ye have bordering about your town, do
no less valiantly then volunta^ly present our selves in this military manner,
according to the form of martial discipline before the face of your whole
town, and your fraternities: I will allege two causes why ye ought to pardon
our boldness in this behalf. First, because I that am chosen to be their
General Captain, have ever from mine infancy borne that love to your town,
that I thought good at this present to make an apparent demonstration thereof
by some extraordinary action; being also the principal animator of my whole
band of soldiers to join their hands, their hearts and their purses with me
for the accomplishment of this my resolved project. Secondly, because although
we are come unto you with martial instruments, yet not with a martial
resolution to invade the precincts of your incorporation by force of arms, to
brandish our glittering and refulgent swords after a terrible and warlike sort
against you, to bereave you of your ancient privileges and immunities, to
ransacke your houses and your goods, to subvert your whole estates, to lade our
selves with the rich spoils of conquered enemies, to put some as obstinate and
stiff-necked rebels to the furious and irrelenting di^t of our swords, to
embrace others with the ar...es of mercy that shall humbly submit themselves
into our hands, and after to carry them away into most lamentable captivity.
These matters (dear Consederates) we never as much as harbored in our
thoughts; much less intended to put any such hostility in execution. But
verily we are come unto you for a contrary purpose, namely, to offer our selves
even of our own accords unto you in a league of friendship, yea such a league,
the like whereof made betwixt us Odcombians and you Euillians, neither
antiquity has recorded, nor the time wherein we live has seen, nor
succeeding ages could have hoped for, had not we Odcombians at this present out
of the sincere affection we bear you, sued unto you for this confederacy.
Moreover we are come unto you for another cause, which is very honest and
religious: for we determine to spend our money with you for the benefit of your
Church, hoping yea most earnestly craving to receive the like courtesy again
at your hands for our Church of Odcombe. But before I use any further speeches
unto you concerning the confirming of this foresaid league of friendship, I
resolve, by way of prevention, or preoccupation, to communicate my slender
opinion into you concerning the lawful use of that, for the which we are now
assembled, I mean Church ales; least any captious and carping wits should deem
that we have intruded our selves into your liberties, as a very disorderly and
confused crew, rather to give some cause of offense, then to benefit your
Church. Therefore to the end I may illustrate this present matter by relating
examples of solemnities used in ancient ages, unto some whereof our Church-ales
may (in my opinion) be very fitly compared, I will exemplyfie some few. The
ancients celebrated solemn meetings at certain times of the year for their
pastimes and recreations, as the Romans had their several These feasts are
treated of at large by su^drie ancient Roman writers as Liuie, Varro,
Macrebius, Gellius, etc.
feasts, whereof some were called Bacchanalia or Dionysia, some Saturnalia,
some Agonalia, some Lupercalia, and some others Amberualia, with innumerable
more that were ordained for su^drie purposes. Likewise the Athenia^s had their
^ocrales thereof wrote an Oration.
Panathenea, and their Thesmophoria. The Thebans their Xenop.histo.Graca.i.b.5.
Aphrodisia, and their Trietericall Orgia celebrated every third year upon
Cithaeron a mountain of Boeotia. The Corinthians their Xmop.in orat.de
A^esilao.
Hyacinthia. The Lacedaemonians their Xenop histo G^ act. lib.5.Plut.in Lyeur.
Phiditia, invented by their famous lawgiuer Lycurgus, and so called from the
Greek word (...) which signifies parsimonie, because those feasts exhibited
a very true spectacle of sobriety, and frugality. Finally the ancient
Christians which lived about the beginning of the Primitive Church had their
feasts of charity, which they called in Greek Epist.tude. Apustult.Tertull.in
Apolog^tico.
(...) because they were the very means to confirm mutual amity, and
Christian charity betwixt friends and friends. I humbly crave pardon for mine
error (if at the least l err) in saying that these Church ales which we use
now in England are very like to those (...) of the ancient Christians, if they
are rightly and religiously used, as they ought to be without any outrageous
enoimities. Truly I think they are: my reason is, because these are feasts of
charity, as those were, and they were instituted by our ancient progenitors for
many hundred years ago for these two causes of especially First for the
breeding of love betwixt neighbors, and secondly for the raising of a stock
for the supporting and maintenance of our Church, and the Church affairs: so
that I do most confidently believe that the good and religious use of
Churchales may be well retained, if the abuses thereof be utterly banished, and
exterminated out of a Christian Commonwealth, as drunkenness, gluttony,
swearing, lasciviousness, with many more, which indeed I must needs confess
seem to be the inseparable accidents, and individual adjuncts of Church-ales.
But ought the use of Church-ales, which were first destinated for a religious
intent, to be absolutely exti^pated, because now and then some few abuses
creep into civil and sober societies, by the means of some dissolute,
rusticall, and ill-nurtured pessants? Surely no. Neither ought they which do
so greatly dislike the lawful use of Church-ales soberly managed for the
benefit of a stocke-spent Church, incur less reprehension, then that furious
king of Thrace Hom.Ilia.6.
Lycurgus, who because many of his subjects were often times drunk with the
wine that came from plentiful vineyards of his kingdom, in his angry
passion, caused all the vines of Thrace to be rooted vp^ an action verily most
indiscreet and inconsiderate. For it behooued him rather to have rooted away
the abuse, I mean the drunkenness of his subjects, then to abolish both the
use and the abuse clean together. Therefore let us, at this our present
meeting, (fellow soldiers) imitate the feasts of those ancient and religious
Christians, not those of the profane and irreligious Gentiles, wherein were
exhibited many lascivious spectacles, that as certain angling hooks yielded
alluring baits to draw the spectators to diverse vanities, and most inciuill
outrage: but we Christians ought at our solemnities to express a very pattern
of modesty, and temperance, yet so intermingled and seasoned Atticis leporibus,
that is, with the sauory salt of pleasant conceits, well beseeming both the
time, the place, and the persons, that they may neither savor of a rude
scurrility on the one side, nor of a too Cynicall austeritie on the other side,
but keep the golden mean, which virtue betwixt both extremes we call in
Greek (...) in Latin vrbanitas, and in our mother English tongue, ciuility.
Now for as much as this sociable and neighborly meeting, which does tend to the
advancement of our Churches wealth, cannot be performed without some expenses
of money, give me leave I pray you to make some short digression from my maine
matter, to the end to animate you to spend your money for so laudable a
purpose. Be not I beseech you slaves to your money, which is but a base
excrement dug out of the very bowels of the earth. Worship not so dumb an
image, as a little piece of stamped gold, or silver. For truly I may very fitly
term those even worshippers of their money, out of whose purses a man shall
with greater difficulty draw a little piece of coin, although it be for the
benefit of their country, the credi^ of themselves, the good of their souls,
and the wealth of their Church, then Hercules club out of his hands. Therefore
set a broach your pelse at so opportune a time as this is; howbeit I exhort you
not to prodigality, which is an extreme vice, but to frugall and moderate
expenses for the advantage of your Church. Remember that golden sentence of the
sweetest Philosopher that ever drew vital breath, (...)the place of a
Captain: to that I derive the word Ducall not from Dux, which signifies a
Duke, that is, a supreme or sovereign Lord of a Signiorie or free State, as
the Duke of Florence, the Duke of Saxony etc.f For the name of Duke I did not
challenge it my self, in my souiall merriments, although a worshipful friend
of mine graced me with the religious title of the great Duke of Charity^ but
more properly from Dux which signifies a Captain in war which word. comes
from Duke, that signifies to lead an army or a band of soulcicis.
Plato, that We are not borne for our selves only, but that our country does
challenge one part of our birth, our parents another, and our friends the third.

Tax me not, Confederates, of arrogance, though I do according as the nature
of my place and office does require. For even as it behooves every provident
and prudent Captain to direct and instruct his soldiers in those things that
are to be done, and to forbid them those things that are not to be done: so I
by virtue of my * Ducal authority, which is a dignity that I have received at
this time, not by way of usurpation, but by imposition, (for by the general
consent and suffrages of you all it was imposed upon me) by vertuel say of my
Ducall authority I command you some things, and prohibit you some other things.
The things that I command you are these. First a mutual oblivion of all
injuries whatsoever, even from the beginning of the world till this present
day, (if at the least any have been offered betwixt us Odcombians and you
Euillians) according to the imitation of that memorable Valor. Max.li. 4. verum
memorabilium Tul. in I. Philippica. Xenop. histor. Graca. 3. lib.7. lust.lib.5.
Diodorus Siculus lib.14. historica Bibliotheca.
(...) of the Athenians, that is, an oblivion of wrongs, which was established
by their valiant Captain Thrasibulus, after the bloody government of the
thirty tyrants (who had most grievously dilaniated the whole State with very
horrible massacres) was abrogated and defaced out of the Commonwealth of
Athens. Secondly, friendly, loving, and harmless society, joined with civil
and discreet merriments fit for this flourishing time of the year. Thirdly, a
cheerful spending of your money without any base whinching or murmuring, for
the emolument of your Church. The things that I prohibit you are these.
Drunkenness, swearing, brawling, picking of quarrels, lascivious and obscoene
communicatio^. For (according to Menanders speech) (...), that is, evil words
corrupt manners. Finally, I forbid you to commit any enormous outrage, whereby
we should scandalize our credit, and make our selves infamous in our country.
For these foresaid matters beseem rather the wanton feasts of the goddess
Aug.de Ciuit.Dei.
Flora, or god Bacchus the patron of drunkards, which were celebrated amongst
the barbarous Paynims, then the sober solemnities of godly and religious
Christians.

But whereas at the beginning of my Oration I called you Confederates, (which
word signifies those that are united and combined together in a league of
friendship) not because ye are so already, but for that I hope ye will be so:
I hold it expedient to unfold unto you the ceremonies which were heretofore
observed in ancient ^^ at the making of leagues, and to declare the custom
which I would have you now use touching this present league between us. It was
the custom of the ancient Romans (as Deca^
Liuie their most peerless and incomparable Historiographer doth' record)
that a certain Herald of arms should at the Kings commandment take an
herb in his hand, and strike an Hog with a flint stone, pronouncing these
words. Sic a love feriatur is, qui sanctum hoc fregerit foedus, vt ego hunc
porcum ferio: that is, I pray that lupiter may so strike him that shall violate
this holy league, as I now strike this present Hog. But Polybius the Arcadian
historian affirms in his third book of Histories, where he treats of a
league that was concluded betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians, that there
was another rite. For he says thus. As soon as the conditions of the league
were agreed on betwixt the parties, a certain herald of arms took a stone in
his hand, and uttered these words: If I make this league without any guile or
deceit, I pray the gods to give me most happy success in my affairs. But
if I do, or as much as think otherwise then according to the covenants of the
league, I wish that all the rest being saved, I only may perish, even as this
stone shall by and by fall out of my hands: and there withal he presently
flung away the stone. As for the Polydorios Virgilius lib.3. ca.15.de rerum
inuentoribus.
Arabians, whenever they contracted confederacy with any foreign nation, one
standing in the midst betwixt both the Ambassadors, struck with a certain
sharp stone the palms of the hands of them that were to make the league,
even about their greater fingers, and incontinently taking a piece of flocks
out of the garments of both the Ambassadors, anointed seven stones that were
put in the midst of them, with the blood that issued out of their hands; and
all the while they were occupied about this ceremony, they inuocated Dionysius
and Urania. This being done, he that was the mediator of making the league
betwixt the friends, engaged his credit, as suertie for the stranger: which
league they also thought good to observe that contracted friendship and
familiarity together. These and such like sundry forms of making leagues
there were heretofore amongst the ancient Pagans, according to their several
and distinct nations. But we setting aside these superstitious rites, as being
for many ages past grown stale and out of date, will unite our selves in the
league of love, especially for this time, only by the joining of our bands
together, a token very sufficient to ratify an everlasting and inviolable
union betwixt us. Erosmu in Adagio Ch^^ad. I.
Let us not imitate the Foedifrage (that is the league-breaking) Carthaginians,
who for their most execrable infidelity have been branded by many classical
historiographers with the infamous mark of eternal dishonor, and infamy;
Insomuch that Punica fides, that is, the faith of the Carthaginians, is
prouerbially used for all imaginable treachery, and disloyalty. But rather le^
us in our thoughts, in our words, and in our deeds, firmly and sincerely
establish this present league not only we that are here present during our
lives, but also posterity for many succeeding genera^ ions after us, to whom
let us now co^lecrate the memory hereof. But what mean I to expatiate so far
beyond the bounds of the time I limited myself? well then I will recall my self,
and now at length draw together the sails of this my rude and inelegant
Oration. For I perceive that I do even cloy your ears with such an heap of
co^fused words. Wherefore su^marily to shut up al in a word, I most heartily
desire you all to take in good part this my naked and slender Oration,
considering that I am no professed Orator, nor an affected Rhetorician, to whom
it belonges to paint out his speeches with filed phrases, curious
circumquaques, and rhetorical insinuations; but I am rather a man of arms,
and a soldier. Therefore ye ought to expect the less at my hands.
Nevertheless if in this my speech I have delivered any documents that are
worthy the observation, put them I pray you in execution with all alacrity.

DIXI.

THIS ORATION FOLlowing I pronounced at Odcombe to the Euillians when they came
home to us.
Dear Associates, we entertain you with a whole volley of most hearty
thanks, partly for the bountiful and magnificent entertainment ye lately
affoorded us at your town, and partly for that ye have satisfied our
expectation by reuifiting us according to your faithful promise, for the
relief of our Church. Truly we ingenuously confess that ye Euillians have
justly merited our everlasting love, in that ye being oppidanes (that is,
townsmen) At the pronouncing of this word, a volley of shot was discharged by
twenty Mus^ eters.
borne, brought up, and dwelling in a rich, populous, and fertile town,
dotated with ancient charters and privileges, yea living in so fat a soil,
that it does even flow with milk and honey, do vouchsafe us your poor
confederates the Odcombians of this favor, as to visit us with such a troop
of the most selected persons of your town; us I say the Odcombians, being a
rural and mountanous people, dwelling upon a billy and sterill country, and
wanting many comfortable helps of life, which both Nature and Art have most
abundantly powered out upon you. Nevertheless because it shall not be thought
that I de^ rog^te too much from our selves by attributing so much unto you,
pardon me I pray you though I speak somewhat in comme^dations of this little
parish Odcombe being my native soil, the smoke whereof (according as another
Au bor says of a man's native country) is more dear unto me, then the fire of
a foreign place: and the rather I am induced to digress somchin; into the
praise hereof, because ye shall have the less occasion to repent for the
league ye have contracted with us, as being no perfidious and disloyal
slaves, but such as will, while our breath does last, show our selves most
faithful and sincere friends to those whom we have once entertained in our
friendship. Lucian in his Treatise entitled Encomi^ patriae, whose words are
these (...) that is, that smoke of a man's own country it brightet then the
fire of an other country.
Therefore to derive my beginning even from that which is the necessariest
thing that man has in this life, without the which it is impossible for him to
breath as much as one minute of an hour, I mean the air, nature the best
perfectresse of things has privileged this rien soil of Odcombe with so
great a prerogative of a most wholesome and pleasant air, that in that part of
happiness we hold our selves nothing inferior to any town or parish
whatsoever in the whole Shirewe dwell in, nay we attribute so much to the
excellent subtlety of our piercing Odcombian air, as the Poet In Epistola ad
Mec^
Horace did to the air of Baiae a famous maritime town of Campaniain in Italy,
whereof he says thus, Nullus in orb locus Baiis praelucet amoenis. That is,
no place whatsoever within the whole circumference of the earth does surpass
pleasant Baiae for the incomparable temperature of the air. Neither do we
Odcombians stick to affirm that our air is as sweet as that of the royal
City Madril in Spain, Brixinia in the Earldome of Tyrol, Serauallum in Italy,
Ormus in Persia, Alexandria in Egypt, and finally Croton in Magna Grecia: all
which Cities are most highly extolled both by the ancient and modern
Geographers for the passing amoenitie of their air. The second thing which
does even nobilitate our little parish (being also such a special accident for
the sustentation of man's life, that it is impossible for man, especially in
this part of Europe, to live well without it) is our wool, which is so famous
for the singular finenesse thereof, that wedare boldly avouch, that no place
whatsoever in England yields better saving only Cambden in Herefordthite
Lemster in Hereford-shire. Neither surely is this a thing of the least
importance to ennoble our Parish. For even as Stephanus de vrbibus. Pompo.
Mela.lib.^. Strabo vulgo Melazo.
Miletus which was in times past the very Queen of the Cities of Ionia in
Greece, and the mother of almost ^ou^escore Colonies, grew no less famous for
the singularity of her wool, which was distracted into diverse regions and
quarters of the world, then for her pleasant situation, and the stateliness of
her sumptuous buildings: So Odcombe (not that I make any just comparison
betwixt the glorious city of Miletus and our little parish, being but as it
were an handful in respect thereof) ought to be much the better regarded, by
reason of so worthy an help that it ministers to cover man's nakedness. The
third is the conspicuous eminency of our Church, being erected upon so lofty
a place, that it ouerprieth and ouertoppeth the whole country round about it;
even as that notable Egyptian watch tower called Plinius lib.2.cap.85.
Pharos near to Alexandria, which was built by Ptolomaeus Philadelphus upon so
eminent an hill, that it ouerlooked the whole circum^acent country. And truly
this our Church deserves commendation in consideration both of the nobility of
the founder, being one Moritonius an Earl of Normandy, that came into this
land (as I have heard) with William the Conqueror; and also of the antiquity.
For it is at the least five hundred years ago since the first foundation
thereof was laid. The fourth is the variety of our sweet and wholesome springs,
distributed by the provident artifice of nature into sundry convenient places
of our parish, as well for the delight as the vtility of our inhabitants, and
endued with that orient and Cristalline cleerenesse, together with the singular
effects most inseparably thereunto adjoined, that we may presume to compare them
with whatsoever fountains are reputed the excellentest in our whole country.
The fifth and last is that which shall (I hope) encourage you to persevere most
constantly in your league, namely, our unity and perfect love amongst our
selves; for we all from the very highest to the lowest are most firmly knit
together in an indissoluble knot of friendship. It fares not with us as it
dothoftentimes with citizens and townsmen. For they are eftsoons so enraged
and inflamed with the burning 7 eale of ambition, that they foster many
turbulent factions, and oppose themselves in such virulent and hostile manner
against each other, that now and then there fall out most grievous broils and
mutinies betwixt them, whereby the strength of their societies is the sooner
weakened and dissolved: but we Odcombians conioyne our selves together in one,
even as the members in man's body without any emulation, or repining at each
others prosperous estate, and dispose our affections as a well-tuned harmony,
that they never suffer any iatring discord. So that by this sympathy of our
neighbourly love we wax the stronger, and become even inexpugnable to our
enemies, if at the least we have any. Herein we follow the wise counsel of
that sage Scythian Plutar^bus:
Scylurus, who being on his death bed called to him all his sons, which were
in number fourscore, to all whom severally one after another be delivered a
sheafe of arrows bound up together, commanding them to break those arrows
as they were so bound; they tried, but were not able to do it. Whereupon he
took the sheafe again into his own hands, and having loosed the bond, he
easily brake all those shaftes being sundred one from another, which he could
not do, when they were bound together. By which token he intimated to them
that they should be strong and invincible, as long as they perseuered in the
bond of unity, but should quickly come to utter ruin and destruction, if by
their private dissentions they were divided asunder. Therefore, loving
Confederates, imitate us Odcombians in this our unity, so that not only ye
your selves may cherish and embrace mutual love amongst your selves, but also
that ye and we jointly together may express such sincerity of friendship,
by reason of this late league confirmed betwixt us, that we may be as it were
one fraternity, one neighborhood.

Now if any shall reprehend me of partiality, for attributing so much to my
native country, which seems indeed in outward show but a very obscure and
ignoble place: I heartily crave pardon for my presumption in this behalf,
being by so much the more pardonable, by how much the less I did ever
illustrate my country with any condign praises heretofore in all my life till
this present time. Desiring my contrymen also the Odcombians to take this my
present speech as a sufficient satisfaction and recompense in liew of my long
silence of Odcombe, for whose good and saferie, I hope I shall be as ready to
expose my body to any perils, (if opportunity shall so require) yea, (which
is more) to power out my dearest vital blood, as ever was noble ^u^lirus
lib.2.sectio.5.
Codrus for his Country of Athens, Liuius Deca.
Marcus Curtius for Rome, or the famous Lady Androclea for Thebes.. Pausanias
lib. 9. Boeticorum.


As concerning the entertainment which ye expect at our hands, pardon us we
pray you, though we requite you not with a correspondent proportion both in
manner and matter like unto yours. For we want those means to express our
bounty toward you, as ye oppidanes are plentifully furnished with all. But
this we will assure you, that the defect of your entertainment shall be most
abundantly supplied with the integrity of our hearty love and affection. Truly
we have neither Bulls, nor Bears, nor Apes that are wont sometimes to be
beaten upon skittish iades, nor any such things to show you, for the sight
whereof together with the most peevish pastimes that they yield to their
spectators, many men are often times drawn to undertake long and chargeable
iournies: but in steed thereof we show you our men, that like valiant
Martialists present them; selves unto you with their warlike munition, some
with partisans, some with those remorselesse and merciless instruments which
were for almost seven score years ago invented by a certain Polydor.
Virgil.etc.
Germane as a pernicious bane of many millions of worthy men, I mean Muskets
and Caliuers; and some other with swords, with all which weapons we Odcombians
can (if need requires) maintain right, and repulse wrong: but these
instruments which were made for the effusion of blood, we like peaceable men
lay aside at the entertaining of you, and with our Laurel branches in our
hands, which are the true ensigns of peace, most effectionately ambrace you as
our dear friends.

But seeing I perceive that the time does impose silence upon me, I will break
off further circumstances, which do breed a tedious wearisomenesse to the
ears of the hearers: and finally conclude my speech with this request, namely
to entreat you all, and that most instantly, that ye would as lovingly accept
of this rural entertainment, which our parish shall now yield you, as of
luxurious and Epicurious delicacy, which Cities and towns do oftentimes
afford their guestes; seeing kind entertainment ought not so much to be
measured by the curiosity of delicious cates, as by the unfeigned welcome and
entire benevolence of the inuiting friends.

DIXI.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
AT the conclusion and vpshot of this Book, let me a little advertise thee
(gentle Reader) of a Book lately Printed in huggermugger, entitled The
Odcombian banquet. And I am the rather induced to make mention of it, because
it does not a little concern my credit to clear my self of two very
scandalous imputation laid upon me by that virulent and rancorous pessant,
some base lurking pedanticall tenebricous Lucifuga that set forth the book.
Whereof the first is the Motto in the first leaf of the book. A sinus portans
mysteria. The other in the end of the book, even in his Nouerint vniuersi,
viz. That one that intended to epitomize it, affirmed he could not melt out of
the whole lump of my Volume so much matter worthy the reading as would fill
four pages. For the first I will tell thee the original wherehence it sprang.
It happened that after I had presented my Book at Royston to the King, and
returned back to London for Books to present to Noblemen of the Court, I did
determine for conceit sake, and to minister occasion of merriment to the King,
to get me an Ass to carry my Books, with this Latin inscription in fair
Capital Roman Letters upon that which should have contained them, Asinus
portans mysteria; being indeed taken out of Alciats Emblemes, and spoken of an
Ass that carried the Image of the goddess Isis. But here the diuulger of the
foresaid Odcombian Banquet most sinisterly and malignantly applied it (as all
the Readers do interpret it) to my self, and thereby very peruersly wrested
it from that allusion which I intended. As for the second imputation contained
in his Nouerint vniuersi, it far exceeded the first in spite full
bitterness. For whereas he writes that he could not melt out of the whole
lump of my Book so much matter worthy the reading as would fill four pages,
I will boldly affirm for the better justification of my Observations, and by
way of opposition against the malicious censure of that hypercriticall Momus,
that of the six hundred fifty and four pages (for indeed so many are in the
book) he shall find at the least five hundred worthy the reading, especially
in my descriptions of these Cities, Paris, Lions, Milan, Padua, Venice, Verona,
Brixia, Bergomo, Zurich, both the `Badens, Basil, Strasbourg, Heidelberg,
Spira, Worms, Mentz, Franckeford, Colen, etc. This also I will further say for
the confirmation of the sufficiency of my historical notes, (seeing they are
so severely chastised by the censorious rod of this maleuolent traducer, that
biteth my work with his Theonine teeth) and yet without any vain glorious
ostentation: that let him or any other whatsoever in our whole Kingdom of
Great Britain, show both larger Annotations for quantity, and better for
quality (absic dicto inuidia) gathered in five months Travels by any English
man since the incarnation of Christ, I will be rather contented to consecrate
all the Books that remain now in my hands either to god Vulcan or goddess
Thetis, then to present one more to any Gentleman that favors wit and
learning. Therefore let this Coryatomastix Zoilus bark at me as long as he
list, swell with envy as big as the AEsopical Toade, and shoot all his
darts of malignitie against me; I oppose this double thield stronger then the
seven fold Target of Ajax in Ovid, for my security and defense against him,
first that it has pleased the best of the Kingdom even from the Kings own
person with all those sacred members of the Royal family, and many Noble
personages of the best note of our land, as well as the Lords of the Privy
Counsel, as other generous spirits of great eminency, not only to afford
gracious entertainment to my book, but also with their courteous approbation
and candid censure to think well of my labors. Secondly, that my vnparalled
friend, that voluble linguist and sound Scholar M. Laurence Whitaker, who (I
think) does as far excel in learning my antagonist the Author of the
Nouerinti vniuersi, as a rose does a nettle in sweetness, or a Pearl a
Pebble-stone in price, has vouchsafed to confirm the authority of my book
(having yielded me that favorable and patient attention to hear me read over
the whole before it came to the Press) with his no less learning then elegant
Elogie that preceedeth my own Observations. But to conclude this matter of my
malicious enemy, against the violent stroke of whose base wrongs my
innocence and integrity will like a brazen wall defend me, I wish the same of
them that an ancient Poet did of the bitter Poet Archi lochus; Vtque repertori
nocuit pugnacis Iambi,
Sic sit in exitium lingua proterua tuum.


FINIS.

