THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN BY ANE HONORABLE GENTLEman servand to his
HIGHNESS, To a LORD of His Maties Privy Counsale in both Kingdoms, From
Madrid, the 5 of Apryle stilo veteri 1623.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by THOMAS FINLASON, His M. Printer. 1623.

MY LORD.
GO where I will, I can no moir flee from your kyndnesse then my own shadow.
It has quickly over taken me in Spain, and from Spain I send you bak all
the thanks that ane honest heart can think.

For that We do here, that your L. may know it from a seeing witness, and
from you, all Scotland, though I have no Commission but the liberty of telling
truth. The Prince came through France, and to this Court Post, without a fall
or any other harm; Went into the french Kings Cabinet and saw him, the Queen,
and Monsieur and Madame, and the Queen Mother and most of the Court, without
being known of any, and so come hither to this Court the first advertiser,
and was in the Ambassadors house before he could believe it.

What acts of a strong and able man he did by the way, is a Story not to be
matched, and behaves himself so weel here as cannot be told; (...) And when
it shall please GOD he comes home in safety, will deserve to be received by
all his Fathers Subjects lyk a blessing sent from heaven. For there was never
in any Prince of his Race, more Religion, understanding and good Nature,
honesty and Activenesse, the LORD croune all with his long life, and then is
Our Isle happy.

He was received with all the honor that could be done to any mortal man.
The King made him ane Entry as great as he had been Emperor. Gives him
always the place, and the right hand; And has him Judged in his Palace, as
he were at Saint James. For though it was in their Lent. when they exercise
the sttraitest manner of the Catholic Religion, He and His, had more
liberty than they would use; There was never any, (not of the Roman
religion) Judged in the Palace before. The King and all his Court studying how
to devise pleasure for Him, opponed the order of the Pragmatique, which did
forebid all braverie especially in Lent. Resigning all Donations and Regal
power to Him; Commanded all the Presidents and Judges and Governors to take
their direction from Him, all requeistes presented to Him. What He would do
was done, though in His wisdom He would do nothing but by the Kings
Ministers, and their Customs; All Prisons opened, all prisoners set at
liberty, and they that were in for debt, the King fred them, and paid the
debtes. In a word all was done, and is doing every day, that could show how
sensible the King is of the honor He had done of so trusting His Person in
his Majesty's hands. For the business, it must go on according to the pace,
that their duty to Sea of Rome, will permit, but for their own affection
they are desirous of the Match as we can wish them. The King and his Brother
use Him as He were their Fathers Son, and as their eldest Brother.

The Jnfanta is a Lady to please any Eye, if She were but a mean
Gentlewoman, comely and well favored, of stature: tale as most Women here,
and in any Country; Healthful and likely to be a Child-bearer; Better
favored than any either Picture or report made Her; And as Her Sister is in
France, the handsomest Woman of the Court, so is the Jufanta MARIA in this, (so
is She named.) And for goodness, God only knows the heart; But for good
report, no Woman under Heaven has a better; And for breading none so good,
saving in that which we are not to consider now, but leave it to God; Religon,
wherein She is so deuote and charitable, that I pray GOD these of our opinion
may imitate Her. You may think that I am so turned Spanish, that I am only
set to praise, in conscience I speak within compass, and am just the man
without corruption, you ever took me to be, and by the grace of God, shall
so cume home, and so die. But I write this for your information and
satisfaction of such of my Friends, as your L. pleases to impart it to, from
on they have no cause to distrust. Tell it to whom you will, and give me for
Author; And let me entreat them all to thank God, that since our Masters
Marriage was confyned in so narrow a circle, so few to choose of His equales,
that He is likely to have one that there is so much good in by all appearance,
both of outside and inside; And let us all join in hearty prayer, that we
be not deceived; but that God may bless all to His Glory to the well of His
Church, and of our Master and His Subjects. And if your L. would know further
to judge Her by her Parents, the King Her Father was a sincere good man, and
for Her Mother She was the matchlessest Princess of Her time, especially for
wisdom, goodnesie, and health, She died in Childbirth; And all Her children
be full and strong. The King is taler than Our Prince, strong and nervouse
well favored, and well spoken, and likely to b^^e a brave active King.

Don Carlos is a little browner complectioned, but a lusty wise-like young
Prince; And the Cardinal Don Fernando the youngest is the finest, quickest,
louliest Youth that can be seen if He had nothing to recommend him but His
hap and godliness. Now let God do what He will, those be good tokens. The
Prince keeps His health strongly, and if God, put end to all before the
heates come on, this journey will turn to joye to us all; And praise to the
breast it bred in, and all the actors, which that it may be, God grant if it
be his blessed will, And so I end for a long tim^, and if it be till I come to
England, you will not blame me after all this.

Your L. most loving Servant.
Madrid, the 5. of April. 1623. If your L. had seen with what a brave manner
His Highness acquit Himself, the first time He saw His Mistrisse, it would
have done your heart good. The famousest Courtier or Woer in France would not
have acted it more galla^tly. He never did any thing so well, not run at Tilt.
in which He is Master.




