

AN APOLOGY FOR SUNDRY PROCEEDINGS by Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, of late
times by some challenged, and also diversely by them impugned.

By which Apology (in their several due places) all the Reasons and
Allegations set down as well in a Treatise, as in certain Notes (that go
from hand to hand) both against proceeding ex Officio, and against Oaths
ministered to parties in causes criminal; are also examined and answered:

Upon that occasion lately reuiewed, and much enlarged above the first private
project, and now published, being divided into three parts: the first part
whereof chiefly shows what matters be incident to Ecclesiastical conisance;
and so allowed by Statutes and Common law: the second treats (for the most
part) of the two ways of proceeding in causes Criminal, viz. by way of
Accusation, and ex officio Iudicis: the third concerns Oaths in general, but
more specially the lawfulness of such as be ministered touching supposed
offenses, either of themselves that swear, or of their brethren:

Respectiuelie submitted to the grave judgments of the reverend Judges and
other Sages of the Common law: of Judicious Professors of the Civil law: and
of the right reucrend Prelates and other grounded Divines in this Realm.

Whereunto (for the learneds sake, and for similitude of Argument and
Judgment) I have presumed to adioine that right excellent and sound
determination (concerning Oaths) which was made by M. LANCELOT ANDROVVES Doctor
in Divinity, in the common Divinity School of the University of Cambridge
in Iulie, An. 1591.

Lex, iustitiae; Iustitia, Reipub. basis.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER BARKER, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.

THE GENERAL Preface, containing the Occasion, and general distribution of
this Treatise following, before it was meant to make it public.
THE endeavors of such disturbers as have been the chiefest stays of a further
propagation of the Gospel, and the only stains of her Majesty's happy
reformation; have rested most, in advancing a new found discipline, and in
discrediting the present government Ecclesiastical, by their speeches and
writings. The later whereof they have gone about; as well by impugning the
callings and form of government Ecclesiastical, (as if they were contrary to
Gods word) as also by defacing the persons of the Governors, with unchristian
gibes, contumelies, and other indignities.

But these succeeding not to their wish, nor sorting to that effect they
purposed; sundry of the^ have entered into, and pursued a more politic course.
for by themselves and others (more simple) excited cunningly by them, they
challenge diverse received proceedings in Courts Ecclesiastical, not to be
justifiable by law: pretending now their especial grief to rest herein; for
that they are dealt with and oppressed contrary to law, even as if they did
carry a principal and zealous care to have all her Majesty's laws duly
observed.

By whose frequent clamours, some very grave, wise and learned (no way affected
to their other fancies) either not being well informed of proceedings
Ecclesiastical, or not weying (for want of leisure) certain points seeming to
be doubtfully reported in the books of Common law, so thoroughly as their
great learning therein does afford: in a kind of commiseration (for so I
interpret it) toward some of those who seem distressed, and to be otherwise
well meaning men; have lately called into question diverse proceedings
Ecclesiastical, both for matter, and for circumstance or manner; that they are
contrary to the laws of this Realm.

Yet all of them do not iumpe in the self same opinions hereafter touched.
For they are severally holden by several men; the most whereof, are stood in
by men of meanest place and reckoning in that study; and such as are known to
be overmuch addicted to factious innouations. But all the chalenges whatsoever
(for contrariety unto the laws of the realm only, so far forth as they
are hitherto commen to knowledge) may fitly be reduced into this order and
sum. They tend to the chalenging of proceedings Ecclesiastical, done either
by those who proceed by her Majesty's immediate Commission, who are either
Judges delegates (dealing in matters only betwixt party and party brought
before them by appellation) or Commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical (serving
especially for punishing of crimes and offenses) or else such as be executed by
those, who deal in ordinary jurisdiction.

The exceptions that touch the very matter and object of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, do in very deed by necessary consequence tend, either to the
whole taking away of the Ordinary jurisdiction (as where it is affirmed, that
no Canon, constitution, nor ordinance provincial whatsoever, may now be put in
ure, without her Majesty's express assent first had to execute the same:) or
else do reach to the taking of it away but in part.

Those opinions that tend to the abridging of it but in some part; do go
about it partly by way of excluding Ecclesiastical Judges, from the handling
of certain matters; (as by holding, that none Ordinary may cite any
whomesoeuer, but in causes Testamentarie and Matrimonial: and that no Lay man
ought to be cited or summoned to appear before any Judge Ecclesiastical, to
take an oath in any other cause, then Testamentarie or Matrimonial:) And
partly by deriuing them from the conisance Ecclesiastical unto other Courts:
(as that the judgment of heresy now lies rather in the Common law, then in
the law Ecclesiastical:) and some other of them (being defended by the same
men that hold the next precedent opinion) do tend both to the excluding of
Courts Ecclesiastical, and to the diuerting of such causes another way, as
that nothing now can be adjudged heresy, but according to the statute, 1.
Eliz. cap. 1.

As for the exceptions (pretended to be taken from the laws of the Realm)
against the circumstances, or manner of proceeding in courts Ecclesiastical,
they do either concern such points as go before, and are preparatories to the
suite (and such is this: that, the Queens Majesty cannot give, nor any man
receive authority, to use any other process in matters Ecclesiastical, then
by citation:) Or do touch the manner of entering into the suite, as that an
Ecclesiastical Court may not proceed without accusation or presentment, and
that Lay men may not be cited ex officio, in any cause but Testamentarie or
Matrimonial: Or they concern the manner of handling, and proceeding in the
suite, as that, If a matter be duly presented against a man, he may not be
examined upon his oath: whereunto some (belike meaning to qualify and
distinguish it) do add this, viz. in a matter of incontinencie or such cause:
and that, no man is bound to declare any matter against another, except some be
an accuser: Or do concern the sentence or judgment of the Court
Ecclesiastical, as that by none Ecclesiastical authority, a man may be
deprived of his benefice being his freeholde, being not endited, and no suite
of party offered against him: Or else do touch the execution of the judgment:
as that the Q. Majesty cannot give, nor any man may take authority of her, to
use any coertion for any matter Ecclesiastical, but exco^munications and such
like: and that therefore a man may not be punished by imprisonment or fine, for
or in any matter Ecclesiastical: and lastly, that a man that stands above
forty days excommunicate, may no way be punished, but upon the writ De
excommunicato capiendo: and that the said writ may not be awarded, but upon
original cause arising upon some of the ten crimes touched in the stat. 5. El.
c. 23.

But others that be indeed professed dealers for an innovation in the Church
(when they are conuented before authority) not only do most greedily take hold
of these exceptions pretended to be taken from the Common law against
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical; but do allege also sundry others, yet pretending
to ground themselves for both, not alonely upon the laws of the realm (as
those do, of whom we hitherto have spoken) but upon Gods law also, the Civil,
the Canon, or Ecclesiastical law, and upon equity and reason. Not because
they were persuaded by the pregnancy of any of these so to think, but having
embarked themselves in that common quarrel, viz. to impugn the government
Ecclesiastical of this Realm, in all things to their utmost: have first (as
is probable) entered into the opinions; and after have sought some color to
vernish them over with, wheresoever they could hit of it. Which their
exceptions peculiarly framed by the professed Innouatours, and their own
proofs both for them, and for these also before recited, (which were put into
their heads by some Lawyers) shall (God willing) then be distributed and laid
forth, when we come to the handling of them, because other parts of this
Treatise are more apt for that purpose, then this general Preface.

These opinions of late ringing sundry times in mine ears, and seeming to me
to be diversely mistaken; I called to memory (so nere as I could) what, and
where I had read any thing touching them. Whereupon turning some books, and
confusedly noting what I found, I was more and more confirmed in my former
conceits, sufficient for mine own persuasion.

Now because you pretend not to have traveled in these kind of questions, and
have so earnestly importuned me to take some pains therein: I have bin content
for your own only private reading and satisfaction, to plot my simple
conceits into this order as you see. For owing very much unto you, and
therefore not daring to deny you so small a matter, I have (with ye little
leisure I could get) hazarded rather to have want of judgment in me, then
lack of good will, by you to be censured. Meaning in the first part of this
Treatise to pursue the particular order here above comprised: saving that
those four recited opinions which touch the circumstances of entering into a
suite Ecclesiastical, and the manner of proceeding in it, I shall be forced
(contrary to the natural method) to put after all the others, as requiring
several handling, and falling more fit in the second and third parts of this
Treatise.



An Epistle to the Reader, containing the occasion of the publication of this
Apology, with a general delineation of two Treatises written against the
scope of some part of the same.
Upon occasion touched in the Preface going before (gentle Reader) I was about
a year and three quarters since, drawn to set down this simple Apologeticall
discourse ensuing, albeit in very many places thereof now enlarged. Which
Treatise (by him to whom it was addressed) being then imparted unto certain
others of honor and quality, it is said, that they were also desirous to
have copies thereof, for some considerations to themselves best known.

The book was somewhat long, and had many quotations, so that it could not
conveniently in any short time be written out truly and fair, for so many as
seemed earnestly to request it. Hereupon it was then (in private sort)
committed to the press, and forty copies, or there abouts were printed,
without any purpose of further publishing.

It appears now, that near about the same time, certain Doctors of the
Civil law (required thereunto by some in authority) did agree upon a brief
schedule, containing some grounds of ministering an oath of office in crimes
punishable by Ordinaries, and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: a matter referred
but to private consideration, and desired for like satisfaction only.

This small schedule was after delivered forth (by some to whose hands it
came; as the report went) to be confuted by certain Divines and Ciuilians of
either University, and by certain professing the Common law.

Sure it is, that within four months after, a Treatise (said to be penned
against the purport and drift of that schedule) by sundry (holden wise, and not
unlearned, to whose sight the written copies thereof were credited) was most
highly commended, and extolled.

It seemed so precious, that copies thereof (though desired) were made very
rare: and not vouchsafed to the vulgar and meaner sort, but kept tanquam
Cereris mysteria. So that almost a year (after knowledge of it had,) did
pass; ere it happened to come to my poor hands: and that was by the means
of a right noble Counselor, who had also much adoc, to procure a copy
thereof for himself.

That which came to my hands does carry this title, viz. A brief Treatise of
Oaths, exacted by Ordinaries and Ecclesiastical Judges, to answer generally
to all such Articles or interrogatories, as pleases them to propound: and of
their forced and constreyned oaths ex officio: wherein is proved, that the
same are unlawful.

I was glad of this opportunity offered; for I hoped to be instructed in some
important point, that I had not before considered of: and either to be aright
persuaded (whereof I am most desirous) if I had mistaken; or else be confirmed
in my former opinion. For there was reason I should so be, if in a book drawn
with so great advise, by men of such rare skill and dexterity, and so well
digested, I should not find demonstratiue arguments, even to press mine
assent against the course (as I took it) of the laws both Civil and
Ecclesiastical; against the practice of all the other states of Christendom;
and against apparent approbation thereof by Gods book it self.

But when I had first cursorily run that Treatise over; I must confess, I
was partly drawn into cogitation, that I had not hitte upon the right book:
because such is either my dullness or prejudice (for I do assure you, I will
not be opiniatiue against that which I may discern to be well grounded reason,
or sound authority) that I stand yet as resolutely persuaded as before, this
piece of work notwithstanding.

And albeit I wanted both fit occasion, and judged it also (for the reasons
hereafter touched) not worth the while to say any thing to the vnconcludency
and imperfections, which I conceived to be in that Treatise; yet was I
nevertheless (not long since) moved, by those who may command me, to take
some time to answer it. Being signified withal from them unto me, that it was
otherwise fully meant, to put mine aforesaid raw discourse of these matters
(even as it was) unto print again, to be made public.

Whereupon, knowing this resolution, and that (...) might perhaps be (...); I
condescended to assaye, whether I could as it were lick over my discourse
again, into any more tolerable fashion: not omitting withal, to answer the
whole matter of the aforesaid Treatise seeming to me any way pertinent; yet not
in the same order as it is there set down, but in several places of my book,
as it falls in most aptly, after the method, into which I had first plotted
it.

Of which whole Treatise, I trust I may (without offense) give you a general
taste, by this Epistle. Truly I neither do know, nor have heard, who were
any of the Authors, or who was the Enditer of it. If therefore it should happen
that I did use some measure (though far scanted) of that liberty of speech,
which is vppe-mette, pressed down, and running over in the Treatisour, against
many in place, (I doubt not) his betters, and of as great worth and
sufficiency as himself every way; I hope that I shall not (justly) be noted,
to be carried with sharpness of humor against any particular person; but to
have been provoked unto a moderate, necessary, and general defense. Albeit I
purpose rather to way, what is fit for us to speak, then for him to hear.

Unto the whole matter of the Treatise, these three several points might have
sufficed for a general answer. The first is, that the state of the
controversy, or issue, is by him mistaken: the second concerns his
arguments; for he assumeth that as granted, which is not; which in the
schools is called, a fallacy petitionis principij: the last and third, is his
sophistical answering, even to such objections as him self frames. For the
first therefore; ye are to understand, that in the Treatise it self, this
seems to be the general issue by him tendered, against which he would argue:
viz. the forcing of oaths by Ordinaries and Judges Ecclesiastical, generally
to answer to all such questions or interrogatories, as they shall demand or
minister, touching either the thoughts, words, or deeds of him, that is to
depose. Unto which in the title is also added another challenge, for that they
are ministered of office, by the Judges. So that he conceiueth erroniously all
proceeding of office to be only in causes Criminal; and in this respect alone
worthy to be challenged, because it is done by the Judge, without prosecution
of a party.

Now if he do reason (as he pretends) against some matter practiced by
Judges and laws Ecclesiastical in this Realm; then by charging them with
exacting of oaths, for men generally to answer unto all their thoughts,
words, and deeds, that they shall be enquired of, that I speak but mildely;
it is a very untrue, and slanderous imputation, both to the men, and to the
Law it self. If it were mistaken by him through ignorance, yet was it over
great rashness, thus to speak evil of such as be in Iudae ep. V. 8. and 9.
authority, especially for matters he perfectly knows not. But if it were
wilfully done, then must I needs say, that he perverted and wrested the matter
in controversy of set purpose, to make the men and whole calling odious; and
thereby to give the better tang (in some men's tastes) unto those Cart-loads of
contumelies, and spiteful The Latins call this calumniam, the Grecians, (...).
reproaches, wherewith throughout the whole Treatise, it pleases him to charge
both them, and their proceedings; as (in part) shall by and by appear.

For the second point of the three: he first defines an oathe: then he
says it is a part of Gods worship: he tells the end and institution of
oaths by Gods Law: and that they are either private or public: he shows
the necessity of it in some private suites: and what things are to be observed
by him that takes it, and what by the Magistrate, that gives it: likewise he
sets down (yet but in part) certain cases, how an oathe is used in some
Temporal Courts; and how it ought to be used (as he says) by the Canon Law.
All which, I will not greatly now trauerse with him. But hereupon he
infers, that the oaths ex Officio used in Ecclesiastical Courts, are
against Gods Law, Common Law, and the Canon Law it self.

So that if he mind to reason out of those premises, it must needs be
gathered for him to this effect, viz.

In the Law of God, in the Common and Canon Laws, we find oaths thus and
thus prescribed, and used:

But the oaths ministered in Courts Ecclesiastical touching matters Criminal,
are contrary to this prescription and use: Ergo. They are contrary to those
three Laws.

I will omit that this reason concludes not necessarily, being ex meris
particularibus: because it might be, that though sundry oaths by those three
Laws were in deed of such form; nevertheless other there may be also far
different; and yet both sorts allowable.

But for answer I say, that the Assumption, or second proposition (which must
be understood) is by the Treatiser not once mentioned, much less undertaken
to be proved, but is taken up by him as granted, which in truth is flatly by
us denied. For it shall be proved (God willing) that there is no such
contrariety as is by him surmised, no nor great diversity betwixt the oaths
there ministered, and those, which Scripture mentions, or Common Law
practices.

Now touching the last point of the three: He makes it as a sufficient
answer unto objections that may be made, for assertion of such oaths as he
impugneth: if he can but note any difference betwixt the things resembled
together: though such diversity be not in the point, for which the comparison
is made: no, nor in any other point, that is material. As for example. If a
man affirm, that Christ's second coming may be compared to the coming of a
thief in the night, meaning for the secrecy thereof, and want of expectation;
should he well confute this comparison, that would thus say: No Sir, that is
untrue, for there is a great diversity betwixt their commings: because Christ
comes to deal justly, but a thief to do unjustly? But to come nearer home:
If I did argue thus, viz. The received use of the Star Chamber to deny men
counsel, when they answer to Interrogatories, is not against the Rules of
Justice; therefore no cause is there, why the like approved use in the
Chauncerie, should be counted against Justice: I pray ye, should he reason
soundly against it, that would answer it in this sort: Oh Sir, there is a
great diversity betwixt those two Courts: for the one proceeds Criminallie,
to inflict penalties for the Queen, the other but Ciuillie for private amends
in equity, unto the party? Or if he should answer thus: The Lords of the
Counsel be Judges in the one, but not so in the other? Considering, that in
all things (being not the same) there is diversity; and yet a reason of
comparison is concludent; if there be no difference in the point, for which it
is brought.

If then the whole substance of that Treatise shall be found upon discussing,
to labor of some of those three infirmities; so that (as himself affirms in
the winding up of all) he might truly say he has used but few proofs: I
could therefore have wished, that he had not showed himself as Suffenus
sibiipsi, by setting the Garland upon his own head, before the victory; where
he tells us, that albeit his proofs by him brought be few, yet (says he)
they are effectual. And thus much for the matter of that Treatise.

Now let us here also consider the manner of penning, and the brief of the rest
of his unnecessary words, which are wholly besides the matter. For the
enditing, surely I do esteem it (for my part) to be a very commendable,
easy, and flowing (if not ouerflowing) style. Yet if I may be pardoned to
speak freely, that which I think, truly it runs altogether upon an
haughty, comptrolling, contemptuous, disdainefull, and salt mineral vein,
as may appear by a taste of some particulars, not unfit to be opened; which
for order sake, I will contriue into these five several heads: viz. 1. Of his
discourteous and opprobrious terms used against sundry particular persons and
callings: 2. His covert reproching and wounding of all Ecclesiastical Judges
through the sides of Papists, for their raging against Subjects, and treachery
to their Sovereigns, in former times: 3. His reuiling the proceedings
Ecclesiastical, which he there impugneth: 4. His untrue imputations and
slander of these proceedings: And lastly, the pretended impieties supposed
thereby to be committed, with the dangers and penalties, that he charge all
such to have incurred, which have been dealers in such practice of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

For the first of these: as where he terms all that practice that part of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction (whether Ordinaries or Commissioners) by the names
of Inquisitors, rough and rigorous exactors, and offensive butchers: Charge
them to cloak and shadow foul matters under glorious and painted glosses,
beautiful shows, and fained pretenses: that of their Judicial Courts and
Consistories, this saying of the Poet is verified, viz.

Victa iacet pietas, and tergo caede madentes

Vltima coelestum terras Astraea reliquit: As if they had there murdered or
unlawfully put some to death.

Where he also says, that Ordinaries challenge or assume to themselves the
goodly name and title of Spiritual men: that they are men to whom the savor
of gain is sweet, and therefore says of them, Auro loquente tacendum est.

Those Doctors also which by commandment do (as before) seek to justify the
course that he oppugneth, he calls (through contempt) English Doctors: a
term usually sastened but upon such, as bear the name of learned, and yet
besides English (their mother tongue) perhaps understand none other language
at all: yet the meanest of such Doctors can tell, that a Publican differs
from a Collectour, and that regula Iuris signifies not an example or
precedent, at both which he stumbleth. He pleasantly also (like a Sennor
Soldado) sorteth nine of them by ranks, into more then two quaternions, as the
soldiers which kept S. Peter were sorted: as if through their baseness, a
quaternion of them were not worthy to be laid in balance with a mess of
such as himself is; or as though in a brave resolution of his own single
valor, he valued them by dozzens together, and durst encounter them all at
once, like as the single Spaniard does, with so many naked and contemptible
Barbarians.

He terms them also (in scorn) Learned Canonists: as if he would insinuate,
that the little skill they have, were in the Canon law only, which he names
the Popes Testament: and as if their degrees of schools were taken in that
profession. Whereas it is well known, that their profession and degree, is in
the Civil laws: a law being (for the equity and wisdom thereof) by the
space of sundry quaternions of hundreths of years, the common law of all the
Civil nations of the world save one. What he esteems of it, greatly skilleth
not, but Tullie, a man more wise then he, does give it exceeding great
commendations. And all the Christian world (saving ourselves) are not
destitute of reason, for well esteeming and practicing of it. For the course of
those Doctors education, it has been in the liberal sciences, in the
languages called learned, and perhaps in such of the vulgar also, as be of any
commendable note, and in other sorts of good learning. Wherein if they have
accordingly profited, their employment (happily) may be many ways (thereby)
as behoofefull to the service of their Country, as that which some call
learning, is beneficial and gainefull to themselves.

Likewise the poor Apparitors that serve in Ecclesiastical Courts, he
calls them, their hunting Spaniels, malepert Apparitours, Messengers and
Pursuiuants: men though in mean place, and but ministerial quality, yet as
necessary to be had in those Courts, as Errand-bailifs be for Temporal.

To come to the second; may it be denied, that the matters wherewith he
reprocheth the Popish prelates, of former times, are bent per obliquum, through
their sides to wound all the Reverend fathers, and others now living? who (for
proceeding of Office against some of his darlings) are fallen as deeply into
his indignation. For have these sharp biting terms been bestowed upon any of
their late Predecessors, or upon them, till of late years, that certain
disordered persons joining (though in other respects) with the Papists, to
oppugn this Church, have been dealt with in the same course, that Papists are,
and were from the beginning of her Majesty's reign, before these other sprung
up? If this were not his meaning, for what end is almost half his Treatise
spent by way of Inuectiue against the Popish Prelates? So that (no doubt) he
meant to lay upon the present Judges Ecclesiastical the reproaches of them,
whose steps he charge them to follow, in that this course of proceeding
was (if we may trust him upon his bare word) brought in by the practice of
the Popish Clergy: And therefore he says, that Bishops now practice
Antichristian decrees, and Popish Canons, the very heads of that Hellish
Cerberus of Rome, and the synewes of his tyrannical authority: For else this
were but running of riot, and vain barking against the Moon.

Of this sort are those his other speeches also, viz. that the Papisticall
Clergy most irreligiously practiced the same: that they finding it a fit
instrument to maintain their Romish Hierarchy, and to tyrannize over the
consciences of good men, most impiously violating the laws both of God and
man, imposed this manner of corrupt oath upon the people: that they were far
more cruel then Claudius or Caligula: mad men, greedy and devouring Wolves:
that they fed (with delight) their fierce and cruel minds: that they
tyrannized in cruel manner: that they forced men with rough and rigorous terms
of disgrace and reproach: that they were merciless magistrates using sudden and
raging committance: that they promised in verbo sacerdotali, if that be ought
worth: and he calls them unbridled Clergy men, Pharisaicall Clergy men,
unjust and lawless men, with their bad practices and fond intentions:
merciless Ordinaries, with their extraordinary and lawless power: their
actions cruel and accursed dealings of Barbarous bloody bishops, murtherous
minds and intolerable iniquity of bishops, using a Barbarous course of
inquisition. He inueigheth also at large, against their hypocrisy and feined
holiness: against their temporal possessions, as the nurses of pride,
presumption, and vain pomp of the world. Truly if this kind of mislikers,
had that little of temporalties which is still left, how humble they would be
may justly be doubted: but I durst undertake for them, that they will use no
great pomp in hospitality, nor in any thing else, saving in words. Likewise
against their ambition: for he affirms, that three Archb. enforced above the
kings of the land: against usurping and encroching upon the kings jurisdiction
by Popish prelates, to bring causes to their costly and lingering consistories:
against bringing in (by them) of foreign decrees, corrupt canons, and
ceremonies of the accursed See of Rome: against their claiming of exemption
from taxes imposed by any other whomsoever, then by the Popes authority: and
against certain clergy men, that (in former times) opposed themselves (with
great obstinacy) against the payment of a subsidy: as if lay men had not done
(rebelliously) as much, as these did obstinately: Against haughty Hugh bishop
of Lincoln, who (he says) as a lusty champion of that irregular confederacy
drew out his wooden dagger of excommunication, against the kings Judges:
against a bishop of Winchester, who was outlawed for a wilful murder, and a
while refused the judgment of the kings law: against the Popes collectour who
conuented the vicar of Saltash before himself, for breach of an oath given for
strength of a bond: against the Hospitallers and Templers, who drew the kings
subjects into suite, before the conseruatour of their privileges: And against
the proud prelate cardinal Woolseys court legatine; and both his and Nixe the
blind bishop of Norwich his falling into praemunire, for encroching upon the
kings jurisdiction: Adding also a sly surmise of some other things (in the
times of Popery) to have been used, which he does but vainly imagine, to be
now practiced by Commissioners Ecclesiastical. So that by this trick of
cunning conueyance, he would induce and draw on his affectionate readers to
believe, the same to be now in all bishops present, which was blame worthy in
any of their predecessors. For his favorers may not judge that such a man as
he, would wander so far wide (as he does) from his purpose: belike if these
now do but any one action (though never so justifiable) which the Papists have
done in times past, they shall carry all the co^tumelies, which they (in any
other respects) have either worthily, or unworthily deserved. Whether this be a
direct Christian course, every one that is in any place of justice shall most
sincerely discern; which will but consider with himself, how unequal he
would judge it to be, to have his own honesty, discretion, loialtie, and
religion measured and esteemed of, according to the actions of the worst men
that ever before occupied the same place that he now does.

Unto the third point (which is reuiling of proceedings Ecclesiastical (in
this behalf) all such speeches of his, as these following do appertain: of
the whole Canon law indistinctlie and generally he speaks thus: that they be
laws and ordinances contumelious against God, injurious to Magistrates, and
especially established to maintain Antichristian tyranny: Of an Oath of
purgation, or an oath ministered to answer (in some cases) unto Articles and
interrogatories criminal, he says, It is against law and reason; an
intolerable error and disorder: a foul and great abuse: hard and unjust
dealing: indiscreet, unjust, and unlawful forcing: offensive proceeding:
usurped officious power, and licentious pleasure, contrary to all due course
of Justice: a violent course of injurious inquisition, examination, and of
wrested oaths: a lawless proceeding which the Justice of the land detesteth:
that they be unjust oaths, and full of iniquity: strange oaths and strong
purgations, not healthful but hurtful: poisoning purgations, given for
preservatives: Catholic oaths: a vicious and lawless inquisition: and
lastly, a profane, and more then heathenish Inquisition.

The fourth point concerns his untrue and slanderous accusations of their
proceedings, who be Judges Ecclesiastical: as where he says, that such
general oaths (viz. as before has been touched, when I spoke of the issue
mistaken) are exacted, none accusation, suite, lawful information, presentment
or indictment iudiciallie preceding: that the Ecclesiastical Commissioners,
term themselves high and supreme Commissioners: that it is exacted by every
ecclesiastical Judge to satisfy his jealous suspicion of any crime, to appose
by oath, and compel men to their purgation, or upon every bare surmise and
uncertain rumor: that by the like reason (unto the practice of this oath)
there should be erected a court of Inquisition, more then Spanish, to sift and
ransacke (by oath) most secret thoughts: That the Interrogatories used by
Ecclesiastical Judges are not certain, but do foolishly wander at the
doubtful will of a sly and subtle apposer: that having snared the silly
subject, they do either (against law) enforce him to accuse himself of his
most secret thoughts; or contrary to Christian charity, yea humanity,
constrain him to answer against his natural parents, etc. And that in
defense of these abuses, diverse even of the learned sort, do great violence
to the Statute, 1. Eliz. cap. 1. wresting the same to a wrong sense: all which
are very calumnious accusations.

The fifth and last point of his lavish and loose speeches; concerns the
impieties, dangers and penalties, wherewith he charge all that have dealt in
any such Ecclesiastical cause. As first, that it is a great and profane abuse
of the holy name and majesty of God: that Gods sacred institution is thereby
greatly perverted: that it is hurtful to the Church and common weal: that it
is a great indignity to the Crown: that they usurp conisance of pleas: that
they do no lesse-then Thorpe sometime chief Justice did, who (as much as in
him lay) broke the oath which the king is bound to keep toward the people:
that they are violaters of the king, and injurious dealers against his
Regalitie, Crown and kingdom: nay rather lay violent hands on him, impugn
his royal throne and scepter contrary to the policy, Justice, laws,
customs, and freedoms of this kingdom; yea contrary to the law of God it
self: that hereby they impugn the royal prerogatives united to the Crown,
with the breach of their own oaths; especially if they have taken the oath
for the maintenance of the supremacy royal, whereof he makes some doubt (as
it seems) and advises them of this danger, as a Scilicet.
welwiller: that it is plain extortion and wrong unto the party. And lastly,
that they are all offenders, and do incur the forfaiture of the penal laws
of Praemunire.

Seeing then his words of this matter be so big, his terms so biting, his
speeches so confident and peremptory, and his accusations so grievous: Is
there not (in defense of Justice and of so many good and great learned men in
several professions) great occasion offered to have it examined; whether the
force and weight of his reasons will bear out this copious harvest, and hot
raging fever of words, or whether these words were but used because matter
wanted? What weight and moment his reasons are of, is not of this place
particularly to discuss, but shall be reserved to the several parts of the
Discourse following. And I will not strive by bare words to return these
of-scowrings of a foul mouth and a defiled pen upon him again; further then
must needs cleave fast to himself, the Author of them: when they shall (by
reason) be wiped off from the persons charged, and so are to rebound back,
upon their first owner.

And to give you an inckling (in the mean time) that it is not otherwise like,
then to fall out so: It shall not be amiss, a little to consider how
gingerlie sometimes he treads in this matter: and how here and there
himself minceth and qualifieth the state of the controversy, as it were
waiuing his first issue; notwithstanding all those his former high looks and
brave terms. For first he grants, that diverse even of the learned sort, do
hold, and that very confidently, (meaning hereby as I take it, sundry
professors of the Common law) that these proceedings which he impugneth, are
warranted by the Statute, 1. Eliz. cap. 1. and can he (whosoever he be for a
man) showing no more, yet see more herein then so many of the learned sort can,
that be of an other judgment?

And though he exclaim (as ye have heard) mightily, that this kind of oath
is contrary, and a stranger to the laws, Justice, and policy of this Realm;
yet in the very closing up of his treatise, having said, that it was never put
in ure or use by any Civil magistrate of this land: by the strength of truth
is forced to add thereunto this exception: viz. but as it is corruptly crept
in amongst other abuses, by the sinister practices and pretenses of the Romish
prelates: thereby employing, that yet it has been used of long time by the
Civil policy and magistrates of this Realm: noting them withal, I know not
with what other abuses, as being ouerrought, which belike they also shall hear
of, as his leisure will permit him, if they please him not in the mean time
the better.

Likewise, going about to answer the objection that may be made, for
justifying of this oath by the like approved course in the Star Chamber: he
uses these words as a reason of his allowance of such proceeding there: viz.
The Star Chamber requires an answer to matter in fact, done either to the
injury of a private person, or hurt to the public State. Then (by like
reason) if Judges and Commissioners Ecclesiastical, shall but require this
oath to answer matter in fact (as in very truth they do none otherwise)
done to the hurt of the public State, then is the cause in controversy thus
far yielded up by him. But can he (in deed) think it reasonable and just, to
exact such oath for punishment of an injury done but to a private person in
his temporal goods, or such like: and shall it be in his judgment unjust and
unreasonable to be exacted for discovery and restraint of such enormities,
which cannot be denied to be prejudicial both to the state of the Church and
Common weal, wherein Judges Ecclesiastical most usually do practice it?
Vltra non desidero; habemus quasi confitentem reum.

In another place of the Treatise, he sharply inueieth, for that the
Commissioners Ecclesiastical, minister the oath before the party be permitted
to have the Articles. Now in his showing of differences betwixt the proceedings
by Commissioners ecclesiastical and the Star Chamber, one of them is this;
that the defendant there, has the copy of the bill of Information to answer
by his counsel, ere he take his oath for the truth of it: yet he
restrains it thus, viz. So the Information in the Star Chamber be not made
Oretenus: so that it must hereupon needs be yielded that at sometime, and upon
some occasion it may be: and therefore it is not simply unjust, to give the
oath before the defendant have a copy: nor for him to be debarred from
counsel, when he answers but interrogatories of his own fact or knowledge.
For (in deed) the defendant in the Star Chamber is not allowed counsel, when
he answers to Interrogatories, sorted into Articles, but only is allowed
counsel for the manner of framing of his answer to the Bill into due form of
law: the Counselor not aduising him in the matters of fact, least happily he
draw the defendant into perjury. For it were very unreasonable, that counsel
should direct him in the matter, and as it were to say unto him: answer not
this thus, though it be true; for then you are like to be grieuouslie punished.
Nay rather, as a writer in the Civil law advises: the counsel (even to the
bill of Information) ought to tell the defendant to this effect: Si hoc modo
respondeas, perdes quidem causam: sed si aliter quam veritas se habet, perdes
animam.

Furthermore, in one place where he reprehendeth forced and constrained oaths;
he limiteth his meaning by these words, viz. in that general manner: which is,
as before he had surmised: viz. to sift generally all a man's thoughts, words and
deeds, and that without any accusation, or complaint precedent: so that it is
not simply the urging of them to take oath in a criminal cause which grieves
him, or is to be condemned: but to do it in that general manner, for all
thoughts, words and deeds. If then no such matter be (in very truth) ever
practiced, the man (it seems) will easily be reconciled again unto them,
whom he so eagerly before snatched at, and took up.

Lastly, in one part of the Treatise he speaks in deed against oaths in
criminal causes: but it is with this taxatiue restraint: especially (says
he) in causes of life and death, contrary to the laws of this realm: so that
if it be not ministered in any cause of life and death, no, nor yet in any cause
of mutilation of limme (as in very truth it is not now by any court
ecclesiastical, a thing most notorious) then there is no cause of offense
given, either to the laws of the realm, or unto himself. And therefore for
this time the Treatiser, and those which exercise Jurisdiction ecclesiastical,
may seem (in some broken manner) to be grown again to a pretty kind of
pacification; hold as well, and as long as it shall.

But there is another party also, that perhaps will venture to rip up again
the seames of this green peace, if he may not (in some sort) be satisfied.
For there came unto mine hands a good while after the former Treatise,
certain brief Notes (without discourse) that are delivered abroad into many
hands by writing; being commended to be gathered by a man of great reading, and
judgment in Divinity, I awe, and in what not? It bears this title, Notes to
prove the proceeding ex Officio, and the oath and subscription which are now
required, to be against the word of God, the ancient Fathers, and Canons of the
Church, and the laws, liberties, and customs of the realm of England: the
proceeding of Office, and the oath required, though he tells not how he
conceiues it to be required, (as the Treatiser did) do both fall into this
disputation, which we have in hand. As for the subscription; (upon other
occasion) that may hereafter elsewhere be debated. The several points which
(in respect of the two former) he handles, are by himself distributed and
sorted into these several heads: viz. First, testimonies out of ancient
Fathers, that do mislike the proceeding ex Officio, and oath now used:
Secondly, English Martyrs that have refused and misliked the oath now used:
Thirdly, the proceeding against heretics in England, without exacting an oath
etc: Fourthlie, the Canon law teaching Inquisition and proceeding ex officio
by oath. Fifthly, another order of proceeding, but yet in causa fidei, and not
otherwise. Sixtlie, the bishops proceedings contrary. Seventhly, the laws of
England. Eightlie, the manner of the reuocation of the proceeding ex officio in
king Henry the 8. time. Ninthly, the manner of debating of that cause in those
days. 10. Sir Thomas Mores reasons for maintenance of proceeding ex Officio
and the oath, with summarie answers to them. 11. And lastly, Inconveniences
which come by the use ex Officio, contrary to the common law. For proof of
some of which (especially the first) he is so plentiful in quotation only of
places, (without rehearsing their sayings) out of the ancient Fathers,
counsels, etc. that for mine own part, I must confess that upon the first
view of their names in his moster book, I was greatly astonished, least I had
too resolutelie defended a matter against such an army of ancient Fathers, and
as it were against the general consent of the old Primitive Church; from
which I mean not (God willing) casilic or rashly to swerve. But when I had
approached nearer, I well discerned this my fear to be all in vain, in that
they had neither banner displaied, nor weapons bent against this cause, but
rather against the faces of the adversaries thereof: as may plainly appear
in the several and opportune places of this simple Discourse ensuing.

I may well resemble this dealing of the Note-gatherer unto young setters up in
London, as Apothecaries and such like, that be not at first well stored with
stuff: who to furnish up their shoppes unto the best show, are wont
oftentimes to embellish them with good numbers of painted gallie pots, boxes
and glasses, entitled on the outside (even with golden letters sometimes) of
such precious Waters, Oils, Simples, and other drugges of medicine, which they
never smelt of, because such never came within them. And perhaps I should save
him from suspicion of a greater fault, (that is either want of judgment, or of
wilful perverting of the ancient Fathers) if I should freely deliver my
conceit in this behalf: which is, that his leisure served him not, to look
what was indeed contained in those places, which there he quoteth: but that
he did set them down (upon trust) out of the Pies or Indices of the said
several books, wheresoever the bare words of Inquisition, of Accusing, of
Oath, or of Swearing was found. For I dare auowe, that he which shall read the^
in the Authors themselves, will judge, that many of them were gathered together
in condemnation of taking any oath at all, (an error holden by the
Anabaptists) albeit being truly understood according to the circumstances, the
places serve neither the one turn nor the other) rather then that by any
color, they may be wrested to speak either against oaths ministered in causes
criminal, or against proceeding by Judges of Office.

Let thus much therefore (if it be not too much) suffice, to have delivered in
some generality, touching the said Treatise and Notes. both which are
undertaken, for the whole substance of them, to be here and there answered, in
this simple discourse ensuing.

THE CONTENTS OF the several Chapters of the First part.
1 THat a several royal assent is not required to the executing of every
particular Canon. 2 The particular distribution of all other causes to be
proved to be of Ecclesiastical conusance, besides Testamentarie or
Matrimonial, with a discourse of bishops certificates against persons
excommunicated, being a special point of their voluntary jurisdiction, where
there is no party which prosecuteth. 3 That matters in the former chapter
adjoined to Testamentarie and Matrimonial causes (though properly they be not
of Testament or Matrimony) are of Ecclesiastical conusance, and how far. 4
General proofs out of statutes, that sundry other causes besides Testamentarie
or Matrimonial, are of Ecclesiastical conusance. 5 That suites for title of
Benefices upon voidance or spoliation: likewise that suites for tithes,
oblations, mortuaries, etc. for pensions, procurations, etc. are of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, is proved by statutes especially. 6 That suites
for right of tithes belong to the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and how far,
is showed out of the books and reports of the Common law: so of places of
burial and Churchyardes: and of pensions, mortuaries, oblations, etc. 7 Of
right to have a Curate: and of contributions to reparations, and to other
things required in Churches. 8 Proofs in general, that sundry crimes and
offenses are punishable by Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: and namely idolatry,
heresy, perjury, or laesio fidei, and how far the last of these is there to
be corrected: also of disturbance of divine service, or not frequenting of it,
and neglect of the Sacraments. 9 That Simony, Usury, defamation or slander,
beating of a Clerk, sacrilege, brawling or fighting in Church or Churchyard,
dilapidations or waste of an Ecclesiastical living, and all incontinency are
punishable by ecclesiastical authority, and how far. 10 That the matters and
crimes here reckoned, be also of ecclesiastical jurisdiction: and proofs that
any subjects, lay or other, may be cited in any cause ecclesiastical. 11 That
lay men may be cited and urged to take oaths in other causes, then
Testamentarie or Matrimonial. 12 The grounds of the two next former opinions
examined and confuted. 13 That judgment of heresy still remains (at the
Common law) in judges ecclesiastical: and that the prouiso touching heresy,
in the statute 1. Eliz. cap. 1. is only spoken of ecclesiastical
commissioners thereby authorized. 14 That by the statute, her Majesty may
commit authority, and they may take and use for ecclesiastical causes,
attachments, imprisonments, and fines. 15 That an ecclesiastical person may be
deprived of his benefice without enditement or prosecution of party. 16 That
after forty days, an excommunicate person may be otherwise punished then upon
the writ De excomm. capiendo; and that the said writ may and ought to be
awarded, upon contempts rising on other causes ecclesiastical then any of
those ten crimes that be mentioned in the stat. 5. Eliz. cap. 23. 17 Of a
prohibition, what it is: where it lies not, and where it does: and how it
cease by a consultation: and of the writ of Indicauit. 18 An analysis or
unfolding of the two special statutes touching Praemunire, with sundry
questions and doubts about that matter, requiring more grave resolution.


THE FIRST PART OF an Apology of certain proceedings in COURTS
ECCLESIASTICAL, wherein is chiefly showed what matters be incident to
Ecclesiastical conusance, and so allowed by Statutes, and Common law.
CHAP. I. That a several royal assent is not required to the executing of
every particular Canon.
IF no Canon or Constitution Ecclesiastiall might now be put in ure, but such
as her Majesty's express assent is first had unto; then do all their other
opinions against the ordinary jurisdiction ecclesiastical stand in no stead,
and might be spared; because this would serve to cut off all at once, which
they shoot at. For none that exercise ordinary jurisdiction have hitherto had
it in particularity (which by the oppugners seems to be meant) otherwise then
by permission of law, unto every of their proceedings. Neither in truth, for
the infinity of it, and troublesomnesse to procure such assent from her
Majesty, for every particular matter and dioecesse of this Realm (from time
to time) were it possible to be used. Now if Ordinartes (from whom either
mediately or immediately, appellations do lie unto her Majesty in the
Chancerie) by reason of the want of such particular assent, unto the execution
of every canon, shall (according to this conceit) have nothing to do; then
cannot the Queens delegates neither (to whom appellations from Ordinaries do
come) have any thing wherein to bestow their travel: and therefore this point
seems first of all meet to be cleared, and to be bestowed in the first rank.

The absurdity of this opinion (whosoever were the hatchers of it) will easily
show it self. For if matters testamentary and matrimonial (which all they
grant to be ecclesiastical) right of tithes, and sundry other causes (which
shall be also proved so to be) shall not, ne can not, by reason of this want,
be dispatched (as now they are) by ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and yet can
not be dealt in by any other authority, according to any law now in force:
then is there a maine imperfection in the policy of this Common weal, viz.
For men to have a right, and yet no likely or ready mean to come by it: and
for gross oftences to be committed (that are by law punishable) and yet no man
sufficiently authorized to execute such laws.

The judgment of whole Parliaments kept in several Kings and Queens reigns
(since that act, whereupon this fancy seems to be grounded) so many as have
had cause to speak of the jurisdiction ecclesiastical, do also fully
convince it. The 25. H. 8. ca. 19.
statute for delegates upon appellations, does argue, that Ordinaries might
(without further leave obtained, as in former times they did) execute their
jurisdiction ecclesiastical. For if there were to be no more ordinary
proceedings, till the king should give his assent to the execution of every
canon; for what use should appellations from the decrees and judgments of
Ordinaries, be there provided for? Likewise 27. H. 8. ca. 20. 32. H. 8. cap. 7.
two statutes were not long after provided in assistance of jurisdiction
ordinary, and for the better and speedier recovery of tithes in Courts
ecclesiastical, according to the course of the ecclesiastical laws in that
behalf. And the 34. and 35. H. 8. cap. 19.
like was also enacted for recovery of pensions, procurations etc. withholden.

In the time of K. Edward the sixth, in 1. Ed. 6. cap. 2.
a statute (since repealed by queen Marie) a great number of particular causes
of jurisdiction ecclesiastical, are there (by the way) rehearsed; that
Ordinaries and other ecclesiastical Judges might, and did then deal in.

In the time of queen Marie (before the supremacy was given unto the Pope)
the 1. Mar. cap. 3.
act for not disturbing of divine service or preaching, reserueth the
jurisdiction that Ordinaries then had, for punishment thereof, by laws
ecclesiastical, over and above the penalties (of new) thereby inflicted.

In the Queens Matesties 1. Eliz. cap. 2.
time that now is; by the act for uniformity of Common prayer, Ordinaries etc.
may enquire etc. and punish the violations of that act, by censures etc. as
heretofore has been used in like cases, by the Queens ecclesiastical laws.

The Statute De excom. capiendo, reckons 5. Eliz. ca. 23.
up (particularly) diverse Crimes and offenses Ecclesiastical; punishable by
that jurisdiction, which were hindered much from punishment that apperteined,
for want of due execution of that writ De excom. capiendo, and therefore
provides remedy therein. Which necessarily argues the continuance and
approbation of execution of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical by Ordinaries, without
further obteyning of leave.

By the statute against perjury (made at the same time) 5. Eliz. cap. 9.
it is provided, that it should not extend to Courts Ecclesiastical: but that
offenders in perjury, or subornation in a Court Ecclesiastical, shall and may
be punished by such usual and ordinary Laws, as heretofore have been, and yet
are used and frequented, in the said Ecclesiastical Courts: which proves
the usual practice of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical hitherto used (without any
special assent) to be lawful.

The statute against usury provides, 13. Eliz. cap. 4.
that such usury as is above ten pound in the hundred by year, shall (not
withstanding the other penalties there newly inflicted) be also punished and
corrected (as in times past) by the Laws Ecclesiastical. And by the 13. Eli.
cap. 10.
statute of dilapidations, the remedies that by the Laws Ecclesiastical were
(before) given against executors and administrators of incumbents; are there
extended also to donees and alienees; to be (by the same authority) dealt
with. In the which clauses of statutes, there is no repeal of any former
particular statute or Law, nor any general non obstante contained. And
therefore, if those Parliaments had been of this judgment; that no Canon might
now be put in ure, without the Royal assent first obtained, there would have
been added these, or some like words, viz. They the said Ordinaries first
obteining the royal assent for the putting in ure of such Canon, as they mind
in that cause to proceed by: that thereby (without all scruple of danger) their
proceedings (so appointed to them) might have been warranted. But being
altogether needelesse, it is no marvel though it were omitted. For can any man
doubt (if it were needful) but that there is a sufficient Royal assent had,
when as it is given to the whole act, before it can pass for a Law?

Lastly, the same statute out of 25. H. 8. ca. 19.
which (as I conjecture) this opinion was stirred up, does establish all Canons
which be not contrariant nor repugnant to the Laws, Statutes, and customs of
this Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the Kings prerogative Royal, that
they shall now still be used and executed as they were before the making of that
act, till they should be viewed etc. by the 32. persons, etc. which is not
hitherto done. But such were used before, without any express or particular
Royal assent (from time to time) obtained: and therefore may still be used
without any such new assent. For to exact it were (in very deed) to bring in a
quite disuse of all ordinary Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in stead of using
it: which hitherto (from planting of Christianity) and in all succeeding
times, has nevertheless been practiced.

This opinion, as an arrow shot unadvisedly at the Bishops, glanceth off them,
and wounds very deadly the favorers of the new Discipline (in whose behalf
it was framed.) for they are so far from taking express leave of the Prince,
to put every of their Constitutions ecclesiastical in ure, that they hold,
her Majesty has nothing to do to make or establish any Church-lawes. And the
clause for use of such former Canons and Constitutions synodall before
mentioned, as they were used before that time, will not help the exercise of
their synodicall co^stitutions made long after in a Conuenticle, called
together by their Moderators writ. But belike (when they set up) the statute of
submission of the Clergy shall be turned into a statute of submitting the
Princes scepter, to the rule of their Presbytery in all Church Matters.

The chiefest color and pretense 25. H. 8. ca. 19.
for this opinion, is taken (as I conjecture) out of the now revived statute
made in K. H. the eights time, of submission of the Clergy. But the words
thereof do plainly discover the weakness of such collection. for it is not
enacted simply, that they shall not put in ure, etc. any constitutions etc. but
according to their above said submission and petition, which was, that they
would not enacte nor put in ure any new Canons, etc. in their Convocation,
without the Kings royal assent and authority in that behalf. Otherwise there
were a flat contrariety in the self same Act, by reason of the last prouiso
thereof (next before repeated) where Canons already made (so they have the
qualities thereby limited) are appointed to be used. For it is there said,
shall be now still used and executed as they were before the making of that
Act. And where in 27. H. 8. c. 15.
the 27. year of the said King, the same submission and former Act is
repeated, there in the very body of the statute (touching not putting in ure of
Canons, etc.) the same modification (as before) is retained, viz. According to
the said submission and petition of the Clergy, which concerns only new
Canons. For of those that were then already made, the very self same prouiso
(as before is set down) appoints, that they shall still be used and
executed, as they were before the making of either of those Acts. Which was,
without any such express assent (as by this opinion is enforced) and is
therefore neither requisite, nor almost possible.

I have also heard some allege the 1. Eliz. ca. 1.
clause of the statute, made for uniting of all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to
the Crown; against the exercise of Jurisdiction by any Ordinaries: which (to
mine understanding) is a very simple collection. Belike they mean, that no
Jurisdiction is united to the Crown, but there must be a Commission under the
great Seal (to warrant the execution of it) unto him, that is to exercise it.
Then must every Steward of a Leete, every Constable, and sundry other
Officers be driven to procure like warrant for the execution of their Temporal
offices, for (I trust) it will not be denied by these men, but that all
Temporal authority and Jurisdiction, is by Law also united to the Crown.

In deed this reason would serve against either the one or the other
Jurisdiction, if they were not derived and claimed from the Crown, but from
some other authority immediately; as the Popish Clergy did theirs from God, by
the means and direction of the Pope. Yea even another 8. Eliz. ca. 3.
Parliament shows, how far this collection is from the mind of the makers
of that Law. For that very clause 1. Eliz. ca. 1. (together with her Majesty's
letters Patents, directed forth for confirming and consecrating Archbishops
and Bishops) is brought, in the Preamble thereof, as a strong proof without
scruple and ambiguitie, that the authorities and Jurisdictions by them
executed; be thereby given unto them, from her Majesty. And therefore this
opinion does remain destitute of any ground of Law.

CHAP. II. The particular distribution of all other causes to be proved to be
of Ecclesiastical conusance, besides Testamentarie or Matrimonial, with a
discourse of Bishops certificats against persons excommunicate, being a
special point of their voluntary Jurisdiction, where there is no party that
prosecuteth.
THe next opinion, viz. That by the laws of this Realm none Ordinary may cite
any whomsoever, but in causes Testamentarie or Matrimonial (though it draw
deep) yet it has not so large a reach, nor draws so great a compass as the
former. For this leaves some ordinary Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in these
two cases; where the other (upon the matter) sweepeth away all. But if this be
simply true, then the former must needs be false. For if (by Law) an
Ordinary, without more a do, may cite men in these two cases, then may some
Canon, etc. (by Law) be put in ure, without any further Royal assent to
execute the same.

But if it shall be proved true, that (by the Law of the land) in some causes
besides Testamentarie or Matrimonial, an Ordinary may cite: Then this
opinion, that in no causes besides Testamentary or Matrimonial, an Ordinary
may cite (being the contradictorie thereof) must needs (according to rule of
reason) be proved false. For it will not be denied by any, but in what cause
soever an Ordinary may lawfully deal, in that (if need be) he may use
citation. All matters done by Bishops (who only be immediate Ordinaries under
her Majesty) either belong to their order and degree, as ordeining of
Ministers or Deacons, confirmation of children, dedication of Churches or
Churchyards, etc; or to their Jurisdiction. Their Jurisdiction is of two sorts:
the first is voluntary, that is, when those whom they deal with, do not
stand against it: (and such for the most part, are Institutions, probate of
Wills, and committing of administrations, visitations, Certificats of Bishops
into the Q. Courts, ordeining of Real compositions in matters ecclesiastical,
etc.)

But something must here be said touching certificats of Bishops; because none
so fit a place hereafter does fall out, for this matter. A little Treatise set
out in the time of King Henry the eight, and printed by Berthelet, cum
priuilegio, (proving that by the laws of this Realm the B. of Rome had not,
ne ought ever to have had any supremacy here) does Cap. 1.
thus write of these certificates. If (says he) Excommunication, Bastardy,
Bigamie, Deposition, or Deraignement of a religious person, or Divorce, be
certified by a Bishop of this Realm, it is admitted in the Kings Courts; but
the Popes certificate is not admitted. And as certificates of Bishops be in
these cases admitted at the common law, so have sundry statutes since,
authorized their Certificates duly made into the Queens Courts, in certain
other cases.

Nevertheless, I find two cases in the said Treatise, where the Certificate
of a man's excommunication from a Bishop, shall not disable the party
excommunicated from his action: as regularly excommunication does when it is
duly certified.

For first, Ibidem ca 4.
if a Bishop be a party to a suite, and do excommunicate his adversary; such
excommunication (though it be certified) does not disable his adversary in his
action.

Secondly, Ibidem.
where an action of debt was brought by an executour, and an excommunication
under a Bishops seal was pleaded against such executour; this was adjudged no
good plea: because the executour was not to recover any thing to his own use:
and for this there is alleged 14. and 21. Hen. 6. But if this were the only
ground and reason of such judgment, then where this reason is not found true
in fact: as it may often happen, if the goods and chattels be great, the
debtes and legacies small, and where the executour has clausulam de residuis
by the will, viz. all the remnant of the goods and chattels bequeathed to him:
it would seem to me (under correction) that in such a different case, the
law also should be otherwise: because much comes to the executours own use
in particular.

This certificate of excommunication by Bishops of all the others is most in
use: and would be of more use, to the great commodity of her Majesty
(especially upon the statute de excom. capiendo) and to the terror of sundry
malefactors: were it not for the chargeablenes of that course unto Ordinaries
(whom the tenth man that is certified, does not satisfy again) and for the
manifold abuses about the execution of that writ, committed by under
officers: and were it not that, iura and libertates, the laws or rightes, and
liberties of holy Church, granted and confirmed by the great Charter, are not
so inuiolably in these days maintained; as was meant by 15. Ed. 3. ca. 3.
those acts of Parliament, which do exact oaths for observation and defense
of them.

It is a liberty peculiar to this Church of England, above all the Realms in
Christendom, that I read of: that if a man stand wilfully forty days
together excommunicate, and be accordingly Nota interlin. page Regist. 65. b.
certified by the Bishop into the Chauncery, that then he is to be committed to
prison, by virtue of a writ directed to the Sheriff. Notwithstanding, that in
one precedent (in the Register) of this writ, it Regist. in breu original. page
68. a.
is said; quod huiusmodi breue nostrum, de gratia nostra procedat.

For a note in the same book upon the same word (used in another writ) does
teach us; that such clause is but used, pro honor regio, etiamsiad id de iure
teneatur. And it appears by sundry old precedents of writtes there, that
the granting of this writ, is by law required: as where in a writ de
excommunicato capiendo Reg. in br. orig. page 65.
it is said: quod potestas regia sacrosanctae ecclesiae in suis querelis deesse
non debet. And in sundry other writtes of that kind, it is Ibid. and page 66.
a. and b. 68. a. and 69. b. and 65. b.
affirmed to be, secundum consuetudinem Angliae, which is the Common law of
this Realm. And therefore in other precedents of the same writ, the King
says Ibid. page 69. a.
thus: Nolumus quod libertas ecclesiastica, per nos vel ministros nostros
quoscumque aliqualiter violetur. And again, Ibidem.
Iura and libertates ecclesiasticas illaesa volentes in omnibus obseruari.

In these Certificates, the Bishops, and others, having in some cases
authority to certify (as the Chancellor of Oxford, the Custos
Spiritualitatis of a vacant See, and the Bishops Official, and vicar general,
ipso in remotis agente) that they make none error; must remember to observe
these three things. First, that it be Noua not. breu. page 64. f.
expressed therein, that the party against whom they do certify, is
excommunicated maiori excommunicatione: because for the lesser excommunication
(as happily for companying with an excommunicate person) a man shall not be
imprisoned. Secondly, that Ibidem.
it be certified, that he was by name and particularly so excommunicated; and
not in gross, in company of a multitude (as was often done in elder times) or
indefinitely and in generality, as when the BB. excommunicated all, whosoever
should violate any part of the great charter. For that excommunication (says
Fitzherbert in that place) must grow upon a special suite against a man
either ex officio, or by a party, whereupon a Significauit may be grounded.

Thirdly, Reg. in bre. orig. page 69. b. and notainterlin. page 65. b.
(if any inferior officer under the Bishop or his Archdeacon, did
excommunicate the party certified) yet must the Bishops Certificate run,
that it was done nostra autoritate ordinaria.

But that the expressing in the certificate of a particular cause of the
excommunication, is at the Common law (of necessity) required; I cannot
gather out of any place of the Register, or of Fitzherberts Natura Breuium.

It is true, that when the proceeding is upon any of the ten crimes mentioned
5. Eliz. ca. 23.
in the statute, made for that purpose; the particular original cause must be
expressed in the certificate.

Nevertheless, when the proceeding is upon any other crime of ecclesiastical
conisance, orin matters testamentary, matrimonial, or for tithes etc. whether
moved of office, or at the instance of the party; therethe Common law (as it
was before) is retained.

Now I find precedents of these writtes in the Register, wherein no
particular original cause, but only general be expressed; which, as in other
certificates of Bishops as touching bastardy, etc. the Court believes, without
further trauerse or examination. namely in sundry precedents of this kind of
writtes, is only contained, Reg. in br. orig. page 65. a. 66. a. 69. a.
that the party was excommunicated propter suam manifestam contumaciam: but
what was the cause original of his conuenting, out of which such contumacie
grew, is not at all declared; and yet the certificates were allowed to be good
in law.

Likewise in another precedent of the same writ, though some more
particularitie be found; yet is it left so generally, as the certain and
special cause cannot thereby be known unto the Court, to which it is
directed. For it is Ibid. page 65. b.
certified, that a party was excommunicated, propter suam manifestam
contumaciam, in non parendo certis mandatis licitis sibi factis: but what those
mandata were, is not touched.

And as these Certificates do only in generality mention the parties
contumacies, and disobediences: so is there also a precedent there, of crimes
themselves certified but in a generality, whereupon a writ of excommunica^o
capiendo, was nevertheless awarded. For it is Ibid. page 66. b.
testified that a Clerk excommunicated propter manifestas offensas suas, was
appointed to be attached, and thereupon imprisoned.

Notwithstanding this be a special right and liberty of this Church of
England; yet is not this writ de excommunicato capiendo always to go
forth, and upon every certificate whatsoever of a Bishop, or of other
thereunto authorized; albeit the certificate be contrived into never so due
form. For if he Reg. in breu. orig. page 67. b. and in breu. Iudic. page 39.
71. b. and 72. (...)s.
that did excommunicate, be himself for some supposed contempt to be attached
at the suite of the party certified: then shall the execution of the attaching
of the party excommunicated be respited, till the other plea of the Ordinaries
attaching be determined: least otherwise the parties suite against the
Ordinary should be hindered by his imprisonment. Yet it is Nou. not. br. page
64. and 65. f.
to be understood, that a Bishop shall have Significauit upon his own
certificat, touching an excommunication for contumacie, incurred even in his
predecessors time.

But albeit the certificate be duly made, and the writ de excommunicato
capiendo be thereupon awarded forth: yet if there be loose or corrupt
execution thereof by the Sheriff, or by his under officers; both the endeavor
of the Bishop, and care of the Queen to have contemptuous persons iusticed,
are wholly frustrated. Though this carelessness in times past were not so common
as now it is; yet it Reg. in br. orig. page 65. a.
seems by the Alias and Pluries in the Register, that Sherifes, and their
under officers were then also slack enough, to perform this part of their
duty: howbeit it is testified by the Kings writ in this behalf, Ibid. page
65. b.
that the undue execution of it, redoundeth in contemptum manifestum regis,
episcopi damnum non modicum and grauamen, ac iuris Ecclesiae suaelaesionem
manifestam. In which regard, such a negligent Sheriff is (by law) upon a writ
to be called into the Court, whence the writ issued; there to answer such his
contempt.

The effect of the writ de excommunicato capiendo, (when he has his due course
and execution) is double. First, upon the very certificate of the Bishop, the
party excommunicated, is to be debarred action in all the Queens Courts. Yet
if upon an Nou. not. br. page 65. d.
appellation by him made from the sentence of excommunication, he be delivered
out of prison; or have a Supersedeas thereupon; then is he not to be barred
from action in respect of such certificate, or of the sentence of
excommunication. Secondly, the Reg. in br orig. page 65. a. and b.
party is to be imprisoned by his body. Per corpus suum secundum consuetudinem
Angliae, iusticies, donec etc. This iusticing by body according to the custom
of England, is committing to prison; and that Westminster. 13. Ed. 1. cap. 15. 5.
Eliz. cap 23.
without bail or mainprise. Nither Nou. not. br. page 66. e.
does the writ de homine replegiando, lie in this case. Now a man being thus in
prison, I find in law but two means of his delivery. The first is, by
submitting himself to the bishop. This submission may be in two sorts: either
by present satisfaction, at or immediately upon his delivery; or by caution put
in, that he will hereafter perform it. Quia vicecomes (says a Regi. in br
orig. page 67. a.
writ in the Register) nulla inde facta satisfactione, aut praestita cautione
prout moris est, de parendo mandatis ecclesiae in forma iuris, quosdam
deliberauit; idcirco etc. where we also see, to what end the caution (by the
party excommunicate) must be put in, agreeably to sundry Ibid. page 65. b bis
66. b. and 67. a
other precedents of this writ, viz. de parendo mandatis ecclesiae, in forma
iuris. Which is to perform that which the bishop shall reasonably and
according to law, enjoin unto him. For it was thought most inconvenient, that
he who had resisted the course of law, and contumaciously persisted in
excommunication, until his imprisonment; should now be trusted without good
security first given, before his delivery. This clause of those writs in the
Register, Fitzherbert Nou. not. br. page 63. c.
does translate thus into French, viz. de estoier and obeier les ordinances and
rules de seint esglise.

Under the clause in formaiuris, is that other part of submission contained:
which is prescribed by the law ecclesiastical in this case of submission and
of giving caution; viz. de parendo iuri. This appears by that writ in the Reg
in br. orig. page 66. b. and 67. a
Register, where a clerk imprisoned upon the significauit offered caution to
his ordinary (the bishop of Elie) de parendo iuri; but yet could not thereupon
alone be delivered, for that he expressly refused, to satisfy tam de iniuria
ecclesiae illata, quam de contemptu, as the writ required. This form de
contemptu and iniuria, is not only here, but in Reg. in br. orig. page 65. a.
b. 68. a.
other precedents also of this writ observed, as they be recorded in the
Register. And in another writ by words more general, yet tending to the same
purpose, viz. Ibidem 65. b.
ad satisfaciendum Deo and sanctae ecclesiae sufficientem exposuit cautionem.
To satisfy God, viz. for his continued contempt of the keys and power of his
church: and to satisfy the church, as well for the evil example and scandal
given, as for the needless charges that he had put the officers unto, to bring
him to conformity. For it seems when a caution was put in only thus: de
parendo iuri and mandatis ecclesiae, in forma iuris: that by reason of the
general conceiving thereof, sundry took occasion to wrangle and quarrel with
that, which was after enjoined unto them, as if it were not contained within
the words or meaning of their caution: and therefore that clause that such
should satisfy for their contempt, and for the injury to the church, was often
used in the kings writs of that nature, to avoid all cavil, and for more full
explanation. In such caution, two things besides are required: the one, that it
be idonea and sufficiens, as appears by all the writs in this behalf, that
be set down in the Register: the other, that it be offered by the party, who
is to submit himself. For it is Ibid. page 66. b. and 67. a. Nou. not. br.
page 63. c.
said in one of those writs thus, viz. Idem W. cautionem saltem pignoratitiam
(iuxta intentionem mandati nostri praedicti) de satisfaciendo de huiusmodi
contemptu and iniuria, antequam a prisona praedicta deliberetur, offerre debet
and tenetur. For a caution is not imposed by the Ordinary, but is accepted by
him upon the parties submission and offer thereof; when he seeks to be
absolved from the censure, and delivered out of prison.

But what may be reckoned to be idonea and sufficiens cautio, I find not
determined or colligible out of the books of Common law. One kind thereof
which is pignoratitia, a caution real or by gage, is mentioned in the next
allegation before. And in that it is there said, the party should put in
cautionem saltem pignoratitiam, we are thereby given to understand, that the
courts of Common law do take knowledge of some other kinds of cautions
besides this, and accounts of this, as being not of the most grievous sort of
cautions unto the party.

The word Cautio is a term taken out of the Civil law; for which (at the
Common law) they Nou. not. br. page 63. c.
use security or obligation etc. therefore what be the several kinds of
cautions, must be taken out of that learning.

Cautions in Civil law be of three sorts: one is Fideiussoria, as when a man
binds himself with sureties to perform somewhat, another is Pignoratitia or
realis Cautio, as when a man gageth his plate, or morgageth his land for
performance, the last is luratoria cautio, as when the party which is to
perform any thing, takes a corporal oath to do it. By the Civil law, a
Judge is not bound to accept of this last, unless the party will also swear,
that he is not able to put in either of the other. And therefore where
Ordinaries do promiscuously at absolutions accept this Iuratorie caution
offered de parendo iuri, and stando mandatis ecelesiae, in forma iuris; they
do more then they simply need to do; and rather gratify then do any
grieuance to the party, as some have thought.

For seeing this has bin the most usual, nay (for a long time) almost the
only caution given at absolutions; that they may lawfully still accept it, is
made manifest by statute, viz. saving and reserving to allarchbishops and
bishops, and all others having authority to certify any person
excommunicated, like authority to accept and receive the submission and
satisfaction of the said person so excommunicated, in manner and form
heretofore used, and him to absolve and release. etc. 5. Eliz. cap. 23. yet is
not any of them so simple, but he will think either of the other two (if they
be offered) to be better security then the parties bare oath; a matter so
little regarded of most men in these latter times of this bad world. For satius
est incumbere rei quam personae: Real security is more safe then personal.

Now when such caution is offered as the Ordinary does accept of, for the
parties performance of that which shall be enjoined unto him: shall he needs be
forced to send for a writ of deliverance unto the Chancery? No verily. For the
bishop himself, if he will, may enjoin the shiriffe to deliver him. Accedas
(says Reg. in br. orig. page 66. a. and nou. not. br. page 63. c. d.
the writ unto the shiriffe) in propria persona ad episcopum, and ex part
nostra moneas and efficaciter indicas, vt accepta cautione praedicta, ipsum
mandet deliberari a prisona. And again, a writ to a bishop runs thus:
Mandamus quod accepta cautione praedicta, ipsum deliberari mandetis, alioquin
quod nostri est in hac part exequemur. And therefore Fitzherbert Nou. not. br.
page 63. g.
says plainly, that the bishop, or he at whose certificate the party was
taken, may command the shiriffe to deliver him out of prison.

But what if the Ordinary shall refuse to admit of the caution offered, and
thereupon to release him, albeit the caution be good and sufficient: shall the
party remain still in prison? Nay, the writ de cautione admittenda, is
provided for remedy in such a case. This not deliverance, after sufficient
caution offered, may happen either upon negligence and delay in the bishops
under-officers; or upon his own wilfulness. Upon such under-officers delay;
as when the bishop wills them to absolve the party excommunicated: in which
case Reg. in br. orig. page 65. b. Nou. not. breu. page 63. f.
the shiriffe is not to make deliverance, till it appear unto him, that the
party is (indeed) absolved. Neither is Ibidem.
such official or archdeacon bound to certify the shiriffe, that they have
received letters from the bishop to absolve him: but the shiriffe ought to go
or sen to them, to know the truth, and accordingly to make deliverance. If it
happen upon the bishops own wilfulness; in such case I find two degrees
observed in proceeding: for first Reg. page 66. a. Nou. not. breu. page 63. d.
there goes a writ to the bishop himself, that he admit of the caution, and
also that he command the party imprisoned to be delivered; or else the king
will do that which apperteineth to him, in like case to be done.

But if this will not serve the turn, then secondly may the party have a Reg.
in br. orig. page 66. a. Nou. not. breu. page 63. d.
writ directed to the shiriffe: that in his own person he repair to the
bishop, and on the Queens behalf monish him, and effectually require him;
that taking first such caution, he command the prisoners deliverance: and that
if he shall refuse in the shiriffes presence to do it, then the shiriffe
himself (taking Reg. page 67. a.
such sufficient caution of him) do deliver him. And if the shiriffe also
shall appear to be negligent or wilful; the Reg. 66. a.
party may have the like writ to the Coroners. But they must likewise first
(before they deliver him) take sufficient caution of him, viz. de parendo
mandatis ecclesiae in forma iuris: and de satisfaciendo tam de contemptu, quam
de iniuria ecclesiae illata.

If the shiriffe be too forward, so that the bishop fears that he will
deliver the Nou. not. br. page 63. and 64. h. Reg. page 66. b. and 67.
prisoner by color of some writ, without taking such caution, as may be
judged sufficient; then may the bishop purchase a writ to the shiriffe, that in
no case the prisoner be delivered; except in his presence, he offer to the
bishop cautionem saltem pignoratitiam; at the least a gage or real caution, de
satiffaciendo, etc.

But if the Shiriffe shall in deed deliver him out of prison without such
sufficient caution (which in the Reg. p. 67. a. Nou. not. br. page 64. b.
Register is thus expressed; nulla inde facta satisfactione, aut praestita
cautione prout moris est, de parendo mandatis Ecclesiae, in forma iuris) then
must a Writ go forth out of the Chancerie, for the new attaching of the
prisoner; containing also a Venire facias for the Shiriffe; that he do
appear and answer his contempt. For such his dealing, is there said to be, In
laesionem libertatis ecclesiae, and contemptum manifestum regis. Thus much
touching the first means of deliverance of a person excommunicated out of
prison.

The other mean for deliverance of such excommunicate person out of prison, is
when he has appealed to a superior ecclesiastical Judge, from the sentence
of excommunication given against him; as unjust, or as void and erroneous. For
if he rest in the sentence given, then must he needs submit himself, and
offer caution, as before is said. But if he hold himself to be unjustly
dealt with, and therefore will not submit: then ought he not to be enlarged out
of prison, but upon Appellation made to the superior Ecclesiastical Judge,
who is the only competent and able Judge (in that behalf) to determine;
whether he have been duly proceeded with, and rightfully excommunicated,
Iuxta canonicas sanctiones, or not: as Reg. page 69. b. and 70. a and b. Nou.
not. br. page 64. c.
appears by sundry of these Writtes in the Register, and otherwise.

The reasons why such one is not to be detained in prison that has appealed
from the sentence of excommunication, are first, because upon the Appellation,
the Judge from whom it was made, does thereby cease to be his Judge in that
cause. Secondly, for Ibid. page 68. a.
that the nature of an appellation is, to put the Appellant into the same state
that he was in before the sentence given, for the doubtfulnesse that is in the
mean time of the validity or inualiditie of it. Thirdly, by reason that
where the presence of the Judge to whom the Appellation is made, may be had:
there the party Appellant is (for the time) usually absolved and released
from the excommunication. Lastly, least by his imprisonment he be hindered
from the effectual prosecution of his Appeal, which may happen prove to have
been just.

If allegation be made to the court in his behalf, against whom the Writ de
excommunicato capiendo, is awarded and gone forth, that he has appealed: and
yet it do not authenticallie so appear by public instrument there showed;
yea (for the most part) even where such public instrument has been showed: a
Reg. 69. b. 70. a. and b. Nou. not. br. page 65. b. c.
Writ of Scire fasias first goes forth to the Shiriffe, that he do Reg.
page 70. b.
warn the Bishop, and him who did prosecute the party imprisoned; to come
into the court, and there to show cause why the Shiriffe should not surcease
from attaching him, or deliver him if he be before in prison, whiles the matter
of the Appellation depends. In the same Writ also (for the most part) is
contained, that the party (if he be taken) either shall be brought Reg.
page 69. and 70. Nou. not. br. page 65. c.
up into the Chancerie, under sure and safe guard, or else shall find sufficient
mainpernors that shall undertake for him body for body, for his personal
appearance in court at the day prefixed; also that he shall prosecute his
Appeal, and that he shall receive and endure what the court shall think good
to order him unto; yea Reg. page 70. b.
that his mainpernours shall safely even redeliuer him again to the prison
where he was; if it shall happen that the court shall so order it.

Now if the Bishop, when the proceeding was of Office, or the party at whose
instance it was; do Reg. page 70. a.
not come upon the Scire facias served at the day prefixed, or at furthest
quarto die post, (unto which day the custom of the Chancerie is to continue
the Process) the^ is the party to be delivered out of prison; so that it do
first appear by public instrument that he has in deed appealed.

But if the Bishop Reg. page 70. b. Not. br. page 65. e.
and he that prosecuted, either by themselves or by their Attorney, do come
at the day prefixed; and he that was imprisoned or his mainepernours do not
come: then a Writ for the reattachment of the excommunicated person goes
forth to imprison him; until he satisfy tam de contemptu, quam de iniuria
ecclesiae illata. And likewise an Attachment for his mainpernours, to be
brought into the court to satisfy the King, the Bishop, and him that
prosecuted; and to receive what the court shall further consider. And this
course of Scire facias before the party be delivered, does seem chiefly to
be observed; when there may be doubt made, that some cause may be alleged (by
those who have interest) why he should not be delivered.

If no such doubt may be made, and when by very Nou. not. br. page 64. e.
authentical public instruments (showed forth in court) his appellation
evidently appears; there sometimes without any Scire facias first awarded, a
Supersedeas is directed forth unto the Shiriffe. Ibid. and Nota interlin. in
Reg. page 68. b.
Nevertheless (in this case) the party must within the year of his Appeal,
by witnesses or oath; prove his diligence in prosecuting his Appeal with
effect.

For there are precedents of such Writs in the Register, where no Scire facias
before the Supersedeas went forth, for any thing that there appears, viz.
Quia C. appellauit A. Reg. page 68. a. and 69. a. and b. Nou. not. br. page 64.
e.
sententia excommunicationis tanquam ab iniqua, and prosequitur appellationem
cum effectu, proutper instrumenta publica apparet: nos nolentes quod praefato
C. per praedictum breue nostrum via praecludatur, quominus dictae appellationis
suae negotium prosequi possit in forma iuris, etc. maxim cum appellantium
status debet esse integer, ideo pendente appellatione supersedeas, etc. And
thus far of the second means of delivering an excommunicated person out of
prison. But mo or other means then these two, (for my part) I have not hitherto
found mentioned in any Statute, or any report of the Common law; though I have
carefully sought for them.

Now I will resume again (after this long, but I trust not unnecessary
digression) the second member of ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; called
contentiosa Iurisdictio. That is, when such matters be handled; against which
some party stands, or is dealt with thereby against his will. If it be
contentiosae iurisdictionis, whether it be for a right there demandable and
determinable, or else for a crime there punishable, (which are the heads of all
litigious Jurisdiction ecclesiastical) it cannot be intended, that parsrea, is
contra quem res agitur, the party to be dealt against, will gratis without
process appear, and from time to time attend: except it happen sometimes by
collusion with the plaintiff. And in this respect (amongst others) it is said,
that iudiciu^ redditur in inuitu^: and Reus is called pars fugiens, the party
presumed to come thither against his will, and willing enough to be gone if he
might. Therefore if any cause, besides those two, shall be proved such, as the
Ordinary may lawfully deal in; it will follow, that in such a matter also he
may use a citation to call him. Dato enim principali, necessaria adiacentia
veniunt in consequentiam.

But that an Ordinary may deal in sundry other causes besides these two, it
shall appear both by Statutes (which are the judgments of the whole Realm)
and by the judgments and uncontrolled opinions reported in the books of the
Common law.

In discourse whereof will appear not only Aristot. in lib. post:. Analyt.
(...), that the matter is so, but also (...), the reason why, and in what
manner and sort it is determinable or punishable there: being three principal
questions to be opened, for the perfect knowledge of anything that is to be
handled: and serving in these controversies, to some further use and profit,
which may lighten you in the length of the disputation.

Pursuing therefore the two former heads of that part of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction: first the matters by litigious Jurisdiction demandable and
determinable, are either such as are yielded to be mere Ecclesiastical (by
the authors of this opinion) viz. Testamentarie and Matrimonial: to the first
whereof (for affinity sake) I add last Wills, (such as may not be termed
Testaments,) Codicils, Legacies, Administrations, and Sequestrations of the
deads goods, (commonly called letters ad colligendum:) and to the later, I
join divorces, iactitation of Matrimony, questions of legitimation or
bastardie, for restitution of a man's wife taken away, that a man shall receive
his wife again, and suites for goods or chattels promised with a woman in
marriage: or else they are such others (claimed to be Ecclesiastical) as
remain still (by this opinion) in controversy. All which (I think) may be
comprehended under the general term of reliqua iura Ecclesiastica.

And these are either some duty arising at first upon exercise of voluntary
Jurisdiction, and yet by denial made litigious: and such be real compositions
sought by some party to be disanulled, procurations, pensions, Synodals,
Pentecostals, indemnities, fees for probates, etc. or growing due only upon
exercise of litigious Jurisdiction: and these are either due to the Judge
himself (as fees of citations, fees of sentences, etc.) or are due to others
attendants in the Court, (as fees of Aduocats, Proctors, Registers, Apparitors,
etc.) or else they are such as are due to Ministers in the Church, that have no
title, as wages for a Curate, or a Clerk, or unto a Minister, that has title.
And this right of a Minister that has title, touches either something
incident to him, as to name the Parish Clerk: or concerns the whole title
and interest in and to his benefice, or else touches but his maintenance and
living. His interest and title tends either to attain it when he pretends
just title to it, or to retain it being in his possession, or else to recover
it being bereaved or spoiled of it.

The duties which concern Ministers maintenance, are tithes of all kinds,
Oblations, Obuentions, Pensions, Mortuaries, Churchyard or place of burial,
etc. Or lastly, it is something, that is due to a whole Parish, as to have a
Chapleine found, or divine service, or Sacraments administered amongst them, or
something due to their Church to be delivered, or for a Parishioner to be
contributorie with the rest to reparations of the Church, to seats, to bells,
to the buying of books, of Vtensiles, or of other ornaments, and requisites in
the Church.

Concerning crimes and offenses claimed to be punishable by Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical: they may al (I think) be reduced to some of the three heads,
touched by S. Paul: viz. as being contrary either to Piety unto God, to
Justice toward our neighbor, or Sobriety toward our selves. That which is
against God; the Latinists call by the name of Impietas; that which is against a
ma^s neighbor, they term Facinus; and that which a man designeth against
himself, Flagitium. albeit the two last be often confounded, without any
curious observation of such propriety of words.

Against Piety to God-wardes, are these: blsasphemie, swearing, idolatry,
heresy, error in faith, schism, apostacy from Christianity, not
frequenting public prayer, neglect of the Sacraments, perjury in an
Ecclesiastical Court or matter, disturbance of divine service, vtolating and
profaning the Sabbath, and such like. Contrary to Justice are these: Simonie,
usury, diffamation, subornation of perjury in a Court Ecclesiastical:
violence to a Minister, sacrilege, dilapidations, not building of a Church
enjoined by atestatour; not fencing the Churchyard; not repairing a Church or
Chauncell, or not keeping of it in comely sort; or when a Churchwarden
refuses to yield an account of the Church stock, and goods; and violating
of a sequestration made for tithes not paid; hindering to gather or carry
tithes; money promised for redeeming corporal penance, and detained; contempt
to the ecclesiastical jurisdiction, fighting or brawling in Church or
Churchyard, and such like. And against Sobriety are these: all Incontinencie
(not made death by the law of the Realm) whether committed with one which is
of his kindred in blood, forbidden either in generality, or by some of the
degrees Leuitical, or with one of his alliance so forbidden, both which are
called incest: or committed by such whereof the one is married, which is
adultery: or where the one of them has bin married, termed by some stuprum: or
where both be single, termed simplex fornicatio: or whether it be marying of
two wines, or being married unto two husbands at once, which is called
Polygamie: Solicitation of a woman's chastitte, drunkenness, filthy speech,
and such others.

There be also certain punishments and censures (besides these) which I think
will be yielded to be matters of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as enioyning of
penance; suspension from entrance into the Church, or from the Lords supper,
or from execution of a ministers office, or from his benefice; sequestration of
a benefice; interdiction of some place, from having service or sacraments there
administered; interdiction of some certain act, (as not to marry, whiles a
suite matrimonial depends) and excommunication, the less and the greater.

I do also find in writers of the Civil and Ecclesiastical laws, certain
offenses affirmed to be of ecclesiastical conusance: which may seem (even in
this Realm) to be such, albeit I do not expressly read them to be so
accounted, in statutes or reports of the Common laws. As for violation or
perturbation of liberties ecclesiastical: for admitting of excommunicated
persons, unto Quaere of these two first named: and see for the first Lyndwood
e. oecernae. de poenis. verbo regis Angliae.
action or testimony in a temporal Court: forging of letters and matters
ecclesiastical, as testimonials for ordeining etc. or using and putting them
in practice wittingly: burying excommunicate persons, or notorious heretics in
the usual places of good Christians: abbettours and voluntary company keepers
with persons excommunicate: and diggers up of corpses buried.

CHAP. III. That matters in the former Chapter adjoined to testamentarie and
matrimonial causes (though properly they be not of testament or matrimony)
are of ecclesiastical conusance, and how far.
TOuching such as I have adjoined for necerenesse of quality, unto matters
testamentarie: First a man's last will, (whereby legacies be given, but none is
therein made executour) cannot be called a testament. The like is to be said of
a codicill: and a legacy though it be given by testament, yet may it also be
given by such a last will, and can (in neither case) be properly called a
matter testamentary, because it is but Delibatio haereditatis, or successio
particularis. And by suite for a legacy, neither the testament comes
directly and principally to be proved, nor yet to be impugned. But much less
may administrations and letters ad colligendum, be properly accounted matters
testamentarie, because they are committed, when a man dies intestate, or per
viam intestati. Besides that, the course of granting administrations was not
at the common law, but came in by statute, long after this writ of
Prohibition 31. Ed. 3. cap. 11.
(whence this controversy springs) is pretended to have been framed.

As for divorce (which by like reason I joined with matters of matrimony)
because it tends to the overthrow and dissolution of marriage; it cannot be
termed (properly) a matter of matrimony: (though no man can be divorced but he
which has been married) no more then blindness may be called seeing, for
that nothing can truly and properly be said to be blind, but such as either
once did see, or by nature of the thing, should have eyes: Priuatio enins
praesupponit habitum. This appears also by 24. H. 8. ca. 12.
a statute; where divorce is contrediuided and reckoned as a diverse suite from
a cause of matrimony.

Likewise iactitation of marriage, because it tends (by the intention of him
that brings the suite) to be cleared of a matrimony or contract
matrimonial, that is pretended by the other party; it can no more properly
then the former, be called a matter of matrimony. As for goods or chattels
that are promised with a woman in marriage, who sees not, that it is a mere
circumstance, nothing touching the validity or inualiditie of a matrimony?
yet nevertheless (I take it) no man is so wedded to his opinion, that he will
deny the conisance of these matters to belong to the Ecclesiastiall
jurisdiction, as well as causes properly termed testamentary or matrimonial.

But I purpose to make the matter a little more plain, and withal to show,
as well when and how some matters testamentary themselves, as the rest annexed
to testamentary or matrimonial causes (which I find touched in the laws of
the realm) do belong to the conisance of an ecclesiastical Court, and when
and how unto a temporal Court; beginning first with testaments. M. 2. H. 3.
Fitz. testa. 4.
These are to be proved before Ordinaries, saving in certain places, where the
lord in his temporal Court (by custom) proves the testaments of his tenants.

The Canon law does not permit an Ecclesiastical person to declare his will,
and to dispose of such goods as he has gotten by reason of his
ecclesiastical promotions as he list: but they must be left to that Church,
by which he got them. But Treatise of Constable. prou. and legatine, printed by
Thomas Godfrey tempore H. 8. cap. 13.
the law of this Realm is, that Clerks may make their wills as liberally
and freely, as any Lay man may: and that though they have them, for their
spiritual ministration. And therefore by reason of this contradiction and
repugnancie to the Common law, such Canons are here of no force, nor in
practice.

Touching executours, it is sometimes to be determined by the Common law, in
what cases, and who may be made an executour: for a T. 12. H. 7. sol. 22.
woman (by the Common law) may make her husband executour of such things
whereof she was executour to another before, or of a duty due unto her before
co^erture, or of rent being behind, upon a lease made unto her for term of
life, or of a lease, or of any thing whereof the possession must be attained by
action: but she cannot make him executour of that which she has in possession.
for by the very entermariage, the property is in her husband: albeit, by the
Spiritual law, as well in the one case as in the other, she may make her
husband executour: which (says Tremayle and Frowicke) whether it be their law
or no, is not to be disputed by the Common law, because we are ignorant, and
cannot judge what is their law.

And if a man T. 12. H. 7.
be condemned in costs in a court ecclesiastical, and after die, making an
executour (by the opinion of King smell) it is as good reason to sue the
executour in a spiritual cause, according to the Spiritual Law, as to sue
him for a temporal matter in the Temporal Law. Else (says he) when an
amends is adjudged in a Spiritual court, and the party dies, the either
should be without remedy, which were no reason: and none did gainsay it. But a
H. 6. H. 3. referente Fitzh. tit. prohib. 17.
man may not sue an executour in a Spiritual Court, for the testators debt:
albeit if the testator enjoin the executor to pay the debt to him, he may
then sue for it in Court Spiritual, because of the iniunction and promise. And
this shows how an Executor may be sued or not sued in an Ecclesiastical
Court.

Now an Executor may sue another in a Spiritual Court touching his testatours
goods, in this case, viz. If a T. 4. H. 3 referente Fitzh. tit. prohib. nu.
man devise or bequeath corn growing, or goods, unto one, and a stranger will
not suffer the executor to perform the testament for this legacy, he shall
sue the stranger for it, in a Spiritual Court. But if a man take from the
executors, goods bequeathed: for this, the executor must use his action of
trespass, and not sue in the Spiritual Court: for 2. R. 3. 17.
executours can not sue for the goods of their testatour in a Court
Ecclesiastical, but at the Common Law. If T. 18. Ed. 2. testa. 6.
a testament bear date at Cane in Normandy, and be proved in England, the
executour may upon such testament have action.

Of legacies or devises it will be sufficient to touch a few points. In the
books of the Common Law it is set down, that they 37. H. 6. page 9.
shall be recovered in a Spiritual Court, and not in a Court Temporal.
Therefore H. 8. H. 3. ex Fitzh. tit. prohib. 19.
if a termor of certain land bequeath his croppe, and die, the Spiritual
Court shall hold plea thereof. Likewise, 46. E. 3. fol. 32.
where one sued in Court Christian, for goods devised by testament, which
another claimed by deed of gift, and thereupon brought a prohibition, and
showed the deed of gift, and alleged withal, that the defendant was neither
executor nor administrator: yet because it was by name of a legacy, it was
adjudged to belong to the Spiritual court, by which it was to be determined,
and the circumstances to be tried, whether the devise were good or not. And in
respect, a man has such action against the executor for a legacy before the
Ecclesiastical Judge, therefore the M. 20. E. 4. 9.
legatarie or deuisee may not of his own head, take the goods or chattels
devised to himself, out of the possession of the executour. And for this also
especially, because T. 2. H. 6. 15.
the Law does not bind that the legacies shall be assigned, paid, or
delivered, until the debts of the testatour be satisfied and paid: But
because Bracton. lib. 5. cap. 16.
a frank tenement or inheritance devised, is not demaundable in an
Ecclesiastical Court, but in the Temporal: therefore the Perkins tit. devises.
legatarie (according to the devise) without further assignment or delivery,
may enter into them, after the death of the testatour.

If a man Reg. in br. orig. page 48. b.
by his testament do bequeath goods to the fabric of a Church: for this
legacy the executors may be sued in court Ecclesiastical. Also, if Liberties
of the Clergy, by the Laws of the Realm, by John Gooddall. Printed by Rob.
Wier, tempore Hen. 8.
wardship or chattels real (as a lease) be bequeathed by will; a man may sue
for them in the Court Ecclesiastical, but not so for lands devised.

If a Ibidem.
testatour by his testament does charge his executors to pay his debts: the
creditours (in respect of such charge) may sue for them in the Court
Ecclesiastical. When a Ibidem.
man (as I do interpret it, being executour or legatary, and so enjoined by
will) does refuse to collate or erect a Grammar School, and is therefore sued
in a Court Ecclesiastical, if he purchase a prohibition: the other party
shall have a consultation.

Touching committing of administrations, by the very statute whereby they were
established it is enacted, that 31. Ed. 3. ca. 11.
where a man dies intestate, the Ordinaries shall depute the next and most
lawful friends of the dead person intestate, to administer his goods: which
deputies, as they have action against others in the Kings Court, for to recover
the debts owing to the dead, so in that Court there lies action against them,
for such as the dead did owe: but they are made accountable to the Ordinaries,
as executours be, in the case of testament etc. And 36. H. 6. 31. referente
Perk. tit. testa.
when such letters of administration be showed under the Ordinaries seal, or
when a testament is so showed, a man has no direct trauerse against it, in the
Temporal Court.

That to sequester the goods of an intestate, commonly called letters ad
colligendum, belongs to the Ordinary, appears by this case: If an 7. H. 4.
18.
Ordinary sequester the goods of an intestate to another man, and a third
disturbeth, here the Ordinary has an action of trespass at the Common law,
though the sequestration be a spiritual act, because he had possession: yet he
cannot have an action of debt, albeit actions of debt in this case run
against him. But if the Ordinary do sequester the goods (ex officio, or for any
contumacie) which gives no possession to him, there the Spiritual Court shall
have jurisdiction.

That divorces are of Spiritual jurisdiction, is apparent by many books at
the Common Law, needless to be rehearsed: but whereas prohibition 12. H. 7.
24.
lay in Corbets case upon a suite brought in the Spiritual court, to repeal a
divorce, and consequently to make the issue of the second wife bastards,
whereupon no Consultation would be granted (which may therefore seem to make
this point doubtful) it was not, for that the Court Ecclesiastical might not
hold plea of divorces: but the prohibition lay, because the title and descent
were comprised in the libell: and this was agreed to be the cause, by the
Court: and so it is Brook tit. prohib. nu. 9.
reported by Brook. And if a man give goods in T. 13. H. 3. referente Fitzh.
tit. Prohib. nu. 21.
marriage with a woman unto the husband, if they be afterward divorced, it was
holden, that the woman divorced may well sue for those goods in Court Christian.
But if any further doubt should (herein) upon the former case of Corbet
remain: That statute which 24. H. 8. ca. 12.
affirms, that divorces (by appellation) were carried forth of this Realm
unto Rome, like as other causes Ecclesiastical of testament, of matrimony, of
right of tithes, oblations, and obuentions, and appoints how delegates (upon
such appellations made) shall determine them all within the Realm, does put it
clear out of doubt.

Likewise where it is affirmed by a far elder statute, that Ordinaries are
18. Ed. 3. pro Clero cap. 2.
both to certify and try of bastardie and bigamie, which (for the most part)
cannot be done, without the conusance of divorces, whereupon the former
(especially) does depend.

As for Regist. in bre. iudicialibus. page 5. a. and 26. a.
questions touching Bastardie or Legitimation of any, it appears that at the
Common Law, they do belong to a court Ecclesiastical; and upon a writ, are to
be certified into the Queens Courts, by the Bishop. If Regist. in bre. iudic.
page 53. 2.
a man be spoiled of the possession of his wife: so far forth as the Action
does but extend to be restored to her possession; it must be handled in a Court
Ecclesiastical: notwithstanding ( Goodall, of the liberties of the Clergy, by
the Laws of the Realm.
says Gooddall in the Book aforesaid) that a man for his wife only, may
have Action of trespass at the Common Law; and also a writ, de vxore
abducta cum bonis viri.

Also for a man that lives asunder from his wife, there lies Action in a
Court Ecclesiastical, for him to receive her again and to cohabite with her;
as may be gathered by 13. Ed. 1. c. 34.
that statute of Westminster the second; where it is provided; that a woman
eloped from her husband, shall loose her dower: except the husband (without
compulsion Ecclesiastical) do receive her again. Therefore for a man to
receive his wife again, compulsion Eccles. may (in some case) be used, with
allowance of the statutes of this Realm.

Lastly, it remains to show here when, and how, goods and chattels promised
with a woman in marriage (after the marriage accomplished) be demandable and
determinable in the Court Ecclesiastical. For besides one or two cases before
rehearsed, where (by the way) so much is implied, it appears by many
consonant judgments in the very point. For if a 22. Assisatum fol. 70. per
Thorpe cui concordat M 16. H. 3. per Fitzh. proh. 22.
contract be made between two men, that if the one will take to wife the
others daughter, then he will give him ten pounds: In this case, if the money
be to be demanded, it shall be demanded in the kings Court: because he did
not promise the money with his daughter in marriage, but by way of covenant,
that he should marry his daughter. But if he had promised the money with his
daughter in marriage, then it should have been demanded in Court Christian.

Likewise 14. Ed. 4. 6.
in an action of debt, the plaintiff declared, that he had married the daughter
of the defendant, and that he should have twenty pounds in respect thereof:
and by agreement of all the Justices of the Common Plees, without any answer
of the defendant, it was decreed that the plaintiff should have nothing upon
his writ, because it is determinable in a Court Christian, and is of the same
nature, as the very marriage is. So does Reg. fol. 46. and 48. per Brook tit.
prohib.
Brook also collect out of the Register, that for marriage money and pensions,
the suite lies in the Spiritual Court: and agreeable to the former
distinction of Thorpe, Fitzherbert Fitzh. no. na. br. tit. proh. fol.
also reports it in his Nouanatura breuium. Bracton in like manner affirms
it, Bracton. lib. 5. cap. 16.
and yields a reason thereof: for he (speaking of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction) says thus: Sic de rebus datis vel promissis ob causam matrimonij
principaliter: and sic de rebus quae accidunt matrimonio, vt sipe cunia
promissa fuerit ob causam matrimonij: quia eiusdem iuris, id est
iurisdictionis, esse debet accessorium, cuius est principale. And albeit Brook
Brook t. t. iutisdict.
in his abridgement report, that the same was also elsewhere holden by 17. E.
4. fol. 4.
three, viz. Chocke, Townesend and Littleton: yet he himself seems to doubt
of it, and says there is also great 37. H. 6. fol. 9.
opinions against it, because there is quid pro quo, and therefore likely to be
determinable in a Temporal Court.

Therefore it may probably be thought that these opinions which he speaks
of in this behalf 37. Hen. 6. either were meant in such a case, as grew to a
lay contract, such as Thorpe speaks of in the book of Assizes (before
alleged) or else there was some covenant for the money, by deed. For 45. E.
3. fol. 24. per Br, iurisdict. 11.
in an Action of debt brought upon a covenant by deed, that if the plaintiff
should marry the defendants daughter, the defendant should give him an hundred
pounds, which condition of marriage the plaintiff had performed: it was
adjudged, that (notwithstanding Articuli Cleri) the matter did belong to the
Temporal Court, because it was by deed: but it had not belonged to it, but to
the Court Ecclesiastical, if it had been without deed.

And the rather may it be thought, because this has been taken for Law both
before and since; notwithstanding those opinions mentioned by Brook.

First in the Reg. in Br. orig. page 46. b.
Register we find to this effect, a certain woman in consideration of
Matrimony to be contracted with her daughter promised 40. marks: the
Matrimony was accordingly celebrated: the woman dies, making executours. Then
for not payment thereof the husband brings his Action in the Court
Ecclesiastical: the executours obtain a prohibition: whereupon, the matter
coming to scanning; a Consultation is nevertheless granted; whereby is
affirmed, that the Ecclesiastical Court may lawfully proceed therein.

Yea, and long after these opinions delivered, Fitzherbert affirms, that such
suite belongs to the Court Ecclesiastical, as has been alleged. And so
does the little Treatise of the liberties of the Clergy, by the Laws of the
Realm, in these Goodall, of the liberties of the Clergy.
words, viz. If he that promised money with his daughter in marriage, dies:
he that married her, may sue the executours for the money, in the Spiritual
Courts. There is in the said little Treatise, another case touched and
affirmed to be of Ecclesiastical conisance; which belongs to this Chapter.
It is Ibidem.
this: If a man (says he) give goods with his daughter in marriage, and after
there is a Divorce: the same may sue for those goods in Ecclesiastical Court.
But he shows not whether upon any Divorce whatsoever, the goods be there
recouerable, viz. whether, as well when the Divorce arose of the woman's
adultery; as when it grew upon some consanguinitie or other Canonical
impediment, found out after marriage. Hitherto concerning those kinds of
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, which I adjoined to causes Testamentarie and
Matrimonial.

CHAP. IIII. General proofs out of Statutes, that sundry other causes besides
Testamentarie or Matrimonial, are of Ecclesiastical conusance.
BEfore I proceed further to show (in particular) what matters besides be of
Ecclesiastical conisance and Jurisdiction, and how far; I hold it nothing
amiss to show (in some generality) first; that there are some other such,
which be neither Testamentarie nor Matrimonial, nor yet any way depending, or
of affinity to them. The Great Charter (to the observation and propugnation
whereof, the King and the great Nobles and Officers were wont to be sworn)
lays this groundworke of all which follows: We have granted to God, and by
this our present Mag. Chart. cap. 1.
Charter confirmed, for us and our heirs for evermore; that the Church of
England shall be free, and shall have all her whole rights and liberties
inviolable. But that the Church had these rights and liberties then, (which are
now claimed) the Acts of Courts Ecclesiastical in those and former times, and
in all succeeding ages, (without prohibition, or other oppugnation,) with the
statutes and reports, (some whereof were made not long after) and so from time
to time downward (till these late challenges) do make it very manifest.

It is provided by Statute; that 24. Edw. 1. stat. de consultatione.
the Chancellor or chief Iusticer of the King, upon sight of the libell
whereupon any prohibition is brought (if the case cannot be redressed by any
Writ out of the Chancerie, but that the Spiritual Court ought to determine
the matter) shall write to the Judges (where the cause was first moved) to
proceed; the prohibition directed, notwithstanding. So that, wherein soever
(by custom and liberties of Holy Church) Judges Ecclesiastical were wont to
proceed; if no Writ lie thereupon in Chancerie, they may still hold plea, and
take conusance.

Also in the conclusion of the Statute of Articuli Artic. Cleri. 9. Ed. 2. ca.
16.
Cleri, where sundry matters besides Testamentarie and Matrimonial are
mentioned, it is thus enacted: that the Prelates, Clergy, and their
successors, shall use, execute, and practice for evermore, the Jurisdiction of
the Church, in the premises; after the tenor of the answers aforesaid,
without quarrel, inquieting, or vexation of our heirs, or any of our Officers,
whatsoever they be.

Likewise it is by Parliament 15. Ed. 3. ca. 6.
accorded, that the Ministers of holy Church, for money taken for redemption of
corporal penance, nor for proof and account of Testaments, or for travail
taken about the same, nor for solemnity of marriage, nor for other things
touching the Jurisdiction of the Church, shall not be empeached nor arrested,
nor driven to make answer before the Kings Justices, nor other Ministers: and
thereupon shall have Writs in the Chancerie, when they will demand. Where we
find, that other things besides Commutations, matters Testamentarie and
Matrimonial, do belong to the Jurisdiction of the Church.

And to like effect after, in the same Kings days: 18. Edw. 3. pro Clero. c 6.
Commissions to enquire of Judges of Holy Church, whether they made just Process
or excessive, in causes Testamentarie and others, which notoriously pertain to
the conisance of Holy Church, were from thencefoorth forbidden. Therefore,
these Statutes being still in force, if Judges Ecclesiastical shall be found
but to deal as they ought, in matters appertaining merely to Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical; how the vexations, impeachments, driuings to answer, and
strange enquiries against them, (used in some places) may be justified by Law;
is worthy the consideration of those, that are, or shall be procurers therein.

In a statute of King 1. Ric. 2. ca 13.
Richard the second, mention is made, that the pursuites for Tithes, and for
some other causes, of right ought, and of old times were wont, to pertain to
the Spiritual Court. In a Statute of King Henry the eight it is 24. H. 8. c.
12. in the praeamb.
testified, that both the authorities and Jurisdictions Spiritual and
Temporal, do conioyne together in the due administration of Justice, the one
to help the other: And that the Laws Temporal are for trial of property of
lands, and goods, and for the conservation of the people of this Realm in
unity and peace, without rauin and spoil. And in the body of the Statute are
particularly named and reckoned for Ecclesiastical, (besides causes
Testamentarie and Matrimonial,) these, viz. divorces, right of tithes,
oblations, and obuentions, of which it is affirmed, that the knowledge of these
causes by the goodness of Princes of this Realm, and by the Laws and
customs of the same, appertains to the Spiritual Jurisdiction of this
Realm. And because by that Statute, remedy was only provided, that
appellations in those aforesaid cases should not be prosecuted out of the
Realm: (there being also many other causes of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical,
wherein a like remedy was convenient to be had) therefore the next year after
it was enacted, that 25. H. 8. c. 19.
all manner of appeals, of what nature or condition soever they be, or what
cause or matter soever they concern, shall be made and had by the parties
grieved, etc. after such manner, as is limited for causes of appeals, in
matters Testamentarie, Matrimonial, tithes, etc. in the said former statute
mentioned.

In a Statute of King 1. Ed. 6. c. 2.
Edward the 6. (besides matters of voluntary Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, as
collations, presentations, Institutions, inductions, letters of orders and
dimissories) are reckoned in general as Ecclesiastical, all suites and causes
of instance betwixt party and party, and all causes of correction: And in
particular, all causes of bastardie, or bigamie, and inquiry De Iure
patronatus: besides matters of Testament, of administration, or of accounts
upon them. And 5. Eliz. c. 23.
in one Statute in her Majesty's reign, are reckoned in particular (as the
more grievous sort of matters of correction in Ecclesiastical Courts)
heresy, refusing to have a child baptized, or to receive the holy Communion,
or to come to divine service, error in matters of religion or doctrine now
received, incontinencie, usury, Simonie, perjury in the ecclesiastical
Court, and Idolatry. And therefore Judges Ecclesiastical may lawfully cite
men, in certain other causes, besides Testamentarie or Matrimonial: and ought
not (eonomine tantum) to be vexed, unquieted, impeached, driven to answer, or
arrested.

CHAP. V. That suites for title of Benefices upon Voidance or Spoliation:
likewise that suites for tithes, Oblations, Mortuaries, etc. for Pensions,
Procurations, etc. are of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, is proved by statutes.
MAtters and suites for the title of Benefices ecclesiastical (so they touch
not the trial of the patronage) do belong also to the knowledge and
jurisdiction of a court ecclesiastical, by the laws of the Realm. For
conisance of voida^ce of benefices, 25. Ed. 3. pro Clero. ca. 8.
and the discussing thereof, de iure do belong to Judges of holy Church, and
not to the Lay Judge.

The Common Treatise of constitu. Prou. and Legatine. ca. 9. printed by Tho.
Godfrey. tempore H. 8
law does mention five causes of auoidance of a benefice, viz. death,
resignation, deprivation, creation, and cession. But whether it may be deemed
void in law, upon any of the last four means of auoidance: is by the law
ecclesiastical determinable.

And by the books of the Common law, M. 22. Edw. 4. fol. 24.
whether the Church be full or not full, or the Clerk able or not able, is
triable in an ecclesiastical Court. Townesend.

For if an Regist. in br. orig. page 55. b.
inferior Ordinary shall differ or refuse to admit or institute a Clerk
presented, and the Clerk bring his double Querele (being of the nature in some
sort of an appellatio^) from the Archbishops court: and the adverse part do
bring a prohibition, the said Clerk may have hereupo^ his consultation, so
that the court eccles. by color hereof, deal not with the right of patronage
of the benefice.

Likewise for spoliation of a 44. Ed. 3. 33.
benefice, a man is to be sued in Court Christian. But this lies not, but
where a Clerk is in, as an incumbent. for if he be in, as an usurper of the
Church being full, or as a trespasser, there lies action of trespass, and not
spoliation. But if two 38. H. 6. 19.
incumbents be in, and the one claims by one patron, and the other by
another, there lies no spoliation: but where both claim to be in by one
patron, or by means of one patron, then lies action of spoliation, and not
otherwise. For where the right of Aduouson may come in question, there lies no
spoliation, for that cannot go to a Spiritual Court. And again a little
after: 38. H. 6. 20.
Spoliation and debate upon an appropriation, shall be determined in the
Spiritual Court.

Touching tithes where they are to be sued, it appears by acts of Parliament
thus: The 13. Ed. 1. ca. 5. Westminster. 2.
plea for tithes shall pass in the court Christian, as far forth as it is
derained in the Kings court. In the next Kings 9. Ed. 2. ca. 1. Artic. Cleri.
days, thus: In tithes, oblations, obuentions, mortuaries, (sithence they are
proposed under these names) the Kings prohibition shall hold no place. Ibidem
cap. 5.
And again, the Kings prohibition shall not lie for tithes of a Mill, newly
erected.

Likewise in the days of K. Richard the 2. it is thus 1. Ric. 2. ca. 13.
contained in a statute: The Clergy complain for that the people of holy
Church pursuing in the spiritual court for their tithes, and their other causes
which of right ought, and of old times were wont to perteine to the
spiritual court, and that the Judges of holy Church having conisance in such
causes, and other persons thereof meddling (according to the law) be
maliciously endited, etc. and by secular power oppressed, and be forced by
oaths, obligations, and many undue means compelled to cease utterly, against
the liberties and franchises of holy Church: It is enacted, that such
obligations made by violence should be void: and the enditors of malice when
the enditees be acquit, should incur the pain of those that procure false
appeals, etc. Likewise the preamble of a 23. H. 8. ca. 9.
statute in K. Hen. the 8. days does argue, that matters of tithes are to be
heard and determined by Judges Ecclesiastical.

The same is also proved by that, where in 24. H. 8. ca. 12.
another statute it is said thus: Inconveniences have arisen by reason of
appeals out of the Realm to the Sea of Rome, in causes testamentarie, causes
of matrimony, and divorces, right of tithes, oblations, and obuentions. And in
27. H. 8. ca. 20.
the preamble of another statute, Deteiners of tithes. pursuing such their
detestable enormities and injuries, have attempted in late time past, to
disobey, contemn and despise the process, laws, and decrees of the
ecclesiastical courts of this Realm, in more temerous and large manner, then
before this time has bin seen. And therefore it Ibidem.
was then enacted, that for subtraction of tithes, offerings, and other duties
of holy Church, the party grieved, may by due process of the kings.
ecclesiastical laws of the Church of England, convent the person offending,
before the Ordinary, and also compel him to yield their said duties. And
likewise for any his contempt, disobedience, or other misdemeanor, upon
complaint to any of the Counsel, or to two Justices of the peace, to have him
committed, until he shall be bound to give due obedience to the process,
proceedings, decrees, and sentences of the ecclesiastical court of this
Realm. And 32, H. 8. ca. 7.
afterward by another statute of the same King, it is enacted, that for denying
to set out tithes, for deteining, withholding, or refusing to pay tithes or
offerings, Ordinaries may proceed according to the course and process of the
ecclesiastical laws. And in the Ibidem.
preamble thereof, it is directly affirmed, that by order of the common laws
of this Realm, a man cannot have any due remedy against deteiners of tithes.
And the 2. Ed. 6. ca. 13.
like also appears by the statute of tithes, made in K. Edwardes reign.

That which is before affirmed and determined, concerning tithes, oblations,
obuentions, and mortuaries, may likewise be said of pensions, portions,
corrodies, procurations, indemnities, and other such duties ecclesiastical.
For it is enacted, that 34. and 35. H. 8. ca. 19.
for these denied, ecclesiastical persons themselves, may make such process
against the person denying, or against the Church charged, as heretofore they
have lawfully done, and as by, and according to the laws and statutes of the
Realm, they now lawfully may do. And the person convict, (according to the
ecclesiastical laws) shall pay to the plaintiff, the things recovered, and
his costs.

CHAP. VI. That suites forright of tithes belong to the ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and how far, is showed out of the books and reports of the
common law: so of places of burial and Church-yardes, and of Pensions,
Mortuaries, Oblations, etc.
THe reports of judgments and opinions of the Courts at the Common law
(contained in the books of terms and years) called booke-cases, and other
treatises of that law, are no less plain and pregnant in this matter. An M.
44. Edw. 3. fol. 32.
attachement upon a prohibition was sued against a plaintiff in a Court
Ecclesiastical, surmising that he did sue there for hay and money, which
touched neither matrimony nor testament: but upon showing the libel, which
proved, it was for tithes and oblations, a consultation was granted, for the
spiritual court to proceed. And M. 22. Ed. 4. fol. 24. and passim alibi.
where the right of tithes is in question, it is triable in the Court
spiritual. Likewise, 38. H. 6. fol. 21.
so soon as it appears, that the right of tithes comes in debate, the Lay
court shall cease, and shall be out of jurisdiction: quod fuit concessum.

The same is testified in the book of Assizes: 22. Assis. fol. 75.
For if the Kings patentee of tithes renewing in a Forest, that is in no
Parish (in which case the tithes do belong to the King) have cause to sue any,
that ought to yield tithes, and ought to sever them from the nine parts; such
suite shall go to the spiritual Court.

In the book of Entrees in the precedent of a Prohibition. consultation. 2.
consultation granted, it is thus said: In causis de decimis, de testamento,
velmatrimonio, quando sub eo nomine proponuntur, prohibitioni Regiae non est
locus. And so Bracton lib. 5. cap. 2.
Bracton says: Non pertinet ad Iudicem secularem cognoscere de ijs quae sunt
spiritualibus annexa, sicut de decimis, and alijs Ecclesiae prouentibus.
Bracton lib. 5. cap. 16.
And again afterward: Mutatur quandoque iurisdictio de jurisdiction in
iurisdictionem, mutatis rerum nominibus, vt si de Laico catallo fiat
spirituale, (vt cum res fuerint decimatae) fiunt de Laico catallo res
spirituales, and sic mutatur iurisdictio secularis in spiritualem. And
therefore where it is reported in the book of Assizes, 38. page 20. that the
Exchequer held plea in matter of tithes betwixt two parsons of Churches,
because the one was the Kings debtour; it is Brook tit. Iuris. 9.
said, that neither of the Benches would have done it, and that it was a
marvel.

It appears in the Register by Regist. in br. orig. page 45. b. 46. 47. b.
48. b.
sundry consultations granted after prohibitions brought, that at the Common
law, so declared and confirmed by Articuli cleri, tithes are of
ecclesiastical conisance. And it is alleged Gooddall of the liberties of the
Clergy. Regist. page 51. a. D.
truly out of the Register, that for tithes happening due in time of vacation
of a benefice, the Judge ecclesiastical may cite ex officio. More
particularly, sundry kinds of tithes are there expressed; which by
consultations were proved and allowed to belong to the determination of an
ecclesiastical Court. As first Reg. page 48. b.
tithe of wool rising of sheep killed or dead. Again, Reg. page 48. a.
tithe of calves and lacticinioru^, that is, of milk, butter, and cheese, (as
it may be gathered by another consultation) are both due to be paid, and
demaundable in a court ecclesiastical. Thirdly, another Reg. page 49. a.
co^sultation co^teineth, not only butter, cheese, and lacticinium, to be due
and demandable in court eccles. but also of pannage, that is, tithe of maste,
and of coltes. To these does the Treatise of the Gooddall of the liberties of
the Clergy, by the laws of the Realm.
liberties of the Clergy add tithes for honey, and wax of bees. But why he
should say further, that it seems all these must be by prescription, as if
tithes of all kinds were not ipso iure due, saving when some law does
otherwise specially limit and determine: I must confess, yt I can see no
seeming, nor yet colorable reason.

And not only the party himself who deteineth tithes may be sued, but if he
die, his executors may be sued also for them in court ecclesiastical. For so
is it Regist. in br. origin. page 48. a. and Gooddall ibidem.
testified by a Consultation obtained for tithe of Wool, denied by the
Testator, and by his executors who brought the prohibition. And the Gooddall
ibid.
like is testified by the said treatise of the Liberties of the Clergy,
touching tithes of Mils.

Whereas also for restraint of the malice of diverse, a provincial constitution
was made by the Bishops of the Province of Canterbury, in their Synod at
London, that such as hindered the gathering or carriage of tithes, by due and
accustomed ways should be excommunicated ipso facto: It happened that a parson
bringing his action in court ecclesiastical upon that constitution; was
hindered and stayed by prohibition, suggesting that it was instituted touching
debts and chattels, being neither Testamentarie nor matrimonial. But the
consultation Reg. p. 46. b. and 47. a. and Gooddall of the Liberties of the
Clergy.
granted, does signify; that the court ecclesiastical may lawfully proceed
in that plea, so far forth as the action reaches but to the excommunication
of the party, by reason of his hindering the Parson to gather and carry
tithes, by places due and accustomed, so that the said constitution and suites
ecclesiastical thereupon brought, be both allowable.

Yet we are to understand, that nevertheless in some cases, the suite for
tithes does not lie in an ecclesiastical court: as for example, where it is
otherwise determined by statute. For it is provided, that 45. Ed. 3. ca. 7.
where a man is sued in a court Ecclesiastical for tithes of great trees above
20 years growth, which may serve for timber of ships or houses, the kings
prohibition shall lie. But it was Reg. in br. origin. page 49. a. in Notabili.
Brook tit. Consultat. 11.
agreed in the Parliament at Sarum, that a consultation lies for Sylua caedua,
albeit it renew not year by year.

It was also Plowden. 17. Eliz. inter Sobie and Mullins.
adjudged in the case betwixt Sobie and Mullins, that of hornebeames, Sallowes,
and such like trees, (that are of so base nature that they serve not for
building, nor are of any endurance, and serving for fuel and other mean
uses) tithes should be paid, not only of the trees themselves, but of their
boughs when they are lopped, of what age soever they be.

The Ibidem.
opinion of the Court in this case then, further also was, that if the tree it
self by that statute (being but an affirmance of the Common law before) be
privileged for tithes, as Oak, Ash, and such like; that the arms and boughs
also of them (being of twenty years growth or above) shall be free likewise.
And the reason is added, for they may serve for some use in building.

So that here it may be doubted, if trees above twenty years growth, being of
a kind privileged and timberable, as Oak, Ash, Elm, etc. be of themselves so
little, so crooked, or so rotten, as that they can serve for nothing but blocks
and fuel, and be also so employed: whether thereof tithes shall be paid, and
be demandable in a Court ecclesiastical? For here the reason of that
judgment does cease, because they serve not for any use in building, and
cessante ratione, cessat lex.

This doubt is also enforced by the opinion T. 11. H. 4. fol. 242.
of Askham: who to maintain the prohibition there brought (though the suite in
the ecclesiastical court were for great wood) was driven to auerre, that they
were such great trees as might serve to build an house sufficient for any man's
dwelling, according to the custom of the Country. Which allegation of matter
in fact had not needed, if only the kind and age of the trees had been to be
respected, to maintain the Prohibition. But this question is to be discussed
by the reverend and learned Judges.

I do find a Note in the Register, but not set down by whom nor when,
touching immunitie of some things, from paying of tithes, to this Nota in Reg.
page 54. b.
effect, viz. Note, that the Justices say, that tithes shall not be yielded but
of such things as bring profit from year to year, and that by the memory of
man; but this is against the Decretals, says he. Now admitting this report to
be true; what might be the reason of such opinion of those that were Justices
then, is not expressed; and I cannot conjecture. for not only the Decretals and
Cano^ law, but Gods written law, and before that, ye law of nature (under which
other the^ such tithes were paid) do seem to be against it: and those Justices
had not (for any thing I can find) either former written law, or any report of
un written law or custom to yt effect.

And if this should be received for law, as is here in words laid down; then
need no tithes be paid of Sylua caedua; yet was it determined in the Parliament
at Sarum, yt they should: and so Reg. page 44.
it is at the Common law also. And the^ neither parsonall tithes, nor tithes of
Mils, nor tithes of Licoras, nor of Saffron heads (being gathered commonly but
once in 3. years) nor tithes of corn out of fields that lie fallow and
without fruit every other, or every third year; nor tithe calves or lambs
falling of such cattle, as do bring forth but every other year, nor tithe of
fruit trees, that bear but one year in three. And if tame elephants (for
carriage) were used as commonly here as in some other countries (which go with
young two or three years together) by like reason no tithe of the^ neither
might at all be demanded, because every of these are such, as bring no profit
from year to year.

Where also is added, that this yearly profit must have had his continuance
by the whole memory of man: hereby would be cut of all tithes of grounds newly
stubbed up and turned to good meadow, pasture or arable, from great timber
trees. Likewise all tithes of any new sets and commodities; as of sundry
roots, artichocks, osiers, woad, rape-seed, hoppes, French wheat, and such
like, being in most places but of late knowledge and small continuance, were
wholly taken away. And so were all tithes of grounds lately left dry by the sea,
or by fresh waters, or won by the industry of man.

The same Note further reports, that the Justices opinion then was: that for
tithes of pit-coles, quarries and other like, by no means a Consultation should
be granted: because Parsons took tithe of the blades that grew on the ground
over them, and therefore they should not take tithe of the coals. This opinion
(as it seems to me) that very Note misliketh in these words: But (says he)
by the like reason, a man ought not to pay tithe of agistment, because he
yields tithe for the beasts that feed in his pasture. But I do not well
conceive the truth of that which he here insinuates: as if Agistment money
were to be paid for the herbage of the same beasts, which by their calfe,
lamb, wool or milk, do bring commodity to the Church. Yet if he mean that
tithe of Agistment money is to be paid for barren cattle, though they depasture
in the same pasture where fruitful cattle do, and at the same time; then does
he come nearer to the purpose of confuting that reason, which implies thus
much, that several kinds of commodities in one year, arising out of one ground,
should yield but one kind of tithe. For if this were true, then where tithe of
haie has been paid, nothing should be yielded for the after-math (commonly
being half the value of the haie) though it be depastured with cattle, which
bring no commodity to the church: then also might not the vicar of Tenham in
Kent, have tithes (as he has) of the fruit of the great Orchard in Summer,
because he had tithe loppings of the trees in Winter, amounting to sundry
loades of faggot. And then also should not the Church have tithe fruit of such
great young Orchards turned from tillage, as still yield tithe corn, or haie
growing under the trees for sundry years together.

If to these objections it be said, yt there is great diversity; because these
examples do in deed import several fruits and commodities to be taken; yet
either at diverse times of the year, or else arising out of several parts of
the ground: for reply I say, that the like may be also said of colepits and
quarries, for so much of the ground above as is dug, bears at that time
neither corn nor grass. And albeit for coals (when men be come to a certain
vein and depth) they use to dig side-long, leaving great pillars to support
the earth from falling: yet is it not the self same part of the ground below
where they dig, that bears grass or corn above, and therefore herein no
diversity. And with like reason might tithe of the seed of Woad be denied,
because tithe of the leaves was before paid: or tithes of Saffron heads,
because tithe Saffron was paid the same year. Yea, if this note were assured
law, then should no tithes be paid of any Minerals: as of lead, tin,
copper, quicksiluer, etc. how it goes in Cornwall, Devonshire, and at
Mendiffe hills in Somerset shire for tin and lead, I have not enquired. but I
am assured, that in the Peake in Darbishire, tithe lead is the chiefest part of
the Ministers living, in such places where it is gotten. Which I fear me would
hardly be yielded (as it has been by time immemoriall) only of pure good
will; if the law in that point were against the Ministers. But the discussing
and judgment of these doubts, I must refer wholly to the reverend Judges,
because they do surpass my slender skill.

It seems also by the book of Entrees, that Tit. Prohibitio^.
a prohibition lies, where tithes of corn and wood be sued for in an
Ecclesiastical Court, if an action of trespass be thereupon depending before
at the Common law. De hoc quaere. 38. Ed. 3. fol. 8.
Likewise if a man covenant to pay or set out his tithes truly, he must be
sued in a Temporal Court upon this act of covenant, and not else where.
Furthermore, tithes of corn, etc. may be considered either before they be
severed from the nine parts, in which 38. Edw. 3. 6. 50. Edwa. 3. 10. 38. Edw.
3. 8.
case, if all the corn be carried away (it is said) the suite lies in a
spiritual Court: Or after seuerance; and then to carry the tithe away, after
seuerance from the nine parts; is said to be a trespass determinable at the
Common law. But I find (to mine understanding) great opinion against this: as
Bract. lib. 5. cap. 16.
first Bracton, where he says: Cum res fuerint decimatae, fiunt de Laico
catallo res spirituales. For decimare must needs be to tithe and set out from
the nine parts. Secondarily the opinion M. 22. Ed. 4. fol. 23.
of the whole Court. For upon an action of trespass brought by a Parson
against the Vicar, the Vicar justified, that he took them for tithes being
severed from the nine parts; and that he and his predecessors, time out of
mind, had prescribed them to be due: whereupon the Judges (ex officio, without
petition of either party) dismissed this plea, unto the Spiritual court; as
not perteining to their jurisdiction. Soluat Apollo. But it seems to me, that
the 27. H. 8. ca. 20. 32. H. 8. cap. 7. 2. and 3. Ed. 6. cap. 13.
statutes for tithes do now stint this strife, and makes both cases to be
Ecclesiastical. Upon 14. H. 4. 17.
corn carried away, whereupon it comes to be tried betwixt two Parsons of
Churches, who has right to the tithes; this trial belongs to the spiritual
Court, and is not upon action of trespass, to be brought to the Common law.
And so it was adjudged; albeit that the defendant there said, that his
Parsonage was then in lease. But if they 39. Ed. 3. 23. 5. H. 5. 10.
had joined issue, whether the place whence the sheaues were taken, were in the
one Parish or the other, then it should have been tried at the Common law,
because Brook tit. Iurisdict.
the bounds of a Parish shall be tried by the Country, as is there said.

Yet in a little Treatise An answer to a letter cap. 1. printed by Tho. Godfrey
circa 26. H. 8.
printed by Thomas Godfrey in K. Henry the eights time, it is testified, that
it has been holden in times past etc. that the division and distinction of
parish from parish, is a thing so mere spiritual, that no man may do it but
the Clergy. which asseueration though he disallow, if the Clergy claim it by
any immediate power given them from God: yet (says he) of these and of diverse
other things; it is no doubt, but they have holden plea in times past; rather
by a custom and by a sufferance of princes; then for that they be mere
spiritual: or that they of the Clergy, had authority so to do, by any
immediate power of the law of God. So that he allows division and distinction
of parishes, to have been (of old) of ecclesiastical conusance; though to be
derived from the kings prerogotiue royal. And it Prou. constit. aeternae
sanctio. de poenis. and ibi Lindwood verb. limitibus paro. chiarum.
appears by a constitution provincial made in a Synod at Lambhith holden
under Boniface then Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year of Christ 1260,
that the Clergy then (undoubtedly) held, and so practiced, touching limits
parochiarum; that they merely belonged to the court ecclesiastical. And
Lindwood coming 200 years or thereabout, after him, in his Commentaries or
Glosses thereupon; makes no doubt of it, but only quoteth Canon law for it.

If a Parson grant to M. 8. Edw. 4. fol. 13.
me by deed all the tithes of his benefice, and yet afterward he sueth me in a
Court Christian, for the tithes of mine own lands, whereupon I bring mine
action of covenant in the Temporal Court; nevertheless I shall not have a
prohibition, because I may plead that matter in bar in the Ecolesiasticall
court. Danbie and Chok.

But if a rent reserved upon a lease of tithes or offerings, be 44. Ed. 3. 32.
sued for in a Spiritual court, there lies a prohibition, for this is a Lay
rent: and so Bracton Lib. 5. ca. 16.
holds in the place before alleged agreeable to the statute of Articuli
Cleri. It is holden, Regist. fol. 38.
that if a Patron having an Indenture to be quit of certain tithes, be sued in
a Court Christian for those tithes, he shall have a prohibition. But ask
whether (this precedent of the Register notwithstanding) he may not have a
consultation by the opinion of Danbie and Chok, before recited: and the rather
in this case then in the former, by how much it is more to be presumed to be a
Symoniacall compact against him, that is Patron. For if it be not Symoniacall,
he may plead this covenant in bar, in a Court ecclesiastical, as well as in
the former case.

The competencie of the Court for suite of tithes, depends also much upon the
consideration of the parties, that contend for them. For 38. Edw. 3. 6. 31. H.
6. 11. 7
in an action of trespass brought at the Common law, the defendant said, that
the corn, whereof the plaintiff complains, was growing in D. which is
parcel of M. where he is Parson, and thereby he claims: And because in the
pleadings they were both named Parsons; the opinion of the Court was; that it
was out of their jurisdiction. In another Hill. 7. H. 4. fol. 35. per quosdam
libros, and 102. per alios.
action of trespass brought against a Lay man that claimed by lease from
another Parson (notwithstanding that by M. 44. Ed. 3. it was alleged, that the
Kings Bench in such case shall have jurisdiction, because it is between a Lay
man and a Parson, and that by Articuli Cleri (by the contract) transcunt
decimae in catalla: yet because it was of tithes, which they might reconer in
Court Christian, Gascoigne held; that the Temporal court ought to be out of
jurisdiction: for (said he) though it had bin so done before, yet it shall not
be done so by us here. And of the same opinion was Moile, in another like
action of trespass: that, 6. Ed. 4. 3.
between a Parson and a Fermer of another Parson, action for tithes lies in a
Spiritual court, because the Fermer claims the tithes as due to himself
during his term, which none gainsaid.

But upon the former of these two last cases, Brook Brook tit. Iurisdict. 82.
does thus collect: that, it thereby appears clearly, that upon contention
for tithes between a Parson and a Lay servant of another Parson, the
Spiritual court shall have jurisdiction. For (says he) the servant does
claim to the use of his Master, and not to his own use, upon any Lay
contract. Yet how this collection may stand together, with other judgments
elsewhere reported to be given, may move some doubt: For, in 31. H. 6. 11. 1.
H. 6. 5.
an action of trespass brought by a Parson against the servant of another
Parson: the servant justified for tithes of his Master, and thereupon demanded
judgment, whether that Court would hold plea thereof: and it was not allowed,
because the said defendant was a Lay man. Likewise, 6. Edw. 4. 3.
it an action of trespass brought by a Vicar for corn, taken by the servant
of another Parson, that claimed them as tithes of his Master; and the plaintiff
claimed them as tithes due to his Vicarage: it was adjudged by three, that the
Court temporal had jurisdiction, because the plaintiff had none action against
the servant, in a Court spiritual, at least as is there affirmed.

Markham seems to be of opinion, that if any 38. H. 6. 19.
part of right of tithes do come in debate between two Patrons, that there the
court Ecclesiastical can not hold plea. And if 25. H. 8. vt refert Brook
tit. Iurisdict. nu. 95.
the Lord of a Manor claim tithes of certain lands in D. to find a
Chapleine or Curate in D. therewith, and the Parishioners there claim those
tithes likewise for the self same end: It was delivered for law, that the Lay
Court should have jurisdiction between them, and not the Spiritual Court.

The last cause of drawing an action for spoliation of tithes from a Court
ecclesiastical, that I find, is: where the tithes in demand, do amount to a
fourth part of the yearly commodity of the whole benefice: because hereby, the
right of Patronage, may be touched or prejudiced; which right of Patronage is
to be handled in a court Temporal only, and by no means in Ecclesiastical.
For so is it testified by Lindwood c. aeternae sanct. V. iute-patronatus.
constable. Prou. de poenis. edita 1260.
Lindwood himself, to be the old custom of the Realm; and therefore the
Common law of the land. But in another place he seems to be of opinion, that
(this notwithstanding) no prejudice toward the Patronage can grow, though the
suite for all the whole tithes and oblations should be prosecuted in court
Ecclesiastical. For (says he) Lindwood in verbo quarta pars bonorum. c. 2.
Prou. constable. de foro competenti.
the right of Patronage is founded upon one of these three, viz. building,
founding, or endowing of a Church. So that the right of Patronage does no way
respect tithes or oblations coming to the Church, but rather the building of
it, the ground whereon it is situate, or the endowment (as of glebe etc.)
assigned unto it. This he writes saluo iudicio meliori: and under the same
reservation, I do hold, that where a great part of tithes is (by suite)
euicted from one Church unto another; the very patronage it self is much
prejudiced and endamaged. For if the Patron happen to sell it, the less value
the benefice is of, the less recompense shall he have for it. Besides, if
Stat. circumspecte agatis.
a pension be assigned out of the benefice unto the Patron (as it may be
Lindwood, vbi supra. V. pensionem.
upon the foundation) the more the benefice is empaired, the more hard will the
pension be to recover. Lastly, for so much as the Clerk presented is (by law)
bound to relieve his Patron fallen in decay: in this respect, great prejudice
grows to the Patron, when a fourth or greater part of the benefice is euicted.

That which Markham held (as is aforesaid) viz. that if any part of right of
tithes do come in debate betwixt two Patrons, there the Court ecclesiastical
could not hold plea: seems to be borrowed from a consultation in the Reg.
page 46. a.
Register in these words, viz. we being not willing to have any thing derogated
from jurisdiction ecclesiastical, do signify, that you may proceed, according
to the course of the ecclesiastical court, in the plea aforesaid; so as the
action reach but unto spoliation of tithes; and not to the aduowson or right of
Patronage, of any part of the Church: saving that he speaks of the right of
any part of the tithes, and the Register goes to the right of Patronage it
self, of any part of the Church.

But where Stat. circum. specte agatis.
a fourth or greater part of tithes etc. is not in demand betwixt two Parsons
of Churches, there the Plea goes to the ecclesiastical court. The Goodall of
the liberties of the Clergy by the laws of the Realm.
book of Liberties of the Clergy, hereof writes thus: one Parson of a Church
may sue another in case of spoliation or taking of tithes or pension, in court
Christian: so that the matter in demand, amount not to a fourth part of the
value of the Church; by reason thereby the right of Patronage seems to come
in question. but if they be both of one man's Patronage, they may be sued there,
to what value soever the thing demanded shall amount unto.

That Pensions out of Churches, are demaundable (not only by statute, but also
at the common law) in a court ecclesiastical: is made plain, by Reg. page
47. (...). ibid. page 53. 2. Goodall, vbi supra.
two consultations in the Register, and by other books of law. But Goodall
further adds: that for a pension, there lies also a writ of Annuity at the
common law; so that it is at the plaintifes election, where to sue. but if
there he do declare, upon the prescription; and after he sue in the spiritual
court, by the name of a Pension; the other (it seems) may then have a
prohibition.

For Mortuaries, that they at the common law be of ecclesiastical conisance,
read the two consultations in the Register, and the other which M. 9. H. 4. M.
10. H. 4. 1. Entres, title of prohibition. Reg. page 45. b. Reg. page 49. a.
be here quoted. And likewise Reg. page 50. a. b.
for oblations detained; which ought (says Goodall, vbi supra.
Goodall) to be paid at their usual days.

Another thing due to the Minister, whereby also he has a part of maintenance,
is demaundable and determinable in an ecclesiastical Court, viz. the places of
burial, and the Churchyard.

Touching the first: A Parson, to an Li. 44. assi. pa. 8.
assise brought against him for a house, did plead that he was Parson of P.
and that to be parcel of his Church, by time immemoriall, and that there had
bin burying of dead bodies: whereupon Persey held opinion, that the court
temporal, ought not to take conusance thereof. For the second; 44. E. 3. lib.
assi.
it is a good plea against the jurisdiction of the temporal court, to plead,
that the land is his Churchyard.

The true reason hereof I take to be alleged by Bracton (because it is
dedicated and consecrated to God) where thus he writes: Bra. li. 5. ca. 16.
Negocium terminabitur in foro seculari, si de laico feodo agatur, nisi fuerit
dedicatum and Deo sacratum: sic enim res efficietur sacra: hoc autem diet non
potest, de re in liberam and perpetuam eleemosynam data. For though a thing be
given in Francke almoigne, to an ecclesiastical person; yet it remains of
lay fee still, and is not said to be consecrated to God. Therefore 19. H. 6. 20.
a trespass done upon a Parsons glebe land (which is a francke tenement)
cannot be tried in a spiritual court. But it seems that in a trespass done
in a Churchyard, it is otherwise. for if a H. 17. H. 3. Fitz. referente, tit.
prohib. 26.
man take trees that are growing in a Churchyard, the Parson may sue for them
in Court Christian. Sed quaere.

And that matters of burial do belong to conusance ecclesiastical, is
declared by a consultation in the Reg. page 52. b.
Register very plainly.

CHAP. VII. Ofright to have a Curate: and of contributions to reparations, and
to other things required in Churches.
Now when a Parish or Hamlet has right to have a Curate found in their
Chapel, to say them divine service: If this be denied them, and no
circumstance otherwise be incident thereto, to draw it to the Common law, it
should seem by all reason (of his own nature) to be a matter belonging to the
conusance of a court ecclesiastical, accordingly as always (without
impeachment) it has bin used. Yet I find in the books of Common law, that
22. H. 6. 32.
an action of the case was mainteinable for not saying divine service, albeit
it was there confessed, to be a spiritual matter. What the circumstances and
cause thereof was, that it was so ruled in that case, Quaere.

It appears by the Reg. page 56. a.
Register; that a prohibition being brought upon a suite in court
ecclesiastical, for withholding a Chauntery, a consultation was after
granted: whereby is affirmed; that pro subtractione Cantariae, and debita
punitione pro huiusmodi subtractione, the suite belongs to a court
ecclesiastical: and the like (therefore) must needs be thought of a Chaplain
or Curate, not found to say divine service, where it ought to be either by
composition, or by prescription.

But that parishioners ought to be contributories, and may be cited in a cause
of contribution toward the reparations of the body of the Church (termed Nauis
ecclesiae) and to the charges of buying and furnishing other vtensiles,
ornaments, and books, required (by law) to be bought of the common charge;
does appear partly by the Register, and partly by Fitzherbert in his noua
natura breuium, who does gather it thence. For if (says he) a Fitzh. no. na.
br. tit. Consult. fol. 50.
Bishop do cite any of the parishioners of a Church, to be contributorie to
the reparations of the parish Church, or of any Chapel annexed to it: if the
party sue a prohibition directed to the Bishop, surmising that he is impleaded
(touching lay fee) in court Christian; the Bishop shall have a consultation
upon this matter showed in the Chancerie, on his behalf. And partly also by
the Injunctions which were set out by the Queens Majesty in the first year
of her reign, and are under the great seal of England, for better record of
the matter, her highness being thereunto authorized by act of Parliament. For
in Injunctions published 1559.
these are contained, sundry vtensiles, ornaments, books, and other things,
that by the common cost of every Parish shall be provided, and from time to time
supplied: and whether they be wanting or no, is to be enquired by
ecclesiastical Judges; and the observation of the Injunctions is by them to be
urged (against those, that shall infringe any of them) by processes and
censures ecclesiastical, according to the course of that law.

And herein the Injunctions follow but the Common law. For Of the liberties of
the Clergy by the laws of the Realm.
if a terre-tenant holding land that has usually paid for such tenement a
pound of wax, or such like, unto the Church, do withhold it; the
Churchwardens may sue him for it, in a court eccles.

Also Ibidem.
if a man that withholdeth Church goods, do by his last will enjoin his
executours to make deliverance; any of the Parish may sue the executours for
them in court ecclesiastical.

For proceeding ecclesiastically against refusers to contribute unto the
reparations of the body of the Church, there remains a judgment in a
consultation Reg. page 45. 2.
(recorded in the Register) to this effect, viz. vobis significamus, quod super
reparatione and emendatione defectuum corporis ecclesiae (iuxta consuetudinem
approbatam) facienda: procedere poteritis, and ea facere, quae ad forum
ecclesiasticum noueritis pertinere, dicta prohibitione non obstante. And by
reason of defectes in reparations of a Church, money it self may lawfully be
sued for, in a court ecclesiastical, as Reg. page 48. 2.
appears by another consultatio^ in the Register. And so is it also provided
by statute (in this behalf) amongst other things, viz. Circumspecte agatis,
13. Ed. 1.
Prelates may punish for leaving Churchyards unclosed, or for that the Church
is uncovered, or not conuentently decked: in which cases, none other penance
can be enjoined, but pecuniarie.

CHAP. VIII. Proofs in general, that sundry crimes and offenses are
punishable by ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: and namely, idolatry, heresy,
perjury, or laesio fidei, and how far the last of these is there to be
corrected: also of disturbance of divine service, or not frequenting of it, and
neglect of the Sacraments.
LAstly do follow the testimonies of the laws of the Realm for proof, that
many crimes also and offenses are punishable by jurisdiction ecclesiastical:
and first in general, then in particular, for sundry of them: The King writ
thus to his Judges: Statut. Circumspecte agatis. 13. E. 1.
use your selves circumspectly in all matters concerning the Bishop of Norwich
and his Clergy, not punishing them, if they hold plea in court Christian of
such things as be merely spiritual, that is to wit, of penance enjoined for
mortal sin, etc.

In hospitals 2. H. 5. ca 1.
that be of any others foundation then the Kings, it is enacted that Ordinaries
shall enquire of the foundation, erection and governance of them, and of all
other matters necessary in that behalf: and thereupon make thereof correction
and reformation after the laws of holy Church, as to them belongs.

In the statute of Citation, it is permitted, that a man may 23. H. 8. ca. 9.
be cited out of the Dioeces where he dwells; when some spiritual offense or
cause is committed and done, or omitted, neglected, or foreslowed to be done by
some, having spiritual jurisdiction.

In a statute of K. Edward the 6. 1. Ed. 6. cap. 2.
Causes of correction be reckoned as ecclesiastical: which statute though it
be repealed (for the principal purport there of being touching Ordinaries
seals, and names not to be used any more, in their citations and processes)
yet it brings sufficient evidence, that sundry matters of correction be of
ecclesiastical jurisdiction. And so Bracton testifies, that it was used and
holden in his time: for he says, In Bracton lib. 5. cap. 2.
causis spiritualibus vel spiritualitati annexis, vt si propeccato vel
transgressione fuerit poenitentia iniungenda, iudex ecclesiasticus habet
cognitionem, quia non pertinet ad regem iniungere poenitentias, nec ad iudicem
Secularem.

The sundry consultations set down in the Register do show; that when the
proceeding is ad correctionem animae, for some sin not punishable in the
Temporal Court; the conisance is Ecclesiastical. One Regist. 45. a. b.
example shall suffice: viz. Nolumus, cognitionem ecclesiasticam, in ijs quae
ad forum ecclesiae, and maxim ad correctionem animae pertinent, contra
iustitiam impedire.

But to descend to more particulars, and first concerning those which are
contrary Pietati in Deum, That idolatry is punishable by Jurisdiction
ecclesiastical; appears by the statute 5. Eliz. cap. 23.
De excommunicato capiendo, before alleged: and touching Heresy or error in
matter of Religion or doctrine (besides that Statute) others do also show, how
it is inquirable, and punishable by Jurisdiction ecclesiastical. For both the
Preamble and Statute of Henry the fourth, and the Statute of Henry the fifth
touching Heresies, do plainly testify hereof. In the former whereof is said:
2. H. 4. ca. 15.
that the Dioecesans of the Realm, cannot by their Jurisdiction Spiritual,
without aid of the Royal Majesty, sufficiently correct nor restreine the
malice of Heretics; because they go from Dioecesse to Dioecesse, and willnot
appear before the Dioecesans, but contemn the keys of the Church, and
censures of the same, etc. And in the 2. H. 5. ca. 7.
later: that the conusance of Heresy, errors and lollardies, belongs to
Judges of holy Church, and not to secular Judges. And likewise by a later 25.
H. 8. c. 14
Statute then those, whereby it was provided; that every person being presented
or indicted of any Heresy, or duly accused or detected thereof by two lawful
witnesses at the least, to any Ordinaries, etc. might by them be proceeded
against, etc. and none otherwise.

Neither is it material, though the said three statutes do stand repealed; for
they show (nevertheless) touching Heresy; what then was, and now is still at
the Common Law. which offense to be still punishable at the Common Law, does
also more plainly appear by the statute of Citations, being still in force.
For there it is provided, that (the said statute notwithstanding) 23. H. 8. c.
9.
the Archbishop may cite and summon any person of his province for cause of
Heresy, if the immediate Ordinary do consent, or do not his duty: and
that the prerogative of the Archbishop of Canterbury shall not be prejudiced
by that Statute.

The like is testified of breach of an oathe, and of perjury in an
ecclesiastical Court or matter. For after that (amongst diverse other matters)
in the statute of Circumspecte agatis. 13. Ed. 1.
Circumspecte agatis, breach of an oath is mentioned, it is thus in the end
added: In all cases before rehearsed, the Spiritual Judge shall have power to
take knowledge, notwithstanding the kings prohibition. And by the aforesaid 5.
Eliz. ca. 23.
Statute De excommunicato capiendo (among sundry other crimes and offenses)
Perjury in the Ecclesiastical Court, is reckoned to be of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. And so is it by a 5. Eliz. cap. 9.
prouiso in the statute against perjury, made at the same time.

By books of the Common Law, I find two cases, wherein breach of oath called
laesio fidei, in an oath voluntarily taken, whether privately, or before an
Ecclesiastical Judge (as was in those days much used) is to be determined in
the Temporal, and not in the Ecclesiastical Court. The one is such as fell
out in the case of the vicar of Saltash; who had made an Obligation, and had
bound it by an oath (that he would not go against it) before the Popes
collector in England; who pretended (though unjustly) some Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical in himself. Against which oath, when the Uicar was supposed to
deal, and was therefore conuented before the said Collector; there went forth
a prohibition, and no consultation could be obtained. For (said Hankeford) a M.
2. H. 4. 15. Concordat 24. H. 1. per Brook praemunire 16. Doct. and stud. lib.
2 cap. 24.
man shall not be sued before an Ordinary for perjury, but where the
principal matter whereupon the perjury grew, was a matter Spiritual or
touching it: and alleged this reason: for else, if the perjury should be
found against him; he should be straight awarded there, to perform the oath
whereupon the perjury grew, and where of he is attainted: and so (though it
were to pay debts) he should be there compelled to pay them; and hereby, Lay
contracts should be determined there, contrary to the Kings royalty.

And again, the same man, in the T. 11. H. 4. fol. 241. secund. vnam impress.
and 88. vel. 85. secund. aliam.
same Kings days, (afterward) reports; that a man had sworn to make a
feofment of his land; and because he did it not, he was vexed by the party,
in the Court Christian, as for the perjury: and because such suite shall be as
a compulsion to perform a thing touching land and inheritance; it was adjudged
in such manner, as if he had sued for the principal, in Court Christian.

And the effect P. 38. H. 6. 29.
of both these cases is rehearsed (with the like reason) by Fortescue in the
Eschequer Chamber; and was expressly granted by some, and gainesaide by none.
Therefore Fitzh. tit. proh. 12. ex Regist.
if a man and his wife do aliene the right of his wife, and the wife is sworn
that she will not sue the Cui in vita: and yet after the death of her husband
brings the Writ, and the other sueth her in Court Christian for breach of
her oath, she shall have her prohibition.

Agreeable to which, is that judgment long agone, that M. 4. H. 3. referente
Fitzh. prohib. 15.
if a man sue another in Court Christian pro laesione fidei, which oath arose
upon a temporal contract or cause, a prohibition lies. And Bracton lib. 5.
cap. 2.
Bracton that writ in that time, says thus: In placito quod pertinet ad
coronam and dignitatem regis, etsi fides fuerit apposita in contractu, non
propter hoc pertinebit cognitio super principali ad iudicium Ecclesiasticum.
Hereof he allegeth a reason in another place of the same book, Idem lib. 5.
cap. 9.
Iurisdictionem regiam non mutat fidei interpositio, sacramentum praestitum,
nec spontanea renuntiatio partium.

To which resolutions accords this book case: In an M. 20. Ed. 4. fol. 10.
attachment upon a prohibition, where the plaintiff was sued in Court Christian
pro laesione fidei, in that he had sworn to pay fifteen pounds, and did not:
Brian held, that when the faith is made touching a matter Spiritual, then the
breach there of shall be punished in a Court Spiritual: (as if one should swear
to pay me his tithes truly, or a woman to marry with me) but if the faith be
made upon a matter Temporal, then the breach of faith shall not be punished
there: because they will not assoile him (if he be convict) till some Temporal
duty be contented and paid.

A later Treatise of the Common Law made in King Henry 8. his time, does
touch this A Treatise that the B. of Rome had never Supremacy here, by the
Laws of the Realm. cap. 1.
point thus, viz. In most cases of perjury, the King and his Courts have had
the punishment, and in some cases the Clergy in their Courts, have had the
punishment, by the custom of the Realm only: viz. such as have risen upon
Spiritual causes.

Another case where the Ecclesiastical Law shall not have conusance of the
breach of an oath voluntarily taken, is when there lies an action for the
matter (whereof the oath was confirmatorie) at the Common Law. therefore it
was holden by Brian T. 22. Ed. 4. fol. 20.
not long after; that if a man swear to pay twenty pounds, that he owes, at
a certain time, and pay it not; and for the perjury be brought into the
Spiritual Court, there shall lie a prohibition: because (says he) an action of
debt lies at the Common Law.

I make this a several cause and reason from the former, because an oath may
grow upon a Temporal matter, (which was the former cause) and yet none action
lie for it. And if I promise without any consideration to give you twenty
pounds, and bind it with a voluntary oath, it seems the Common Law will
hold it still but pro nudo pacto, and so give none action at all.

But some occasion is given unto me to think, that courts Ecclesiastical, de
facto (howsoever de iure) held plea of breach of oath and of faith falsified
(which Lyndw. in cap. aeter^ae sanctio. verbo fidei transgressione. de poenis.
amounts to as much in some respects, as breach of a corporal oath) even when
such oath or faith voluntary taken, was for confirming of a matter Temporal.
For this I find not only before the Writ was framed de recognitionibus per
sacrament a non faciendis, de catallis and debitis, quae non sunt de testamento
vel matrimonio: but afterward also, and that as well by judgment, as by
opinions delivered and reported for book cases: albeit with certain cautions;
which shall (by the way) be touched.

First then, that Ecclesiastical Courts handled this cause long before that
Writ was devised; I find in a Prou. Constitutio, (...) sanctio. de poenis.
Provincial Constitution made at a Synod holden at Lambhith under Boniface
then Archbishop of Canterbury, in the time of King Henry the third, Anno
Christi 1260. which constitution I do allege, not as being of force now, for
the purport thereof (because it aims at the bridling of the Kings
Prerogative, and of his Temporal Courts) but thereby (historically) to show,
what was then held and practiced usually.

The effect of it (to this purpose) is: that whereas Prelates do take Conisance
of sins and of misdemeanors of such as be under their Jurisdiction; as of
Perjury, or breach of faith, of Sacrilege, of violation of Church liberties,
(for infringing of which, even by the Kings Charter granted to the Church of
England, such disturbers do fall into Excommunication ipso facto) and of such
like causes which be merely of Ecclesiastical Conisance: yet are prohibitions
directed forth out of the Kings Court; and Judges Ecclesiastical are called
thither to answer; as if they dealt not concerning Perjury and breach of
faith; but suggesting that they deal touching chattels. Therefore a little
after, is added this, viz. Dicta. Prou. Constable.
And if perhaps the King in his attachements, prohibitions, and summons shall
make mention, not of Tithes, but of right of Patronage: not of faith falsified
or perjury, but of Chattelles: not of sacrilege or disturbance of
ecclesiastical liberties, but of some trespass pretended to be done by his
subjects or bailiffes, the ^edresse whereof belongs unto him: then let the
Prelates aforesaid make known unto him; that they hold no plea, neither
intend to do, concerning right of Patronage, or chattelles, or any other things
belonging to his court: but concerning tithes, sins, and other mere
spiritual matters, belonging to their office and jurisdiction, and tonching
the safety of men's souls etc. So that the truth of such allegation being
manifested to the king, they thought the plea sound and sufficient, to obteinea
discharge from such prohibitions, etc. if they were in those respects only
granted.

Yea, and Lindwood, who writ anno 1423, and long after that writ was framed
(who also by reason he was Official principal of Canterbury or Deane of the
Arches, had good experience in these causes) makes no Lindw. ibidem V.
periurio.
doubt; but that matter of perjury or of breach of faith, arising upon what
cause soever, so far forth as it concerns doubt, whether such oath were
lawful or not, and do bind in conscience, or not; is of ecclesiastical
conisance. And therefore teaches how the libell in that case is to be framed,
that no cause of prohibition be given, viz. the party has damnably broken his
oath made for payment of so much money, unlawfully pretending, that he is not
thereby bound or tied. The statute Circumspecte agatis says: defamation shall be
tried in a Spiritual court when money is not demanded, but a thing done for
punishment of the sin, and likewise for breaking an oath; without
distinction, whether it arose of a temporal cause or not.

Since the said writ, we have a judgment in the very point in the time Lib.
22. Assis. fol. 70.
of king Edward the third. For if a man demand a debt of ten pounds before
the Ordinary, for that the defendant plight his faith to pay it etc. and has
not paid it, but broken his faith: the Ordinary cannot enjoin him to pay the
debt for sauegard of his faith; and if he do, he does it against the kings
prohibition. But he ought to enjoin him other corporal penance, except the
party will willingly redeem it. For so Fitzherbert Fitzherberts Abridgement
tit. Prohibition. number. 2.
reads those last words of exception, more truly then my book of Assizes
(as it is printed) carrying indeed therein no sense at all. The like appears
in the reign of king Henry the sixth: for there it 34. H. 6. 70. vt Brook
allegat tit. Jurisdiction number 2.
was holden, that if a man buy an horse of me, and swear upon the Evangelists
to pay me ten pounds for him such a day and pay it not: I shall have action of
debt at the Common law, and also a citation pro laesione fidei at the
Spiritual law, and shall not therein offend the Common law, because they are
diverse things.

As for opinions afterward, we find it was held by Brian and Litleton in the
time of K. Edward the fourth, none there gainsaying it: that M. 20. Ed. 4. for.
10.
in laesione fidei arising vp^ a temporal matter, the Spiritual court might
punish it ex officio, but not at the suite of the party.

To the same purpose also Mordant said in the time of K. Henry the seventh, T.
12. H. 7. fol. 22.
that if a man be sued in a Court ecclesiastical by a party pro laesione
fidei, in not paying a sum of money promised, there shall lie a prohibition;
but if the Judge ecclesiastical shall do it ex officio, then no prohibition
shall lie. which no man gainsaid or impugned. These two opinions, lest they
should seem to cross the former judgment in the book of assizes, and the
other book case of 34. H. 6. (both which admit a party to sue in the Court
ecclesiastical) do seem to me only therefore to reject a party, and to
require proceeding ex officio Iudicis: because it was presumed; that a party
would not prosecute, to have the sin alone punished; but rather for
satisfaction of the thing promised to him. Yet this in truth may be otherwise
by the law ecclesiastical. So that upon all that which has herein bin last
spoken, it might probably seem to some; that punishment of perjury or breach
of faith, even arising upon a temporal cause, should be still (by the Common
law) of ecclesiastical conisance: so that penance for the sin be but
enjoined, and no temporal amends required. which doubt is to be referred to
the reverend Judges resolutions.

That disturbance of divine service is also punishable by jurisdiction
ecclesiastical, the statute thereof made, in the time 1. Mar. cap. 3.
of Q. Marie, does prove: for though it do provide punishment temporal
therefore; yet it reserueth the jurisdiction that Ordinaries had, for
punishment thereof by laws ecclesiastical. Not to frequent or come to divine
service at times appointed, is declared to be subject to proceeding and
censures ecclesiastical, as well as to other punishments, by the statute 1.
Eliz. cap. 2.
for Uniformity of Common prayer: and so is both that, and neglect of the
Sacraments; by the statute De excommunicato capiendo, heretofore often
alleged, proved to be of Ecclesiastical conusance.

Long before that statute, upon a prohibition brought, a consultation Reg. page
50. a. b.
was granted: whereby the Ordinaries proceeding ex officio, against one that
refused to receive the Communion, is allowed and warranted. And so does the
little Goodall of the liberties of the Clergy.
Treatise of the liberties of the Clergy, report this offense to be of
Ecclesiastical conusance. Thus much touching offenses ecclesiastical, being
referred to impiety toward God.

CHAP. IX. That simony, usury, defamation or slander, beating of a Clerk,
sacrilege, brauling or fighting in Church or Churchyard, dilapidations, or
waste of an Ecclesiastical living, and all incontinencie, are punishable by
Ecclesiastical authority, and how far.
AMongst such crimes as be offenses against justice, I do place simony first;
as participating also not a little with the former sort, yet rightly sorted
hither: because it is, as a buying and selling of such things, as be not (in
truth) res mancipi (as the old Romans spoke) things lying not in commerce
between men to be bought and sold. This fault the said Ibid. in fine.
statute De excommunicato capiendo, shows to be punishable by jurisdiction
ecclesiastical.

That usury is likewise, it does appear by authority of diverse Parliaments.
The king and his 15. E. 3. cap. 5.
shall have the conusance of the usurers dead, and the Ordinaries of holy
church shall have the conusance of usurers on live, as to them apperteineth, to
make compulsion by the censures of holy church for the sin, and to make
restitution of the vsuries taken, against the laws of holy church.

By annother later act made against usury, 11. H. 7. cap 8.
there are reserved to the spiritnall jurisdiction, their lawful punishments
in every cause of usury. And so is it expressly also mentioned in the aforenamed
statute De excommunicato capiendo: but this jurisdiction is since somewhat
restreined, because 13 Eliz. cap. 8.
usury can not now thereby be punished nor corrected, except it reach above the
rate of ten in the hundred by year.

By a consultation in the Reg. page 49. b.
Register, which was granted in allowance of proceeding against one for his
usury, it is thus said, in this behalf: Quta in articulis Cleri continetur,
quod si Praelati imponant alicui poenitentiam pro peccato, prohibitioni nostrae
non est locus, vobis significamus quod ad correctionem animae praefati S. in
hac part (viz. pro vsura) dum tamen nihil aliud attentetis quod cedat in
laesionem dignitatis nostrae, in curia Christianitatis procedere poteritis,
prohibitione nostra non obstante. But this fault and sin of Usury is mixti
fori: that is to say, in some respect is of temporal, and in other regard of
eccllesiasticall conisance, not only by the statutes of the Realm (as you have
heard) but also even by the law civil, albeit in a diverse sort. For in
countries where that law has place, if it be D D. in l. Titia. ff. soluto
matrimonio.
called in question, whether a contract be vsurarious or not, the court
ecclesiastical does determine this: but for to pronounce such a contract void
and to execute that sentence, belongs to a temporal court.

For cause of defamation, it is Stat. circumsp. agatis. 13. Ed. 1.
recorded by an old statute, that it is already granted, it shall be tried in
a Spiritual court. And again: In Artic. cleri 9. Ed. 2. cap. 4.
defamation, prelates shall correct by penance corporal, the kings prohibition
notwithstanding: but if the offender will redeem the penance with money, the
prelate may freely receive the money, though the kings prohibition be showed.

By the preamble also of the statute for 23. H. 8. cap. 9.
citations, it is plainly argued, that defamations belong to the comsance of
jurisdiction ecclesiastical, so they be duly and according to law prosecuted.
Also by the books of Common law it appears throughout the arguments made in
the great case of prohibition, in the time of T. 12. H. 7. fol. 22.
Henry the seventh, that the suite for defamation belongs to ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. for there, as well by those Sergeants that stood against the
consultation, as the others, and by the Judges also that granted the
consultation (the original cause being defamation) it is yielded, that the
punishment of slander or defamation, is belonging to the Spiritual law.

Whereas there is a Provincial constitution, that decrees a slanderer or
defamer of another, to be ipso facto excommunicate, this is allowed by Reg.
page 49. a
consultation in the Register, unto a court ecclesiastical. And it is there
added to this effect, viz. Si in causa diffamationis ad poenam canonicam
imponendam agatur, tunc vlterius licite facere poteritis, quod ad forum
ecclesiae noueritis pertinere, prohibitione nostra non obstante.

One that sued Reg. page 51. 2.
another in a cause of diffamation in court ecclesiastical, was there
condemned in expenses to the defendant, who was absolved, for that the
plaintiff failed in his proofs. The plaintiff to hinder the execution of the
sentence, and to escape without expenses, procured a prohibition. Yet upon
debating of the matter; a Consultation was herein also awarded. So that we
see, both the Principal and the Accessarie cause, to be of ecclesiastical
conisance.

If (says Liberties of the Clergy, by the laws of the Realm.
the Treatise of the Liberties of the Clergy) a man defame or publish one for
false, an adulterer or usurer, he may be sued in court ecclesiastical. And
another Treatise (published also in king Henry the 8. time by a common Lawyer)
says thus: That the bishop of Rome, etc. cap. 3. printed by Berthelet.
In some cases of diffamation and slander, the kings courts; and in some cases
the Clergy have holden plea thereof.

Therefore I do the more marvel (the law being so plain) at the Note that
is set Nota in Reg. page 54. b.
down in the Register touching this matter, viz. All the Justices are against
a Consultation in a case of diffamation. which is spoken indistinctly and
indefinitely, and therefore more generally perhaps touching any diffamation
what so ever, then the Justices meant, or then by Statutes and law may be
warranted.

It may be that a book case of Henry the 4. gave occasion of this mistaking,
being not thoroughly weied. for at first sight it seems to sound, as if no
diffamation at all were of ecclesiastical conisance. And so Tit. Consultation,
nu. a. and alibi.
even Brook in his Abridgement seems to take it. But the truth is, by that
case is only meant, that such diffamation as arises upon a Temporal matter,
is not of ecclesiastical conisance: which is the first exception of the
general rule set down in the Statute of Circumspecte agatis: where is said;
that diffamation shall be tried in the Spiritual court.

And that the said case is to be restrained to such diffamation only, will
appear most plamlie to him, that considers the scope of M. 2. H. 4. fol. 15.
Hankefords argument. The Vicar of Saltashe had given an oath before the Popes
Collecter, in confirmation of an obligation by him made. The Deane of Windsor
sued the Vicar before the Collecter, prolaesione fidei: the Vicar purchased a
prohibition. Hankeford to maintain this prohibition, argues, that the
perjury couldnot be sued in an ecclesiastical court, for that it arose upon
a temporal cause. Adding for proof of his saying, that himself had a matter
upon the like reason ruled for him, and against the Archbishop of Canterbury,
H. 14. Edw. 3. par attachment sur Prohibition, etc. de ceo que il suist en
court Christian, pur diffamation. The matter then was not ruled against the
Archbishop simply, for suing diffamation there; but of such a kind of
diffamation. For else this would not have fitted the purpose of Hankefords
argument: because he having to prove that laesio fidei arising upon a
Temporal cause might not be sued in an ecclesiastical court: could not make
any color of that assertion, by alleging of a judgment that no diffamation
at all might be prosecuted there: for that is not the like reason. And
therefore, as that laesio fidei arose on a Temporal cause; so did the
diffamation there spoken of, for which a prohibition did lie without
Consultation.

That diffamatorie words touching a temporal cause may not be sued in court
ecclesiastical; we have also a prohibition Regist. fol. 42. b
in the Register, without any Consultation granted. For whereas one gave
witness in an Inquisition made by the king about his exchange in York: the
party touched, sued the witness (for diffaming him) in a court
ecclesiastical, whereupon the witness brought a Prohibition, by reason the
matter was a Temporal cause.

By Statute likewise it is Ed. 3. c. 11.
enacted, that a Prohibition shall lie, if a man be sued in court
ecclesiastical for diffamation, in that he endited the other.

I find also another cause, why some diffamation may not be sued in a court
Ecclesiastical: and that is, when action therefore lies at the Common law.
As P. 18. Ed. 4. fol. 6.
where a man brought Action of trespass for goods taken away; the defendant
hereupon sued him in a spiritual Court for diffamation. But Hussy the kings
Attorney, in behalf of the Plaintiff desired a Prohibition; because the plea
in Court Christian was moved, the suite hanging there: and had it granted.
Quod nota. So if I be robbed, and speak of him that robbed me before others,
so that he sueth me in a spiritual court for diffamation; there lies a
Prohibition: because I may have an Action at the Common law, videlicet, mine
appeal of the robbery.

There be also in the book of Book of Entries, tit. Prohibition.
Entries, precedents of Prohibitions granted against those that for diffamation
prosecuted such in court ecclesiastical, as sued them in temporal courts,
for maime, and for forging of evidences.

So that we may conclude this point, that out of the cases excepted; the rule
of Circumspecte agatis, and Articuli Cleri (for diffamation to be of
ecclesiastical conisance) has place, even by allowance of the common law.

There rests yet one point belonging to this place; fit to be cleared. There
is alleged for other purposes by the Notegatherer, a little old printed
Treatise, Concerning the power of the Clergy, and laws of the Realm. In
which, the Statute of Circumspecte agatis (both here and elsewhere by me
alleged) is avouched to be no Statute, but a bare constitution. The words Of
the power of the Clergy and laws of the realm, cap. 8.
be these: We never saw any proof that Circumspecte agatis, was a Statute,
or taken out of the kings answers. and there be in the said treatise diverse
things that be directly against the laws of the Realm as it is in this
point. That Prelates for fornication, auouterie and such other, may sometime
assign bodily pain, and sometime pecuniarie pain. And the law is, that
Prelates shall never assign pecuniarie pain for correction of sin, but
only at the desire of the party. And also it is recited in the said Treatise,
that if the Prelate of any Church, or his Advocate, ask of the person a
pension; that the suite should be in the Spiritual Court: and the law of
the Realm is even to the contrary. And we think, that if it had been a
Statute; that the law should never have been used therein, so directly
against the Statute, as it has been used. And in the nineteenth year of King
Edward the third, in a Writ of Annuitie brought in the Kings Court against
the said Article of the said Treatise: it is said, that the said Treatise is no
Statute, but named so to be by the Prelates. And also the said Writ of
Annuitie is judged to be maintenable in the Kings Court, and that is
directly against the Treatise of Circumspecte agatis, wherefore we think it
is no Statute. The very like words are also used (I think all by one Author)
in Ibid. cap. 8.
another Treatise of constitutions Provincial and Legatine.

Now, in that to prove it no Statute, he says; There be in it diverse
things directly against the laws of the realm, seems to me a strange
reason. As though statutes (for the most part) be not to the restraining and
changing of the law of the realm.

His first special objection does answer it self. For if the Party desire
commutation of corporal penance into pecuniarie, especially if he be a free
man; the Ordinary may lawfully accept of that commutation, and being so
understood, circumspecte agatis; iumpeth therein both with Articuli Cleri. 9.
Ed. 2. cap. 2. 3. and 4.
law and practice.

Touching his second objection against it, of a pension: I refer my self to
that which hereof has been spoken in the 6. Chapter of this first part. As
concerning his alleged book of 19. Edward the 3. reporting it to be no
Statute, I must tell him, that he has a larger printed book then mine; if
he have any reports, either of the 19. or 20. years of king Edw. 3.

But whatsoever either he that was Author of those two little Treatises, or any
other private or particular persons do think may be collected or probably
spoken thereof: I trust they will all be contented to submit their judgments
to an Act of Parliament. Therefore to cut of all doubts at once in this
behalf; let them read the 1. and 2. Ed. 6. (...) cap. 13. in a Prouiso. (...)
Act for true payment of tithes, made in king Edward the 6. time; where both
Articuli Cleri, Sylua caedua, de regia prohibitione, and also Circumspecte
agatis be called Statutes, and are appointed to remain in their entire, as
they were before that new statute.

If a man lay Stat. circums. agatis, 13. Ed. 1.
violent hands on a Priest, this offense is punishable also by ecclesiastical
Judges. Therefore it was determined in another Parliament, that for
excommunication pro violenta manuum iniectione in Clericum, before Art. Cleri.
9. Ed. 2. ca. 3.
a Prelate, where penance corporallis enjoined: if the defendant will redeem
his penance by giving money to the Prelate or party grieved, it shall be
required before the Prelate, and the kings prohibition shall not lie.

This seems to have been there determinable (by some reports at the Common
law) even before these statutes. H. 7. H. 3. referente Fitzh. tit. Prohibition,
nu. 30.
For if a man enter into S. John's place, and beat the brethren there, and take
their chattels, for this violence he shall be sued in Court Christian, and so
it was adjudged by the Court.

In a Consultation granted after a prohibition in this case was brought, it is
Reg. fol, 49. b.
thus contained in the Register, viz. si in causa iniectionis manuum
violentarum in clericum, in possessione Clericatus existentem, quemque alter
sciuit esse clericum, non de violata pace nostra, sed de excommunicatione, ad
correctionem animae tantummodo agatur: tunc prohibitione nostra non obstante,
vlterius in eadem facere poteritis, quod secundum forum ecclesiae, and de iure
fore videritis faciendum.

But I find two cases where laying violent hands on a Clerk, shall not be
sued in a Court Ecclesiastical, but there will lie a prohibition. The first
is, If a Clerk be Regist. fol. 42. and 51.
arrested at the Common law, if thereupon he sue in a spiritual Court pro
violenta manuum iniectione in Clericum, there lies Prohibition. Another case
is, T. 11. H. 4. fol. 241. in alijs libris vel 88. vel 85.
when a man is excommunicate for laying violent hands on a Clerk, if the
spiritual Court deny absolution till amends be made to the party for the
battery, a prohibition also will be granted: because it shall be intended, he
which sueth, does it to recover damages.

But (though it be at the suite of the party) if only the punishment of the
offense, and not any amends be sued for, it is determinable in a Court
ecclesiastical, albeit the Art. Cleri. 3. and 6.
Temporal Court have also the debating of the matter, touching the amends and
the battery. For (says Thirning) if a party sue only Ibidem.
to inform the Court that the other has laid violent hands upon him, being a
Clerk; to the intent, the sentence of holy Church may go against him, to be
excomunicate for the wrong done to holy Church, and not to recover damages;
peradventure it might be tolerable. To which an other book agrees, H. 22.
Ed. 4. fol.
that if a man beat a Clerk, and he sue him in the spiritual Court for his
sin of excommunication, he does well: but if he sue to have the matter there
examined, and for amends; there lies a prohibition. For we find a Entrees.
tit. Prohibition.
precedent of a Consultation granted, even where a party sued in Court
Christian, proviolenta manuum iniectione in Clericum.

And so is it testified by the Gooddall of the Liberties of the Clergy.
book of the Liberties of the Clergy, by the laws of the Realm, in these
words: A Priest may sue to have him excommunicated or corporally punished that
laid violent hands upon him, but not to have amends. Nevertheless, if Gooddall
ibid.
a man put to corporallpenance for diffamation, or for beating a Clerk, to
redeem his penance, will agree to pay money to the party damnified: and after
contrary to his promise will not pay it; he may then be sued by the party
damnified, even for the money, in a court ecclesiastical. And not only the
party may thus sue to have him punished, but the M. 20. Ed. 4. 10
Spiritual court may also punish it exofficio, as Brian and Litleton there did
hold.

To this accords the said little book, where is said, that the Gooddall, ibid.
ecclesiastical Judge may of Office cite for laying violent hands on a Clerk,
to punish him corporally, but not by money. Whose opinion is well confirmed by
a Consultation in the Register, to that purpose. For thence is Reg. sol. 51. 2.
gathered, both that such a beater of a Clerk, does incur excommunication
ipso facto: and that the ecclesiastical Judge ex Officio, may lawfully proceed
to enjoin him corporal punishment.

Touching Sacrilege, that it is also punishable by law in a Court
ecclesiastical, two adjudged cases may be alleged out M. 4. H. 3. per Fitz.
Prohib. nu. 14.
of Fitzherberts great Abridgement. For if a man take goods out of the Church
or Churchyard, he that has property, may sue him in a Court Christian, and
may compel him to stand to the sentence and judgment of the Spiritual court
for this offense. And again: H. 17. H. 3. per Fitzh. tit. Prohib. nu. 26.
If a man take trees that are growing in the Churchyard, the Parson may sue for
them in court Christian, and for the sacrilege also.

Lyndwood, speaking of Sacrilege, Lyndw. in V. Sacrilegio. c. aeternae sanctio.
de poenis.
says, It is not a crime meerelie ecclesiastical: because the conisance
thereof may belong to a temporal Judge, at least touching the corporal
penalty: but not concerning the censures of the Church, that ought to be
laid upon such.

15. and 6. Ed. 6. cap. 4.
Concerning fighting, quarelling, and brawling in Church or Churchyard, the
Ordinary in some degree is to punish it by suspension ab ingressu ecclesiae in
a lay man, and from ministration in his office in a Clerk; and in another
degree, in either sort Lay or Ecclesiastical, by denouncing the party
offending to be excommunicate ipso facto, by virtue of that Statute.

Dilapidations likewise, and waste made upon a living Ecclesiastical, are
determinable and 13. Eliz. ca. 10.
punishable by Ordinaries. For the Statute made in her Majesty's time for
remedy in Dilapidations provides; that as before by the laws Ecclesiastical,
just actions and remedies might be had against executors and administrators of
deceased incumbents: so they should by virtue thereof be used against alienees
and donees of the goods of such incumbents.

The Treatise of the Clergies liberties says, that for Liberties of the
Clergy by the laws of the Realm.
Dilapidation the parson may sue (in court Ecclesiastical) the executors of
his predecessor.

So at the M. 2. H. 4. sol. 9.
Common law, Tirwhit did hold, that if an ecclesiastical person make waste of
his benefice, he shall be deposed, as a Dilapidator of his Church. But
deposition cannot be justified, but by authority ecclesiastical.

Those crimes which I said were opposite to sobriety in a man's own self, are
also punishable by ecclesiastical authority. Stat. Circumspecte agatis. 13.
Ed. 1.
For the Clergy are not to be punished for holding plea in court Christian, of
such things as be meerelie spiritual, that is to wit, of penance enjoined for
deadly sin, as fornication, adultery, and such like. In which words of
(such like) I doubt not but other incontinencies, as Incest, Stuprum, and
Polygamie be also understood, being all more grievous then fornication, and two
of them more execrable then adultery.

And so does Lyndwood interpret the word, huiusmodi, such like: that Lyndw.
V. huiusmodi. c. Circumspecte. de foro competenti.
is to say (says he) Incest, whoredom, and others, which be contained under
the sin of Lechery. And to these are to be added other crimes, which also
are to be handled and punished in a court ecclesiastical; as namely,
Sacrilege, Usurie, Heresy, Simonie, and Perjury, to c. Ecce. 23. q. 4.
which an old Canon also adds such offenders as be Inspectatores nugarum, and
consulters of Starregazers, Phanaticall persons, Wisardes, Fortune Tellers,
Drunkards, and Idolaters.

And to make it more plain, that all unlawful company of man and woman, not
being capital by the laws of the Realm, is subject to the Jurisdiction
ecclesiastical, the 5. Eliz. ca. 23.
general word of Incontinencie (which comprehends all) is used in the
statute De excommunicato capiendo.

In the Reg. sol. 45. a. and 57. b.
Register there be two precedents of Consultations granted in causes of
Fornication; against which (in both) the Judge also proceeded of office. And
the treatise of Clergy liberties says, Gooddall of Clergy Liberties.
Though a bishop may not visit the Kings free Chapel, yet he may cite and
punish the Chaplain thereof for keeping a concubine. Hear also what another
old Treatise written by a common Lawyer, in those times An answer to a
letter, cap. 1. Printed by Tho. Godfrey, tempore H. 8.
says in this behalf, viz. the Clergy ought to have correction (as of
crimes mere spiritual) of auoutrie, fornication, Simonie, and Usury, and to
order matrimony, tithes, oblations, and perjury (in some case) and of diverse
other things: whereof it is no doubt, but they have holden plea in times past,
rather by a custom and by sufferance of princes; then for that they be mere
spiritual, or that they had authority by the immediate power of God. So that
they be by him yielded, of long time to have been of ecclesiastical conisance.

CHAP. X. That the matters and crimes here reckoned be also of ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction: and proofs, that any subject lay or other, may be cited in any
cause ecclesiastical.
THere do yet remain sundry points, which in the second Chapter of this
part, I have set out, as being of ecclesiastical conisance, hitherto not
spoken unto purposelie. First then for ordaining of real compositions (being a
matter of voluntary jurisdiction) and disanulling of them, if they have been
made contrary to law and right (which is for the most part of Jurisdiction
contentious) we have in the Register some testimony. For Reg. fol. 51. b.
whereas an Ordinary had made an ordination or real composition for certain
Chaplains to serve from time to time in a Church, which were not found by those
that ought; the bishop hereupon ex officio proceeded to interdict the Church,
and unto other Canonical pains. And though thereupon a Prohibition was
brought, yet was it reuersed (upon debating) by consultation, and the bishops
proceeding allowed, for lawful.

Touching Reg. fol. 50. a.
disanulling of a real composition (unduly made) in a Consultation there, is
thus contained: Significamus quod in negotio adnullationis Ordinationis pro
Pensione, tanquam iniquae and non rationabiliter factae, and non de laico feodo
in curia Christianitatis agitur, procedere, and vlterius facere poteritis, etc.
prohibitione nostra nonobstante.

Next follow the censures ecclesiastical, whereby Ordinaries punish or urge
execution of their sentences or decrees. First suspension ab ingressu
ecclesiae, is 5. and 6. Edw. 6. cap. 4.
showed to be an ecclesiastical censure by a statute of king Edward the sixth,
forbidding brauling in Church or Churchyard. The other suspension indistinctly
taken, whether ab officio tantum, or ab officio and beneficio; is mentioned for
a censure ecclesiastical, by 1. Eliz. cap. 2.
a statute 1. El. and by her Iniunctiones in fine.
Highness Injunctions.

Interdiction of a Church is also proved so to be, by the first allegation out
of the Register in this chapter.

That Sequestration is another censure ecclesiastical, and the conisance of
the violation thereof of that jurisdiction, is proved clearly by a
consultation in the Register. For there a certain Parishioner Regi. fol. 44. b.
had cut down Syluam caeduam, not paying but deteining the tithe from the
Parson. Hereupon the bishop of Elie his Official, did sequester the said wood
cut down. The Parishioner did break and violate the sequestration. therefore
the Official proceeded with him in causa violationis sequestri. the defendant
purchased a prohibition. Nevertheless, upon discussing of the matter, a
consultation was granted in these words: Licite procedere poteritis, quatenus
de Concordat. Clem. vnica de sequest. possess. and (quoad violat. interdicti)
Clem. grauis. de sententia excomm.
violatione sequestri syluae caeduae excisae (ratione decimae inde rectori
ecclesiae debitae, unjust detentae and non solutae) per vos sic interpositi,
agitur: and vlterius facere poteritis, quod ad forum Ecclesiasticum noueritis
pertinere.

That excommunication is a censure Ecclesiastical almost all allegations
before, and consultations in the Register do show.

That which next comes to handling here, is: that Constable. prou. Bonifacij. c.
a nostris. de concess. praebendae. and ibi Lindwood.
the Parson and Vicar have the appointing of the Parish Clerk: who being so
appointed, is to have the customable fees of the Parishioners for his service,
or else he may sue for them in Court ecclesiastical. That Constitution
provincial calls these eleemosynas consuetas: and (I think) they may be
comprehended under the word Reg. fol. 52. b.
Largitiones charitatiuae, for which the Register has a consultation, as being
of ecclesiastical conisance.

For goods (as a pound of wax, etc.) due to a Church, and detained; Reg. fol.
50. b.
the Register allows the Churchwardens to sue in court ecclesiastical, and
to procure that the church may for them, be again put in possession.

Now follow (in this place) certain crimes of ecclesiastical conusance: and
first such, as be contrary to piety toward God; namely blasphemy, which c.
2. de maled.
though in parts on the other side Sea (where Civil law has place) it be
mixti fori, that is, enquirable and punishable as well in the temporal as in
the ecclesiastical court: yet in this Realm, I have not learned of any
punishment thereof (or for swearing) by any temporal power. Also idolatry,
and error in religion; which are showed to be of ecclesiastical conusance, by
5. Eliz. c. 23.
the statute De excommunicato capiendo. Likewise Apostasy from Christianity;
which is the highest degree of heresy: and therefore subject to the same Court
and penalty. Lastly, violation and profanation of the Sabbath, to be
punishable by a Court ecclesiastical, both the continual custom of the
Realm, and the statute of Circumspecte agatis, (which does allow them to
enjoin penance for sin) does make very manifest.

But we are to understand (as Lindwood in c. circumspecte. de foro competenti.
V. mort. peccato.
Lindwood also well admonishes) that every mortal sin is not of
Ecclesiastical conusance: for then (faith he) the jurisdiction of the
temporal sword, were wholly overthrown; seeing you could hardly name any
cause, which under color of the sin, might not be brought unto conusance
ecclesiastical. But the said statute is to be understood, of such sins, the
punishment whereof does belong properly to a Court ecclesiastical. That is all
such (as I do gather) for which no remedy is provided at the Common law, nor
by the same forbidden to be dealt with, by a Judge ecclesiastical.

And of this sort, is subornation of perjury, in an ecclesiastical court and
matter, tending to the breach of justice: and unlawful solicitation of a
woman's chastity, drunkenness, and filthy speech, referred to the violation of
sobriety.

Violation of a sequestration or of an interdiction, is in this chapter touched
before. The hindering and disturbance to carry tithes by ways due and
accustomed, is handled in the sixth chapter of this part.

For sundry crimes, the court Ecclesiastical may enjoin penance corporal,
but not pecuniarie: and if it do, there lies a prohibition. A^tic. Cleri. 9.
Edw. 2. cap. 2.
Notwithstanding, if Prelates enjoin a penance corporal, and the party will
redeem such penances by money, if this money (so promised) be demanded before
a Judge spiritual, the kings prohibition shall hold no place. And again: for
Ibid. cap. 3.
excommunication before a Prelate (for laying violent hands on a Clerk) where
corporal penance is enjoined, if the defendant will redeem it by giving money
to the Prelate or to the party grieved; it shall be required before the
Prelate, and the Kings prohibition shall not lie. Furthermore, Ibid. cap. 4.
in defamation, Prelates shall correct in manner above said, the Kings
prohibition notwithstanding, first enioyning a penance corporal, which if the
offender will redeem, the Prelate may freely receive the money, though the
Kings prohibition be showed. And to the same effect, there is a consultation in
the Register, Reg. fol. 53. b.
viz. in a plea for recovery of money promised to a Prelate or to the party
grieved for redeeming of corporal penance, (imposed for laying violent hands
on a Clerk) you may lawfully proceed, our prohibition notwithstanding.

When a Reg. fol. 55. a.
party proceeded with for some offense in Court Ecclesiastical, submits
himself to such order as the Judge shall take with him, either at his
absolution from the sentence of excommunication, or otherwise, does after
refuse; for such his refusal, he may be dealt with, and punished in Court
ecclesiastical, and may be urged by censures, to perform the order according
to his submission, which the Ordinary shall set down. Likewise may an Ordinary
deal for contempt of his decrees or jurisdiction; as may be perceived, both by
the said consultation against one Lindsey last alleged, and Reg. fol. 57. b.
also by another reported in the Register.

And as Ordinaries may deal in the causes before specified: so may they also in
the necessary accessories and dependences of those causes. And therefore they
may adiudge expenses against the party overcome in law; and by censures drive
him, to payment of them. Example hereof we Reg. fol. 51. a.
have in the Register, where the plaintiff in a cause of defamation failing in
proof, was condemned in expenses; and could not avoid the payment of them by
the prohibition which he brought. therefore in another precedent there, it is
thus said: Iuri est Reg. fol. 53. b. Goodall, of the liberties of the Clergy,
by the laws of the Realm.
consonum, quod vbi cognitio causae principalis ad forum ecclesiasticum
pertinet; and eius accessorium pertinere debeat. Vel sic: iuri est consonum,
quod cui attribuitur cognitio in causa principali, eidem attribui debet
executio eiusdem. And there it is further said, to this purpose: Si praedicti
40. S. pro misis and expensis in causa diffamationis adiudicati fuerint, tunc
ad executionem inde faciendam licite procedere poteritis, prohibitione nostra
non obstante.

Fees due in Ecclesiastical Courts, and Curates and Clerks wages detained,
come next in this place to be proved of Ecclesiastical conusance. I must
confess that for the two former of these, I do not call to mind, nor
hitherto find by turning of my few books of the Common law; that any thing is
written of them.

Now seeing that from time to time, as occasions have fallen out of due fees
there to have been detained, they have been demandable in the same Court
ecclesiastical without bringing prohibition: it is some good inducement to
lead us to think, that they have been (without contradiction) always yielded
to be of ecclesiastical conusance. For, being such matters as subjects have a
right unto, and yet no writ lying therefore (as I take it) at the Common law
(which Stat. de Consultatione, 24. Edw. 1.
reason is the ground in statute for granting consultations, and of leaving
causes of that nature, to the determination of an Ecclesiastical court) it
will therefore follow, that these also do belong to jurisdiction
ecclesiastical.

But touching Clerks wages, called in the Provincial constitutions
eleemosynae consuetae, and in the Register contained under the general word of
Largitiones charitatiuae; I have incidently spoken in this chapter before.

There remain yet some offenses (set out by me to be of Ecclesiastical
conusance) which I find not hitherto so avouched to be, by any writer of the
Common law: yet are they so holden by the law Ecclesiastical, and by usual
practice also without any prohibition or other impeachment. The first c. dura.
etc. falsariorum. de crimine falsi.
of them is forgerie in an ecclesiastical mattter, or the using and setting
out of forged letters knowing them to be such: as of letters testimonialles, of
orders taken, of institution, and such like. Next, is the burying (in usual
burial for other Christians of c. quicumque de haeret. in 6.
notorious Heretics; or of persons dying excommunicated, and without
repentance thereof.

Thirdly, willing c. si concubinae. de sent. excom.
and familiar co^uersing with persons, whom they know to be excommunicated
matori excommunicatione.

Fourthly Bald. in ca. co^uentic. de pace iureiurando firmanda.
frequenters of conuenticles, which does also come under schism.

Lastly, unlawful Extrau. detestandae. de sepultura.
digging up of corpses buried, either upon spite, or in any other sinister
respect whatsoever.

I have hitherto stood upon matters, wherein Ordinaries (by Law) may hold
plea: to show thereby, that they may cite in other causes then Testamentarie or
Matrimonial. For deal in them, or handle them they could not, unless the
party which is pretended to offer the wrong, or to be the offendour, might be
conuented, which is by citation. Therefore (besides the authorities here and
there in the former discourse falling in by other occasions, which might
sufficiently prove that they may cite and compel men to come before them) I
will now briefly use some further direct proof to convince; that in other
causes then those two, men may be cited before Judges Ecclesiastical.

It appears by Articuli Cleri, that for any matter Ecclesiastical
indefinitely, men might be cited. For upon doubt moved, whether the Kings
tenants were subject thereto, in such sort as others are: it is decreed, that
Artic. Cleri. 9. Ed. 2. ca. 12.
such as hold of the Kings tenure, may be cited before their Ordinaries, and
may be excommunicate for their manifest contumacie, and after 40. days, may
be attached by the Kings Writ, as others. The 23. H. 8. c. 9.
preamble of another statute proves Citations even of men, wives, servants,
and other the kings subjects for diffamations and tithes (so they be upon just
matter, and in due order) to be lawful. The body of that statute Ibidem.
provides, that no Citation be made out of the Dioecesse etc. where the party
dwells, but where some Spiritual Offense or Cause is committed or done, etc.
so that a contrario sensu in any other offense or cause Spiritual (as very many
are before proved to be) any subject may be cited within his or her Dioecesse,
and in those also there excepted, may be cited out of the Dioecesse.

Likewise Ibidem.
for Heresy, the Archbishop of Canterbury may cite any of his Province if the
immediate Ordinary do consent, or do not his duty. In a statute 32. H. 8.
cap. 7.
made for tithes, any man withholding them, shall be conuented according to the
Ecclesiastical Laws. And there is also mentioned Compulsorie Process and
censures of the Church. In a statute 1. Ed. 6. ca. 2.
of King Edward the sixth, though for the body thereof it be repealed, yet
thereby is testified; that summons and citations be Process Ecclesiastical in
all suites and causes of instance betwixt party and party, and in all causes of
correction.

Therefore seeing there is no color, that only Ecclesiastical persons shall
fall out to be deteiners of such duties Ecclesiastical, or that they only
will prove offenders in the crimes before recited, neither can all the Kings
tenants, nor yet men, wives, servants and other subjects be intended (for the
most part) to be other then Lay persons: we may safely conclude, that not only
in causes Testamentarie or Matrimonial, but in very many other before noted,
any subject whosoever, may be cited before his Ordinary, or other competent
Judge. Quoderat probandum, as being the very contradictorie of the opinion,
that we are in handling.

CHAP. XI. That Lay men may be cited and urged to take oaths in other causes,
then Testamentary or Matrimonial.
THe third opinion now follows, which is: that by the Laws of the Realm,
no Layman ought to be summoned or cited to make (or take, as I think is meant)
an oath, in any other cause then Testamentary or Matrimonial. This differs
from the former in two points. The first is in the party to be cited: For the
second opinion was, that none whosoever, including both Ecclesiastical and
Lay: where as this is only, that no Lay man may be cited, etc. The second
difference is in the end of the citation: For here is said: a lay man may not
be cited to take an oath in any other cause: thereby leaving (as it might seem)
the Ordinary at large, to urge persons ecclesiastical to take an oath, in other
causes also. But all comes to one end. For if neither Lay nor Ecclesiastical
(as the second opinion holds) may be cited in any other cause: then cannot
Ecclesiastical men be cited in any other cause, to take an oath. That which
cannot be done at all, cannot be done for any end. non entis nullae sunt
qualitates. so that both these run to one point, saving that hereby is
affirmed, a citation may not be made to the intent a Lay man shall take an
oath, saving in those two cases.

Now if this citing be meant of the party defendant; then does it not impugn
any proceeding ecclesiastical in use. for the party conuented, is not cited
ad subeundum iuramentum, but ad respondendum tali in causa decimarum, etc. and
faciendum vlterius quod iuris fuerit and rationis. If it be meant of witnesses,
neither are they cited (against their will) not so much as in Testamentarie or
Matrimonial causes, or any other, to appear; till faith be made by the
party, or by some other for him, that they take them to be necessary witnesses
for to testify in that cause; and that being required, and their reasonable
charges offered them, they do nevertheless without cause refuse to come, and
to testify a truth. For then goes a citation called Compulsories for them,
sub poena iuris to come and depose their knowledges in such a matter, betwixt
such parties. So that the citation is not ad subeundum iuramentum, albeit when
they come, they are not to set down any deposition, but upon oath: because it
is iuris diuini, naturalis, and gentium, quod non credatur testi iniurato. Also
the Author of this opinion should have done well, to have signified whether a
Lay man being come thither without citation, might then be urged to take an
oath. Therefore if the Author hereof, will hereby maintain any controversy
against Courts Ecclesiastical; the issue must be, either that to make the
Defendant put in his answer upon his oath, (so far forth as he by Law is
bound) or to make witnesses testify upon their oath, is a thing contrary to
the Laws ofthe Realm.

But it appears by discourse upon the former opinion, in how many sundry
causes of litigious Jurisdiction, (besides Testamentarie and Matrimonial)
Ordinaries may hold Plea (by the Laws of this Realm) according to the course
of the Queens ecclesiastical Laws. That the ecclesiastical Laws do
require this course (with the cautions aforesaid,) I think no man that knows
any thing in that Law, will make doubt. A Plea is a conflict in cause of
Judgment, betwixt one that affirms, and another that denies. There be but
two ways (besides the parties confession, which is not properly called a
proof) to prove any thing: that is, by witnesses, or by a public
instrument, called by the Common Law, matter of Record. Now if witnesses might
not be urged to testify upon oath, in any causes but Testamentarie or
Matrimonial; then could no Plea be holden in any other cause, when the
chiefest and most usual means of proof in recent facts, be taken away.

This liberty and privilege of holding Plea in the causes before showed, and
in this manner as is now claimed, 24. H. 8. c. 12.
by the goodness of Princes of this Realm, and by the Laws and customs of the
same (as a statute rehearses) appertains to the Spiritual Jurisdiction of
this Realm, and has been in all ages, used in Courts Ecclesiastical without
impeachment, as by the Records thereof may appear. And therefore, upon any
singular conceit (newly taken up by some private persons) it is not safe to be
now thus questioned, and oppugned. There is an old Statute in force (as I
take it) that may greatly bridle such new quirkes, except men were marvelous
well assured of the grounds of so great and so general an innovation. For it
is enacted, that 15. Ed. 3. c. 3.
great Officers about the King, and in his Courts of Justice, shall from time
to time forward, be sworn when they shall be put in Office, to keep and
maintain the privileges and franchises of Holy Church, etc.

Can it with any color be intended, that the Common Law does allow Courts
ecclesiastical to hold plea in those sundry other causes, which we have
hitherto proved to be ecclesiastical: and yet, that it will not allow them any
means or possibility whereby to hold such pleas? For if no Lay man might be
cited to an ecclesiastical Court, and there ordered to take oath in any other
cause then those two: then first the party conuented (if by Law he needed
not) would never answer to the Libel upon his oath. Yet has this been a
course continually practiced, and by Law so appointed, not only in
Ecclesiastical, but also in all Courts of the Civil Law both here and
throughout the rest of Christendom.

Again, if no Lay witnesses may be called to testify in any other matter;
then should most men in those causes, be hereby either quite foreclosed of
their right; and many gross sins should pass wholly without reformation or
punishment: or else all such matters must needs be proved, only by such
witnesses that be of least indifferency; and therefore of least truth and
credit. For those men be always most indifferent, which either be friends,
or at least be no euill-willers, to either party. Now seeing every deposition
must needs tend to the grieuance or hinderance of the one party or the
other: can it be presumed of him which loves both, and does wish alike well
unto them, that he will willingly and gratis without any process come and
depose, and thereby do one of his friends a displeasure? there rests then,
that only such will offer themselves to testify; who either be enemies unto
both, or friends to one, and either enemies or strangres to the other (and
how can these be upright and indifferent witnesses?) or else such who be mere
strangers unto both sides. but it does most rarely happen, that mere strangers
unto both, shall be able to depose any thing to purpose: and more rare will it
be, that such will offer willingly of them selves, to come in ad testificandum.
Besides these and many such like absurdities, necessarily ensuing this opinion;
if it be yet still stood in, that the Common law permittes compulsion of lay
men (whether parties or witnesses) to take oath in causes testamentarie and
matrimonial, but denies it in all other cases: let us consider, what may be
imagined for a probable reason of such difference in proceeding betwixt causes
that belong to the conisance of the self same court. For I have read and
often heard, that the Common law is grounded upon good and sound reason. And
it cannot be said in this case: quamuis durum sit, tamen ita lex scripta est.
for that this is no statute, or written law; but only the reported opinion of
one man, whence all the rest have since taken it. Was it then meant, to give
unto subjects an ample means of coming by their rightes in these two causes:
but to restrain or debar them in all other, as namely for tithes and other
rightes demaundable in ecclesiastical courts? or was it the purpose of that
law, to have men stand convicted of most grievous crimes that be of
ecclesiastical conisance (as happily of Heresy) being neither by them
confessed, nor yet proved by sincere and upright witnesses: but only by such,
as do thrust them selves in to bear witness; whom not only common speech,
but also sundry statutes do term Accusers, and therefore do hold at least
for parties and men not indifferent? May not many other ecclesiastical causes
be of as great importance and prejudice, as (perhaps) a will of goods under xl.
s. or a trifling legacy, or a x. pound matter, promised with a woman in
marriage? and if the law had bin so, could no man hit of it from the Conquest,
until our fathers time, when Fitzherbert writ his nouanatura breuiu^? was none
of skill in Edw. the 1. time, to put it into the statute of circu^specte agatis:
or in Ed. the 2. times, to mention it in the statute of Articuli Cleri? did
none read it in the Register that understood it, before Fitzherbert? or was
it not put down there, but in some late copies, as is most likely? And after
he had set it down, would not the law in that behalf have bin urged against
sundry Bishops, that practiced the contrary in K. Hen. the 8. time, and
continually since, if that opinion had bin holden for good law? Touching this
matter, the Treatisour says thus in effect: that the not co^pelling of
witnesses to swear and to depose their knowledges, brings none other
prejudice; but that the party plaintiff, fails in his proofs thereby. Why?
is that no small prejudice, for a man (which has in deed a right) to have the
causes go against him, through the wilfulness of witnesses, yt neither will
come of themselves, nor may be compelled by others, as this opinion imports?
Is not this to give cause of acquiting the wrong doer, and of co^demning him
that has the very right? and does it not nourish or at least tolerate that
sin in the witness, which i^ condemned by the law of God in these Leuit. 5. V.
1.
words, viz. If any have thus sinned, that is, if he have heard the voice of
an oath, and he can be a witness, whether he has seen or known of it, if he
do not utter it, he shall bear his iniquity? In which place I doubt not, but
all such be included; who knowing the matter which is in examination or
question before a Magistrate; shall refuse nevertheless (being duly called)
to give testimony to the truth, according to their knowledges. The Treatisour
further says: that it may be sufficient for a court ecclesiastical, to have no
better means for bringing in of witnesses to testify, then te^porall courts
have. Truly if they might be allowed the same; I think none of them would
desire any better. For when a witness is unwilling to depose, unless he be
urged by process: what is more usual in te^porall courts, then to have a
sub-poena to charge him to appear, and to testify, at such a time and place?
But because by this his saying (it seems) he entendeth, that the course of
urging witnesses to testify (as is claimed, and always has bin used by
courts ecclesiastical) contains some repugnancie against the laws of the
Realm: therefore, for clearing of that point, I will briefly show, that it is
not so much as a diverse, and much less a contrary or repugnant order, unto
the laws of this Realm.

First for practice; what is more frequent, then for Justices of the peace to
bind men by recognisance, to give in euidenc at Sessions or Assizes touching
supposed offenders?

It would be over tedious to set down the sundry cases reported by the book
of Assiles to this effect: viz. that where a deed is pleaded and denied; and
process against the witnesses is desired; that it shall go out to call them to
testify. It will be sufficient to refer you, to Brook titulo testmoignes.
Brooks Abridgeme^t, where they be gathered: (yea though the actio^ be 1. H.
6. 5.
personal) if a deed with witnesses at it be pleaded and denied: process
shall be awarded for the witnesses per Markham and Rolfe.

Be not Jurors also (that be summoned to pass on trials) fined, if they
appear not? and what more equity to amerce or fine them, then necessary
witnesses? seeing trials can no more be made without evidence; then they may
without a Jury?

By statute; 23. H. 8. ca. 3.
Jurors for trial of Perjury, are appointed to be fined, if they refuse to
make appearance.

Likewise if any 5. Eliz. ca. 9.
witness be served to testify in a court of Record, and having tendered
(according to his countenance) his necessary charges, do not appear: he
shall forfeite ten pounds, and make further recompense, according to the
loss. So that we see, it is no contrary or repugnant course to the Common
laws, to have witnesses urged to testify; being there also practiced. But if
here it be replied, that the Common law forbids it unto courts
ecclesiastical, saving in those two cases: it will easily appear, that it is
so far from being forbidden, that it is indeed allowed unto them, by Common
law and by statutes. There be very many precedents in the Register of
consultations granted, upon debating of the several matters there, after that
prohibitions had been purchased: in every of which almost general words of
allowance of the manner of proceedings, according to the law ecclesiastical,
be contained, as Reg. in br. orig. fol. 56. b. and fol. 57. b.
namely allowing of the proceeding iuxta Canonicas sa^ctiones. and setting in
the end of every co^sultatio^ there (except two or three) these or the like
words in effect, viz. Cicite procedere, and vlterius facere poteritis, prout
ad forum ecclesiasticum noueritis pertinere prohibitione nostra non obstante.

Nay let an instance be given (if any man can do it) where of old, any such
prohibition has gone forth, and not bin reuersed again by consultation, yea
almost where it has gone forth at all; only for censuring a wittiesse, that
refused to come in and testify, in any other matter of ecclesiastical
conisance, besides testamentarie and matrimonial. And yet has it bin in
continual and uninterrupted practice, for so long time as any ecclesiastical
acts now remaining, do mention pleas in those courts to be holden.

Justice Brook in his Abridgement, both testifies that by the Civil law,
witnesses (which will be holden indifferent) should not come till they be called,
and sets it down as a matter worth the noting; whereby may be gathered his
allowance thereof. The Brook tit. Corone. nu. 220.
words be these: By the Civil law, Accusers be as parties, and not as
witnesses; for witnesses ought to be indifferent, and not to come till they be
called: but Accusers do offer themselves to Accuse etc. quod nota.

That by the Civil and Canon law witnesses may be urged to give testimony,
and in what sort, will appear by this distinction. By the Civil law, l. si
quando C. de testibus.
witnesses may be urged to give testimony, and that without distinction,
whether the cause be Civil or Criminal: be Ciuilly or Criminally, directly, or
by way of exception moved: except their persons be privileged. As by l.
inviti. ff. de testibus.
the law Civil men of 70. years of age be in this behalf; viz. that they may
not (against their wills) be urged to testify.

By the Canon law, if the cause be Civil and not criminal, witnesses may be
compelled (without distinction also) except they be persons priuileged.
Nevertheless even Panor. min c. dilectorum. de testibus cogendis.
priuileged persons may be compelled, in want and defect of other proofs; that
the truth may be found out.

If the Alphon. Villag. lib. 3. ca. 15. conclus. 12.
cause be criminal, whether Ciuilly or criminally moved, so the action be
directly moved for the crime, and not by way of exception or bar only:
witnesses are to be compelled. saving that by later Canons; Clerks were not to
be compelled to testify, in causes of blood.

But if the question be touching a crime, by way of exception: then, either
there may ensue thereupon some effect of punishment, (as upon excepting a man
to be criminous, who then is to be preferred to a dignity, to a benefice, or
unto orders) in which case any witness may be compelled to give testimony: or
else no penalty can thereupon follow, (as when the exception is taken only to
repel a man from testimony or accusation) and in this case witnesses are not
compellable, except the party who excepteth, be like to be grievously thereby
prejudiced; if his witnesses cannot be gotten to depose.

There is nothing more convenient, then that every court should use his
peculiar course of proceeding, by that law (wherein they deal) prescribed. And
therefore Anton. in c. quod clericis. de foro competenti.
lay men's matters in a Court ecclesiastical, are to be handled according to
the manner of proceeding by that law required: even as Bartol. in l. 3. fin. ff.
de testibus.
clerks shall and ought to be dealt with in temporal or civil courts, after
the manners and orders of those courts.

Seeing then, compelling of witnesses to testify, is not contrariant,
repugnant, nor yet diverse from the Common law; nor by it forbidden, but
allowed unto Ecclesiastical courts, according to the course of those laws;
which do require it (as is showed) and no reason or equity leading to admit it
rather in those two causes, then in others of the same conisance: therefore may
any witnesses whatsoever be urged to take oath and depose in Courts
ecclesiastical, and in other matters ecclesiastical, then either
testamentarie or matrimonial.

But to descend yet to more particulars: the Kings tenants may Artic. Cleri. 9.
Ed. 2 cap. 12.
be cited before their Ordinaries as others. Therefore both they and others
(though Lay persons) may be cited in all causes of that jurisdiction: neither
is it there distinguished, whether they come in as witnesses, or as parties.
Also they may Ibidem.
as others be excommunicated, for their manifest contumacie. This contumacie
(after appearance) grows only upon peremptory refusal to perform some
decree or commandment of the Judge, as in refusing to be sworn, or to be
examined, being sworn. Seeing then for manifest contumacie the Kings tenants
or others may be excommunicated, and this is indefinitely set down: it will
follow, that as in any other not performance of the decrees of the Judge
(according to the ecclesiastical laws) so in refusal to be sworn, whether
he be party principal or witness, there is manifest contumacie. Vbi lex non
distinguit, nec nos distinguere debemus.

Particularly in matter of tithes (being neither a cause Testamentarie nor
Matrimonial) the 27. H. 8.
contemners of the process, laws and decrees of the Ecclesiastical courts of
this Realm, are by statute condemned: but an urging to answer or testify upon
oath, is a decree of an Ecclesiastical Court, ergo, may not be contemned. The
Ordinary Ibidem.
in a suite of tithes for any contempt, contumacie, disobedience, or other
misdemeanors (upon complaint) may have the party committed, till he shall be
bound to give due obedience to the process, etc. decrees, and sentences of the
Ecclesiastical court of the Roalme: but requiring a parties or a witnesses
oath, is such a decree. Therefore, etc.

Likewise by another statute, 32. H. 8. cap. 7.
the Ordinary may convent for withholding tithes according to the laws
Ecclesiastical: therefore he may convent and cite a man Lay or other (if he be
supposed to be a withholder) to answer upon his oath. For so is the
Ecclesiastical law.

Further, by that statute, the Ibidem.
Ordinary may proceed to hearing and determination etc. according to the
course and process of the ecclesiastical laws: but the process and course
of hearing by that law, is by the parties personal answer upon oath, if it be
required; and by compulsories of witnesses to depose by oath, as is before
touched. Therefore, etc.

The statute of 2. and 3. Edw. 6. cap. 13.
king Edward (touching tithes) provides, that both they and the costs,
charges, and expenses in the suite shall be recovered before the
Ecclesiastical Judge, according to the kings Ecclesiastical laws: but for
recovery of them, those laws require (in cases aforesaid) both oath of party
and of witnesses: ergo, etc. By that statute is established, that the Ibidem.
Ordinary even for personal tithes may call the party before him, and by his
discretion examine him by all lawful and reasonable means, other then the
parties own corporal oath, concerning the true payment of such personal
tithes. Ergo a corporal oath is in other ecclesiastical causes a lawful and
reasonable means: for, exceptions are always of the nature of the rule, and
should be within the rule, if they were not excepted; and therefore also in all
other tithes, as prediall and mixed, it is a lawful and reasonable means to
put the party unto his oath, quia exceptio firmat regulam in casibus non
exceptis.

The statute for Uniformity of Common 1. El^z. cap. 2. ad finem.
prayer, authoriseth ecclesiastical Judges to enquire, to take accusations,
and informations, and to punish the breaches of that act etc. in like form as
before had been used in like cases by the Queens Ecclesiastical laws: but in
like cases (by those laws) oaths both of parties and witnesses have been
usually taken. Therefore, etc.

One only instance destroys a general assertion; therefore if there were but
any one instance to the contrary, an oath by law may be urged of some lay man
in some other cause then testamentary or matrimonial: which being true, and
the very contradictory of the opinion that is in issue (upon this point)
between us, it must needs follow that the opinion is untrue, and therefore not
grounded upon law: Quod probandum nobis proponebatur.

CHAP. XII. The grounds of the two next former opinions examined and confuted
THe ground of these two opinions last handled (for any thing that I could ever
learn) does only rest upon a precedent of a writ of prohibition and of
attachment thereupon. In treating whereof (for that I shall be forced to
gainsay something, that is delivered by grave, learned, and wise parsonages) I
must first protest before God in sinceritic of heart, that I do it not
calumniandi, sed veritatis studio; whereof I am something resolutely persuaded,
in this behalf. I do reverence and esteem them that are contrary persuaded,
being men of great learning in their profession: neither contemning nor
condemning any, so much as my self, as being most privy to mine own wants,
and therefore (I trust) something taught to measure my self by mine own foot.
Sed amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, magis amica veritas. The copy of this writ,
I find reported and set down in two several books. In the Register tit.
prohib.
Register (contrary to the use of other precedents there) is delivered but a
parcel (as seems) of a writ, in two or three lines, in these words, viz. Rex
vicecomiti S. Praecipimus tibi, quod non permittas quod aliqui laici ad
citationem talis episcopi aliquo loco conueniant de caetero, ad aliquas
recognitiones faciendas vel sacramenta praestanda, nisi in causis
matrimonialibus and testamentarijs. T. etc. And in the margent thus: Prohibitio
ne latci conuentant ad citationem episcopi, ad recognitionem faciendam.

But the precedent of attachment framed upon this writ, runs generally,
without excepting so much as these two causes; even as if a lay man (whether
party or witness) might not be urged to answer or testify, or to take an
oath except he lust, in any cause ecclesiastical at all. For it is Reg. in br.
orig. fol. 36. b. tit. Prohibitiones.
thus, viz. Rex vicecomiti Salutem. Pone per vadium etc. talem episcopum, quod
sit coram iusticiarijs nostris etc. ostensurus quare fecit summoueri, and per
censuras ecclesiasticas distringi laicas personas, vel laicos homines and
foeminas; ad comparendum coram eo, ad praestandum iuramentum pro voluntate sua,
ipsis inuitis; in grave praeiudicium coronae and dignitatis nostrae regiae;
necnon contra consuetudinem regni nostri. and habeas ibi nomina pleg. etc. T.
etc. And in in the margent it is entitled thus: Attachiamentum inde.

Also in the Abridgement of statutes Abr. Rastall cit. prohib. and consult. nu.
6.
gathered by Rastall, I do find a precedent of a prohibition set down at
large, mentioning a writ to like purpose to have been sent to the shiriffe; but
none attachment thereupon: where of those words rehearsed in the Register
(though something altered) seem to be a parcel. In that point it is thus: Rex
episcopo Norw. Salutem etc. Mandauimus etiam vicecomiti nostro comitat. Norf.
and Suff. etc. quod non permittant quod aliqui laici in Balliua sua, in
aliquibus locis conueniant, ad aliquas recognitiones per sacramenta sua
faciendas, nisi in causis matrimonialibus and testamentarijs. Whereby these
three varieties do appear, between this, and the former: First, that which is
said here by way ofrehearsall, that the king had sent such a writ to the
shiriffe; seems in the Register to be set down as containing part of the
writ it self, directed to the shiriffe.

Secondly, that which is here recognitiones facere per Sacramentum, is in the
Register with the disjunctive; viz. ad aliquas recognitiones faciendas, vel
Sacrament a praestanda. Thirdly, in the Register these words are added; ad
citationem talis episcopi. That writ which Rastall sets down at large
(whe^cesoeuer he had it) seems to be the perfect and whole copy of the
original, and therefore of more credit. It is also probable, that the gatherer
of the Register did abridge out of this Writ at large, as he thought good. For
in the very Writs that went forth in deed (the copies whereof be in the
Register) letters (for the most part) be put there, in stead of the names of
the parties: whereas, here it is ad citationem talis episcopi, and talem
episcopum, without name or any letter for it; that might direct men to know, of
what Writ it was a parcel; which argues, it was not verbatim copied forth of
the Writ. Howsoever it be, the one of them must expound the other, seeing they
concern one and the self same matter.

In treating therefore hereof; I mind first to show, that albeit these words
did carry the sense yt is enforced; yet it may be, that the law is otherwise,
then yt they are not of that acceptio^: and lastly how they are otherwise
meant, and what is that true meaning.

For the first, it is no law of necessity; being neither Statute, nor Common
law. No statute: for it is not in the Parliament rols, nor in any printed
book of statutes at large, nor in sundry ancient written copies. It is no
common law: for it is said to be formata prohibitio super articulis cleri ( 9.
Edw. 2.
which is a statute of late time in comparison) and the precedent of that
Prohibition (as it is in the Register printed, and being understood according
to the mind of the Authors of this opinion) is contrary to the general
custom of the Realm. For by time immemoriall, all Ecclesiastical courts
(without impeachment) have cited both the parties principal for answer; and
witnesses also, urging them to depose by oath, in all the other several causes
also, that are proved before to be of ecclesiastical jurisdiction and
conusance.

I have had of long time an old Register in parchment written (as may be
evidently gathered, and appears by the frame of the hand and letter) about
king Edward the seconds, or king Edward the thirds time. In it there is no such
precedent of prohibition or of Attachment; as either the printed Register, or
Rastals Abridgement of statutes, sets down. But there are many prohibitions
unto ecclesiastical courts, that run in this sort, viz. Ne teneatis placitum
in curia christianitatis de catallis and debitis, quae non sunt de testamento
vel matrimonio. And the first of this sort is thus entitled in the margent:
Prohibitio regia de catallis and debitis quae non sunt de testamento vel
matrimonto.

One thing besides I find there (in mine opinion) worth the noting for this
purpose; yet not observed in the printed Register. For such precedents of
Original Writs, as exceeded the memory of any man, at what time they were
first drawn and framed: that old book sets down simply without any
addition. But if they were of later times devised; then this mark and title is
given unto them in the margent, viz. Prohibitio formata, or breue, etc.
formatu^. Now Rastals Abridgement gives the like title to the writ (whereupon
this controversy grows) viz. Prohibitio formata super articulis cleri: which
argues that there is no such original writ of old at the common law; but that
it was the^ newly devised to meet with a new mischief. Quae de nouo emergu^t,
nouo indigent auxilio.

The being of it in the Register, does not make it of necessity to be law; for
sundry of those writs were framed of late times (as may appear to any that will
peruse the^) upon particular men's suits (and as occasions fell forth) and
sometimes (perhaps) drawn upon private suggestio^s of the counsel of one side,
though afterward allowed.

Nay in my said old written Register of writs, there is a precede^t which (as I
take it) goes not now for law. For there is a direct writ to the shirifs of
London; signifiyng, that no Clerk (though he forfeit his recognizance of
statute merchant) shall be attached or imprisoned by his body: except there be
some cause why he should not enjoy the privilege of a Clerk.

Besides, it is no new or strange thing, to have some form of a writ which is
set down in the Register, to be upon better advise disallowed. For I have
credibly heard, that it was not long since adjudged, that in an action for
trespass, done in a warren of Conies, a man might not plead that they were
cuniculi sui; albeit the Register (in that behalf) Reg. fol 102. tit. de
transgressione.
frames the writ so. And in the self same title (whence this form of
prohibition is taken) a clause in a prohibition was Reg. fol. 37.
rejected by the court. For it is said in the marge^t, Curia noluit concedere
istam clausulam in prohibitione: but if it were law assured, the Judges would
not have rejected it.

Fitzherbert (who in his book No. na. br. fol. 37. G.
of Nature of writs, was the first that sucked this conceit thence) in the
self same book touching this rule, set down in the Register, viz. notandum
est, quod quando rex praesentat vt in iure coronae, tunc incurrit ei tempus:
says thus; now this rule is not holden for law. But it will be said, that
Fitzherbert himself, and sundry that follow him since, do hold this point we
speak of, for law. This (no doubt) carries a great presumption with it, and
that worthily; for the worth of the learning and judgments of such men. Yet I
will show that his saying (from whom they all since do take it) is none
undoubted rule of law; and therefore theirs neither, that do gather from him.
I protest before God, I will not seek after objections against his book; but
take only such two (in stead of mo) which I had in my mind, because they do
touch ecclesiastical matters. He says, that Fitzh. ibid. fol. 269. D.
at the Common law, an heretic ere he can be condemned, must be convicted of
heresy before the Archbishop, and the whole Clergy of the province, and after
abiured thereupon; and after that (of fresh) convicted and condemned by the
clergy of that province: and this must be in their general council of
convocation: and holds there; that at the Common law, a bishop in his
dioecesse might not condemn an heretic, until 2. H. 4. 2. H. 4. cap. 15.
did give him authority: and that then he might not be committed to the
secular power to be burnt, until he had once abiured, and was again relapsed
into that, or some other heresy. But neither of these points be law; and so I
have heard the two chief Justices, the L. chief Baron, and some other Judges,
and the Queens learned council, resolve in a special consultation holden about
the matter of heresy. For albeit the Convocation may (in deed) condemn an
heretic, yet every B. at the Common law (before any statute) might (and at
this day may also) in his own dioecesse so condemn; as the preamble of that
very statute makes manifest: and so by the^ all, was it then holden for law,
notwithstanding Fitzh. opinion there; which was fully by the^ considered of.
And albeit it may seem needless, yet for further strengthening of these
reverend men's opinions, there is a 10. H. 7. fol. 17.
book in the very point. For it is said, that for heresy or any point against
the faith, the BB. had none other power to bring the^ in, but to make process
against them by citations, until the Statute of Heresy, 2. H. 4. ergo, before
that statute, they had power to proceed against heretics, in Ordinary course
of the law ecclesiastical. Which assertion the very Note-gatherer also makes
in his title of the laws of England, yet to another purpose: howsoever in the
maine point yt we now treat of, he stick fast to Fitzherbert.

Likewise, Fitzh. no. na. br. fol. 30. F.
he says it appears, that before the statute made pro clero in the 18. of
king Edw. 3. cap. 7. the right of tithes were determinable in the Temporal
court of the king; and that the law was altered at that time herein, by that
statute. Whereas (in very truth) there appears no such matter; other then a
grieuance offered (in this behalf) to the liberty of the Church, which then
was determined, that it should afterward cease.

I know that Gooddall (writing of the liberties of the Clergy, by the laws of
the Realm) concurreth in this point with Fitzherbert: for thus he writes; It
seems that before the Statute, the right of tithes were determinable in the
Temporal court: but that statute has altered the law. So that it may be
coniectured, the one of them borrowed it of the other.

But this whole doubt, whether causes of tithes, before that statute of Edw. 3.
were determinable in an ecclesiastical court or no, is resolved by a Treatise
nipping (in truth) wholly at the Clergy and laws ecclesiastical, and so
indifferent an Vmpier, as that the Note-gatherer alleges him for his
purposes: therefore in this case not to be refused by them, who produce him for
their witness. For that Of the power of the Clergy, and laws of the realm,
cap. 15.
Treatise writes thus, viz. Long after that the kings courts of his Bench and
common Pleas, and also all inferior courts were put out of jurisdiction for
tithes: yet nevertheless Writs of Scire facias were commonly sued in the
Chancerie for tithes, and the defendants were thereupon put to answer:
wherefore at the petition of the clergy, and in consideration of a disme that
the clergy granted to the king, it was enacted 18. E. 3. ca. vlt. that such
Writs of Scire facias, thenceforth should not be granted for tithes. And a
little before Ibidem.
thus, viz. That suites for tithes shall be taken in the Spiritual court, is
only grounded upon a favor, that the kings of this realm, and the whole
realm, have in times past borne to the clergy. And Ibidem.
again in this sort: We think that the kings courts be put out of
jurisdiction for tithes, by a custom of the realm, and not by the immediate
power of the law of God. Therefore (by this man's opinion) it is the common law
or custom of the land; and not that statute, which made tithes of conisance
ecclesiastical.

And in very truth that tithes were demandable in a court ecclesiastical
before this; may appear by statutes before that time, and by reports after;
testifying that the conusance of right of tithes (at the Common law) is
incident to jurisdiction ecclesiastical, as in the peculiar Ca. 4, 5, and 6.
huius Partis.
treatise thereof, is before showed.

Lastly, (to shut up this first point) a precedent of a prohibition of all
other Writs that can be devised, may with least reason be said, necessarily to
report what is law: for that Prohibitions are so often reuersed and disanulled
again, by consultations: as might have happened in this very-matter; for any
thing that can be certainly known, as well as in any other such like.

For the second point, that Recognitionem facere, simply and absolutely, cannot
signify the answer unto the Libel of the party conuented, nor the deposition
of witnesses, may appear: because this form of Prohibition, is said to be
formata super Articulis Cleri, But out of them no such matter can (with any
color) be gathered; and therefore being taken in such sense, must needs be a
gloss besides his text.

Again, I find in the form of another writ in Fitzherbert, where Sacramento
recognoscere, so being joined together, Fitzh. nou. na. breu. fol. 31.
does signify a testification by oath. Likewise in sundry Reg. in br. Iudic.
fol. 7. a. 12. a. and 75. a.
writs of the Register, recognitio per sacramentu^ velrecognoscere per
Sacramentu^, is used for a deposition, upon oath. But where Recognitionem
facere (without further addition) should signify a parties answer, or
witnesses deposition, I do not call to mind that I have read in any, so much
as pretending to write Latin.

Howesoeuer it might be showed in other, surely in that Prohibition, which is
in the Register (for avoiding many absurdities) it cannot so signify. for the
Register reads it, that the Sheriff shall not permit lay men to come together
in any place, ad recognitiones faciendas, vel Sacramenta praestanda, but in
those two causes. So that by the disjunctive (Vel) whatsoever recognitionem
facere be there: neither that may be done, nor an oath in any other cause may
be taken by any Lay man whatsoever, though otherwise he were willing. For the
word Laici is indefinite, not restrained to any one sort of Lay men: and so
that which is here forbidden, is simply forbiddento all Lay persons, and in all
other causes, whether they be parties or witnesses, willing or unwilling, with
oathe or without oathe. For in the Prohibitio^ there, no mention is made of
that clause, which the attachement thereupo^ does inserte, viz. ipsis inuitis.
So that, if that precedent of Prohibition be of it self perfect: this which I
have said, does thereupon necessarily follow. But if any thing be to be
understood, which is not expressed: then why may we not (for reco^ciling of
Rastels writ and this together) safely affirm; that they be both to be
understood, of recognitions and oaths given (in deed) in eccles. courts, but
yet touching goods and chattels, no way concerning matter, either
testamentarie, or matrimonial. It cannot be truly said, that recognoscere is
Sacramentu^ praestare, or recognitio, to be the same that Sacramentu^ ipsu^,
the oath it self. This is proved by the precede^t of that very prohibitio^ in
the Register: where they are distinguished, as two several things, with a
particle disjunctive. And like wise by the writ, in Rastals Abridegeme^t. for
there the recognitio^ is forbidden to be made, per Sacramentu^: and therefore
not the same, but diverse things: seeing no matter is the self same thing with
that; which is but his adiuncte. Then being not the same things, and both
forbidden; and presupposing the interpretation that is urged: it will follow
that no Lay defendant need, nay he may not recognize (though without oath) or
make any answer at all, in any other cause eccles. then those two. So that
there will never be issue joined; and so no plea ecclesiastical, saving in
those two causes. For will any defendant (think ye) make any answer at al,
either when a thing is demanded of him that he list not to yield unto; or when
he is cited to be punished; if neither he need do it, nor yet may by law,
though he would? But admit the defendant would be willing, and would adventure
the danger of law, for answering to the plaintiff, and joining issue with
him: yet how many such pleas could proceed any further; when no lay witnesses
might be used, either with oath or without oathe, to make recognition, or to
depose? And if Rastals writ be law, and so to be understood, as is now
enforced: so that witnesses may not testify in other causes then those two
super sacramenta sua; their depositio^s (as of men unsworn) must needs be
merely void, by all laws divine and humane. So that if the prohibition be not
meant of holding plea touching goods or chattels in other causes, it must
needs sort to this point; that in no cause (besides those two) any lay person
may (by law) though he would, come to answer or testify, with an oath or
without an oath, in a court ecclesiastical. But this is absurd and unreasonable
to imagine, and will be so confessed, even by those who stand in this opinion:
and therefore that must needs be also absurd, whereupon it necessarily
follows. For omne verum vero co^sentaneu^: and, by the rule of reason we
know, Ex veris possunt nil nisi vera sequi.

Now for proof that it is absurd and contrary to law, thus I proceed: No
plea can be holden, but where there is one that affirms, and another which
denies that which is affirmed: and then either matter of record or witnesses
must be used, to prove the intention of the plaintiff: But in sundry other
causes then those two, pleas (by law) may be holden in a court ecclesiastical;
(as I hope) manifoldely and sufficiently, is before showed in this Treatise: and
therefore in those other causes, Lay men may, and ought to answer and
testify: which is the contradictorie of that, which does necessarily follow,
upon this their interpretation. So that this conclusion being true, the
contradictory of it is untrue; and then that untrue also, whereupon it is
necessarily consequent. For (as I said before) I trust no reasonable man will
conceive, that only ecclesiastical men will prove deteiners of such
ecclesiastical duties, and culpable in those offenses, that are proved (before)
to be of ecclesiastical conusance: nor yet that they only shall always happen
to be present, and able to bear witness, in all those other several
ecclesiastical causes, before touched.

Furthermore to make it more plain, and to deliver it in seueralty;
recognitionem facere cannot signify (in this place) the answer of the party
conuented. For if a lay man against who^ there is cause of action, upon some
other of the matters ecclesiastical list not, nay if he need not, and which
is more, if (by law) he may neither come to the place, nor (being come) may
answer either yea or no; then could no plea at all in any such ecclesiastical
cause be holden. If it be said, that a Lay man must answer, but not by oath in
such other cause: I reply again, that either the Register has not the writ
aright printed, or else this no way can be so meant. For by the disjunctive
(vel) when the proposition is negative and prohibitiue, as it is here, both the
one and the other is forbidden to be done. Arg. l. 13. cum ita ff. de rebus
dubiis.
A disjunctive argues several things, that had need to be expressed by
several words.

And by like reason it cannot be meant of witnesses depositions: for if the
party conuented shall be content de facto, (though he be not compellable by
law, as this opinion presupposes) to deny the intention of his adversary;
then no Lay witness might in any such other cause ecclesiastical, be used,
either to depose with oathe or without oathe; because both be forbidden, and so
no plea in any such other ecclesiastical cause could be holden, which is
before proved to be otherwise: and therefore consequently, that is not the
meaning of these words of the writ, which is (by Fitzh. nou. na. breu. fol.
41. a.
Fitzherbert and others that follow him) enforced.

Touching the writ of Attachement thereupon whether (as it is set out in the
Register) it may be holden to have bin an original writ at the Common law,
drawn (at first) by the grauest advise in the Realm; and to be so perfect, as
that nothing (further then is expressed by the words) need therein to be
understood to come by the true meaning: may partly be gathered by that which
follows. First it is said, pone talem episcopu^, not using letters for his
name, as in most of the other writs. Next, a Bishop (who in that he has a
Barony, is presumed to have temporalties whereon to be distreined) is here
appointed to find vadios and plegios. Thirdly, it has laicos homines and
foeminas; as if women were not homines; seeing homo is the common gender.
Fourthly, though the prohibition (whereupon it is framed) forbids both
recognitio^s to be made, and oaths also to be taken by lay men: yet the
Attachement wholly omitteth the making of recognitions. And yet how many
oaths soever should be given if none answers or depositions do thereupon
ever follow (which two the opinion that we impugn, means by recognition)
what color of prejudice does or can grow, that either Prohibition or
Attachement, should need to be awarded? Fifthly, neither by Civil nor Canon
law; neither yet by practice; does any sommons or citation go out of an
ecclesiastical court, in such sort, as this Attachement assigns, to be a
prejudice unto the royal dignity, viz. ad comparendum coram eo, ad
praestandum iuramentum, pro voluntate sua; ipsis inuitis. For it were a
grieuance given (even at the Canon law) if an Ordinary should either call any
being not a party or necessary witness in some matter depending, or should
call witnesses against their will, not being first required, and having their
charges offered; or if he should do it, when there is no cause, but Pro
voluntate sua.
for his own pleasure, as this writ implies. Sixthly, the proceeding hereby
condemned, is said to be done; in praeiudicium grave, coronae and dignitatis
nostrae regiae. But if no matters be thereby drawn from the kings courts, as
in deed none be (though you follow the interpretation thereof by some
enforced) then what prejudice comes to the crown? For, though lay men be
urged to depose upon their oaths, in all other causes besides, that be of
Ecclesiastical conisance; what damage or detriment does the Crown and
dignity royal thereby sustain; more then it does by their compulsiue
deposing with oath, in causes Testamentarie and Matrimonial, which this
opinion admits and allows of? For if none other causes Ecclesiastical
then those two, could conveniently be proceeded in, nor any remedy could be
given by a court Ecclesiastical, for want either of the parties answer, or
witnesses depositions upon oath: yet could not Temporal Courts (as the Law
stands) give any more remedy in them. And so no prejudice to them or to the
Crown, that Courts Ecclesiastical do proceed as they do, to the
determination of such causes. Nay rather on the other side it were a prejudice
to the Crown, that subjects should offend, and no good means should be found
by Law to punish them; or to have a right, and yet no way for them to come by
it.

Seventhly, that which is there condemned, is said to be Consuetudine praed.
vsi fuerimus semper libettatibus huiusmodi. Prohibition in Rastell. tit.
Prohib. nu. 6.
contra consuetudinem regni nostri. which does strongly argue, that urging
parties in other Ecclesiastical causes to put in their answer upon their
oaths, or witnesses so to testify; is neither by that form of Prohibition
forbidden, nor by the Attachment thereupon, meant to be disallowed. For (first)
the custom of diverse Courts Temporal, requires parties answers upon oath;
and likewise allows Writs of sub poena and other process (in sundry cases)
to compel witnesses to come in, and to testify their knowledge.

And again; in Courts Ecclesiastical, the custom has always been, to
require oaths of parties and witnesses (though otherwise unwilling) in manner as
is a fore touched. Which may appear, both in that the Laws Civil and also
Canon, which they deal by, do require it: and that no books of Acts
Ecclesiastical (as I am verily persuaded) can be showed, whether of old or
later times; by which it may not appear, that this course of compelling
parties and witnesses to take oaths, in other causes then those two; has been
used, so often as occasion has required. And therefore not this, but some
other manner of proceeding it was; which by the Writ of Attachment is meant,
to be contra consuetudinem regni.

Lastly, this form of Attachment, mentions not so much, as excepting of
compelling to take oath, in causes Testamentarie and Matrimonial; albeit the
prohibition have that exception. And therefore for avoiding of jar betwixt
them, something must necessarily be understood, to have been at first in the
Writ it self (whereof this is a minute) further then is here expressed. And
why shall not then, the clause de catallis and debitis be understood therein,
as well as this other; seeing so strong probabilities do lead it, and so many
absurdities and inconveniences be thereby avoided; which the late enforced
interpretation does (necessarily) infer with it self?

Therefore we may conclude this second point: that to debar Courts
Ecclesiastical, in any cause of that Jurisdiction, from exacting parties
conuented to put in their answers upon their oaths, or from compelling such
witnesses (by censures) to testify, who being required, and their necessary
charges being offered, do nevertheless refuse to testify a truth: is not,
nor yet can be, the meaning of that Prohibition, or of the Attachment thereupon.

The last point of the three to be touched, is concerning the true meaning of
those words of the Writ, whence these controversies have flowed. It is
therefore to be remembered, that it was very usual for men in those days, at
making of any contracts, whether in matters of Lay fee or others, for their
more security, to make faith or oath, for performance. This they either did
privately, for confirming of deeds drawn betwixt them: or else (for more
readiness of dispatch and better testimony) they Register. page 37.
would recognize one to another such contractes, with faithful promise (called
fidei praestatio) and sometimes with Register. page 43. monstrauit nobis
Matilda.
corporal oaths voluntarily taken before Ordinaries, and therefore procure an
Act to be made by a public Notary. Then, if either paertie failed in
performance, he was by Process Ecclesiastical called before the Ordinary, as
to answer for an Act done before him, or fidei laesione: which failing, being
confessed or proved, the Offendour was enjoined grievous penance, and (no
doubt) oftentimes compelled by censures, to keep his faith or oath, by
satisfying of the other party.

This course being so ready at their own doors in every Dioeces, and of so
speedy execution; for the great fear then carried (by most sorts of men) unto
the censures Ecclesiastical, and for grieuousnes of the penance otherwise;
grew to be very usual in every place; as may partly appear by the often
disputes upon prohibitions brought hereupon (even after this Writ was framed)
that are here and there mentioned in the books of the Common Law, and are
before touched by me in c. 8. huius part.
the 8. Chapter: and partly may be showed by sundry old evidences and
instruments, recorded in ancient legers, and in Acts of Ecclesiastical Courts,
before the time of Edward the second, which I have seen and perused. Namely I
have ready to be showed, a solemn contract in writing made almost 400. years
agone: wherein the Earl of Arundel, upon a concord then made for himself and
his heirs, promises and grants to the Archbishop of Canterbury and to his
successors, certain red dear and fallow of both seasons, yearly for ever, to
be at a certain place delivered for the Archbishop, out of the forest of
Arundel. For the observation whereof, he there binds himself and his heirs,
by a corporal oath taken; and further grants, that if he or they fail
herein, then the Archbishop shall excommunicate them so failing, and keep them
under the same censure, till the purport of that agreement be performed.

I have likewise to be showed, an old written book of 23. Ed. primi.
Acts Ecclesiastical, sped in the Audience Court of the Archbishop of
Canterbury in the reign of King Edward the first, wherein sundry suites pro
laesione fidei of that nature be contained. The thing which gave color
hereunto, was the pretense of avoiding and punishing the sin of Perjury. For
the Canon Law says thus: Iuramenti causa, regulariter quis forum
Ecclesiasticum, and non seculare sortitur. c. praedicandum. 22. q. and D D. in
c. cum sit ex. de foro competenti.

If (says a learned writer on Panorm. in c. cum sit. de foro competenti.
the Canon Law) the Action be touching an oath in respect of the Court
Poenitentiall, or be commenced for release of the bond of such oath, so that
it respect not principally the commodity of some Lay person: or if it be
doubted, whether the oath be lawful or not, be to be kept or not; then the
conisance of it does belong to a Court Ecclesiastical. And in Panor. in c.
qualiter. el. 2. de accusat.
another place thus: When the party to be damaged by violation of the oath,
is such, as cannot use Action: or when inquiry is made for the correction of
the Crime; then may the Judge Ecclesiastical enquire even against a Lay man
not observing his oath. Insinuating, that in all other cases, violating of
oaths by that Law belongs to the conisance of a Temporal Court. And the
statute also of circumspecte agatis which allows punishment by the Court
Ecclesiastical for breach of an oath, but distinguishes not there, in what
causes or how far, did give herein some encouragement. So that the mischief
that grew hereupon was this: that most Lay contracts of goods and chattels were
by this means drawn into Ecclesiastical Courts, though (in truth as I
think) contrary to the Common Law of the Realm. For if the principal matter
be of Lay conusance, for confirmation whereof such faith is made, or oath
taken; then (according to the distinction Cap. huius partis 8.
before proved out of the Common Law) it is not such faith or oath, that will
change the authority of the Court, to make it simply of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. For so Bracton. lib. 5. cap. 9.
Bracton writing in the time of Henry the 3. testifies, and withal gives
good light and evidence, to the interpretation hereafter following, of those
words of this Writ: Iurisdictionem regiam non mutat fidei interpositio,
sacramentum praestitum, nec spontanea partium renuntiatio, quamuis sibijpsis in
hac part praeiudicent per consensum: and illud idem dicendum erit de debitis
and catallis, quae non sunt de Testamento vel Matrimonio, vel eorum sequela.

It was Grauam. 64.
one of the hundred Grieuances which the German nation complained of: that
Civil causes and contracts, by pretense of faith or oath given, were drawn
into Ecclesiastical conisance.

Therefore to meet with this mischief, and to cut off the occasion, this
Writ of Prohibition seems to have been framed, viz. to forbid Lay men in
any place, either before Ordinaries, or in private amongs themselves, to make
any recognitions or acknowledgings: whereof? of debts, or of co^tracts touching
goods and chattels by their faiths or oaths taken, in any cause whatsoever,
besides Testamentary or Matrimonial. For in these two causes neither then, nor
at any time since (as in part is before showed) was it unlawful, for Lay men to
make acknowledgement and depose in a Court Ecclesiastical upon oath, though it
touched goods and chattels. In matters Testamentary, as in Probats, and in
legacies of goods and chattels in demand; in matter of inuentaries, and of
accounts of the deads goods and chattels. In matters matrimonial, as in money
promised with a woman in marriage, as is more fully showed in the 3. Chapter.
And so this writ is not simply prohibitorie of all Recognitions and Oaths (by
lay men) in Ecclesiastical Courts, excepting those two causes: but only
forbids Recognitions and oaths in other causes made or taken, that do
touch debtes, goods and chattels, or other such lay contracts, and all citing
of parties to take them, or which have taken them, and all citing or compelling
of witnesses to depose touching such contracts about goods and chattels: though
confirmed by faith or oath of the contractours.

Nay there is strong evidence to be brought; that not many scores of years,
before the 9. of Edward the 2. (when as Articuli Cleri were enacted, whereupon
that Prohibition is said to be framed) the Clergy both used, and thought they
should have wrong to be barred from hearing all breaches of faith and
periuiurie arising of, or touching what cause soever: so they dealt not with
the very Temporal causes themselves whereupon such faith or oath was
confirmatorie. If (says a Constitution Co^stit. aeternae sanctio. de poenisin
Concilio apud Lambhith sub Bonifacio Anno 1260. tempore Henrici 3.
Provincial of Canterbury) perhaps our Lord the King in his Attachments,
prohibitions, summons, shall make mention not of tithes, but of right of
Patronage: not of breach of faith or perjury, but of chattels: not of
Sacrilege, or disturbance of liberties Ecclesiastical, but of trespasses of
his subjects, the correction of which, he affirms does belong to him: then
let the aforesaid Prelates make known unto him, that they neither take
conisance, nor mind to do, touching Patronage, chattels, or other things
belonging to his Courts: but of tithes, sins, and other causes mere
Spiritual, belonging to their Office and Jurisdiction. Whereby we first gather,
that the Common Law herein was not then resolutely agreed upon; in that they
conceived, this allegation touching faith broken and perjury, would satisfy
the King and his Courts. And secondly that the Kings Writs of prohibition and
Attachement (in this behalf) were then awarded, but for faith and oaths made,
concerning goods and chattels, because by that pretense, the conisance of
chattels was drawn into Ecclesiastical Courts.

I do find in an old written parchment book of statutes, reaching down but
to H. 5. death; many matters of mark contained amongs the statutes. As among
others there be, regiae consuetudines apud Claringdon promulgatae. which (as is
there rehearsed) were by K. Henry the second, propounded in Parliament unto
Thomas Becket, then Archbishop of Canterbury long before that Provincial
constitution. Most of which, he did condemn by his censure, as prejudicial to
the liberties of the Church: And this is said there, to have been the original
cause, first of his banishment, and afte^ of his death. But some of those
customs, Becket did tolerate; whereof this is one, serving to our present
purpose, viz. Placita de debitis, quae fide interposita debentur, vel absque
interpositione fidei, sint in curia regis. Hoc tolerauit.

At the end of that Treatise it is said; that four years after Beckets
death, viz. 1174 of Christ; the King repenting himself, did together with the
Prelates and greatmen of his kingdom, abrogate and condemn those evil and
unjust customs; appointing only those that were good, to be thencefoorth
observed. Yet (says he) some of those that were so abrogated by the king, and
condemned by the Church; are still observed in the kingdom. If this be with
the kings knowledge and allowance, let the King look to it, for God knows it.

The chief cause why I note it, is this: that it was even then thought a
Custom of the Realm; and by Becket himself allowable and tolerable; that
Pleas of debts, though faith or oath were given for their payment, belonged to
the Kings temporal Courts. Next is, that hence may be gathered, how the
Recognitions and oaths forbidden to be made in Courts Ecclesiastical by the
Writs which we here dispute of; are to be understood of such of them only, as
concern debts or chattels; saving that in causes Testamentary and Matrimonial
only, they may be there made and acknowledged, albeit they concern debts and
chattels.

It may also appear evidently, that the Recognitions forbidden to be made in
Courts Ecclesiastical in any cause saving of Testament or Matrimony, ought to
be understood of Recognitions and oaths about debts and chattels. For lightly
in every place, where these two matters of Testament and matrimony are spoken
of, there also debts and chattels are spoken of to this effect; that in these
two cases, Pleas of debts and chattels may be handled in Courts
Ecclesiastical, but in none other. Bracton (who wrote before this Writ was
framed) says Bracton lib. 5. cap. 2.
thus: Si Clericus petat versus Clericum vel Laicum, debitum, quod non sit de
Testamento vel Matrimonio, sequi debet forum Laicale. And Ibidem.
again a little after: Non pertinet ad regem cognoscere de catallis, quae sunt
de Testamento vel Matrimonio. Likewise in a precedent of a prohibition, he
Ibidem. lib. 5. cap. 3. and cap. 10. and 13.
uses this addition: Nec teneatis placitum in curia Christianitatis de
catallis vel debitis, quae non sunt ex Testamento vel Matrimonio.

In the Prohib. and Consul. nu. 3. and 7.
book of Entrees the like is often found, as Attachiatus fuit ad respondendum
tam Domino regiquam N. de placito, quare secutus est placitum versus eum in
curiae Christianitatis, de catallis and debitis, quae non sunt de Testamento
vel Matrimonio. And in a Consultat. 2.
copy of Consultation there: callide machinans impedire, suggerensque in
Cancellaria nostra ipsum tractum fuisse in placitum coram vobis in curia
Christianitatis, de catall^s and debitis quae non erant de Testamento vel
Matrimonio etc. Yea, and in Register. Ibidem tit. Prohibitiones.
the Register it is set down more plain a great deal in a copy at large of
a Prohibition, upon the same point, and with the same causes excepted, being
the next following to that which we (principally) do here treat of. For the
very word of Recognitio before an Ordinary, is there used and applied to a
debt or contract touching goods and chattels. Cum recognitiones debitorum (quae
non sunt de Testamento vel Matrimonio) ad nos, coronam and dignitatem nostram
(and non ad alios) pertineant in regno nostro: and executiones earundem per nos
and ministros nostros (and non per alios) fieri debeant: ac iam ex querela I.
acceperimus quod vos ipsum I. ad viginte solidos, quos coram vobis nuper in
curia Christianitatis recognouit se debere A. eidem A. soluendos intra certum
tempus iam praeteritum monuistis, and in ipsum I. pro eo, quod praedictos
viginti solidos intra tempus praedictum, ad monitionem vestram soluere
recusauit, (quanquam huiusmodi recognitio Testamentum vel Matrimonium non
tangat) etc. excommunicationis sententiam fulminastis etc. vobis prohibemus,
etc. And the very like words, to the same effect, and with like exceptions, are
there used in the five precedents of Prohibitions, next in order following.

And in the old written Register (before spoken of) there be many copies of
Prohibitions set down; in all which whenever that exception of causes
Testamentary and Matrimonial is mentioned, that clause de catallis and debitis
quae non sunt de testam. etc, comes in with all. In the printed Register
among the Writs Judicial, we have these Regist. in Br. Iudic. fol. 38. a.
words: Quare secuti sunt placitum in curia Christianitatis de catallis and
debitis quae non sunt de Testamento vel Matrimonio. And again: Ibid. fol. 39.
a.
cum traxisset in placitum in curia Christianitatis de catallis and debitis,
quae non sunt de Testamento vel Matrimonio etc. prohibitionem impetrauit. We
have further, in the Register of original Writtes, to this effect: Regist. in
Br. origin. fol. 57. b.
Quatenus ad correctionem animae and non placita de catallis and debitis
concernunt, etc. licite ex officio procedere poteritis, etc. And in diverse
other Writs of Regist. in Br. orig. fol. 46. qua ter. and 49. a.
Consultation there, to this purpose: Prohibitionem nostram impetrauit,
asserens se trahi in placitum in curia Christianitatis, de catallis and debitis
quae non sunt de Testamento vel Matrimonio etc. Inso much, that this Regist. in
Br. origin. fol. 46. b. and 49. a. in fine.
Writ is entitled as by his name thus: Prohibitio nostra, or regia de catallis
etc.

I find a Consultation in the Regist. in Br. orig. fol. 54. a.
Register, where is rehearsed: that certain Lay men of Couentree were by
compulsories, called into an Ecclesiastical Court, as necessary witnesses (in
truth) in a cause of legacy; yet they to avoid appearance, and to obtain a
Prohibition; suggested that they were drawn into the Court Christian to
testify, about chattels and debts, not belonging to testament or Matrimony.
Now if that meaning (of the Writ in controversy) which we here impugn, were
true; what needed they to have mentioned chattels and debts at all? for then,
the other part of their suggestion (though false) had been (in Law)
sufficient, to have obtained the prohibition, viz. That they were called,
against their wills, to testify in a Court Ecclesiastical, touching matters,
being neither Testamentary nor Matrimonial. But seeing they were driven to
plead both: it argues, that citing men to take oaths, and to depose against
their wills, in any other cause then those two; is not simply and absolutely
prohibited; but for that the matter concerns chattels and debts, and yet is
neither Testamentary nor Matrimonial. And therefore not that (which of late is
enforced) but this meaning of the Writ by me delivered, is the true
interpretation thereof.

The very Writ it self set down by Abridgement of the statutes.
Prohibition. 6.
Rastall at large, does establish this interpretation: Rex Episcopo Norwicensi
etc. salutem. Cum cognitiones placitorum, etc. super turatis Recognitionibus
Laicum feodum contingentibus, and rebus alijs ac causis pecuniarum, and alijs
catallis and debitis (quae non de testamento vel matrimonio) ad coronam and
dignitatem nostram pertineant etc. for, if Iurata recognitio (being in the same
writ) should signify a diverse thing: then must we needs say, that the
recital speaks of a matter to be remedied, and yet the remedy given is of
another nature, and so not pursuant to the former.

Furthermore, the tenor of that writ runs to the Bishop of Norwich, and to
his Archdeacons, etc. yet those words thereof, (whereupon the doubt rises)
are not directed to them, as if they should be charged thereby (which had bin
most apt, if any such thing had bin meant) not so to cite lay men, or that they
should not charge them with such oaths, or that they should not suffer such
Recognitions to be made before them: but it is there said, that the King had
commanded the Sheriff, that he should not permit, quod laici conueniant in
aliquibus locis ad faciendas recognitiones, etc. which use of the words ne
laici conueniant, and the changing of the persons, argue strongly that it was
meant of such recognitions of debts and chattels, and such oaths, as Lay men
of themselves were willing enough to make; and therefore had need of such
restraint, by the Sherifes authority. which their voluntary perfourming
thereof, without urging by censures; is also argued by that which is there said
of the Ordinaries accepting at Lay men's hands of such things: viz. vobis
praemissa, and alia consimilia, in partibus illis, acceptantibus. This of their
willingness without constraint, is also proved by the words immediately
following the point in controversy, viz. and ne super huiusmodi feodis,
debitis and catallis, coram vobis and alijs iudicibus Ecclesiasticis, in
praeiudicium iurisdictionis nostrae regiae ad coronam and dignitatem nostram
spectantibus, subire praesumant.

Whereby (as in a thing needful) Lay men are charged not to dare or presume
in any other causes before Ordinaries to make any such Recognition or oathe,
touching goods or chattels, prejudicial to the Crown: by which words, this
our interpretation is expressly established. Now if those words in the copy
of the Prohibition and of the Attachement in the Register shall be objected
against this, viz. Ad citationem talis Episc. And those, Ipsis inuitis: I
answer, that for many absurdities thereupo^ following, which are before noted;
these words cannot stand with the writ in Rastall, nor with the interpretation
that is by some of late urged. But understanding them (as I declare) of
citations and compulsories to make answer or testify by oathe, concerning
chattels and debtes, not belonging unto matter testamentary or matrimonial;
makes al most aptly to agree together. For whether we say, that Ordinaries
then used to cite all in general of their Dioecesse, who had made promises or
contractes in lay causes, by word only, (or by writing) to come and confirm
them, by their faith given, or by their corporal oaths before them, for
better confirmation and security of the bargain, as some wise and learned
have thought very Pro huiusmodi rebus (per vices) trahitis coram vobis.
Prohibition in Rastall, vbi supra.
probably: or whether they be meant of citing parties to put in their answers
by oath concerning such chattels and debtes in demand, confirmed by faith or
oath given; or of witnesses being not willing to depose in those causes, or of
all these three: it is assured, that he, who finds himself grieved thereby,
will be un willing: and that albeit the pretense of such Ordinary be to punish
the sin only; yet hereby (per obliquum) the conisance of lay contractes
will be drawn to eccles. courts, and so the Kings courts (unto which they
properly belong) shall thereby be encroched upon, and prejudiced. But this
cannot be truly said, touching matters of mere ecclesiastical conisance,
being neither testamentarie, nor matrimonial; though lay men be urged by
courts eccles. to answer or testify in them upon their oaths.

Besides, what damage comes to the cause now by us defended; if we say, that
the absurdities following upon such their interpretation being not a fore well
weyed, and he out of whose copy the Register was printed, understanding it as
they do; was content to add those two clauses, for an explanatio^ of the said
writs, according to his own meaning; or that he was willing they should so be
understood? which perhaps enduced him to make such a brief abridgement, of so
long a writ. For it does not appear, that before the imprinting, it was
perused and allowed by any the Judges then being; or by any others, deputed by
public authority, for the reuiewing and correcting of it. No doubt if it had
bin (that I speak of nothing else) so many gross errors in the Latin both
against co^gruity and al sense, as in every leaf (almost) of the copy which
the Printer followed, are to be found; could not have so escaped, without
co^trolement and amendment. But the former words set down by Rastall at large
in the writ in self (where neither of these last recited clauses are to be
found) are too clear in this point, to be dimmed by any such light colors.
But if hereupon it be perhaps granted (as the author of the Treatise does)
that witnesses may take oath and depose willingly, in other ecclesiastical
causes, at the request of some of the parties: I must then call to their mind,
that I have showed before, that (following their own interpretation) they may
not, though they be willing. Yea though witnesses might, if they were willing;
how can a reasonable man entend, that the party to be sued, will come in at
all, but much less answer, if he may not be compelled unto neither: viz.
neque ad recognitionem facienda^, neque praestandu^ sacramentu^: as Fitzherbert
(in his natura breuiu^) also does understand and read it. And the words
reach unto all lay persons, not distinguishing a party from a witness.

Again, by that their interpretation of recognition and oath, they could never
have such witnesses that be indifferent, as in part is before touched. For if
witnesses may not be urged to swear or to answer further then they list
themselves; then will they only answer to the matters propounded by him who
produces them, and will refuse to answer the Interrogatories propunded by the
other party for his defense, by whom they were not requested to come. Which
course (upon the matter) taking away all testimony, that ought to be
indifferent for either party, in such pertinent matters as are to be
demanded; is contrary to the law of God, of nature, of nations, and to the
very quality of a witness. Decius says: Decius in l. 2. C. de edendonu. 43.
Si testis deposuit pro vna part, and interrogatus pro alia noluerit
respo^dere, illi fides adhiberi non debet; quia praesumitur supprimere
veritatem. And so the course being most unreasonable, that whereupon it
follows, must needs be also very absurd, and against Justice. By all which
premised discourse, it is made (I hope) manifest, whether Fitzherbert had good
ground out of that form of Prohibition and Attachement to Nou. not. breu.
fol. 41. litera a.
gather; not only that Ordinaries must express a particular cause in all
their Citations: but also, that if they express any cause at all in the
Citation, that (it seems by that writ) it must be a cause matrimonial or
testamentarie. For seeing they have none other means besides Citations to
summon men to their Courts: What is this latter collection (built but upon a
doubtful seeming) else then an asseueration implied; that none other of the
causes (before) proved to be of ecclesiastical conisance; shall ever be dealt
in, by any court ecclesiastical? and so (upon the matter) in no court at all;
for that temporal courts be out of jurisdiction in those matters. Which how
it may be defended from gross absurdity, I would gladly learn from any, that
patroniseth this opinion. But if the law were so in deed, that none should be
called into ecclesiastical courts, but for those two causes: I marvel what
the Preshyteries (so much doted after especially by sundry favorers of this
interpretation) would do here in this Realm, when their Co^sistorial power
should be so lopped, that they could not call any man before them, but either
in testamentarie causes (which they make in other men's dealings to be mere
Civil causes) or matrimonial, many of which also they now seem willing to
abando^, as temporal matters? for they should be driven, either to be kings of
molehils; or else to preach in the most vehement vein they have, against that
law and those magistrates, which (in such sort) would restrain them: as if
they were both Antichristian, at least for hindering and so impounding of the
pretended government of Christ: that thereby they might at length be set at
liberty, to deal in their Consistories against all crimes whatsoever,
according to their own platfourmes. Yet herein they should deal very
unequally; because they will not now suffer that, under this government; which
themselves would practice against crimes in a far more ample, and peremptory
manner, then either now is done, or were meet to be suffered.

In the books of the Common law I find also some cases, that give strength
to this interpretation. For an M. 44. E. 3. fol. 32.
Attachement upon a Prohibition was sued, because they sued in a spiritual
Court for hay and money, which touched neither matrimony nor testament: and
after upon showing the Libell, which proved that it was for tithes and
oblations, a consultation was granted.

Likewise M. 38. H. 6. fol. 14.
a Prohibition was sued forth of the Chauncery (directed to the Justices of
the common Pleas) to make an Attachement, because the defendant had sued the
plaintiff in the spiritual court for debt, which did not touch matter of
matrimony nor testament, whereof the conisance belongs to the Kings Court: and
thereupon a prohibition was granted thence. Wherein it is worth the noting,
that Fitzherbert (in his Fitzh. Prohibition, nu. 5.
Abridgement) leaves out these words (for debt) contrary to the book it self
at large, and also Brook. Prohibition, nu. 6.
to Brook. I will not say it was to give color to his opinion in his Natura
breuium, as if he meant to have it sound, that no matter at all, but either
matrimonial or testamentarie, might be sued in court spiritual, whereas by
these two reports it may appear, that Prohibitions did not lie in this respect
for that the parties were sued and called into the ecclesiastical court against
their wills in any other cause whatsoever then those two: but only, for suing
there for chattels and debt, which did touch neither matrimony nor testament.
Whereof may be gathered, that ever since the first framing of this writ,
either none in this point has known the law, until Fitzherbert (for no^ est
instandum inproposito:) or else those words do carry another meaning then is
now fathered upon the^: which that they doeboth in the affirmative for ours,
and negative against theirs (I hope) is somewhat plainly proved. And
therefore we may conclude, that these two last opinions, the one for not citing
any person, in any other cause then these two: the other for not citing lay
men, and for not urging them to take oath, in any other cause ecclesiastical
whatsoever, but either testamentarte or matrimonial, are void of all ground of
law: nay are contrary to Statute law, to Common law, to practice for time
immemoriall, and also unto reason in some sort.

CHAP. XIII. That judgment of heresy still remains (at the Common law) in
Judges ecclesiastical: and that the Prouiso touching heresy, in the Statute,
1. Eliz. cap. 1. is only spoken of ecclesiastical Commissioners thereby
authorized.
THe two other opinions remaining, that respect matters, handled by
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction (and come next to be treated of) for the affinity
of them, and because they both depend upon one and the self same grounds, I
purpose (briefly) to handle together: viz. whether the judgment of Heresy
now lies rather in the Common law, then Ecclesiastical: and whether nothing
may at this day be adjudged heresy, but according to the statute primo of her
Majesty's 1. Eliz. cap. 1.
reign: For in the true understanding of that statute, the decision of these
two opinions will wholly rest. It seems by the latter, the author of them
thinks, that before the statute, 2. H. 4. Ordinaries at the Common law might
not by their jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, proceed to the condemnation of an
heretic: and therefore (seeing all former statutes made against heretics,
stand now repealed) he gathers; that no heretic may be dealt with, but
according to the said statute, made in the first year of her Majesty's reign.

This opinion (it may be) he gathered out Fitzh. in noua not. br. fol. 269. D
of Fitzherbert his Noua natura breuium: yet I think rather, it was his own
conceit, both because he does not allege Fitzherbert for it; and for that
Fitzh. leaves (even at the Common law) authority in the whole Convocation of
a Province, to condemn an heretic, albeit he there also hold, that (at the
Common law before such statute) a Bishop in his dioecesse, could not so
condemn. But I have showed in the twelfth chapter hereof, by very great and
good opinion, the law in this point to be mistaken. For proof that it is so, I
also touched it something in the 8. chapter.

For in the Preamble of the statute it is thus contained: The 2. H. 4. cap. 15.
dioecessans of the realm then complained, that they could not by their
jurisdiction spiritual (without aid of the royal Majesty) what? not at all?
Nay, but not sufficiently correct, nor restrain the malice of heretics: Why?
because they wanted authority at all to deal with them? No, but because the
heretics go from dioecesse to dioecesse, and will not appear before the
dioecessans, but contemn the keys of the Church, and censures of the same. So
that, had it not been for their fugitiuenesse, their refusing to appear, and
contempt of the keys; the ordinary dioecessans had Jurisdiction spiritual, to
correct and restrain them. In which respect, and for better assistance of
their former jurisdiction, it was then first provided, that heretics should be
attached and imprisoned. Other authorities out of Statutes, I there (in the
eight Chapter) alleged also to this purpose.

The words of the Statute made primo of her 1. Eliz. cap. 1.
Majesty (from which this second opinion is gathered) do make the matter
clear; that nothing thereby is meant, but that Commissioners for causes
ecclesiastical, according to that Act (termed by the common people the high
Commission) shall not have authority to adiudge any matter or cause to be
heresy, but only such, as has been so adjudged, by the authority of the
Canonical Scriptures, or by the first four general Councels, or by any other
general Council; wherein the same was declared Heresy, by the express and
plain words of the Canonical Scriptures. So that the jurisdiction of
Ordinaries, and of the Convocation, still remains as it did before at the
Common law.

But I muse greatly what color or pretense he could have, to gather the first
of these two opinions out of the aforesaid words: for does he or can he
think, that the ordering, determining or adiudging of a matter to be Heresy
by the Commissioners ecclesiastical (there spoken of) is a judgment at, or
according to the course of the Common law, as the Common law is taken in
usual signification? Or shall it be imagined, that wheresoever any matter by
occasion comes in to be mentioned in a statute (as for 13. Eliz. c. 12.
example, naming matters of faith, mentioning errors in doctrine, or the
doctrine of the Sacraments) that the determination of all such points, and what
and how many special matters, are contained under those general heads
whatsoever; shall (by reason of such incident mentioning of them in a statute)
be put over to the judgment of a Jury, or to the determination of Temporal
Judges? What other may conceive, I know not; for my part, I must take it (till
I be better informed) to be so simple a conceit, as is worthy rather to be
dismissed with laughter, then to be confuted with further reason.

CHAP. XIIII. That by the Statute her Majesty may commit authority, and
natural borne subjects may take and use in Ecclesiastical causes,
attachments, imprisonments, and fines.
THe next opinion that comes to be treated on, is: Whether the Queens Majesty
by her letters patents under the great seal of England, may authorize the use
of any other process in matters ecclesiastical, then by citation, as by
letters missiue, attachment, or such like? whereunto I add the other two of
the same author, and depending upon the same string: whether her highness may
so authorize the use (in matters ecclesiastical) of any other coertion or
punishment, as by fine or imprisonment? These opinions if they be not well
grounded upon law, seem to me to touch her Majesty's prerogative royal, and
supreme government (that was yielded unto her highness by statute) very
deeply; whosoever be Author of them.

And if this authority that is hereby impugned, be (in truth) a pre-eminence
united and annexed to the Imperiallcrowne of this realm, by Parliament: and if
he be a man of any quality, (so that he has taken the oath of Obedience) let
him use good aduisement, how it may stand with such his oath and allegiance.
They are pretended both by the Treatiser and the Note-gatherer to be grounded
upon Magna charta, cap. 39.
these words of Magna charta, viz. No free man shall be taken or imprisoned, or
be disseised of his free hold or liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed,
or exiled, or any otherwise destroyed, nor we shall not pass upon him nor
condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his peers, or by the law of the
land. Whereupon the Notegatherer also does collect, that none may be attached,
but such as be first endited. But the end why this law was made, and the time
when it was made, are needful to be considered. The end was this, that the
Kings of this realm should not challenge an infinite and an absolute power to
themselves, (as some kings elsewhere did, and yet do) without judgment and
lawful proceeding, to take away any man's liberty, life, country, goods or
lands.

And it was at such time when the kings themselves thought, that Jurisdiction
ecclesiastical, was not (in right) no more then it was in fact at that time
belonging to the crown: therefore in that it is here said, We will not pass
upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his peers, or by the
law of the land; it is manifest, that the words have no relation to
Jurisdiction ecclesiastical: for that which was done by that Jurisdiction, was
not (at that time) taken to be done by the King or by his authority: and the
laws that ecclesiastical Judges practiced; were not then holden to be the
Laws of the Land, or the Kings laws; as (since the lawful restitution of the
ancient right in that behalf to the crown) they be often called, The 1. Eliz.
cap. 2. and pass. alibi.
Kings or the Queens ecclesiastical laws.

In the Preamble 25. H. 8. ca. 21.
of a statute made in king Henry the eights time, it is to this effect said:
that the people of this Realm, have bound themselves by long use and custom,
to the observance of certain man's laws (besides those which were ordained in
this Realm) not as to the observance of the laws of any foreign Prince,
Potentate, or Prelate: but as to the accustomed and ancient laws of this
Realm, originally established as laws of the same, by the sufferance of
Kings, and by consent and custom of the people, and none otherwise. And a
little after, mention is there made, of such laws humane, induced into this
Realm; by the said sufferance, consents, and custom. This is brought to
prove; that the Parliament or such as it shall authorize, may dispense with
those, and with all other humane laws of this Realm: for so they be termed.
Whereupon, in the body of the statute, ensued that authority, which the
Archbishops of Canturburie have, of granting faculties, etc. And therefore the
humane laws (spoken of in the Preamble) are those Canon laws; which by such
sufferance, use, and custom are (now) as the accustomed and ancient laws of
this Realm, originally established as laws of the same: howbeit by the means
aforesaid, but induced into the Realm, and not here at first made nor ordained.

There is 5. Eliz. cap. 25.
another statute also, made in her Majesty's time; in the Preamble whereof,
they be called the Ecclesiastical laws of this Realm. So that when whole
Parliaments do aduow them to be laws of the Realm, yea and that for proof of
another point perhaps doutfull: we may then well make but light account of all
the Treatisers exclamations to the contrary, who calls the^ strange laws and
foreign laws etc: so long as we mean but of such Canons, as have been of long
time used, and be 25. H. 8. ca. 19.
not to the damage or hurt of the Queens Majesty's prerogative royal, nor
contrariant or repugnant to the laws, statutes, and customs of the Realm.

Furthermore, it is well and notoriously known, that proceedings and
condemnations Ecclesiastical in ordinary Courts were never made by the
judgment of a man's peers, viz. by a Jury: and therefore those words
rehearsed, can not be so far extended, as to include that jurisdiction. Yet
as institution unto a benefice, both before and after Magna charta, belonged
always to ecclesiastical persons and jurisdiction; so did also the
destitution or deprivation from a benefice by the Common law: in which respect,
Bishops (that claim not the patronage) do always plead to a Quare impedit,
thus; Nihil clamat praeter institutionem and destitutionem Clericorum, vt
Ordinarius in dictarectoria de A. etc. whereby may appear, that a man might
(by law) be put out of his benefice (being his freeholde) otherwise then
according to the form of that statute. And this (by the way) may also show,
how unsound a collection the Note-gatherer makes, out of those words of Magna
Charta; where, because a benefice is a freeholde, he would infer that a
Clerk may not be deprived of his benefice, but by a judgment at the Common
law.

I have also proved in the chapter next before, and in the eight, and the twelft
chapters; that an Ordinary in his dioecesse (even at the Common law) might
condemn a man for heresy; whereupon (after committing to the secular power)
such an heretic was put to death, by burning: but this was not done by any
judgment of his peers, and therefore those words of Magna Charta, are no way
to be construed of any jurisdiction ecclesiastical.

Furthermore, besides judgment of a man's peers, there is added, or by the law
of the land; which permits other trial then by Peers: as by battle, etc.

Now seeing all jurisdiction and authority in this Realm, as well
ecclesiastical as temporal, was ever in right, but now is also (justly)
acknowledged, and is infact, united and incorporated unto the crown of this
Realm: therefore inquire, whether upon the premises it may not be probably
said (albeit not according to the usual speech) that a judgment duly given
by the jurisdiction ecclesiastical, is given by the law of the land? But this
cloud, or rather mist, which they would cast, is also plainly dispersed by the
first chapter in Magna Charta: for thereby is made a flat distinction and
seuerance, betwixt the grant there made to God, (with confirmation of the
Church of Englands freedom, rights, and liberties for evermore) from those
grants that are after made, to other the freemen of the whole Realm, in the
rest of that charter: so that the jurisdiction of the Church, can not be
intended to be meant in any of all the rest, except it be particularly
expressed. Yet if those words were admitted to be meant and stretched forth
unto that jurisdiction also, will not statutes made by the like authority of
Parliament, sufficiently qualify or impeach the^?

Unto this head, is that objection of the Note-gatherer to be referred, where
he allegeth out of the diary acts of the Clerk of the Parliament, I know not
how truly, 4. H. 4. art. 29.
that the Commons exhibited a petition, that Lollards arrested by the statute
of 2. H. 4. should be bailed, and that none should arrest, but the shiriffe or
other lawful officers. Buthe does fully answer himself therein: for the
kings answer was (says he) that Leroys' aduisera; which is the form of
dissent, that the Kings and sovereign Queens of this Realm do use, when they
dissent or deny any statute or petition in Parliament offered unto them to be
confirmed for a law. Whereby we see, that arrests and attaching for crimesmight
be made without enditement precedent; and by others then the shiriffe etc; and
also, that albeit Magna Charta had been to the contrary, yet an act of
Parliament coming after, might change that law. Wherofifneed were I could show
sundry other examples: notwithstanding, that which the Treatiser puts us in
mind of, viz. that in K. H. 3. time, there was a just sentence of curse and
anathematization, denounced by the Bishops; against the violaters orbreakers of
the said great Charter. But what if Bishops should use the like authority now,
to excommunicate indefinitely and aforehand, all such as shall hereafter break
some temporal law? it is to be doubted, that the Treatiser would not in this
case be the same man, nor yet affirm it to be a just sentence; but would
rather threaten them with a Praemunire, for their kindness.

It is assured, that par in parem non habet imperium: and none authority can so
bind it self by any law; but that (upon good occasion and by like power) it
may be abrogated again. Yet how little this plea of ours is needful in this
case is sufficiently showed. Yea rather the defenders of these and such like
opinions against the rights and liberties of the Church of England notoriously
known so to be, by the reported laws and customs thereof, to them that know
any thing in either: had need more justly to fear that censure of the Bishops,
if it be so just; if so be they carry any fear at all or reverence unto the
censures of the Church, which be so justly inflicted, as themselves do yield.

As these opinions do only reach and shoot at the commission ecclesiastical,
to impound and streine the authority thereof unto so narrow a room; as that
her Majesty should thereby have no service done by those her subjects which
are employed therein; whereby the fancies of the favorites of these men, might
more freely grow without discovery, or any such penal^ie as they think they
need care for: so for the just defense (herein) of that commission, I may
allege the words of the same statute, whereby it is established; 1. Eliz. cap.
1.
viz. They shall have full power and authority, by virtue of this act, and of
the said letters patents, under your highness, your heirs or successors, to
exercise, use and execute all the premises, according to the tenor and effect
of the said letters patents, any matter or cause to the contrary, in any wise
notwithstanding. By which words, tenor literarum, is signified whatsoever
tenent in se, viz. that which is expressly contained in them: by the effect of
them is understood, whatsoever is within the true and unforced meaning, of any
such letters patents. So that if attachment, fine, imprisonment, etc. be either
in the letters patents expressly contained (as in truth they be) or undoubtedly
meant by them; then the use and exercise of these, shall thereby sufficiently
be warranted and authorized unto her Majesty for granting; and to the
commissioners, for so executing. And if any doubt (otherwise) might be made,
yet there be two clauses in the words aforesaid, that be called verba sieve
clausulae operatinae: and do therefore supply many defects and wants in the
exercise of a jurisdiction, delegated by the Princes rescript. The first of
them are those words, Full power and authority: and the other is, the general
non obstante, in transcendenti, viz. of any matter or cause whatsoever.

But to all this is answered by some, that these words, viz. according to the
tenor and effect of the said letters patents, do work thus much: that her
Majesty need not grant all, but so much jurisdiction, as her Highness
thinks meet: and that so many or few of them (so they be two atleast) may
thereby be authorized under her Majesty, to exercise such jurisdiction. It is
true, that those words so work and import so much: but does it hereof
follow, that nothing else is meant or can be comprehended thereby? Nothing (say
they:) for other process then citation, or other censures or punishment then
excommunication, etc. her Majesty can not commit unto them: else might she
also give them authority to hang men. What? is there no more difference with
these men, betwixt attaching, fining or imprisoning, and plain hanging? What
will they then say of the Star Chamber, which may impose all those three, and
yet cannot put any man to loss of limme or of life? and this is great reason.
For we are taught by the Civil law, (and I think it is agreeable also to the
laws of the land) that wheresoever an authority is given (in never so
general or pregnant words) it cannot be drawn forth to reach unto any
mutilation of limme, or pains capital, except they be plainly expressed.

Other some, as the Treatisour, does answer this objection in this sort: but
yet to the end of proving oaths of the parties, in causes criminal to be
unlawful, a matter to be handled in the third part, viz. that how general
soever the words of the act be in one place, yet are they to be restrained to
this particular, viz. none other then such jurisdiction ecclesiastical, as may
be lawfully used: and entending (per petitionem principij) that such oaths, be
contrary to law. But in this his interpretation (he says) he contrarieth
diverse great learned men in that law, whom it behooves with a more narrow
eye to behold this statute law.

Truly half an eye of a mean learned man, will serve to discover, that he
cautelously leaves out one member of the disjunctive alternation, which is in
that statute. For it is thus, viz. all Jurisdictions etc. whatsoever, by any
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power or authority, has heretofore been, or may
lawfully be exercised, etc. So that if either it have been exercised at any
time, or having not been put in exercise, yet lawfully may be; it is here
granted to her Majesty. And were it in deed meet either in temporal or
spiritual Jurisdiction, to leave it to the dispute and determination of every
private subject that is dealt with; what may be lawfully, and what may not so
be done, in either law?

The Treatisour, nor any other, cannot in answer hereof, say: that the word
lawfully, must also be understood as repeated in the first member. First
because it is a disjunctive proposition; and therefore that word should have
bin expressed in the first part, if it had bin to be drawn unto both; and not
to have bin put in the second part only. Secondly, for that it would then take
away from her Majesty all such ecclesiastical authority (being most lawfully
in her Highness) as was heretofore exercised by, or under the Pope, by
usurpation; and therefore most unlawfully. Nevertheless the matters granted
and exercised by the commission, which are by him challenged; (I trust, God
willing) shall be also otherwise proved lawful and warrantable. Against
imprisoning by virtue of the commission (one of the special matters now in
handling) the said Treatisour obiecteth: that, such parties as refuse to swear
to answer the articles exhibited against them, are imprisoned without bail or
maineprise: whereas by the law ecclesiastical, they ought not to be
imprisoned, but to be proceeded against, as pro confessis.

It is true, that by Ordinary authority ecclesiastical, no man may be
imprisoned. Therefore the untying of this knot, rests upon the whole matter
here disputed of, viz. whether that statute 10. Eliz. do not warrant her
Majesty, to grant by her Highness letters patents, power to imprison, for such
contempt, as this objection imports.

To prove that her Majesty may not so grant, nor they take such authority:
the Note-gatherer affirms, that the commission binds them precisely to
crimes punishable by the ecclesiastical law; and to proceed according to the
ecclesiastical laws of this Realm, and not according to the temporal:
quoting five statutes for this, albeit there be in none of them any such
matter. but both the first and second part of this objection, is untrue. For
the commission (though now that power be not altogether used) grants the
execution of four statutes unto them, and allows them to proceed as well by
Iuries, as by course of the law ecclesiastical. And when Doctor Grindall was
Bishop of London, sundry crimes ecclesiastical (by virtue of the commission)
were tried by Iuries, before him and certain Judges, and other professors
also of the common law; being then in that commission. Yet is the
Note-gatherer, upon this untrue ground bold to infer, that to do otherwise,
is to encroche upon the temporal jurisdiction: and to make an hotchepot in one
commission. Truly this his collection is not worth an hotchepot, that is a
pudding, as Littleton does expound that word. For the temporal Judges are
not to proceed in matters of ecclesiastical jurisdiction: and therefore their
jurisdiction is not encroched upon, though in such matters ecclesiastical
attachements or imprisonments be used, or fines imposed; seeing they themselves
cannot (in those causes) use or impose them.

When the whole Realm at the beginning of her Majesty's reign was visited (by
virtue of this statute) by Divines, Ciuilia^s, and Common Lawiers in that
service employed; who had authority by their several co^missions to attache,
imprison, fine, etc. as well as to use censures ecclesiastical; al which they
did accordingly: then and at that time, none of these quick and narrow sighted
fellows (lately sprung up) were to be found; that could see more then the
reverend Judges, and could so roundly tell her Majesty, that she did grant
more authority to her Commissioners, then by that statute was given to her
self. Oh, belike it was law then, and good justice against Papists: but to
deal against pretended Reformatists, it comes far too short.

But the Treatisour urges this matter yet further: he says, that no learned
man will affirm, any Jurisdiction (by that act 10. Eliz.) to be united to the
crown, but spiritual or ecclesiastical. And that none such can affirm, that
any jurisdiction etc. repugnant or offensive to the Common or Civil Policy of
this Kingdom, is established by that Act: for that there is none Antinomy or
contrariety of laws. Whereupon he would infer, that Attaching,
Imprisonning, and Fining etc. (by virtue thereof) is not warranted to be
granted.

In answer whereof, let him understand, that his argument follows not upon
either of those Antecedents. For the first, though the matters of jurisdiction
thereby united to the crown, be only ecclesiastical: yet the manner of
conuenting, or punishing in them, is not in that Act so restrained, but that
such other courses may be used, as to her Majesty's wisdom shall seem most
fit: which by and by shall be showed God willing. For the second: we deny the
manner of conuenting and punishing established by the commission, to be
repugnant or offensive any way to the Civil Policy of this kingdom: for it
is warranted by that Act.

This point (if the words of that whole clause be advisedly weyed and
considered) will be made most plain. In the exercise of a criminal
jurisdiction, there is the matter, wherein it is bestowed, the manner of
conuenting, and sanction or penalty to be inflicted upon offenders, which are
to be considered. Now the matter of this jurisdiction and authority granted
to her Highness, and that may be assigned over by her Majesty unto
Commissioners, is visiting, reforming, redressing, ordering, correcting, and
amending all such errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, contemptes and
enormities whatsoever, which by any spiritual, etc. Yet what course is to be
holden in calling and conuenting, and what kind of penalties or censures shall be
inflicted upon offenders by that authority; are by no words of that act
expressly granted to her Highness, or mentioned, that they may be assigned by
her unto the Commissioners; and therefore of necessity to be supplied by those
general words, viz. According to the tenor and effect of the letters
patentes. For else (by such an interpretation of theirs) we should have matters
for a Jurisdiction, but neither any manner to convent and compel to come before
the Commissioners; nor yet punishment to lay upon enormious offenders, against
whom it was intended. Which, because it is very unreasonable; therefore that
opinion, whereupon it necessarily follows, must needs be more absurd, and
without ground of reason.

Yea (say other of them) be this as it may; and let them seek out what
processes, etc. may and shall be used by the Commission Ecclesiastical: for it
is contrary to the law, to grant (by Commission) authority to inflict any
punishment upon a faul^, which (by law) ought not to be inflicted: and
therefore they gather that the Queen cannot authorize, nor any man may take
power to attache, to fine, or to imprison men, by that Commission. Thus far
it is true, that a Commission may not be granted to alter or change any law
in force: but I trust it is not contrary to the Common law and custom of the
Realm, by act of Parliament, to alter and change that which stood otherwise
before, at the Common law.

If this so did by the course of the Common law, no man may be put to the
rack or torture (especially about felonies or murders) thereby to draw him to
confess of himself, or of other men, his accomplices: Yet is it notorious, that
in Wales and the Marches thereof, the President and Counsel there
established, do use, and lawfully may put men to such torture; by warrant of
instructions only sent unto them from time to time, under her Majesty's
gracious hand.

This their authority (I take it) is derived from these 38. H. 8. ca. 28.
Rastall, Wales 32.
words in an Act of Parliament: The President and Counsel there, shall have
power and authority, to hear and determine, by their wisdoms and
discretions, such causes and matters, as be or hereafter shall be assigned to
them by the Kings Majesty, as heretofore has been accustomed and used. Which
do contain no more particularitie of authority, nor yet are of so much
pregnancie to that purpose; as the words (that establish the Commission
Ecclesiastical) be, for Attachment, fine, and imprisonment to be used, if it
shall please her Majesty so to commit them.

The devise of the Commission Ecclesiastical, was for assistance and aid of
Ordinary Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical; and for rounder proceeding, and for more
grievous punishment at least (in these dissolute times) more feared; then can
or may by Ordinary Jurisdiction be inflicted. Therefore, if by the general
words of that Act, 1. Elizabeth, both these proceedings whereof we here
speak, and many other particularities of manner, persons, times, places, and
other circumstances might not be warranted: then the authority (there) given
to her Majesty, were of none use at all, neither could it possibly be
practiced.

But I think this power here by these opinions impugned, may be also proved
directly, out of the words of the very Act, thus: whatsoever by any Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical power or authority has heretofore been, or may lawfully
be exercised or used for visitation, etc. or reformation, etc. of all manner
errors, etc. and enormities whatsoever, that is united to the Crown, and by
that Act may be committed over by her Majesty: But Attaching, imprisoning,
and such like corporal coertion, by some Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power
or authority, has heretofore lawfuly been exercised: And therefore may be
appointed by her Majesty to be now exercised by the Commissioners
Ecclesiastical.

For proof of the Minor, I am to put you in mind, what corporal punishments
and chastisements the superiors of every Regular person, as of Monk, Friar,
and Nun, might and did lawfully from time to time lay upon them that were
under their Ecclesiastical obedience; and yet (even after their professing)
they remained still the Kings subjects.

Likewise, when the statutes against Heresies were in force, these Attachings,
imprisonings, and other corporal chastisements were then lawfully exercised
and used by Ecclesiastical power and authority.

Lastly, 1. H. 7. ca. 4.
Bishops and Ordinaries may lawfully at this day punish and chastise Priests,
Clearkes, and religious men within their Jurisdiction, being convicted of
incontinencie, by committing them to ward and prison, there to abide, for such
time as shall be thought to their discretions convenient, for the quality and
quantity of their trespass. So that we may conclude, that if any such power
have been used, then her Majesty may (as it please her) use it still; and
appoint the same to be used by her Highness Commissioners, how and upon whom,
she thinks good.

The Treatisour himself testifies, that diverse even of the learned sort, do
hold and affirm (and that very confidently) that the Act and Commission
thereupon, do give full power and authority for any course soever, for the
government in causes Ecclesiastical, that shall be mentioned in the letters
Patents. This he exemplifieth by sundry examples, though holden by such learned
men, which nevertheless he accounts contrary to Law: whereof some fall in
most fit for this place (because they are bent against the said Commission)
and others for other places of this Apology.

First he thinks it very absurd and not warrantable; that the Commissioners
Ecclesiastical should command Justices of Peace, to assist any for
attaching and imprisoning of offenders till they give bond for appearance. And
says, this is against Law and Justice. The only reason he renders of this
his assertion, is: for that Justices of Peace be Magistrates, and
Commissioners of Record, authorized, as well as the other. Belike himself is
some Justice of peace: Hoc vrit hominem, qui imperare, non parere didicit.

And will he then (upon his learning) deliver; That no Magistrate or
Commissioner of Record, may be commanded by another; though no less be
warranted by his Commission? Hereupon would follow, that Justices of Peace and
Sherifs might not be commanded in any case by the Judges of either Benche, by
the Exchequer, by the Justices of Assisse, by the L. Treasourer, by the L
Chancellor or L. Keeper; nor yet by the whole Counsel board. He thinks it
also not justifiable, that any Magistrates should be commanded by the
Ecclesiastical Commissioners to assist in Attaching, or to attache any, upon a
warrant, called Quorum nomina. For reason of unlawfulness hereof, he
alleges: that no cause or matter is therein expressed or declared. But this
might be (de facto) omitted, in any other warrant, as well as in that. and yet
is it untrue, that in this kind of warrant, no cause is declared. But admit it
were otherwise; what Law of the Realm is against it? And if the like warrant
shall come from the Lords of the Counsel to him, or any other Justice of the
Peace, to be ayding and assisting unto some Messenger, in attaching of certain
persons to be carried up unto them as Prisoners, whom the said Messenger shall
name unto them: will he refuse to intermeddle in the service as surmising the
Lords to do therein against Law; because they command him being a Justice of
Record; and for that they signify not by their Warrant, what the particular
cause is, where with they mind to charge such persons that are to be Attached?
But if in so doing their Lordships do nothing contrary to Law, howsoever he
do foolishly and undutifully to refuse to give his assistance: why shall the
Law anymore be against the Commissioners, doing but the like; and that by
express Warrant of her Majesty's letters Patents?

Another reason, why such Warrant should not be justifiable, he does allege:
because the names of such persons to be Attached be not set down by the
Commissioners, but are referred over unto others to set them down.

Mine answer hereunto is: First, that the Warrant of Quorum nomina, is very
rarely used by the Commission, and the rarer, the better. Secondly, when it is
used, the names of the parties are set down and allowed (before) by the
Commissioners, and not by others, for anything that I can learn. Nevertheless
there may be good and weighty occasions, to omit this course: as when such
Warrant is directed to a man of quality and good credit, that he may put in
the names; for this end lest when one is served, he bewray all to the rest,
whose names be also in the same Warrant, that they may convey themselves out of
the way. Howsoever it be in this behalf, I think the Treatisour will be long
in finding out how this should be reckoned, to be contrary to the Laws of this
Realm. Hitherto touching the challenges made to some particular points, in the
manner of exercising that Commissun.

But the Note-gatherer, (to cut off all these particular disputes) alleges;
that it may be thought, the whole Commission is void in Law. For that (as he
surmiseth) it bears date in July, but was signed in November next after; 18.
H. 6. cap. primo.
contrary to a Statute. What? was this quarrel which is now picked against it,
worth the practice, of abusing a Counselors name, to procure a copy thereof?
Well, both the Preamble and body of the statute also does clear this cavil.
For by the Preamble it appears; that the mischief to be remedied was: for
that by grauntes antedated long before the King granted them, other grauntees
who (in very truth) had the first grant and great seal set to it, (yet
bearing date truly) were expelled by color of letters Patents, bearing the
elder date. In the body of the Act is contained this particle Such, which is
of restraint, viz. That the King (willing to put out such slye devises or
imaginations) did ordeine by Parliament; that letters Patents should be dated
the day of their delivery into the Chauncery; or else be void. Now if this
Statute were to be understood of all letters Patents whatsoever, where is the
reason of that Law found in a Commission? but, ratio, est animalegis: and
cessante ratione, cessat Lex. Therefore this Statute can be stretched to none
other letters Patents but Such, as the mischief mentioned in the Preamble, may
happen into.

Yea, if it were otherwise to be understood; he must (ere any will believe
him) bring more evident matter then this: viz, It is thought, and It may be
thought. Let him then go seek the Records in the Chauncery; and see, whether
the date and the day of the delivery of it, do not agree: and so may he have
more color to wrest the statute, when he does not misreport the matter in
fact, as herein he has done.

CHAP. XV. That an Ecclesiastical person may be deprived of his benefice
without enditement or prosecution of party.
IN the next opinion, I mind to be very short: it is this, that by none
ecclesiastical authority, a man may be deprived of his benefice (which is his
freeholde) being not endited, and no suite of party offered against him.
Whereby (we see) he requires both an enditement, and a suite of some party.
It seems his meaning is, that a Minister cannot be deprived, but by way of
enditement at the Common law, and that the Judge (of Office) may not prefer
such enditement; but it must needs be at the suit of a party. I can not well
conjecture, whereupon he pretends to ground this opinion. If upon the 29
chapter of Magna Charta; it is showed in the chapter next precedent, not to be
understood of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, or of the practice thereof. And
moreover, that chapter in Magna Charta requires no suite of party to prefer
the enditement; so that it may be done by the Judges of Office well enough.

But this conceit is very strange, that Bishops shall not have authority to
deprive an Ecclesiastical person from his benefice. It is showed in the
chapter before, that by usual and allowed course of pleading to a Quare
impedit, the Ordinary does claim (as of common right) institutionem and
destitutionem Clericorum, in benefices within his jurisdiction. And the old
rule was, Cuius estinstituere, eius est destituere. But perhaps it will be
said, he meant, that a Bishop might do it, but not of Office, that is, without
a party, albeit he put a Copulative in stead of a Disjunctive.

But if his meaning be such, he means more then is true. And further, what
privilege or benefit is this to the party conuented, to be prosecuted by a
party, (and therefore perhaps of malice and by subornation of proofs) rather
then by the ordinary proceeding of office and duty, for whose sincerity, we
may more probably presume and intend?

Moreover, what if one that has a benefice will come unto the Bishop, and
there stoutly defend Atheism, Apostasy, or denying of Christ, or any other
heresy, gross blasphemy, or idolatry: may he not (till some accuser be found,
or a party to prosecute) deprive such a person from his benefice ex Officio?
What if the beneficed person will confess before the Ordinary, that he was
never called to the Ministry, but has usurped it, by color of forged
testimonials of Orders: or that he has committed Simonie, Incest, Adultery,
or has two wives living at once, or 13. Eliz. ca. 12.
that he never subscribed nor read the Articles of religion, or being once
convicted, do again defend some error against such Articles: may not the
Bishop ex officio in all, or in any of these cases, deprive or declare his
benefice void, except some other will come and make himself a party? But that
he may do it, appears 1. Eliz. cap. 2.
by the statute 1. of her Majesty: for there it is said, he may enquire (which
is always ex officio, as shall be more plainly showed in the second part) and
may punish by Deprivation, etc. as in like cases has been used by the Queens
ecclesiastical laws.

CHAP. XVI. That after forty days, an excommunicate person may be otherwise
punished, then upon the writ De excommunicato capiendo: And that the said writ
may and ought to be awarded upon contempts, rising on other original causes
ecclesiastical, then any of those ten crimes mentioned in the statute 5. Eliz.
cap. 23.
THe last opinions to be handled in this part, be these: viz. that an
excommunicate person standing so above forty days, may in none other sort be
punished then upon the writ De excommunicato capiendo. The other is: that, the
said writ De excommunicato capiendo, ought not at all to be awarded upon
contempts rising from any other original causes then upon some of the ten
crimes, that be mentioned in the statute 5. Eliz. cap. 23. The first is easily
impugned: for he may be punished twenty pounds by month, for absence from
divine prayer: neither shall his excommunication excuse him, for it is in his
own default. Besides, it is a great contempt in an ecclesiastical cause, and
therefore punishable by the Ecclesiastical commission, upon the express
words used in that Act, which does establish that Commission.

And this stands with reason, where there are great numbers of such wilful
persons, or slack execution by Vnder-shirifs and Bailifs of that writ, as
often falls out; besides the great charges, in suing of it out. For I dare
auow that in sundry dioecesses in the Realm, the whole yearly revenues of
the Bishops there, would not reach to the iusticing of all such contemners
(being of the baser sort of persons) by the course of this writ. They might
happily to the great charge of the shire, keep many of them in prison long
enough: yet they should never procure the fees back again, that first,
whether for rich or poor must be defrayed, for want of ability in the persons
so excommunicated.

Lastly, the law ecclesiastical very reasonably and gravely provides in this
behalf, that if a c. excommunicamus.. qui autem. ex. de haeretic.
man stand excommunicate above an whole year, he may be proceeded with for
suspicion of heresy: because the law presumes, that such a man has small
feeling of religion, but rather contemns it, and nourishes some damnable
opinion against God and his Church. And therefore, such an excommunicate
person, may be punished by reason thereof, otherwise then by that writ.

All the color of reason that I find alleged against this course, by the
Treatiser, is thus: that on our behalf it will be said; this is a shorter way
then the other pursuit of the writ De excommunicato capiendo; being
ouer-trouble some and full of unnecessary circumstances. But hereunto he does
answer, that we forget the old and true saying: Compendiaria res improbitas,
virtus longa. Now if he will have this to be a good answer, then must he
hold; the shorter way always to be the worse, and the longer the better. And
where is then the rule of Logike, Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per
pauciora? and how is he so suddenly fallen out with himself, that elsewhere
condemns Courts ecclesiastical for lingering consistories? I perceive
neither long nor short will please him long together. But his reason is a
fallacy of the consequent. For though it be but a short cut unto wickedness;
and the way unto virtue be long and hard: yet is not all length commendable,
nor yet are all short courses condemnable.

The latter opinion of the two, here also to be handled; does cross and thwart
other of their own opinions: for the Civil law says: Frustra fertur
sententia, nisi parata sit executio. A decree or judgment is of no effect,
where execution of such sentence can not be had. The Judges ecclesiastical
have no compulsorie means to put their judgments unto final execution,
saving excommunication, and the writ De excommunicato capiendo, after forty
days obstinacy. Those of the impugners of ecclesiastical jurisdiction (under
pretense of the laws of the Realm) that be straitest laced; do yield causes
testamentarie and matrimonial to be of ecclesiastical conusance; and (I hope)
sundry others be proved no less to be.

Now how shall any of those be ever effectually proceeded in, seeing they are
none of the ten crimes reckoned in that statute; if for not performance of
that which is decreed, the wilful party shall never be attached, for
persisting under excommunication?

It appears also plainly by the Preamble, that the said statute was enacted,
for better assistance unto jurisdiction ecclesiastical, by more due execution
of the writ De excommunicato capiendo; especially against offenders in crimes
of ecclesiastical conusance. The Ordinaries (before this) who had to deal in
any matter ecclesiastical, and all subjects that sued any other there, had
this interest; of having a contemptuous person being excommunicated, and so
remaining above forty days; to be attached and imprisoned by virtue of that
writ; upon what original cause ecclesiastical soever such contempt grew. Now
if that statute providing but a straiter course for execution of that writ, in
ten crimes only; should with all take away the force and use of it, as it
stood before at the Common law; not only in sundry other crimes of
ecclesiastical conusance still there punishable; but also in all causes
Testamentarie, Matrimonial, of tithes, and in all other rights ecclesiastical
in that Court only still demandable: then should it work a clean contrary
effect to the very true drift and scope aimed at; and to the meaning it self
of the Lawmakers. But this is very unreasonable and absurd to imagine. for,
quae in fauorem sunt introducta, non debent in odium retorqueri: and, quae ad
vnum effectnm parantur, non debent contrarium operari effectum.

It is true, that in the beginning of the body of that Statute, the words be
general in this sort, viz. Every Writ of excommunicato capiendo, that shall be
granted out of the high court of Chancerie, against any person or persons, etc.
Whereupon some very learned in those laws have thought, that the manner of
granting it, returning and delivering it, which be there especified; does
reach unto all and every writ de excommunicato capiendo: but yet that the new
penalties there provided for such person excommunicate, as shall not yield his
body; are to be restrained unto those only, who by Significauit are certified
to have been excommunicated upon some cause or contempt, arising upon some
original matter of some of those ten crimes, there especified.

This seems to carry great reason with it: for in truth (that generality
there not withstanding) not only in the Preamble, but in diverse parts of the
body of that statute, we find words taxatiue and of restraint; carrying the
chief purport of that Act unto such writs, as be grounded upon some of those
ten crimes. For the Preamble only speaks, of persons offending in many great
crimes and offenses: of continuing in their sinful and criminous life, and
of such offenders. And the beginning of the body of the Statute is: for
redress thereof be it, etc. and afterward this word of Limitation is often
used, viz. Such writ of excommunicato capiendo: such persons excommunicate; and
such Significauit. And therefore that statute nor any Prouiso in it cannot be
intended, generally to take away the writ de excommunicato capiendo, in all
causes, saving in those ten crimes; as by this opinion is enforced.

But the clause thereof, Saving and reserving to all persons having authority
to certify excommunicate persons; does put all this matter out of doubt and
dispute. For thereby is saved and reserved to them like authority to accept
and receive the submissions and satisfactions: to absolve and release, and to
signify: and thereupon to have such writs, etc. in such manner and form as
heretofore (respectiuelie) they have used, as has been accustomed; and as they
or any of them had, or ofright ought or might have had: anything in that
statute specified or contained, to the contrary here of, notwithstanding. If
then they may still signify in like manner and form, shall have writs
thereupon, may absolve and release, receive satisfaction and submission, etc.
as they had done before that time: then may and ought the writ de excommunicato
capiendo, to be awarded for contempt arising on other original causes
ecclesiastical, then any of those ten crimes in that statute reckoned. For so
Ordinaries did, and had before that time, and since also; whatsoever this
opinion now does deliver to the contrary.

CHAP. XVII. Of a Prohibition, what it is, where it lies not, and where it
does: and how it cease by a Consultation: and of the writ of Indicauit.
WHen any Court goes beyond his bounds, and deals in other matter or sort,
then the laws of the land will warrant; there lies in some cases writs at the
common law, which are of Prohibition or Indicauit: and in other cases, a writ
brought in by statute, called Provision and Praemunire: and the Prohibition and
Praemunire do lie as well against temporal, as against ecclesiastical Courts.

The Prohibition is a charge by the kings writ, to forbear to hold Plea,
either in some matter or manner, which it is supposed a man deals in, beyond
his jurisdiction, or otherwise then law will warrant. Every Prohibition is
either Prohibitio iuris by the very law it self; or Prohibitio hominis, where
the ministry of the competent judges (in that behalf) is used. Any Statute
prohibitorie is 21. E. 3. fol. 29.
Prohibitio Iuris; a very prohibition in it self, and therefore it is a
contempt, to sue against it.

In a prohibition we are to consider; In what matter it lies not, at what time
it lies not, where and when it lies, and how it cease or loses his force.
For the first, it is 18. Edw. 3. pro clero. ca. 5.
provided by statute, and the king there determines thus: that no prohibition
shall go out of the Chancerie, but in such case, where we have the Conisance,
and of right ought to have. And therefore Thirning M. 2. H. 4. fol. 15.
said; when we see the jurisdiction belongs not to us; we will grant a
Consultation. So that if the matter be mere Ecclesiastical, there lies no
Prohibition.

Touching the second point, it seems a Prohibition is not to be granted, till
by sight of the Libel, there appear cause to grant it. For 31. H. 6. fol. 14.
Henkstone held, that by the statute de Regia prohibitione and de coniunctim fe
offatis in fine, a man shall not have prohibition, antequam lis sit contestata
in curia spirituali: which is, till a libell be put in, and the party put to
answer it: and this is to be certified to the Chancellor by the view of the
Libell: which Fortescue granted.

But this has two exceptions: one is, when the copy of the Libell (contrary
to the Statute 2. H. 5.) is denied: for upon this cause, I find a M. 4. E. 4.
fol. 37
prohibition granted, that the Ordinary should surcease, till the copy of the
Libell, according to that statute, were delivered. another exception is in some
court, where a surmise is made, that the suite (in truth) is for some other
matters, then are expressed in the Libell: for Brook reports that Brook
tit. prohib. nu. 17.
a man may have a prohibition in the kings Bench upon such a surmise (as for
example by surmising the suite to be (in deed) for great timber, though it be
demanded in the Libel, under the name of Sylua caedua) but he says it is
otherwise in the Common Pleas.

Touching the third point, for what causes a Prohibition is granted: I find it
may be granted either in respect of some of the parties to the suit, or in
regard of the Judge before whom it is, or for the very matter handled. For the
first of these three: If a T. 12. H. 7. fol. 22.
Parson of a Church do sue another Parsons farmour or servant for right of
tithes, being not such as can try the right of tithes: Fineux held that a
prohibition may be granted. Here of see further in the 6. chap. before.

Touching the second; it may be granted, either for the Judges contempt; as in
not delivering copy of the Libell, as is before touched: or for that he has
not (in deed) any jurisdiction. for so it was judged by Hankeford and by the
whole Court, (as it seems) in the vicar of Saltash his M. 2. H. 4. fol. 15.
case being co^uented before the Popes Collector. Though a Consultation did
otherwise lie, the court will not grant it to one, that has no jurisdiction in
right.

Concerning the third and last point of the three, if the matter be Temporal,
that is such, as Stat. de consultat. 24. Ed. 1.
there lies redress for, by some Writ in the Chancerie, then there lies a
Prohibition, as seems by Statute: to which agrees the Lib. 2. ca. 24.
place before alleged, out of the book of Doctor and Student. Yet this has
also two exceptions: one is, whereas the Spiritual Court holds Plea quite to
another end. For Artic. Cleri. 9. Ed. 2. cap. 6.
when one and the self same case is debated before Judges spiritual and
temporal (as for beating of a Clerk) there the statute is; that
(notwithstanding the spiritual judgment) the kings Court also shall debate
it. For both these conisances tending the one to the amends, the other to the
excommunication; may stand together, as is showed in the 8. chapter.

The second exception hereof seems to be, T. 9. H. 3. per Fitzh. Prohib.
when one Clerk sueth another in the spiritual Court, for the goods of his
house; for there lies no prohibition: as when one Abbot sueth another.
Secondly, a prohibitio^ lies, where a matter (being at first ecclesiastical,)
brings at last in debate, a mere temporal matter with it, to be determined.
Therefore it was holden, that so soon 38. H. 6. fol. 21
as it appears, that the right of tithes comes in debate, the lay Court
shall cease, and be out of jurisdiction: and the same law is of the spiritual
Court: for if it may appear, that the right of aduowson may come in debate,
although it appeared not at first, the spiritual Court must surcease: quod
fuit concessum. This may happen (as for example) when suite is brought (at
first) for right of tithes; and it falls out by depositions or otherwise; that
the tithes Circumspecte agatis. 13. Ed. 1.
demanded amount to the 4. part of the benefice by year: in which case it is
determined, that the temporal Court shall have conusance, even as if the right
of Patronage were in demand principally.

Thirdly, a prohibition lies for such a cause, Doctor and Student. Loco. d.
as albeit there lie none action for it in a temporal Court, yet the matter is
such, as of custom never belonged to an ecclesiastical court. As if an
ecclesiastical court would hold Plea against an executor, upon a bare contract
made by his testator: for neither the court may hear it, nor yet there lies
action for it in a Temporal court.

Fourthlie, there lies Prohibition, when the suite tends to determine and
give execution in a temporal matter; as money, etc. being due otherwise, then
by the judgment given in the Court ecclesiastical. Therefore if a composition
by indenture 11. H. 4. fol. 85.
be made by an Ordinary betwixt two ecclesiastical persons; that the one
shall have tithes, the other an annuitie, with penalty for default of payment:
the suite for this shall be at the Common law: but the suite for any thing
that rises upon a judgment given in the spiritual Court, shall be there, per
Hill. For T. 12. H. 7. fol. 22.
though amends be to be made by a certain sum of money, this is no
necessary cause to grant a prohibition, no more then when the suite is for
tithes, yet the condemnation in money being the value of them: nor when a
penance is redeemed by the party for money, which may be sued for in a
spiritual court, per Butler. Because when an offense is done to a man, it is
Ibidem.
reason that he have amends for it: but there can be no more proper amends then
money, because every thing may be valued by money, per Keble. Which they speak
to prove; that amends in money may be awarded in an ecclesiastical Court for
Diffamation: and so the judgment then passed, upon this ground (among others)
as Brook Consultation. nu. 5.
Brook testifies.

And T. 12. H. 7. fol. 22.
there is a great diversity betwixt a duty or sum of money or other things
at the first demandable and determinable at the Common law; and such a sum
as before sentence given in the Spiritual law, is not due at all. For the
first, there lies a Prohibition, but not for the second: for otherwise, it
would follow, that the spiritual law might give a judgment, which it could
not put in execution. but this were absurd, per Reed and Tremaile.

Fiftlie, it is said that there lies a Prohibition, when the party sued has
an action given him at the Common law, for the original and principal
matter, whereupon the suite at the ecclesiastical law did grow. The case was
thus: Aman T. 22. Ed. 4. fol. 20.
reported that the Abbot of S. Albanes did detain his wife in the said Abbots
lodging against her will; to the intent to make her his harlot. the Abbot
hereupon brought his action of Diffamation in the Court ecclesiastical; and
the husband his prohibition. now because the husband might have his action of
false imprisonment at the Common law against the Abbot, Brian held, that a
Consultation was not to be granted. de hoc quaere.

A prohibition cease and loses his force, after a Stat. de Consultat. 24.
Ed. 1.
Consultation be once granted. This may be proved by the Statute De
Consultat. for the Chanceller or chief Iusticer of the king upon sight of the
Libell, etc. if they can see no redress by Writ, etc. shall write to the
spiritual judges, etc. to proceed, notwithstanding the kings prohibition
directed to them before. But more plainly after: Where 50. Ed. 3. ca. 4.
a consultation is once duly granted, the Judge may proceed in the cause,
notwithstanding any other prohibition thereupon to him to be delivered: so the
matter in the Libell be not changed.

The writ of Indicauit is Fitzh Nature. b^. tit. Prohibition. fol. 45.
likewise a kind of Prohibition; and lies especially and naturally for a suite
of tithes, which do amount to a fourth part or above, of the whole benefice. It
lies also for the Patron, where his Clerk is impleaded for the aduowson (id
est) the right of Patronage, in a spiritual Court. the Patron and Clerk that
is sued in the court ecclesiastical may sue it forth both against the
Ecclesiastical Judge, and the party that sueth there. But it 34. Ed. 1. de
coniunctim ^fat.
lies not till the Libell be brought to be viewed into the Chancerie, and lis
Fitzh. ibid.
etiam contestata. and Regist. fol. 47.
it lies only before sentence be given in the Court ecclesiastical: for it
is afterward void.

CHAP. XVIII. An Analysis or unfolding of the two special statutes touching
Praemunire, with sundry questions and doubts about that matter, requiring more
grave resolution.
IN the matter of Praemunire (which is a question falling often in doubt about
execution of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, wherein as in the matter of
prohibition and consultation you desired earnestly that I would write unto you
what I thought) I cannot in any point satisfy my self, much less you: by
reason that this matter is enwrapped in over many difficult doubts for me to
unfold. yet I have some thing considered of it, and do trust that I shall be
able to point out unto you certain general heads, whereunto most of the doubts
commonly made or happening, may not unfitly perhaps be referred: that thereby
tanquam Thesei filo you may be directed (as opportunity shall serve) what and
how in this behalf to enquire of the reverend Judges, or of other great
learned and grave men of that profession.

There be two statutes, whereupon it is principally grounded. The first is 27.
Ed. 3. cap. 1. de Prouisor.
of Prouisors, established in the time of king Edward the 3. the complaint and
grief there propounded was, that the kings people were drawn out of the
Realm, to answer unto things, whereof the Conisance pertains to the kings
Court: and that judgments there given were impeached in another court. The
mischiefs then noted thereupon were, the prejudice and disherison of the king
and of his crown, and of all the people of the Realm: and the undoing and
destruction of the Common law of the Realm. The remedy there given for these
mischieues was: that if any of what condition soever (being of the kings
liegeance) should draw any out of the realm in plea, whereof the Conusance
pertains to the kings court, or of things, whereof judgments be given in the
kings court, or which do sue in another court to defeat or impeach the
judgments given in the kings court, should have day, etc. as is there more
largely by the sanction contrived.

The other statute is, 16. R. (...). cap. 5.
of the time of king Richard the 2. there is showed and laid forth, that the
Conisance of plee of Presentiments to Benefices, belongs only to the kings
court by the old right of his crown: and that Archbishops, Bishops, and other
spiritual persons having the instituting unto such Benefices (within their
jurisdictions) be bound, and have made execution of such judgments, by kings
commandments, without interruption: and that also they be bound of right, to
make execution of many other of the kings commandments: but it is there
complained, that processes and censures of excommunication upon certain
Bishops of England, were made by the Bishop of Rome, because the said Bishops
have made execution of such commandments: and that he purposed to translate
some Prelates out of the realm, and some from one bishoprike to another within
the Realm, without the Kings knowledge, and without their assent that so
should be translated. There are assigned also for mischiefs hereupon growing,
the open disherison of the crown, the destruction of the king, of his law and
realm, and that these things are against the kings crown and regalie, that
they defeat and destroy the statutes, that they tend to make the realm
submitted to the Bishop of Rome, and the laws and statutes of it by him to be
defeated and destroyed at his will, that they draw out of the realm (against
the kings will) the said Prelates his liege persons of his council, that be
much profitable and necessary to the king, and to all his realm, and that
these devises will be are away the treasure of the Realm: for remedy whereof
it is provided, what shall not be done: viz. that none shall purchase or
pursue, or do to be purchased or pursued: where? in the Court of Rome or
elsewhere: what? any such translations, processes, and sentences of
excommunications, bulls, instruments, or any other things: of what sort? which
touch the king, against him, his crown and his regalie, or his realm: in what
manner touching these? as is aforesaid, and likewise, that none shall bring
them into the Realm: or being perhaps brought in by another, shall receive
them; or being neither brought in by them, nor yet received from others, but
coming (some way) to their knowledge, shall not make any notification, or any
other execution of them: where? neither within the realm nor without, etc.
upon pains there at large contained.

Of those general heads whereunto I said before, that all questions of
Praemunire might be referred, there be some that being expressed in these
statutes, are (I think) without all doubt, to be within the compass thereof:
as by the first of these two, to draw any of the Queens liegeance out of the
realm in a plea, whereof the conisance pertains, or judgments be given in
the kings Court. And that which is said of a Plea in the kings court, is also
drawn by some opinion, unto a court Ecclesiastical, for 9. Ed. 4. fol. 3.
Yeluerton in the Kings bench held opinion oftentimes, that if a Clerk do sue
another in the Court of Rome for a spiritnall matter, whereof he may have
remedy within the realm, that he is in case of Praemunire, quia trahit in
placitum extra regnum. And Fitzh. Noua not. br. fol. 44. lit. H.
Fitzh. holds, that for collation of a Prebend sued out of the realm, a
prohibition does lie.

Secondly, it is an undoubted Praemunire by that statute to sue in another
court, to defeat or impeach the judgments given in the kings court. In these
words of (another court) there seems to be an opposition and seuerance of
such a court, from the Kings court: the rather, because both the Preamble and
the body of the statute do mention, drawing men out of the realm in Plea.
Whereof at that time there was no color for any man to be drawn any whither,
but only to the court of the bishop of Rome, whether he resided there at
Auignon in France, (where the Popes about that time did lie 70. years
together) at Bononie, or elsewheresoeuer.

Therefore for the true understanding of those words enquire: If any of this
realm of late years (whiles the parliament of Paris was established by the
authority of the French king) upon color, that the Queens mai^stie is in
very right Queen of France, should have brought process thence against
another subject to appear there: whether this had not been a Praemunire by
that statute? likewise, If any of the Q. Courts (not authorized thereunto by law
upon writ of error) should defeat a judgment given in any other of the
Queens courts: enquire, whether this be within the meaning of those words,
notwithstanding the (...) and distinction, whereby such another court seems
to be severed and made a distinct thing from all the Queens court?

Thirdly, it is an undoubted Praemunire according to the later of the foresaid
two statutes, to purchase or pursue, or to procure so to be done, in the court
of Rome or elsewhere, any such translations etc. or any other things, which
touch the King, be against him, his Crown and Regaltie, or his Realm, as is
(there) aforesaid: or etc. as is there further contained.

Fitzherbert reports, Fitzh. tit. Praemunire. nu. 5.
that the opinion of the court was (Paschae II. H. 7.) that Alibi in the said
statute was understood of Bishops courts: so that if a man sue there, for a
thing that belongs to the Common law, he shall be in the Praemunire.
Therefore Brook titulo Praemu, nu. 21.
was it holden by some, that a benefice Donatiue by the Patron is a mere lay
thing, and the Bishop shall not visit it, and therefore shall not deprive from
it, and if he meddle in this case, it is a Praemunire: and says that Barlow
bishop of Bathe, for depriving the Deane that had it as a Donatiue by the Kings
Letters patents, was driven to sue a pardon.

Fineux chief 15. H. 7. fol. 9.
Justice, says; a spiritual man may execute temporal jurisdiction, as the
Bishop of Durham does in his county Palantine (viz. as he has iura regalia,
but not as a Bishop) and (says he) the Bishop shall punish his Clerks by
Praemunire for suing in Spiritual courts for a cause temporal. But whether
that Bishop has this authority (seeing Praemunire is brought in by statute)
there is a Quaere inde made, as of a matter doubtful.

It is holden, that a Prohibition does 24. H. 8. titulo Praemu. number. 16.
often lie, where a Praemunire does not: as of tithes of great trees etc. for
the nature of the action does belong to the Spiritual court, albeit not that
very cause in that form; but when it is of a lay matter, or of a thing that
never did belong unto the Court spiritual, herein (as is said) there lies a
Praemunire.

But these notwithstanding, sundry doubts are made in this behalf, because at
this day all jurisdiction Ecclesiastical is now truly acknowledged, and is in
deed (as it was always in law) in the Sovereign prince, and from her
prerogative royal derived down to others, no less then the Admiral court
is, or the court of the Constable of England in times past was, when it was
used: albeit they used their peculiar seals, and names to the processes there
sped. And I have heard very credibly, that some reverend and great learned
Judges (whiles they lived) were of opinion, that for an Ecclesiastical Judge
to deal in a matter apperteining (in very truth) to a Temporal court, yet for
some neerenesse and cohere^ce, by him probably supposed to be an
ecclesiastical cause; could not at this day be a Praemunire; but subject only
to a Prohibition, and punishable as a contempt, as it was at the Common law,
upon an attachment after Prohibition. Which opinion if it be sound; then the
Treatiser is far wide from the truth, where he says: that for men to deal
in any cause not belonging to their jurisdiction, is Praemunire. This were very
hard and rigorous, if every mistaking or going beyond their commission by
Justices of Peace, by any Judges ecclesiastical or temporal, should be no
less then Praemunire. I have heard it delivered by great Lawyers, that so to
do, does but make the Actvoid, as being coram non Iudice, and infers no such
grievous penalty. For it is alleged, that (Alibi) in the statute was put in,
to enclude processes derived from the Popes authority, albeit he kept his
abode any where else then at Rome. In which respect it is affirmed in a 25. H.
8. ca. 21.
statute; that the said statute of Provision and Praemunire 16. R. 2. was made
against such as sue to the Court of Rome against the kings crown and dignity
royal. And it seems to some, that Alibi can not now signify Bishops and
their Courts, which are called the Queens Ecclesiastical courts and Judges,
and the Canons by law established, the Queens Ecclesiastical laws. Insomuch,
as the power given by statute to her Majesty, by her Letters Patents to 1. El.
cap. 1.
name such as shall execute all manner of jurisdictions touching or concerning
any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, is brought 8. El. cap. 1. in the
Preamble.
to prove the sufficient ordinary authority, that Bishops have given unto
them, by the very Letters Patents directed from her Highness, for their
confirming and consecrating, etc.

It is further alleged, that such dealing of an Ordinary touches not the King,
against him, his Crown and Regalie, or Realm, as not falling into any of the
mischiefs, whereof that statute was meant to be a remedy.

And for that (all jurisdiction Ecclesiastical is now both in fact and Law
united to the Crown, and from thence derived) if it should be said that the
handling of a matter but in an incompetent court (yet established by the
Queens authority) were in that high degree of offense and punishment against
her Crown: some think it reaches thus far; as to implie an
incompatibilitie betwixt the Crown and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; and so by
implication, to deny her just Royal prerogative over all persons, and in all
causes as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal; as if these could not both flow
from the Crown, nor stand together and meet in one person; which is most
erroneous to think, and traitorous to affirm.

It is likewise alleged, that this were to make in effect a Praemunire to lie
in every case, where a Prohibition may, and always has served the turn.
Whereas a Praemunire seems to be as a remedy provided, where a Prohibition
could not serve, to stay the course of proceeding. And that even before the
supremacy was acknowledged to the Crown, no Praemunire upon this point (only)
is reported in the books of terms and years, to have been inflicted: but
only for pursuing pleas of the conusance of the kings court out of the Realm,
seeking to defeat judgments there given, and procuring Bulls from the court
of Rome, in derogation of the laws of the Realm.

Moreover, it is to this purpose alleged, that by the 3. and 4. Edw. 6. cap. 11.
statute authorizing two and thirty persons to set down laws
Ecclesiastical, though repealed, it was provided (as they think) in
affirmance of the law, that no man for executing any of them, should have
incurred contempt, pain, forfeiture, loss, nor have been in danger of any
action or suite of praemunire. Yet if such laws had been framed, the Judges
ecclesiastical might (by mistaking) have given some cause of prohibition.
Therefore it is gathered by like equity, to be very hard, that an
Ecclesiastical Judge meaning to do his duty, and but to execute
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction ecclesiastically, yet by similitude and near
coherence of one matter with another, mistaking and so exceeding his authority
(a thing very easy in the Common law, wherein sometimes do happen variety of
judgments, amongst the oldest professers of it) if before any prohibition
brought (as it were to forwarne him) he should hereupon de drawn at the very
first push into a praemunire. For by like reason, if a court Baron should hear
plea of a matter above forty shillings, a praemunire in stead of a prohibition
might be brought against them.

Therefore enquire, and seek to inform your self as well in the premises, as
of these questions following, what is to be holden for law: viz. in holding
plea in an Ecclesiastical court 1. Doubt.
of a temporal matter, whether there be not a difference, when it is
propounded under the very name of a temporal action, and when it is propounded
under the name of an ecclesiast. matter?

And whether the Judge be in danger before the matter be 2. Doubt.
opened unto him, or no? For I think in no Court temporal or ecclesiastical,
the Judges peruse the writs, declarations etc. when they are first put in.

And whether it be as great an offense in law but to hold plea, 3. Doubt.
as to give judgment, and to award execution in an Ecclesiastical court of a
temporal matter?

Also whether it be like degree of offense for an ecclesiastical 4. Doubt.
Judge to execute a temporal matter by censures ecclesiastical, as it is to
execute it, or a matter ecclesiastical by temporal, viz. fine, imprisonment,
loss of limme, or such like?

Likewise of what quality the offense is to go on in plea in a 5. Doubt.
Court ecclesiastical after a mere temporal matter (as right of aduowson,
etc.) falls in controversy, principally to be determined?

Or to hold plea there in a matter worthy of redress, yet never of custom
handled either in temporal or ecclesiastical 6. Doubt.
Court, nor whereof any remedy lies at the Common law?

Also what offense it is to make laws temporal or ecclesiastical without the
Princes assent? 7. Doubt.


What it is to deal in temporal causes or courts, without 8. Doubt.
commission? and what in ecclesiastical?

And lastly of what degree and quality of offense is it, for a 9. Doubt.
Court temporal to hold plea of a mere ecclesiastical cause? or to deal in
censures ecclesiastical?

Or for such a court to hold plea of a temporal matter, being 10. Doubt.
no competent Judges thereof? as for example, if the Court of Common pleas, or
the Eschequer should deal in pleas of the Crown, that be capital? with such
like a great number. And so thus much for the first part.

The end of the first part.
THE SECOND PART OF AN APOLOGY, FOR SUNDRY PROceedings by Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical; of late times by some challenged, and also diversely by them
impugned.

This second part (especially) treats of the two several ways of
proceeding in causes Criminal, viz. by way of Accusation, and ex Officio
Iudicis.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER BARKER, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.

THE PREFACE, wherein is declared, how the four opinions put over unto this
place do fall in with the challenges of the Innouatours; and a general
distribution made of matters to be handled in the second and third Parts.
THe second part of this treatise contains our proofs, together with answer
to the objections made against the manner of practice of jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical by those, who do even profess themselves to endeavor an
innovation in the frame of government of this Church of England. But we mean
not in this place to handle all, which they object in this behalf, but only
some such of them, as touch the manner and form of the proceedings in the
exercise thereof. For it is known they take sundry other exceptions, as
against the manner of calling to function Ecclesiastical, against the
ordination, against sundry the callings and the functions themselves, against
deriuing of the jurisdiction Ecclesiastical from the Prince, against the
matters handled by that jurisdiction, and against the manner of handling them in
sundry other respects, condemning them as Antichristian and contrary to Gods
word. All which are of another consideration, and not fit here to be ripped up.

I find four opinions (pretending that the laws of the Realm be against the
manner of entrance into some suites, and against certain proceedings
Ecclesiastical) that are mentioned in the general Preface to have been put
off unto this place, for avoiding of needelesse repetition, and as falling here
more fit to be discussed, among other like objections of the Innouatours.

The first of them that we put over unto this place is, that an Ecclesiastical
court may not proceed without accusation or presentment: meaning (as I take
it) a presentment by Officers sworn for that purpose. If this were true
(according as the propriety of the words imports) then Ordinaries might not
so much as deal in those two excepted causes of matrimony and testament, nor
in any other concerning rights and duties Ecclesiastical, but only in
offenses and crimes punishable by that jurisdiction. For an accusation or
presentment has none use, but in matters of crime or offense incident unto
that jurisdiction to punish. Besides that, this opinion does contradict the
next following. For this implies, that if the matter be Ecclesiastical, and
that there be either accusation or such presentment; then may the Judge
Ecclesiastical proceed; so that if there be but a presentment without any
accusation, his proceeding without a party, which is to proceed ex officio,
shall be warranted. Whereupon does follow, that proceeding ex officio is not
tied to those two causes only of Testament or Matrimony, as the next opinion
does hold.

For the second is, that no lay person may be cited ex officio in any cause,
but either restamentarie or matrimonial: which if it were true, though a lay
man be duly presented for any crime; yet shall he never be cited for it, or
brought into question, for want of an accuser to prosecute it. Concerning the
citing of lay persons, absolutely in any cause besides those two, enough has
been said in the former part So that in this opinion the citing ex officio
only remains needful to be further spoken of. Truly if the author of it
had understood what he writ, he would never have put it in the tale or
reckoning. For of all other causes Ecclesiastical whatsoever, there can be
least use of proceeding ex officio in those two: because the chiefest, and
almost only use of it is, in dealing against crimes and offenses. But I will
bring these two opinions into a brief thus: the first seems to permit
proceeding of Office in an Ecclesiastical matter, so there be a solemn
presentment precedent. The second condemns all proceeding without a party
(saving in those two cases) and so (in effect) in all causes, if it have none
use in those two.

The third of those opinions is, that albeit a matter be duly presented
against a man, yet he may not be examined upon his oath, as of incontinencie or
such like. Whereby (I think) is meant, that he may not be so examined of any
criminal and penal matter.

The last opinion of the said four, is: that no man is bound to declare any
matter against another, except there be some, that is an accuser. So that by
this last, no witnesses shall ever be had, when the Judge proceeds ex
officio, except themselves list, which commonly none will thrust himself into,
but upon some pique or humor of enmity. And so an accuser who for the most
part comes in of malice shall (by this opinion) have compulsories to force
witnesnesses to testify: but a magistrate proceeding for satisfaction of his
duty only, shall not. By the way may be noted, that hereby also that opinion
is overthrown which holds, no man to be bound against his will to testify,
but in causes matrimonial or testamentary: for accusation is only of
offenses. By this opinion is implied, that when there is an accuser, a man may
be compelled and is bound to declare a truth against another. Which last
being joined to the former, viz. that albeit a matter be duly presented (that
is criminal, and may be penal to him) yet he may not be examined of it, upon
his own oath: does come to this pass, that of an Ecclesiastical crime, there
is (by law) no way to convict a man, except some man will be an accuser, or
else by voluntary witnesses qui sese ingerunt ad testimonium: viz. such, whom
the very law of nations does entend to be enemies unto the party, because
they thrust themselves into the matter.

You are not to marvel that the opinions of those, who shoot at one general
mark, are so absurd, and do so vary and jar among themselves, and do as it
were confront one another. For you remember, quod vno absurdo dato, multa
consequuntur: and that truth is simple, constant, and like it self, and
therefore no truth is disagreeing from another truth: whereas untruth is
manifold, and variable from it self. For two contraries can never be both
true, but they may be, and are oftentimes both of them false.

The first of these opinions then takes away all proceeding, either in crimes,
or in any other causes, where there wants an accusation or such solemn
presentment, as the author of it means. The second (in effect) takes away
all proceeding ex officio, but especially in crimes and offenses. The third
impugneth all examination by the oath of the party, in a matter criminal and
penal. The last would overthrow all urging of witnesses to testify, in a
cause moved ex officio, viz. where there is none accuser, yea though there be
a solemn presentment.

These four challenges (among others) are also made against jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, by the innouators, not only for contrariety unto the laws
of the Realm, but for contrariety also to Canon law, to Civil law, to Gods
law, and unto reason, as is by them pretended.

But as well their other exceptions, that of late have been taken by any of
them, and stirred up against the manner of exercising jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, (so far as I can learn) as also these four last recited
falling in with them (albeit all their said opinions be not holden by every of
them, but according to the variety of their humors and several capacities)
may be reduced (not unfitly) unto these two heads.

They do respect, either the manner of entrance into the suite, or else the
form of proceeding in it. In the manner of entrance (you see) they challenge
it, for that it is not either at the suite of some accuser, or upon a solemn
Presentment: Or for being ex officio in any other cause, then those two of
testament, or matrimony, wherein (in very deed) such proceeding has little or
none use.

In the course of proceeding in the suite, they take exception, partly against
some principal act therein used: and partly against some meaner circumstances.

In that more principal act (viz. of giving an oath) they impugn either the
examination upon oath of the party himself, or the examination of witnesses,
concerning their brethrens actions. Touching the oath of the party, both fault
is found by some with the ceremony used in giving the oath, and because the
oath is given in a cause criminal and penal to themselves. In the ceremony at
taking an oath, there is reprehended (by some) the laying of the hand on a
book, and the swearing by the book, or by the contents of it. Of meaner
circumstances (falling out in proceeding) that they challenge, some are
concurring with the very tender of the oath (as that they have not distinct
knowledge of every particular, whereupon they are to be examined, before they
resolve, whether to take the oath or not: and other are ensuing the oath and
examination: as that the Judges do not rest in that which is affirmed or
denied upon their oath, but oftentimes proceed to a further examination by
witnesses, upon the same points. All which I mind (God willing) to prosecute,
in the same order, that I have here set forth: having first touched some
matters, that I hold not unnecessary to be known by the unlearned sort, for
the better opening and understanding of the disputations following.

THE CONTENTS OF the Chapters of the Second part of this Apology.
OF the distinction of offenses: and several kinds and ends in punishing

Of two sorts of prosecution of crimes and offenses, viz. by a party and of
office:

Of the sundry kinds of obiecting crimes by a party mentioned in the Civil
law: as by reason of a man's public charge and function: also by way of
Exception, Supplication, Complaint, Delation, and Accusation. The true
signification of the word Accusatio: his diverse acceptions, definition and
exposition thereof; with some reason of the frequencie of accusation, in courts
of the Civil laws, in former times is also declared.

That the prosecution of crimes by way of Accusation, is in most places
forbidden Accusation be unlawful; and certain points delivered to be observed
by all them, that will accuse others.

Of the several acceptions of this word Officium: the signification of
Inquisitio, Quaestio, Crimina ordinaria and extraordinaria: the reason why
Inquiry by office came in place of Accusation: of Enquiry general and
special: of Enquiry special ex officio nobili sieve mero, mixto, and promoto:
and of the privileges of proceeding ex mero officio above the other.

Of Denunciation, a special means of stirring up the Office: of the manifold
Rome: and at this present on the other side the Sea: the general acception of
that word; and of four kinds of Denunciation: how they differ one from
another: what is required in them: and when a Denouncer is to be condemned or
excused of expenses. And what course of dealing against crimes and offenses is
holden both in courts of the Ecclesiastical Commission, and in Ordinary courts
Ecclesiastical in this Realm.

That the Civil and Canon laws allow sundry means to ground a Special
Enquiry of office, against a crime, besides Accusation and Presentment: therein
is also contained an answer to a supposed rule: and declared how from General
they descend to Special enquiry: and that besides those two, either a Fame; or
Clamosa insinuatio; or Private Judicial Denunciation; or Canonical
Denunciation; or Indicia; or taking with the manner: or other Notoriety of the
fact: or appeachment by some of the accomplices: or collusion of the Accuser: or
the not obiecting in due time, that every of these do want: or when the Enquiry
tends but to a Spiritual punishment, may severally any of them serve to
warrant such Enquiry: with some observations, touching the nature of most of
these.

That to proceed sometimes against an offense, otherwise then upon an
Accusation or Presentment: or then upon an Appeal or Enditement (which two, at
the Common law have respective correspondence unto the two former) is no
diverse, much less any contrary or repugnant course to the laws, statutes, and
customs of this Realm: this is proved by Common law, statutes, and practice,
in proceeding informatiue, and Punitiue: with answer to certain objections
made to the contrary.

How the second opinion (here to be treated of) is: that no lay person may of
office, in any cause but testamentary or matrimonial: and that the drift of
that opinion is against proceeding of office in matters criminal: the
necessary use and equity of proceeding (sometimes) criminally, by the Judges
office, in courts both Temporal and Ecclesiastical.

Contains an answer to some further objections, made against the conueniency
of office.

That the laws of the Realm do use Enquiries and proceedings ex officio; that

Is set down a reply to the Note-gatherers answers, given to certain reasons
Temporal courts: and an answer to his reasons brought to prove, that in
proceeding of office, there is some contrariety unto the laws of England.

That the Enquiry ex officio against crimes, is allowed both in Civil or
Temporal Ecclesiastical also, by the two laws Canon and Civil.

Contains an answer to such objections, as upon the Civil or Canon laws,
Criminal, by the Treatiser and the Note-gatherer.

Enquiry and proceeding of office without an accuser, and grounded upon
Enquiry, is approved by sundry examples of Scripture.

An answer is made to such objections, as out of Scripture or Ecclesiastical
criminal proceeding of office; by the Note-gatherer and others.



THE SECOND PART of the Apology published in defense of sundry proceedings by
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical.
CHAP. I. Containing a distinction of offenses, and several kinds and ends in
punishing them, with the necessity of punishments.
ALl the controversies remaining to be handled in either of the two parts
ensuing, do rest (chiefly) about the manner of discovering of such crimes as
are punishable by ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. And because many be talkers of
these matters, who understand but little the true nature of them; therefore to
give light unto the whole disputation, and to make it appear to be a matter of
no small consequence, but much to be stood upon; before I proceed further, I
mind to touch some necessary points serving for the better understanding of
all proceedings against crimes. And first of the diversity of faults in
general, then the several kinds of punishment of them, and the ends of such
punishing, and of the necessity of punishing them: whereupon (by consequence)
depends a necessity also to have them first discovered.

All Gl. in c. peccatum de reg. Iur. in 6. gl. in c. si peccatum. did. 1. de
poenit. August. in quaest. in Leuiticum.
faults are done either by committing; as where in action we do that which is
evil, or forbidden, called properly Peccatum, a sin, a crime and offense: or
else by omitting and leaving undone, some thing that we ought to do, called
Delictum, a delinquendo, a default, negligence or contempt. For to him that
knows how to do well, and does it not, to him it is sin, says S. Jacob
c. 4. V. 17.
James. And yet these two be often c. d. si peccatum.
confounded together, and the one is taken for the other in sundry writers.

Of both these sorts, some there be which (by the Civil laws) are called
Crimina ordinaria. Such L. 3. poena ff. de crim. stellionatus.
as be known by a peculiar name, and have in law a certain penalty
expressed for the offenders in them, by special set Magistrates thereunto
appointed, in which respect they are also called Crimina legitima. And all
other be Crimina extraordinaria, so called, either because they were committed
vncertainelie to some, as occasions fell out, or for that they have no peculiar
and proper name in law, or else no certain punishment determinately appointed
(by law) for those who offend in them; and most of them are therefore for the
variety of them (upon the great variety of spots which be in a certain beast
named Plinius.
Stellio) termed in that law Crimina Stellionatus: and may be englished by the
general term of misdemeanors: and such be many of these crimes which usually
are enquired of and examined in the Star Chamber.

Of animaduersions or chastisements exercised against offenders for either of
these kinds of faults: Aul. Gellius, lib. 6. c. 14.
some be by word only, and some be by deed. Of those which be by word alone,
(which we may English Aduertisements) the one is significantly by the Grecians
termed (...) admonition, and the other (...) rebuke or reproof.

The end of those animaduersions or chastisements which consist in words, is
referred only to the reformation and amendment of him, upon whom they are
used, by making him sorrowful for it, and more circumspect and careful how he
carries himself in the like afterward, and thereby is a man said to be won by
another.

The punishments which be inflicted in deed and not in word only, are in the
Greek tongue very aptly distinguished being of three several sorts, according
to the several ends unto which they are referred. For every actual punishment
and penalty is either (...) or (...), the first of actual punishments (as
Aristotle the most exact obseruer of the propriety both of words and matters
Aristot. 1. Rhethor.
notes) is (...): it is such punishment, as especially aims at his
bettering, upon whom it is inflicted, being a punishment tempered with mercy.
For c. duo. 33. q. 4. c. fraternitas. 12. q. 2. c. qui sincera, etc.
disciplina. did. 45.
it is when the party is in deed punished as an offender, yet the rigor of
the penalty is spared, and he co^miserated and pitied as a man, and therefore
apt enough to offend through humane frailty. The end of the second sort of
actual punishments called (...): that is to say, is done for his cause that
prosecuteth it, or is grieved; to the intent there may be some satisfaction.

This may happen in two several sorts. viz. either for the preserving or
reteining the dignity of the L. 1. and 2. ff. de legibus.
law, or of the L. obseruandu^. ff. de ossic. Praes.
magistrate happening to be violated (non enim licet impune legesirridere
transgrediendo) as by fine or such like: or else for the contentment of some
private person, that has received injury by such offense; which in the French
laws is called Amend honorable; and with us in England are either damages
against him (as is in actions of the case) or else the offenders publik
acknowledgement of the fault.

The end whereunto the third sort of actual punishment, called (...), looks,
is especially for the example of others: and may be Englished an Exemplarie
punishment: being usually inflicted for more heinous crimes. Plato Plato in
Goegia.
affirms of this, (...). It is (says he) done for others, that they who
behold the punishment, may at least for terror thereof, become better and
amend. And elsewhere in the same book he says to this effect, It is required,
that every one which is duly punished, be either himself reformed, and made
better thereby, or to be an example unto others to reform themselves, at the
least for fear of like punishment. To which purpose the Demosth. contra
Neoeram.
Greek Orator also has a like sentence of this matter.

Plato in his Plato 9. de legibus.
books of laws assigns one other end of actual and exemplarie punishment:
which is, that they are also inflicted in grievous offenses, upon a very
detestation and abhorring of the crime. For which cause even brute beasts, yea
and sometimes insensible creatures also, are (in a sort) punished; by whose
occasion some heinous deed happens. Of brute beasts slain in this respect,
we have example in Gods Leu. 20. V. 15. and 16. Joseph. lib. 4. antiqui^. c.
fin.
own law. The Romans did of purpose nourish up continually dogs in their
Capitol, to give warning of any secret approach by night; and when the old
Gauls sacking Rome, had almost secretly surprised the Capitol also: because
the dogs at that time did not bark to give warning, they had their legs
broken, and in memory of a detestation Liuius lib. 7. Plin. lib. 19. c. 3. and
4. and lib. 1. cap. 22.
hereof, some dogs every year afterward were put to a kind of punishment.
for certain were yearly splitted alive upon a twiforked stake made of
elder-tree, and set up in that sort publicly, betwixt the Temples of Iuuentus
and Sumanus in Rome.

And we read, Aeschines contra Ctesiphontem.
that amongs the Athenians, insensible creatures, as stones, trees, iron, and
such like (which by their falling had casually occasioned the death of any man)
were solemnly, as it were, banished from thence, and removed from the common
use and sight of men. The L. 1. C. de falsa moneta.
Civil laws do appoint the very houses to be overthrown where forging of
money has been used. And upon the same grounds does the Common law of this
Realm, give Deodands to the Queen, as things accursed, and to be either (at
her Highness pleasure) destroyed, or bestowed upon the poor: and the houses
of attainted persons in treasons, to the intent to have them demolished, and
the trees about them to be rooted up; and so in this behalf is also the law in
France, yet in frequent practices. All which tend to signify, in what
detestation and abomination such enormities are to be had; and that men, who
are endued with reason, may by such examples of law be admonished, what
punishment more justly abides them, if they commit the same for which even
brute beasts and insensible things are so duly, as it were, punished. For
either it does, or at least wise ought to work this effect in men. In which
respect Aristotle Arist. 1. Rhet. ad Theod. c. 14.
says, that punishment is a remedy or medicine to be used against faults. And
so Lib 3. Var. epist. 14.
Cassiodorus gravely writes: Remedium est contrapeccatum, accelerata
correctio. Quick punishment of sin, gives a remedy against sin. For all
crimes and offenses be (in truth) but as so many maladies and distemperatures
in the body of the Church and Common weal; which if they be tolerated to grow
(without restraint and coercion of laws) will quickly spread like a cancker,
either to the destruction, or to the great and apparent danger of both: so that
the necessity of punishments and penalties, by the very ends unto which they
are referred, may sufficiently be thus approved unto us.

The necessary use of them might be further enlarged and enforced also, by the
consideration of sundry, who are interessed in this behalf. And first in
respect of the Magistrate himself: for it is said, Non c. dilecto. de sent.
excomm. (...). 6.
caret scrupulo societatis occultae qui manifesto facinori desinit obuiare. He
that list not to oppose himself against a crime manifested unto him, may
justly be had in jealousy himself, that he is a partaker with the offender.
And again August. in ep. Joan. tract. 7.
Charitas non est sed languor, vbi mali mores digna poena non castigantur. It
is not charity but faintness, to be remiss in punishing offenses. And of
such as have authority to punish offenders, it is said, Aug. epist. 50. ad
Boni^. c. error. did. 83.
Si illos negligant and perire permittant, ista potius falsa mansuctudo est
crudelitas. And again, Error cui non resistitur approbatur. But of that
Magistrate which punishes offenders, it is thus said, Aug. in Enchirid. cap.
72.
Qui emendat verbere, in quem potestas datur, vel coercet aliqua disciplina
etc. eleemosynam facit, quia misericordiam praestat. To an offender himself it
is behouefull, that he may be recalled thereby from his wicked course. for
Cassiod. lib. 3. Var. epist. 14.
malum cum perseuerat, augetur: and c. cum tanto. de consuetudine.
tanto sunt grauiora peccata, quanto diutius animam detinent illigatam.
Therefore Iuo. lib. 8.
non corripere malos est eos occidere. Et consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum
peccati.

In respect of others also, that might take encouragement to go on in
wickedness, or to commit the like, punishments be very necessatie. For in
regard hereof, Tullie says, Pro Milone.
Impunitatis spes magna peccandi illecebra. And in law it is said thus: c. vt
clericorum. 1. de vita and hon. cler.
Iussum est rectoribus prouinciarum, ne sinant crimina coal scere, sed
puniant, ne facilit as ventae incentiuum tribuat delinquendi. To like purpose
Ambrose Sermon. 8. in psalm. 118. V. 2.
writes: Nonne etiam cum vni indulget indigno, ad prolapsionis contagium
prouocat vniuersos? And therefore it is gravely c. sed illud. did. 45.
said by another: Quae est ista misericordia, quae bonitas, vni parcere, and
omnes in discrimen adducere?

Lastly in respect of the whole Church and Common wealth, punishments are most
needful. Examples are plentiful in Scripture, where for the sin of a few,
whole armies and societies have been punished. This we may see in Joshua. 7.
Achan, whose stealing of the accursed garment, etc. was a cause of the
overthrow of Israel in battle. So for 1. Sam. c. 4.
the sin of Ely and his sons many thousands of Israel were slain by the
Philistims. And to like effect 1. Reg. c. 2.
Solomon speaks, when he gives charge to kill Ioab. Smite him, (says he)
that thou may take away the blood which Ioab shed causeless, from me, and
the house of my father. And Ion. c. 1.
for Jonas his disobedience, the whole ship was in danger to be wrecked.
Therefore an ancient Father c. sed illud. did. 45.
says, That as one diseased sheep infecteth the whole flock, so by the
fornication or other crime of some one person, often oftentimes the whole
people is holden defiled.

Upon these and such like considerations, the light of nature did teach even
heathen men thus: l. ita vulneratus. ff. ad l. Aquil.
Interest semper Reipub. delicta puniri. And l. 7. finali. ff. de fideiuss.
poenas ob maleficia solui, magna ratio suadet, the whole common wealth has an
especial and continual interest, and great reason also moves to have
wickedness punished.

If then upon so many and weighty causes it be needful to have crimes
punished, can it be denied but that all good means are to be used, to bring
them to discovery and conviction, which must needs go before the punishment
of them? l. aut facta. ff. de Poenis.
Multis grassantibus exemplo opus est, says the law: where there be many
transgressers, it is needful to have some made an example to the rest: and
therefore l. eum qui. ff. de iniutijs.
Peccata nocentium expedit esse nota: it is most expedient to have evil men's
lewdenesse made known and reueiled.

CHAP. II. There in is showed how there are two sorts of prosecution of Crimes
and Offenses; viz. by a Party and of Office; and the practice of them in
Scripture, and in the several Courts of this Realm declared.
NOw, the means to bring any Crime and Offense into question before Judges and
Superiors in authority, must needs be, and so by all laws, and in all commonweals generally (that I have read of) are either by prosecution of some
party, or else upon the Office of the Judge: the Iul. Cla. lib. 5. fin. q. 3.
Office of the Judge is occasioned, and as it were set on work, either upon
relation made unto him by some other, or upon his own mere motion, without
any relation from others, which may happen, as when an outrage or misdemeanor
is committed in his sight, or in some public presence, where he then happens
to be.

In the law of God and examples of holy Scripture, I do not call to my slender
remembrance where any criminal matters be appointed and commanded to be
prosecuted by a Party: and but in very few places, where any have been used,
who might properly be termed an Accuser, or a Party. For albeit in sundry
places of Scripture we find Accusers mentioned; yet in many of them, such
cannot be accusors or parties (properly and strictly so termed) but only in a
very large signification. because their testimonies were received against
those, whom they denounced of crimes. For where a man is party himself,
making it as it were his own cause, and not the Judges office; there it is no
reason, that his own testimony should be admitted. L. 1.. in propria. ff.
Quando appell.
Quia testimonium in propria causa vel quasi propria, non valet. And it may
then be said to be a man's own cause; whereof he may reap benefit or damage.
But more (God willing) shall be spoken hereof, in his proper place.

Touching bringing crimes into question in Temporal Courts of this Realm,
(that deal in matters civil or criminal) it is to be first remembered, that
these Courts be of two sorts: some using the Queens immediate authority, yet
the same still actually being in her Highness etc; as all the Courts at
Westminster: Others using but a kind of mediate authority, derived from the
Crown; yet by her Grant made (in some sort) their own, as derived down
thereby unto them. For sundry subjects, albeit they have but a derived power
from the Queen (as from whom through the dominions of this Crown, all
justice, and jurisdiction to administer it, whether Temporal, or
Ecclesiastical, does originally flow:) yet do not their Processes run in
the Queens name, nor her seal is used to them.

Of such Temporal Courts as sit but by such a mediate and derived authority
from the Queen unto them, and therefore use not her Seal or name; some were
in times past established for causes Martial, as the Ric. 2. cap.
Constables of England, and the Earl Marshall his Courts (whereof I have very
small experience:) and some for matters perteyning to the Peace. And of these
last, some be for causes growing within the land, as Courts of Counties
Palantine, of cities and towns corporate, Sherifs turns, and Court-Leets, or
views of Francke-pledge: and others be for causes Marine, as all the Courts of
the Admiraltie.

In temporal courts of counties Palantine, in courts of towns and cities
corporate, fauing where some special custom prevails (as in London many) in
Sherifs turns and in Leetes, the course of the common Law is (for the most
part) observed. In Admiral courts, the order of the Civil law of the Romans
(because it is the written Common law of most nations not barbarous, with whom
we have to deal) is especially used; saving where by Statute or Custom, it
is otherwise directed.

Of such courts as exercise the Queens immediate authority, some have no
letters Patents of Commission to direct them; as the Parliament, which is
called, and sits by the Queens only writ: the Chauncerie, from whence all
original writs do come; and yet the L. Chancellor or L. Keeper have no
Commission by letters Patents, but receive their authority by delivery unto
them of the great Seal, as I am infourmed: the Star Chamber (established of
the Queens privy Counsel, and some others to be called) partly by
praescription, and partly by Statute: the court of Requests by custom and
praescription: And the Counsel in the Principality and Marches of Wales,
auctorised by Act of Parliament unto such, and in such manner, as her Majesty
(by instructions under her Roial handwriting) shall from time to time direct.

But those Courts Temporal, which sit by Commission and letters Patents for
exercising (in stead of her Highness) the Queens own and immediate
authority, are either such, as be usually now holden at Westminster, as the
Courts of the Queens Bench, the common Pleas, the Exchequer, and the Court of
Wards and Liueries: or in other places of the Realm abroad, as Courts of
General Assizes, Nisiprius, Jail delivery, Sessions of the Peace, the
Counsel established in the North parts, the Court of Stannery in Devonshire
and Cornwall, and (as I have been infourmed) the Court for trial of life and
death at Halisax, and such like.

I know, that by speech, and by use also (in sundry men's writings) touching the
aforenamed Courts; such only (as it were by a kind of appropriation) be most
usually called Courts of the Common law, wherein matters of fact, touching
hereditaments, contracts, or misdemeanors be tried by a Jury of twelve men,
because this trial is more frequent then any other. But yet we are not to
think, that none but these may truly so be named, as though the other were
contrary to the Law Common; seeing they be also allowed by the Laws,
Statutes, or Customs of this Realm, as well as those which proceed to trial
by Iuries.

In the Courts before specified that proceed to the trial of crimes, by Iuries
of twelve; if there be any Appellour, as of murder, robbery, or such like;
then may the prosecution most properly and truly be said to be done by an
Accuser, and at the prosecution of a party. If it be for the Queen, whether
it be by way of enditemen^ and be preferred by the Judges themselves, or by the
Queens Attorney general, or by some private person; o^ be by way of
Information put up against some offense made poenall, and not capital, (and
this either by the Attorney general, or by some other person) then all such
proceedings, are in truth done ex officio Iud^: And this, either of mere and
entire office, as when the Judge himself prefers it; or ex officio promoto,
as when it is first related and preferred up unto him, and prosecuted by any
other. But in this last case, there is a kind of mixed proceeding betwixt both.
And albeit the Informer do prosecute partly for himself; yet is it for the
Queen also whose the Court is, and so may be truly said to be of office.

This appears plainly, in that the Appeller (because he Is a mere party)
is not so favored, assisted, and p^iuileged in many respects; as when the
prosecution is instituted of Office for the Queen. For the Appellee may put it
to trial of battle with the Appellour, which he cannot do upon enditement;
at the suite of the Queen. Like wise, whosoever does prefer the endi^ement;
or information, though the defendant happen to be acquitted: yet the preferrer
pays neither costs, nor damages, nor is subject to any action in that
behalf, as an Accuser and party both is, and ought to be. But if the
defendant be convicted (so the crime be not capital, but fineable:) then is
the fine, if it be imposed by the Court, to come wholly to the Queen: If by
poen^ll statute; then (most commonly) it accrueth (by disposition thereof)
partly to her Highness, and partly to such private person as informs. And
the enditements be termed upon their beginning, Enquiries or Inquisitions,
which are always ex officio.

Now these and such like; be notes and marks; whereby you may discern
proceedings of these Courts in criminal causes prosecuted by an Accusour or
party, from that which is done upon the office of the Court: for these two
prosecutions do differ in the end; and they differ also in certain priuileged
points, which that of Office has, above that which is by a party. In the end,
thus they differ; because prosecution of Office aims at publicam vindictam, a
public punishment, whether pecuniarie, to acerue to the Queen, or corporal.
In deed, in all capital causes, vindicta is (in truth) public, and
exemplarie, albeit both the Appellour, only do prosecute (perhaps after the
Queen have pardoned it) and that he also seek nothing else, but private
revenge for his own injury received rather then for an example to be made of
the offender, or for the Commonweals satisfaction, and contentment. Of the
contrary side, prosecution in these Courts of an offense criminal (being not
capital) by an Accuser or party, propounds (for the most part) but a Civil
end, that is, some satisfaction and amends to be made unto the complainant
damaged: as in actions of sundry trespasses, in actions of the case etc. And
then do the Ciuilians term this Causa criminalis ciuiliter; and the former,
Causa criminalis criminaliter mota.

Besides such difference in the end, there be also some privileges that are
granted to the one course of proceeding, which are denied to the other; whereby
those two kinds of prosecution do differ. As that in proceeding of Office for
the Queen (as was touched before) the defendant may not gage battle against
the preferrer, as he may do against the Appellour: neither has any defendant
in an enditement or information (though he be acquitted) any costs allowed, when
the suite is for the Queen, as he both has and ought (in justice) to have,
when the suite against him, is only prosecuted by a private and wrongful
Accuser; that was not able to justify his declaration (as we may term it)
accusatorie, of such private offense or misdemeanour, whereupon he sued him.

Now let us consider also how those Courts which have none usual trial by
Iuries, do proceed against offenses. First the high Court of Parliament has
no great use (that I know) of dealing against Offenses: but such as happen to
be committed either by some member of the house, during the time of Parliament;
or against the liberties and orders of that Court. In both which cases they
proceed to examination of them, either upon the Notoriety of the fact happening
among them, or upon credible relation of some; but wholly without any Accuser
or party taking upon him the proof thereof, with any hazard, of so much as
Charges for wrongful vexation; if it should so fall out to be accounted. And
therefore such proceeding, is also of mere Office.

In the Star Chamber, only crimes and misdemeanors be inquired of; but
especially those, which I called before Extraordinaria Crimina: viz. such as
have either no certain name, or at least no set and determinate punishment, by
Law appointed; and may not be punished there, by loss of life or of limme;
but either by Fine, by open shame and infamy, by imprisonment, by nayling or
cutting of ears, or deforming the face, by banishing from some certain place
of the Realm, or forth of all the Queens dominions, or unto a certain place
abroad; or by condemnation unto the Galleis perpetually, or for a time, etc.

The misdemeanors punishable in the Star Chamber, be brought thither into
question for the Queen only, either by her Majesty's Attorney general (and
that is by bill of information, or Ore tenus) or else be brought upon bill
preferred by some private person, that is grieved. In all which Cases, albeit
there be found one which does prosecute: yet can he not truly be called an
Accusour, or a party; for the reasons before alleged, viz. of the end
propounded, which is publica vindicta; and for other great assistance and
privilege, which that Court gives to the prosecutor against the def. in
respect that it is for the Queen.

And namely that he is to answer not only to the Bill upon his oath, but
also to Interrogatories more particularly criminal then the Bill, and the
Interrogatories without counsel: which (in truth) therefore needs not,
because they are briefly drawn article-wise, and concern but matters of
fact, within his own knowledge as is intended. Upon all which matter it
follows, that the prosecutour there is but as a relatour, partly to stir
up, and partly to ease the office of that Court, by furnishing it with proofs.

Nevertheless I am not ignorant, that sometimes, when it appears manifestly
to their Lordships: that the plaintiff (being some private person) has
calumniously, and of malice only, vexed the def. then such plaintiff there, is
(and justly also may be) condemned in costs and damages, for his apparent
calumniation and wrongful molestation of the def. Unto which courses of the
Star Chamber, I take the Courts of the Queens Counsel established in the
Marches of Wales, and in the North parts, to be also agreeable in their
inquiries and examinations of crimes and misdemeanors.

In the Chancerie and Court of Requests, (being both Courts of equity) if any
misdemeanors or crimes be diduced and laid down in the Bills (which happens
very often:) yet are they not Criminallie laid, to have the def. punished for
them: but only Ciuilly, to the intent, that the plaintiff may have an amends
and private satisfaction, as shall be deemed to be equity. And therefore such
prosecution, is not by Office of the Court; but only at the parties suite:
albeit the Office in the Chancerie do thus far assist the plaintiff, for
sifting out of a truth; that the def. must answer, even to the Criminal
points of the Bill, upon his corporal oath: But he may not (in those two
Courts) be put to answer the plaintifes interrogatories upon his oath; except
the plaintiff will be concluded by the def. answer unto them, and seek to
make no further proofs.

But of all the Courts temporal aforesaid, as well those which proceed to the
trial of misdemeanors by Jury, as of others; I think this may be generally
affirmed; That when any lewd practice, abuse, or contempt (not capital, not
tending to mutilation) is supposed to be done against the Court; there (even of
mere Office without any Accusation or prosecution of any party by Bill) the
Judges of such Courts, do Enquire thereof, by examining and by interrogating
every one that is holden suspected thereof, or to be privy thereto, upon their
corporal oaths first taken. Let thus much then suffice for the two sorts of
prosecution, and bringing Crimes into question, by the course mentioned in
Scripture; and by use and practice in Temporal courts of this Realm.

CHAP. III. Of the sundry kinds of obiecting Crimes by a party mentioned in
the Civil law: as by reason of a man's public charge and function: also by
way of Exception, Supplication, Complaint, Delation, and Accusation. The true
signification of the word Accusatio, his diverse acceptions, definition, and
exposition thereof, with some reason of the frequencie of Accusatio in Courts
of the Civil laws, in former times is also declared.
THe same, and none other manner is likewise practiced to bring offenses into
question by the laws both Civil and Ecclesiastical, in such Courts, as
either of those Laws have place and use: That is to say, either by a party,
or else by the Office of the Judge.

Crimes in such Courts may be brought into question before a Judge, upon a
parties prosecution (whereof we are first to speak) two manner of ways. The
one Commendablie, the other not so commendablie. Commendablie in two sorts,
either by reason of some office and charge, or by reason of a man's own
necessary interest. By reason of a man's Office and duty, as when Triumuiri
regij, Procuratores Fisci, Aduocati regij (as French writers call them) or (as
we speak and practice here in England) when the Queens Attorney general (who
by duty is bound thereunto) prefers indictment or information against some
suspected criminous person, or wrong doer. This has very near affinity with
that Denunciation or Presentment (called Judicial) which is to be spoken of
hereafter. And albeit there be a kind of party; yet it is of the nature of
proceeding of Office, which I also touched in the Chapter next precedent.

The Commendable prosecution by a party against an Offense, in respect of a
man's own private interest; is either by way of Exception and challenge, done in
his own necessary defense, and to avoid punishment; or per viam querelae, by
way of Complaint for attayning his right.

Exception is sometimes taken against witnesses that be brought against us, to
this intent only; that by obiecting and proouing them to be lewd or
affectionate persons, there may no credit be given to them in their
depositio^s; and not to have them punished. And this obiecting of Crimes by way
of Exception, has not ye force of an Accusation. Or else l. 1. ff. vi. bon.
rapt. l. 2. ff. de tab. exhib.
it is taken (before issue joined) against him that would accuse us, by our
obiecting of some crime also unto him. Now if this be done only to the end to
repel him from accusing; then has it not the effect of an Accusation, whereby
he may be punished (though he be proved guilty.) But if he that so excepteth,
do set down the time, place, etc. of such crime objected against his
adversary, and do also instant the Judge to condemn him: then shall it be
proceeded in, as in Accusation, and may be called a Recrimination, or
Crosse-accusation, made by the defendant.

The prosecution per Querelam, is also of two sorts: the one extraiudiciall,
when l. 1 C. Retum amotatum.
a man oppressed, humbly and ciuillie complains and expostulateth of some
wrong done unto him, desiring remedy, not so much to have the other punished,
as that himself may, (by ordinary course of law) have reason done him. This
may properly be called Querimonia, a supplication to the Superior. The other
Querela, is Judicial, being a kind of Appellation; l. Arbitrio. vbi gloss.
and Bart. ff. qui satisdare coguntur,
and is either done by complaint unto the sovereign Prince, of some wrong done
by an high Court (such as Praefectus Praetorio kept among the Romans) from
which none Appellation lies: or else is a Complaint unto a superior Judge, of
refusal, or delay to do justice, by his inferior Judge; with us commonly
termed a double Querele. Thus much for the most commendable sorts of
prosecution of offenses, instituted by a party.

Of those which be not so commendable prosecutions of offenses by parties, one
is called Delatio, being the more odious and base; the other is Accusatio,
properly so termed.

Delatio like wise is of two sorts. The one may be described to be a l. 10..
Qui nomen. ff. de iure patr.
secret accusation or imputation of some crime against any, made unto a
Magistrate, by him that is no way particularly interessed in the cause. Against
such, was that law l. pen. C. de Delatorib. lib. 10.
of Constantinus conceived, whereby it was provided, that no private person
should be a delatour, or preferrer up of crimes; and that none should be put
up, without the Advocate of the finances, or revenues of the crown; whom we
call the Attorney general. And of such Delatours or Tale-carriers was this
worthy saying of an Emperor meant: Princeps, qui delatores non castigat,
irritat. Privy accusers and backbiters take encouragement enough from such a
Prince, as will but hear, without giving them any rebuke. Which saying,
Suetonius Sueto. in Domit.
attributes to Domitian; and Plinius Plin. in Panegy. de Traiano.
unto Traian.

There is a second sort of Delatours and preferrers up of crimes, which deal
more openly then the former. And we find also in law, two kinds of these. The
first be a kind of Calumniatours or Sycophants, l. nostris C. de Calumniator.
that prefer publicly (yet under other men's names and persons by them
suborned and excited) some criminal matter against any person. The other sort
be those, who (for gain or reward) do in their own names, prefer up
criminal and poenall matter against others. And of these, some do inform of
conceiled lands or goods; due and escheated to the common treasure of the
Crown; yet supposed to be deteyned wronfully, by any others. And these by the
Civil law l. ex varia C. de Delatorib. lib. x.
are said to be odious and hated of other men; because they do it for no
duty to the Prince or common weal; but upon a greedy desire, to enjoy to
them selves, part of the gain by others loss: being (by that law) some time a
third, and sometimes a half part of that, which they find (in truth) to have
bin detained by wrong, intruded upon, or usurped. Others be mentioned there
also, who prefer informations against offenders of such laws, as do inflict
mulctes and pecuniarie penalties for the offense; upon hope of such gain, as
(by those laws) is assigned to come unto their share. This kind of Delators in
this Realm, we call Infourmers, or Promoters: though their prosecutio^ in this
Realm do much participate (as before is showed) with that, which is called ex
Officio promoto, and in that respect, be greatly privileged. Among the Romans
such were called Quadruplatores, because commonly the fourth part of the
penalty, was awarded unto them. So that by like reason our Infourmers may be
called in Latin Triplatores, when they have a third part; and Duplatores, when
they have the one half, as they have in this Realm (upon penal statutes)
most usually.

In what detestation and hatred this kind of men (though not altogether
unnecessary) were had amongs the old Romans, this saying of Quintilian does
manifest, Quintil. lib. vlti. cap. 7.
Ad deferendos reospraemio duci, proximum est latrocinio. To be induced for
reward or gain, to prefer criminal matter against offenders, is next a kin
to robbery. And in deed, Delatours were far more stomacked, and maligned,
then other Accusours, as may be gathered by these places in the Civil law.
l. 3. C. de Malefic.
We do judge him that accuses in such a crime, to deserve rather reward,
then to be called a Delatour. And again in another place: l. Nulli. in fine,
C. de. Epis. and Cleric.
Let not such fear either the name or suspicion of Delatours.

The last of those ways, by which a party brings offenses into question and
discussing before a Judge, is Accusation. It is called Isidor. vt in c. forus.
de verb. signif.
Accusatio ab Ad, and Caussa: quia Accusator quasi ad causam vocat. There be
other words of near signification unto this, yet not the same altogether, as
postulare, when it is used with the ablative case, Postulare aliquem crimine,
insimulare, incusare, and such like. But there is a difference noted betwixt
this last, and Accusation, which is this: We are said (says Servius in prim.
Aeneid.
one) properly incusare, such as be our betters, and to accuse those, that be
our equals or inferiors. But this difference is not much observed. l. Qui
accusare, C. de edendo. l. Si maritus. Si negauer. ff. de adulter.
This word Accusation is sometimes so generally taken, that it signifies an
Action in a Civil cause; like as, on the contrary side, Action is taken for
Accusation. Tullie, pro Milone names it Actionem Perduellionis. But most
properly it is called Accusation, when it is intended in causes Criminal.

We read of inward, and of external, or outward Accusations. Internal
Accusation is of a man's own conscience. Such is the Accusation spoken of by
Solomon. Proverb. 18. verse. 17.
He that is first in his own cause, is just: or as the vulgar Latin
translation reads it, The just man, is the first Accuser of himself.

External, or outward Accusation is either Private, or Public. Private is
either betwixt enemies, or betwixt friends. That private Accusation and
imputation which is among enemies, is of three sorts: either spiteful
vpbraiding, called of the Grecians by the general name Plutarch in vita
Publicol.
of (...), a word also fitting every Accusation: or reproach and reuiling
called (...): or else Calumniation; that is, malicious or false wresting of his
enemies words or actions, to an offensive purpose.

Private Accusation of one friend touching another, is nothing else, but a
friendly expostulation with him, that is supposed not to have dealt singlie or
considerately, in the course of good friendship, called (...) of the Grecians.
That Accusation which is public, is either ciuillie moved, that is, for
private amends unto the party grieved: or criminallie, that is, for some
public punishment; whether it be (...), (...), or (...). And it is that
Accusation, which here we especially treat of.

This public Accusation, is sometimes done ore tenus; that is by bare words
without writing, which the Grecians do express also by the aforesaid name of
(...). But most usually public Accusation is made by writing. That, which is
conceived in writing, in a more large signification, conteyneth and reaches
even unto those preferrings of crimes (before spoken of) that are done by
Exception or Challenge, by Complaint, or by Delation. And unto this public
Accusation, which is of more general acception, that definition of Aristotle
agrees: viz. that it is a public declaration against some, of injuries or
crimes committed. But in the strict and proper signification it is taken for
that solemn Accusation termed by the Grecians (...), and also sometimes (...);
when as this latter is not taken generally, but for the most especial kind
thereof only.

The effect of this Accusation, when the crime declared is proved to be true,
and by arguments convicted; is called by the Grecians (...); that is, l.
indicasse. ff. de verb. signific.
(as the Latins do express it) arguere.

There is also another different acception from the former, of the word
Accusour, that is not hitherto touched: which is, when that word is applied
(...) unto any, that testifies some criminal matter against another. And in
this signification, we do find it very Vide infr^. cap. 15.
usually taken in holy Scripture, as shall afterward more fully appear. So in
sundry statutes of this Realm, as namely in these words of a statute; viz.
duly accused or detected by two lawful witnesses: 25. Hen. 8. cap. 14. and in
such other statutes; whereby is required, that the Accusours be brought face to
face, against the prisoner: meaning thereby such witnesses as are to give
evidence (upon their oaths) against the party conuented. Hereof we have
diverse examples, and namely in these words of a statute, 1. Ed. 6. ca. 12. in
fine.
That no person shall be convicted etc. or suffer etc. unless the same offendour
etc. be accused by two sufficient and lawful witnesses, as shall willingly
without violence confess the same. Where the witnesses sayings are called
Accusation, and their Depositions, Confession. Likewise in the same Kings
days, where it is thus provided, 5. and 6. Edw. 6. cap. 11.
That no person shall be convicted etc. for any treasons etc. that now be, or
hereafter shall be etc. unless the same offendour be thereof accused by two
lawful accusers: which said accusers at the time of the arraignment of the
party accused (if they be then living) shall be brought in person before the
party so accused, and auowe and mainteyne that, that they have to say against
the party, to prove him guilty of the Treasons or Offenses, contained in the
Bill of indictment. So that here, those that give evidence to prove the matter
of the enditement (which must needs be the witnesses) are called Accusers.
which termein these and like statutes, seems to have bin borrowed from the
common speech of men (who often use to say thus; Who is able to accuse me of
such or such things? meaning, to testify against them) rather then that the
true propriety of the word was there followed. For Justice Brook in his
Abridgement testifies, Tit. Corone. nu. 220.
That the common trial at the Common law is by Jury and witnesses, and not
by Accusers. So that albeit witnesses touching offenses (by some statutes and
by usual speech of the vulgar sort) be termed Accusers: yet (by his opinion)
they do (in very deed) differ much, in that the one is (as he says) the
trial of the Common law, but not the other. The true difference betwixt them
he there proves also out of the Civil law; upon relation made unto him, by
a Doctor in that faculty; and wills it to be noted as a saying, which he
well allows. By the Civil law (says Brook. ibid.
he) Accusers be as parties, and not as witnesses. For witnesses ought to be
indifferent, and not to come till they be called. But accusers do offer
themselves to accuse. For it is a good challenge of a witness to say; that he
was one of his accusers. Quod nota.

Now how unreasonable were it, to admit the testimony of a party in his
own cause? So that by the Civil law (by which this prosecution is most
properly handled,) Accusation (truly so called) is defined to be, Ius
vlciscendi solenni and poenali iudicio, poenas ac delicta: A right which the
law yields to any of prosecuting crimes and offenses for revenge and
punishment, by public and solemn judgment.

For the explaning whereof, we have to note in this behalf that crimes or
offenses be of two sorts. Some be private, whereby a common person only, and
no public person, nor the state of the Common wealth (otherwise then by
consequence) is offended. And this kind cannot be prosecuted, but by the very
party grieved, or by some of his kin and propinquitie. And it may be urged,
either to the end of civil revenge; that is, amends pecuniarie, called actio
vel accusatio criminalis ciuiliter: or to the end of a public punishment,
called accusatio criminalis, criminaliter mota. The crimes that be public,
are those that be heinous, as more deeply touching the state of the whole
common wealth and public peace, then the former; and therefore may be
prosecuted by any man, being called populares actiones, quia competunt cuilibet
de populo: l. de his. C. qui accusare non possunt.
saving that certain persons, for especial causes, are by law from
accusation to be repelled.

Under the word of solemn judgment, be three things contained, and
understood, that such an Accusour must undergo. First l. finali. C. de accus.
he must present the name of the accused person in public judgment, as an
offender in such a special crime: Then must he subscribe his own name,
whereby he is said vinculum inscriptionis accipere: And he must also be
committed unto the like custody and ward, that the Accused (in regard of the
quality of the fault, and dignity of the Accusour) is to sustain, until the
suite be finished. By this band of Inscription or Subscription, the l. qui
crimen. C. qui accusare non possunt.
Accusour binds himself to prosecute the suit: and professes withal, that
if he prove not the Crime, which he lays against the Accused; then he
himself will and shall endure the same punishment; that such crime (when it is
in deed committed) does deserve.

How unusual soever this be among us, or how severe this course of punishment
may seem unto some: yet do we find the equity of it in Scripture, and that it
is to be inflicted upon such, that calumniously impute false crimes unto
others. If upon diligent inquisition (says Deuteronomy. 19. V. 16. and sequent.
the Lord) it be found by the Judges, that the witness is false, and has
given false witness against his brother; then shall ye do unto him, as he had
thought to do unto his brother, etc. Thine eye shall have no compassion, but
life for life, eye for eye, toothe for toothe, hand for hand, foot for foot.
How much more then upon a wilful Accuser, which calumniously seeks for
revenge sake, upon an untrue Accusation so known unto himself, to bring
another man into so deep danger? An Dan. cap. 13.
example hereof we have, in the stoning of the two Elders, that calumniously
accused or witnessed against Susanna. This poenatalionis, or retaliation, is
also allowed by sundry ecclesiastical writers in like case: as by Epist. 2.
ad Episcopos Siciliae.
Eutychianus, and Sixtus 3. Epist. 2. ca. 4. ad Episcopos Orientales.
Sixtus, ancient Bishops of Rome. For witnesses be sometimes compelled to
bear witness, who perhaps may slip by affection, inconsideration, or want
of remembrance: which is therefore more excusable in them, then in Accusers;
insomuch as these Accusers come willingly, without any excitation of others, to
do it. For nemo inuitus agere vel l. 1. C. vt nemo inuitus ag.
accusare compellitur: No man is compelled to bring an Action or an Accusation,
saving in especial cases, as l. Manichaeos. C. de haeret.
in Heresy. Omnes enim haereticum prodere atque accusare debent: and in
Treason also thus far, that he which does not at least reueile it, (though a
man be not bound to prosecute therein as an Accuser) is to be punished, as
partaker of the Treason. But this Inscription, ad poenam Talionis, to endure
the penalty due, if he be not able to prove his Accusation; is l. Fin. ff. de
priu. delict. l. fin. ff. de furtis.
not required in Accusations of private Crimes, whether they be Ciuillie, or
Criminallie moved and prosecuted.

Here perhaps some will marvel, how this prosecution of Crimes by way of
Accusation, could be so usual, as it was (in former times) in the commonweals of Athens, Rome, and such like, insomuch as it became (there) to be the
most ordinary mean of all others, to bring Crimes and offenses into question:
considering the great troubles and dangers, that by Law, did accompany the
Accusers. Such therefore are to understand, that few or none Accusers would
deal so vnconsideratly, as to undertake it, until they thought themselves
sufficiently furnished with witnesses and other proofs, able to convince them,
whom they accused. Next, they are to remember, the use of it to have been
greatest in populare Commonweals, where the readiest step to attain unto
most honorable offices and dignities (next unto service in wars) was to be
able to speak and deliver their minds eloquently before the whole people; who
were the sovereign Judges (in most of those causes) either by way of
Accusation, or else in D^fence of others, being by Accusation called into
dangerous question of their lives, limbs, honor, liberty, country, or of
their goods and lands. Thirdly, that when it was in most frequent use, the
people were heathen, and vninstructed in the true knowledge of God: so that
they thought, to put up an injury done either to themselves, or to their
friends, to be great pusillanimitie, and a token of a base minded man; and to
be (in deed) a vice very discommendable, even as the contrary vice thereunto
is; viz. of doing Injury. For so Arist. lib. 5. Ethic.
Aristotle teaches in his Moral philosophy. In which respect, all danger to
themselves, was the less regarded by them. Lastly, they thought themselves
bound in strict terms of duty, no less to persecute and to plague their
enemies by all means, then they were to do good, and to show kindness unto
their friends. Therefore the same Arist. 2. li. Topic.
Philosopher makes this to be a good argument and consequence; We must do
good to our friends; therefore we must hurt and annoy our enemies. But Christ
refuteth this heathenish opinion in the Gospel, Matthew. 5. verse. 43. and 44.

Now for proofs of that we have said in this behalf, we are furnished of
them out of the grauest writers among the Greeks and Latins. Plutarch says
thus: Plut. in vita Luculli.
Public Judgments and Accusations have been of long time ordained, to
th'entent young men might be bredde up in the study of Eloquence; and that
they might thereby be excited to the valor of a brave mind: that like as
dogs of the best kind by natural instinct do at first sight fiercely assail
wild beasts: even so noble youths should be kindled and inflamed with great
courage thus by accusations to set upon lewd and evil members in a Common
weal. To like purpose Quintil. li. 1^. ca. 7.
writes Quintilian; Crediti sunt clari Iuuenes, obsidem dare Reipub. malorum
Ciuium accusationem: quia nec odisse improbos, nec simultatem prouocare, nisi
exfiducia bonae mentis videbantur. Tullie assigns three several motives,
whereby without any discommendation in those times a man might be drawn to
become an Accuser of others. A man may be well induced (says he) Cic. pro
(...).
to be an Accuser, either Pietate, in a duetifull care: by necessity; or else
by reason of his years. If he willingly enter into it, I do attribute it to
his Piety: If he were commanded, then unto necessity: If in hope to attain
glory and renown, I ascribe it to his youth. But upon any other occasion to
do it, does rather deserve resistance, then pardon. He also elsewhere
teaches, for what end we may enter into Accusation of others. Of accusing, we
are not, (says he) Cic. li. 2. Offic.
to make as it were an usual trade or profession; neither are we at any time
to do it, but either in behalf of the Common weal, as the two Luculli did;
or for our nearest friends and allies, being tyrannously, and piteously
oppressed, whom we have received to our patronizing, as M. Cato, Cn. Domitius,
and others did: or else but once only, as happily in our flourishing youth, for
attayning honor thereby. But it seems, that the chiefest end among the rest
was, for procuring with the people glory and reputation of eloquence unto
themselves. For so Apuleius an ancient writer testifies, where he Apuleius in
2. defens. Mag.
says thus. He does not accuse me for to procure unto himself glory, as M.
Antonius did Cn. Carbo etc. For it was usual (says he) with young men of
greatest ripeness in learning, for their commendation to undertake to accuse
others, thereby to give an experiment of themselves in Judicial Courts, to the
intent, that at some notable Judgment or arraignement they might become known
unto the multitude of Ci^izens. Yet this Custom, which in old time was
permitted unto young beginners, to set out thereby the forwardness and
sharpness of their wits, is long agone (says he) grown into disuse. But
what might be the very true causes of the giving over of such Accusations, it
will not be amiss here also to examine, as being very requisite for the
perfect understanding of the nature of it, and of some other discourses
following.

CHAP. IIII. That the prosecution of crimes by way of Accusation is in most
places forbidden or grown into disvse: the reasons hereof be partly the
dangers to the Accusers, and partly the Hatefulness of that course. Therein is
also declared whether all Accusation be unlawful; and certain points
delivered to be observed by all them, that will accuse others.
IT is very assured, that how usual soever it was in those populare Commonweals; yet of very long time it has not, nor is now practiced in most civil
Commonweals or kingdoms, that I have read of. But in place thereof, is come
either proceeding of mere Office, or else some way mixed, partly of that
proceeding, and partly of prosecutio^ by a Party, who is not properly to be
termed an Accuser.

First in this kingdom how rarely Appeals be brought and prosecuted against
any supposed offenders, saving murderers, and those scarce two in an age, every
one but of mean experience knows. I do call to mind one Appeal of robbery
brought by Benet Smith against Giles Rufford in the beginning of Queen Mary's
reign; as appears by the preamble of a Statute, 2 and 3. Phil. and Mariae,
c. 17. And this kind of prosecution of Crimes, though of all those which we
have, it resemble nearest the Accusation practiced amongst the old Romans and
others: yet in some points it does also somewhat differ from it.

In Flanders all Accusation is altogether inhibited. In the kingdom of Naples
it is only permitted Clarus. q. 10.
unto those, which in that sort will prosecute some injury or enormitie, done
upon them or theirs. In the Decianus.
Venetian common weal, it is wholly forbidden unto private persons to Accuse:
so that the care of prosecuting offenses, is wholly left to the public
magistrate. In France none but the kings general Atturneis (whereof there be
three) may take upon him Gul. Bened. in c. Rainutius. V. mortuo. nu. 200. de
testam.
to be an Accuser: and yet those not properly so to be called. And this reason
is alleged by a learned writer in Law, of that nation: Least too great
opportunity of calumniation and of oppressing the meanest by the power of the
mighty, should there by be given; and for retaining of public tranquillity
in the kingdom. It is testified by a grave and learned Ciuilian writer, Clarus
li. 5.. fin. q. 11.
that the solemn manner of Accusation mentioned in the Civil law of the
Romans, is almost generally now grown in disuse.

The chiefest causes of such disuse thereof (as I do conjecture) has grown
by these two ways. The first, because it is so full of danger and trouble: The
second, because it is and has been so odious and abhorred of most men in all
ages. The danger and trouble may be considered at the beginning of the fuite:
in the course of prosecuting it; and upon the event which may ensue of it.

At the entrance of the suite, upon the Accusers inscription ( l. 16. C. de
accus. and inscrip.
which contained the heinousness of the crime, and the time of committing it)
the Accuser was by and by to l. 17. ibidem.
endure Custodiae similitudinem, habita tamen dignitatis aestimatione; to be
committed to the like safe custody that the defendant was; regard always
being had to his dignity. l. Qui crimen. C. Qui accus. non possunt.
He was also then bound with good Caution of suerties to prosecute the suite.
Much like to the first of these was that law which was established by Crem
Suidas in verbo Bulgar.
the lawe-giuer unto the Bulgarians; who provided that none accuser should have
audience given, until being bound and brought to the torture, it were by his
own examination found out, upon what probable grounds his accusation rested.

In the course of prosecution much trouble may grow unto Accusers, especially
Carrer. de Hae. res. cons. 117.
in the crimes of Treason or Heresy. For in both these, not only the
defendant, but the Accuser also is subject to examination by torture, vbi non
subsunt indicia, where no plain or probable matter appears, whether of them
says truer.

The Inscription also (aforesaid) binds the Accuser to endure some
punishment, upon detection of any rash or undue practice in the Accusation.
This rashness l. 1. ad S. C. Turpillianum.
or lewd practice consists in three several points, and every of them
subject to their punishments. The first is, when the Accuser does
praeuaricari, that is, collude with the defendant in dealing against him: Dicis
causa, and pro forma tantum, for fashion sake; perhaps to keep others from it,
as by suppressing or concealing the best proofs, and by admitting of false and
slender defenses brought and alleged in the defendants excuse. The second is,
when he does Tergiuersari, that is, give over and desist from his prosecution,
upon corruption, etc. The last is, when he does Calumniari, that is, wilfully
Gloss. in Clem. 1. de sentent. and re iudicat.
impute false crimes unto the defendant, which he cannot prove; or make any
unjust petition, or by any other means deal deceitfully and maliciously.
This may be resembled to that which we call at the Common law Conspiracy;
saving that only damages in money be given thereupon. And this peril does
fall out chiefly, and is discovered upon the event of the suite, when it is
brought to an end. For if the Accuser be pronounced guilty of such
Calumniation; then must he endure the same punishment, which the accused
party ought to have suffered, if he had been found guilty; called by
Aristotle (...), and by others poena talionis.

This appears by the Civil law, and is allowed also by the Ecclesiastical.
By the Civil, as namely by the Constitution of the Emperors Honorius and
Theodosius, where it is said to an Accuser; l. 17. C. de accus. and inscrip.
Necimpunitam fore nouerit licentiam mentiendi, cum calumniantes, ad vindictam
poscat similitudo supplicij. Let him not think he has free liberty given
falsely to accuse others, and that without punishment; seeing the course of
Justice requires that for due revenge Calumniators do suffer the like
punishment, which they unjustly would have brought upon others.

It is also allowed by the law Ecclesiastical. Damalus ep. 3. ad Steph.
Archiepisc.
For, Calumniator si in accusatione defecerit, talionem recipiat. If an Accuser
be found to calumniate, let him receive the punishment due to the crime
imputed. Had^ianus 2. q 3. c. qui non.
Qui non probauerit quod obiecit; poenam quam ipse intulerit, patiatur. He that
proves not his accusation, let him suffer the same punishment, into the
danger of which he brought another man. And to the Sixtus c. 4. in 1. volum.
council.
very same effect did Sixtus an ancient bishop of Rome write to the bishops of
the East parts. Yea, besides the like penalty, it was decreed in a Council,
Council. Braccar. 2. Can. 8. An. Dom. 610.
that the Accuser that failed in proof, should be excommunicate. If the
Accuser can not (says the Canon of the Council) prove by witnesses that
which he obiecteth; then let him endure that excommunication, which the party
accused should have done, if he had been convicted. Neither can this be
thought too grievous for him, that willingly and maliciously without just
cause, will conspire against an other: let him impute his punishment to his own
folly. Actor debet venire paratus. Besides the like punishment; such an
Accuser by the old Gelasius ibid. c. si quis.
Canons, was also pronounced an infamous person.

But from the grieuousnesse of this poena talionis, or for Calumniation
presumed, all public Officers (who l. post legatum.. Aduocatum. ff. de his
quibus vt indignis. l. qui cum mayor.. penult. ff. de bonis libert.
by virtue of their office are bound to Accuse) be cleerelie freed and
exempted. Such are called Aduocati, and Promotores fiscales, and regij, The
kings Attorneis or Solliciters general. The reason hereof was, because they
did not of their own voluntary will, or for revenge, as ordinary Accusers
undertake such prosecution; but for the benefit which redoundeth to the whole
common wealth by the punishment of Offenders. Besides, they were not to reap
any commodity or gratification thereby Bart. and alij in l. Si quis in graui..
vtrum. ff. ad S. C. Syllanianum.
unto themselves by part of the penalty or fine; whereby they might be
corrupted or drawn to do more the^ otherwise were expedient. And therefore in
both these respects such are freed from all suspicion of wilful Calumniation,
or reuengefull bringing of men unto a dangerous question and trial. Thus much
how perilous this Accusation is.

How hateful it is unto others, and detested of most men, for one willingly
(as with delight) to become a public Accuser; may appear first by the
restraint thereof. Arist. 6. l. Polit. cap. 5.
Aristotle says, That in a well ordered common weal, Accusations ought to be
most rare. That very law (by authority whereof it was most used) provides,
That it shall not be lawful at any time l. Hos accusa.. l. Iulia. ff. de
accus. l. cum rationib. C. qui accus. non possunt.
for a man to accuse more then two. And an Accusers voice is called an
abominable or deadly voice, especiailie his that will Accuse the master of
that family where he is commorant. Let such an Accusers breath (says that
law) l. 20. C. Qui accus. non possunt.
in the very beginning, before it be heard, be stopped with a sword. Vocem enim
funestam amputari oportet, potius, quam audiri.

Furthermore, it is naturally given to us all, to pity even strangers when
they be brought into danger and distress by others; and in sort to abhor
them that do wilfully procure it. They ought (says Tullie in this behalf)
Cic. pro Muraena.
to weie with themselves that an Accusation is no mean matter, but of great
importance. It is much for a man to address himself unto that, whereby he
may cast another out of his country, or take him out of this life; who both
stands defended by himself and by his friends, yea and by such, as be mere
strangers unto him. For we all willingly run to help to keep off dangers:
and when a man is called into trial for his life, liberty or Country (if he
be not a very enemy unto us) we do tender and yield unto him the good
offices, wishes, and endeavors of most perfect friends; albeit in deed he be a
mere stranger unto us.

How hardly Tullie himself (though sometimes he used it) thought hereof in
the time of his age, this saying of his declares. Cic. li. 2. Offic.
It is the part of an hard hearted and cruel man, yea rather of no man, to
bring many into danger Capitis, of their lives, liberties or country. For
besides that it is full of peril, even to the Accuser himself; it is also
very infamous for a man to bring upon himself to be termed an Accuser. Neither
can it possibly be done without great wickedness, that a man for filthy
lucres sake should turn eloquence (which was devised for the help and
preservation of men) unto their plague and utter overthrow.

This course was so hateful, that oftentimes such as pursued it, were
vpbraided with it as odious. For Mamercus Scaurus Tacitus. l. 3. Annalium.
when he accused Seianus, having this cast in his teeth, sought to excuse
himself by the examples of their forefathers, that had done the like. But
Cornelius Tacitus (who reports this story) judges it to be an infamous
endeavor, whereby noble families are greatly stained and dishonested. Seneca
reports Senec. li. 3. de benefic.
that under Tiberius the Emperor, this rage of public accusing (for so he
terms it) was very rife: and says, that it did waste that Common weal (even
in that time of peace) more then any civil and intestine war, which they had
amongst themselves, had done in times by past.

And not only these Heathen men, but the Fathers of the Church, had it also in
like detestation, that a man by Accusations should be so careful to bring
other men into danger; which August. li. 1. confess. cap. 18.
S. Augustine therefore among others greatly reprehendeth. And he says in
another place thus: August. in Sermon Domini in monte.
All matters, wherein we suffer any indignity, are of two sorts: The one is
such as cannot be restored; the other which may be. Now for that which cannot
be restored, we seek some comfort by taking revenge. But (alas) what does it
avail thee, if thou being smitten do smite again, or that another do it,
to revenge thy quarrel? Will that hurt which is in thy body, be thereby
healed? Which seeing it cannot be truly said, it must needs be, that all
these reuengements proceed but from an haughty and a proud heart. In this
regard, c. Si quis episc. 2. q. 7.
old Canons do call Accusation, Genus illaudabilis intentionis, a kind of
discommendable endeavor or suit. The reason whereof is, for that it is done
(for the most part) upon a reuengefull and wrathful mind, whatsoever be
pretended otherwise. If a man to excuse this, shall think that herein he
pleases God, Anaclet. ep. 1. de oppres. episcoporum.
for that he accuses offenders; saying, that he does it for their reformation
and amendment; this man (as is testified) labors but vainly, and is in deed
carried with a sting of malice, rather then heat of charity. So that besides
the danger to himself, we see how odious a kind of prosecution, Accusation
has been holden: and therefore we are not to marvel, that it is either
recalled by contrary laws (as in most places) or grown in a manner to an
universal disuse in the world.

Hereupon, and perhaps also upon occasion of certain places of Scripture, some
may gather that the course of Accusation is altogether unlawful to be used by
any Christian. In deed, thus it is written in Leuiticus: Leu. cap. 19. V. 16.
Thou shall not stand against the blood of thy neighbor; I am the Lord. And a
little after: Verse. 18. ibid.
Thou shall not avenge, nor be mindful of wrong against the children of thy
people, but shall love thy neighbor as thy self; I am the Lord. Likewise
Jesus the son of Syrach says: Ecclesiasticus cap. 10. V. 6.
Be not angry for any wrong with thy neighbor, and do nothing by injurious
practices. In the Gospel we are thus commanded: Matthew. 5. V. 38 and 39.
Ye have heard, that it has been said; an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth. But I say unto you, resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on
thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. Again, Verse. 44. ibid.
Love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them which hurt you, and persecute you. Which commandments are
also repeated by Luke cap. 6. V. 27. etc.
S. Luke. And to like purpose 1. Cor. 6. V. 7.
says S. Paul: There is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law one
with another. Why rather suffer ye not wrong? why rather sustain ye not loss?

Truly it may not be denied, but that the pregnancie of these places is such,
that all prosecution of private injuries or crimes, done upon revenge, malice,
envy, vainglory, gain, or any such like particular respect alone, is
hereby condemned. For in Accusation it is first required, that a reuengefull
mind be wanting, which is presumed to be present, when the injury prosecuted
is but private, and such as is not subject to restitution, according to the
former distinction repeated out of S. Augustine. Secondly, it must be done upon
a good zeal; to the intent the offender may be amended, and others not hurt,
by the evil example. For by those August. in ser. Domini in mo^te.
words of the Gospel, such punishment of sin, as tends to correction, is
not forbidden; because that is a part of mercy, says S. Augustine. And (says
he) August. ibid.
holy men have punished certain sins even with death, both to strike a
profitable fear into the living, and that the death it self might not hurt
them, who were punished by it, but the sin diminished, which was like rather
to be increased in them, if they should have lived longer. Thirdly, Accusation
by a Christian ought to be referred only to the public benefit of the Common
weal. In this behalf Plato (being but an heathen Philosopher) has a very
severe saying. Plato in Euthyph.
It is an holy thing (says he) to draw them into judgment, that have
committed any murder or sacrilege, whether it be thy father, mother, or any
other whosoever, that has so offended: so it be done for this end, to rid
the Common weal of them, as of a contagious plague unto it. Lastly, Accusation
may not be used for gain and lucres sake. For such Accusers especially are
odious to all men. Another heathen writer could say thus hereof: Quintil. sieve
Tacitus de claris Orator.
The use of this gainefull and bloody eloquence, is sprung up of late times by
corrupt custom; and was devised (as one Aper was wont to say) but instead of
a iaueline or dart to thrust men through with: In locum teli repertus.

So that if men could keep themselves strictly within these former bounds;
then prosecution by Accusation would neither be so perilous to the Accuser, nor
yet so hurtful unto others, but that it might still have a tolerable and
profitable use in Christian Commonweals. And then, that which Tullie writes,
might have place, where he says; that Pro S. Roscio Amer.
it is profitable to have many Accusers in a Common weal; yet so, as that men
be not abused by such Accusations. And thus much for prosecution of crimes by a
party.

CHAP. V. Of the several acceptions of this word Officium: the signification
of Inquisitio; Quaestio; Crimina ordinaria and extraordinaria; Cognitio
ordinaria or perpetua, and extraordinaria: the reason why Inquiry by Office
came in place of Accusation: of Inquiry general and special: Inquiry
special ex officio nobili sieve mero, mixto, and promoto: and the privileges of
proceeding ex mero officio, above the other.
NOw because the aforesaid Cautions be so hard to observe, and for that
Accusation is so odious and of so perilous consequence (albeit these four
points were kept) in case either the Magistrate or people (among whom we
live) should not so construe our doings, as perhaps we do sincerely mean
them; therefore where there be so many difficulties incident to Accusation,
lest crimes and offenses should remain wholly undiscovered, and so unpunished,
to the great detriment of the whole body of the Common weal and Church: It was
very necessarily provided in most places of the world, to have the Judges
office by Inquiry to supply this want and scarsitie of Accusers and parties;
which is the other general mean before spoken of, whereby offenses may be
brought into question and examination. The Office or duty of the Judge, is
the cause efficient of this prosecution: and Inquiry is the peculiar effect
and act, which in Criminal matters that cause produces; or the course whereby
the Office does proceed; and is that kind of prosecution, which is
counterdiuided against Accusation, and prosecution by a party.

The word Officium in the Civil law (from whence it is taken) has diverse
acceptions. It signifies either private duties and things of conueniencie to
be regarded and practiced, in the common life and society of man with man; or
else some more public function. And in this latter signification, we read of
it to be taken two ways. By the first, for a ministerial function unto some
Court, having jurisdiction. And by the second, for the power, authority, or
jurisdiction it self of the Court. I do observe three several ministerial
functions termed in the Civil laws by this name Officium. The first are those
persons, that were publicly appointed to present crimes unto the Magistrates:
as in these words: L. ea quidem C. de accus. and inscrip.
Quae per officium praesidibus nunciantur. The second denotes unto us an
Apparatour, as in these words: L. 1. C. de Ap. parit. Procoss. lib. 12.
Officio, quod tuis meritis obsecundat, non Curialem quenquam, nec excaeteris
corporibus volumus aggregari etc. The third an Actuarie that entered the acts of
the Court; as in these laws: L. 11. C. de Numerarijs, Actuarijs. li. 12.
Officio tuae magnitudinis, datis precibus postulant etc. And again, L. 1. C.
de offic. Comitis sacri patrimonij.
Officium Hellesponti adijt, and rogauit etc. In both which laws by the word
Officium, an Actuarie is understood.

But Officium signifying the authority and jurisdiction of the Judge, is that
power, whereby he may deal of himself, without the petition or instance of a
party. And this Office is exercised either in actions Civil, or in Criminal.
In actions Civil L. 56. ff. locati. l. 51.. fin. ff. de act. empti.
sometimes the Judge does of Office decree a thing which he finds to be
equal besides the action, and besides the bond (whereupon the action rises:)
and L. Si longius.. 1 ff de iudic. l. cum siliusfam. ff. de reb. creditis. l.
7. C. de iudic. and alibi passim.
sometimes also (upon a point in equity) he relieueth by his Office such, as
the strict law gives none action unto. Calistratus reduces all causes Civil,
wherein a Judge has conusance extraordinary, unto these two general heads:
Per cognitionem L. 5. ff. de extraord. cognit.
(viz. extraordinariam, sieve officio Iudicis factam) aut de honoribus sieve
muneribus gerendis agitatur; aut de re pecuniaria disceptatur. A Judge
exercises his authority extraordinary in causes Civil, either when he
takes knowledge of bearing offices and functions; or of causes pecuniarie.

But in causes Criminal he practices this authority of Office; aut cum
Callistratus ibid.
de existimatione alicuius cognoscitur; aut cum de capitali crimine quaeritur:
when he sits to take knowledge, whether a man's honor or reputation ought
to be atteinted; or when he enquires and makes inquisition of some crime
capital; viz. whereby a man's liberty, country, or life may be endamaged.
This Office Ovid touched Ovid. lib. 1. de Tristib.
in these words:

Iudicis Officium est, vt res, ita tempora rerum
Quaerere. --
The effect of the Judges Office, and the course which he thereupon does
follow, is called Inquiry. Inquirere (says Bartolus) est Bartol. in l.
transigere. nu. 13. C. de transaction.
quasi intus quaerere, diligentius abdita indagare, secreta detegere, and in
iudicium deducere. It is to search into a matter deeply and carefully, that is
kept close, to bring it to trial of judgment, which it deserves.

This Inquiry in the old common wealth of Rome, was more commonly called l. 1.
item illud. ff. de S. C. Syllan.
Quaestio. Which word has two significations in that law. The one more
general, signifying any inquiry: The other, that inquiry and examination,
which was used upon bond slaves, and men of the meaner sort, by torture.
Quaestionem sic accipimus, (says the Civil law to this purpose) non
tormenta tantum, sed omnem inquisitionem and defensionem (or as another reading
has it) detectionem mortis. Where we see, that the word Inquisitio is also
used. Of this word Quaestio, such as dealt by it, were called Quaesitores: and
so does Virgil. 6. Aeneid.
Virgil call Minos a Judge, quaesitorem. Out of which (by abbreuiation) came
the word quaestor, and quaestura.

It is here to be remembered, that in the common wealth of Rome, before the
people had conveyed over, and granted away all their power and authority unto
the Emperor; they had in themselves sovereign authority as well of punishing
heinous crimes, as al other matters of importance. Crimes which be more
heinous, were called publica crimina, crimes against the state: and the other,
priuata delicta, private offenses, being of less importance, and done but to
private persons damage. The punishment for some of the public crimes, the
people reserved to them selves only: but some other of them were first put
over unto certain Officers purposely thereunto appointed, called Quaestores
sieve Quesitores Parricidij; because they dealt in them (for the most part) of
Office by way of Inquiry. Yet their dealing therein was called Ordinaria
cognitio and ordinaria Quaestio: And the crimes which they enquired of,
Ordinaria crimina, upon the same occasion.

In the six hundred and fifth year from the first foundation of that City,
it was ordained, that out of Tullie in Bruto and pro Cluentio.
the six Praetours for the time being, four should continually after be
chosen to be Quaesitores of so many crimes allotted unto their several
hearing and determining: and thereupon those Enquiries were called not only
Ordinariae, but also Quaestiones perpetuae; perpetual and Ordinary Enquiries
of such crimes, as were so committed over by the people. Unto which number
Sylla in his Dictatorshippe added three other kinds of crimes: and so there
became (in all) seven perpetuae and ordinariae quaestiones; and so many
Quaesitores of those seven crimes only. For the conisance of all other public
crimes, did remain still in the people, as before.

But when so ever it happened either before or after the appointing of such
perpetual and ordinary Enquiries, that the people (as it seemed good unto
them for the time) did commit over unto several Magistrates, Vide totum
titulum ff. de extraord. crimin. and titulos plurimos sequentes.
whether Dictatours, Cousuls, or Praetours, the conisance of any particular
public offense; because this was not ordinarily so done, but upon that
special occasion, and for that one Inquiry, and they no set officers for that
purpose: therefore it was said to be committed extra ordinem, and was
thereupon called Quaestio vel cognitio extraordinaria.

After this manner extra ordinem was a commission Liui. lib. 19.
of Inquiry granted to Fabius Maximus the Dictatour, against such of the men
of Capua, as were chief auctors of the conspiracy, and defection from the
Romans. The like to this here in England we usually call a special Commission
of Oier, and terminer, for some one matter. All other private and less crimes,
the conisance whereof was not reserved to the people, l. 1. ff. de Offic.
Prefect. vrbi.
were Enquired of and punished Ordinarily by him that was Praefectus vrbi: And
therefore they were also called Ordinaria crimina, and the conisance which he
used therein, Cognitio sieve Quaestio ordinaria. And this appellation and
distinction of Ordinary and Extraordinary Crimes and Conisance of them,
remained after the popular Common weal was surprised by Emperors; being by
this occasion first begun. So that Extraordinary is not that (as some do
ignorantly imagine) which is contrary to good order; but any thing swaruing
from the usual and more ordinary course, and may be both allowable and
expedient; notwithstanding it be so called. And in this acception those words
in these two rules are to be understood and taken: viz. Ubi subest remedium
Ordinarium, ibi cessat Extraordinarium: And, Ubi cessat Ordinarium, ibi
Extraordinarium remedium est aduocandum.

If it shall here be asked, why both the course of Accusation (which in old
times was more usual) is now less frequented; and also why Inquiry, that was
counted Extraordinary, c. Super his. de accusat.
is now become an Ordinary remedy, and Bart. in l. infamem. ff. de public.
iud. Bald. in l. 4.. 1. ff. de condict. ob turpem causam.
succeedes into the place of Accusation: for further satisfaction in this
behalf let such consider that which follows.

First, let that be remembered, which has been spoken in the next Chapter
before, touching the Peril and Hatefulness of Accusations. Next, Tho. 2. 2. q.
3. 3. art. 6.
that things tending to an end, ought to be directed in such sort, as that
end may best be atteined. And the end whereunto any Law is referred, ought
especially to be considered in all both interpretation and practice of Laws.
Whereas then in the times of those frequent Accusations, sundry unjust
vexations, conspiracies, and calumniations, with other misdemeanors in that
behalf, were very rife and usual: Therefore those in authority were forced
(to avoid innocent men from such dangers) besides the former penalties, to
make Laws from time to time, wholly to repel and keep back sundry sorts of
persons from Accusing: whereby this kind of prosecution grew daily to more and
more disuse. So that it was requisite for restraint of Offenders, to expect at
the Judges hands for his Office sake, this necessary duty of prosecuting
Crimes; a course more void from suspicion of such calumniation: whereby that
end which the Law shot at, viz. to have Offenders found out and punished, was
far better, and with fewer inconveniences effected.

It was further considered by men of wisdom, how the greatness of the mutual
peril on both sides, did daily drive both the Accuser and the Accused, unto
intolerable extremities. For when the Accuser had once undertaken the matter
to his own apparent danger, if he could not prove it: was it not as likely
(as it was easy) that he would rather secretly suborne untrue witnesses; then
that by his enemies safety, himself should be punished? A matter of fearful
inconvenience, considering that l. Absentem. ff. de poenis.
it is better, an Offender in deed should escape, then that any man which is
innocent, should be punished.

On the contrary side, if the defendant finding himself in deed guilty,
should propose his chalenges or exceptions in law against the Accuser (which
for his defense with Justice might not be denied unto him) can it be doubted,
but that he might easily also suborne witnesses, for proof of all his
challenges; and so by avoiding the Plaintiff from Accusing, avoid also the
peril he was in, how pregnant matter soever did otherwise lie against him?
Whereby it might often happen, that some upright Accusers, who ever for pure
zeal of Justice did prosecute, should be endamaged both in their substance and
good name; sundry Offenders should escape deserved punishment; and so the whole
scope of severe Laws provided against Crimes, should be frustrated and quite
overthrown. And therefore in great wisdom was this rigorous point of Justice
and hateful course, thought good to be mitigated; and therefore by insensible
degrees of custom, turned to a more moderate and sase course, not only for
the Prosecuter, but also for the defendant. For mitius agitur Abbas in ca.
inquis. de accusat.
cum inquisito conuicto, quam cum accusato. He that is co^uicted by way of
Accusation (especially by the Canon law) is more grievously punished, then he
which is convicted upon Inquiry. Which yet is always so tied, that being a
prosecution of Office; the Judge needs not lend his assistance, but where he
sees good and probable inducement to ground it upon.

All Inquiry is either General or Special. Bald. in l. ea quidem. C. de
accusat.
General Inquiry is a preparatoriecourse proceeding of mere Office, purposed
to enquire and find out criminous persons, within some certain territory or
compass. This is of three sorts. The first is general, in respect of the
persons; but special in respect of the fault: as when the Coroner inquireth of
a murder committed, and no certain person known: or an Ordinary of a
forgerie in some cause Ecclesiastical. And by this l. 1. C. de falsa moneta.
l. 1. C. de rapt. Virgin.
Inquiry general, in certain heinous crimes, every private person may
enquire, to bring the Offenders in by law to be justified. The second is
general in respect of the faults, but special in regard of the persons: as
when some Hospital, College, or Cathedral Church is visited. The third and
last is general, both in respect of the persons and faults, as a general
visitation of a whole Dioecesse; or an Inquiry made by the grand Jury at an
Assise or Sessions of the Peace for the whole County.

Summa Antonini. part. 3. t. 9. c. 7.
Special Inquiry is, when some certain and singular person and crime also,
is enquired of, and brought by due course of judgment unto trial, to the
intent to be punished. This Inquiry is done either when there is a kind of
prosecuter besides the Judge, albeit the proceeding be of Office: or when
there is absolutely no prosecuter besides the Judge himself, against the
party conuented. There may besides the Judge be prosecuters of the Office in
two several degrees. One that does prosecute throughout the whole suite: as
when an Information for the Queen alone, or for the Queen and Informer, is
put up at the Common law, and is termed by the law Ecclesiastical, Officium
promotum. The other, which does but prosecute or solicit in some part of the
suite; as by furnishing the Court with proofs, etc. which is called Officium
mixtum, in some temporal courts, a Relater.

Likewise Abbas in e. cum dilectis. de Purg. canonica.
Officium promotum is of two sorts. The first is, when a man voluntarily
offers himself to prosecute, called Promotor voluntarius officij; and he
differs a little from a Party. The second is, when the Court assigns one to
solicit the Office, who is termed Necessarius promotor officij, because he
may not refuse this emploiment. But when no persecuter at all does stir in
the matter: then the Court only does it in duty to the Common wealth, and
to see sin and disorder punished. Then is this Inquiry termed Officium
simply, or Officium merum by the Canon law, and by the Civil laws Officium
Nobile, as of more worth and dignity, then the other course which is by a
Party, and at his petition and instance. For by a more base appellation (in
comparison of the former) that law terms this, Officium Mercenarium, ac si
merccde aliqua proposita alterius petitiont quasi deseruiret: that-is, when the
Office of the Judge is (as it were) hired and employed, but at another man's
beck, to serve his turn. For albeit in temporal courts of other realms,
long custom (which is Crauetta. Consil. 238. nu. 7.
the Wel-spring of all their jurisdiction) has Alph. lib. 3. c. 11.
established the very same course of proceeding in causes criminal, even at
the instance of a Party, with that which may be done when the Office of the
Court alone proceeds: nevertheless the law it self has given greater
privileges unto proceeding of Mere Office, then unto the other: which was
some occasion also, why it was the rather called Nobile Officium Iudicis. The
first privilege is, that whereas by law now altered by Custom, an Accuser
or Party (properly so called) is in danger of Poenatalionis, if he fail in
his proofs, Propter praesumptam Calumniam: yet the presumption and entendment
Arg. c. in nostr. de procur. and in c. ad audientiam. de praescrip.
of law runs not so against a Judge exercising but the public laws by his
Office, as it does against a Party. And therefore is he not subject to that
penalty as a prosecuteris. l. iniuriaru^.. 1. ff. de iniurijs.
Non videtur facere iniuriam, qui iure publico vtitur. The next privilege by
law yielded unto, proceeding of Office in a Criminal cause, which is denied
to a prosecuter, yea though he be not an Accuser or Party, properly so
called; is, that the Judge proceeding Panor. in c. qualiter. el. 2. de accusat.
of Office may give an oath to the defendant, to answer some criminal matter.
But it is otherwise, when the suite is at the instance of a party which
prosecuteth, because the defendant ought not to be driven to furnish up his
adversaries intention. Thirdly, an Ordinary or delegate Advniuersitatem
causarum, that proceeds of Office, is not bound to make proofs of the Pan.
ibid. and alij DD.
fame (saving before his superior Judge, if an appellation be brought and do
lie) because it suffices, that the fame is apparent and known unto himself.
But it is otherwise in a delegate of one cause, or upon the instance of one,
that voluntarily prosecuteth. Fourthly, when the suit is at the instance of a
party, contrary proofs for proof of the defendants good fame, are admitted.
But this need not be granted upon proceeding of Office; because Arg. c. in
nostr. de procur. etc. ad audientiam de praescrip.
the law does not entend and presume against the sincerity of the Judge, as
against the party prosecuting. Fifthly, upon the instance of a voluntary
prosecutour or preferrer unto the Office, Hostiens. in c. cum clamor. de
testibus.
fit litis contestatio (as I may English it) an issue is joined between the
two parties. But if either one be but a soliciter and assistant to the Office;
or else a preferrer assigned by the Judge; or that the proceeding be of mere
Office: there is then no contestation in the suit (properly so to be termed)
but a kind of contradiction (in sted thereof) required, betwixt the fame or
denunciation etc. on the one side; and the defendants answer by denial on the
other side. Lastly, when the proceeding is of Office, Arg. c. cum clamor. de
testibus.
(even after publication) more witnesses may be received, because the fear of
subornation in this case cease, being the only reason of that rule, viz.
that after publication more witnesses may not be received: Insomuch as
depositions of witnesses are always published unto the Judge: But new
witnesses may not be received, when it is at the prosecution of a voluntary
party, for fear of suborning them in the points, where he finds the former
depositions came too short of his purpose. So that in these respects the
rather, this proceeding of mere Office might be termed, Nobile Iudicis
Officium. Thus far touching Office and Inquiry by virtue thereof.

CHAP. VI. Of Denunciation, a special means of stirring up the Office: the
manifold use thereof in the old Common weal and Empire of Rome; and at this
present on the other side the Sea: the general acception of that word: four
kinds of Denunciation: how they differ one from another: what is required in
them: and when a Denouncer is to be condemned or excused of expenses. And what
course of dealing against crimes and offenses is holden both in Courts of the
Ecclesiastical commission, and in ordinary Courts Ecclesiastical in this
Realm.
But because it is not possible for a Judge of all other men by himself alone
to have knowledge of most crimes committed, or probably intended to be
committed: therefore have those laws devised sundry means to bring and
prefer them unto his knowledge and Office. Among which Denunciation is
principal, and indeed so general; that (by sundry writers) it is made a third
and several kind of proceeding against crimes, and by them counterdiuided
against Accusation and Inquiry. In which respect, I think it not inconvenient
for the present purpose, to have the nature of it also something opened.
Nevertheless it is in deed no different course from Inquiry, Spec. tit. de
de^unc, nu. 16.
but a special means or instrument eliciendi potentiam in Actum: viz. of
drawing the Judges power and Office into action by Inquiry. Denunciation in a
general signification may be described thus; viz. A relating of some man's
crime unto a Judge, to the end to have the Offender reformed or punished; yet
without that solemn inscription by the Denouncer, which the law requires in an
Accusation.

But I hold it requisite first to note, what use hereof and assistance unto
the Office of Enquiry, the old Romans had in their policy by Denunciators;
as it is recorded to memory in the Civil laws of that people. Which I do the
rather in this place, as in the former discourse I have done, to meet with the
childish and sinister conceit of some; who suppose every thing devised and
brought in by any Canon, how old or necessary soever it be; to be no better
then Popish and Antichristian; and eo ipso (without further a do or judgment)
to be condemned. For (I hope) they will not judge the laws and policy of the
Romans to be Popish, Antichristian, or unreasonable; being (for civil
prudence) the wisest and mightiest people that ever was, and altogether
Heathens, when those laws were framed and practiced.

Of those, whom we now commonly call Denunciators, the law Civil has two
sorts. One sort are those, who (being private men) do willingly (for gains
sake) denounce others. Of these L. Res quae. vlt. ft. ad S. C. Turpill.
that law thus speaks: As no man is at first compelled Nunciare, to denounce
any crime against another: so cannot such a Delatour desist, when it pleases
himself. So that these be both Nunciatores and Delatores. Of these Delatours
(being a kind of Parties) I have spoken before.

The other are such, as by reason of some Office or public charge, laid upon
them, are to Denounce offenders unto the Judge, to be by him proceeded with,
unto punishment. These (in general) by the Emperor Constantinus have this
title given unto them; L. 1. C. de custodia reorum.
Publicae solicitudinis cura, the care and regard of public watchfulness. His
words to that purpose be these: In quacunque causa reo exhibito, sieve
accusator existat, sieve eum publicae solicitudinis cura perduxerit; statim
debet Quaestio fieri, vt noxius puniatur, innocens absoluatur. Where (we see)
the two kinds of Criminal prosecution are touched, and the proceeding of
Office, is there counterdiuided against Accusation.

And these having such charge, be also of two several sorts. The first
whereof, besides their Denunciation and relating of crimes unto superior
Magistrates, had authority also to enter into some Inquiry and Examination.
Of these, certain were called Curatores Viarum, L. pen. ff. de via publica.
Dion Cassius li. 54.
who also had a kind of jurisdiction for meaner faults committed in the high
ways, and had two Lictores or Sergeants (for that purpose) attending them.
They enquired of Office upon offenders and disturbers of the public peace in
high ways. Others were called Latrunculatores, who sought up, and made
general Inquiry for offenders, and persons to be suspected; being not
altogether unlike unto our Provost Marshalles. I read L. D. Adrianus. ff de
custod. and exhib. reis.
also of some called (...), that is, principal conseruatours of common peace
and tranquillity. These also, praeficiebantur disciplinae publicae and
corrigendis moribus. L. vlt. ff. de mun. and honor.
There were also men having charge and Office, not unlike to these
Conseruatours called Stationarij: whereof one sort called Milites Stationarij
and limitibus Imperij praepositi, did L. 1.. fin. ff. de offic. prae^. vrbi.
provide for the common peace, and also for the security of wayfaring men in
the high ways, especially about the borders of their provinces; having
authority to enquire and examine any persons, who they were, of what condition
and state of life, from whence, and whither they traveled. And these made
relation to the Magistrates of such suspected persons, as they found; and of
the whole state of things abroad. Another sort L. 1. C. de curiosis and
Stationar. li. 12.
called also Stationarij simply (without addition) were only to make Inquiry
general, and to denounce and present crimes; and after to furnish the Office
with proofs of the crimes detected by them. And these were of the second kind
of such public denouncers, having none authority to make examination, but did
only generally enquire of faults, and present them up. Such were called also
by this appellatiue name, Officium: L. 7. ea quidem. C. de Accusat.
as in that law of Gordianus the Emperor, where it is said to the purpose in
handling, thus; Ea, quae per Officium Praesidibus denunciantur, and citra
solemnia Accusationum posse perpendi incognitum non est. Verum si falsis necne
Notorijs insimulatus sit, perpenso iudicio, dispici debet. These were called
also Officiales; and L. 1. C de private. carcer.
the chief of them that had oversight of the rest, were named Primates
Officiorum. And of them this law L. Qui sepul. chra. C. de sepul. viol.
is to be understood, viz. Sieve quicunque alius Accusauerit, vel ad Officium
nunciauerit.

Other parts of Christendom (where the Civil laws have place) even to this
day do retain some the like Offices and officers for the self same purpose,
though under other names. In some countries men of those functions Bartol. in
l. Diuus. ff. de custodia reorum. Angelus in l. Si Vacantia. C. de bonis
vacantib.
being in towns, are called Decani; and in cities, Capita Centenariorum; who
have this ministerial charge laid upon them, to enquire of misdemeanors done
within that quarter or ward, which is committed to their charge; and to
denounce or present them unto the Magistrates. And by the writers in that law,
these being dealers in temporal Courts, and matters, are resembled unto the
like Officiales Iurati, that are there in Courts Ecclesiastical. The city of
London has in every Ward certain yearly appointed to a purpose not far
unlike, who are called the Wardmote enquest. And for Courts ecclesiastical the
like be here in every parish yearly appointed, called Churchwardens, and
Sidemen, or Quest-men.

Under the generality of this word Denunciation, three several things be
contained. First, when denunciation is made to the Magistrate, by any having a
particular interest; it is called Querela, a Supplication or Complaint. Such is
that in S. Luke, Luk 18. V. 3.
Revenge me of mine adversary, says the widow unto the wicked Judge.

Secondly, when it is made by such, as have no particular interest; it is
called L. delator. ff. de iure fisci.
Delatio. But when it is done per Aduocatos fisci, (such as the Attorney
general) or by other officers purposely thereunto appointed, then is it
properly called Denunciatio, viz. An Information or Presentment. And thus much
touching Denunciation in Temporal courts only.

Denunciation generally taken, as we gather out of both the laws Civil and
Canon, is of four several kinds. The first is called Evangelical; the
second Judicial; the third Canonical; and the fourth Regular.

Evangelical is that, which proceeds by those degrees that our Savior
Christ prescribes Matt. 18. V. 15
in the Gospel. There be two ends hereof. Spec. tit. d.
The principal end is, to procure repentance and amendment in him, which
offends. The secondarie end Panor. c. nouit. de iudic.
where this cannot be effected; is to restreine others from the like, by his
punishment spiritual, only touching the soul; but not any temporal
penalty, either directly or indirectly. But albeit the purpose of this
denunciation be the parties reformation; nevertheless if the crime be such, as
hinders the execution of his ecclesiastical function; the Judge of Office,
is also to depose him, from his Alph. li. 2. ca. 9. conclus. vlt. pract. Can.
Criminalis.
Orders.

Concerning Denunciation Evangelical, question is moved by the Schoolmen
(who in my poor opinion do handle it for many points, both learnedly and
iudiciously) whether in this denunciation those degrees of monition first
privately to the party offending, and afterward before two or three witnesses,
be necessary, and at all times to be observed in all crimes and offenses
indifferently, before the offender may be denounced of them, unto the
Ecclesiastical Magistrate?

For resolution whereof; we are to distinguish between hidden or secret, and
public or open crimes or offenses. If they be wholly hidden and secret; then
indistinctly those degrees Ricar. in 4. Sent. did. 19.
of monition there prescribed, are first to be observed, before it may be
denounced to the Judge; whether the offender by promising amendment and show
of grief, do give any hope of his repentance and reformation; or do give
none at all: saving where the crime is of such quality, as that Thom. 2. 2. q.
33. art 2. and Ricar. vbi supra.
it tends to some great and important damage bodily or ghostly of the whole
body of Church or Common weal, or of many particular persons: as, if it be
Heresy, Conspiracy, or such like. For insomuch as such one sins herein,
not only against thee (as the text speaks) but against others also, albeit
they know not thereof: therefore thou ought forthwith Euangelically to
denounce and present such an offense unto the magistrate; to the intent the
public danger may be speedily prevented: considering that Gabr. Biel.
the benefit of many is to be preferred before any particular persons fame:
and the detriment (whether spiritual or corporal) of the whole Church or
Common wealth, is rather to be regarded and avoided, then an evil fame against
one offender, which (hereby) may perhaps be raised and bruited abroad.

Concerning crimes or offenses, we are to understand, that they may be said to
be Petrus de Palude. in. 4. Sent. 19. q. 4.
public or open two manner of ways: either when they are committed openly; or
when being secret, yet they be published abroad, and the offender is famed and
bruited, to have committed them. Now if by either of these ways, an offense be
made open and public; then it is to be denounced unto him that has authority
to correct it; yea though neither of the said monitions have been precedent.
For Thom. 2. 2. q. 33. art. 2.
we are to provide, not only that he which has offended, may be made better
and brought to repentance: but also that others to whose knowledge it is come,
be not thereby scandalized and offended; according to that rule of S. Paul: 1.
Tim. 5.
Rebuke a sinner openly before all men, that the rest may have fear: Ricar.
vbi supra.
And (as a schooleman says) that they which have taken offense by the fault,
may be edified by the punishment. But he goes in this point further; That if
it be but in the way to be published and made known abroad, though not as yet
bruited; nevertheless it is to be denounced to ye Judge, that the scandale
which might arise thereof, may be (aforehand) prevented. So that if the chief
end of this Denunciation cannot: yet the secondarie end may hereby be attained.

Neither let any man in regard of this Denunciation fear to be accounted
malicious (says August. ad Macedonium.
S. Augustine:) for you are rather blame worthy, if by holding your peace, ye
shall suffer your brother to perish; whom you might have saved by denouncing of
his fault unto them in authority. And again, August. ibid.
Sieve plectendo, sieve ignoscendo, hoc been agitur, vt vita hominum corrigatur.
It is very good to bring me^ to reform their lives, whether it be done by
punishing them, or by for bearing them.

All Denunciations Evangelical 10. And. and alij DD. in c. Nouit. de iudicijs.
(so they be duly brought before him) the ecclesiastical Judge is to admit,
because they be referred only to the parties reformation, or restraint of him
and of others by spiritual correction. But his proceeding in them, is (for the
most part) summarilie and not Iudiciallie: and as a spiritual Father, rather
then a Judge.

The next kind, termed Denunciation Judicial, in respect of the Denouncers
and matters denounced, is either public or private. l. Dious. ff. de Cust. and
exh. reis. l. ea quide^. C. de accusationib. l. 1.. sane ff. de off. Praef.
vrbi. c. episcopus in Synodo. 35. q. 6.
Public, is that relation or solemn presentment of some crime, which is made
unto a competent Judge, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, by public Officers
thereunto appointed: whereupon the Judge of his pure and mere Office
proceeds by due Judicial course of special inquiry, to the acquital and
clearing of the party denounced, if he be found innocent; or to the punishing
of him by some penalty bodily and temporal, which is the peculiar end of
this Judicial denunciation, unto which also no Monition is required to proceed.

But Judicial and private denunciation is that, which may be preferred by a
private person in respect of a particular interest that he has, as being
either hurt, or particularly grieved by some fault or offense committed by
another. The end here of is, not only the punishment of the offender; but
that the denouncer grieved, may be restored or preserved harmless.

For explanation of the latter of these by examples: first in a Civil or
temporal court; vel alieni. l. 1.. Quid autem. ff. de off. praef. vrb.
as when he that is oppressed, is a bondsman,. pen. Inst. de his qui sunt sui
or is subject to another man's power (as an apprentice is:) so that he has
none ordinary action against his superior that does wrong him, but by this
Judicial denunciation; is forced to fly unto the Judges office for remedy.
In a court ecclesiastical: Innoc. in c. Insinuante. Qui cler. vel vov.
as when a religious person, who has no direct action against his Prelate,
denounces some grieuances done unto him, by his Abbot or other superior: or
when as the poor of an Hospital do denounce and relate unto their visitour
some offenses or grieuances done to them by the master thereof, requiring
punishment and remedy therein by his office, in due course of law. And these
two Judicial kinds of Denunciation are most frequent in this Realm, both in
Ordinary courts, and also in courts of Commission, for causes and
misdemeanors ecclesiastical. But the first of them more usual in Ordinary
courts: and the second in courts of Commission.

The third kind of Denunciation is Canonical, (so called, because it had his
original from that law;) and it has also under it two kinds. The one more
special, to be preferred and made by him only, who has interest of having
either his Prelate or Pastor good, or else some ecclesiastical person good,
who is under his jurisdiction. And c. 1. de offi. Custod. c. licet Heli. de
simon.
the end of this Denunciation is, to have such (being criminous) to be removed
from their administration ecclesiastical. The other Canonical denunciation is
more general, in that it may be preferred by any whomsoever; and concerns
either the hinderance c. praeterea. de Sponsalib. c. cum inhibitio. de cland.
despons.
or dissoluing of some marriage contracted or to be contracted, within the
degrees forbidden: or else the desisting from some sin, which is of that
quality, that it increases by multiplicatio^ of Acts in the same kind, or by
continuance of some one Act, and wherein the Denouncer has none other
particular interest, then as every Christian has besides.

The last kind called Regular, is that Denunciation Specul. tit. de Denunt.. 2.
verse. vt. autem.
which is published by any person in Chapter, touching some offense of his
brother, committed contrary to the local and positive rules or statutes of
that place; to the intent he may amend it hereupon, rather then that it should
come to a more public denunciation; and from this, there lies none
Appellation.

The two first kinds of Denunciation, viz. Evangelical and Judicial, do
differ the one from the other, in sundry points, but especially in these
following. First, Pan. in c. noult. de Iudiciis. addie. Vlt.
every one (though he be infamous for some crime formerlie committed, so he
persevere not in that crime still) is admitted to denounce another
Euangelically: because it is indefinitelie commanded by Christ, as a
necessary office of Christian duty, for reclaiming of our brother from
offending. But none are to be admitted to the public Judicial denunciation;
besides those which be specially thereunto appointed: saving that the Canons c.
Causam. Qui filii sint legitimi. c. Quapropter. 2. q. 7. c. Quisquis. 1. q. 1.
c. primo. 5. q. 5.
do compel all Clerks to denounce the crimes of other persons
ecclesiastical: and to the private judicial, none but such as have some
peculiar interest. And in this case it forces not, though such do even then
persevere in a crime; because under pretense of crime, no man is to be repelled
from prosecution of his right.

Secondly, Evangelical denunciation is referred to the amendment of the
offender; whereas upon the public Judicial, his punishment is propounded for
an end thereof: and the private is referred both to such punishment, and that
the thing be restored, and the denouncer also preserved harmless.

Thirdly, upon Evangelical denunciation there is no proceeding in foro
contentioso, or iudiciallie, but only in Poemtentiali: whereas upon Judicial
denunciation, there ensues a due course of Judicial proceeding; and thereof
it has his name.

Fourthlie and lastly, in private judicial denunciation or witnesses (other
then such as be lawful and without just exception) are admitted; because it
lies for restitution of some thing: But in Evangelical, for proof of the
first private monitio^ the denouncer alone must (of necessity) be admitted for
the witness, if the denounced do deny the fault: and for proof of the
second monition, any one other (together with the (...). Mat. 18. V. 16.
denouncer) may be admitted for two witnesses, though both of them happen to
be infamous for some crime in times past by them committed; so that at such
time of denouncing, they persevere not in the crime.

But albeit the law be thus, for admitting of some and rejecting of others
from denouncing: yet throughout all Italy, and in other places of Christendom
besides; Alphons. Villa. li. 2. de denunc. Cano. concl. 8.
Custom in both courts has thus far prevailed, as to suffer any man almost
to denounce, whether he do it of his own voluntary mind, or by occasion of
a Charge and duty in that behalf laid upon him. The reason hereofis; for
that the Common wealth has interest to have offenses punished: which could not
so readily be done, if by this way of denouncing they were not at all brought
unto the Magistrates notice. A matter otherwise likely to happen by reason of
so many difficulties that accompany Accusation, and so many exceptions, which
may (by law) be taken both against Accusers and Denouncers.

Those who have Salycetus in l. ea quidem. C. de accus. Clarus. li. 5.. fin. q.
7.
a public charge of Denouncing and Presenting, whether they serve in Temporal
or in Ecclesiastical courts, ought (upon pains otherwise to be inflicted
upon them) to present such offenses as come to their knowledge; yea though
otherwise they be not opened or published commonly abroad.

Likewise in courts Temporal Clarus vbi supra. verse. Sed quaero.
this kind of public denunciatours ought to present some matters, which the
laws (perhaps) do not punish at all: as namely, if any kill an Outlawe or
Bannito, in places where such law is still in force. Also such Officers must
present all casual violent deaths: because albeit perhaps nothing do
presently appear, but that such death did casuallie happen: yet in process of
time, it may fall out to be discovered, that it was by some malefactor.

Lastly, when such as have charge to enquire generally, and to present, either
do not know certainly whether an offense be committed or not, (a thing which
may happen in such crimes whereof no traces or footesteps after the fact done
can remain; as in Adultery, diffamation, and such like:) or where a fact
does appear, but the Author thereof is not known (as may be in murder,
sacrilege, forgerie, etc.) in both these cases, if the common voice and fame
do run against any person in particular, they are bound to present even such
fame of the offender, as well as the crimes themselves; together with all the
circumstances they can learn thereof, and who be more perfectly instructed
touching it, that perhaps can give particular and more full evidence.

He that is a denouncer by virtue of his Office, is always in his presentiments
to observe, that he be not found to have preferred matter against any, by
manifest calumniation or wilful conspiracy. For Alph vbi supra.
if this appear evidently to the Judge, even such a public denounceour is
not only to pay charges unto him, whom he has maliciously vexed; but is
otherwise also upon the Judges Office to be punished, for a Calumniatour. But
for Calumniation l. 2. C. qui aceusare non possunt.
only presumed (which is then intended and presumed, when the defendant is
cleared, only because nothing can be proved against him:) then he that is a
Denounceour by reason of his charge laid upon him, shall not be prejudiced.
Nevertheless he that is a voluntary Denounceour or preferrer, Gloss. final.
in c. dilecti. de dolo and contumacia. vide Angel. de malef. and Marian. c.
Qualiter. cl. 2. de accusat.
if he do but fail in his proofs, shall be thereupon condemned in expenses,
and be otherwise also punished; albeit not so deeply as an Accuser, yet
extraordinarily by the Judges Office; because at his instigation and
soliciting, the Office does almost no less, then an Accuser does. The reason
hereof is, because in that he proves not his Complaint; the Law presumes
even hereupon, that he did but move it by Calumniation, for unjust vexation.
Which thing does often keep even many good men back from all Denunciation of
crimes, whereunto they are not specially bound; as S. Augustine August. Hom.
50. de poenitentia.
testifies in these words: Good men (for the most part) do bear with other
men's faults, and hold their peace; because they want sufficient evidence in
law, to approve that to the Judges, which themselves know.

Yet there be certain cases, whereby even a private Denounceour and Informer
shall be excused from any Calumniation presumed only: viz. when he makes not
proof of that which he obiecteth. The first is, when he did prefer it by a
kind of Necessity: l. cum fratrem. C. de his quib. vt indignis.
as when the heir prosecuteth the death of him, to who^ he is heir. Secondly,
when it proceeded l. Quamuis, C. de adult.
upon an extreme grief; as when the husband accuses his wife of adultery,
and yet perhaps fails in proof. Thirdly, when the Crime l. 1. C. de falsa
Moneta.
is very enormious; as for Coining, Treason, etc. Fourthly, l. Miles.. mulier.
ff. de adulter.
when a great evil fame did run thereupon. Fifthly, c. de Sent. excom.
when the Denounceour proves, that he heard the infamy spoken of, by men
worthy to be credited. Sixthly, Gl. in c. Paulum. 2. q. 3.
when his witnesses pretending to him they could prove the Crime, do deceive
him. Lastly, 10. And. in c. cum dilect. de Elect.
when he makes half a good proof, as by one witness without exception; which
the Ciuilians term Semiplenam probationem. For in all these Cases, the
praesumed and intended Calumniation (grounded upon this point only, for that
the Denounceour failed in proof) does justly cease. But otherwise, the
aforesaid general rule of condemnation in expenses, etc. is to be observed.
Thus much then of Denunciation, the most usual and general inducement of a
Judges descending to Inquiry special against a particular person, for some
supposed Crime.

Now it follows to show (so near as I can) what course of dealing against
Crimes and offenses is holden both in the Court of Ecclesiastical commission
(which of the two is more egerly impugned) and also in ordinary Courts
Ecclesiastical, at least so far as by Law is warrantable, if an appellation
be brought.

The matters handled in the Commission Ecclesiastical, are such Crimes
Ecclesiastical as are spoken of in the first treatise: being aggrauated (above
the ordinary course of them) by some circumstance of moment. Also these
besides, attaching, and conuenting of Jesuits, Seminary Priests and
recusants of both sorts, execution and punishment of the breach of certain
Statutes, as touching her Majesty's lawful superiority Ecclesiastical,
yielded unto her Highness by 7. and 5. Eliz. 1. Eliz. cap. 2. 13. El. cap. 12.
Parliament: the Statute for uniformity of Common prayer, and the Statute to
reform certain disorders in the Ministers of the Church: punishing of
Libellers, slanderous reports, and disordered preaching against Persons and
matters Ecclesiastical by law established: misdemeanors about Marriages:
conuenticles, tending to schism: Abuse and contempt to Ministers: excessive
vsuries, simonies, incests, adulteries and other foul incontinencies,
subornations of periuries in matters Ecclesiastical, and such like: when
(either by reason of the power of the delinquents, or through some material
circumstance) they be not so readily and easily reformable, by ordinary
jurisdiction.

These matters are brought thither, when Ordinaries be noted of negligence in
giving redress: or when they desire aid, either for the greatness of the
party, whom poor men dare not present or denounce, or for the delinquents
often remoouing from one Dioecesse to another, or for the dwelling of the
witnesses else where, or for the offenders frequent, frivolous, and chargeable
appeals, or for such like considerable occasion: or upon credible information
made by some great personage, or of some that be in that Commission, or being
referred from her Majesty, or from the Lords of the Counsel: or upon
complaint of some party justly grieved, otherwise being without remedy: or by
complaint of a whole Parish, or of a great part thereof: or upon frequent
relation of sundry credible persons taking offense and grief thereat (and
setting down particular evidence of the fact) or in aid and assistance of
ordinary Jurisdiction: as when the delinquent has no certain place of abode:
or lastly by some notorietie of the fact, as by the parties known
handwriting: or for a matter done in great assembly of people, and such like.

Hereupon Articles be framed, wherein are contained the place, time, and
oftentimes the persons able to testify and inform further, and all such other
circumstances and Indicia, (which I interpret as the word is commonly used
Evidences,) tending to the plainer manifestation of the Crime. The Articles are
perused and allowed to be incident to the conisance of that Court, and
containing sufficient detection to open a way to proceed (by way of further
inquiry ex officio, into that crime) by one of those three Commissioners at
the least, (whereof one is of the Quorum) that do subscribe the Process, for
conuenting of the party.

This Process is either by way of Citation (commonly there called letters
missiue) or by way of attachment, when the party is fugitive, or flitting, or
the Crimes be grievous and publicly offensive, so that it may probably be
feared, he will lurk or step out of the way for a time. But in both courses,
some one is bound to the Queens Majesty to prosecute, and to furnish the
Court with witnesses for proof of the matter, not to compound it privately,
and to pay charges unto the party, if it shall appear he has been (without
just cause) troubled. Yet where the Commissioners themselves are sufficiently
informed Indicijs, viz. with evident matter against the party, and where no
such prosecutor or relator does offer to follow it, (so that the Court it
self takes chief care of the prosecution) in some like few cases, such bond
is omitted.

Now when as the party appears (for such just considerations as hereafter
are debated and proved lawful) he is required on her Majesty's behalf, to
take oathe to answer the Articles or Interrogatories truly, (being matters of
his own fact and knowledge, so far forth as by law he is bound) before
every particular thereof be made known unto him; least after perusal (before
his oath taken) he be drawn by counsel to answer cautelously, indirectly, or
wholly to refuse to make answer: perhaps, because he sees they touch him over
nearly, as coniecturing by whom they may be proved. But after the oath is
taken (in setting down his answer) he may consider as advisedly, and
deliberate for so long time, as in any reason may be desired.

And thus far forth the party conuented, is (for the most part without any
party at all) proceeded with, but ex officio Iudicum nobili vel mero: to the
intent, he may not be priuileged to say, that he is not bound to answer;
being at the suite of the Office, and duty of the Judge (for the public
interest of the Church and Commonweal) as perhaps by Law he might, if it
were at first preferred and prosecuted by a party. But after he has perfitely
answered them (for the most part) a party is then made; who (if sufficient
matter be not confessed thereupon to proceed unto a judgment, upon the
Articles and answer) does take upon him to prove it by witnesses; and then
Interrogatories, exceptions against witnesses, and other defenses, (for the
conuented party) are used almost wholly, as in Ordinary Courts. By which
making of a party, that which was merum officium before, does afterward become
officium mixtum, viz. ex mero and promoto.

When the matter comes to final judgment, if the party be convicted, he is
punished either by penance, (for his reformation, and for satisfaction of the
Church offended) or by imprisonment, fine, or censures of the Church, or by so
many of them, as is thought fittest, or by him or others most feared, or to be
most convenient, weighing always the quality of the person, and the offense,
together with other circumstances thereof.

In ordinary Jurisdiction, Crimes be usually proceeded against either ex
officio promoto, that is, at the instance and petition of some, that will
voluntarily stir up and solicit the Judge unto his duty: or else ex
officio Iudicis mero. In the first of these, albeit the party conuented is
bound to answer matters by oathe (if it be required) so they be not of the
Crime objected: yet the rule is, that he is not bound to answer (upon oathe)
touching the very Crime it self, notwithstanding a fame do run hereupon,
until he shall be enjoined his purgation.

But when an Ordinary proceeds against a crime, without a party promouent,
viz. ex officio mero: then his proceeding must be grounded either upon a
presentment of a fame, or of the crime (made by such as be specially deputed
thereunto, as Churchwardens, etc.) or proved by other witnesses, or else upon
notorietie of the fact, speeches and information (of credible persons touching
such fame or scandale thereupon risen) brought often unto his ears (which is
called clamosa insinuatio) or by some other course allowed by law to be
sufficient, to open a way unto such proceeding.

If it be upon a perfect presentment of the crime or fame thereof, the Judge
may safely without doubt of nullitie or grieuance in that behalf proceed ex
officio: and so may urge the party presented to answer upon his oath,
touching the very crime it self. But if there be no such presentment, but
clamosa insinuatio delata ad aures suas, or some equivalent matter, whereby the
party becomes offensive and scandalous (though no man will prosecute or
present him) yet the Judge may and ought ex officio of very duty, to proceed
unto the examination of neighbors there abouts, touching such fame or crime:
which fame if it shall be by such inquiry found and proved, then he may
proceed as before. But if upon such denunciation and notification had from
credible persons, and the crime being not declared to be notorius, nor none
infamy or scandal proved or presented, nor any other sufficient mean to
open way to such Inquiry, he shall nevertheless proceed, and urge the party
to answer of the very crime upon his oath: this (of it self) shall make none
error or nullitie in the proceeding, albeit not warranted by law. For if the
party conuented shall make none opposition (as by saying that he is not
presented, nor yet defamed of it etc. but be contented to answer) then the
process shall stand sound by reason of his submission unto the proceedings.
But if the party (taking cause of grieuance) shall appeal from such
proceeding, then the Ordinary must be able before the Judge of the appeal
(out of the Acts) to justify either the fame, by some presentment thereof
made, or by witnesses, or the notorietie of the fact, or else scandal found by
way of inquiry, or by some denunciation, sufficient Indicia and evidences
(found before) as the law does allow, to open a way unto him, to proceed by
inquiry ex officio. For (otherwise) the Judge Aquo (being made party in the
second instance) shall be adjudged by his superior Judge to have done him a
grieuance, to have his proceedings therein reuersed, and to pay charges to the
party appellant.

These be the courses of proceeding (in this behalf) of both the said
ecclesiastical Courts within this Realm: which in the Treatise following
(for those aforesaid principal points challenged) remain now to be
particularly justified: and shall hereafter (if need require) be showed to
hold for law and equity a more strict and exact course in many points, then
not only Courts Ecclesiastical, but even Civil, (or as we here speak)
Temporal Courts (on the other side the Sea,) usually do observe: or then (by
the Canon, or Civil laws in some respects) were needful, if it were so
thought expedient.

CHAP. VII. The Civil and Canon laws allow sundry means to ground a
special Inquiry of Office against a crime, besides Accusation and
Presentment: an answer to a supposed Rule: how from General, they descend to
special Inquiry: That besides these two, either a fame, or clamosa
insinuatio; or private Judicial Denunciation; or Canonical Denunciation; or
Indicia; or taking with the manner, or other Notorietie of the fact; or
Appeachment by some of the Co^plices; or collusion of the Accuser; or the not
obiecting in due time, that every of these do want: or when the Inquiry
tends but to a spiritual punishment; may severally any of them serve, to
warrant such Inquiry: with some observations touching the nature of most of
these.
THe public Judicial denunciation which is made and preferred up by special
Officers assigned for that purpose, in usual speech we term presentment: and
is that presentment, which must needs be meant by the autors of the first
opinion that is to be handled in this second part, which is this, viz. that an
ecclesiastical Court may not proceed against any crime, without an Accusation
or presentment. And it falls in now very aptly to be treated of in this place.

But if it should be said, that under the word presentment, any denunciation
whatsoever were understood by the authors of that opinion: besides that it is
never so generally taken, the practice of ecclesiastical jurisdiction also,
would not then (hereby) be restrained (which that opinion especially shoots
at) but rather much more enlarged, then they would be willing unto. And yet
though it were so generally to be understood; nevertheless this opinion could
not be truly defended, as shall here be made manifest God willing.

It is showed before, that Accusation and Presentment be courses of proceeding
most properly and peculiarly incident to Courts, guided either by the Civil,
or by ecclesiastical laws. So that we find the authors of this opinion
herein to deal somewhat more liberally, then certain do in other points: in
that these do hereby allow unto an ecclesiastical Court, some course of
proceeding, according to the law ecclesiastical.

I mind first to impugn this opinion, by showing out of those two laws, that
a Judge may have Conisance against crimes, not only upon the prosecution of
some party, which is none Accuser; but also of Office by way of special
inquiry; though no such solemn presentment be preferred up, by Officers
purposely thereunto appointed: and therefore, that sundry proceedings are
warranted against crimes, without Accusation, or presentment.

It has bin showed before, that l. libellorum. ff de accus. l. 5. C. de his qui
accusare non possunt.
unto every Accusation an Inscriptio^ of the Accuser to endure poenam talionis,
in case he prove not his intention, is necessarily required. But the proceeding
to the conisance of a crime by way of Exception repulsiue only, or both
Repulsiue and Recriminatiue against the Accuser; is done by a party, that is
not to use such Inscription: And therefore some proceeding may be against crimes
by a party, that is none Accuser. The like is truly to be said of both the
sorts of Judicial Querelae or complaints, mentioned also in the sixth Chapter
of this second part.

Furthermore, at the Civil law, both Delatours of concealements or
intrusions, and Delatours also upon pecuniarie penal laws, do omit such
Inscription: and therefore are none Accusers. For if we will affirm the
proceeding upon their prosecution, to be at the instance of a party; then does
it follow hereupon, that some may be a party in preferring offenses and
faults, which is none Accuser. But if we will call it proceeding of Office,
yet is it still without any presentment by officers specially thereunto
appointed. And therefore it follows, that the law Civil admits some
prosecution of offenses, without either Accusation or Presentment. The same may
be affirmed of Prosecutours or parties at the law ecclesiastical, prosecuting
either exofficio promoto vel mixto. For there is neither Inscription to make
them Accusers, nor presentment by officers thereunto assigned.

Perhaps here (by praeoccupation) that Rule will be objected by some, whereby is
said, that No man is to be condemned without an Accusour. Which does encounter
both that which is to be spoken by me against this opinion; and also for, and
in behalf, of all this proceeding of Office: and also does overthrow the
opinion it self, that we have now in handling. For presentment, which is one
of the courses allowed by this opinion, has none use in an Accusation, but
only opens a way to the Judges Office for special inquiry against him that
is presented. So that if by such Rule no prosecution might be against crimes,
otherwise then by Accusation: then all presentiments, which be preparatories to
proceeding of Office, must wholly cease.

For clearing of which doubt, I answer: that if this were a Rule (as is
pretended) yet (like as all other Rules) it has many limitations, or excepted
Cases. But Duaren. disput. anniuer. li. 1. c. 38.
a great learned Ciuilian of late times teaches us, that no such Rule can be
gathered out of any law, and therefore was (through mistaking) framed but by
the common sort of Interpretours only. The words of law, whence it is
pretended to be gathered, be these: l. Rescrip. si quis. ff. de munerib. and
honor.
If a man have none Accuser, let him not be debarred from Offices of credit
and honor. Now it is not hereby forbidden to condemn an offendour upon any
course of proceeding besides Accusation; but only that a man shall not for a
supposed offense, in the mean time be kept from bearing offices, until he
shall be iudicially called into question for it. This will more plainly appear
so to be, if we shall call to our remembrance, how many sundry sorts of
Denounciatours (before spoken of) were received and used by the Civil law in
the old Roman Common weal and Empire, who were not tied to any Inscription.
And besides these denunciatours, L. 1.. Quoties. ff. de offic. prat. vibi. l 4.
ff. ad L. Iuli. pecul. l. 3 ff. de offi. praes.. vlt. D. Collat. in Nou^l. l.
1. C. de custod. reorum. l. si quis in hoc. C. de epis.
the magistrates themselves also, are by that law required (even without any
denunciatours) to search out robbers and other disturbers of the Common peace,
and to punish them severely. And in truth it must needs turn to the great
prejudice of the Common weal, if no Magistrates at all should deal against
any offenders, until some Accusers, yea or denouncers might be found.

Furthermore, the Emperor Traiane writing to Plinius, would not have the
Christians Lib. 10. epist. Plinij.
(whom as it seems, he somewhat favored) purposely sought up and enquired for
by the Magistrates appointment; but to be punished only, when they were
voluntarily preferred up unto the^ by others. Which does argue plainly, that
the custom was then, to have other sorts of offenders sought for, and found
out by the Judges and Magistrates; yea though none other man preferred matter
against them. Yea, the words of the law in this behalf are clear. L. 4.. 1.
ff. ad L. Iul. Peculatus.
Mandatis cauetur de sacrilegijs; vt praesides sacrilegos, latrones, plagiarios
conquirant; and (prout quisque deliquerit) in eum animaduertant. Et sic
constitutionibus cauetur, vt sacrilegi extra ordinem, digna poena puniantur.
Nevertheless, to the intent that Judges may put away from themselves all
suspicion of calumniation and conspiracy against men; the said learned man
advises them, not to descend to Inquiry of office against any especial
person, but upon some public fame, or other good occasion of inducement to
lead them thereunto. But as for general Inquiry, the Judge in duty is
bound so often to make it, as the prescript of laws does bear; that thereby
supposed offenders being found out and discovered, may be brought into
question, and unto special trial.

Now therefore I will show, that there is allowed prosecution of special
crimes of Office; yet without any such Presentment precedent, as by this
opinion is implied. It is true by the Rule of law, that general Enquiry is
precedent as a preparatorie course to make way unto the Judges Office of
proceeding by special Inquiry against such, as thereby shall be detected,
denounced, and presented. In which respect it is said, that c. qualiter el. 2.
deaccusat.
as Inscription goes before Accusation; so does Presentment before Inquiry.

Now, upon detection made unto them, either upon general inquiry, or
otherwise (as it is testified by learned Salycetus in l. fin. C. de Quaest.
Iul. Clarus. lib. 5.. fin. q 11.
writers in the Civil law) such Judges as be discreet and sage, do customably
(in most provinces) secretly receive the witnesses depositions in writing (for
the information of the Court) before the supposed offender be cited either
really by attachment, or verbally by process served on him. This they do thus
aforehand, in two respects: both that the defendant be not forewarned to fly
or to hide himself; and that the witnesses (by subornation or other sinister
practice of the defendant) be not drawn away afterward to deny the truth,
and to depose the contrary.

If the defendant shall afterward make his appearance, and deny the matter
objected against him; then be the witnesses reexamined and sworn again in his
presence. But if he shall still wilfully absent himself; in that case the
first examination of the witnesses may serve for the Judge to proceed by, even
unto definitive sentence against him.

This first receiving of information from witnesses, is called in that law
Processus informatiuus; and the rest of the whole proceeding of the Judge after
the defendants appearance, or his wilful absence, is processus punitiuus. And
unto the taking of the process informatiue (though some have disputed
otherwise) it is commonly holden, Ferretus. Consil. 31. number. 11.
not to be necessary; that the supposed delinquent should be called. Which
course of taking informations does very much resemble the examination and
enquiry against suspected malefactors, which commonly is used by Justices of
the peace and other Magistrates here in England.

But albeit detection rising upon general inquiry, do (in this sort) often
and very usually make way to special: yet nevertheless both those laws do
mention many and sundry other received means besides, whereupon to ground a
Judges special inquiry: So that albeit Presentment be one; yet is it not the
only means, to open a way unto proceeding of Office by inquiry.

The first of such means is a Fame of an offense to be by some certain person
committed. For albeit no Fame be presented by officers specially appointed: yet
if there be such a fame in deed to be proved, when need shall require; Panor.
in c. Inquisitionis. de accusat.
then an Ordinary Judge may hereupon proceed to special inquiry against the
offender so by fame discoured.

This word Fame is derived from the Greek word (...), and both of them (...)
or (...), quasi a fando, of speaking; as a thing often spoken and by many. And
therefore is it by Tullie Cic. in Topicis.
defined to be testimonium multituainis; the testimony of a multitude.

The proper effect of fame, is thus declared by old Grammarians writing of the
differences of such words, as be of nere signification: Cornel. Fronto in
differentijs.
Opinio ostendit; Rumor tumultuatur; Fama indicat. The opinion or weening of
men gives an inckling; Rumor tosseth a matter to and fro; but fame gives an
evidence.

And albeit Plutarch Plutar. (...).
do report, that this was a common proverb, (...). In war and in hearsay
be many vain and untrue matters: yet the old heathen Poets in an admiration
of fame, do attribute a kind of divine quality, and eternity unto it:

Hesiodus.
(...)
(...).
Fame being a thing which many people brute abroad, does never altogether fall
to nothing: for it is of a certain divine nature. And therefore by law Arg. l.
sin. ff. de haered. instituendis.
he that is moved with fame, or by the assertions of men worthy to be
credited, is said not to be moved unjustly, or without cause.

Fames be of two several degrees. The one rising c. Sanctum. did. 4. de con
secrat.
upon suspicion only, and from an uncertain author: and this is not of force
to make such proof, that by reason thereof c. Cum in iuuentute de purg. Can.
l. Decuriones. C. de poenis.
the fault should be straight way believed, albeit such fame be coadiuuant,
unto other proofs. And it works a presumption only, against the party, c.
Tua nos. de cohab. cler. and mulier.
serving to put him unto his purgation.

The second degree in Fame, is when it sprung up and had his original from a
certain and likely presumption, and from probable matter. In which case it may
of it self make proof, either in a fact done long agone; (as to prove by
Fame, that a man is dead) or of a fact that D D. in l. Siquidem. C. de adulter.
cannot easily (by direct proofs) be convinced, but presumptiuely; as the very
fact of adultery. For a fame with probable presumption growing upon some
known act coming near unto such a crime, does make proof of the very fact;
so that the end of the prosecution be not of very L. vbi adhuc. C. de iure
dot.
great prejudice: as for example; It may serve for proof of adultery, to the
effect of debarring a woman's cohabitation or maintenance from her husband; but
not D D. in c. Veniens de testio.
that she may be punished by death, where that penalty is the Ordinary
punishment of that crime.

A fame may then be said to be blown abroad, not only c. inquisitionis. in
fin de Accus.
when the greater part of the whole neighborhood or town do speak thereof,
as occasion is offered: but also (in case the fact be of that nature, that
Panor. in c. cu^ oporteat. de Accus.
it is restrained but unto certain persons, which by likelihood may know of
it) then is it a sufficient fame, though none besides the greater part of such
certain persons, do speak thereof. If it be bruited among some few only,
and not by the greater part of such; then is it c. super co. de co qui cognouit
consang. vxor.
properly to be termed a Rumor and no Fame.

Now whenever a fame touching some offense, runs against any person: the
Judge may thereupon ground his Inquiry. For it is the common opinion of
writers Card. A'exan. in c. de Accus. col. 14.
in those laws, that Fame does succeed in place of an Accusation. One reason
hereof is, because the very people among whom fame flies, do seem (in some
sort) thereby to prefer matter up, against a person so infamed: which ought
to be as sufficient to excite the Judge (knowing of it) to do his Office, as
if one certain person or more did present it unto him. For by fame alone Alph.
Villag. li. 3. c. 6 conc. 3.
an offense is said to be made known unto a Judge, though not thereby to
convince the party; yet to the intent of Inquiry, and of descending to a
trial by that occasion. And (as was before alleged) Petr. de Palud. in 4. Sent.
19. q 4.
a man upon fame alone, may be said publikly detected of a crime.

Some Divines (for the times they lived in) most excellently learned, could say
Thom. 2. 2.
that a public fame concerning any crime does stand in stead of an accusation;
and thereunto do apply that of Genesis, where the blood of Abell is said to
cry out against Cain, when he had secretly murdered him. What have thou done?
said God to Cain. Genesis 4. V. 10.
The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the earth: as if that cry
of the blood did occasion the Lord to enter unto the examination of the
impeached person. Therefore does God (though he knew all things) say unto Cain;
What have thou done?

If Fame be very brimme and rife, Panor. c. Tertio loco. de probat. etc. Tua
nos. de appellat.
then is it none in justice for a Judge (though he be but an Ordinary, from
whom an Appellation does lie) to omit to make any proof Iudicially in acts of
such fame, before he proceed. Albeit if an Appellation be brought, he must
then be able to prove, that there was in truth such a fame before he
proceeded. But if the fame be not so strong and vehement; then it is expedient
for such a Judge to have the fame (being not presented) to be in Acts, first
Iudiciallie proved, by deposition of two witnesses at least. For Clarus vbi
supra. q. 6.
so many will suffice to prove a fame (though they be none Officers thereunto
assigned:) But two alone (where a greater number is) cannot make a fame.

But when the prince or such magistrates (from whom none Appellation lies) do
proceed upon a fame not presented; whether it be very brimme and vehement, or
otherwise: yet in them it is not requisite to be proved in Acts Panor. in c.
cum oporteat, de accusationib.
that there was such fame precedent; because it is sufficient to be so, upon
information made known unto them extraiudiciallie. For the law presumes more
strongly for their integrities, and freedom from Calumniation, Conspiracy,
and wilful unjust vexation; then of every inferior ordinary Judges.

That Rule which is set down by Interpreters, that A fame ought to appear or
be proved, before a Judge do proceed, when as there is no Presentment; is
subject to diverse exceptions in law. For first, it has Felyn. in c. Qualiter.
el. 2. de accusat. Clar. q. 6.
no place in the crime of heresy, wherein (by the common opinion of writers) a
vehement suspicion (grounded upon any credible relation) does suffice to begin
a special inquiry. Secondly, that Rule fails Bald. in l. Nullus. nu. 1. C.
ad l. Iul. May. Innoc. in c. cu^ oporteat. nu. 5. de accusat.
when special enquiries be framed either by commandment, or by knowledge of
the prince himself; so such commission be obtained motuproprio, and for the
princes own service; but not at the instance of any party particularly
interessed therein: and such is the Commission ecclesiastical. Thirdly, it
holds not Abbas. in c. 1. de offi. Ordinar.
when such inquiry is made, not to the end of punishing corporally; but of
reforming the party spiritually for his souls health. Fourthly, fame is not
required, Innoc. in c. Qualiter. el. 2. de accusat.
where the inquiry is neither made for any punishment corporal or spiritual;
but only to the end to find out, whether he that is presented or elected to an
ecclesiastical function, be worthy thereof or not. For in such case, to the
end of keeping back an unworthy person; the superior without either fame or
other inducement, ought to enquire of mere office, very carefully touching
him. But it is otherwise, when inquiry touching a fault is instituted against
one that is already admitted into that function, whether the proceeding be then
for his remoouing, or for other punishment.

On the contrary side it is received by the law Canon, that albeit an evil
fame yea Panor. in c. qualiter. el. 2. de accus.
though it be not scandalous and offensive, be sufficient to ground inquiry
against a private or common person: yet every fame (except it be also
scandalous) will not suffice so to proceed against a Prelate.

The whole course by law prescribed touching infamy or evil fame going before
a special inquiry, in other Clarus. vbi supra. q. 6. Alphons. Villag. passim.
realms abroad (even where the Civil and Canon laws have place) is long
since quite grown in disuse and left unpracticed in both courts, not only in
those excepted, but in all other cases also besides, as by sundry writers of
those countries is testified.

Nevertheless in the courts Civil and Ecclesiastical within this Realm,
this kind of proceeding upon an Infamy according to the very prescript form
of those laws, is still required to be practiced and observed. So that by this
discourse (how fame does open a way to inquiry) may appear, the untrue and
injurious Calumniations of those men, who being led by ignorance, or some worse
matter; do buzze abroad, that Ordinaries may make a fame, when and how often
themselves list. But if they could; to what purpose should they be so unjustly
minded, having (by law) so many sundry other sufficient inducements besides
fame, to ground their special enquiries upon; as partly have been, and partly
yet remain to be here opened?

For another and a second means besides presentme^t, which does also open way
unto special inquiry, is Clamosa insinuatio, being not very unlike to a fame,
yet not the same. And it is, c. qualiter. el. 2. de accus. etc. licet Heli. de
Simonia.
when as a Judge stirred up by sundry frequent reports of credible persons (yet
without their depositions) does descend to special inquiry, even without any
preferrer or prosecuter. And this is to be done by him, when as without
scandale and offense, it cannot be dissembled or winked at. For in this case,
not only the judge may, but also he ought to proceed unto inquiry of his mere
office, against him which is so detected and scandalous.

A third means of grounding special inquiry besides presentment, is
Complaint, made either by private Judicial, or by Canonical denunciation. For
if such be made (yea though no fame does appear) the Judge is bound Bald. in
l. Mancipia. C. de seru. fugit. nu. 1.
to frame inquiry of Office against the party denounced; or else he is to be
punished, no less then he is to be, when public denunciation or presentment
is made by officers, Bald. in l. inuenimus. C. de probat.
if he shall not proceed thereupon. But the private Judicial and general
Canonical denunciation do herein differ from public denunciation; because
after public presentment Pract. Conradi. fol. 236. nu. 21.
be made to the Judge, the Prosecuters are not bound to deal any further
therein, but do leave it to the Judges mere Office: whereas in the other two
denunciations last mentioned, the Denouncer does prosecute and solicit the
office.

Clarus. ibid. q. 7.
This denunciation comes in place of a public fame, and thereby opens a
way to inquiry. And by Custom Alberic. in l. ea quidem. c. de accus. nu. 9.
now generally received in other countries, any man is admitted in this sort to
denounce an offender, no less then those which be officers specially deputed.

The manner of preferring denunciations in the parts on the other side, is in
effect thus: He that denounces, Angel. de Maleficijs.
does make known to the Judge in Acts, that at such a time by such a man,
this or that misdemeanor was committed; and that N. and A. etc. are more
sufficientlic informed in the particulars of that matter. In preferring up
Presentiments it is to be observed, Clarus. ibid. q. 12.
that if the crime be done by committing any thing; the place must be
expressed: but if by omitting; then the setting down of the place, is not
required of necessity.

Here perhaps some will object against this, and all other means of opening a
way to special inquiry, besides fame; sundry speeches of writers in both
these laws, whereby they do seem to require, that a fame necessarily go
before every such inquiry. But we are taught Bossius. tit. de Inquisit. nu. 27.
how they ought to be understood; and that in all such places, they do but
speak thereof, as of one especial and principal means, not excluding all
other: and therefore must be thus taken: that by law a fame is but the^
necessarily required; when there is neither denunciatio^, complaint, nor any
other means besides, yt be allowed to be sufficient, whereupon to ground a
special inquiry.

A fourth means besides Presentment, whereupon a special inquiry may be entered
unto, are Indicia, so called ab Indicando, which (according as ye english word
with us is commonly used) I do interpret Evidences, or certain marks and
tokens. For when other inducements thereunto do want, these may serve that
turn. In which respect it is said Bartol. in l. congruit. ff. de offic. praes.
that Indicium sufficiens aequiparatur Fam^: a sufficient evidence or sign is
aequiualent unto a Fame. Like as on the contrary side, when such evidence
cannot be had, a Fame may serve in stead thereof. Therefore in foreign parts
where the course of having a Fame to go before Inquiry special, is by custom
disused: yet nevertheless, if no sufficient Indicia or euide^ces for the
matter do appear; Alphon. Villag. lib. 3. c. 15. conclu. 8.
even in those countries it is still required, that at least a Fame do run
thereof. So that these and all the rest of the means, that open a way unto
special enquiries, are like the Physicians (...); i. things that may serve to
be used, one of them instead of another that wants.

These Indicia be in law taken two several ways: either in a more large
acception: as when they signify such presumptions which be expreslie set down
in law, to make a full proof, Arg. l. Indicia. 19. C. de rei vindicatione.
so that no proofs may be made to the contrary, commonly called praesumptio
iuris, and de iure: or else they be of a more strict and proper acception;
importing some sign of a crime or other matter, l. Solent. ff. de Praescript.
which may serve to the finding out of Truth. And this sort of Indicia are to
be considered in three Clarus.. fin. q. 20.
several degrees.

The first are called Leuia Indicia, light inducements or suspicions: The
second be Probabilia Indicia, more strong and probable: and the third are
Indicia violenta, vel indubitata; most pregnant and forcible evidences.

The first degree of them does produce these two effects; First, that the
party detected may thereupon be arrested and attached (by courts having this
authority) lest he fly: and secondly, that the Judge may enter into the
taking of further particular informations thereof In processu informatiuo: but
they are not sufficient straight way to frame thereupon processum punitiuu^.
For to take further informations Salycetus in l. ta quidem. c. de Accusat.
only touching a crime, any probable suspicion suffiseth; by which the Judge
may (with reason) be induced to believe, that the crime was committed by such
an one. And it is no marvel yt such reasonable suspicio^ may serve a Judge so
far, as to take further informatio^s; seeing it excuses an Accuser from
manifest calumniatio^ by Tullies judgment, as he testifies in these words. It
may happen (says he) Cic. pro Rosc. Ametino.
that a man accused is innocent. But notwithstanding he be clear from the
fault; yet is he not without suspicion. In which case (albeit it be lamentable
in respect of the accused:) yet the Accuser (in some sort) may for such
suspicions sake be pardoned. For seeing he has something to say criminously
grounded upon good suspicion; therefore may be not be taken wilfully to misuse,
and manifestly to calumniate or conspire against him, which is guiltless.

The second sort of Evidences (properly and most usually termed by the general
name of Indicia) though they be of less force, then to make probationem
semiplenam: yet arethey Bartol in l. fin. ff. de Quaestion.
sufficient to ground a special Inquiry upon. Inquisitio potest fieri, quando
extant indicia propinqua ipsi male ficio; quia tunc surrogantur loco infamiae.
And of this sort are those laws to be understood, ^nor. c. 3. loco dt ^oat.
which affirm Indicia non sufficere ad conuincendum: such inducements are not
strong enough to condemn a man. Yet Clarus. li. 5. fin. qu. 63. and ibi
remissiue.
if more of them together do happen to fall out in one matter, each of them
being severally (in his own nature) perfect: then may they all be joined
together, and may suffice to the condemning of him, unto a mulcte pecuniarie or
fine; but not to condemn him unto any corporal punishment; saving when the
Sovereign Prince, or his chief Counsel of State, do thereupon proceed. And
yet even in this Case, such corporal punishment ought to be extraordinary
only: that is, some less and milder punishment, then the prescript of law
provides for an offendour in such a crime; if he had bin convicted either upon
his own confession, or by witnesses; and not alone per Indicia; that is, but
by presumtiue proofs, or probable Evidences. For it is to be understood, that
in most foreign parts, the manner of al punishments, are arbitrarie to the
Judge, according to circumstances.

The third degree of them are such, and so strong evidences, as that not only
special Inquiry for punishment may upon any of them be framed: but the party
may Practica. Car. fol. 72.
thereupon alone, be also condemned; as is commonly holden by writers in law;
especially in secret treaties, hidden crimes, and al such, as (in their own
nature) be of difficult proof.

That such indicia indubitata or violent presumptions may serve for full proof
in matters of very difficult proof, we have an example in Scripture of
Solomon; 1. Reg. c. 3. V 27. c. afferte de praesumpt.
whose wisdom is therefore highly commended, because he grounded his
judgment (whether of the two women that contended, was the true mother) upon
the motherly pity which he found in her, that would rather forgo her natural
child, then to see it dismembered and parted in twain.

Now because of this diversity among these Indicia, if any shall require a
true note of distinction, how these three sorts may be exactly discerned one
from another: it is to be answered, first generally out of the words of law:
Quae l. 3. 1. ff. de Testib.
argumenta, ad quem modum probandae cuique rei sufficiant, nullo certo modo
satis definiri potest. And according to this is the Rule; Omnes probationes
sunt arbitrariae. But particularly in this point, ye must know, that Angel. de
malef. ver. fama publi. nu. 9. Pract. Casoni. fol. 14. nu. 2.
the whole matter Indiciorum, of Evidences, must be left to the arbitrarie
judgment of an upright and sincere man^, such as a Judge is presumed to be:
That he according to the quality of the person, crime, and manner of the
suspicions and presumptions may judge, in which of these three degrees every
Indicium, or several Evidence is to be taken.

A fifth means (besides Presentment) of opening way to special Inquiry, in
processu punitiuo, is that detection which the Grecians call (...). Joan. 8.
So was the woman taken in the very act of adultery in the Gospel. The
Latins term it thus; Deprehensio in flagranti crimine. And upon the borders
of England, taking one with the bloody hand; or (as it is more commonly
expressed) taking an offendour with the manner. For of this it is testified,
Clar. ibid. qu. 8.
that it opens way to special Inquiry. And the like is to be said, when a
Judge himself (sitting publicly) sees some crime committed. Whereof writers
in law do assign for reason (in this behalf) the Judges just grief, upon
the indignity of the fact, and upon the audaceous boldness of the offendour.

A sixth means producing special Inquiry, is Notorietas facti, vel Euidentia
sceleris. Cynus in l. ea quidem. C. de accusat.
When the matter is so notorious, that by no color or wrangling it can be
concealed, shadowed, or excused; as when the whole people be able to testify
it. For then Aug. super Genesis c. euidentia. de accusat.
(as says Saint Augustine) which saying is also repeated in the Canon law.
Euidentia patrati sceleris non indiget clamore accusatoris. What should a
Judge require an Accusers prosecution, where the crime is notoriously and
plainly committed? So it is testified else where, ^. Tua nos. de cohab. cler.
and mulier.
Si crimen ita publicum est, vt merito debeat appellari Notorium; in eo casu
nec testis, nec accusator est necessarius; cum huiusmodi crimen nulla possit
tergiuersatione celari. But this word Notorium, has three acceptions in Law.
The first is Notorietas vel euidentia facti, whereof we here speak. The second
is c. Tua. ibid.
publicum vel Notorium per famam. The third is that l. Diuus. Nu^tiatoris. ff.
ad S. C. Turpillian.
Notorium, or (as others read it in the feminine gender) Notoria, which is a
relation or a presentment unto a Judge of some crime. And so it is taken in
those words of the Civil law, l. ea quidem. C. de accusat.
Nuntiatores notorijs suis assistere iubentur. Presenters, viz. voluntary
relatours and not Officers thereunto specially appointed (except their
Calumniation be manifest and apparent, as the best writers do interpret) must
make good and justify that which they present. And again, Vide August. epist.
150. and 160. and Trebel. Pol. in Claudio.
Verum si falsis necne Notorijs insimulatus sit, perpenso iudicio dispici debet.

Now the second of these two Notoria does open sufficient way to special
Inquiry: but the first Clarus. ibid. qu. 9.
serves not only hereunto, but even to the conviction also of such Notorious
offender. Yet before the party may upon such Notorietie be pronounced
convicted; it is required, Pract. Conrad. fol. 240.
that this Notorietie be made to appear iudicially in Acts unto the Judge
(unto the speeding whereof, the Defendant also must be called) and not only by
extraiudiciall information brought unto him. Upon which Judicial Ferret. Cons.
31. nu. 5. and 35.
proceeding had, the Judge, (before he proceed to sentence of condemnation)
must by interlocutorie decree pronounce such a fact to be notorious.

A seventh means serving to produce first Inquiry in Processu informatiuo,
and after in punitiuo is that, which is called incidens cognitio: when upon
examination of one offendour, it falls out another of his accomplices to be
discovered. For thereupon (as it is the common opinion Lud. Romans in l. and si
certus. ff. ad S. C. Syllan.
of writers) the Judge may ground his further inquiry and taking of
Informations; albeit the supposed offendour Bart. in l. 2. ff. de adult. si.
publico.
be not at first cited thereunto. But this appeachment made by him that is
partaker in a crime; is not to be holden so good, as the saying of a witness,
Clarus. ibid. q. 21.
but as of a bare Relatour: which yet may give just occasion unto the Judge to
enter into further Inquiry thereof, by taking Informations, as the saying of
any other mean or bad person also might, in like case.

An eight means to open way, and to occasion the Judges special inquiry in
processu punitiuo is, Enormitas criminis; the great heinousness of some crime.
For it is holden, Arg. l. Si quis in hoc. C. de Epis. and Clericis. Bart. in l.
2. ff. ad l. Iul. de adulterijs.
that even in strict terms of law, against such a grievous crime, a Judge has
power so to proceed, yea without any fame or Indicia, viz. Evidences
iudicially proved and set down in the Acts of the Court before.

Ninthly, the Judge may lawfully descend to special inquiry of office, if he
shall perceive the Accuser Alph. Villag li. 3. c. 17. concl. 18.
to collude with the accused or to go about to transact, and by secret
composition, to shut up the matter betwixt them. So if he which is supposed to
be robbed, Bart. in l. inter omnes. recte. ff. de furtis.
will collude with the thief, and say that he was not robbed: yet if there be
likelihood to the contrary, he is not to be believed; but the Judge thereupon
is to make special inquiry; Quia interest reipub. puniri furtum.

A tenth means besides presentment, or any of the former, which may justify a
Judges proceeding in this behalf, is when it is grown so far (without gl.
in c. 1. de elect. c. 2. de accus. in 6.
the defendants alleging) that none infamy, or any of the former means lies
against him, as that it is come to some act usually spedde post litis
contestationem, that is, after issue joined. For then (by the common Aretin. in
c. Qualiter. cl. (...). de accusat. Foller. Pract. cri. fol. 102.
opinion of writers in law) it shall be too late for the defendant to object the
want of fame, and of other Inducements, etc. So that the proceeding (for want
of the defendants reclaiming in time) shall stand sound, and shall not be
avoided hereupon, for nullitie or any error.

The last occasion of a Judges justifiable proceeding by inquiry against an
offendour without any of the former inducements hitherto spoken of, is: when
his proceeding Alph. li. 10. concl. 5.
tends to a fatherly and spiritual correction for the souls health only:
and not unto any public, corporal, and exemplarie punishment. So that upon
all, which has bin spoken in this behalf, we may conclude in the very
contradictorie of this opinion: That a Court ecclesiastical (by the laws
both Civil and Canon) may many ways proceed against an offendour, without
either Accusation or Presentment.

CHAP. VIII. That to proceed sometimes against an offense, otherwise then upon
an Accusation or Prese^tment, or then upon an Appeal or Enditement (which two
at the common law have respective correspondence unto the two former) is no
diverse, much less any Contrary or repugnant course to the laws, statutes,
and customs of this Realm. This is proved by common law, statutes, and
practice in proceeding informatiue and punitiue: with answers to certain
objections made to the contrary.
SEeing then that not only by Canon, but also by the Civil laws (within the
compass of which two learnings Accusation and Presentment do properly fall)
there be so many other means besides either of them, to open way to a Judges
proceeding against a crime: let it now be considered, why an ecclesiastical
court may not be allowed an ecclesiastical course of proceeding; or whether by
the statutes or common law of this Realm, an ecclesiastical Judge be any way
restrained and prohibited to proceed upon any other grounds besides the one
of them two. For if the Common or statute Law prohibit this; then are such
Canons, etc: thereby in truth reuersed and void, as contrary and repugnant to
the Laws and statutes of this land. But if no such contrariety, repugnancie,
or prohibition shall be found: then will there be no cause, why the proceedings
of Judges ecclesiastical against Crimes, may not (in this behalf) still
continue, as in all times bypast they have done.

Notwithstanding there be great diversities in proceedings ecclesiastical from
proceedings at the Common law; as in the frame of the Libel; in the answering
of it; in the joining of issue; in the production, examination, and publication
of witnesses; in exceptions or chalenges against them, and Corroboratories of
them; in the giving of sentence or Judgment in writing, and in very many other
points besides, too long here to be rehearsed: yet such diversity alone
notwithstanding (so that the Common law, or statute, do neither contrary nor
contradict them) those proceedings shall be nevertheless justifiable. For by
statute 25. H. 8. c. 19.
All such Canons, co^stitutions, ordinances, and synodals prouincial, being
already made, which be not co^trariant nor repugnant to the laws, statutes,
and customs of this Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the Kings
prerogative royal; shall now still be used and executed, as they were before
the making of that Act, etc. So that no Canons establishing proceedings only
diverse, but Canons contrariant or repugnant to the Laws, etc. be thereby
repealed. Now we are taught by the rules of Reason, that two propositions
reteyning otherwise the same terms, the one being universally negative, and
the other universally affirmative, be contrariant one to another. And though in
materia contingenti both such may be false; yet they can never be both of them
true. Therefore if the one be true, the other of them must needs be false. For
example of contraries; the Common Law holds that All aduowsons or right of
patronage may lawfully, and without Simonie, be bought and sold. This
proposition then being true; the contrary proposition hereunto, which is
established by the Canon Law: viz. that no right of patronage may lawfully or
without Simonie be bought and sold, must needs be false; and therefore by the
Common Law, does stand in this Realm repealed, in respect of this
contrariety.

The word Repugnant in the said statute (we see) is put after Contrariant, as
of a greater force and efficacy: and therefore is to be understood, according
to the common course of our speech, (albeit the Logicians do not so use that
word) for the contradictorie opposition; consisting of an universal
affirmative and a particular negative; or of an universal negative and
particular affirmative. And these be so opposite ex diametro, and do always
so directly thwart one another; that in every subject matter whatsoever, the
one of them being true, the other must needs be false: and e conuerso. As for
example; The Canon Law holds, that All fighting in Duello, that is to say,
trial by battle of one single man against another, is unlawful. But the
Common Law (contradicting this) does hold, that some trial by battle (as
in a writ of right, and in an Appeal of murder or robbery) is not unlawful.
And again, the Canon Law holds, that none aduowsons or right of Patronages
may be in gross. But the Common Law is in the flat Contradictorie hereof,
that some aduowsons be in gross, as well as others be appurtenant to a
manoure. And therefore in neither of those Cases such Canons have place in this
Realm, in respect of this Contradiction and Repugnancie.

If then it may be showed, that some proceedings of the Common Law against
crimes, be also entered into without either Accusation or Presentment going
before: then where the course of both Courts be not so much as diverse; there
cannot possibly be found either Contrariety or Repugnancie: unless we should
say, that the Laws and statutes do condemn that, as unequal and unjust in
Courts Ecclesiastical, which they establish and practice in Temporal Courts
for good and just.

As then an Appeal brought at the Common Law, does most nearly resemble an
Accusation in the Civil and Common Laws: so has enditement a correspondence,
and does answer unto their Presentiments, being also in statute, often called
by the name of Presentment. These two kinds of prosecution of Crimes, at the
Common Law be mentioned in a statute of K. Henry the fifth, in these words: 7.
H. 5. ca. vnico.
Diverse men of malice and enmity, and for gain, and vengeance, have often
caused to be indicted and appealed diverse of our true liege people, of treasons
or felonies in the County of Lancaster; pretending by those Appeals and
Inditements, etc. And though these two be the courses of bringing a man in
processu punitiuo into trial of matters Capital: yet for infinite other
offenses and crimes not Capital, the Common Law has use of Bills in the
Star Chamber, and of Informations in the other Courts, at West-minster.
Neither of which can be truly called either Presentment or Accusation. Not
Presentment, because no such peculiar charge of preferring upon their oaths is
laid upon them, as is upon Jurors at Enquests, that find Inditements; or as
is upon Churchwardens and Sidemen, who make Presentiments. Not Accusation,
because (as is aforeshewed) such Bills and Informations, be both of them put up,
ex officio promoto. Again, they cannot be called Accusations, because those,
who put them up, are not parties; but the King is the party. For it is thus
said in Statute, 3. H. 5. ca. vnico.
He that will sue for the King to attaint them, that pay or receive such coin
(as is there forbidden) etc; shall have the one half of the forfaiture. And
after in the same Kings days: 8. H. 5. ca. 3.
He that will sue for the King in this behalf, shall have the third part of
that pecuniarie pain. So that whosoever does prefer or follow them; yet the
suite is the Kings, and he the party; whose also the Court is, where the suite
is prosecuted.

It may appear, that at the Common Law, other means besides Appeal and
Enditements (which respectively do resemble Accusation and Presentment) be
received to ground a Judges Inquiry upon, in Processu informatiuo; whereupon
also follows oftentimes processus punitiuus; that is, the trial of the
Offender. As first, by the common custom and practice of the land. For do not
some several Justices of the Peace, upon their own suspicion conceived, or
upon secret relation of others (whom they credit) send for men by warrant to
be apprehended and brought before them? do they not take informations sometimes
against supposed offenders, upon depositions of witnesses, before the party be
sent for? Do they not also without any such witnesses, oftentimes examine the
party himself, and (according to their discretion) bind him to the Peace, or
to his good behavior: or perhaps send him to the common jail to be
imprisoned? Do they not receive and sometimes prefer and procure enditements
to be found (as of common Barattarie and such like Crimes) upon their own
only suspicions, or by information of some one other (perhaps an enemy) and
upon other as mean presumptions? Are not sundry persons traveling through
some town, or found in some privy search lodging there (with good reason)
oftentimes brought to a strait examination and inquiry of matters Criminal;
upon the only view of their persons and deportment, without all further
intelligence or cause of suspicion? Yet be all these without Appeal or
enditement; and many times upon as light and perhaps lighter suspicions, and
informations less likely and credible, then any be admitted (in like case) by
the Commissioners ecclesiastical; and much less by Ordinaries, who must (in
case an Appellation be brought) in a more strict course of Law, be able
soundly to justify the inducements, that they had to lead them into those
criminal questions and enquiries. Yet upon these grounds alone, not only the
apprehension of the parties, their examinations personal, and the taking of
informations from others against them, is founded: but also (as often falls
out) other penalties and disgraces be inflicted; as binding to the Peace, or to
their good behavior, making them to answer enditements of Barattarie, or such
like; imprisonment of them by a good space, sometimes till the next Sessions or
general Assizes; and sometime extending discretion even to condemn men to be
whipped publickely upon the single Denunciation of a woman being infamous, and
party in the pretended Crime: one who is as easy to be suborned to speak and
charge a man falsely, as to deal lewdly; and whose testimony (though it were
not singular) is of no weight and credit. Much less therefore (being but one)
ought she to be taken for sufficient to condemn any, flat contrary to Gods
own Moral Law.

I have also known Articles put up against a good Minister and Preacher, to
have been rejected in respect of their insufficiency, by the Commission
ecclesiastical. Yet the same Articles (being preferred even by his adversary,
but assisted with some of countenance in the Country) have afterward served
to have an Enditement found against him, to be a Common Barattour: yea by those
and before those, who perhaps might all of them be apposed, to tell directly,
what Barattaria truly signifies and imports; and whence it is derived.

Likewise do we not see, that upon the like grounds to some of these, a man
may be touched with great disgrace and discredit; and that not unjustly? As
when some great and potent man in a Country (against whom few or none there
abouts dare openly deal) is put out of all Commissions and public charge in
his Country, upon private (yet credible) information given to some of the
great officers of the Kingdom, touching his oppression, or other ill demeanor
of himself?

Do not the like grounds of Suspicion, of private Complaint and Information
exhibited unto them, justly and sufficiently (often times) move and warrant
the Lords of the Counsel, to call some great malefactors into question, and
to deteine them, till they be acquitted or condemned by due trial?

Besides this usual practice, do not the very Laws of the land allow of
these and like inducements to take informations, and to enquire into matters
Criminal? 10. H. 7. fol. 17.
For in an Action of false imprisonment, it is a good plea for the defendant to
show the felony, and to plead that he took the plaintiff for suspicion of
such felony: per Frowick. And why then, may not three or more of the Queens
Commissioners ecclesiastical, be in reason as deeply trusted upon their
suspicions (though in truth they use it not in this sort) as some one single
Justice of Peace may be, upon his own only suspicion? And is it not (...)
^ikely, that they will have as good ground of their suspicion, as he has of
his; and as much care of Justice and of their own credit?

In an old 3. Ed. x. ca. 12.
statute we find, that Notoriousnes of a fact, an evil name of a man, yea
and light suspicion also of Felony, may any of them serve, to imprison a man.
Albeit in the two first cases such a person is by that statute appointed to
endure hard and strong imprisonment: yet ask whether in the original Rolls,
this statute do speak of imprisoning; or else of strong and hard poenance,
which such be appointed to suffer, that refuse to be justified by the Common
law of the land.

And as these and like inducements do serve to ground the process
informatiue: so do they no less, even in Process punitiue, when the inquiry
and examination is to punish the offender. For if any the Judges at Westminster
or of Assizes, have just occasion of suspicion ministered of a misdemeanour to
be committed by some belonging to that Court, touching matters of their Courts
and present jurisdiction: may they not, and is it not usual with them, even
hereupon only, without any enditement or other prosecution of party, to call
such supposed offender unto examination before them, to the effect of punishing
him, according as the quality of the fact shall fall out to require?

In the time of King Henry the seventh it was provided by 19. H. 7. ca. 14.
Parliament, for suppressing of Retainours; That two Justices (whereof one to
be of the Quorum) might call all such persons, as they shall think to be
suspected of any Retaynour, and them to examine of all such Retaynours by their
discretion: and their certificate into the K. Benche against all of them so
examined, and by that examination found in default, to be against them as a
conviction: and their certificate of any persons by that examination accused to
be Retainours, to be of like effect and strength against them, as an Enditement.

By the same it was also Ibidem.
enacted, that such Justices (as before) or the Lord Chaunceller, or Lord
Keeper, or three of the Kings Counsel attending him, should have full power
and auctoritte without any suit or information made or put before them or any
of them, to send for by Writ, Sub poena, Privy seal, Warrant, or otherwise
by their discretion, for any person so offending; and the same person to
examine by oath or otherwise by their discretion: and to adiudge such as should
be found guilty by verdict, confession, examination, proves, or otherwise,
in the forfeitures and pains, as though they were condemned after the course
of the Common law, etc. So that it was thought then by the whole state of the
Realm, none unjust course (no not in a Temporal Court) for Magistrates to
call some offenders into question criminal, whom they did but think to be
suspected, and to condemn them without either Enditement, Appeal, suite, or
Information made.

By a Statute made in her Majesty's time it is enacted; 1. Eliz. ca. 1.
That if any man be in prison for supposed speaking in behalf of foreign
Supremacy, and happen not to be endited within one half year of the offense
committed; that then he shall be set at liberty. Whereby appears, that a man
may happen to be brought into Question criminal, and to be in prison also
(which is an Attachment, and some punishment) without any Enditement or Appeal
precedent.

The statute for 1. Eliz. ca. 2.
Uniformitie in Common prayer, mentions three means of Conviction by the
course of the Temporal law: viz. Verdict of twelve men; the parties
confession; and the notorious evidence of the fact. If then the Notorious
evidence of the fact without Appeal or Enditement, Verdict, or Confession, may
(at that Law) serve for a Conviction: may it not with as good justice, and
equity serve for the same purpose, at the Ecclesiastical law, without either
Accusation or Presentment?

If here it be said by any, that though such practice of Temporal Judges be
lawful, and the Laws and Statutes be just in this behalf; yet perhaps the
Common Law will not give so large a scope unto Judges ecclesiastical: against
such doubters I will object those words of Magna Charta. cap. 1.
Magna Charta, where it is not a new granted, but Confirmed only, That for
evermore the Church of England shall be free, and shall have all her whole rights
and liberties inviolable. And this is a confirmation of their rights and
liberties, before any grant was made to the rest of the Realm besides: being
yielded at such time, when as (through general ignorance) it was untruly
holden, that the state Ecclesiastical (signified there by those words, The
Church of England) had not their Jurisdictions from the Prince, but from God
alone, derived down to them by the means of the Pope: and therefore that
their Courts and Laws, (whereby they proceeded) were not in any respect to be
accounted for Courts holden by the Kings authority, or their Laws the Kings
Laws. Whereupon arose that untrue and prejudicial phrase of seuerance of a
Court Christian, from the Kings Court. So that if they were confirmed to them,
when their Jurisdictions (in fact) were not holden of the King, as now they
be, and ought to be by Gods Law: is there not then more just cause so to
continue them at this time; seeing they be not so much as a diverse course from
the Customs and Laws of the Realm in Courts Temporal?

But that this course of proceeding in causes Criminal, sometimes without
either Accusation or Presentment, is in truth a right and liberty of the
Church of England, may appear by that, which to this point has been before
delivered; and by the continual practice also of those Courts, in all ages: as
the Acts thereof from time to time do make very manifest.

Yet, this is more particularly and nearly proved, in the very point that we
handle, by a 1. Eliz. ca. 2.
statute made in her Majesty's reign; where it is provided, that Ordinaries
not only at any other time and place, then at their visitations and Synods may
take accusations and informations (a word of far more large signification,
then Presentment:) but may also enquire elsewhere within their jurisdiction.
Which Inquiry is before showed to be always ex Officio; and (being absolutely
spoken without further addition, and in some sort severed from all ki^de of
Informations) must necessarily be without Presentment.

But how far and in what manner may they so do? Truly in like form as
heretofore has been used in like cases, by the Queens ecclesiastical Laws.
If then to proceed Criminally without either of them two, be warranted and
practiced by the Queens ecclesiastical Laws (as before is showed) assuredly
this Statute does auouche and justify them.

To this disputation may be referred that objection, which the Notegatherer
makes touching a 11. H. 7. ca. 3.
statute of K. Henry the seventh; Note gatherer.
whereupon (he says) Empson and Dudley proceeded, that was 1. H. 8. ca. 6.
repealed by another in the time of K. Henry the eight; although he puts it
under his title of the laws of England, as by them seeking to impugn al
proceeding ex officio; albeit under presentment (which this opinion allows)
proceeding ex Officio, is necessarily implied, and presupposed.

For answer whereof; it is true, that the said statute was so repealed: but
whether it were the same and the only statute, whereupon Empson and Dudley
proceeded, is left there uncertain and untouched. Howsoever it was in this
behalf, seeing it authorized all Justices of Assise and of the Peace, to
proceed thereby; it is most probable, that many besides them two, did also
deal by virtue thereof.

The effect of the said statute was, that upon information to be made for the
King before Justices upon any penal statute not extending to life or member,
they might (without enditement) hear and determine all offenses against the
form of any statute in force.

The reason of making the said statute, is signified by the preamble to have
bin; for that, although at Sessions charge was given to enquire of many
offenses against statutes; and Enquests to that effect were straightly sworn
and charged to enquire and to prefer the truth: yet they were let to be
found by imbracerie, maintenance, corruption, and favor; by occasion whereof
the statutes could not be put in due execution. And again in the same place:
The twelve men, for the causes before rehearsed, will not find, nor present the
truth. Howesoeuer this were at that time, it may be feared, that it is in
some place too true still, even until this day. So that if this were then a
sufficient cause to make such a statute; the cause still continuing, if not
increasing; that statute will seem to have been (in that regard) less
unreasonable.

In the statute of Repeal thereof, for the reason of abrogating 1. Hen. 8. c.
6.
it, is only assigned; That thereby many sinister, crafty, feigned, and
forged informations have been pursued, to the great damage and wrongful
vexation of the subjects. But this might as well happen, even when men be
prosecuted by way of enditement. For is it not usual to find them upon any
one man's evidence and information, the Jury not regarding (oftentimes) what
enimitie rests betwixt them? Therefore it was not the course by information
that displeased; but the badnes of the informations that gave occasion of
repeal. For by statute, even in K. Hen. 8. 31. Hen. 8. c. 14.
his days, an Information was made equivalent unto a presentment by verdict of
twelve, in matter of heresy, that is far more penal, then the former. Which
cruel statute I would not have alleged, but that the Note-gatherer groundeth
himself thereupon, for another purpose.

And we see, that there is no such cause alleged, as the Notegatherer
insinuates; either as if it were an unjust and unreasonable course, or in
respect that it was ex officio, at the instigation and solicitation of some one
person; or yet, that it was without Appeal or Enditement. For if it had bin
simply unjust; then all the treasure which had bin levied by color thereof,
should have bin restored. And it is evident, that Bills and Informations against
offenders, are still in frequent use, and may be preferred for the Queen by
any, and against any, whomseuer. And those which be found offenders, may
(without either Appeal or Enditement) be condemned and punished thereupon in
sundry geat penalties and losses both pecuniarie, corporal, and of their good
name and credit.

And for further proof, that it is at this day holden none injustice by the
tempor all laws for to ground an inquiry, yea, and also a Conviction without
either Appeal or enditement, is plainly proved by a latter statute, which is
yet in force. For Justices of 5. and 6. Edw. 6. cap. 25.
Peace at their Sessions have authority to enquire of the offenses of them,
which be admitted to keep Alehouses, not only by Presentment, but by
Information, or otherwise by their discretion etc. and may hear and determine
the same by all such ways and means, as by their discretion shall be thought
good. And a little after it is there enacted; that the Certificate of the
Justices touching every such Recognisance and offense, shall be a sufficient
conviction in the law of such offense. So that for this one kind of offense,
as much is established by this statute, as was for sundry others, by the
aforesaid repealed Act. And therefore it is no course of proceeding condemned
as simply unjust; howsoever the famous King Henry the eight, was willing at
the very entrance of his reign, to gratify his subjects by that Repeal.

Another objection in this behalf is taken out of the preamble of the repealed
statute for heresy, made in the time of the aforesaid king Henry the 8. the
words are these: viz. It stands not 25. H. 8. ca. 14.
with the right order of Justice, nor good equity, that any person should be
convict, and put to the loss of his life, good name, or goods; unless it were
by due accusation and witness, or by presentment, verdict, confession, or
process of outlawrie. Which words (you see) do speak of conviction, and of
being put to loss of one of those three, and not of the calling into question
and manner of proceeding. This does appear, in that to the word Accusation is
joined Witness, with a copulative: whereas the opinion (whereof we treat)
implies, that either upon any Accusation or yet upon Presentment (without any
more ado) an Ordinary may ground his further proceeding. But a man may not be
convicted in a Court Ecclesiastical, either upon a bare Accusation or
Presentment without witnesses, or his own confession: to which (I think) may
well and with good reason be added, wilful contumacte, and not presumed only;
which contumacie both in Ecclesiastical Courts, and some others of this
Realm, amounts to as much (in construction of law) as a confession: and it
has a correspondence unto an Outlawrie, that is a kind of conviction, at the
Common law, grounded upon wilfulness only presumed.

Moreover, this preamble does not rest in the two words of Accusation or
Presentment, being the only things required (by this opinion) to warrant
proceeding Ecclesiastical; but adds also witness, verdict, confession, or
process of outlawrie: and therefore cannot (by any means) be referred unto
enducements, to ground proceedings upon, but only unto means of conviction:
and the rather, because in that whole sentence, no verb passive is used, but
conuicting and putting to loss, etc. which makes me the more to marvel, how
the word Presentment, with a disjunctive, came in amongst the rest: as if by a
Presentment alone, a man might be convicted, or put to loss of any of these
three.

Some other words following in the same preamble, are also Ibidem.
brought for this purpose, viz. wherefore it is not reasonable, that any
Ordinary, by any suspicion conceived of his own fant asie without due
Accusation or Presentment, should put any subject of this Realm, in the
infamy and slander of heresy, to the peril of loss of life, loss of name
and goods. These words are inferred upon the former, and are directed unto
none other crime but Heresy, where the peril and penalty is so grievous, as
loss of life, loss of name and goods, jointly together; and therefore can by
no reason be drawn and stretched unto every other crime ecclesiastical, where
no such peril of penalty, or of punishment rests. For words of statutes
are of strict interpretation, and are most strict in matters criminal and
penal, and therefore may not be extended unto other crimes, then are
expressly mentioned; yea though there were (in both) a like reason. Whereas
(in truth) betwixt the punishment of Heresy, Atheism or Apostacy, and other
crimes ecclesiastical, there is as great dissimilitude as may be. For death in
those three is not inflicted, but when all hope of amendment and reformation
of the party himself is past, and he is therefore taken away by death, to the
intent others may be terrified by the example, and that he have none
opportunity to entise any more to his heresies, or to continue in his
blasphemies against God. But in the correcting of all other crimes
ecclesiastical (though secondarily sometimes the terror of others is sought)
yet principally the parties own reformation, and bringing unto penitency and
amendment, is intended. For hereby he sustaineth no loss at all, not so much
as of his good name, but rather a gain; because after his reformation and
repentance, he ought to be (of al Christians) holden as dear and precious in
Gods sight, The Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, and do not
vpbraide.
as if by falling into the sin, his credit had never bin impaired. In which
respect those Canonical penances were by the fathers of the Church, and by the
old and pure Canons said to be medicinae animae, rather then poenae: yet not
as satisfactorie for the sin, but as good inducements unto, and also
testimonies of repentance.

And you know, how absurd a kind of reasoning it is, either to argue from one
thing to another a dissimilibus: or to reason from that which is more likely to
be, unto that which is much less likely (viz. a maiori ad minus)
affirmatively, as must needs be out of this place: for thus their objection
must be gathered: Without accusation or presentment of heresy; none shall be
put in peril of loss of life, loss of name, and goods: therefore without the
one of these two, an Ordinary may not proceed to the punishment of any other
less offense ecclesiastical. Yea though no one of these three, and much less
all of them be any way thereby hazarded, or brought into peril.

Furthermore in these last recited words there lies a plain opposition,
betwixt any suspicion conceived of the Ordinaries own fantasy: and a due
accusation or Presentment. Therefore, if sound and credible information,
notice, evidence, or other sufficient matter may appear to be brought unto
him, so that he cannot be said suspiciouslie to conceive it of his own
fantasy only, then the true intent hereof is thereby satisfied. But shall the
Preamble of this repealed Statute stand for sound authority, and shall not the
equity and reason of the very body of the Statute it self, 11. H. 7. though
afterward repealed (much rather then a Preamble) be received for a good
argument; proouing that it is neither unjust nor unreasonable, at some times to
ground a Judges proceeding criminal, without either Appeal or Indictment?

Lastly, here seems a due accusation or else a due Presentment of Heresy, in
reason and equity to be required: but it is not here, neither (as I take it)
elsewhere by the laws of the Realm determined, what may be accounted a due
accusation or a due Presentment of a crime in an Ecclesiastical court. Then
(as I construe the law) must it be left unto the law ecclesiastical to
determine, when these may be said to be duly done, either preciselie, or by
that which is aequiualent unto them.

And so we may conclude, that to proceed in an Ecclesiastical Court against a
crime, otherwise then either by Accusation or such Presentment, is not contrary
or repugnant unto the laws of the Realm, but rather the like course often
practiced by them: and thereby the Justice and equity of such proceeding more
strongly confirmed and justified unto us, and the contrary opinion quite
overthrown.

CHAP. IX. The second opinion (here to be treated of) is, that No lay person
may be cited of Office in any cause, but Testamentarie or Matrimonial: the
drift of that opinion is against proceeding of Office in matters criminal: the
necessary use and equity of proceeding criminallie, sometimes by the Judges
office, in courts both temporal and ecclesiastical.
THe very drift of the second opinion (that comes here to be disputed of) is;
that a Judge ecclesiastical may not proceed at all of Office, or make special
Inquiry, (which is the effect produced by that cause) against any crimes or
offenses of late persons. For in debarring them from Citing any such, the very
whole proceeding against them (unto which that is the introduction) is thereby
also debarred: and by restraining their citing of Office unto causes only
Testamentarie or Matrimonial, all dealing against Crimes (without there be an
Accuser) is thereby taken away. Which second opinion therefore quite
overthrows the presenting of any lay persons (though criminous) allowed by
the generality of the next precedent opinion; insomuch as upon Presentiments,
follows proceeding of Office by Inquiry; and yet both these opinions had one
Author. So well be these men's conceits digested. But let us first examine what
may be the colorable occasion of this second opinion, over and above the
impounding of all ecclesiastical proceeding unto those two heads (spoken of in
the first part) saving where the party conuented himself is willing. Which
willingness in the party for rights that may be supposed to be by him
detained; but especially for crimes supposed by him to be committed, can never
with any reason be intended, that it shall be obtained at his hands
(considering there is so small use of any proceeding by office, but against
crimes; and least of all in causes Matrimonial or Testamentarie.

That no lay persons then should be dealt with at all, for such crimes, as I
have before proved to be of ecclesiastical cognizance; but be suffered to do
them without controlment: I think (in charity) not to be their meaning. It
must needs then follow, that it is the proceeding against crimes ex officio
Iudicis, viz. without an Accuser, which is hereby principally condemned, as
unreasonable or unjust.

Therefore to prove it reasonable; I mind here (somewhat further) to show the
necessary use and equity thereof, as well in the one court as in the other.
And to clear it from injustice; I will declare first, that it is both practiced
by the temporal laws, and also is by common and statute law, an allowed
proceeding unto courts ecclesiastical: next, that it is practiced not only by
the law Canon (which many would take for a sufficient disallowance of it:) but
also by the Civil laws, subject to no such exception; insomuch as they are
used by the rest of Christendom for their Common law, by the grounds whereof,
all their customarie laws and ordinances be argued and disputed. And lastly,
that such course of proceeding was used and is allowed by sundry examples in
holy Scripture: together with answers unto the objections made to the
contrary, as they fall fittest into each of the several parts of this
disputation.

The equity and necessary use of this course to be holden, may be showed by
the party, which (by law) is supposed to be the exciter and stirrer up of a
Judge unto it, when none other person is found that will prosecute. This party
I mean, is the Clarus. ibid. q. 7
public interest which the Church or Common wealth has, to have crimes
punished: Interest Reip. prouincia^ purgari malis hominibus: and ne maleficia
remaneant impunita: poena enim vnius, terror est multoru^. Bonis nocet, qui
malis parcit. Sicut est misericordia punie^s, sic est crudelitas parcens: with
sundry other like rules of law and Canon, partly before touched. Now the public
interest does not only rest in this, when some benefit is coming toward the
common treasure, but is chiefly showed by procuring common tranquillity and
repose of the subject; with sincerity of religion, and integrity of
conversation. And it was called by the Romans (especially after the popular
state was turned into a monarchy) by the name of Fiscus: and may well and
significantly with us (in respect of the meaning) be termed, the interest of
the crown and dignity royal, which by all offenses are said to be violated.
Therefore do the Practica Millei fol. 3. nu. 31.
Ciuilians of other nations say, In quocunque crimine fiscus est accusator:
against every crime the benefit of the Commonwealth is an accuser. And another
Clarus. ibid. q. 10.
says, that in what crime soever a Judge may proceed of office, there Fiscus,
the common benefit stands in stead of a Party. And it is testified to be a
Decius consilio 170. nu. 1.
common rule, that even in an offense but against a private person principally,
the judge oftentimes is of office to proceed to the inflicting of some penalty
not expreslie set down in law, against such an offense (for so is poena
extraordinaria meant in the Civil law) by reason of the very interest the
Common wealth has, to have misdemeanors punished. In which Clarus ibid. q. 12.
respect some man that by law may not use action, yet is not forbidden
implorare officium Iudicis, to stir up the Judge (by petition) to proceed for
his own office and duties sake.

If her Majesty's most honorable council together, and every one apart; if
the Judges of the land; if careful and upright gentlemen of the Commission of
Peace in every country; of office, and for their duties sake (for the most
part) without any so much as private complaint (much less professed Accuser or
Party) but perhaps upon some general muttering; yea and sometimes without so
much, for a care and upon a fear (at large) only conceived, what may happen:
did not, or should not enquire, look into, and take informations of riots,
violences, disturbances of peace, conspiracies, felonies, murders, and of other
misdemeanors and outrages, and so seek further to discover them, and to punish
them, or bring them to Justice; might it not justly be feared, that the realm
would much more abound, and ouerflow in all kind of mischief? Would the
Constables abroad, Headboroughs, Bursholders; and such other inferior officers
and ministers of themselves prefer such up, or being found out and presented
by others; would they effectually follow and prosecute them as appertains, so
that the magistrates need not to take further care? I think it will not be so
supposed. The like then may be said of Ecclesiastical officers and offenses,
notwithstanding all general Enquiries in Senes or Synodes, and in visitations.

But it will perhaps be said; in the one Court, they may be presented by the
sworn men, and in the other by enditement of the grand Jury, at Sessions and
Assizes, etc. It is true, they may be; but how many, I pray you, are so found
out, and endited (from time to time) by the grand Iuries of their own enquiries
and knowledges: if either some party (grieved in particular) do not give
evidence; or the Judges or Justices of themselves do not inform them, and urge
them; notwithstanding the straitness of their charge and oath, and that they
be taken out of the several parts of every shire? But be it, that some
notorious murderer or felon, is soby them endited at some times: how many
other offenders in penal statutes (being men of any reckoning in the shire)
are endited at all, thorowout the Realm, in many years, if none of the bench
do take care to urge the Iuries? as Recusants in coming to divine service,
such as have and keep Reteiners, and give liueries contrary to statute, only
to band in quarrels, and to maintain bad actions; or yet such as go
excessiuely in apparel, or which violate the statutes appointed for not eating
flesh, upon certain days. Nay, it falls out often times, that the more to
give edge to such Iuries to do their duties, evidence has been given unto them
in these offenses: yea, such and so good, as upon less evidence, they would
perhaps have endited a man of felony, to the hazard of his life, especially
if he were but some base fellow. Now, when none almost will be found to give
evidence (saving in such a cause where he finds himself or some of his
pinched) yea, and not in such neither, if the other party be a man of any
tolerable reckoning or ability; and very few (albeit themselves do perfectly
know it, or have reasonable good evidence given, against some man of power)
that will find an enditement against such an one, although both he that gives
the evidence secretly, and all the Jury may be in some hope, not to be known,
who it was that did principally stir in it, because they be sworn to keep
the Queens counsel, their fellows, and their own: can it then with reason
be imagined, that any man (almost) will be found voluntarily to become an
Accuser, and to prosecute at his own costs and charges? Experience teaches
that most men will not, few that dare, and those only such, as take themselves
in some particular respect, wronged.

We see in a great multitude of penal statutes at the Common law, how men by
third parts and moities of forfeitures (besides great privileges in proceeding)
are as it were allured and entised to inform against offenders: yet very few
(notwithstanding such great gain as thereby might be got) are found (besides
such as make an occupation of it) that will voluntarily prefer informations:
albeit there be enough that want the money, and could well be content to finger
it, out of what male factours purse soever it came.

The reasons of this backwardness in informing, I take to be the charge,
trouble, common obloquie, and offense taken by them that be prosecuted, and
thereby fear and peril to come unto some further mischief upon their
procurement, or for their favor. Now, where men that are so well hired, and
(by reason the Queen is party to such informations) so fully in all reason
protected, will not, lust not, or dare not prefer matter penal against
others: shall we look for better courage to be showed by private persons,
against offenders in Ecclesiastical crimes; where they can expect no such
countenance nor remuneration, to lighten the other burdens and dangers? and
therefore either of Office to be prosecuted, or must be wholly left unpunished.

In riots committed and done upon others, we see just cause of grief for the
injury received: and thereby occasion given to seek lawful revenge. There was
good remedy also provided for them at the Common law. Yet in the time of king
Henry the seventh, for a further remedy and repressing of them by the Lords
of the Star Chamber, the State was driven, to make a statute. By authority
whereof their Lordships proceed in that and others ex officio, albeit (in many
causes) they have some party grieved, that by way of complaint promoteth and
prosecuteth the office. Yet the proceeding is (as was touched before) by way of
inquiry; in that no man (there) sueth for private recompense; but the scope of
the whole process is criminal, and ad vindictam publicam, vel corporalem vel
pecuniariam, applicand^m fisco, non parti. So that where men have ^ust cause of
grief, yet was it thought very expedient and requisite, to provide a sharper
course by way of inquiry of office. How much more then is this course needful
to be holden, for punishing Ecclesiastical crimes, which (by the policy of
this Realm) have no other punishment: and where no man has (for the most
part) any private injury, whereupon to complain himself?

Here perhaps it will be said, that he which can give information of a crime to
a judge; may accuse, or procure a presentment in an Eccelesiasticall Court (if
it be of that jurisdiction) or may inform and procure an enditement, if the
cause be Temporal: or else that it were meet his information be not believed,
but that he should be holden as a slanderer and a malicious person. We are to
remember, that if this Dilemma (viz. either thou must accuse and prosecute him,
etc. or else thou art but a slanderer) had not quiddam tertium to minister
answer unto it; many grievous faults should pass unpunished, and many poor
men should be sore pinched. For experience teaches, that Clarus ibid. q. 6.
often times even in crimes publikly committed, you shall hardly find
witnesses, that will depose their direct knowledge, when it tends to the
offense of some man of countenance, that may do them a displeasure after. And
therefore they will either say, they saw it not, heard it not, marked it not,
or at that time remember it not. Yet it is known, that a witness is urged by
the religion of an oath, and is not intended to thrust himself into the matter
willingly: which as it ought to serve to take away all offense conceived by him
whom he touches; so ought it to wash away all fear and other affection, in
the witness.

Then how much more probably may it be supposed, that there is many a mean
man, (though otherwise able to give good and true information, perhaps of three
or four witnesses, which do know the matter more fully, and touching other
particularities, sufficient for a Judge to enquire, and to look into the
party so denounced) who nevertheless in many respects dare not become an
open Accuser, or a preferrer of presentment, of enditement, or of information?
because there is more cause to take offense at such, then at one, who is called
and urged to testify. So that if there were no means for a Judge
Ecclesiastical to take knowledge, nor to proceed, but upon the voluntary
prosecution and accusation of some party, (which is the course opposite unto
proceeding ex officio) then surely many execrable offenses that are most
displeasing to Almighty God, offensive to the godly, dangerous to men's
inheritances, and to the offenders own souls health; yea and some that be
pernicious banes to all religion, unto professing of God, and to Christianity
it self, were like (through want of discovery and impunitie) to spread
themselves over both Church and Commonwealth in very short time, before
Accusers would be found: Namely, Atheism, Apostasy from Christianity,
Heresy, Idolatry, Schism, Error in matter of Religion, Sacrilege, Perjury
Ecelesiasticall, Blasphemy, Subornation of perjury as well in matters of
marriage and testament (being of special consequence) as in others; Horrible
swearing, Polygamy or many wives, Incest, Adultery, and other uncleanness,
Drunkenness, excessive Usury, Simonie, Forgeries of Ecclesiastical seals
for testimony, Usurpation of the holy Ministry, dangerous Conuenticles,
ungodly libelling, and such like.

For who are commonly made privy to such sins, but men of like humor and
affection? in whom we may not presuppose such sincerity of conscience, that
for reformation of the party delinquent, they will abandon all friendship, and
adventure any displeasure; even but to take a trial (with their great charge
and trouble) how they shall be able to make proof of such matters against
them.

Besides these inconveniences, that otherwise would ensue; there be many
others, all which (in particularitie) to rehearse, would be over tedious. As
after an accusation be begun, and that the Judge sees violent presumptions
against the party conuented: if the prosecutour for fear, for tediousness,
for bribes, or by collusion would desist: were it not meet that the Judge, of
office should nevertheless proceed by inquiry; that the delinquent may reap,
as he has deserved? is it not meet that a Judge should be more careful of the
public good of the Commonweal, then every common person? and if he be so in
deed, shall he not be allowed as good means to do these good offices to his
Prince and Country, as any private person? And shall he not be as much
cherished and allowed upon his own care, and for his duties sake, to procure
the suppressing of sin and reformation of offenders, as to do it, at the
instigation of any private party? Nay is there not less danger of suborning,
corrupting, or instructing of witnesses by a Judge (who has no private
interest to see a man punished) then there is in the prosecution by a party;
who (for the most part) does it but of malice, or upon some other sinister
respect? And what if any that is in deed a friend, should be Ioh. Andr. in add.
ad Spec. tit. deinquisitionib.
purposely framed to be an Accuser; to the intent some delinquent may escape,
and not be called again into peril, upon the same crime? If it be said
hereunto, that the penalty of calumniation, viz. poena taltonis which is to be
inflicted upon him that fails in proof of his accusation, will take away
this suspicion; it may be replied, that in most countries, this poenatalionis
is grown in disuse: but chiefly this may be answered (even where that
penalty still has place) that the Accuser may make half a good proof (as by
one upright witness) and c, 1. de elect. in 6.
so should both the delinquent escape punishment; and himself also (by law)
be freed from danger of the penalty of calumniation presumed, and of enduring
retaliatio.

Besides, the like equity may also often happen, when only two sufficient
witnesses can testify of a crime: for if the one of these should be driven (of
necessity) to be a party, then the full proofs (required in such cases) were
thereby clear taken away; and so the offendour should escape punishment. And
therefore there is both necessary use, and good equity, to warrant proceeding
ex Officio, in matters criminal.

CHAP. X. An answer to some further objections made against the conueniencie
and reasonableness of proceeding against crimes of Office.
TO cross the necessary practice of proceeding by Office, In his title of
Inconveniences.
the Note-gatherer assigns sundry inconveniences by him surmised to arise
thereof. First, (says he) In treason and felony challenge is admitted to the
Accuser: here none. For it is in the Ordinary to admit one to infourme, and to
witness again in the cause, wherein he was before deposed, to the contrary.
What these last words, viz. to the contrary, do serve for here; neither I,
nor perhaps the Author himself of the Notes, can conjecture. If Acouser here
be taken for a witness (as is before showed:) then I must tell him, that
challenges and exceptions against witnesses not only be allowed unto the
defendant at the law Civil and Ecclesiastical; but in a far more
beneficial manner, then is received by use at the Common law of this Realm.
For it is commonly said (how truly I am not to discuss) that a witness
ought not to be received nor deposed upon his oathe for the prisoner, as being
against the Queen. And if such be permitted to speak at the prisoners request
(as some seldom times has bin) and be not sworn thereunto: what credit will
the Jury give unto his bare words? nay what credit may they give to them,
and save their own oaths; who are sworn to dealc according to their
Evidence; which cannot be so termed, except it be upon oath, upon matter of
record, or upon the parties confession.

But if he take Accuser here, for him that voluntarily prosecuteth and
soliciteth the office; then he may remember, that against such, the very Common
law gives no challenge; because any man may prefer Enditements and follow
them for the Queen: whereas the Civil law has whole titles of chalenges that
may be made against Accusers; which laws be also retained in those Courts,
against all voluntary preferrers to the office, who are holden as parties. But
if the Judge alone at the Common law cause an Enditement to be put up; may the
prisoner challenge the Judge, when as he shall not challenge any common person,
which does it?

That is true in part, which he says, that in Bartol. in 1. Diuus. ff. de
custod. reorum.
inquiry of office, a Judge (by the Civil law) may examine him which
denounced the matter, as a witness therein. Yet it is not general in every
denounceour or preferrer up unto the office, but only in such as be officers
specially appointed, and sworn for that purpose. Now what want of equity, or
what injustice is herein, seeing perhaps such knows the matter best, and was
the man that infourmed his fellows of his particular knowledge therein, which
made it to be presented? May not one single man in a graund Jury do the like?
And what should hinder such a man afterward to give also particular evidence
thereof at time of the trial? For is there any course more usual, then for him
that preferres up the enditement, and gives evidence to have it found; to be
also a witness, and to give evidence of the very felony, etc. at the
prisoners trial for life and death?

But if it were true, that every Infourmer and prosecutour might be examined
also as a witness (which is very untrue both by law and practice) how could
this prove, that which he aduoucheth; viz. that no challenge against the
Accuser is admitted in Courts Civil and Ecclesiastical, seeing both against
prosecutors and witnesses by the Civil and Canon laws, exceptions or
challenges may be taken? And though it were true, that this were generally
allowed, and were also an inconvenience: shall therefore the examining of one
for another, when he ought not in equity to be, ouerturne all proceeding of
office as unreasonable, which is the drift at which he aims?

Another of his Inconveniences hereof is; that hereby a Bishop may (upon his
own suspicion) supply the place of an Infourmer, a Witness, and a Judge.
That his own suspicion alone, will not serve to open way to such proceeding,
is showed before in the seventh Chapter. And how the Bishop being Judge, should
be used as a witness in the same cause, wherein he is a Judge; there is no
color in all the law or practice, that I have known, or can imagine. Except
it be in a matter done in his own presence, whiles he sits iudicially; and
appearing also notoriously unto others there besides himself; or espied only
by himself.

Now if the prejudice to the party be not very great, why the Judge alone,
as well as any common person there, that might happen to have heard it or seen
it, may not be trusted for a sound witness; I for my part can see no cause.
Has the Note-gatherer never heard of a Cutpurse espied by the Judge himself
sitting on the bench, by him caused to be stayed, and being endited upon his
relation, presently tried and condemned?

For a third inconvenience hereof, he assigns: that it is a means to draw
causes from the Common law, when neither in the Citation nor Bill, men shall
know the cause, why they be conuented: and so are deprived of the means of
suing a Prohibition at the Common law. This he terms Addere forum foro.

Yet inquiry by office prescribes no such generality of Citation. And
therefore if this were true, it makes nothing against that proceeding. But
that a Libel does not contain the cause of the conuenting, is a very strange,
and no less bold assertion. If his meaning in this objection be, that a man
cannot procure a Prohibition, till he have the copy of the Libell; thereby to
show the temporal Judge, that something is there in demand or prosecution,
that is not of ecclesiastical Conisance: then he might more plainly have
declared it. And for mine own opinion, hereunto I will agree, that (in most
cases) the law is so; howsoever late practice be otherwise.

For when the ecclesiastical Judge denies the copy of the Libel where he
ought not, to the prejudice of the party, in this respect: then the statute of
K. Hen. the 5. and a writ thereupon framed, does relieve him. And denying
copies of libels, needed not to 2. Hen. 5. ca. 3. Register. page 58.
have bin complained of at that time as a grieua^ce, if the law had bin, that
upon the parties own suggestion only, without sight of the Libell, the
temporal Court might at pleasure award a Prohibition. So that this not
expressing of cause in the Citation, and denying copy of the Libel, is so
far from being a means to draw causes from the Common law unto those
Courts; that it is of it self sufficient to bring thither by Prohibition
causes originally being of ecclesiastical Conisance.

But what serves this not expressing of the cause of conuenting, (if it were
so) for comdemnation of all proceeding by Office; seeing this might no less
happen to be omitted, though the prosecution were at the instance of a party
or Accuser? Yet further to satisfy both him and others herein; Citations in
causes Criminal out of ordinary Courts, Letters missiue, and Attachements
out of Commission Courts, do all import, that there be misdemeanors of
ecclesiastical Conisance, to be objected against the party conuented. Albeit
to express all the particulars, would be both over tedious and chargeable to
the subject, and (in many respects) inconvenient besides. And why should this
be accounted any more inconvenient or unreasonable, then writtes of sub poena
out of the Star Chamber or Chauncerie are, which contain not so much
particularitie of the matters objected, as those Citations in ecclesiastical
Courts?

In the reign of K. Hen. the 8. there were contrary writings published betwixt
S. German a common lawyer, and Sir Thomas More, about proceeding only against
heresy ex officio mero; and without any of those allowed means precedent,
which (by law) may open a way to such Inquiry. These reasons of Sir Thomas
Mores, the Note-gatherer assaieth summarily to answer; and I mind not to
defend; further then I find them coincident with some by me used, and not
fully answered by him. And the rather, because having not Sir Th. Mores books
in readiness with me, I cannot know how truly they be gathered: and for that
proceeding of office against other crimes, and upon allowed grou^des by law,
may stand sound and good; though all that which Sir Thomas More defends in
dealing against heresy (without Presentment, fame, etc: especially where the
penalty is so grievous) were to be condemned for unjust and unequal.

Sir Thomas More in justification of such proceeding against heresy, alleges
the like course to be holden, in ministering of temporal Justice, viz. that
Judges upon secret information, bind a man to his good abearing, and awarde
out a Writ to enquire De gestu and fama, against any man whom they please: and
that the Lord Chaunceller upon like secret information, puts men out of
Commission. For answer of these, the Note-gatherer says thus: But they do
not without matter proved, put a man from his free-holde, or in danger of
life, loss of goods, etc: as Ministers be deprived, and put from their
freeholde. By which his answer appears, that he yields these objections
(in fact) to be true: and the consequence cannot be denied For if the same
course be just and reasonable in them; why should it be unreasonable in others?
As for the grieuousnesse of the penalty surmised to be in the one greater then
in ye other; this is not material to make it of just, unjust. For Magis and
minus non variant speciem: more or less makes not things to be of diverse
kinds. And what will he say then, against that Criminal proceeding of Office,
where neither life, free-holde, nor goods is called into question? Shall that
then (in his judgment) be reasonable and just? Furthermore, what does this
particular recrimination hinder the conueniencie of proceeding by office? For
does that course of proceeding teach or require, that men be punished without
any matter proved? Therefore if this should happen so to be; yet is it only
the personal fault of the men, and not of Law, which establishes proceeding
ex Officio. For though an Accuser should prosecute; yet the Judges (if they
were so ungodly minded) might (de facto) offer this injustice. Yet this ought
not to be any cause to condemn all proceeding by Accusation, to be
unreasonable or unequal.

But this is so far from any tolerable answer unto those objections: that it
is (in truth) nothing else, then a very untrue and ^anderous imputation, that
will not, nay cannot be justified. What? Ministers deprived, yea put in danger
of loss of life, or goods, without any matter proved? I cannot conjecture what
further meaning herein he may have, otherwise then to slander: except perhaps
he think, the Notorious wilful contumacie of those that refused sundry times
upon their oaths to answer Articles objected on her Majesty's behalf (for
matters of their own facts, or within their knowledges, and not touching
either their lives or limbs) so far as by Law they were bound; not to be a
matter sufficiently appearing and proved to the Judges: whereas such their
contumacie and contempt, evidently appeared to the honorable persons, Judges,
and other sage, prudent, and learned men, not only to be most intolerable; but
was judged by them, to tend also unto the utter overthrow of the whole
fundamental justice of this Realm, if it should be suffered.

I do read in deed, Inter epist. Caluini in folio: page 421. and 422.
that the Ministers of Geneua do in a letter of their own, written to the
Ministers of Berne (against one Cumperell a Minister also of Geneua) testify
no less of the Eldership there, then here is traduced. For because Cumperell
Two means to occasion Inquiry and examination of Office, even at Geneua.
did not answer directly (as they thought) before the Consistory or Eldership
unto their Interrogatories by them of mere Office ministered unto him (whereof
two concerned his thoughts, and the very cogitations of his heart) so that they
held him thereupon as convicted: and for that there were vehementia indicia,
great presumptions, with a common fame, that he being ordained Minister for a
parish in their territory, called Drallian, had nevertheless under hand
sought to place himself in the territory of Berne (for this was his heinous
fault whereof they then enquired:) Therefore the Consistory pronounced, Quod
erant iustae causae, cur Ministerio abdicaretur; that they were just causes to
depose him from his Ministry. So that albeit we have no such Law or practice
in England (thanks be to God, whatsoever the Note-gatherer says) to condemn a
man, without any matter proved: yet some other Churches (whom he and his
Consorts do more admire, then their own) think they have warrant enough,
even upon a fame and some tokens, to depose a minister, when they shall find
that course meet to be used.

Another reason in that behalf is alleged by Sir Th. More; that the Lords of
the Counsel upon secret information call men of Office, without any prosecutor,
unto examination of matters criminal. To which the Notegatherer answers
thus: viz. that this is, in matters concerning the state of the Prince and of
the Realm; in matters of allegiance: and that a Jesuit or Seminary priest
may be examined by oath, quia ipso facto a traitor.

First, all the matters that their Lordships do, or may examine, are not of
such hie quality. And if they were, it is not the importance or hemousnes of
the matter, that can make Justice of that, which is Injustice in it self; as
was touched by me before. And so be also sundry matters dealt with, in some
Courts Ecclesiastical nearly touching the state of the Prince and Realm.
Besides, it is a very strange allegation to say, The Jesuits or Seminary
Priests may be examined by oath, quia ipso facto traitors. As if all, or any
traitors, might be examined by oath of their treasons; considering, that to
examine the party by oath, of matters touching loss of his life, or limbs,
is flat contrary to the Laws, policy, and custom of this Realm in both
sorts of Courts: yea and perhaps contrary to divinity too, as the Treatisoure
his own Camerade (though fighting in the self same quarrel and following the
same Colors) can and does tell him.

That which has been said to these two last objections, may also serve to
retoyne unto his reply, made against the objection, that the like course is
used by Martial Law.

But if this proceeding of office by Special inquiry be so reasonable and
oftentimes necessary; how comes it to pass (may some man ask) that the
names of Inquisition and Inquisitours be holden so odious? Admit those names be
odious unto many: yet this (without further reason) may not serve to condemn
ye course it self. For many sorts of men be also odious, perhaps without any
just desert or particular abuse in themselves, other then for their office
sake, who are not therefore wholly to be rejected: as, Informers of
concealments of poenal statutes, Takers, Purueyers, Bailifes errand: yea and
some administers of Justice too, if they be any thing exact and severe therein.
Neither is this odiousnes general against all Inquisition whatsoever; but only
against one particular course of proceeding thereby in the crime of heresy
practiced in some Popish dominions: but of al other most rigorously and cruelly
in Spain; yea (as is supposed) far beyond their own Commission, that they
have from the Pope: and yet their Commission is also in many points exorbitant
from all Law and reason.

A writer in the Civil Law assigns a special cause of the hatefulnes unto
the Common people of the Spanish Inquisition for matters of heresy. Albericus
de Rosate. in rub. C. de haeret. nu. 6.
Inquisitors of heresy (says he) are hateful and suspected of all Laymen,
because of a long time it has been believed, that they are wont to proceed
upon most light suspicions, especially against those that be rich. Nay in
deed how can it be otherwise, seeing their dealing by that Inquisition is
especially against men of greatest wealth; because upon their condemnation
their goods and lands are confiscated to the house of Inquisition: that is, to
the Inquisitours themselves?

Now seeing none of these strange courses be used in any Criminal proceeding
in this Realm; there is therefore no just cause here, to make it hateful unto
any. Yet the Treatiser does imagine this kind of proceeding to be more frequent
in Courts ecclesiastical within this Realm in respect of the Judges own fees,
thereby arising. For answer whereof: First in Courts of Commission
Ecclesiastical (against which some have the greatest edge and egernesse) the
Commissioners have no fees at all; no not so much as iiij. s. toward their
charges, that Justices of Peace be allowed by Statute, at such times as they
serve at Sessions of the Peace, etc: whereas Commissioners are employed, and
serve therein freely at their own charges, with loss of time and intermitting
their own business, only of duty and conscience to her Majesty and to the
Common weal. So that if it were not in this respect, the Commissioners
ecclesiastical both might and would sit still, with more ease to themselves,
and less obloquie; howbeit by the worst of every sort of Subjects.

As for Courts of Ordinaries, I know some of the greatest of them in England,
that have not two matters ex Officio mero prosecuted in them, in three years
space. And for such ordinary Courts as have some more causes of that nature:
alas, what great fee is it, for the Judge ecclesiastical to have iij. pence
for a Citation, or vj. pence for examination of a witness, or upon an act of
Absolution, or such like; to make him desirous (in that respect) to entertain
the cause; seeing he will hardly be excused with xx. pound charges (that every
such several matter may put him unto) if an Appellation be brought upon any
error or mistaking, that may happen to be found, in his proceedings of Office?
Besides that, the like fees are due to the Judge, no less upon the prosecution
of a party, then they be upon proceeding by office: and therefore none
inconvenience hereupon more in the one course (which this opinion allows)
then there is in the other.

Yea, may some say, all prove not offenders, that be so called, and that are
thereby put unto trouble and charges. It is true; yet meet to be called, if the
law be observed in this point, that there must be (before) a sufficient ground
of inducement thereto. Neither do all those prove to be offenders, that are
prosecuted by a party or by an Accuser; and thereby be put to no less charges
and trouble, even when (besides the malice of the preferrer) there was no
colorable ground of the accusation. The like may be also truly said of many
others, who be called even before temporal Judges and Justices of the peace,
either by warrant, writ, or otherwise. Yet is this no cause, hereupon wholly
to disallow these conuentings. And there is no more reason to find fault with
the fees due unto the Judges ecclesiastical, in regard that every one which
happens to be conuented, proves not guilty of the matter imputed to him:
then there ought to be with the fees, that are due to Judges in temporal
Courts for judicial or original writtes etc. because many of such suites be
commenced (as often falls out in the end) without good matter on the
Plaintifs or Informers behalf. Thus much in answer to the objections made
against the reasonableness, and conueniencie of proceeding by Office.

CHAP. XI. That the laws of the Realm do use Enquiries and proceedings ex
officio, and that they allow it in Courts Ecclesiastical, with answer to some
objections that are made to the contrary.
IN the next place I am to show, that dealing by way of inquiry or enquest, ex
officio, without suite of a party; called by the Common law Office del Court,
are both mentioned and practiced by the laws of the Realm. In Mag. Charta.
cap. 26.
Magna Charta mention is made of a writ of Inquisition of life and member. In
an old statute of king Edward the first, a seuerance is made betwixt the suite
of the King from the suite of a party: and the King is thereby (as it were)
bound to sue, and to lend his office, for prosecution of the misdemeanors. For
it is 3. Ed. 1. cap. 13.
thus provided, that if any take away a woman by force etc. the King at his
suite that will sue, shall do common right within forty days: and if none
commence his suite within forty days, the King shall sue. Which suite being
in his own Court, and before himself, must needs be of office. For where
there is Inquisitio, Inquiry, there the King is party: as by another statute
of the same Star. de Inquis. capiend. 33. Ed. 1.
Kings days appears: De Inquisitionibus coram Iusticiarijs quibuscunque
capiendis, and in quibus D. Rex est pars qualitercunque concordatum est etc. In
a statute of 18. Edw. 3. pro Clero. c. 2.
king Edward the third, arreignment at the suite of the King (which is ex
officio) as a distinct matter from that which is at the suite of a party, is
spoken of: and so 42. Ed. 3. c. 4.
are also Commissions of inquisition afterward. Furthermore in K. 8. H. 6. c.
16.
Henry the sixth his time, en quest or inquisition of office is mentioned: and
in sundry 11 H. 7. c. 25. and 1. H. 8 c. 12.
statutes both after and before, which are needless to be repeated. For (as I
take the matter) every enditement is an Inquisition: which if it be at the
prosecution of a party, it is, as officium promotum: but if it be by the
Judges, for the Queen (in respect of the interest of the Commonwealth) then
is it officium merum or nobile, as before is declared.

This manner of dealing, in sundry cases is so usual at the Common law; that
there be whole titles made in the Abridgements, touching Inquisition and office
del Court: viz. of enquiries and matters done by the Judges upon their
discretions, without the instance of any party.

In reports at the Common law, we find it said, M. 20. H. 6. 38.
that Judges ex officio did charge an enquest to make inquiry of their own
collusion, supposed to be committed among them. 34. Edw. 3. 3.
Further: One of a Jury, that departed from his fellows after that he was
sworn, was examined at his return by the Judges ex officio, whether he had
since spoken with the defendant or no? Likewise it is said, 11. H. 4. 17.
that the Court ex officio ought to award an Assise to enquire (whether the
disseisin were with force) by reason of the kings fine. In the book of Assis.
lib. 16. page 4.
Assizes: The Court ex officio sent a man to prison, because they found he had
not made fine. And a great number of particular articles are there set down,
whereupon Assis. lib. 27. page 138.
enquest or inquisition ex officio in the Kings bench is to be made. We find
of elder time by Bracton. li. 4. c. 8. fol. 302.
Bracton, where the appellor that prosecuteth, makes default or dies, there
the king may proceed ex officio. And again there: Let the king ex officio suo,
and for his peace proceed to inquisitio^, for the suspicion that he has of the
appeal.

Moreover, where a Parson and Vicar were both willing enough to sue before the
Temporal Judges: yet M. 22. Ed. 4. 23.
the Judges finding the plea to be of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, did ex
officio, at no man's instance, dismiss it out of that court, as not perteining
to their jurisdiction. And do we not often see the ordinary course for
enditements, much assisted and helped by the Judges and Justices search,
examinations and dealing therein, (of office and duty only) both in treasons
and felonies, and in other causes of more private interest, that be preferred
by others? do they not also upon their own discretion, and for causes known
to themselves, without prosecution of any party, (and so ex officio only)
often times commit persons of suspected behavior to prison; and not dismiss
them, till by a writ of inquiry de bono gestu and fama, they be found worthy
to be set at liberty? So that by these few, and sundry other that might be
brought, it may appear; that proceeding and inquiry ex officio, is so far
from being, so much as a diverse course from the laws of the Realm, that it is
often practiced thereby, when no party besides the Judges themselves, do
entermeddle.

But it is not only by that law practiced, but also allowed (by it) for a
lawful course of proceeding in Ecclesiastical Courts against crimes and
offenses. By a statute of 2. H. 5. cap. 1.
Henry the fifth, such an Inquisition of Hospitals of the Kings foundation, is
appointed unto Ordinaries: and in those that be of any other man's foundation,
Ordinaries are authorized not only to enquire of the foundation, estate, and
governance of them, and of all other matters necessary in that behalf, but
also to make thereof correction and reformation, after the laws of holy
Church, as to them belongs. So that if Ecclesiastical laws do warrant this
inquiry and course of reformation and correction, then this statute will give
force unto it. By 1. H. 7. cap. 4.
another statute: If any Clerks be convicted of incontinent living in their
bodies (being but before perhaps openly noised thereof) before whom convicted?
before Ordinaries. How? by examination, and other lawful proof requisite by
the law of the Church, they may by the Ordinary, at his discretion, be
committed to ward. Which together with the committing, must needs be both done
ex officio: for that no party to prosecute is there mentioned to be required;
and because the Ordinary thereby may proceed, upon the public infamy noised
abroad.

The statute of 23. H. 8. ca. 9.
Citations made afterward, mentions a case where an inferior Ordinary may be
party to a suite holden before him: which may as well be understood in a cause
moved of Office for an offense, as in any other matter. But more plainly
afterward: for there the very word ex Officio is used; and it is provided, that
the forfeiture of that statute, for calling a man out of the jurisdiction where
he dwells, shall run against him that cited, whether he proceed by virtue
of his office, or at the suite of any person. Whereof may be gathered, that the
laws of the Realm take knowledge of that course ex officio to be as
warrantable as the other, made at the suite of a party: so that other
requisites be observed. And though the statute against Heresy stand 27. H. 8.
ca. 10
now repealed, yet it may serve to prove, that not only inquiry, but
examination also of the party himself, in a visitation by Ordinaries (both
which are done ex officio) is holden for a course of the law ecclesiastical
not to be condemned or disallowed by the laws of the Realm.

In a statute touching 1. Ed. 6. cap. 2.
Ordinaries seals now also repealed, certain ecclesiastical causes be
rehearsed: among which, causes of instance betwixt party and party, are
plainly severed and distinguished from causes of correction: thereby giving us
to understand also, how rarely causes of correction be prosecuted by any
party; but by the Judge ecclesiastical himself alone proceeding of Office.
And 1. Eliz. cap. 2.
by a statute in the first year of her Majesty's reign, made for uniformity
of Common prayer, Ordinaries are authorized to inquire and to punish etc. the
violation of that act, as heretofore has been used in like cases, by the
Queens ecclesiastical laws. But that an enquiry is always of office, and
what the laws ecclesiastical be in this behalf, and how the continual use
has been, is showed before: so that none need remain doubtful in these points.

The very Common law not only takes knowledge of this course holden in Courts
ecclesiastical: but in some respect does also privilege it, even above the
proceeding by a party. 7. H. 4. 18.
For if an Ordinary do sequester goods of the dead for any contumacie, or ex
Officio; which gives no possession to him, the court spiritual (in this case)
shall have Jurisdiction. And it seems by that case, the law to be otherwise,
when it is at the suite of a Party. So in a case M. 20. E. 4. 10.
of violent hands laid upon a Clerk, both Brian and Litleton held (no man
gain saying of it) that the spiritual court may punish it ex officio, but not
at the suite of the party: least the beater thereby be kept from his
absolution, till some temporal duty be contented and paid. And Mordant T.
12. H. 7. sol. 22.
was of opinion; that if a man be sued by a party pro laesione fidei in not
paying a sum of money promised, there shall lie a Prohibition: yet if the
judge ecclesiastical shall do it ex officio, that then no Prohibition shall
lie. Neither does any gain say him herein. Unto which opinion of his, another
judgment given in the Assis. lib. 22. page 70.
book of Assizes in like case, seems to accord. To like effect also Fitzh.
nou. not. breu. tit. Consultation, fol. 50. etc.
Fitzherbert reports, that an Ordinary may cite and proceed against a man ex
Officio, pro violenta manuum iniectione in Clericum: likewise for tithes
detained in the time of vacation of a benefice: so he may cite also such as
refuse to maintain a Curate or Chaplain: and for fornication or like offenses.

Fitzherbert Nou. not. br. page 64. E.
in another place also thus writes: If a man (says he) be sued in court
Christian, or if the bishop sue and cite him ex Officio and excommunicate him,
etc. And again Ibid. litera F.
thus: Significauit lies not, but where the party is excommunicate by name,
maiori exco^municatione: upon a spectall suite against him ex Officio, or by a
party: therefore both are alike lawful, and allowable by the common law. And
that for wrongful detaining of tithes in time of vacation of a benefice, the
ecclesiastical Judge may cite and proceed ex Officio, does plainly appear
even by Liberties of the Clergy, out of the laws of the realm, by John
Gooddall. Printed by Rob. Wier.
one of those books which the Note gatherer does allege against this course;
though (in truth) it have no one word tending that way. Belike he thought no
man had the book but himself; because (it may be) he casuallie happened upon
it in rifeling amongst other old books cast aside in some Stationers shop.
To like effect the same book has; that Ibid.
if a man bequeath a bullock to a church for reparation of it, or of the
churchyard: if he that has him will not deliver him, either the Churchwardens
may sue for such detinue in a court ecclesiastical, or the Ordinary may ex
Officio call him, and urge him to delivery. And the like is there testified
(being taken out of the Register) in a more grievous crime of ecclesiastical
cognizance. For (says he) Ibid. ex Regist. in br. orig. page 45. a.
if the Judge ecclesiastical cite a man of office for fornication, etc. and a
prohibition or appeal being brought, he after renounceth all delays, and
submits himself: the Judge shall proceed ad poenam Canonicam imponendam,
upon a consultation or writ unto him to be directed.

Likewise the Register is very plentiful in this behalf; as first where
Berous in rubr. de accusationibus, nu. 10.
Inquiry (which is always ex officio) is not only allowed, but commanded to
be made by a Judge ecclesiastical: Register, page 54 b.
Uobis mandamus, quod habita super praemissis per Inquisitionem and alios modos
informatione pleniori, etc. and for the very word of proceeding ex officio: as
where it was written unto the Official of the court of Canterbury or his
Commissarie thus: Register. page 57. b.
Cum vos nuper ex Officio vestro, fama publica referente, quod T. etc. vestrae
iurisdictionis C. in amplexibus fornicarijs tenet, ipsam cora^ vobis in curia
christianitatis pro correctione animae suae in hac part citari feceritis,
procedentes contra eum (ibidem) iuxta Canonicas sanctiones, etc. vobis
significamus, quod in causis praedictis, ex officio vestro, quatenus ad
correctionem animae, etc. procedere and facere poteritis, quod ad officium
vestrum speciale de iure noueritis pertinere, etc.

Likewise in another Consultation it is contained thus: viz. Cum vos Register.
page 57. a.
nuper (vt acce^imus) iuxta officij vestri debitum obieceritis Ioanni de E.
parochiano de C. quod ipse, etc. detinet, etc. vobis significamus quod in causa
praedicta quatenus adrestitutionem, etc. and ad poenam canonicam eidem I. pro
detentione eorundem legatorum imponendam coram vobis agitur licite procedere
etc. poteritis. And again thus: Cumper Register. page 54 b.
vos contra H. de Lyndesey Notariu^ publicum super Vide 3. part. c.
fornicationis crimine infra iurisdictionem vestram commisso grauiter
infamatum, tum super dicto crimine, quam super eo quod iurisdictionem vestram
per tumultum and rixas, executionesque vestras in hac part debite faciendas
nequiter impediuit, ex officio ad animae suae correctionem fuisset processum,
etc. vobis significamus, etc. quod procedere poteritis. Mention is also there
made in a precedent of a Consultation, of proceeding Register. page 51. b.
ex officio ad promotionem parochianoru^, in these words: Cum ex officio ad
promotione^ dictorum parochianorum, traxeritis in placitum, etc. vobis
significamus, quod procedere poteritis, etc. Furthermore, there is mention made
of one, who by that course was proceeded lawfully with, for refusing to pay
his usual oblations, to be confessed to the Priest, and to receive the
Communion, in these words: Register. page 50. b.
cum ipsum ex Officio vestro coram vobis ex causis praemissis euocari
feceritis, ad procedendum contra eum, ad poenam corporalem sibi pro correctione
animae suae in hac part infligendam, etc. vobis significamus, quod in dicto
placito, sic coram vobis ex Officio vestro, moto; procedere and vlterius facere
poteritis in curia Christianitatis, quod ad vos, and ad forum ecclesiasticum
noueritis pertinere, prohibitione nostra non obstante. And upon a prohibition
brought by a knight to his Ordinary, that proceeded ex Officio against him,
for certain his crimes and excesses; a Consultation was Register. page 44. b.
granted: the words of the Register are these: Cum vos nuper ad corrigendum
crimina and excessus subditorum vestrorum iuxta Officij vestri debitum
procedentes, R. de C. militi obieceritis, etc.

The like consultation is there found against a Chaplain proceeded with ex
Officio for fornication; that had also brought a prohibition. The words Reg.
page 45. a.
of the Writ unto the Ordinary be these, videlicet, Cum vos T. de W.
capellano, ex Officij vestri debito obieceritis, quod ipse carnaliter cognouit,
etc. in animae suae periculum and scandalum aliorum, vnde contra eundem ad
correctionem animae, etc. As in other consultations there, after prohibitions
(upon untrue suggestions) had been purchased.

An example is also Reg. page 51. a.
there of allowing (by Consultation) of proceeding ex Officio; to the end of
enioyning corporal punishment; against one that laid violent hands upon a
Clerk; whereby he incurreth (says the Writ) excommunication ipso facto.

Likewise an Reg. page 51. b. and 52. a.
Ordinaries proceeding ex. Officio, to the interdicting of a Church, and to the
inflicting of other Canonical pains for withholding and not finding of a
Chaplain or Curate to serve, (according to an ordination or real composition
thereof made) is there approved lawful by Consultation granted. And so is the
like proceeding of Office allowed for Reg. page 51. a.
tithes withheld, falling due to the Bishop and Archdeacon in the time of
vacation of the benefice; for by the law and custom then, in Changed by the
statute, 28. H. 8.
most Dioecesses of this realm, tithes of vacant benefices were due to them.

In the writ of Consultation alleged before out of the 57. page of the Register
for allowing proceeding ex Officio against a fornicator: it is Reg. page 57. B.
also contained; that the party before prohibition by him brought, had
submitted himself: for which cause of the parties violating his own
submission, and for his contempt mandatorum sibi factorum: the Ordinary is
authorized and warranted to deal against him, (as before he had begun) ex
officio. By all which may appear, both the practice of Inquisition, and
proceeding ex officio in some cases by the laws of the Realm, and the
allowance also by those laws, of such course holden in courts ecclesiastical
both in offenses and in other causes also, that be neither testamentarie nor
matrimonial.

But it may perhaps be said, that great abuse may hereupon follow, if the Judge
list to vex a man wrongfully: for he may pretend strong Evidence and
Information or a common fame to be against a man, or such like before showed,
whereof he is credibly advertised. Well, if it be but so much, that the
ecclesiastical Judge (when he is called by his superior) must be able to make
proof of some such: it is more then a Judge or Justice of Peace need show,
why he calls any man into question, or binds him to the peace, or to the
good behavior. And what laws can be devised, but they may be abused?
whatsoever has an use, has also an abuse, saving virtue, says Aristot. in
Rhetoric.
Aristotle. Yet if he be an Ordinary (as has bin aforeshewed) such grounds of
his proceeding must appear in Acts Iudiciallie, or be well proved: or else
(upon an Appellation) his proceeding is to be reformed.

Besides, is it not more probable that a Party which will accuse, shall do it
of malice to vex oftentimes an innocent, and to bring him into peril; then a
Judge who reapeth no commodity thereby, but satisfaction of his duty? and is
not he more like to deal in these causes with sincerity, then quilibet e
vulgo? yet by this opinion, such are permitted to accuse and to prefer matter
against any, though no fame nor other matter, no not so much as suspicion do
appear against them.

Is it not then all one, whether the innocent man be wrongfully vexed by the
Judge, or by a private person, who (in a manner) professes, that he does it of
malice? nevertheless for all this inconvenience and abuse that may happen, it
will not be thought convenient (I trust) to damme up the way from every man
both Judge and party, to prefer suites against offenders. For if it should
so be, in short time there would be neither Judge nor other, but lewd persons
only; and they might live as they list.

Yea, but it seems unreasonable (will some man say) that a man should be
called into question and not to know his Accuser. Surely if the way of
proceeding by Accusation be taken, he is to know him: but when by Inquiry,
though for the most part the Denouncer is known, yet there be many weighty
and very considerable causes, why even witnesses in cause of heresy: and much
less those that gave the information, should not be known; which every man
of himself, without rehearsal, can weie and call to mind.

Besides, this objection makes nothing against all proceeding ex officio. For
when it is grounded and instituted upon a Presentment by officers specially
appointed, their names are known to him whose process is made. Yet I must
tell you, that hereby it comes often times to pass, that mean men in parishes
abroad, and for very foul crimes, do rather make choice to be bold with their
oath and conscience, then with a delinquent, whom they have some occasion to
fear.

But (I pray) what necessity is there (in Justice) of knowing the Relatours?
may not a Jury endite a man without any cause openly appearing, as when the
matter is either known to some of them aforehand, or the Evidence (as some
times happens) is not given openly? which cases happening; the party
endited shall never know who gave the information, because they are sworn to
keep secret the Queens, their own, and their fellows counsel. Which course
for the trouble of the party supposed to be delinquent, does amount to as
much, as if the Judge ex officio mero had done it.

When the Lords of the Counsel have a supposed malefactor in examination, are
they bound in Justice, or were it but good policy to signify unto him, who it
is that gives the information; and to confront them together at first dash? but
howsoever these (by circumstances) should be thought fit to be carried, it is
neither to nor fro, to the condemnation of all proceeding upon the office of
the Judges only, as unjust, whether a man know or be ignorant, who made the
Denunciation.

CHAP. XII. A Reply to the Note-gatherers answers, given to certain reasons
that have been made long agone, for to show the like course to be also
practiced in temporal courts: and an answer to his reasons brought to
prove, that in proceeding of Office, there is some contrariety to the laws
of England.
SIr Thomas More in his aforesaid Treatises (to show that it is not simply
unjust, upon some occasion to conceal the names of those that gave the
information) alleges, that in like sort at the Common law a man may be
endited, and none evidence openly given at the bar: and that the enditers be
bound to keep the kings counsel close. To this the Notegatherer answers;
first that before the party answer, or be arraigned, he knows the matter
wherewith he is charged. So does he also in ecclesiastical courts, so soon
as the matter is objected unto him. Secondly, that the indictment goes to
particular matter, and it must be certain. And so do articles also in a court
ecclesiastical. Thirdly, that they which indite him, shall not be Judges of
him nor arraigne him. No more shall they who present or denounce a man to an
ecclesiastical Judge, be Judges of him: and therefore (whatsoever the
Note-gatherer say to the contrary) it is not aliter ex officio. Fourthly, that
Judges in such a case are to proceed circumspectly. And so must they do in
other cases as well as this: and so must ecclesiastical Judges also. Fiftlie,
that two witnesses must be at the arraignment, unless the party willingly
confess the same. And so it is in courts ecclesiastical. For without the
parties confession, or two witnesses; none may be absolutely convicted. And yet
this which he here says, is not general in all arraignments. For the statute
1. Edw. 6. c. 12.
made the 1. year of K. Edward the 6. (which hereunto he voucheth) mentions
to this purpose only treason and misprision thereof. The said statute is also
repealed since by Q. Mary. The other statute 1 and 2. Ph. and Mar. cap. 10.
1 and 2. of Philip and Mary, that he alleges, is only for such trial of
treasons, that be made treasons by that Act. For the self same Act does
appoint, all other trials of treason to be made according to the due order and
course of the Common laws. But though it were so, that at all trials two
witnesses should of necessity be present: and though it were admitted, that
his other four answers were true in fact, and that the courses of proceedings
ecclesiastical were to the contrary: yet these do not any way impugn or
overthrow sir Th. Mores reason, viz. that me^ may be endited, and not know who
gave the evidence or preferred it; in like sort as some know not who preferred
up matter of crime against them into courts ecclesiastical, and therefore this
must needs be wholly impertinent, and besides the purpose.

Unto another reason of sir Th. Mores (grounded also upon resemblance of the
practice at the Common law, unto the ecclesiastical in this behalf) viz. that
a man may be at that law arrested and imprisoned, only upon suspicion: he
frames two answers. The first of them is, that at the common law there must be
a fact precedent, whereby a cause of suspicion must be grounded: otherwise,
there lies an actio^ of false imprisonment. What? If an offense appear to be
done, shall this be sufficient (without all peril) to ground a suspicion against
any man whomsoever, that it was he which did it, and so to imprison him?
Neither yet is it general, that a fact must be precedent, before a man be
arrested. For if it be a fact of such quality and nature as leaves traces and
signs after it; as murder, Coining, and such like, which be called by
Ciuilians, facta permanentia; in the^ it is true that a fact must be precedent.
But in such facts, as leave no such traces behind them, so yt it is not certain
whether they be committed at all or not, and yet probabilities thereof do
appear (as of speeches, secret treaties of co^spiracie and treason:) for such
facts a suspected party may be arrested and imprisoned, though it be not
assuredly known, whether the fact be committed at all, or not. And these are
called facta transeuntia. Nevertheless, this is not in any sort, an answer
unto sir Th. Mores reason. For admit that a fact must always be precedent:
never the later this remains true, that a Justices only suspicion may serve
to arrest and imprison a man. And yet the law ecclesiastical (for which More
reasons) does in truth require stronger grounds for enquitie special, the^
the Judges only suspicio^, as is before at large in this second part declared.

The Note-gatherers later answer unto that reason of Mores is; that a felony
or murder being done, and a fact manifest, the party apprehended and
suspected, knows that he is to answer that fact, and not other by-ways, as
is used in the ecclesiastical proceedings. Truly, of all that ever I heard,
these answers be by-ways, and besides all way too, of any reasonable
answering objections. It may be that the party himself (especially if he be
not guilty) knows not (till he be asked) the very particular cause of his
apprehension.

But it will be said, that upon his examination, he learneth what it is. Why
sir, and so do all that be conuented in courts ecclesiastical know by their
examination, the matter objected. Then where is the difference and the by-way
that this man so talks of? But will you see his clerkelie vain of reasoning
herein? For it is, as if he had gathered it thus: viz. A man arrested, knows
that he is to answer a fact which is committed: Ergo, Albeit at the common
law a man may be arrested upon suspicion: yet proceeding ex Officio is
unlawful, how good grounds soever there be for it, far sounder then
suspicion.

For another inconvenience of proceeding by office, importing with all a
Contrariety to the laws of the Realm, the Note-gatherer assigns; that
thereby the Accessarie may be punished, and the principal may escape; which is
contrary to the Common law. The consequence hereof he goes about to prove
thus: For that (as he says) the Principal may (in those courts) be an
Informer and a witness both against the Accessarie. By which saying, his
slender skill or experience in those laws appears. For it is most notorious,
that there is no better nor more usual challenge and exception against an
Informer or witness; then to allege quod est particeps vel socius criminis
praetensi. Albeit even at the Common law, we usually see partakers and
accomplices in coining, in other kinds of treason, and for sundry heinous crimes
(especially which are secretly contrived) to be admitted to appeach and to be
witnesses, and to give evidence against others their partners.

He affirms also, but makes no show of proof thereof; that hereby the two
Jurisdictions be confounded; and that proceeding of office is derogatorie to
the laws, liberties, and customs of England. In which respect, it is
sufficient that these be as easily by us denied, as they be barelie, boldly,
and untruly by him avouched.

He further allegeth in three places (as if it were a matter very considerable)
out of Hall, and the Acts and Monuments of the Church, that by the statute of
25. H. 8. cap. 14. all proceeding of Office is repealed; and calls the
statute against Heresy, 1. H. 4. the statute ex officio, as if it had been
unknown before. First, that very statute 1. Eliz. cap. 1.
it self of H. 8. stands repealed. Secondly, it is very untrue, that it did
at any time repeal proceeding of Office. For it does not so much, as once
mention it. And therefore what any writers do name the said statute of H. 4.
thereby repealed, as I have not sought, so is it not material; seeing they
misunderstand it, if they so write. Yea, the Notegatherer himself yields,
that the said statute of K. H. 8. does establish proceeding of Office, if he
understand what himself writes. For it does appoint (and so he allegeth it)
that from thenceforth proceedings against Heretics should be upon accusation
or presentment. If upon Presentment, then of consequence by the Judges Office.
For so all laws testify; and Presenters be not Accusers or parties. For they
are severed and counter-diuided even in that very place, one against the other.

The principal drift of that statute of K. H. 8. was to provide, that an
Ordinary upon his own only suspicion should not call men into the dangerous
question of heresy, as (it seems) was before used by some of them upon color
of that statute 1. H. 4. and therefore there repealed.

The next statute, which to the same purpose he quoteth, 31. H. 8. ca. 14.
is so far from impugning proceeding of Office; that for grounding proceeding
ecclesiastical even in the crime of heresy, it provides besides Accusation
and Presentment, not only information by two witnesses; but also inquiry, and
that is always of Office. But do not these men draw near the lees, when they
are driven thus to allege the statute of Six Articles (being also repealed)
against proceeding of Office? I had thought their courage in the pretended
cause of sincerity, had been so great; that they would rather have quit the
place, with loss of their cause, then once to have borrowed so much as the
shadow of a weapon, out of that store house.

Against this course the Note-gatherer also allegeth certain books printed in
king Henry the eights days Cum priuilegio. These he terms to be the manner
of debating that cause in those days. The first was made by S. German (as it
is thought) and is entitled, The division of the Spirituality and Temporaltie:
with his reply against Sir Thomas Moore, entitled Salem and Bizance. The
next, concerning the power of the clergy and laws of the Realm. The third
entitled, Of the liberties of the clergy collected out of the laws of the
Realm by John Goodall, and printed by Robert Wier, but without privilege. And
the last, Marsilij Patauini Defensor Pacis in English, with the Kings and her
Majesty's mothers arms; which (belike) he mentions, that they may stand in
stead of privilege. But will you see, what great and strong debating there was
of this matter, by the said four books? Truly, saving in the first of them,
there is not a word mentioned against proceeding of Office. And in Goodalles
book, by sundry places thereof (as is elsewhere in this Apology alleged)
this kind of proceeding is plainly avouched to be a Liberty of the Clergy,
given unto them by the laws of the Realm.

And all that is said in that one book Of division betwixt the temporaltie and
spirituality. cap. 7.
and one only place thereof, is no more but thus, word by word; viz. Another
cause of division, for that diverse suites have been taken ex officio; so that
the parties have not known, who have accused them: and thereupon they have
been caused to abjure in cause of heresy, sometime to do penance, and to pay
great sums of money for redeeming. Which vexation they thought came by the
Judges and the Officers. Therefore the fault that he then found, was not the
very proceeding of Office; but for that it was handled in such sort, that the
party knew not who gave the information, which he calls Accusing; and for
that it was in cause of heresy: being a crime of far more important danger
to the party, then any other offense Ecclesiastical: yet not challenging the
very proceeding thereby for unlawful, but as being (with such circumstances)
some cause of division between the two states, as he surmised. The soundness
of which judgment I mind not here to examine.

The Note-gatherer urges further, that the Popish bishops were deprived in
king Edward the sixth his time, by Accusation or Presentment; though (as it
seems) he knows not by whether of them. But what if they at that time had
been proceeded with otherwise then of Office? Would this prove all proceeding
of Office to be contrary to the laws of England; which is his drift and
purpose? Yet I have often showed before, that Presentment is a preparatorie
course peculiar only to proceeding by special inquiry of office. But for
plain proof in fact, that they were in deed proceeded with ex officio
Iudicum; I refer me to the acts judicial of their deprivation yet remaning,
and to that also which I have written in a certain chapter of the third part
of this book.

Here it will not be unseasonable to admonish the Reader once for all of a
palpable Advertisement of an error.
mistaking both of the Note-gatherer and Treatisour in a material point; who
by the whole course of their writings and titles of their books, seem to
imagine, proceeding ex Officio to signify nothing else, then ministering of an
oath to the suspected party in a cause criminal: Whereas (in very truth)
there may be some proceeding of Office, though that oath be not at all urged or
used; yea and where it ought not to be imposed, though it were urged. Like as
on the contrary side, there may be proceeding even by way of Accusation, where
the oath may and ought to be exacted for the parties purgation: perhaps
burdened by great probabilities, yet not being so pregnant, as to convict him.
And therefore without all color of reason, and ignorantly do they and some
others (as the late Petitioner to her Majesty) confound proceeding of Office,
with ministering of an oath, being but one Act thereof: which is in deed
sometimes, but not always, no; nor yet alonely used in that course of
proceeding. Nevertheless, taking it whether way they lust, the said Popish
bishops were in truth proceeded with of Office, though denounced by certain,
and (as is expreslie set down of some of them) were urged, and did answer the
Articles objected upon their corporal oaths; which (by law) they needed not,
and therefore (as it is likely) would not have done, if the Denunciatours had
been parties.

To prove this course to be against law, he allegeth also out of a book made
Defense of Priests marriages. page 175.
by D. Parker sometime Archbishop of Canterbury these words: viz. The very
front of her Graces articles (meaning Queen Marie) charge the
ecclesiastical Ordinaries to put in execution the Canons and Ecclesiastical
laws, none other but such, as were used in the time of king Henry the eight.
And commands also moreover, that those should no further be put in execution,
but as they may stand with the laws and statutes of the land. What then? Ergo,
all proceeding of Office (though continually practiced in sundry matters in
both their reigns, without contradiction) is contrary to the Laws of the
Realm? Truly, if there be one method of sound reasoning (as Ramus holds
concerning teaching of Arts) I would be sorry this kind of disputing should
be it. For I have not been taught, nor shall ever learn (I think) either to
reason thus, or to put such Enthymemata into true Syllogismes; viz. Such Canons
only were then to be put in execution, as might stand with the laws of the
Realm. Ergo, proceeding of Office is contrary to the laws of the Realm.

His last allegation (falling into this place to be discussed) that he brings
in maimed also, to prove this proceeding to be against the laws of England,
is out of one of her Majesty's Injunctions, Iniunction. 50.
Against slanderous and infamous words, which is thus verbatim: viz. Her
Majesty straightly commands all manner her subjects, to forbear all vain and
contentious disputations in matters of religion: and not to use in despite or
rebuke of any person, these conuicious words, Papist or Papisticall heretic,
Schismatike, or Sacramentarie; or any such like words of reproach: But if any
manner of person shall deserve the accusation of any such; that first he be
charitablie admonished thereof: and if that shall not amend him, then to
denounce the offender to the Ordinary, or to some higher power, having
authority to correct the same. But what (I pray) can be gathered hereof, more
then a care to retain private persons in a charitable course, one toward
another, without reproachful words, upon any differences of opinions? Or does
this reach to the abrogating of any course of proceeding? Nay, rather it does
establish it, seeing upon Denunciation (which is here mentioned) proceeding of
Office may be grounded, but not Accusation.

But the Treatiser says that hereby the same man is Judge and Accuser: which
is contrary to the policy of this Realm, that suffers not an Accusor to be a
witness, nor an Enditour to be a Iuror for trial of the fact. I answer, that
the first is untrue. For that which opens way to the Judges Inquiry is
holden (by Law) as the Accusour, and not the Judge. Touching the second, I
have showed out of statutes, that witnesses be called Accusors: therefore that
is not contrary to the policy of the Realm: and yet is it contrary to Civil
and Canon Laws. For the third; if his reason a simili be good, then is the
Iuror as a Judge, and the Enditour as an Accusour. And in deed what do their
affections differ? and yet what more frequent then for an Enditour to give in
evidence upon his oath; or for one Iurour upon his own knowledge, to get an
Enditement found? Therefore for a witness, to be a kind of Accusour; and an
Accusour to be a kind of Judge, is not contrary to the policy of this Realm.

Hitherto in answer of allegations, and objections made against proceeding of
Office, and brought for proof of some contrariety, unto the Laws of the
Realm.

CHAP. XIII. That the Inquiry ex Officio against Crimes, is allowed both in
Civil or Temporal Courts and in Ecclesiastical also, by the two Laws Canon
and Civil.
TO prove that the Canon and Civil laws both, do allow of the course, I
shall not need to stand long: because so much has by the way very often,
(though hitherto not of purpose) been declared. To allege therefore for the
former once for all, it is the Archid. in c. foelicis. sin. de pactis in 6. and
Marianus in c. qualiter and quando. de accus. nu. 108.
common opinion, that by the Canons, Judges Ecclesiastical may indifferently
in every Crime being within their Jurisdiction, proceed ex Officio, for the
common benefit. And (as was upon another occasion alleged before) Abb. in c.
1. de officio Ordinarii.
when the Inquiry is made to the purpose of correcting for the souls health,
and not of punishing, the Judge may proceed ex Officio, though no fame were
precedent. And again; Angel. in. fin. Auth. quom. oport. epis.
when an Inquiry is made of any Crime committed against the Majesty of God,
as heresy, blasphemy, etc. the inquiry is of validity, though it be without
the solemnities of place, time, etc.

By the Civil Law it is so allowed of, as it is called a proceeding per
Nobile Iudicis Officium. In the old Common weal of Rome, what was more usual
with their great Magistrates then habere quaestionem, to make special
enquiries and trials of supposed offenders? one Liuius lib. 39.
or two in stead of many may suffice. L. Posthumous the Praetour had Tarentum
assigned unto him for his Province; and there he made severe Inquisition
against such Shepherds that had conspired and lincked themselves together, and
made all High ways and Commons (by their robberies) most dangerous to be
passed. Of which sort of persons he thereupon condemned seven thousand. Those
Magistrates that L. 12. ff. de peric. rei vend. l. 14 ff locati. l. 12. ff. de
decurion bus.
were called Aediles, had authority by their Office upon a summary knowledge
had of the cause (such as is used in Pie-powder Courts here) to break all
unlawful measures, to overthrow, destroy, and mar false and corrupted
wares, and to punish those that offered them to sale: yea and sometimes also to
beat with rods. This proceeding was so well known to all in those times,
that Tertullian an ancient father of the Church does put the Emperors to whom
he writes, in mind of their own laws, whereof he there urges Tertullian. in
Apolog. ca. 2.
execution. If I be not deceived (says he) the Civil Laws do command,
that malefactors be sought up and found out; and not to be concealed, etc.
This is appointed by the decrees of the Senate, by the Ordinances of Emperors,
and by the very Empire it self; whose ministers you are. And again
Tertullian. ibid. c. 4.
in another place thus: Nulla lex vetat discuti, quod prohibet admitti.
Whatsoever any Law forbids to be done, assuredly it permits to be sought out,
and sifted. Let us see (says the L. 3.. Praeterea. ff. desuspect. tutoribus.
Civil Law) whether a Gardein of an infant that is suspected, may be removed
from his Gardeinship without any accusation. and it is received that he ought
to be, if by evident tokens it appear to the Praetour, that such a Tutour is
to be suspected.

And albeit the Gloss. in l. 2.. si publico. ff. de adult.
gloss say, that ordinarily (by that Law) the Judge proceeds not ex
Officio: yet by reason of the strait course holden thereby with all Accusours,
so that Accusation is now almost generally through the world grown in disuse:
it is therefore by Gandinus de malefic. tit. quomodo cognos. nu. 6. and passim
alii.
such general custom made lawful in every cause, for a Judge to proceed (at
the Civil Law) ex Officio. So that (considering such Bald. in l. 1.. in
initio. ff. de offic. praesidis.
custom) it is as ordinary a remedy now, as Accusation. And some reason
hereof is assigned to be this, that the Law judges even an Accusour not to be
wanting in such proceeding, for that Prae. Millei. fol. 3. nu. 31.
in every Crime, Fiscus est Accusator, the common interest is the Accusour: and
it is so far from being a course disallowed by that Law, that Angel. de
malef. ver. haec est quaedam. and ibi Aug. in addit. a. nu. 12. vsque ad 48.
(albeit there were no such custom at all) yet there be very many cases,
wherein by the very express disposition of that law, the Judge may proceed
ex Officio. Nay it is thus testified by a great Lawyer, that Io. Andr. in add.
Specul. tit. de Inquisitione.. quando autem.
in any case whatsoever even by the Civil law, it is permitted to the Judge
to proceed of Office, and so by way of Inquiry.

And this is received, not only in public and popular misdemeanors, but
also in private offenses. For Decius cons. 170. nu. 1. quod est communis opinio.
in these (without either complaint or Accusation) the Judge may proceed of
Office by way of Inquiry. Albeit the Law set not down for such, any certain
(either corporal or pecuniarie) penalty; for then such an offendour is
punishable, by some extraordinary penalty. The reason of this proceeding in
private Crimes is, the very interest, that the Common wealth has, to have such
offenses punished. By reason of which common interest, Bald. in l. 1. C. qui
accusare non possunt.
even where there is an Accuser, yet if he be away, the Judge ex Officio may
proceed and go on in the cause. And so it is observed by common practice, in
Civil law Courts. The like is to be said when the party will collude with
the Bartolus in l. inter omnes. recte ff. de furtis.
malefactor: for if he that was robbed will collude with the thief, and say
he was not robbed: yet if there be likelihood to the contrary, the party is
not believed, but the Judge proceeds ex Officio, quia interest Reipub. puniri
furtum.

Touching the penalty due, upon such proceeding, some writers hold, that D D.
in c. qualiter. el. 2. de accus.
the ordinary pain appointed by Law, is not to be inflicted upon proceeding
of Office. But they also make these exceptions: viz. that this does not hold,
Innoc in d. ca.
where the Crime is notorious: nor Card. Alexand. in c. de accusat. col. 39.
where the defendant upon the inquiry confesses the Crime: nor by the
Plerique omnes D D.
course of the Civil Law. For in these cases they affirm that the very
ordinary pain (expressed in the Law) may be imposed. But it is assured,
Clarus lib. 5. fin. qu. 49.
that by Custom at both these Laws not only a milder pain, but the very set
pain of Law it self may be inflicted, even when a Judge has proceeded of
Office.

But here some may object, that those Laws do seem sometimes to require an
Accuser. It is true: but neither always, nor of necessity, as has been
opened. And it is showed before, that public interest stands in steed of an
Accuser. Likewise the c. qualiter and quando cl. 2. de accusat.
Law accounts fame precedent to be a kind of Accuser. And where fame
wants, other Bartol. in l. congruit. ff. de Off. praesidis.
presumptions, and Indicia or evidences are (in this behalf) equivalent unto a
fame.

It may further perhaps be urged, that by Civil law, this Inquiry ex
officio, is counted an extraordinary remedy. If it were so admitted to be,
what would this avail those, that oppugn it simply? for the rule is, Vbi
cessat remedium Ordinarium, ibi decurritur ad extraordinarium. And it is not
holden, nor is otherwise likely, if a party will seriously and with effect
prosecute, but that the Ordinary Judge will cease further to deal therein, ex
officio: yet it is a little before signified, that by reason of such general
custom, this Inquiry ex officio, is become, even by the Civil Law, to be an
Ordinary remedy. And besides that custom, wheresoever Specul. Marran. de
Inquisit. nu. 39.
Inquiry of office is specially permitted either by Law (as in many cases) or
by statute, there it is as ordinary a remedy as Accusation. And by the Ibid.
nu. 48.
Canon Law, it is absolutely an ordinary remedy.

I have also heard it to have been objected against this course, that bad and
infamous persons suggestions have been accepted. If it be so, it is but the
fault of persons, not of the Law. And if by an Appellation from any ordinary
Court, this point come to hammering; it will not be found absolutely
justifiable. yet experience teaches, that not only Relatours (that be
infamous and bad persons) be in some cases admitted by the Laws of this
Realm, but (which is more) they are permitted also to be witnesses. As both
infamous persons, and those that be partakers with the appeached in treasons,
murders, and felonies: which is permitted in favor of the Prince and common
wealth, in detestation of such grievous crimes, and for the very nature of the
crimes, which are (for the most part) so performed; as none honest persons,
but such as themselves, are or can be privy unto them.

Upon the same grounds, the Civil Law also admits the like witnesses.
Therefore is it testified to be Decius consilio 342. nu. 8.
the common opinion of writers in that Law, that for the horriblenes of some
crimes, witnesses otherwise disabled in Law, may be received, as in here sie
and in Treason. Also when the truth of the matter cannot otherwise be had:
therefore the rule is, that when the fact is of such quality, that other
witnesses cannot by any possibility be had, in such case those shall be
admitted, that are in other cases forbidden by law. Therefore none of these,
nor any such like frivolous objections, will be able to overthrow this course
so manifoldly grounded both upon those former several laws, and also upon
reason.

CHAP. XIIII. An answer to such objections, as upon the Civil or Canon laws
are brought against all proceeding of Office in causes Criminal by the
Treatisour and the Note-gatherer.
AGainst all that is or may be brought out of those two laws for confirmation
hereof, the Treatisour rather exclaimeth, then obiecteth; that they are strange
laws, strange and foreign proceedings; and I know not against what
pretended strange courses, he bitterly inueieth: as if nothing that is used
els-where in the world, could savor of Justice besides our own; or might be
received amongst us, how apt or beneficial soever it be otherwise.
Nevertheless, we find in the books of terms and years, many things
reported out of the Civil and Canon laws; yea and many rules taken out of
them, which are there both alleged and allowed of. That sage and prudent
Senate, with the whole people of Rome, when of twelve Tables (which contained
the ground of all their laws) ten of them were transcribed and taken out of
the laws of sundry commonweals then in Greece: they neither held it any
disparage to their own Nation; nor in that respect accounted them the less to
be Roman laws.

Though it were granted, that the proceeding of office in Courts Civil and
Ecclesiastical with us, was drawn at first from those two laws: yet the same
or like proceeding, which is used in sundry temporal Courts here; perhaps
will not be judged to have bin taken and borrowed from those two laws; but
rather to have bin the very old original custom and Common law of the land.
Which consideration (if it be true) must needs (in mine opinion) make much for
the approving of the reasonableness and equity of that proceeding: when as
several nations, by one instinct of the light of reason, have so long iumped
and hitte upon one and the same course; without borrowing it, the one of the
other. But from whencesoeuer any of these courts in this la^d, have borrowed
their proceeding of office; seeing temporal Courts of the Realm have practice
of the like course, and those laws do allow it also unto Courts
ecclesiastical according to the use even of so many hundreths of years, as
this Nation has bin Christian: therefore these Vide preamb. stat. 25. H. 8. c.
21.
proceedings ought not now at length to be accounted either foreign or strange
from our policy, but rather as our own homebred English laws, and her
Majesty's laws ecclesiastical, as they be often termed in acts of Parliament.
It is true which is said out of the Civil law, Ea nostra facimus, quibus
auctoritatem l. 1. C. de Vet. iure emendando.
nostram impartimur: Those things we make ours, upon which we bestow our
authority, whether expressly, or by implication, upon long continuance of
practice.

The Note-gatherer to the intent to prove (as may be gathered) that the Civil
laws do disallow this proceeding, says: It is to be proved, that the Pagan
Greeks and Romans, ordinarily used In criminibus violatae religionis, no such
manner of proceeding, but Per accusationem.

It is warely said by him, that it is to be proved; because as yet it is not
done. But if it could be proved, that they used none other (the contrary
whereof is made apparent) does it thereupo^ follow, that we may not; or that al
other courses be unjust? or if they used not any other, then Accusation
ordinarily; that therefore they used not proceeding of office at all? or if not
in that one crime violatae religionis; that therefore in none other crime
whatsoever?

Unto this Chapter are many of those quotations to be referred, which the
Note-gatherer has mustered and thronged together in his first title, which is
this, viz. testimonies out of the ancient fathers, that do mislike the
proceeding ex officio, and oath now used. But like as many of them be
altogether mutes, both in the one point and the other: so sundry of them that
are compelled to give evidence and to say somewhat; do not once mention an
oath; yet happily speak somewhat of Inquiry or Accasation. Yea, and his maine
conclusion, which he propounds unto him self in that title to prove,
reaches no further, nor is otherwise then thus: Inquisitio ab imperatoribus
prohibita. Such of them therefore belong to this disputation. But this
conclusion of his might be true; and yet neither the parties oath in a
criminal cause any whit impeached; nor all proceeding of office thereby
disallowed. Nevertheless whether all proceeding by inquiry be prohibited by
the Emperors shall appear. For I mind here to examine every of his quotations
falling into this place by peece-meale. In that his quotation out of Eusebius
3. book and 30. Chapter, no matter (sounding to either of these ways) is
contained: but he writes there of S. Ignatius. Likewise in his 4. book. and
13. Chap. nothing is touched, but of Polycarpus. And in the 17. Chapter of the
same book, no more. For he only mentions there the writings of Justinius
Martyr. Paul. Diaco^ lib. 10. in v. ta Traiani.
Paulus Diaconus in the place by him quoted, but not alleged (for he alleges
no place at all in that whole title) says thus: Traianus the Emperor writ
back to Plinius Secundus, Christianos profide nullatenus inquirendos: that
Christians for that they believed, should not at all be enquired after, or
sought for. To the like effect Tertullian Tertul Apolog. c. 2. Nicephor. li. 3.
ca. 17.
says in the place by him quoted, viz. Traianus rescripsit hoc genus
inquire^dos quidem non esse; oblatos vero puniri oportere; Traian by his
rescript decreed, that this kind of men should not be enquired after: but being
offered or hit upon should be punished.

It is manifest therefore hereby, that albeit in some favor to the Christians
(who^ he saw so constantly and in such multitudes, little less then to offer
themselves unto death for profession of Christ) he commanded, that they should
not of purpose be enquired after and sought up, which is done by general
inquiry, and not by special: yet notwithstanding neither the one inquiry, nor
the other was by him condemned or forbidden. For special inquiry is not spoken
of there at al: and general inquiry (as I showed before 2. part. c. 7.
out of Duarenus) is hereby plainly established; insomuch as this course
(being but now newly forbidden) does prove, that it was lawful and in use
before: and being but concerning Christians only, it argues that al malefactors
besides, were still (as they had bin before) enquired after, and d^ligently
sought up, the law Civil being left, as it was before. But how lawful and
expedient Tertullian thought inquiry to be (if the Christians had been
malefactors in deed, as the Emperor and other heathen then held them) the
next words following Tertul. Apolog. cap. 2. 1
containing his judgment touching that decree) do plainly show. Oh (says
he) what a decree is this, that necessarily overthrows and confounds it
self? He denies that they are to be enquired, as holding them innocents; and
yet appoints the^ to be punished as malefactors: he spares them, and is cruel
toward them: he winkes at them, and yet does punish them. How falls it out
(o Emperor) that thou entanglest thy self by thine own judgment? Si damnas,
cur non and inquiris? If thou condemnest them, why do thou not also use
inquiry against them? If thou will not use inquiry toward them, why do
thou not quit them, as guiltless? Through all thy Provinces, for searching up
of Robbers, Militaris statio sortitur, certain set soldiers (called
Stationarij) are by lotte assigned: and against traitors and common enemies
every man is as largely authorized, as any such soldier. Yea, and Inquisition
does reach also unto Accomplices and concealers. Then belike of all other, only
a Christian may not be enquired against, and yet he may be offered unto
punishment.

Hereunto also serves that, which the same ancient father writes in that
book afterward, and is alleged by Nicephorus in one of the places Tertul.
Apolo. c. 6. Niceph. li. 4. cap. 12.
that are quoted by the Note-gatherer: so far is it from serving his turn
any way. What injustice then do such Judges to us (says Tertullian) which
make enquiries alonely against us, and that wickedly, unjustly, and cruelly?
Whom Vespasianus albeit a conqueror of the Jews, commanded not to be
straightly watched: For whose sake, Traiane in part disanulled the public
laws, in that he forbade Christians to be enquired after: and whom neither The
old Civil laws appointed enquiries.
Hadrian (albeit he was a most curious searcher into all matters) nor he that
was named Pius, would allow to be persecuted.

Yet if this prohibition of Traiane had bin so to be understood, that special
inquiry should not be used against Christians: how little nevertheless this
would make for the absolute condemnation of all proceeding in that course, may
appear by the like decrees, which were also made by Emperors in favor of
Christians, that they should not so much as be accused. For the same father
elsewhere says thus: Tertul. Apolog. cap. 5.
Tiberius Caesar persisted in his opinion, and threatened great dangers to all
Accusers of Christians. Nicephorus likewise, in the next aforesaid place,
Niceph. li. 4. c. 12.
alleged by the Notegatherer himself, thus writes out of Tertullian: That
Marcus Antoninus the Emperor, after that the Christian Legton in great
distress of his whole host (being ready to perish for thirst) had by prayer
obtained a shower at Gods hand; did appoint a fearful kind of death to all
that would institute Accusation against any Christians.

To the same purpose both Eusebius, Eusebius l. 4. c. 12.
and the said Niceph. li. 3. c. 28.
Nicephorus, do write in two places (quoted also by the Note-gatherer, as if
they served his purpose) out of Antoninus his edict. My father (says the
edict) did decree, that this sort of men should not be troubled, except they
commit some crime against the Roman empire. And therefore, if any shall
hereafter dare to trouble or impute crime unto any Christian, only for that he
is a Christian; let him that is so accused, be acquitted; albeit he be found
indeed to be a Christian. But let him that accused him be duly punished, as he
has deserved.

Now because in favor of the Christians, these several Emperors did command
as well that they should not be accused, as Traian did that they should not be
enquired after and sought up: shall we therefore hereupon gather, that neither
accusation nor inquisition might be used by the law of the Romans against any
offenders? or that these ancient fathers (which report the^) misliked of both
those proceedings, and so (upon the matter) condemned all proceeding and
punishing of any offenders whatsoever? But if this be most absurdly gathered;
then consequently are these his allegations friuolously and absurdly alleged,
to prove, either an absolute or simple prohibition, or any mislike at all of
proceeding by inquiry and of Office against offenders.

In Dion Cassius (whom to like end he quoteth) the life of the Emperor Nerua is
not found. In Dion Nicaeus abridged by Xiphilinus, Xiph. in Ne^ua.
these words be read in the life of Nerua, which it may be he meant. (...). The
emperor would not permit the rest, to accuse certain persons either of
impiety, or of Jewish profession: by which term the Christian religion is
thought to be meant. What? Because he forbad certain to be acused of those
crimes, does it hereupon follow that inquiry of Office (which is a several
course from accusation) was wholly mislliked? This might therefore with some
more color (considering that which follows) have been brought against the
course of proceeding by accusation, and yet impertinenly enough also. For in
the same place Ibidem.
it is recorded thus: (...). No small tumult was stirred up hereupon, for that
every one did accuse whom he listed.

There remains yet one quotation to be spoken of, that is to be referred to
this place, which he brings out of Eusebius Eusebius. li. 4. c. 9. Niceph. li.
3. e. 37.
and Nicephorus; where Adrian the Emperor thus writes unto Minutius Fundanus.
If the men of that province in justification of their request can bring and
affirm any thing truly and plainly against the Christians, whereby before the
tribunal seat by due course of judgment they may be convicted: then let them
only bend themselves to that purpose. But I can by no means endure it, that
they should be put to death, only upon the petitions and outcries of the
multitude. But this has no kind of show, either against Accusation or
Inquiry of Office. For it condemns only the merciless and cruel injustice
of some Deputies; who to gratify the clamorous common people, were contented
to execute the poor Christians without any proofs.

To this place perteine also the Note-gatherers allegations c. qualiter and
quando. el. 2. de accusat. c. ad abolendam. etc. excommunicamus. Qui autem. de
haereticis. c. cum contumacia. de haereticis. in 6.
out of the Canon law: yet they are so far from impugning proceeding by way of
Inquiry, that they do very especially establish it. Which though he be not
ignorant of, and being so plain, cannot dissemble: nevertheless he does sum
them, and withal affirms (though untruly) that the bishops proceedings are
to the contrary; whereas all ecclesiastical Judges will yield unto him, that
those Canons both are and ought to be observed, so far as the statutes of the
Realm does warrant them; saving in such points as himself has misreported
them. For first, where a Bishop (as was then for the most part used, but now by
long prescription worn out, which prescription Panor. d. c. Qualiter.
is also of validity and force) did in all weighty matters perscrutari
diligentius causam coram ecclesiae Senioribus: that is, examined the^ before
his Chapter, or so many of them as would be present; this he peruerteth thus:
causa perscrutanda ab ecclesiae Senioribus: as if from the Canon law he could
hammer us out the Lay elderships, that be dreamed of; and could make them in
every parish the Judges of that which was only done by Bishops, coram, in the
presence of the Praebendaries of the Cathedral Church, but not by them.
Secondly, whereas only in proceeding against a Prelate it is required, that the
excess be grievous; this he does make general and indifferent to all
enquiries against any whomsoever. Thirdly, he has forged of his own head
besides the text there, that to the intent of degradation, a Judge
ecclesiastical may not proceed by way of Inquisition, but by accusation only.

And for specification of such contrarieties as he surmiseth to be in bishops
proceedings against those alleged Canons, he first says; that their oath is
not abiurationis or purgationis. It is true, that besides these two, some
oaths which they minister, are veritatis dicendae, upon the crime enquired of.
Which oath one of his own Canons by him quoted, might have taught him, if he
had read it over. viz. c. accusatus.. licet vero. de haeret. in 6.
Coram Inquisitoribus iurantes, tam de se, quam de alijs, super facto haeresis
dicere veritatem. If then in heresy, much more in other crimes. And in truth
there is not one word in any of those Canons tending to restreine al oaths unto
abiuration and purgation alone; as to any that list peruse them, will be
manifest.

The next contrariety unto them he assigns, c. accusatus. de haeret. in 6.
Clem. 1. de haereticis.
for that Ordinaries and Commissioners ecclesiastical deal by way of Enquiry
in other matters then heresy. Herein he childishly mistaketh his book; and
yet will he be dealing in matters, wherein he seems to me, to have no insight
at all, howsoever (perhaps) he do flatter himself otherwise. For no Canons do
forbid Ordinaries to deal in any matters criminal, being of ecclesiastical
conisance; nor any others in causes duly committed unto them; whether they
deal by the one course of proceeding, or by the other. But Inquisitours for
heresy, having that matter only delegated unto them by their Commission, are
in deed there forbidden; that by color thereof, they should not reach out
their authority, unto matters no way touching the crime of heresy. So that
the prohibition there, is for matters that are out of their Commission; and not
for any manner of proceeding. For they may not deal in matters, that are not
committed to them, any more upon Accusation, then they may do by way of
Inquiry.

The third contrariety surmised by him to be in Bishops proceedings against the
Canons c. statuta. de haeret. in 6.
is; that they suffer not publication to be made of the witnesses depositions:
which is a mere slander, without any color of truth. Nevertheless, when by
publication of the witnesses names that have deposed in matter of heresy,
great peril might grow unto them through the friends of the impeached, or
otherwise: in that case only the Canons (with certain moderation and cautions)
do permit (upon the Judges discretion) the names of the witnesses to be
suppressed from the defendant, and to be kept from being published abroad at
all.

Thus much concerning objections made by the Treatiser and Note-gatherer out of
the Civil and Canon laws, against all proceeding of Offfce with offenders.

CHAP. XV. Enquiry and proceeding of Office, r^thout an accuser, and grounded
upon some other of the means (before) proved sufficient to enter into such
enquiry, is approved by sundry examples of Scripture.
FOr proceeding against crimes by inquiry, and of Office sometimes upon the
denunciation of one, sometimes upon fame or hearsay, sometimes upon
notoriousnesse of the fact, and sometimes upon a suspicion only conceived: but
still without party to accuse and prosecute; we find diverse not obscure
traces in the Scripture it self.

Under the law of nature, when Gene. 38. V. 24. and 25.
one told Judah prince or head of his family (and therefore a magistrate)
that Thamar his daughter in law in her widowhood was begot with child, at that
man's only relation without further accusation, and upon the notorious evidence
of the fact, of Office he gave sentence that she should be burned.

When Joseph Genesis 44. V. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10.
had caused his silver cup to be put in Beniamins sack, and had sent his
steward to search them all, who also charged them with this theft, and upon
pretended suspicion only, did enter to an inquiry, and to make further search:
yet there was none of them that appealed to the law of nations, as if they were
unjustly dealt with, having none accuser, but joined issue with him, and flatly
denied the matter.

In the trial of Number. 5. V. 12. and deinceps.
ielousy upon the only suspicion of the husband, (though something be
extraordinary therein and ceremonial) yet by that enquiry of the Priests (to
the apparent great peril of the woman if she were faulty) we may note this
part of justice in course of that judgment: viz. that there is none accuser or
party, that pretendes he can or will prove it. For of the husband (who finds
himself grieved, and therefore only denounces her to the Priest) it is said,
this inquiry shall be made, because Verse. 14.
the spirit of jealousy is upon him. It is also there said to be done, when
Verse. 13.
the sin is secret, and the husband knows it not, but only suspecteth it:
and when there is no witness against her, nor she taken in the manner: and
therefore such, as it may not be intended the husband becomes the accuser,
pretending to make proof of the very fact: yet nevertheless it is testified
there, that for bringing her to so dangerous an enquiry and trial, the Ibid. V.
31.
husband shall be free from sin.

If a man be entised secretly to Idolatry, by him or her that is dearest and
nearest unto him; God commands thus in this case: Deuteronomy. 13. V. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Thou shall not consent unto him, nor hear him, neither shall thine eye pity
him, nor show mercy, nor keep him secret: but thou shall even kill him, thine
hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and then the hands of all
the people, and thou shall stone him with stones that he die. In that it is
here said, Thou shall not keep him secret, and that the hands of all the
people must be upon him, it appears yt the judgment must be public, and not
done by private authority alone: for Mat. 26. V. 52.
every one that (by vsurpatio^) takes the sword, shall perish with the sword.
Then, if this judgment must be public; where is there any Accuser? for he
that reueileth and denounces it, is a witness; in that his hand must be upon
him, according to that other part of the law, viz. The Deuteronomy. 17. V. 7.
hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to kill him and afterward the
hands of all the people. Nay, how can such an entiser possibly be condemned,
except it be upon his own examination; and so by course of inquiry, seeing
Nomb. 35. V. 30. Deuteronomy. 17. V. 6.
one witness shall not testify against a person, to cause him to die? so that
here we have in Gods own law a judicial course, in a capital matter and
secret, instituted upon one private man's denunciation: who is so far from
being an Accuser properly taken, that he is a witness: and the sin to be found
out by course of inquiry upon the parties own examination; in so much as
there can be (in this case) none other way of conviction.

Likewise in the same chapter, it is prescribed thus: that Deuteronomy. 13. V. 12 13,
14, 15.
if thou shall hear say (concerning any of the cities, which the Lord thy God
has given thee to dwell in) wicked men are gone out from among you, and have
drawn away the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other
gods, which ye have not known: then thou shall seek and make search, and
enquire diligently: and if it be true and the thing certain, etc. thou shall
even slay the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword: destroy it
utterly and all that is therein, and the cattle thereof with the edge of the
sword: where we plainly find, diligent inquiry upon hearsay and fame
commanded, and prosecuted of office even unto condemnation and execution;
without any mention of Accuser or prosecuter of the cause.

In the same book afterward, and for the crime of idolatry likewise, it is
thus appointed: Deuteronomy. 17. V. 4, 5
If it be told unto thee, and thou have heard it, then thou shall enquire
diligently: and if it be true and the thing certain, that such abomination is
wrought in Israel; then shall thou bring forth that man, etc. and shall stone
him with stones till he die. So that here also we have a fame, or perhaps but
the denunciation of one man, whereupon the magistrates inquiry is grounded;
and upon the inquiry the magistrates sentence (finding the matter true and
certain) and the execution of the judgment; all without Accuser or prosecuter.

For grounding proceeding criminal without accusation, upon the notoriousnesse
of the fact; we have a course prescribed in these Deuteronomy. 22. V. 22.
words: If a man be found lying with a woman married to a man, then both twain
shall die. And Ibid. V. 28.
again, If a man find a maid that is not betrothed, and take her and lie with
her, and they be found, then shall he give, etc. therefore upon taking in the
manner, proceeding unto condemnation and execution is warranted, though there
be none Accuser, but only the witnesses, that depose it.

So the Iosu. 9. V. 22, 23.
Gibeonites for their apparent guilefull dealing, falling out by their own
confession upon examination; were condemned by Joshua unto perpetual slavery,
without any Accusation.

When the Iosu. 22. V. 11. etc.
children of Israel heard say that Reuben, Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh
had built an altar contrary to Gods word, as they at first conceived it: they
purposed to war upon them; yet thought good to delegate ten princes unto
them first, to take their answer and excuse. So that upon the fame brought
unto the men of Israel (without any set Accusers) they entered into further
Inquisition and examination of this matter. The 2. Reg. 5.
prophet Elisha had the sin of Gehazi his servant divinely reueiled unto him;
and was authorized by God to condemn him, and to punish him for it: yet sought
he none other to accuse his servant, and to object that crime unto him, besides
himself, that was to judge him. Upon ye only outcry Act. 22. and 23.
of the multitude against Paul, the chief captain (not ignorant of the law of
the Romans) brought him before the great Council of the Jews, without any
particular Accuser or Prosecutour there mentioned: notwithstanding that
general Outcrie be Acts. 22. V. 30. and 23. V. 6.
termed an Accusing in that place, but not properly.

Furthermore, at the only Deuteronomy. c. 22. V. 14. etc.
denunciation of an husband, that he found not his wife a Virgin, she is put to
her clearing before the Judges. Wherein if she clear her self, then without
her further mediation (the Denouncer) her husband is to be chastised by the
Elders, and condemned in a fine to the father of the woman for his
calumniation, and unjust bringing her name into question, and life into danger.
But if she be not found a maid, she is to be put to death: so that the one of
these sentences, must needs be of the Judges office alone. For if the husband
be the Accuser of the woman, then must the condemnation of him be ex Officio;
because his own complaint reaches no further, but to his wives condemnation
or clearing. But if the woman's father be said in this process to he the
Accuser of the husband, then is the wives condemnation done ex Officio. So we
find that Daniel Dan. 13. V. 51. and sic deinceps.
proceeded without any other party against the wicked Elders ex mero Officio.
For he was both Judge, examiner, and Accuser.

By the Luke 16. V. 2.
parable of the wastfull Steward we are taught, that upon credible reports
only, we may enter into examination and enquiry of the misdemeanour of such,
as be under our authority. How is it (says the rich man there to his
Steward) that I hear this of thee? give an account of thy Stewardshippe. And
he looked for none other to Accuse, then himself that was to judge.

When by divine revelation the hidden and close hypocrisy of Ananias and
Saphira Acts. 5. V. 3. etc.
was made known unto Saint Peter; and that by special oeconomie, he was
publicly to proceed to their examination and condemnation unto death; he
sought none other Accuser, but himself objected, and by his own Apostolical
authority, proceeded also to sentence against them for that sin.

And if that be truly which is commonly said, humana iustitia imitatur
diuinam: why should not this course of proceeding be divine and godly? for God
does as it were make Inquiry upon a cry of sin coming into his ears; and
afterward punishes without any accuser. The Lord Genesis 11. V. 5.
came down to see the City and tower of Babel, which the sons of men
builded. And Genesis 18. V. 20. and 21.
again afterward touching Sodom, the Lord said, because the cry of Sodom
and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is exceeding grievous, I will go
down now and see, whether they have done altogether according to that cry
which is come unto me, and if not, that I may know.

S. Paul upon the credible 1. Cor. cap. 5. V. 1. etc.
fame and hearesay, touching the incestuous Corinthian, without any accuser or
party to solicit him thereto, determined and adjudged he should be
committed to Satan. For it is thus said in that place, it is heard certainly
that there is fornication among you, etc. It is thus written in the book of
Nombers: Nom. 35. V. 30
Whosoever kills any person, the Judge shall slay the murderer through
witnesses. Where we see this duty and office required at the Judges hand (so
there be proof made of the crime, by two witnesses at least) and that
indistinctlie and simply; without any mention of Accusing or prosecuting by
any third person.

Nay, to say that which the truth is; it is so far off, that (by Scripture)
an Accuser should be required in all criminal proceedings: that as yet (for my
part) I have not found many places, where it is so much as mentioned to have
been used, at least as Accusation is properly taken. One I read of in the law
of God, viz. Deuteronomy. 25. V. 1, 2, 3.
Where there shall be strife between men, and they shall come unto judgment,
and sentence shall be given upon them, and the righteous shall be justified, and
the wicked condemned: then if so be the wicked be worthy to be beaten, the
Judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face, etc.

In the Acts of the Apostles, in the speech of the Recorder or town-clerke of
Ephesus, the course of Accusation is in these words mentioned. If Act. 19. V.
38.
Demetrius (says he) and the crafts-men which are with him, have a matter
against any man, the law is open, and there are deputies, let them accuse one
another. And it was practiced afterward against Paul, as appears by the
several places of the Acts, handled in the next chapter of this treatise.

But albeit Accusing and Accusers be elsewhere also sundry times mentioned,
yet upon particular discussing and view of the places it will appear; that
none other Accuser be thereby meant, but witnesses only: who in a large
signification, sometimes are improperly termed Accusers, as I have before
showed. When the wicked high Priests, Scribes, and other Elders of the great
Council of that nation, proceeded against our Savior Christ, whom they knew
and perceived (by the moving of all Jerusalem at his triumphant receiving
thither) to be in great reputation with most of the people: it is no doubt,
but they kept in outward appearance a color of a due and Judicial course of
proceeding with him, were it but for fear only. Let us see then, whether they
retained Accusation as the only lawful course.

It is true, Mat. 27. V. 12. Luke 23. V. 2.
three of the Evangelists do report, that the chief Priests and Elders
accused him before Pilate: and Mark. 15. V. 3.
as one of them says, of many things: and as Luke 23. V. 10.
another of them says, they accused him before Herod vehemently. Yet whosoever
will attentively way and consider of that history, shall well perceive, that
our Savior was condemned (before) by the Eldership, and that these imputations
of crimes against him before Pilate and Herod (called there Accusing) was
nothing else, but to approve unto them the justice of the sentence formerly
given by the Sanedrin or great Council upon him: to the intent that they might
obtain a decree for his executing, at Pilates, or at Herodes hands. For
albeit the Jews (after they were conquered by Pompeius Magnus) had (...),
their own laws, ordinances, and ceremonies left unto them: yet had they not
iu^ gladij, the power of life and death in them: and so they signify unto
Pilate, when he was willing to have shaken them off, and to have had no dealing
at all in that action. For when he said, Ioh. 19. V. 31.
take ye him, and judge him after your own law: then the Jews said unto
him, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death. And Pilates decree was
nothing else; but that it shouldbe Luke 23. V. 24.
as they required. What that was, two other Evangelists do express, viz.
that he might be Mat. 27. V. 23. John 19. V. 16.
delivered unto them to be crucified. Lo whereunto his decree tended, unto
Christ's execution, but not to condemnation; for he had before washed his hands,
and pronounced Jesus innocent.

For proof that he was first condemned by the Eldership, and then execution
only sought for, by Pilates authority: it appears in the 26. chapter of
Verse. 65. 66.
S. Matthew thus; behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy: what think ye?
they answered and said, he is worthy to die. And this Council was holden
ouernight, immediately after his apprehension. This action Saint Mark shows
plainly to have bin his condemnation. They Mar. 14. V. 64.
all condemned him (says he) to be worthy of death. Thus having condemned him,
when Mat. 27. V. 1. 2
the morning was come, they held a Council again, to put him to death; and
thereupon led him bound to Pilate the governor, to procure a decree for his
execution. For in the next verse after, it is directly said Ibid. V. 3.
thus: then when Judas etc. saw that he was condemned, he repented himself
etc. which was before his appearance before Pilate, and before he had dealt with
him at all.

What then was the course whereby the great Cou^cill proceeded with him? not by
Accusation made by any other then themselves: but upon witnesses (though false,
and by them suborned) and upon pretense of his own confession. Mat. 26. V. 59,
60.
They sought false witnesses etc. at the last came two false witnesses etc. and
a little after, what Ibid. V. 65.
have we more need of witnesses? behold now ye have heard his blasphemy. And
S. Luke Luke 22. V. vlt.
thus: then said they, what need we any further witnesses? for we have heard
it of his own mouth. Whereby it is made manifest, that albeit the Priests and
other Elders, sought by all means possible (outwardly) to approve their
proceeding against Christ unto Pilate and the people: yet did they never seek
or require any third person, to prefer up Accusation against him: and
therefore a course of proceeding not of necessity to be observed by Gods law,
as they al then conceived and understood it. Likewise when the first martyr S.
Steven was proceeded with by the same Council and Eldership residing at
Jerusalem, none accuser, but Act. 6. V. 11. 13
witnesses only were used For though the Libertines and Cyrenia^s (upon spite
toward Steue^) did suborne the witnesses, yet did they not appear themselves
openly in the action, as Accusers. Nevertheless it bare the show at first of a
Ibid. V. 15.
due and Judicial proceeding in Council, howsoever the execution of him after
was done without judgment given, and Act. 7. V. 57, 58, 59.
by tumult of the people.

Now least any man should surmise, that this was but a corrupt custom crept
into those later times; we will therefore look something higher, what was done
in former ages.

In the proceeding against Naboth, though it was a most wicked judgment,
grounded upon perjury and subornation, yet we may 1. Reg. cap. 21. V. 9, 10,
11, 12, 13.
see, the plot was so laid, as it might seem to carry aprete^ce of a due
Judicial course; whereupon may be truly gathered something touching the manner
of proceeding then used. For in a solemn fast, when Naboth sat Iudicially
with the rest of the Elders, and chief of the people; upon the only
witnessing of two wicked men in his presence (that he blasphemed God and the
king) Naboth was condemned to be stoned.

The matter for which I note it, is this: that the process was without any
Accuser or party. For there are named only the witnesses, the elders, and
governors, and Naboth the party condemned.

By which, (together with the history of the adulteress Ioh. 8. cap. 10.
mentioned in the Gospel, being conferred with Deuteronomy. 17.
Deuteronomie) I do gather; that ostentimes, in their Judicial proceedings,
the Jews had none other persons that any way dealt, but witnesses, Judges, and
the party against whom they proceeded. For in the Gospel, albeit those that
told Christ of the woman's adultery, are Ioh. 8. V. 10.
called Accusers in these words, Where be those thine accusers? yet such of
Verse 7.
them as were without sin, were willed by him, to cast the first stone at
her: Alluding therein to that law, Deuteronomy. 17. V. 7.
that the hands of the witnesses, shall be first upon an offendour condemned, to
kill him. So that there were none other Accusers, but the witnesses.

This is more plainly proved out of the same book Deuteronomy. ca. 19. V. 15, 16,
17, 18, 19.
afterward. For where it is said, that one witness shall not rise against a
man for any trespass, or for any sin, or for any fault that he offends in,
but in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall the matter be established: it
is forthwith added thus: If a false witness rise up against a man to accuse
him of trespass: then both the men which strive together, shall stand before
the Lord, even before the Priests and the Judges, which shall be in those
days, and the Judges shall make diligent inquisition: and if the witness be
found false, and has given false witness against his brother, then shall ye
do unto him, as he had thought to do unto his brother. Whereby may appear
that he that is said to accuse, is termed a witness three times, and his
falsehood is to be found out by the Judges inquisition. This also appears
more plainly by the story Dan. 13. V. 34, 40, and 62.
of Susanna, where the Elders were witnesses, and there were none other
Accusers.

So in the Deu. cap. 21. V. 18, 19, etc.
condemnation of a disobedient son, there is none other Accuser, but the very
parents that make the complaint, and bear witness also.

So that we find in Scripture, proceedings of office, grounded upon
Denunciation of one person, upon hearsay, upon suspicion, and upon Notorietie
of the fact, as well by Judges Civil or Temporal, adiudging unto a temporal
punishment, and by Judges being both Civil and Ecclesiastical, and by
ecclesiastical alone, inflicting the like penalty: as also by ecclesiastical
Judges, proceeding to censures ecclesiastical, without any accusation or
party to prosecute, other then the Judges themselves. And therefore criminal
proceeding of office, (and consequently without Accuser) and likewise without
any solemn presentment; is by manifold examples of Scripture, sufficiently
approved for lawful and godly.

CHAP. XVI. An answer to such objections, as out of Scripture or
ecclesiastical writers, be made against criminal proceeding of Office, by the
Note-gatherer and others.
AGainst this, are objected two places out of the Acts of the Apostles. It is
not the Act. 25. V. 16.
manner of the Romans, for favor to deliver any man to the death, before that
he which is accused, have the accusers before him, and have place to defend
himself, concerning the crime. And the Act. 23. V. vlt.
other: I will hear thee when thine accusers also are come. By which they
would gather, that the very Heathens knew it to be contrary to equity, to
proceed against a man, otherwise then by Accusation.

But both receive one answer. In deed the usual and most ordinary way of
proceeding among the Romans in veteri Republica, (before it was reduced to a
Monarchy) was at the first in crimes capital (where the people was Sovereign
Judge) by way of Accusation, as is more largely touched before. And (next unto
service in war,) eloquently to accuse a man before the people, was the
readiest step, that forward wits sought Cicero 2. offic. Plutar. in Lucul.
credit and countenance by; being an especial mean, to bear offices of
honor in that Commonwealth. Upon which occasion, it was in great credit and
use; till through sundry calumniations (to bring men wrongfully into peril of
attainder,) they were forced per S. C. Turpilianum, and other laws, to lay
most grievous penalties and dangers both upon those that did not prove that
which they objected, and therefore were presumed calumniari, or who did
praeuaricari, i. collude, tergiuersari, wrangle, or desist from prosecuting. So
that, being so dangerous to the accusers in many respects; it became
afterward, to be less frequented. Yet always both before and after, this
they observed: that when there was any that would be Accuser or party
seriously, without collusion: there the Judge never enquired ex Officio: for
vbi adest remedium ordinarium, ibi cessat extraordinarium, as that was holden
then, saving in certain cases before by me touched.

But this Crime here objected against Paul, was accounted capital by the
Jews, and he had ynow that were his Accusers, so that there needed to be none
Inquiry, ex officio mero, against him. That he had accusers who determined to
prosecute him, appears by these places: The Acts. 22. V. vlt.
Captain would know the certainty, wherefore he was accused of the Jews.
Again, Acts. 33. V. 29.
he was accused of questions of their Law: and further Acts. 23. V. 30.
Claudius Lysias the Colonel, signifies plainly by letter to Felix the
Governor, that he had commanded his accusers to speak (before the Governor,)
the things, that they had against Paul. So that the Governor not knowing the
cause, and knowing that the Accusers were commanded to prosecute before him,
had just occasion to say, that he would then hear him, when his Accusers came.
And in the next Chapter, Tertullus an Acts. 24. V. 2.
Orator did accordingly come with others of the Jews, and accused him before
Felix. Likewise when he was afterward conuented before Porcius Festus, (the
Governor that succeeded next) the Jews Acts. 25. V. 7. and 18.
that came thither from Jerusalem, laid many and grievous complaints against
him. And after more plainly thus: against whom when the Accusers stood up,
they brought no Crime of such things as I supposed.

But to make it plain even out of that place, that the Romans besides the way
of Accusation used also (upon cause) to enquire of Office: Lysias the Colonel
(by occasion of the cry and uproar made against Paul) did without any man's
Acts. 22. V. 24.
instigation, (and therefore of Office) command that he should be scourged
and examined; that he might know, wherefore they cried so on him. Where (by
the way) appears, not only that he was then proceeded with of Office, but
also it was meant that he should be (upon those only enducements) examined by
torture, of matters that might be Poenall to himself. Neither did Paul take
exception against this course as unlawful, nor the Captain conceive fear,
that he had done more then he could justify, in any other respect but this,
because Paul was a Citizen of Rome. For they had a law, Duodecim Tab.
that a Citizen might not be beaten with rods, nor tortured any way, but by
decree of the people. And yet any other of their subjects might be, and were
often so used.

It is notorious to them that have read any thing almost, of the state of that
Commonwealth, that the Dictators (who for their half year had a Sovereign
authority) did enquire and punish even capitally, ex Officio, as they in
discretion thought meet.

The Censors of manners had and practiced for their five years space, the
Inquiry and punishment ex Officio, of sundry misdemeanors and dissolute
courses of life; not capitally, but either by deposing men from their offices
and degrees, by noting them with infamy, by corporal punishments of the
lighter sort, or by fine, or by all these.

But the Note-gatherer makes also more quotations out of the ancient fathers;
which because they mention not an oath at all, I do therefore refer them to
this place; as brought by him to prove, that no proceeding Criminal, may be
upon the Judges Office alone.

First, none of the places quoted out of Origin have any resemblance of this
matter. That which he quoteth out of S. Ambrose Ambr. li. 8. ^pist. 64.
in respect of some difficulty, does require to be plainly opened. Syagrius
bishop of Verona had called before him one Indicia, sanctificata benedictione, a
professed Virgin (as I take it) upon question of her incontinencie. There was
none Accuser that took upon him to prove it; neither was any Fame risen
thereof; but inuidia conflata ipsi, she was depraved by light persons, by
heretics, and infamous men, and that by wicked practices, through briberie and
intemperancie: yea by some such as had been (before) put out of her house, for
actions far unseeming that, which they outwardly professed. But it was
alleged in justification of the said Bishops proceeding with her, that a
rumor had been spread, that the said Indicia had borne a child, which she
had made away. And that this rumor was so spread by certain women (though but
base) that ran unto the Monastery, and there first bruited it, from whence
it came abroad among the people, and so to the ears of one Maximus. Howbeit,
these which were said to be the first authors of that rumor, were conveyed out
of the way. Now Syagrius the Bishop there, hearing of such a rumor, and
thereupon proceeding against the said Indicia, did decree, that she should be
inspected by Midwiues, for the clearing and proof of her Virginity. Which (as
he alleged) he did the rather; because certain (taking scandal hereat) did
affirm; that if she should be tolerated without such inspection, they would
not communicate any more with their Bishop. But S. Ambrose there taxes them
thus: Quales illi, qui volunt praescribere Sacerdotibus, quid sequi debeamus?
What kind of persons be these, that will presume to prescribe unto us Bishops,
what we have to do? And albeit the said Maximus was (in very truth) the
Relatour Sermon suo accusationem detulit: aures tuas impleuit clamore: testes
auditionis deduxit: cognitionem poposcit.
thereof to the Bishop; yet was there none Accuser in proper terms of Law so
to be called, nor any that did iudicially denounce her thereof, Quam nullus
argueret, nullus deferret.

Now because a woman of her quality, in so disorderly sort, upon no better
grounds of inducement, was adjudged to so uncomely a course of clearing her
Virginity; and of so great uncertainty, besides the danger, that the Midwiues
might be suborned: Therefore S. Ambrose (being Archbishop of Millaine, in whose
Province Verona stood) did auocate this cause from the Bishop unto his own
audience. He therefore hearing it Iudicially, in the presence of his brethren
and fellow Bishops (to whom he imparted it:) besides the former defects, did
find upon examining of the matter, that Renatus and Leontius two witnesses
produced upon the Fame, which it was intended they had heard (though they were
suborned) yet did they materially vary one from the other, in the ground of
the cause. It fell out likewise by proof, that they two had sent out of the
way, Mercurius and Lea; two other supposed witnesses, and but lewd persons.
Also that another pretended witness, called Theudule was run away, knowing
that it would be objected in way of exception against her; how she had lien at
the said Renatus his beds feet. Besides, another woman had also confessed,
that the said Renatus did commit fornication with her.

Now because hereupon, no sinister or bad fame against Indicia was in Law
sufficiently proved; but rather to the contrary a good fame was proved by one
Paterna, and by the nurse of Indicia: therefore S. Ambrose absolved and
dismissed her from such inspection, restoring her to her former good name, but
co^demning Maximus, and excommunicating Renatus and Leontius for their
indirect, unjust, and calumnious dealings. Yet did he not (as he says) simply
condemn that kind of purgation and proof of Virginity, by inspection. For
he says thus: Quid ergo? Negamus inspiciendas virgins interim, quod nusquam
legerim? Non adstruo, nec verum arbitror.

In which Process, many points may be noted, to auoche the Jurisdiction of
Archbishops and Bishops, and sundry their proceedings Ecclesiastical at this
day: but I find no footesteps or color of any mislike. If these words of
his, be alleged to prove, that no Criminal Process should be made without an
Accuser properly so called: viz. It is requisite, that the witnesses be void of
partiality; yet so that there first appear an Accusour; this very Epistle
will show, that such Accusour (though then they were more usual) is not
necessarily always to be required. For he finds fault, that she was
conuented, although there would appear, neque author criminationis, neque
accusator, neque professor delationis; Maximus (in truth) being underhand
both a Relatour, and a kind of Prosecutour. So that (no Fame being thereof) if
any one would but have showed himself as a Relatour, or a Denounceour; it
might have sufficed, though he were not a very Accusour, Qui delationis se nexu
obligabat; as S. Ambrose there speaks of the Inscription required (by Law)
adpoenam Talionis, for him, which should fail in proof. And in truth, if
Enquire of office were not lawful, and none Accusour were to be received, but
as Law and old Canons appoint; assuredly there would be few or no Crimes at
all in any Court ever prosecuted. So great is the trouble and danger.

Besides if the want of an Accusour, had been sufficient to have reuersed
Syagrius his sentence, and to have quashed the whole Process: then what needed
S. Ambrose so carefully to have examined her Fame good or bad, by so many
witnesses? But that he knew (if an evil Fame had been proved) the Judge might
by Law have proceeded as he did, without any either Accusour or Denunceour.

So that we see, he thought it meet, and by Law required at his hands, for
her clearing and absoluing, to make Inquiry of the Fame; albeit each of those
were wanting. And therefore he did of mere Office by way of Inquiry, proceed
to the final sentencing of that cause. In like sort was that his condemnation
of Maximus, Renatus, and Leontius, done of his mere Office, without so much as
prosecution by any other man.

Furthermore to show, that he required not of necessity an Accusour in every
Criminal cause; he makes there a plain seuerance between the Civil Laws
(as in that behalf they were then most practiced) from the Laws
Ecclesiastical, even at that time. For (says he) Si leges publicas
interrogemus, accusatorem exigunt: Si Ecclesiae, duobus (in quit) aut tribus
testibus stat omne verbum. Then where witnesses might be had to prove the
matter, there was not in an Ecclesiastical cause (no not in Saint Ambroses
time) any Accusour necessarily required, besides the Judges Office.

In the 136. Epistle of S. Augustine by him also quoted, there is nothing
sounding that way. He there only shows, that Bonifacius a Priest, was not
detected before him of any Crime, and that he had not commanded his name to be
razed out of the number of Priests.

In the next Epistle is contained, that the said Bonifacius being of S.
Augustines householde, and perceiving the lewd inclination of another in that
house, would neither agree unto it, nor yet conceile it. The other being
complained of by him to S. Augustine their Bishop, did reply; that
Bonifacius, seeing he could not (as he would) abuse his chastity, did seek
(of spite) in that sort to touch his good name. Touching this reciprocal
Crimination of one of them against the other, S. Augustine August. Epist. 137.
says thus: When this matter had long troubled me (says he) finding no
mean, whereby the one of the two might be convinced (albeit I believed the
Priest better) I thought at first to leave them both to God, until some such
just and plain cause might appear in the one of them (whom in deed I greatly
held suspected) whereby I might turn him out of mine house. But afterward
calling to mind, that at the Sepulchers of some Martyrs, it pleased God
sometimes to work myraculously; I willed them both to go to the place where
the Martyr Foelix of Nola was buried; because from thence whatsoever should
happen from God to be reueiled upon either of them, might most easily and
faithfully be signified unto me by writing. Can any thing hereof be gathered
against Criminal Process made of Office? Why? It mentions neither the one
course, nor the other.

But perhaps it will be said, that S. Augustine put neither of them to a
Corporallothe. Therein he did most orderly and according to Law. For no Law
would permit it in this case, the Crime being not manifested abroad by any
Fame etc. And the Criminations being mutual, each of them being Denounced and
charged by the other to be Criminous. But for treating of such oaths, this is
not the peculiar place.

Another of his places quoted out of S. Augustine, I cannot conjecture why he
brings; except he meant to allege it against Accusation, because speaking
to a Donatist of a Donatist, August. Ep. 164.
he says thus: Emeritum certe non decet defendere Optatum, sed fortasse nec
accusare.

By the quotation out of Greg. Ep. ex Regist. li. 5. ca. 125.
Gregorius Magnus, writing to Maximus (that had entered into the Bishopric of
Salona, and was accused of Simony) I think he meant these words, if any:
Seeing (says he) the charge of making proofs is not laid upon thee, but upon
him that accuses; see thou repair unto us without delay: and then there shall
either an Accuser be ready, which shall duly prove that which is objected
touching Simoniacall heresy and other matters: or else some other wholesome
and due course (as the exigence of the cause does require) shall be taken, etc.
What? Because the Accuser must prove (where that course is pursued) does it
therefore follow, that none other manner of proceeding is lawful? Nay rather
this place (though somewhat obscurely) insinuates that though the Accuser come
not at all; yet the fault shall not be wincked at, or left vndealt with. By the
way, let me note unto you out of this place; that Gregory did in the mean
time suspend the said Bishop from celebration of the Sacrament; till trial of
his matter might be had.

In the place which he quoteth out of Theodoret, concerning proceeding of
Bishops, no matter sounding any thing that way, can I find. S. Basil in the
place Basil. Ep. 70.
by him quoted, complaining of the injurious persecutions then used against
Christian Bishops, says thus: Whereas no wicked man is condemned sine certis
indicijs, without certain Evidence: yet Bishops are condemned by mere
calumnies. And a little after he says thus: Some know not their Accusers, nor
have at any time appeared in the Judicial place, nor have been complained of
at all: and yet being taken away at midnight, have been straightway driven
into banishment. Who denies, when the proceeding is by Accusation, but that
the defendant should know his Accuser, that he may be allowed his just
exceptions? But what is this to prove, that no course is lawful, besides
Accusation? And the fault is not alone assigned hereupon; but also because they
were banished, before ever they were either complained of, or were brought unto
any Judicial place.

In Concilio Triburiensi by him quoted, and likewise in the ninth Canon of any
of the seven Councils holden at Carthage, there is nothing (less or more)
touching either Accusation, Oath, or proceeding of Office, to be found. And
that which is in Balsamon in the ninth Canon of the Carthaginian Council
holden sub Honorio and Theodosio Paruo; is nothing but a Decree, that an
excommunicate person shall not be received to the Communion, by any other
Bishop or Priest, upon pain of the like Excommunication to him that
receives him. And the Tripartite history in the tenth book and foureteenth
chapter, has no more, then the said former places have, that way. In the
seventh Chapter of the same book quoted also by him, it is said, that the old
Accusers of John Chrysostom were again excited against him.

That which he points at by his quotation of Marcellus Eishop of Rome (as I
conjecture) is contained in these words. He dehorteth Maxentius from
persecuting Christian Bishops, and wishes that they be not called in question,
till that which has been wrongfully taken away, be restored unto them. Marcel.
ad Maxentium, inter opera Clementis,
And then (says he) let him answer his Accusers; and if it be needful, let
him have a competent time of deliberation, to wey those things that be
objected against him; lest being innocent, he be ouer-throwen by any fraud or
deceit. Because it is not lawful to judge or condemn any man, before he
have lawful Accusers present, and have liberty for his defense to avoid the
Crimes imputed to him.

Another B. of Romes authority he also voucheth to the same effect. The words
he means (I take it) are these: Damasus Papa Ep. 3. ad Steph. and Council.
Afric. in 1. vol. Council.
Let not the same men be Accusers and Judges; but Accusers by themselves,
Judges by themselves, witnesses by themselves, and the accused by themselves,
every one in his due order. For first of all Inscription must always be made,
to the end that he which accuses (if he do calumniate) may himself receive
the punishment appointed for that Crime. For before this Inscription, no man
may be judged or condemned; seeing even the Leges seculi.
temporal Laws do retain the same course.

Both which places do show, what things are required, when the proceeding is
by Accusation; but speak nothing to the condemnation of any other course. But
would they, who (to abolish all proceeding of Office) do bring these places;
yea, or would any other in these days (think you) for conscience sake and
only to see reformation, adventure this Inscription ad poenam talionis, in
case the defendant shall be acquitted, and custodiae similitudinem, which these
places, and the Laws do require: and also endure excommunication, which the
Canons do (in that case) establish to be inflicted? For they may not with
reason think it over hard to be bound by those Laws and Canons, wherewith
they hoped they could have bound others. Quod quisque iuris in alium statuit,
eodem ipse vtatur. Hitherto in answer of their objections pretended to be
taken from the Scriptures and ancient Fathers.

Now for closing up of this second part, and for proof (which with this kind
of men, I trust will be impregnable) that an Accusation is not of necessity
required in proceeding Ecclesiastical criminallie; let them hear what is
established by the Discipline Discipl. of France. tit. Eccles. Senate or
Consistory. Art. 11. being the 6. Article in the Synod at Lions.
of the French Churches, compiled together, when Beza was president of their
Synod. For in this behalf they determined, no more to be required, for
calling a man before the Consistory, but that it be not done without cause, and
sufficient reason. Where you see, no mention of Accusation to be made, either
for the first preferring up, or for further prosecution of the cause: And
therefore their meaning was (as the ordinary practice of all their
Presbyterial Elderships is) to proceed Criminally against any Denounced unto
them, though it be but by one Elder in his Ward; or by any other person (unto
whom they give credit, never known unto the party conuented) without other
Presentment or Prosecution of Accuser or party: and therefore of their own
mere Office.

That this interpretation is not forced, and that the practice of their
Consistorial Elderships is according thereunto; may be made manifest by one
Calu. Farello. pa 64. Epistolarum in folio.
of Caluins Epistles unto Farellus. But you are first to understand, that by
their discipline, all dancing is simply and absolutely forbidden, as a
grievous sin, matched with whoredom; and is such, as for which a minister
must be deposed from his function, no less for the one, then for the other.
Now it happened, that sundry in Geneua had daunced together in the house of
one Balthasars widow, amongst whom one was a Syndicke (which is one of the
four chief magistrates ofthat Town) and another of them was an Elder of the
Church, for that year. This matter coming (I know not how) unto Caluins
ear, they were called to the Consistory, and charged with that offense,
without any Accuser or party (and therefore of mere office) upon none other
ground, but because, Resmihi comperta fuit: says Calvin, I knew the matter
well enough. Nevertheless, all (almost) that were conuented, denied it at
first very constantly. At length Calvin judged, that they should be driven to
confess the truth, upon their corporal oaths. This was done accordingly, and
the matter was thereupon confessed: the rather, bcause Corneus (one of the same
company) gave them warning, that he would not suffer any of them to be
forsworn. Yet for all this, one Elder Henrich, seeing he was to be deposed
from his Eldership for it, he would not so easily give over his hold; but
alleged against their course of proceeding with him (as in the very like case
Tho. Cartwright did not long since in the Consistory at Paul's, before sundry
honorable persons in Commission, and Cartwrightes allegation against the oath
ex officia in a criminal cause, by Calvin answered long ago.
others) that place of Saint Paul: viz. Receive not an Accusation against an
Elder, under two or three witnesses. But both did it with the like success.
For Calvin put him off (he says) with a Dilemma, and made little less then a
jest, at his so impertinent an allegation. For he says, it was altercatio non
illepida, a pleasant kind of controversy. Well, notwithstanding this poor
defense, Henrich the Elder, being first reviled and rated of all; was deposed
from his Eldership, and also shut up in prison; where he did exasperate against
Calvin (the chief cause thereof) the hatred of so many, as did bear unto him
but sclender good will before. The Syndick also, was for the same offense put
out of his A chief Civil magistrate, deposed by the Eldership of Geneua, for
dancing.
Magistracy; until he should show forth some public testimony of his
penitencie.

Diverse others of that merry company, were likewise for the same crime
imprisoned. And Perinus, though for a time he were stepped out of the way as
far as to Lions; yet do what he could, Calvin there protests, that he
should not escape unpunished. So that we see, it was made no Peccadillo, or
trifling sin, but an heinous criminal matter (worthy of degradation, of
public penance, and also of imprisonment) against which that Consistory so
proceeded without Accusation or Presentment, and of mere office, even against
one of the Elders of their Church, and also against a principal Magistrate of
their City; and for which, all that denied it, were compelled to make answer
upon their corporal oaths first taken; to answer the whole truth, which in
that behalf they should be asked, by those of the Consistory. Which not only
touched every man's own act, but (no doubt) reached unto all their Accomplices
also, which had trodden the same dismal dance together with them.

Thus much of this second part touching the two sorts of proceeding criminal;
viz. by Accusation, and upon the Judges Office by way of inquiry; and for the
justification of the latter of them, by reason, by laws temporal of this
Realm, by laws Civil of the Romans, by Canons, by examples and proofs out
of Gods word, by ancient Fathers and Councils, and by practice of such
modern Churches, as the greatest oppugners of this course do account to be
best reformed: And therefore is manifoldly warranted, both by humane and divine
approbation.

The end of the second part.
THE THIRD PART OF AN APOLOGY, FOR SUNDRY PROceedings by Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical; of late times by some challenged, and also diversely by them
impugned: Treating Of Oaths: but more specially, that oaths may be imposed
tending to the discovery of a man's own offenses, and of his brethrens.

Unto the end whereof is adjoined; A Determination in Latin: made (to like
effect) by Master D. ANDREVVS, in the University of Cambridge.



Imprinted at London by the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER BARKER, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.

An Advertisement unto the Reader.
I Have not quoted (gentle Reader) any Pages in the Treatisours or
Notegatherers writings, which I have occasion to allege: because those which I
followed, are but private written copies. but when I had almost finished the
reuiewing of this Part; I was credibly told, that the said Treatise was put
forth, and spread abroad in Print: from Scotland, or from Middleburgh. and I
have since seen the same in print: howbeit varying in certain places from my
Copy, namely about the latter end thereof. For there be some additions, which
(in my judgment) differ no less from the style of the rest; then they do
from the written copy.

Farewell.

The Contents of the Chapters in this third part.
MAtters in this third part to be handled: Of the lawfulness of Oaths: What
an Oath is: and the reason or original Formal cause, of the use of Oaths.

An answer to certain doubts made concerning Oaths; as namely why in
Scripture, God is said to have sworn: how (by Oath) he is said to be called to
witness: an Oath no Adiuration be lawful: after whose meaning an Oath is to
be understood: whether every Pr^m ssor^e Oath, be simply to be kept: whether
an Oath may be dispensed with, and how far: and whether a Christian may (by
mutual Oaths) contract with him, that swears by false gods.

Division of Oaths according to the outward form of taking them: according to
the matter and inward form of them: with plain description of every kind of
oathe.

That the ceremonies used in taking and giving corporal oaths, with laying
hands upon

The true issue of the next opinion in question: two sorts of crimes and
offenses prohibited: in what cases an oath (here spoken of) may not be:
ministered: and the manifold conueniencie criminal and penal unto the party:
with some few objections, touching inconueniencie thereof, an^wered.

That oaths of men touching matters dammageable, criminal and penal to
themselves,

Wherein are contained answers to such objections and reasons, as be made for
proof of a

That ministering of such oaths, is by the Laws of the Realm allowed unto
Judges of Ecclesiastical

That such oath touching a man's own crime is allowed, both by the Canon and
Civil

An answer to some objections, pretended to be made against this kind of oath,
from the Civil or Canon.

That not only such an oath may be taken, but also being by Magistrates duly
commanded,

An answer to such objections, as be pretended to be gathered from Divinity,
Divines, Examples of godly men; against ministering oaths unto parties, in
matters of their own crimes.

Four several opinions of the Innouators, against the parties taking of oath
in criminal

That a man being charged by authority to discover his knowledge touching some
offense

Their arguments are answered, that condemn the ministering and taking of an
oath as

That after the party has answered upon his oath, it is neither unusual,
unlawful, not Canonical Purgations, with answer to the Treatisours
objections against them.

The third part of an Apology for certain proceedings by Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, of late times by some challenged.
CHAP. I. Matters in this third part to be handled: Of the lawfulness of
Oaths: What an Oath is: and the reason or original Formal cause, of the use
of Oaths.
THat which follows in this third part of Apology to be handled (according
to the order that I have proposed to my self in the Preface before the second)
are the chalenges taken either to the oath of the party, which is sued and
conuented: and they are either against the ceremony and outward actions used in
taking it; or else because it is given to tie the party to answer in a cause
criminal and penal unto himself: or else they are against examining and
urging men to depose touching actions of their brethren being criminal; or at
least such; as albeit the examiners do hold and make to be criminal and
misdemeanors; yet the examinates themselves, do take them for good and godly,
not deserving any punishment, but rather high commendation: Or they do touch
some circumstance, concurring with the tender of the oath: as that the
examinates have not distinct knowledge of every particular, whereupon they are
to be examined before they resolve, whether to take the oath, or not: Or
lastly, they concern some event ensuing the oath and examination: as that the
Judges do not rest in that which is affirmed or denied upon the parties oath;
but oftentimes proceed to a further examination by witnesses, concerning the
same points.

This matter of an oath is a principal challenge of theirs, which they draw
and spinne out into these particular exceptions and chalenges as yousee. And it
is the thing (together with proceeding against crimes and offenses, by way of
Inquiry, Ex officio) wherein you most especially desired a full resolution,
which would to God, either in the rest or in this, I were as able to do; as I
am ready and willing: and as the matter it self and goodness of the cause
would yield and afford, to a skilful and sufficient man. But the rather to
perform my promised utmost endeavor; I hold it not amiss, for better
understanding of the rest, to touch (as briefly and plainly as I can) the
nature of an oath, and some (I trust) not unnecessary questions about that
matter which I have collected.

First I will touch (but very briefly, not taking upon me to do it, in sort as
Divines could) the lawfulness of oaths with answer to some objections, which
is the question An sit? I will stand the less herein, least I seem to seek,
to draw any of them into hatred; as if these innouating disciplinarians did
directly condemn oaths before Magistrates; which most solemnly they protest,
they do not. Albeit if all their positions (hereabouts) were scanned and
compared together (some holden and delivered by one, and some by others of
them) both shrewd and lewd conclusions, pricking fast forward to this point;
would necessarily thereupon follow.

Next I will handle what an oath is: which is the question Quid sit? Then the
original Formal cause, and also final of an oathe; which is the question
(...), (that is) why it is? Afterward, certain not unnecessary points of
doubt; which be made concerning oaths, and therefore nearly tending to the
better opening of the qualities of them. And lastly how many sorts and several
kinds of oaths there be; with some description of them: whereby you may the
better understand what they are, and how they differ one from another: which
two last do open the question (...), of what sort and quality the oath is.

The lawfulness of an oath appears; in that we are in the Exo. 20. v. 7.
Deuteronomy. 5. v. 11.
Decalogue forbidden, to take Gods holy name in vain: And in Exo. 19. v. 12.
Exodus it is said: Ye shall not swear by my name falsely: neither shall thou
defile the name of thy God, I am the Lord: So that to swear, is not simply
and absolutely forbiden; but swearing in vain, and for swearing. In Deuteronomy. 6. v
13. Deuteronomy. 10. v. 20. Ies^. 45. v. 23.
Deuteronomie there is a flat commandment to swear: and it is there joined,
with the fear and service of God, as being an effect of both: Thou shall fear
the Lord thy God, and serve him; and swear by his name. And in the prophet
Iere. (...). v. (...).
Jeremy thus, Thou shall swear, the Lord lives, in truth, in judgment and
in justice; and the nations shall be blessed in him, and glory in him. And
again the same Prophet pronounces a blessing upon such; as duly, and as they
ought, do swear by the holy name of God. Iere. 12. v. 16.
If (says he) they will learn the ways of my people to swear by my name,
The Lord lives, as they taught my people to swear by Baal: then shall they be
built in the mids of my people. And the prophet David Psalm. 63. v. 11.
thus: All that swear by him shall rejoice in him, for the mouth of them that
speak lies, shall be stopped.

We find even in the New Testament, that the Apostle Paul did diverse times
swear: as Romans 1. v. 9.
first, God is my witness. And again; Romans 9. v. 1.
I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness
in the holy Ghost. Likewise in 2. Cor. c. 1. v. 23.
another place, I call God to witness upon my soul. Whereupon S. August. ad
Publicol. and Sermon. 30. de verbis Apostoli. Beda in 1. Cor. ca. 15.
Augustine thus collecteth: That ye may know it is no sin to swear truly;
we find the Apostle Paul to have sworn.

Therefore where Christ telling what was said of old time, viz. Mat. 5. v.
33. and 34.
Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform thine oaths to the
Lord, does after add this; Swear not at all: must have another
interpretation, then Anabaptists (that be adversaries to all oaths) do frame:
for the holy Ghost is not contrary to himself. There is not one God who is
author of the old Testament, and another of the New (as some blasphemous
heretics hold) and Christ came not to dissolve the Moral law of God, but to
fulfill it: and the holy men that are reported to have used oaths both in the
old and in the new Testament, and have allowed them by their Canonical
writings; were no takers of Gods holy name in vain, nor mistakers of Christ's
meaning: for they had the spirit of Christ speaking in them.

In which respect S. August. lib. de mendacio, c. 15.
Augustine says hereof thus: By that which the Saints and holy men in
Scripture did practice, may be gathered (oftentimes) how the commandments
comprised in it, are to be understood. How then is that commandment of Christ
to be understood? The same Father in the same Ibidem, and lib. 1. de Sermon.
Domini, c. 30.
place does teach us. The Apostle (says he) in that he swears in his
Epistles, does thereby show unto us; how that saying is to be understood:
viz. I say unto you swear not at all: that is not so to swear, as to do it
lightly and easily, and so (happily) to fall from that unto a custom of
swearing, and from customable swearing, unto plain for swearing. Therefore we
find not that the Apostle did swear; but in his writings: where a more wary
consideration is a stay unto the rashness of the tongue.

And again the same S. Ep. 158. ad Publicolam.
Augustine to like effect as before, does elsewhere write: It is said in the
new Testament that we ought not to swear at all, which seems to me
therefore to have been said, not as if it were sin to swear, but because to
for swear is a most heinous sin: from which he would have us to be far
off, in that he admonishes us not to swear at all. And he Sermon. 28. c. 3. de
verbls Apostoli.
briefly thus determines hereof: Ecce verum iura, non peccas. S. Jerome does
thus expound Hierom. in 5. Matthew.
that commandment: Christ does not here forbid us to swear, but means that
we should not swear by creatures.

It is gravely and truly said by a very learned Schooleman Thomas 2, 2.
thus: An oath in it self is both lawful and honest: this appears by the
original of it: which is because men believe that God is truth that cannot be
deceived, and also has knowledge of all things. Likewise by the end, because
an oath serves oftentimes for clearing of men, and taking up of controversies;
as is said in the sixth chapter to the Hebrews: but yet an oath may turn to
the evil of him, which uses it ill: that is, without necessity, and due
caution.

And therefore where it is said by Matt. c. 5. v. 37.
Christ: Let your communication be yea, yea: nay, nay: for whatsoever is more
then these comes of evil, has another meaning then it seems to carry at
first show ex cortice verborum: For S. August. lib. 1. de Sermon. Dom. in monte.
c. 30.
Augustine says in another place, thus: If thou be compelled to swear; know
that it necessarily comes of their weakness, whom thou go about to
persuade; and this infirmity is a kind of evil. Therefore he does not say,
whatsoever is more; is evil, but comes of evil. For thou do not evil
that use thy swearing well, to the intent to persuade another man in some
matter of moment: but it comes of a kind of evil in him, for whose
infirmity thou art compelled to swear. And in another place thus: August. in
c. 1. ad Galat.
Albeit an oath be more then yea, yea, or nay, nay, and therefore comes of
evil: yet comes it not of evil from thee, but of their infirmity, or not
believing of thee without an oath. But Gratian teaches (...). q. 1. c. 16.
us, that by this word (Evil) in this place wickedness or sin is not to be
understood, but a punishment of sin, poenapeccati. And besides, these two
sayings of Augustine, are spoken of Private, and not of Public oaths.

Now follows what an Oath is: but first touching the name of it, in the Latin
tongue: wherein it is known, by three several words: The first is
Iuramentum, a word derived a Iure, of Right or Law, as a thing required by
Law: and this is of most general use, to all kinds of Oaths. The second is
Iusiurandum, serving sometimes in general, for every Oathe; but most often for
that which is called Decisorium which shall be touched afterward: The third
word is, Sacramentum, a Quintil. lib. 5. ca. de iureiurando.
Sacrando, because thereby a man does Deuouere, vow up and give over his own
safeguard and prospering unto God; if willingly and wittingly, he swear
falsely: which last of the three, in the Emperors days (whose constitutions
are set down in codice Iustiniani) was most of all the three in use: and so is
it used for an Oath, in all the Latin Entries, at the common Law: and thereof
comes their French word Serement.

S. Aug. sermon. 28. de verbis apostoli Mag. Sentent. did. 39.
Augustine says, Iurare, est ius veritatis Deo reddere: And again in the same
place: Quid est iurare per Deum, nisi testis est Deus? Tullie Cic. 3. Offic.
defines it thus: Iusiurandum, est affirmatio religiosa. Aristot. 18. Rhet. ad
Alex.
Aristotle defines it thus: (...), an Oath is a speech void of proof by any
demonstration; other then that it is made, by taking the name of God to
witness. But more fully (yet briefly) by Azo in summa.
Azo, Iusiurandum est affirmatio vel negatio, adhibita religione. It is not
tied to any form of words, but (in this behalf) is very manifold. S.
Hieron. in 4. Ieremiae.
Jerome says: where we find in the old Testament, The Lord lives, this is
an Oath. And an other old Chromatius in c. 5. Matthew.
writer far more generally: whosoever (says he) speaks the truth, does
(in some sort) swear, because it is written, A faithful witness does not
speak untruly.

The most general formal cause, and also final, of every lawful oath, is for
a confirmation of that, whereof we swear. Now the confirmation of matters
within compass of Science; is made by discourse of reason; proceeding upon
points, known by the light of nature, to be infallibly true. But the several
accidental facts and words of men, cannot by such necessary discourse of
reason, be confirmed: and therefore, those things that are spoken, concerning
such matters, are (for the most part) confirmed by the words of such as know
them. Yet a man's bare word was not thought sufficient, for confirmation of
that, which was to be delivered by him.

One cause, why it is not to be thought sufficient: is the want of care (to
deliver a sincere truth) which most men be possessed with through corruption
of our nature: but rather in steed thereof, very untruths; as by wicked
affections we be lead. Secondly, humane testimony is not always sufficient:
by reason of want of knowledge: for men can not know things that are to come,
nor things absent, or done in distant and remote places from them. Yet because
there be sundry occasions to speak hereof; and for that it is most requisite,
in the common affairs of the world; that a certainty (even of these matters)
may be known (for manifold occasions happening) therefore it was necessary
for the further credit of such as pretended to be able to speak thereof to
have recourse unto divine testimony: for that in God, there is neither
untruth, nor any thing is hidden from him. And that which is so confirmed and
strengthened, by so much a better and greater testimony, the^ the bare sayings
of man are, must needs be intended to be more sufficiently, thereby approved
unto us.

To this effect we find it thus determined by a Council; Council. Tolet. 8. ca.
2.
Whatsoever concerns any league of peace, is then more firmly grounded, when
an oath does strengthen it. Yea and each thing that draws men's minds to
friendship and concord, does continue more fast; when they are tied by the
bonds of mutual oaths. Whatsoever also is to be proved by witnesses, is
more surely verefied, when an oath concurreth with that, which is affirmed. And
where witnesses be not, it is the strictnes of an oath, which only can
descry, of what credit he is, that pretends to be innocent and guiltless.
Therefore he that swears by calling God to witness; does (as it were) use
Gods testimony, to concur with his own saying. And it is (in this regard)
generally by all nations presumed; that what is spoken, with such invocation of
divine testimony, may be (probably and for the most part) holden for truth.

The very heathens by light of nature, could discern thus much: for Aristot.
cap. 18. Rhet. ad Alex.
Aristotle says that no man will forswear himself, that fears the
punishment of God; and shame amongs men: considering, that albeit his perjury
may be hidden from men, yet can it not be concealed from God. And another in
this sort: Terent, in Hecyra.
I know nothing more sacred then an oath, whereby I may approve my faith unto
other men. And Cic. lib. 3.
Tully to like effect: Our predecessors, thorough the whole course of this
life, thought there was no straiter bond to tie men, then their oaths.
Therefore the Civil law holds; that L. Antistius. ff. de acquir. ha^ed.
he which swears does not only declare, but confirm and establish thereby,
his true meaning. And that law calls it a L. 1. C. de iuram. calumn.
religious fear, whereby the quarrelsome boldness of such as contend in law,
is restrained. The Canons do call it c. cum contingat. etc. li vero, de
iureiutando.
vinculu^ animae, a band of the soul; borrowing that speech from Divines.
Demost. contra Baeotum.
Demosthenes says; that an oath is the greatest and grauest matter, that is
amongs men: and as he elsewhere does testify; Idem contra Aristocr.
to swear in truth, is a duty, which (for the most part) is to be performed
of all men. Aristotle hereof further says Arist. 1. metaph. cap. 3.
thus: (...). most ancient is most honorable: but an oath is a most worthy or
honorable thing. And an heathen Vlpian. l. 1. ff. de iureiurando.
civil lawyer gives it this elogie: Iuramentum maximum expediendarum litium
remedium: an oath is an especial mean for dispatch of suites. Therefore the
more commendable and necessary an oath is in any respect; the more ugly and
horrible is perjury, and the violation of an oath. Aristot. 1. lib. Rhet. ca.
15. in fine.
Aristotle could discern thus much. (...). he that stands not to his oath,
or performs not what he swears, turns all the world vpside down.

It is written of Plutarch. in apotheg. Aelian. 14. var. lect. c. 2.
Agesilaus, when he heard how Tissaphernes the General of the Persians had
broken the league, which was mutually agreed upon, and also confirmed by oath
betwixt them; that he said he took himself greatly beholding to
Tissaphernes for it; for he doubted not, but God and men, would take vengeance
on him that had perjured himself; and would on the other side prosper, and
give good success unto himself in those wars; who was willing to keep his
oath, but was deceived by the other. And Plato lib. 12. de legibus.
Plato accounted perjured persons, as so many monsters amongs men; and
therefore says; they seem to be of the race of the Tytanes, insomuch as (by
their periuries) they do no less then those Giants were feigned to have done,
that is, even wage battle with God himself. Hitherto concerning some part of
the nature of oaths.

CHAP. II. An answer to certain doubts made concerning Oaths; as namely why
in Scripture, God is said to have sworn: how (by Oath) he is said to be called
to witness: an Oath no tempting of God but a part of his worship: why
(nevertheless) some are repelled from taking Oath: whether Adiuration be
lawful: after whose meaning an Oath is to be understood: whethere uery
Promissorie Oath, be simply to be kept: whether an Oath may be dispensed with,
and how far: and whether a Christian may (by mutual Oaths) contract with
him, that swears by false gods.
Seeing then (as the Ad Heb. 6. v. 16
Apostle testifies) an Oath is made by him that is greater: it may be asked,
how (in Scriptures) God is reported, to have sworn?

The same Scripture does answer it self, in this point: for it is there
said; that men when they swear, do swear by a greater, but Ibidem v. 13.
God having no greater to swear by, did Genes. 22. v. 16. Isai. 45. Ierem. 49.
v. 13. Ierem. 22. v. 5.
swear by himself.

Now because an Oath is for a confirmation of truth unto others, least he be
supposed to speak untruly, as has been said: how can this doubt fall in God,
who is truth it self? I answer (as before) it is Hebr. 6. v. 16.
amongs men, that an Oath, is for such confirmation. But when in Scripture God
is reported to have sworn; this is not, in respect of any possibility, that
defect of truth may happen to be in his divine Majesty, which had need so to
be confirmed, or as if it were not needful for us wretches, to rest in his
sacred single word: but it is done, Ibid. v. 17. 28.
more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the settled
incommutabilitie of his counsel or decree: that by two unchangeable things, in
which it is impossible God should fail, or be deceived; we might have strong
comfort. So that thereby we are taught to our comfort, that what is so
confirmed by Gods Oathe; does proceed, from the infallible and unremovable
determination of Almighty God.

It may be asked, in what respects God is said to be called unto witness by an
Oathe?

I answer with the Schoolmen, for two respects: the first is, because he
oftentimes reuealeth and brings forth the very truth of a matter (untruly
delivered by any man) either by inward inspiration of some other person, or
else by bringing it to the open light and view of the world, which (before) was
kept close and secret. The second consideration is for his punishing of all
those, that swear untruly: and herein he is as in this world their
witness; so either here, or in the world to come; he is their Judge, and a
revenger. A civil Lawyer, though but an heathen, could say, Quipeierat, Deum
habet vltorem, God himself will take vengeance, of a perjured person.

Neither can an Oathe be said to be a tempting or a provoking of God, so long
as it is used, but upon necessity, or good occasion.

An oath is said to be a service and worship yielded unto God himself, in a
twofold regard: the first is, in that we sulfil and perform that, which we
swear: the second, in that by calling of him to witness, we do withal
acknowledge, that he knows all things; and is a swift Judge and Revenger of
all those that love or make leasings.

So that albeit an oathe, in respect of the matter concerning which it is made
(for the most part) may be termed an humane and civil matter: yet in respect
of him who is called to witness; it is always a divine, and a religious act.

But insomuch as an Oath is (upon diverse occasions) necessarily required of
us, as a piece of Gods service and worship: it may be questioned; why some
sort of men are repelled by politic Laws, from taking any Oath, and from
bearing testimony? I answer, that children, mad men, and such like, are not
admitted to take oaths; because they have no perfect use of reason: and
therefore do want that due and reverend consideration, and also that Hierem. 4.
v. 2.
judgment; which the word of God requires, besides truth and Justice, to be
had and used in taking of an Oath. but perjured persons, are therefore to be
repelled; because by their demeanor fore-past it is made apparent, how
slender account they make of Gods holy name: for their contempt (in this
behalf) is intended still to rest in them: Semel malus semper praesumitur
malus; praesertim in eodem genere delicti.

It is made doubtful (in diverse respects) whether every or any adiuration be
lawful to be used amongs Christians? the resolution whereof, will best (I
think) be made manifest, by the definition thereof, and by distinction.

To adjure (as Thom. 2. 2. q. 90. in Axiom.
Aquinas does define it, though not altogether so generally) is nothing else,
but to induce or provoke one to do or omit something, by using or interposing
of the name of God, or of some other sacred thing. This is used either toward
our selves, or else toward others. toward our selves, as when by a
promissorie Oath or vow, we bind our selves solemnly to God, for performance
of something. And this kind of adiuration may be lawful, or unlawful;
according to the several qualities and circumstances of the matters; which we
have so adjured or bound our selves to perform; which is not my purpose (here)
at large to prosecute.

The consideration of adiuring others reaches either to such, as be no way
under the Adiurers authority, or to such as be. Of those which be not under
the Adiurers authority; the first, is God above all. Now, albeit we use in our
prayers unto his divine Majesty, sundry vehement obtestations, as by his
holy name and for his Gospels, and his son Christ Jesus his sake, and for
the promises made in him: yet is not this (properly) to be called Adiuration;
as though by this earnestness we thought men could, or did mean, to move or
change his will, which is immutable: but that hereby we may the better
enkindle, and stir up our own faith: to the end, we may be more fit to
obtain that, which in his eternal wisdom he has decreed, and though fit to
bestow upon us.

The second member is of such, as be creatures, and these are either
unreasonable: toward whom (as I take the matter) all Adiuration as it is
vain (in that they hear us not, or understand us not) so is it also unlawful:
or else they be reasonable creatures. Of reasonable creatures not subject to
the Adiurers authority, some be Spirits, and some be men. To adjure Spirits
being absent, whether they be good or evil Spirits, seems both vain; and
unlawful: for that we have neither warrant so to do, nor yet, that they do
or can hear us. Besides that, their actions are not subject to our directions,
but unto Gods alone. For (as Aquinas there alleges out of Saint August. li.
3. c. 4. de Trin. Tom. 3.
Augustine) Spiritus descrtor, regitur per spiritum ^stum. But if they be evil
Spirits, though they certainly might be known to be present, in respect
some that them are thought to be condemned into the air, some into the waters,
and some into the entrails and caves of the earth, as diverse very learned men
do hold: yet to do this; with intent to learn or obtain any thing of
them, it is (without doubt) simply unlawful; and they Deuteronomy 18 ver. 10, 11 and
12.
before God abominable, that so do adjure, or contract any familiarity with
them. But the said learned Schooleman, by force of that place of Saint Luke
10. ver. 1. 9.
Lukes Gospel, viz. Behold I give unto you power to tread on Serpents and
Scorpions, and over all manner power of the enemy, and nothing shall by any
means hurt you; thinks it lawful for us, in the name of God, to adjure even
evil spirits; to the end only, that they hurt us not, either spiritually or
bodily.

But the Adiuring of such men, as be not under the Adiurers power or
subjection, is sought to be done, either by way of compulsion or seeking to lay
upon them (thereby) such a necessity, as a man may (by vow) impose upon
himself, (which is unlawful, because it is an usurpation of a power over
another, that is not given him) or else; it is by way of persuasion, to move
him, the rather by the respect of the sacredname of God. and this is thought
not unlawful to be used, in matters lawful, and of importance.

There rests only now to speak, of the urging (by course of Adiuration)
of such other men, as be under our authority. This urging is done; either in
way of absolute compulsion, or else but causatiuely. Absolute compulsion (in
this matter) I call it; when a man seeks, as deeply and necessarily, by such
Adiuration, to tie a man's will and conscience: as he may do, by the like
obtestation of Gods name, bind his own will and himself. And this Adiuration
is very unlawful: because every man is lord and guider of his own will, and
of his own voluntary actions, but not so of any other man's. And according to
this acception is that of Origin. hom. vlt. in Matthew. Tom. 3.
Origin to be understood, where he says thus: I think, that he which will
live according to the Gospel, ought not to adjure another man: for if by
Christ's commandment in the Gospel, it be not lawful to swear; it is
evident, that a man may not adjure another: and therefore it appears, that
the high Priest did unlawfully adjure Christ, by the living God.

But if it be but compelling causatiue, that is in respect of the duty which
every inferior (by oathe or otherwise) owes unto his superior, proceeding
justly and according to Law: then is this Adiuration lawful; and requires
necessarily, the inferiors obedience therein, upon peril of sin and
penalty of the Law. The use hereof we read as well in the Old, as in the
New Testament. Prou. 29. v. 24.
Solomon says, He that is partener with a thief hates his own soul, for
heeheareth cursing, and declares it not. I am told by those that are very
skillful in that language, that the Hebrewe interpreters do expound this
cursing (which is here spoken of) to be an Adiuration and curse, that was
usually made by the Priests against such; as had secretly done, or known of
any offense: to induce them hereby the rather, to reveal it.

And in the New Testament, the very word of Adiuration is used by Saint 1 Thessalonians. 5. v. 27.
Paul. (...). I adjure you by the Lord to read this Epistle to all the holy
brethren. And it is worth the consideration, whether that be not also an
Adiuration where he Ephesians. 4. ver. 17.
says, (...) etc. This therefore I say and testify in the Lord, that ye
walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind. Thus far of
Adiuration.

Where there may be some doubt by reason of the variable acception of some
words of an oath; question is made according to what sense, such oathe must be
understood, taken, and performed by him that swears.

This question does Isid li. 2 ca. 31. de summo bono.
Isidore thus answer: with what cautell of words soever a man does swear;
yet God, that is witness of the conscience, so takes it, as he that gives the
oath, does understand it. For that man which will take vantage upon the words
of it, is guilty two ways: both because he takes Gods Name in vain, and also
circumuents another by deceit. therefore if he that swears mean simply and
not guilefully, then is he bound, according to his own intention. But when the
words are or may be of another signification, then either the taker, or the
tenderer of the oath does mean; In this case, it is thus by Aug. sermon 28.
cap. 2 de verbis Apostoli.
S. Augustine gravely and briefly resolved: ream linguam non facit nisi men's
rea: It is not the words, but the guilty heart that makes the perjury: which
it seeemeth he translated out of Arist. 1. Rhet. cap. 15.
Aristotle, (...), forswearing is of the heart, and not of the mouth alone.

Thomas of Tho. 2. 2. q. 91. ar. 7.
Aquine (in this behalf) thus writes: when the meaning of him that swears,
and of him that tendereth the oath, is not the same; if this do happen, by the
fraudulent meaning of the taker of the oath: then ought such oath to be kept,
according to the sound intent of him, to whom, or by whom it is tendered: In
which respect, the old verse is to good purpose:

Glo. in Auth. iusiurandum.
Fallit iurantem, iuratio facta per artem.
A cautelous and crafty oath (in truth) deceiues none so much as him, that
takes it: if by his own fraud he think to escape perjury. therefore
wheresoever any fraud or cavil is used by him that takes the oath; there
perjury in the sight of God, is committed. Martial. li. 6. Epigr.
Martial butan heathen Poet, could discern thus much:

Jurat capillos esse quos emit, suos,
Fabulla: nunquid ille Paulle peierat?
A man wears hair on his head that he bought, and yet swears they be his own
hairs: I pray you sir is he for sworn, or not? Frivolous then and ridiculous
is that excuse, whereby Popish writers would excuse their S. Francis of a lie,
under pretense of his charity, and good zeal. Angel. in li. 3. si tibi iudic.
ff. de condict. ob turpem causam.
For on a time, a manslayer came fleeing away by him; and being pursued with
hue and cry; Friar Francis was asked by one of the pursuants, whether he saw
such a man pass that way, or no? whereunto (putting first his hand into his
sleeue, or as some write, his finger in his ear) he answered, that he saw no
such man passing that way, meaning through his own sleeue, or ear. In deed
such deceitful answering or swearing, is so far from excusing a man from
untruth and perjury; that Cic. lib. 3. Offic.
Tully says thereof thus: fraus distringit non dissoluit periurium, fraud and
cautelous dealing, does not excuse or qualify; but tyeth harder, and
enwrappeth a man further into perjury. Hereupon it is also said in law, thus:
Gl. in. c. quemadmodum. de iureiurando.
Conditiones tacit subintellectae non faciunt iuramentum conditionale,
conditions and private protestations, which he that swears frames in
himself, or keeps in his own mind, do not make the oath to be
conditional which is given him simply.

It may also be asked, whether every promissorie oath, is simply and absolutely
to be kept, or how far?

For answe^ hereof, I will note unto you, what I find (probably) said; and
then leave the exact resolution thereof, unto grave Divines.

Every such oath, is simply to be kept, if it happen not into some of the three
cases here touched.

The first of these cases is; when the thing, by oath promised or vowed to be
done; was (in very truth) even at the first taking of it, simply, and in it
self evil; howbeit perhaps not then discerned so to be, by him who took the
oath. And in this case, the party sins grievously in swearing; but more
grievously he should sin, if he kept his oath. For every oath must be made
Ierem. 4. V. 2.
in iustitia, in righteousness. And 22. q. 4. per totu^ praesertim c. inter
caetera. Augusti Seuero. etc. qua^ to. de iureiurando.
iuramentum non est vinculum iniquitatis, vel cuiuscunque criminis, says
Saint Augustine: an oath tyeth no man to do that which is wicked. To like
effect says Isidorus, In Ibidem c. in malis ex l sidoro in synony. lib. 2.
malis promissis rescinde fidem; in turpi voto muta decretum; quod incaute
vouisti, ne facias: impia est enim promissio, quae scelere adimpletur.

The second case is, when that which is promised by such oath; is an
hinderance and impediment to a greater good, as if a sufficient man for it,
should swear never to be a minister of Gods word and Sacraments; what desire
soever him self should afterward have thereunto, or what need soever the
Church of God should have of his help in the ministry. In such a case, he
sins by his rash swearing; but not in keeping the oath, as the Schoolmen
hold, albeit they think it better he should break the like oath; then that
he should keep it.

The third case is, when as some unlooked for accident is discovered, or
falls out afterward; that was not thought upon before. Now, if by such
event ensuing, the oath cannot be performed without crime and impiety; then
(without doubt) is such perfourmance of the oathe a sin, as well as in the
first case of the three. Saint Ambrose in this Ambros. de offic. lib. 3. c. 12.
behalf says thus: It is sometime against Christian duty to perform a
vow promised by oathe: so Herod offended which put John Baptist to death,
rather then he would go back with his oath and promise. Yea even where such
oath might be performed without sin; yet may there be sundry cases, wherein
the party is thought not to be bound, unto performance. As imagine, that I
being to receive L. finali. C. de non numer. pecunia.
money which is in telling for me; do in the mean time (in assured hope to
receive it) seal an obligation, and withal swear to pay unto him so much
money at such a day. Nevertheless if the intended creditor shall thereupon
refuse to deliver me any money; or if any other accident (without my default)
do happen, whereby I could not receive it; in such a case, neither mine oath,
nor obligation does bind me, to performance and payment. Therefore these
rules ensuing are gathered out of that, and sundry other like laws, viz.
iuramentum non porrigitur vltra consensum. Arg. l. Quod Seruius ft. decondictio
causa dati.
Censetur clausula apposita in iuramento, quod promissio valebit, rebus in
eodem statu remanentibus. c. tua nos. de eccles. aedific.
Iuramentum non extenditur ad inopinata. Non c. veniens. etc. Quinta vallis. de
iureiurando. c. ex multiplici. de decimis. Arg. c. audita. de restitut.
spoliatorum.
extenditur ad ea de quibus non est cogitatum. And Iuramentum c. ad nostram.
el. 2. de iureiurando.
non extenditur ad incognita. And upon these grounds it was; that the Emperor
Vespasian did Sueton. in vita Vespasiani.
release, or (as we more usually now speak) dispense with a certain knight
of Rome, for his oath. This knight had solemnly sworn unto his wife; that he
would never put her away. Which he might (otherwise) lawfully have done (by the
heathenish custom of that City then) either for any just cause, or for no
cause at all. After this oath, the wife was taken in adultery; therefore the
Emperor, dispensing with her husbands oath (because in all likelihoode, the
knight in so swearing, never dreamed of such a treachery) the knight then
without scruple; did repudiate, and forsake his adulteress wife.

For the like L. vlt. ff. ad municipialem.
reason did Antonius and Uerus Emperors, dispense with the oath of one (being
chosen Duumvir, a chiese Magistrate in Municipio, not much unlike unto one of
the Consuls in Rome) who had before sworn; that he would never after that time
be present in any meetings or assemblies of the Senators, or Decurions there.
Out of which place, a Alberic. de Ros. in l. quotiens C. de precibus Imper.
offer.
writer upon the Civil law does gather; that the Emperor may dispense with
a man's oath.

Here then another great, and not unnecessary doubt arises; whether any man
may discharge or dispense with another man's oath; and if he may, how far, and
in what cases this may be done?

In answer whereof; we are first to understand, that according to the
distinction of times, into time past, present, or to come, there is also
diversity of oaths. One kind of oath (in such regard) is termed Assertorie;
which is an affirmation or denial with oath, touching some thing that is past
or present. Now there is no doubt, but that this oath cannot at all be
discharged, released, or dispensed with; by any humane authority. for the
matter of it being either concerning a thing past, which cannot be altered and
revoked; or present, which is also immutable; insomuch as it is impossible for
a thing both to be, and not to be at once: therefore, the oath it self must
needs be vndischargeable, and vndispensable: for to give a dispensation herein,
were no less, then (in effect) to determine; that it is lawful to have truth
wanting in some oaths: insomuch as other dispensation then this, the nature of
things past or present, cannot admit.

The other kind of oath, is called Promissorie: whereby a promise (confirmed by
an oath) is made, that some thing shall be done or not done, hereafter. And
about this kind of oath, the doubt only rests.

This Promissorie oath is made, either touching such matters as do immediately
and apparently tend to the advancing of the glory of God, or to the benefit of
sundry others, whether such benefit be spiritual or corporal: or concerns
such matter, which evidently derogateth from the glory of God, or from the
benefit of others; or it is of a matter tending to the only profit and
benefit of some particular man; to and for whose behoof such promise (with
oath) is made: or lastly, it consists and is bestowed upon such matter, as by
reason of some event happening, or at least discovered afterward; it may be
justly thereupon doubted, whether the oath it self do bind or not, be
lawful or unlawful, expedient or not expedient, profitable or hurtful to the
party (all circumstances considered) to be kept and observed.

In the first case of these four, no man can discharge from or dispense with
such oath; except either the oath were at first but conditionally made, and the
condition fails; or else were made by such one, as is under an husbands or
fathers subjection. For in the first of these excepted cases (in very truth)
the oath binds not at all. But yet some superiors declaration of so much, is
therefore necessary; because it is most dangerous to permit unto every simple
and private man's own discretion and judgment; how far, and where he need
or need not, to perform his promissorie oaths. And in the later of the cases
excepted, an Number. 30. per totuin fere.
husband or father (before he has given any express, or implied ratification)
may (even by Gods own law) discharge and disanull his wives oaths and vows,
or his daughters, being made in her youth, and in his house (that is under his
power) of what sort and quality soever they be, yea though such promissorie
oaths have been Ibid. v. 14.
made by them, to humble the soul. and then by reason of such disallowance
there of by their superior, it is there said: The Lord will forgive her, this
breach of her oath and vow made.

Now because in any (saving in these excepted cases) this kind of oath is
simply vndispensable; therefore we do detest the presumption of the bishop of
Rome; who takes upon him oftentimes to commute even this kind of oaths and
vows (as he says) into better. and so by this shift of descant, he
pretends to discharge men from their formal oaths, by them advisedly taken
and made, to the glory of God, and for the benefit of others.

The second sort of those four kinds of promissorie oaths are such; as if a
man should perform; he should doubly sin. which point I have somewhat
touched in the question next going before. yet least a man do err herein, by
mistaking; it is holden very requisite, that he consult with wise and learned
Divines; both to resolve him, whether such oath be simply unlawful by him to
be performed; and also to advise him, what course he is to take in respect of
his soul and conscience; for his oath so unlawfully, and unjustly made.

In these unlawful oaths, we think that superiors whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical, not only may and ought to discharge the parties thereof, if
they be scrupulous and desire it; but also may and ought, to disanull and make
them void, though the parties themselves be unwilling thereunto. And so we
find, that a 34. Edw. 3. ca. 9.
Parliament here in England did enact in these words, viz. That all alliances
and couins of Masons and Carpenters, and Congregations, Chapters, ordinances,
and oaths amongst them made, or to be made: shall be from henceforth void,
and wholly adnulled. The reason of this disanulling of all such oaths was; for
that they were apparently derogatorie, to the public good of the Common wealth.

With these kinds of oaths, the man of Rome not only dispenses when they
are already made, which were tolerable amongst them of his own only proper
Jurisdiction; but also (in the pride of his heart, exalting himself above all
that is called God) he dispenses with men aforehand, to make such unlawful
oaths and vows: and namely of marriages, and also to remain in them, being
within the degrees Leuiticall, which by God himself are prohibited plainly.
yet because (for very shame) he seldom does dispense with marriages
contracted, or to be contracted inter ascendentes and descendentes; as the
father to marry the daughter or his niece, etc. or the son to marry his
mother, grandmother, etc. or yet in primo gradu transuersali aequali, as the
brother to marry the sister: therefore the Schoolmen and Canonists his
Parasites (but especially since the great case fell out betwixt king H. 8. and
Katherine of Castill, his deceased brothers widow) have been contented to
turn those their former old songs; of Papa potest, quicquid Deus ipse potest,
and potest tollere ius Naturae; and (instead thereof) to say Couarrauias.
now; that in those aforesaid degrees of consanguinitie (because they are of
the law of nature) the Pope (their unholy father) can not dispense withal.
Nevertheless, they do still no less resolutely, then impudently hold, that
the prohibitions in the rest of the Leu. 18. ca. (...). 20.
Leuiticall degrees are not of the law of nature; and therefore to be, by the
Pope dispensable. But if they be laws Ceremonial, they are abrogated by
Christ, and need no dispensation of any man's. If Judicial, then they bind
none precisely, but the people and Common weal of the Jews: but if they be
Moral laws (which only remains, and of which sort in deed they are) then
consequently are they of the law of nature. and, that the said prohibitions be
in deed Moral laws, and of the law of Nature: appears by the words of God
himself, generally testifying of them all, that for such abominable and
incestuous matches as be there specified and forbidden; he did cast out the
Cananites and other people of the land, before the Israelites. But they, being
heathens, had none other law but the law of nature to take knowledge of, or
to bind them; and therefore could not for those pollutions have been justly
punished; if the prohibitions of them, had not been by the law of Nature,
which binds all men indifferently.

In the third case, videlicet, when a Promissorie oath tends only to the
profit and benefit of some particular person, to whom such promise is made
(as namely an oath of a Soldiour to his General, of a Subject to his Prince,
of a Tenant to his Lord, or of a bondsman to his Master) it is generally holden;
that he to whose only behoof it was made, may sufficiently again discharge
it. because it is intended, the promise is (in deed) then performed unto the
superior, when it is disposed of according to his pleasure, and as he likes
best of.

The fourth and last aforesaid sort of oaths Promissorie, is the special
subject, wherein (if in any) a dispensation may properly have place.

To dispense, or to discharge a man from an oath taken; has two diverse
significations and acceptions. for it is taken, either for a release of the
very bond of the oath, so that the party should no more (before God) be tied
thereunto: or else for a sound interpretation and declaration, that upon some
event ensuing, or discovered unto us afterward, or other considerable
circumstance; such oath does, not necessarily (before God) require a
performance.

A Promissorie oath is made, either for confirmation of some thing, unto the
performance whereof, we are (otherwise also) bound by Gods law, or by the
law of nature: or of such, as for accomplishing whereof, we are besides our
oath, tied by positive law of man: or of such, as otherwise then by oath, we
(no way) stood bound to fulfill.

The last of these three is also of two sorts: for it either concerns matter
some way tending to the service of God, and humbling of our selves before him,
voluntarily by us promised; or else matter humane and civil only, by our oath
confirmed.

In the first of those three last, wherein besides our oath, we are bound by
Gods law, or by the law of nature; a dispensation by way of release of the
bond of the oath cannot by any human authority be given. for else, a man
might (hereby) be set at liberty, not only to break the law of God and
nature, which is eternal and immutable: but to go against his own oath also:
which, being Praeceptum iuris Diuini, is also (in that sense) vndispensable.
Except a man should absurdly imagine, as the heathen Romans did of a water,
that was in Via Appia, consecrated unto Mercury; for they Alex. ab Alexand.
Genial. dier.
were so besotted as to think, if a man did besprinkle his head with a Laurel
branch dipped in that water, therewith calling upon Mercury; that by such
expiation, he was clearly discharged from any breach of oath, and from
perjury. But as dispensation is taken for a sound and true interpretation of
those laws, how far they reach, and where the general words of them ought
to cease; it has place even in these; whether they be precepts Affirmative or
Negative, that rule of the Schoolmen notwithstanding, videlicet; Praecepta
diuina negatiua obligant semper and ad semper: Praecepta affirmatiua licet
semper, tamen non ad semper.

For examples sake; first in Precepts Negative, contained in Gods law: if a
man shall swear for more precise observation of that commandment, Thou shall
not kill; that he will never shed any man's blood; yet, if in necessary defense
of his l. vt vim. ff. de just. and iure. and ibi gl. and DD.
person or Jason in d. l. qui dicit eum esse communem. and Diaz, reg. 597.
goods, he shall afterward kill a thief, the Superior may (in this case) by
way of such dispensation lawfully declare; that he is not (hereby) to be
holden guilty of the breach of that commandment, or of his oathe. Likewise
if a married man who voweth and swears never to company with any woman, but
his wife, during their two lives, shall (without any negligence or default of
his) be herein wickedly deceived by another woman, which is by him taken to be
his own wife: it may (for his satisfaction) by such dispensation be
determined and declared, that hereby he has neither offended against Gods
law, nor his oath.

In precepts affirmative, contained in Gods law: Matthew. 12. v. 5. 8.
Christ himself has declared, that the Priests employed on the Saboth, about
the sacrifices of the Temple, or those who (on that day) Ioh. 7. verse. 23.
circumcised children; and others Matthew. 12. verse. 10. 12. Marc. 3. verse 4.
Luc. 6. verse. 9.
doing on that day, the necessary works of charity; or that, Luc. 13. v. 15.
Luc. 14. verse. 5.
whereby man's life is necessarily sustained, do not violate the Saboth therein.

If our parents, to whom we do owe and (perhaps) have also sworn honor
and obedience; shall command any l. Lucius. ff. de cod. and Demonst. L. nepos.
ff. de verbis signific. L. silius. ff. de cond. institut.
unlawful or dishonest thing, as to betray our Prince and Country, etc. it is
assured, that in not performance hereof, it may and ought to be declared,
neither Gods commandment nor our oaths, to be thereby violated. Though a
Judge should swear, to accept evermore (in judgment) of the depositions of
two witnesses, produced for proof of any matter, so they be not excepted
against justly by the adverse party: according to that saying of our Savior
Christ; In the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be established:
Nevertheless, if according to direction of man's Just. de Testam.. 1. c.
relatum etc. cum esses ex. d. tit.
positive law in this behalf; he shall reject the testimony of children,
being but ten or twelve years of age; it may and ought to be declared, that
herein he does not offend against the oathe by him taken.

The like is true of any oath in general, because the commandment of God, for
performance thereof, is not so L. non dubium. C. de legibus.
peremptory, that it does bind us to do any thing, which is in it self
wicked: for non c. non est. de reg. iuris in 6.
est obligatorium contrabonos mores praestitum iuramentum.

The like may be said ofsundrie laws of nature: wherein this kind of
dispensation by interpretation has place; no less then in the former: and are
needelesse, to be further here exemplified.

Touching the second member of the matters of Promissorie oaths, viz. whereby
an oath is taken for a fuller confirmation of that, whereunto we are also bound
by positive law: it is much more assured, that according to the second
acception of dispensation; such oathe may be interpreted and declared not to
bind; where, indeed it ought not, by the true meaning of the Law; howsoever
the generality, or pregnancie of the words, may strongly (perhaps) seem to
weigh unto the contrary.

Yea and in the first sense, a dispensation of relaxation by a Sovereign
Prince or other thereunto aucthorized may be granted; for release of an oathe,
made in performance of some positive law. But this is only by way of
abrogating such Law or Statute; either altogether, or as toward that person,
or for some particular action and time; and not, by way of releasing the very
bond of the oathe, which is not subject to man's power. For when such Law or
Statute is disanulled and gone (as local Statutes of Colleges etc. may be
even here in England) then the Oathe made unto them, as unto Laws or
Statutes; must needs (withal) so far cease, and be released.

When the matter is such, as for performance whereof (otherwise then by our
voluntary oathe taken) we no way stood bound, whether it be in Actions
Religious or Civil: the bond of our Oathe (if in very truth, we did at
first, in foro poli stand tied) may not by any man be released.
Nevertheless a dispensation of true interpretation, has place in this very
especially, and such interpretation may be needful, sometimes in respect of
the very matter promised by Oathe to be performed, being (indeed) no due
matter for an oathe. As the oathe for single life, vowed by such, as have not
the special gift of Continency. Sometimes it may be requisite, in respect of
after-euents: as if I swear and vow to God, to keep some certain spare and
so strait a diet; as (through weakness and infirmities after happening) I
can not possibly observe, without apparent danger of the loss of my life.

And sometimes, this kind of dispensation may have necessary place; whereas
some thing does after fall out, or (at least) is discovered; which I never
forethought, or if I had, by all probability, I would never have vowed or
undertaken so much. Examples of these you may frame many, out of that, which
has been answered to that question; whether all promissorie oaths, were
absolutely to be kept, or no?

Lastly, some doubt may be stirred; whether a Christian may capitulate or
contracte, (by mutual oaths given and taken) with a Pagan or heathen Prince,
or other private person, that takes his oathe by Idols or by false gods:
seeing in so swearing, he sins greatly, in that he gives (thereby) that
reverence unto them, which is only due, to the true and everliving God?

This very question was asked of Saint Aug. ep. 154. ad Publicolam.
Augustine by Publicola: and he did thus answer him: he that uses (says
he) the credit of him that swears by false gods, not unto evil, but unto
good: he does not communicate with that sin of swearing by Diuelles: but is
party only to those lawful covenants, wherein the other perfourmeth, what
he swear. Yet if a Christian should (any way) induce or draw an other to
swear by them, herein he should sin grievously. And least any man weigh
this learned fathers judgment herein over light, we have also an example
hereof in Scripture, and uncontrolled: for Genes. 31. verse. 53.
Jacob took an oathe of Laban, swearing by the God of Nachor. Now we Josh.
24. verse. 2.
read in Scripture, that this Nachor was an Idolater, and served strange gods.
Hitherto of some doubts that may be moved touching oaths.

CHAP. III. Division of Oaths according to the outward form of taking them:
according to the matter and inward form of them: with plain description of
every kind of oathe.
NExt follows to be discussed how many sorts, and several kinds of
oaths there be; and how they differ one from another.

An Oathe, as touching the outward form of taking it; is either verbally or
corporally taken. Uerball, when by words or speech only, we conceive the
form of the Oathe; as, God is my witness; The Lord lives, etc. Corporal,
when by some outward gesture or act in taking the Oathe; we testify that we
accept of it, as it is ministered. as, by laying hand on a book, on our
breast, or under the thigh of him that ministers it: as Abraham's servant did.

Again, some oathe is solenne iuramentum; and others be not. that oath is
called L. 3. and 5. l. in fine and 34.. qui iusiurandum. ff. de iurciurando.
solenne, which has certain sole^nities prescribed and endited, either by the
parties themselves, by the Judge, or by the Law, with certain set-conceiued
words, from which he that swears, may not vary. but if he do, his Oath
shall not be accepted.

All these may be given and taken, in two several sorts. Either simply; as
thus: I speak it before God etc. or with some imprecation to our selves, or
others, whom we hold very dear unto us, adjoined thereunto; as thus: So and
so 1. Reg. ca. 3.
do God unto me and more. for thereby we do expressly as it were deuote, and
bind our selves or them, unto the punishment of God; if that be not true,
which we swear. Of this kind I find examples in Scripture, that 1. Sam. 14.
verse. 24. Neh. 5. verse. 12, 13.
some were so imposed by Magistrates; and 1. Sam. 14. verse.
othersome were voluntarily so taken. The examples of them both, you may see in
their several places according to the directions given by quotations in the
margent. An example of an oathe taken voluntarily by imprecation, we also
find in the 4. 1. Sam. 20. verse. 13. 2. Sam. 3. verse. 9. 35. 2. Samu. 19.
verse. 13. Neh. 10. verse. 29. 42. Cor. 1. ver. 23
new Testament: for Paul says, I call God to witness unto my soul; which is
to execrate his own soul, if he had not sworn truly. So much of the outward
form of an oath.

There are besides that, two principal divisions of an oath: the one
respecting the matter of it, according to the circumstance of time; the other,
which considers the inward form, with other circumstances. For the first,
every oath, is either concerning a thing past or present: and this is called
Assertorium iuramentum: or else touching a thing to come, and it is called
Iuramentum promissorium. For the second division; an oath may be made, either
iudicially or extraiudicially. And both these (in oaths promissorie) are
either Confirmatoria actus futuri; as (in judgment) that I will use no vain
cauillations and delays: or forth of Judgment, as an oathe of allegiance:
or they are obligationis introductoria, when the very oath works the bond in
law, for something (afterward) to be done.

But this bond is only by the Tot. tit. ex. de Iureiurando.
Canon, and not by the Civil laws, saving in one case that I can call to
mind: which is the L. vt iurisiura^di. ff. de operis libertorum.
oathe of a man once a bondslaue, and now set free (called libertus) that is
made unto his patron, to perform some works or other thing unto him. For in
this case, the very oathe is obligationis introductorium: and makes the freed
man bound (by that Law) to perform it, in vim turamenti.

Furthermore a promissorie oath (whether taken in judgment or out of
judgment) is either necessary; as when it is imposed by the Magistrate upon
his subject: or it is voluntary.

An oath assertorie (being of chiefest use, and therefore most to be stood upon
and explaned) is also either extraiudiciall or judicial. and both these, be
either necessary, or voluntary.

The judicial necessary oath Assertory is sometimes given to the defendant
when there is (formally) another party besides in judgment; and sometimes,
when there is no such party beside; but the Judge that proceeds ex officio.
When there is a party, it is either iuramentum calumniae, veritatis or
purgationis: but if there be no such party beside; it is either purgatorium
tantum, or partim purgatorium and partim inquisitorium.

The Judicial and voluntary oath; is either suppletorium, aestimatortum in
litem, or decisorium. Which last, is oftentimes confounded with iudiciale
iuramentum, without further addition: by reason of the more frequent use of it,
in Civil law courts in elder times; when men durst trust one another
conscience better, then now (generally) they have cause to do.

The decisory oath, is either delatum or relatum by the one of the parties,
that are in suit together.

Now I mind briefly and plainly (without tying my self to any exact
definitions) to describe these unto you; with only quotations of the Scripture
(where examples of them may be found as I conceive it) for avoiding of
tediousness, by particular rehearsal.

Genesis 43. v. 3. 1. Sam. 25. v. 26. 1. Sa^. 26. v. 10, 16. 1. Sam. 29. v. 6. 2.
Sam. 4. v. 9. 2. Sam. 19. v. 7.
Assertorie is, when (by oath) any thing past or present, is affirmed or denied
to be.

A Genesis 24. v. 3. and 9. Genesis 47. v. 31. Leuit. 5. v. 4. Number. 30. v. 3. and 14.
Josh. 1. v 6. Josh. 2. v. 12. Josh. 2. v. 22. Josh. 9. v. 15. 18. 19. 20. Judge
15. v. 12. 1. Sam. 14. v. 45. 1. Sam. 28. v. 10. 2. Sam. 3. v 35. 2. Sam. 19.
v. 13. 1. Reg. 1. v. 13. and 17.
Promissorie oath is, when any thing is (by oath) promised to be done, or not
done.

In a Promissorie oath, there is a double bond before God: the one is, that it
is sin, if truth be wanting: and the other is, that he is bound to do: hat,
which he promises. But in an Assertorie oath, there is no bond, but only
this; that the matter be true, which is affirmed thereby, or denied.

The effect of a Promissorie oath is, that he is bound to make that true, which
he has sworn: but if it were not in his power to do it; then there wanted in
such oath, judgment and discretion; except it were in his power to do it when
he swore, but became impossible by some casual event after happening, that
could not be before thought on. In which case nevertheless, he is bound to
perform it, as far forth as lies any way in him, so the oath be such,
which did bind, as carrying with it none impiety.

But if the promissorie oath be made touching such a thing, as was in his
power; yet such as ought not to be done either because it was in it self
evil, or is an hinderance or let of something that is good: then in such an
oath, Justice is wanting.

An Genesis 21. v. 31. Genesis 26. v. 31. Judge. 21. v. 1. 1. Sam. 19. v. 6. 1. Sa^
20. v. 13. 17. 1. Sam. 30. v. 15. 2. Sam. 19. v. 23. 2. Sam. 21. v. 17. 1. Reg.
1. v. 29. 30. 51. 1. Reg. 2. v. 8. 23. 24. 2. Reg. 25. v. 24. 2. Chro. 15. v.
14. Nehe. 7. v. 18. Nehe. 10. v. 29. Ierem. 38. v. 16. Ierem. 40. v. 9. Hebr.
6. v. 16. and 17.
oathe promissorie and confirmatorie, is; when it is made for more full
assurance, of some act to be done, or not to be done.

A 1. Sam. 14. v. 24. and 28. 1. Sa^. 24. v. 22. 23. 1. Reg. 2. v. 42. 43. Ezra
10. v. 5. Nehe. 5. v. 12. Josh. 23. v. 7. In these words: Nor cause to swear
by them.
necessary oath (generally) whether there be two parties formally; or the
Judge proceeds ex officio; is that, which a Magistrate causes those that be
under his authority to take, for some convenient purpose and end.

In law it is defined to be Postilla in v. iureiur. L. in bonae fidei C. de
reb. cred. and iureiur.
such, as you neither may refer or put over to the other party, to take his
oath to the contrary: nor yet may be refused by your self. For L. 11.
quita^it. ff. de interrog. act. and L. 11. de periurio. ff de in litem iurando.
ibi, ex necessitate.
if you do, you shall be holden as convicted, and the suit must go against
you.

This necessary oath, is tendered by the Judge, whenever he sees cause in
equity to move him; albeit no party make petition: and then it is called
Nobile vel merum Iudicis officium. or else it is tendered and ministered by him,
at the petition of a party: and then it is termed mercenarium Iudicis
officium, because thereby he seems, but as it were to serve his turn, that
makes the petition.

The first of this necessary sort, where there be (formallie) two parties; is
Iuramentum calumniae. which is, when one is urged to swear, that he moves a
cause, alleges or answers some Judicial matter, bona fide, that is truly,
directly, and not captiously: and that he believes it to be true: and thinks
he can (indeed) make proof of it: and that he does it not to vex his
adversary, but to relieve himself: and not of any purpose, to delay the suit.

Necessarium iuramentum veritatis is Mascard. de probat. vol. 1. page 18. nu. 6.
that; which is ministered to witnesses: and that also which is ministered to the
party, who is to answer unto Positions or Articles: And that also is so
called, whereby the Judge does interrogate and examine either of the parties
or the witnesses; to the intent, to be more fully instructed in the cause.

1. Reg. 8. v. 31.
luramentum purgationis (where there be such parties) is; when in a cause
criminally moved by some accuser or party: the Judge (upon defect of
sufficient proof) does tender to the defendant an oath to clear himself.
This, though it be established by the Canon; yet of long time it has been in
use as well in Civil or Temporal courts (on the other side of the Sea) as in
Ecclesiastical: so that if the defendant shall refuse to take it in either; he
is holden pro confesso, and conuicto.

The other oath of purgation or clearing simply, when there is no formal
party in judgment, besides the defendant; is that, which (by reason of fame,
scandal, vehement presumption, or upon some other of those means that (as I
have showed before) do open a way to Inquiry ex officio) the Judge does give
unto the defendant, to his clearing of the very crime objected: without any
meaning then to seek further proofs of that crime, after the defendant has
taken such oath.

The other oath necessary, being partly of Leuit. 5. v. 1. Number. 5. v. 12. and
sic deinceps. Josh. 7. v. 19. 1. Sam. 14. v. 43.
clearing, and partly of further inquiry is that; which (as is next aforesaid)
is given to the defendant upon criminal matter objected and upon the
circumstances thereof: yea (oftentimes) with purpose to make further proof, in
case the defendant shall not confess it, or not so fully in material
circumstances, as the Judge has cause to think, may by witnesses or otherwise
be proved. Yet if he shall confess so far, as is thought may be proved;
then (according to the quality of such his answer) he is presently either
proceeded with thereupon unto a judgment, or else dismissed as cleared
thereof, by his oath.

The examples and other justification hereof, shall more largely (God willing)
be showed, in their proper place hereafter. For this is the oath, that the
Innouators do so much condemn, and exclaim against.

But now touching voluntary Judicial oaths, whereof Suppletorium is that,
which is tendered to the plaintiff or defendant (according to the quality of
the cause) in a civil matter, for supply of proof, made semiplene tantum: as
(happily) by one singular witness, being without all iu^t exce^tion.

Iuramentum in litem, or Aestimatorium is then L. 1. cum l. sequ. ff. de in
litem iurando.
given by the Judge; when the defendant does not restore the very thing that
is in demand. in which respect he is to be condemned in the value thereof,
according to such rate, as the plaintiff is endamaged, taking it upon his oath:
yet so, as the Judge (by equity) may tax and moderate the quantity of the
sum, which he may not exceed; and also when the party has sworn, the
Judge may defalke thereof, as he sees cause in equity.

Decisorium iuramentum delatum is that; which Exodus 22. v. 11. 1. Reg. 8. v.
31. Hebr. 6. v. 16.
either the one or the other of the parties, first offers unto his adversary
to take, according to that he affirms or stands in. perhaps upon
confidence of his good conscience, or for want of better proof.

So that, if he to whom it is so deferred, shall take such oath: then must the
matter be adjudged, according to his oath; as if the parties, had so agreed the
cause. But if he shall refuse it, and yet will not refer it, that is, will
not put it over unto his oath; that first made the offer: then shall he be
overthrown in the cause. So that to refer an oath, is nothing else; but to
offer it back; to be decided by his oath (according to his own issue) that
first made the offer. L. iusiurandum. 34. ait Praetor. ff. eodem. and l.
generaliter. 12. se liuramento. C. d.
But if upon such referring it over back again, he also that made the first
offer, will not take the oath: then he that so referred it over again, shall
have judgment pass with him, as if he himself had sworn, when it was first
offered him: for maximae turpitudinis est, nec delatum subire, nec refer
iuramentum.

Examples of these decisorie oaths, there be also at the common law: for, 19.
H. 6. 43.
where the defendant desires that the plaintiff may be examined or sworn; this
is peremptory to the plaintiff in this point: and so is the wager of law ex
part defendentis. By the custom of London, if the defendant desire to have
the plaintiff swear to his declaration, and he do it, the defendant is
thereupon condemned.

But this oathe decisorie (at the Iul. Clarus. li. 5. finali. qu. 63.
civil Law) is never used in matters criminal, except they be moved ciuilly
(not criminally) that is for the plaintifes private amends and satisfaction: or
else the cause be but of small value: or the proceeding in such criminal cause
criminally; be referred and intended, to no corporal, but to a pecuniarie
punishment or fine only. Thus far for a general understanding of the nature
of every several kind of oathe.

CHAP. IIII. That the ceremonies used in taking and giving corporal oaths,
with laying hands upon the Bible or Testament, and swearing by the contents of
it, are not unlawful.
THe first challenge (now coming to be spoken of) that is made by some of
them against the ceremony used through this Realm in all corporal oaths
taken either in Temporal or in Ecclesiastical Courts; is the laying of our
hands upon a book, when we take the oathe.

For the better approbation hereof, it is meet to consider the general end
of it, the particular use of it, and the general practice of that or of the
like ceremony, reported both in Scripture, and in other writers to have been
used in such action.

The general and chief end of this, or of any the like ceremony used in this
action, is to signify thereby, that we do then advisedly attend, and give
heed to the oath wherewith we are charged, and that we do accept of it, and
bind ourselves in sort as it is given.

The use of this in particular; is to strike a more advised fear and reverence
into us: when we consider the reverence due to an oathe, as it is described in
that book; and the curses there threatened against those, that for swear
themselves, or shall take the name of God vainly.

This use of such corporal ceremony in taking of an oathe is touched in the
L. 3. C. si minor se maiorem dixerit.
civil law, out of which it is gathered; that, by touching and by corporal
taking of it, the oath is holden to be more inviolable, and the harder (upon
any plea) to be recalled.

The practice of corporal oaths, taken with some like effectual and
significant ceremony by the godly; is to be found in Scripture. When Genesis 24.
v. 3. and 9.
Abraham caused his servant (that was under his authority) to take a
corporal, Promissorie and necessary oath, for the finding out and fetching of
a wife for his son Isaac of his own kindred; he willed him to lay his hand
under his thigh. with this ceremony likewise Genesis 47. v. 29.
did Jacob take an oath of his son Joseph; that he should not bury him in
Egypt; thereby as it were signifying, that simply they were to take the
oathe, even as they looked for Salvation in the promised Messiah, that was to
descend of those two Patriarchs, according to the flesh.

So does Saint Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 16. ca. 33
Augustine interpret this ceremony: The hand (says he) put under the thigh
did signify, that the Lord (according to the flesh) was to descend from that
person.

Another ceremony (besides this) we find used in holy Scripture, when such
corporal and more impressiue oathe was taken: and that is the lifting up of
the hand, toward heaven: a gesture so commonly used, that sometimes it is
taken for the oathe it self. For Abraham Genesis 14. v. 22. 23.
said to the king of Sodom, I have lift up my hand unto the Lord, the most
high God, possessour of heaven and earth, that I will not, etc. Likewise God
says in Deuteronomy. 32. v. 40.
Deuteronomie: I lift up mine hand to heaven and say, I live for ever. And
likewise where it is Exodus 6. v. 7.
said: I will bring you into the land, which I lift up mine hand (id est,
swear) that I would give to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. So the Prophet Ezechiel:
I Ezech. 20. v. 15
lift up mine hand unto them in the wilderness; that I would not bring them
into the land, etc. That these were oaths taken with that significant
ceremony, another Dan. 12. v. 7.
Prophet declares. I heard the man clothed in linen, which was upon the
waters of the River; when he held up his right hand and his left hand unto
heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever. with the same pertinent gesture
does the Angel in Apoc. 10. v. 5.
the Revelation swear by the living God, and lifted up his hands toward
heaven; where (by immutable providence) that was decreed: and from whence
comes swift judgment upon all, that make or love leasings.

This gesture in taking a corporal oath was so usual, that from the people of
God, it seems to have been derived down, and taken up even with the Gentiles.

-- Virgil. lib 12 Aenead.
sequitur sic deinde Latinus,
Suspiciens caelum, tenditque ad syderadextram:
Haec eadem (Aenea) terram, mare, sydera, iuro: as Virgil writes. And no less
is by some thought to be meant in the Digests of the civil Law, by the word L.
quidam. ff. de probationibus.
emissamanus. Yea, and the practice of that very ceremony of swearing with
laying hand upon the holy Gospels; was both had, and allowed by the Fathers in
the Primitive Church, as appears by Saint Aug ad Publicol. epist. 154.
Augustine in his Epistle ad Publicolam.

In the times of the ancient Christian Emperors, it was received and used in
Civil Courts. An oathe (says Novel. Justin. 8. vel 9.
Justinian) is then said to be corporally taken; when a man in swearing,
does touch with his hand, the holy Gospels. And again: L. generaliter. in
omnibus. C. de rebus credit. and iureiur.
Whether the oathe be to be taken in tublike judgment, or in houses, or in
holy Oratories, or with touching the holy Scriptures, etc. And it is
provided, not L. rem non nouam. patroni. C. de iudicijs.
only that they shall be taken tactis sacrosanctis Euangelijs: but that Ibidem
ante.
the Scriptures shall lie continually before the Judges sitting in judgment;
that both they and the suitors, may be put in mind; that the judgment is
Gods, and done in his presence. For touching the holy Gospels at the taking
of an oathe: we have other testimonies also recorded in L. 2. C. de iuramento
propter calumniam dando. and 1. and nulli de sanctiss. ep. in Auth.
ancient laws.

So for the laying of holy Scriptures before them, at the time of taking
oathe, both Auth. sed iudex. C. de episcopis and clericis. c. fin. de iuram.
calumniae. Clem. 1. de homicid. Clem. 1. porro de haereticis.
out of Law and Canons.

And by the most general custom of all Christendom; the same ceremony in
taking a corporal oathe, is until this day continued. But it is Panorm. in c.
and li Christus. de iureiur.
reported, that in Italy, they use to lay their hand upon any Book, Bible, or
other. And it seems by a Duarenus in tit. ft. de iureiur. ca. 11.
French Writer, that they which swear there, do use to hold up their hand
toward heaven: thereby signifying, that they call God to witness. In some
other places they take a corporal oathe, by laying their hand on their breast.

But where the Treatisor reprehe^deth at taking an oath a vain ceremony and
sond invention (as he calls it) of stretching out three middle fingers upon
the book, and the thombe and little finger under it; with some mystery (by him
supposed) thereby to be signified, as if hereby this Church of England or
present regiment thereof (which he oppugneth) were therein to be touched:
Truly he might with less show of humor, have spared that vain and fond
invention; insomuch as no such matter is either by law commanded, by Judges
urged, or by any others practiced.

One other Ceremony or manner of taking an oath, is by some of them also
reprehended: that is, for swearing by the book, or by the contents of it.

We do find in a very old statute of this Realm (termed the awarde of
Kenelworth) these 51. Hen. 3.
words: All that have to do in this b^halfe, shall s^eare upon the holy
Gospels of God, that none shall take reuengement, etc. by occasion of the
Commotion: And in the same Statute, not only upon, but also by the holy
Gospels. For it is there thus Ibidem.
contained, Those that have been robbers in wars and roades, and have
nothing; shall come and swear by the holy Gospels of God (finding sufficient
surety) that from henceforth they shall keep the peace, and suffer
satisfaction, and penance, after the judgment of the Church. where (by the
way) may be noted, that it seems Ordinaries then did, and might enjoin
penance and satisfaction to parties delinquent; for wrongs done by them, in
temporal goods and chattels.

The manner of swearing by the 1. Eliz. ca. 1.
contents of the Book, is prescribed to be used in the oath of the Queens
supremacy. But is this the only cause (think ye) that some of that suite,
refuse wholly to take it, or come very hardly unto it? Some of them mince it,
and gloss upon it, and I know not with how many interpretations, limitations,
and protestations, do (in very deed) take the whole force and true meaning of
it away, as deeply as the Papists do, though in other respects.

But it will be said, the contents of the Book be creatures, and therefore
not lawful to swear by them.

Truly it must be confessed, that simply to swear by a creature, is Mat. 5.
v. 34. 35. and 36.
forbidden. Swear not at all, neither by heaven, etc. nor by earth, etc.
says our Savior in the Gospel: which must be understood, to be forbidden in
any other creature, as well as in those.

The prophet Esaias says: He Esaias 65. v. 16.
that swears in the land, shall swear by the God of truth: Jeremy Iere. 5.
v. 7.
says, How should I spare thee for this; thy children have for saken me and
sworn by them that are no gods? Therefore are they Iere. 12. v. 16.
taxed that swear by Baall, and are taught to swear thus, the Lord lives.

Saint Augustine, as to this purpose, writes Aug ad Publicol. epist. 154.
thus: The very swearing by creatures is evil, because it is forbidden by God:
but to keep that thou so swearest is good; that thereby thou may avoid the
sins of lying, and deceit. The godly ancient E^seb. lib 4. hist. ca. 15.
Martyr Polycarpus, did rather choose to be burned to afhes, then to swear by
the fortune of Caesar.

Saint Hierom. in 5. Matthew.
Hierome says: He that swears, either worshippeth or loves him, by whom
he swears. The decrees c. and iurabunt. c. considera c. clericum. c. si quis
per. etc. mouer te. ficut etiam. 22. qu. p^ima.
of Gratian do gather the same prohibition, against swearing by creatures; out
of sundry old Fathers, and Councels.

Swearing is a kind of religious act, whereby we give worship to God, as
most true, most just, and knowing all things; and therefore to be taken only
in his name.

Yet (these reasons notwithstanding) we find sundry examples, of virtuous and
godly personages in the Scriptures; that have sworn by creatures. First it may
seem, that God himself so swears: where it Amos. 8. ver. 7.
is said, the Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob. Joseph did Gene.
42. V. 15.
swear thus, By the life of Pharaoh, ye shall not go hence, except your
youngest brother come hither. In the communication and treaty of league betwixt
David and Jonathan, it is said thus: And David swear again, etc. as 1. Sam.
20. V. 5.
the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, there is but a step, between me and
death. So did Abigail 1. Sam. 25. verse. 26.
swear before David: as the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives. The
Patriarch Jacob at the league betwixt him and Laba^, swear, by the fear of his
father Gen 31. verse. 53
Isaac. And Vrias swear thus unto king David, 2. Sam. 11. verse. 11.
as thou live, and thy soul lives. The like oath does Elisha 2. Reg. ca.
2. verse. 3. and 6.
use to Eliah the Prophet twice in one Chapter; as the Lord lives, and as thy
soul lives, I will not leave thee. The Sunamite woman swears 2. Reg. ca. 4.
verse. 30.
thus to Elisha the Prophet; as the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I
will not leave thee. Saint Paul 1. Cor. 15. verse. 31.
writes thus: by our rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die
daily. This does S. Aug. in 1. ca. ad Galatas. and ser. 30. de verbis Apostoli.
Augustine affirm, and also prove to be an oath in two several places of his
works. And so does Beda in 1. Cor. ca. 15.
Beda also our countrieman, and an ancient Writer. Which none of these holy
persons would have done, or suffered in their presence to be done; if it had
been either idolatrous or blasphemous.

In the times of the Primitive Church; we find records of this form of oath
taken, viz. by the holy Gospels. Saint Aug. ad Publicol. epist. 154.
Augustine says, It is a greater matter to swear by God, then to swear by
the Gospels. which proves, that this form of Oathe was then in use, and that
without reprehension. But Saint Chrysostom. Hom. 44. in Matthew. in opere
imperfecto.
Chrysostom more fully: If (says he) there be any cause at all, it is
counted but a light matter to swear by God: but he that swears by the
Gospelles, is thought to have done a far greater matter: to whom must be
said, Ye fools, the Scriptures were made for God, not God for the
Scriptures. The same ancient Father elsewhere also notes, that manner of
ceremony to have been used in his time, in taking corporal oaths: whereas
going about to reclaim men from that usual deferring of decisorie oaths unto
others; he Chrysostom. Hom. 15. ad pop. Antioch.
thus says: At least (says he) if nothing else will move thee, have a
reverend regard of the very Book, which thou reachest to him to swear by;
and peruse but the Gospel which thou take in thine hands, and vrgest him to
swear by, etc.

Ancient Christian Emperors did set down by law; that this form of oath
should be Justinian. Nou. Coll. 2. constable. 3.
used. viz. by God Almighty the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, etc. and by the
four Gospels, that I do hold in mine hand. And other Emperors (before) Arcad.
and Ho. norius A A. l. 41. C. de transactio. nibus. anno Christi 395.
allowed even of this kind of oath: per salutem principis.

For resolution of this doubt, I cannot disallow of the Schoolemens answer,
that whether the oathe be expressly by God, or by implication, it is not
material; so that we do not swear simply by the creature. Now there is no
man so full of cavil, who will conceive when we swear to the oathe of
Supremacy thus: So God help us, and by the contents of the book, or, By the
holy Gospels; that thereby we swear, either by the cover, paper, ink, or
form of letters; but rather by the wisdom and spirit of God, by which it was
indicted: and withal, as it were renouncing all the promises, and calling upon
us all the curses therein made, if we swear not truly. Therefore (
Bonauentura. Angel. de Clauasio, and alij.
say they) there is relatio ad Deum actualis in an oathe, when both in words
and meaning we swear by him: and when we swear by some excellent creature,
not simply, but in respect as there shines in it a great measure of divine
truth, or Majesty, then it is called relatio habitudinalis ad Deum, a secret
implied reference to God himself. For as the good that is done to a Prophet,
or Disciple, in the name of a Prophet or Disciple; and the despite that is done
to them, or unto the poor, redoundeth unto God his Creator, and is said in
Scripture to be done unto God himself: So when we swear by a creature, with
an especial reference to God the Creator: it is intended (indeed) as done by
him, and in his holy name.

This their distinction seems well confirmed by some of the places before
alleged. Where God is said to swear by the excellency of Jacob; it cannot
be understood, that it was by any worldly excellency, wherein Jacob
excelled; but (indeed) was by himself, as those words to the Heb. 6. ver. 13.
Hebrews do testify: because God had no greater to swear by, he swear by
himself. Jacobs oathe to Laban, was not by any accidental conceit or passion
of his father Isaacs mind: but by the very object of his religious fear, that
is by God himself.

In like sort, those oaths by the life of the soul of such as they spoke unto,
and that which was by Paul's retoycing; must needs be understood. For the
oathe which 1. Sam. 20. ver. 3
David swear unto Jonathan, as God lives, and as thy soul lives; is (after)
in the Ibidem. verse. 42.
same Chapter said to be sworn, in the name of the Lord.

Therefore where Joseph swear by the life of Pharaoh, it may not be taken as if
he meant (without any reference to God) to swear simply by acreature; but it
was either by way of deuoting, and as it were binding of the Princes life unto
God; a thing which (thereby) he signified to them, that he held most dear
unto him: or else by way of contesting, and calling to testimony the truth of
divine Justice; for execution whereof, the Princes of the earth are set: as
some of the Schoolmen do answer it.

Saint Hom. 44. oper. imperfect. in Mat.
Chrysostom does make the swearing by the Gospels equivalent with the oath,
that is made by God himself; where he confuteth the opinion of such, as
thought it to be a greater matter to swear by the Gospels, then it was to
swear by God. In which regard a Innoc. in c. etsi Chr. de iureiur.
Canonist says: paria sunt iurare per Deum, ac. per fidem. Tyndall our
countryman (in this behalf) well Tyndall in 5. Matthew. page 208. suorum operum.
interprets the meaning of an oathe, made by the holy Gospels: when thou
swearest (says he) by the Gospel book, or Bible, the meaning is, that God,
if thou lie, shall not fulfill unto thee the promises of mercy therein written:
but contrariwise to bring upon thee all the curses, plagues, and vengeance
therein threatened, unto the disobedient and evil doers.

And when the name of a crcature (in which no such measure of divine majesty
shines, as does in the holy Scriptures) is used in an oathe; it is
understood to be done with this reference unto Almighty God, whereof we do
speak by Saint Aug. de verbis Apostoli. Ser. 28. ca. 6.
Augustines judgment. What is it (says he) to s^eare by God, but, Ius
reddere Deo, to doeright to God? when thou swearest by thine own health or
salvation, but to do right to them? But more fully and plainly afterward:
When Ibidem.
a man says thus; by mine health or salvation, he binds and gageth that
unto God: when by his children, he pledgeth them unto God; that what he
speaks may fall upon their heads: if true, then truth; if false, then
falshoode. Now seeing whatsoever a man in swearing names, whether his
children, his own head, or his salvation, he binds it thereby unto God;
then how much more does he it, when he falsely swears by God himself?
Yea when far more mean creatures then these be named in an oathe, yet the
same reference unto God, is taken to be retained. For the same learned Aug.
ibidem. ser. 28. ca. 12. sed secundum alios libros Set^. 30.
Father says: Lo I tell you, that he which by a stone swears falsely, is
perjured: whereupon I infer, that many are deceived, who think in that the
thing by which they swear, is of no value; therefore they are not guilty of
perjury: truly in this case thou art altogether perjured, in that thou
swearest falsely, by that thou take not to be holy: if thou think the thing
it self not to be holy; yet account him holy, to whom in that sort thou
swearest: for when thou so swearest, thou do not swear to thy self or unto
a stone, but thou swearest to thy neighbor, thou swearest to a man before a
stone; but do thou not also swear before God? and albeit the stone do not
hear thy words, yet God will punish thy falsehoode. And Tyndall in the Tynd.
in 5. Matthew. page 208.
aforesaid place to like effect: When (says he) thou swearest by any
creature, as by bread or salt, the meaning is, that thou desire; that the
Creator thereof, shall avenge it of thee, if thoulie. Ulpianus, though a great
Lawyer, yet but an Heathen man could see this meaning to be in such oaths:
viz. both that we ought to swear by God; and that if our oathe were conceived
by any creature; yet it has (for the most part) a respect unto God, and
thereby binds, as if it were made by God himself. L. 33. Qui per salutem. ff.
de iureiurando.
Qui per salutem suam jurat (says he) per Deum iurare videtur; respectu eni^
Diuini numinis it a jurat. Whereupon a great learned man of Duarenus in tit. de
iuteiurando.
late years gathers thus: whosoever swears, albeit he make no mention of
God, yet is he intended to de^ote and subject himself to the vengeance of God,
if willingly he deceive. And other Heathens (though they named often^mes
something else which they held deate unto them, in taking their oaths) yet, by
the light of nature could see thus much; that an oath was an honor proper to
the everliving God. Therefore Apuleius de Deo Socratis.
Apuleius writes thus: vtrumque idoneum non est, per quod adiures vtue per
ista iurent, cum sit summi Deorum hic honor proprius: which he proves out of
Ennius (as Lipsius lib. 1. Elector. ca. 18.
Lipsius does read it) in these words: Nam and Iouis iurandum dicitur, vt
ait Ennius. The verse which he means, is alleged by Tully:

Fides alma, apta pennis, iurandum Iouis.
The same etymology (of Iusiurandum quasi Iouis iurandum) does Lipsius in the
same place also prove, out of this verse of Naeuius;

Ius sacratum, Iouis iurandum sagmine.
So that we may conclude, if the contents of the holy Bible were to be
accounted (in each respect) but a creature; yet with such regard, and
necessary reference that it has to God himself; it is neither unusual, nor
unlawful. Thus much for the two opinions delivered against the ceremony in
taking, and manner of charging by oathe.

CHAP. V. The true issue of the next opinion in question: two sorts of crimes
and offenses prohibited: in what cases an oath (here spoken of) may not be
ministered: and the manifold conueniencie and necessity of an oath (sometimes)
to be ministered in a cause criminal and penal unto the party: with some few
objections, touching inconueniencie thereof, answered.
Now follows the most principal challenge by this sort of men. and it is
that, which they make against such oath, as I termed before, an oath of
purgation and of Inquiry. which is, when a Judge having some one or mo of
those grounds treated of, and proved before sufficient (in equity and law) to
ground an Inquiry ex officio against a crime; does (accordingly) proceed,
and urges the party conuented, to answer the matter and circumstances
(whereon the Inquiry to the end of Purgation, or else to punishment and
reformation is framed) upon his corporal oath; though the matter be criminal,
and thereby may happen to be penal to him self, and perhaps unto others also.

Now whether such oath may by a Magistrate lawfully be urged, and therefore
not to be refused by the party; is the very issue of this question.

Crimes and offenses are of two sorts: they are either prohibita quia mala,
that is, either mala perse, in their own nature wicked, and therefore by laws
forbidden: or such as of their own nature are not simply evil, but therefore
made evil, because (for some public good end) they are forbidden by positive
laws. Whether in both these sorts of crimes, those men do think, such oath
to be unlawful, or but in the one of them, and in whether of the two; I have
not yet heard any resolution; and therefore will bring my proofs indifferently
for either.

But these two cautions you must be forewarned of. First, that it is not holden
by any Law in England, nor by practice of any Court here used; that a man
should be examined upon his oath, touching a crime, whereby his life or any of
his limbs may be endangered. The reason why the laws thought it unreasonable
to stretch it thus far, was for fear of perjury. because it cannot be
intended of most men, but they will rather hazard an untrue oath; then either
their life, or limbs. Skin for Job 2. V. 4.
skin (says Satan to God) and all that ever a man has, will he give for
his life.

And to this very purpose is the same text (not unaptly) alleged, eue^ by the
Treatisor himself. which makes me the more to marvel at the Note-gatherer
(pretending to be both so great a Divine and Statesman also) that he could not
see, this to be far the sounder opinion by divinity; and that he knew not the
policy and custom of this Realm, to concur also therewith; howsoever he
auouche the contrary, as Part. 2. ca. 10. page 93.
before is by me noted.

The next caution is; that if the Judge have probable cause to suspect the
party to be such one, as will Iul. Clar. lib. 5. finali. q. 45.
forswear himself, rather then tell a truth: there he ought also to abstain
from tendering oath unto him, especially touching a crime.

This not only by law is required, but (as ancient Fathers judge) by
divinity also: Aug. de decoll, Ioh. Bapt. ser. 11.
quare (says S. Augustine) prouocasti hominem ad iurationem; quem sciebas
falsum esse iuraturum? why did thou provoke such one to swear, as thou
knew would swear falsely? And Aug. ibidem.
again the same learned Father: he that provoke a man to swear whom he
knows will swear falsely, is worse then a man killer: for a man slayer
kills but the body, but this man goes about to kill the soul: yea two
souls; that is, his whom he so provoke, and his own soul.

An example hereof may be of him, which knowing the very truth, yet deferreth
an oath decisory. whereas a Judge, though he know it not, but only have
probable suspicion, that the party is like wilfully to periure; ought not to
urge an Oathe at his hands.

In the handling of this oath ministered to a party ex officio in a cause
criminal, and thereby penal to him; I propound this order to my self. First
to diduce down more largely that equity (which is before in the ninth Chapter
of the second part showed, to be in the Inquiry of Office) unto this chief
and most usual act in such Inquiry; that is, of examining the party by his
corporal oath, with answer to some few objections made against the equity
and reasonablenes of it, by the Treatisour. Next I mean to show it to be so
far from being contrary to the laws of the Realm; that by them it is often
used and practiced; with answer to such reasons, as be made to prove the
contrary. Then that the laws of the Realm, do allow it in Courts
Ecclesiastical. Fourthly, that it is practiced and allowed by Canon and Civil
laws. And that it is in use amongst other nations, with answer likewise to
objections made to the contrary. Sixthly, that it is practiced and allowed in
Gods law. Lastly I will (God permitting me) answer their objections, that out
of the word of God and Divinity I have heard made, to the contrary. First
therefore touching the equity of such oath. All inquiry of crimes is made in
some of these three sorts. First where neither person nor any deed is known
to the Judge (in particular) to be committed; And such are enquiries by grand
Iuries at the common law, and Enquiries by Churchwardens and Sidemen in
visitations, at the Ecclesiastical law. This is called Inquisitio generalis,
Inquiry, or Enquest general.

Secondly inquiry is made, when a fact is known to be done, but the
delinquent is not known. As the Inquisition by a Coroner (upon some murder
committed) at the common law: and as the Inquiry upon forgerie committed in
some act of an Ecclesiastical court; in which kind of Inquiry, the hidden
person is enquired after, in respect of the apparent fact.

Lastly, Inquiry is made against a particular person; where there be
presumptions and detections, that some certain crime is by him committed; but
whether he have committed it or not, it is not certainly known: and herein
the crime being hidden is enquired of, because of the person, apparently
pressed by some probabilities thereof. The second of these is termed also
Inquisitio generalis, but it is not so general as the first: and the last, is
most properly termed Inquisitio specialis.

In the first and second of these sorts of Enquiring, it will not (I take it)
be denied by any; but that such should be assumed (by the several Judges and
Officers in that behalf) as they (in their discretions) think most fit, and
to be most likely to know the offenders, and the offenses with their
circumstances; and that they be charged upon their oaths, touching their
utmost knowledge, concerning such Offenders. And may it not then thereby happen
and fall out; that an oath shall be ministered to one, who himself is such an
offender as is enquired of? For the grand Jury (as I take it) have their oath
given to enquire, and present, their own, their fellows, and others faults,
that they shall have in charge. And yet to avoid this inconvenience, I trust
it will not be thought meet, that al Enquiries by oaths, should be therefore
given over. Then if this be a thing equal and agreeable unto law, to urge an
oath; even where it may happen the party that takes it, to be the offender:
why should it not stand with more equity, to urge it upon such an one, as
albeit he be particularly detected by great presumptions and probabilities; yet
may happen nevertheless to be most clear from the crime, imputed to him?

Again, if one of the grand Jury being to be sworn would deny to take the
oath, except he might have some certain offenses (usually given in charge)
left out and foreprised severally out of his oath, least otherwise he should
thereby be driven to accuse himself: or if one supposed, most able to give
evidence, and information to the Coroners enquest, upon a murder committed;
should desire to be spared from telling his utmost knowledge thereof, upon his
oath; least thereby he be driven to accuse himself: would the Judges or
Officers hereupon, think it reasonable to spare these men and let them so go;
and not rather repute them to be (in deed) guilty of those crimes, for which
they refuse to take oath, to tell and discover their knowledges? In like so^t
therefore, why should such men, as be probably detected of crimes nothing so
penal, and who refuse to take oath to answer them, be judged by any man to
do it upon good ground and conscience? and not rather, that they (as those
others) refuse it, upon guiltines of their own conscien ces?

As the equity of this oathe is showed by the former comparisons; so may it
also by consideration of the crimes and the quality of them, whereupon it is
tendered in courts Ecclesiastical.

None of such crimes have any punishment appointed unto them by the temporal
laws of the Realm: and by the ecclesiastical Jurisdiction (whereby they
only rest punishable) the penalty is far milder then for those crimes, and
the like, was inflicted by the Judicial law of God, given to his peculiar
people: yea not to be accounted (in very truth, and for the most part) so much
a punishment as a medicine, tending to the reformation of the delinquent
(principally:) and secondarilie to the terror or satisfaction of others.

Out of this number of medicinable punishments, I only do except incorrigible
heresy, Atheism, and Apostacy from Christianity: which (for the horror and
danger of them unto others) ense resecantur, ne pars syncera trahatur. Both
these three, and the rest are in such abomination with Almighty God, so
manifoldly dangerous to the offenders soul, so noisome and prejudicial to the
laws, and unto all civil societies of men in a common wealth: that no well
advised man will think them meet to be suffered to take root and grow, but
rather by all means possible to be discovered, and corrected. But being
works of darkness, and by the very remnants of those sparks of the knowledge
of honest and dishonest, just and unjust (that continue with us since Adams
fall) even by them that commit them, they are co^demued to be such, as had need
to be shrouded in all secrecy. And therefore they are of that quality and
nature, as cannot (lightly by any possibility) be discovered, but either by
the parties themselves, or by other partakers with them in the very crimes;
and (thereby) parties also to the same offenses. Yet (as Tertullian says) a
malefactor for the most part leaves some footesteps and traces behind him,
which may serve to good purpose, for his discovery. Whereupon it comes to
pass, that presumptions fall out to be known abroad, of great likelihood and
probability; that such crimes and offenses have been committed and done by
such a person. So that when great bruites and fames hereof do fly abroad to
the offense of the godly, to a scandal and a stumbling block unto the weak
Christian, and to the obloquie of our holy faith and profession, with the
common adversary: we must either permit such a supposed delinquent and thus
discovered, to be examined by his oath touching the crime, and material
circumstances of it: or else must we suffer sins and grievous enormities (so
they be closely committed) to grow up and take strength without controlment;
till they have gathered that head, that they shall be able even with their
peize and grieuousnesse, to ruinate both Church and Common wealth. which if it
be unreasonable and ungodly (all things before weied) then that whereupon it
follows must needs be absurd also.

If in heinous and dangerous crimes to the person of the Prince or state of
the kingdom (whereof there be good probabilities and presumptions against some
person) it be holden necessary and lawful Policy; to torture the supposed
delinquents, that they may confess, albeit it be capital to themselves and
to others also in the highest degree: is it not of as great equity in crimes
of no less secrecy, and some of them in no less execration with Almighty
God then these, to use the means of the parties oath; where no capital, nor
(oftentimes) no corporal, yea (for the most part) where no punishment at all
(properly) so to be called, but a correcting and reforming of the party, is
intended?

When there be great presumptions of complots laid, that are dangerous to the
Prince and whole state: is it holden good policy, to let the parties alone
(without either torture or examination) until some will voluntarily offer
himself to be an Accuser, and to be able to make proof of them, though the
party be never once examined? I fear me greatly, if this were holden for
law and equity; such great and secret offenses would never come to Justice,
till there were no man to administer it, but the offenders themselves. And may
not then the like be conceived justly of crimes subject to Ecclesiastical
censure and Jurisdiction?

In the division of the several kinds of oaths, there are mentioned
certain, (even where two parties be formally in judgment) that be necessary
to be taken by the other party, when as the suite is but betwixt two private
persons, and touching their own private commodity and interest. They are
tendered by the Judge sometimes at the only petition of one of the parties,
and then it is called Mercenarium Iudicis officium, as of more base quality,
in that he does nothing, but that, which he is (in some sort as it were) urged
unto: and sometimes are offered by the Judge himself ex officio, without
petition of either party, as in equity he sees cause: and then it is called
Nobile Iudicis officium (touched also before) as being of a more high and
worthy respect, and of greater regard.

Of these sorts are Iuramentum calumniae, veritatis, and Purgationis. All
these by law are necessary to be taken. for l. 2. and Authen. principales. C.
de iuram. calumniae. Mar. de iuram. call nu. 6. Cuiacius. li. 9. obs. ca. 37.
if they be refused, being so tendered, he is overthrown (in his cause) that
refuses; and is holden pro confesso and conuicto. And yet very often it
falls out, that by such oathe, the party is drawn to discover his own
dolum malum, couine, fraud, or mal-engine, and other also his own lewdness;
both prejudicial (by law) to his honesty and good name, and also otherwise
penal to himself. For examples sake by the nature of Iuramentum calumniae,
he is to discover (in some sort) even the cogitations of his heart in that
behalf; viz. l. 2. C. de iuram. calumniae.
That he stands in law or affirms something in a full opinion and
confidence; that he has of his own right, and that the suite, as he
mainteineth it, seems to him good and just. And Ibid. and d. Authen.
principales.. i. Instit. de poena temere litig. Nou. 49. c. 3.
further, that what soever he shall be asked about that matter; he shall
answer it from time to time truly: and that he neither has fraudulently
given, nor will after give, or promise to give any thing, to corrupt the mind
of any man, that has to judge in that cause.

Now if in a private cause, betwixt private persons, suing but for private
benefit and commodity, and at one of their petitions per mercenarium Iudicis
officium, his adversary must of necessity take such an oathe touching matters
(perhaps) of his own fraud and lewdness; and to the discovering (oftentimes)
of matters criminal and penal to himself, or else must loose his suite, and
be condemned as convicted, by his own presumed and implied confession, and
this both by the Canon and Civil laws (being the Common law in both courts,
of all other nations abroad in Christ endome:) then in a public cause moved
by the Judge ex nobili officio, where he sees by his discretion and direction
of laws, good cause in equity, for the public interest that the Church and
Common wealth have, that sins be punished and repressed; for discharge of his
duty according to the trust reposed in him, and not of malice or to pull any
private benefit from the party: how much more is it herein equal and
necessary, that an oath be ministered to such presumed delinquent, for the
discovery of the whole truth? or else if he stubburnely shall refuse, that
he be holden (as in the other case before) pro confesso and conuicto?

When an enemy of malice or for other sinister respect does accuse a man of a
crime, iudiciallie; and brings him thereupon into question and great danger; if
he cannot make sufficient proofs for his condemnation, yet by probable
presumptions has so touched him, as thereby he becomes unto the Judge
justly to be holden suspected thereof: In this case, (by both the laws
aforesaid) the Judge is to give an oath of Purgation to the suspected person,
touching that crime; which if he shall refuse, he is holden as convicted of it:
whereby it may happen, that his accuser is more gratified and pleasured, then
by any proofs that him self could bring, or could otherwise procure. Is there
not then much more equity, when the question and inquiry of the crime is
stirred up for a better purpose; and without any such malicious accuser; that
upon like presumptions and probabilities, the like oath should be given and
tendered by the Judge, to such supposed delinquent?

Can any man give a sound reason, why it should seem equal, that when an
enemy gave the first occasion, pars reae should then (upon presumptions) be
urged to take the oath, or else to be condemned of the crime; And that it should
not be much more equity for him to take it; when the Judge (for his duties
sake, and stirred up by probable inducements) does originally call him into
question?

And when a man is pressed with such probabilities as the Judge finds to be
sufficient thereunto, he is justly put to his oath of clearing himself, if
he so can; and so this tends (in some sort) to his own benefit. Is it not
much more reason then, that upon the like presumptions appearing to the Judge,
he be urged to that oath, to tell the whole truth of the matter, with the
pertinent circumstances, as well for the public benefits sake of the common
weal, as for his own good, and escaping of punishment?

Some may perhaps here ask, why the proceeding by the Judge of Office should
be more privileged in this behalf, then when a crime is proceeded against,
by an accuser or party? For in the very beginning of the suit, the Judge
proceeding ex officio may require the oath of the supposed delinquent touching
both circumstances and crime: but when he proceeds by way of accusation,
albeit in courts Ecclesiastical, the party conuented may be examined by oath
upon other matter of circumstance, yet he may not so be examined touching the
very fact and crime, or any thing nearly or presumptiuely tending thereunto;
until by sufficient presumptions, the Judge be induced, to account him greatly
to be holden suspected.

This question (almost) does answer it self: for when the Judge proceeds
by inquiry; before he offer the oath to the party, the presumptions against
the party are known unto the Judge: but when by way of accusation, till the
accuser have brought in such proofs as he can, they are not known unto him.
Besides, the Accuser does it of malice, or for revenge, or for other
satisfaction of his own private humor, for the most part: But the Judge (by
common entendement) does it of sincerity of mind, and for the good of the
common weal.

Again, Panorm. in c. per Inquisitionem: de electione. etc. inquisitionis,
extra, de accusat.
those that be convicted upon such Inquiry, are (most usually) punished by
some milder punishment, then when they are connicted upon an accusation: yea
and in ecclesiastical courts sometimes, not so much as punished at all
corporally; but means only of inducement to repentance, are used toward them.

All which being joined to that which has been before spoken of the equity of
Inquiry ex officio, do sufficiently (I trust) recommend both the general
equity of the use of this oath, and also the great necessity of it in sundry
causes, and upon diverse occasions.

But the Treatisour, toward the very beginning of his disputation against
these oaths, surmiseth; that in justification of the equity and conueniencie
of them, it will by us be alleged, that the same is requisite for the
Inquiry, and finding out of suspected faults, whereof there is no proof: and
to search and try the evil minds and corrupt consciences of dangerous
dissemblers, and so necessary for the government of the Church and common
wealth. He that may pen his own Commission, will commonly make it large
enough: and he that may be allowed to frame and temper his adversaries armor,
is likely to make it thin and slender enough. Were it then any marvel,
though this man should thoroughly answer such objections, as be wholly of his
own framing? You are to understand, that by this word the same, in this place
used; he understands general oaths for a man to discover all his thoughts,
words and deeds: whereof he had spoken in the sentence before: and this is the
false issue which (in the Epistle to the Reader) I have noted to be by him
tendered: against which, if any reason material had been brought by him: yet
it were but (...), that is, fighting with his own shadow, and nothing
touching any law or practice in this Realm.

In way of retortion against us upon this objection, he infers, that all
such are justly reproved, who have practiced and put in ure this general
oath, where otherwise there was sufficient proof. But he may not thus carry
away this later point which he interlaceth, viz. that there is no lawful use
of any defendants oath touching a matter criminal, where other sufficient
proofs may be had. For these absurdities hereupon would follow: First where
no witnesses are known to the Judges aforehand (though they come in after the
parties oath taken) that there a man by his own perjury should be for ever
cleared and acquitted, and so (without any punishment or other worldly danger)
he might heap one grievous sin upon another. Secondly that a man's own
single oathe in his own cause, yea and for his own clearing should be as
effectual and powerful, as any two Vide de hoc plura. ca. vit. 3. partis.
men's oaths (by Gods word) are allowed to be, touching another man's fact,
whether it tend to acquitall, or to condemnation. Thirdly it would thereof
follow, that all oaths in causes criminal should be of purgation) and
clearing only, and none at all of Inquiry.

But the Treatisour himself reasons also in this his book against all
cathes for purgation: So that upon the whole matter, he makes all kinds of
oaths by defendants touching their own offenses or misdemeanors to be simply
unjust and unlawful: The contrary whereof in both will (I trust) be proved.
Lastly it would hereupon follow, that not only Ecclesiastical Courts, but
(for avoiding like injustice,) the Star Chamber also should be barred, from
giving an oath in any criminal cause to the defendant, where the matter may
(perhaps) be proved by witnesses.

But (I pray) how can either the Court, or the prosecutour tell precisely,
what the witnesses will or can prove, when they come to depose, by virtue of
their oaths? For many a man when he is sworn tells another tale, then he
did before, when his tongue walked at liberty.

Therefore (by this opinion) the Judges for giving the defendant such an oath,
shall so long remain under a doubtful danger to have dealt unjustly; until
(by the event of the suit) it might be discovered; that the matter (indeed)
could not be proved by witnesses.

The Treatisor, in refuting ex absurdo his own absurd objection; brings in
(by the way) that these general oaths would enforce men to accuse themselves
to their public shame, reproach, or condemnation: and their natural parents,
dearest friends, and nearest neighbors: or else for avoiding of such mischief
and inconvenience, to commit most wilful and damnable perjury: and the
Notegatherer says it is unnatural: which because it will be (perhaps)
applied also to all oaths given even in a particular criminal cause, and for
that he thinks this a matter very absurd; therefore it requires some brief
answer.

When a man upon some such sufficient inducement, as is spoken of in the second
part, is brought before a Magistrate (by special Inquiry) unto examination:
his discovery against himself or other, neither by Gods Law, nor yet by man's
Law is taken for an accusation unnatural; but a necessary confession of
truth, whereby God is glorified, sin punished, and the common wealth
benefited, howsoever the party sustain thereby some touch in his reputation.
Be not Eccles. ca. 4. verse. 24. 25.
ashamed (says Ecclesiasticus) to tell truth for the good of thy soul: for
there is ashame that brings sin: and there is ashame that turns a man to
honor and grace: and therefore, he Ibidem verse. 30. 31.
says afterward: Do not gainesay the truth in any the least point: but be
ashamed of an untruth, though it proceed from thine own ignorance. Be not
ashamed to confess thy sin: and stop not the course of the floude. And
therefore (in such respect) he ought not to refuse to take and perform his
oathe; as more fully (God willing) remains to be showed hereafter.

Another objection he also makes falling not unaptly into this place, viz.
that where loss of life, liberty, member of the body, or good name may
ensue, there the presumption of perjury is great: and where it is so great,
the sentence of the Magistrate trusting to such an oathe, is grounded but upon
aweake and feeble foundation. So that in this his presumption of perjury, he
matcheth (without any good reason) the danger of loss of good name, with
danger of life, liberty, and limme. with better reason he might have put in
loss of worldly goods: and then by necessary consequence he had taken away
the use of al oaths in every subject matter whatsoever. For who knows not,
that for attaining riches and substance; most worldly men, not only do
willingly hazard their good names, honesties and reputation: but that many do
also apparently adventure (for them) their liberties, limbs, lives, and
souls? Therefore, if for fear of perjury, none oaths may be tendered,
whereby a man's good name, may be questioned or impeached, much more then ought
they not to be; where a man's wealth and substance (which most men do most
thirst after) may be any way thereby impaired, it is vpbraided as an affection
too common with all men: O ciues, ciues, quaerenda pecunia primum, Virius post
nummos. Virtue, honesty, and good reputation, are esteemed by many degrees,
worthy to come behind riches. and therefore I answer, that where a crime is
(in some sort) detected unto the Magistrate already: the presumption is more
strong, that most men being sworn, will rather deliver a truth, yea though it
touch themselves, or their friends (somewhat) in reputation; then that by
periuring themselves, they will throw both their own bodies and souls into
hell: Nemo praesumitur immemor salutis aeternae, says the law. In deed where
the Judge has good and probable inducements against some special person, that
he is like (in any cause whatsoever) to forswear himself: there (as was said
before) he ought to forbear, to tender an oath. But it may not therefore be
made general, as if no man at all should be urged to take an oath, for fear
of being perjured. Yet the Treatisour here does seem to incline this way: in
making an oath to be over feeble a foundation, to ground a sentence upon. Why?
if the party confess against himself that which is objected; shall he be
thought but to dally, and to have a longing to be punished, so as the Judge
may not safely take him at his word, and give sentence against him? If a
prisoner arrained plead guilty: what needs either evidence, or Jury to be
used; Confessio est liquidissima probatio, and plusquam probatio. But if he
deny it; yet if the proceeding in a court Ecclesiastical, be to his purgation
alone; he is not to be acquitted without a competent number of Compurgators:
neither yet is he for ever so to be cleared, by the Judges sentence; but that
even after such purgation; good proofs touching the very fact it self (if any
can be made) are to be admitted. which case happening, he is punishable both
for the fact it self, and for his perturie.

But when the proceeding is by way of inquiry, for punishment or for
reformation: then albeit the defendant deny it, nevertheless witnesses or
other proofs (if any may be had, either then or afterward) are to be used
against him. And therefore in such case as law allows sentence to be given
upon the defendants oath; yea or upon judicial confession without oath; it is
no feeble, but rather a most strong foundation for the Judge to build upon.

The Note-gatherer no less missing the cushion and matter in issue, then the
Treatisour; reasons thus against oaths (which they call general, unto all
thoughts, words and deeds:) Her highness (says he) has oftentimes caused
to be openly notified in the Star Chamber, that her gracious meaning is not,
to search into men's consciences; or to force the same; but only to extend the
laws upon crimes committed either in word or deed. Belike if a man keep not
his conscience (as he calls it) to himself, but uses some ouertword or
deed, he will then (I hope) permit the party defendant to be interrogated
by oath, (as in the Star Chamber) touching such a crime. which if he will
grant, let him, as much as he thinks to be for his ease; exclaim still,
against all such Ordinaries and Commissioners Ecclesiastical, as shall happen
to give such oath more generally, or without any ground precedent of inducement
thereunto, by law allowed. for these untrue imputations, will not touch any
person or practice, that I have heard of to be used, since her Majesty's happy
reign. Thus much for the equity of the defendants oath in some matters
criminal; and in answer of objections, made against the conueniencie of it.

CHAP. VI. That oaths of men touching matters dammageable, criminal and penal
to themselves, are urged and exacted by temporal Courts, and by the laws of
this Realm.
HEre I am to show, that the like oath in matters criminal, and that may be
penal to a man's self; is practiced by the course of the Laws of this Realm;
and therefore this proceeding, is no contrary or repugnant course unto them.

The Chancerie, is a principal and high Court of this Realm; and a court of
conscience and equity, to moderate, (...), viz. the exact rigor of law.

In this court, though the procedings (for the most part) be moved Ciuiliter
and no^ criminaliter; that is, not to any public punishment, but for the
private interest of the party: Nevertheless, many bills of complaints be
there put up against defendants, wherein sundry their lewd practices and
misdemeanors criminal be deduced and set forth; and yet must the defendant
make perfect and particular answer thereto, upon his oath.

The same course is observed in other courts of the nature of Chancerie, as in
the Court of Requests. And sometimes further also, even quando agitur
criminaliter adpoenam partis: as is oftentimes observed in the Court of the
Counsel in the Marches and principality of Wales, and before her Majesty's
Counsel, established in the North parts. So that, to the intent of a
defendants being urged by oath (sometimes) to discover himself in a matter
criminal; it comes to as much in these courts, as is challenged for
unlawful, in Courts ecclesiastical. For though in some of those aforesaid
Courtstemporall, no punishment can be inflicted thereupon; yet either
discovery of themselves (if they be faulty) with shame and reproach to them;
or else perjury is enforced in them all: which is the maine inconvenience,
that the Treatisour, and Note-gatherer do assign, against such oaths.

There be sundry considerations touching the court of Chancerie, which if we do
attentively confider, will argue unto us, the long use and approbation of
urging defendants answers to be made upon their corporal oaths: yea though
some matter of their own crimes and dishonestie, be therein deduced.

It must needs be, that the Chancerie is the ancientest court of this Realm:
because from thence all original writs and Commissions do come; whereupon the
other courts do ground all their proceedings. And yet by all probability it is
most likely, that as in sundry other points of proceeding there, so in this
behalf, they drew the exacting of the defendants answer upon oath, from the
Civil law. For that Court being here in time and nature the first, could not
take light from other Courts of the Common law, but from some other, that was
both before it and them. Secondly, Answers, Reioinders, etc. in the other
Courts (most usually termed courts of the Common law) are not put in upon
oath. Thirdly, the very word of Cancellarius and Cancellaria are Latin words,
that are found to have been first used by the Civil law. and did signify
such an assistant to the Sovereign prince, or other supreme Judge, as for his
wisdom and skill in law, was adjoined unto him: and was so called, because
he did sit intraeosdem Cancellos cum Principe, in the same Tribunal seat or
bench with him, and in his absence determined matters for him and in his stead.
and yet we read not this word of Cancellarius in the ancient times of the Civil
law, that was practiced whiles their Commonwealth stood vninuaded, by
perpetual Dictators and Emperors: nor till above 300. or 400. years after:
about which times, and before; this realm being wholly under the Romans
dominion (as the chiefest part of the then known world also was) no doubt
their language, but especially their laws, were here received. The sundry
Colonies and other towns built and inhabited here by the Roman soldiers,
and others; must needs spread that language very far.

The old British or Welsh language (at this day) after so many periods of
times, vicissitude of Fortune, and mixture of other nations; does retain very
many provincial Latin words. Martial the Poet, that writ in the times of
Uespasian and of Domitian Emperors, says thus of a British woman.

Claudia caeruleis cum sit Ruffina Britannis:
Cur quaeso Latiae pectora gentis habet?
This woman is thought by many, to be the same, whom S. Paul salutes in the end
of the Epistle to the Romans. And again the same Poet.

Dicitur and nostros cantare Britannia versus: which argues the use and
knowledge of the Latin tongue, to have been (then) rife in this Island.

That the Civil law of the Romans was then used here, their histories may
testify. for they gave their own laws to most of the Provinces which they
subdued, and permitted (...), to very few of them. Many of the same laws were
also taken up and retained by the Saxons: even until the Norman conqueror
brought hither, and established the customs of Normandy. And namely amongst
others, they retained til then the law; yt al brethren should, participate
alike, their Fathers inheritance. And we do Cic. samil. (...).
read, that Trebatius an ancient Civil Lawyer, and often alleged in the
Pandects (who lived in Julius Caesar's time, more then forty years before
Christ) did remain at Samarobrina in this Island of Brytaine. Likewise
afterward, the Forcatulus.
very oracle of that Law Aemilius Paulus Papinianus did profess the law, and
kept his Tribunal seat of Pretorship, at the city of York.

Fourthly, that the Chancerie took this course and many points besides from
the Civil law; is apparent, by the whole course of other proceedings there,
viz. by the defenda^ts answer to the bil upon his oath, and sometimes to
interrogatories: by the sundry issues that there may be tendered: by that
term, and whole manner of publication of witnesses depositions: by examining
witnesses upon Interrogatories: by examining witnesses in perpetuam rei
memoriam: by the term and use of final decree, and many other such like
points, much varying from the manner of common Law, and iumping, almost wholly,
with the Civil. And to conclude, this consideration is thereby made more
probable: for that in elder times, the Chancellors to the Kings (for the most
part) were Clergy men, whose study and profession then, was the Civil laws.
Therefore this urging to put in answer upon corporal oaths taken (albeit the
matter in some degree, happen to be criminal) being a special practice in
that chiefest Court of Equity; can hardly be construed to be against equity.
and being in the original temporal Court of the land, cannot be contrary to
the fundamental laws of the same. and that Court being of so great antiquity
and continuance; this answer by oath, can not be an abuse or corruption lately
crept in; wherewith the Treatisour (without any ground) charge all those
temporal Courts that have received it.

In the Court of Star Chamber, the proceedings are against crimes criminally
moved by way of Inquiry; though (for the most part) at the promotion or
solicitation of some private party grieved. namely against forgeries,
periuries, subornations, ryots, rowts, and other sundry heinous misdemeanors:
against which there lies no capital punishment, nor loss of limme, by the
common law. Yet is the defendant there, to answer upon his corporal oathe, not
only to the bill preferred against him; but to as many other (perhaps
sometimes even cross) Interrogatories, as the Counsel of the plaintiff shall
devise.

But to this (I hear) it is replied by some, that there be two maine
differences betwixt the course there, and the proceedings in a Court
Ecclesiastical. The first, that none there is bound to take his oathe, but
only where there is an accusation preferred against him by an other: so as if
he purge himself lawfully, he is to recover damages. Touching recovery of
damages (if by damages be meant costs and charges) these for the most part be
(in this case) also given even by the high Commission, that is so much
impugned. For (except it be immediately for the Queen) there is a party bound
to prosecute and pay charges, if the defendant be molested without cause. But
if such damages (as they term them) be recouerable in the Starrechamber; I
think they are not very great: and where the matter is preferred once by her
Majesty's learned Counsel; I am told there be no costs adjudged, though the
defendant happen to be cleared. But if (in this behalf) there were any
difference; yet it makes no difference in the very point in handling:
videlicet, that an oathe is there given to the party in a cause criminal and
penal to himself.

The other part of the replic (builded upon an accusation there preferred) is
indeed different from the course of Ecclesiastical proceeding: but yet if
there be equity for it in the Star Chamber, it does much more fortify the
giving of such an Oathe in Courts Ecclesiastical. For in these Courts, if
there be an accuser or any party that informs or promoteth; then the
defendant is never examined by oathe upon the very crime. For when a party
prosecuteth, who (as the law intends) does it for malice, revenge, or some
other particular respect; he is not so much favored nor privileged in the
proceeding; as when the Judge ex officio Nobili, even for his duties sake, and
for the public commodity of the common weal, does make the Inquiry.

If then it be both equal and lawful in the Star Chamber, at the
prosecution even of a private person (who may be intended for the most part,
not to do it of conscience only and zeal of Justice, to have vice punished)
to examine the defendant upon his oathe, for discovery, often times, of faults
and misdemeanors even openly done and committed, and so the more easy to be
proved by witnesses, and where the punishments are usually corporal and
otherwise far more grievous, then be inflicted in any Court Ecclesiastical:
then how can it in an Ecclesiastical court be thought unreasonable; whereas
the office, duty, and charge laid upon the Judge, are (by common entendment)
the only exciters and causes of prosecution: and where (if it be an Ordinary
Court) canonical penance (for the reformation of the party) is inflicted: And
(if it be before the Commissioners Ecclesiastical) neither their greatest
corporal pain is so grievous, nor their fines so deep? And yet many of the
crimes are as heinous toward God, and as secretly and closely committed and
plotted; as any crimes are, that be punishable before their Lordships, in that
most honorable and sincere court of the Star Chamber.

The second difference by some taken (in this behalf) between these
proceedings; I hear, is this: that in the Star Chamber a man is not driven
to answer directly to the fact it self, but only to the circumstances of the
fact, as was in Trussers case, as is said.

But I am certainly informed (by those that have better cause to know the
practice of that Court, then the Author of these objections and differences)
that the practice of that Court is clean otherwise.

As for Trussers case, it was the felony only (a matter capital to him) that
was ordered not to be enquired of him by Oathe. but touching the lewd
confederacy it self, and of his other practices about it, he was ordered (by
oath) to answer them. So that the reason of the like equity in both courts
(these notwithstanding) remains still unshaken.

To this reason (as is noted else where) the Treatisour also (for his part)
does thus answer, viz. that the Star Chamber requires answer to matter in
fact, done either to the injury of a private person, or hurt to the public
State: as if he would insinuate, that Courts Ecclesiastical urged Oaths in
far more unreasonable cases. Truly, if the injury reach only to a private
person, without any further offense or scandal: the imposing of any such
oathe by Civil or Canon law, will not be justified: and other then for
answering matters in fact, do one to the breach of laws, or to the offense of
Almighty God, and consequently to the hurt of the public State; none oathe is
at any time there exacted.

Yea not only in the Courts above named, but in all the other Courts of Record
at Westminster; I am credibly informed, that, (time out of mind) it has been
observed, for the Judges by corporal oathe to examine any person; whom they
had cause (in discretion) to suspect to have dealt lewdly, about any writ,
return, entry of rule, pleading, or such like matter (not being capital)
touching their several Courts. as namely Sherifes, and their under Officers
and Ministers, Protonotaries, Philizars, Chirographers, keepers of Records or
Rules, Clerks, and sometimes Councillors and Atturneis, or the very parties,
having suites.

But because the Commission (as the Note-gatherer collecteth) binds them
precisely to crimes punishable by the Ecclesiastical law, and to proceed
according to the Ecclesiastical laws of the Realm, and not according to the
temporal: therefore (says he) it is a frivolous allegation, to say; such a
thing is used in the Star Chamber, Chancerie, or the Benches: ergo the
Ecclesiastical Commission may do the like.

First, here he calls them Ecclesiastical laws of the Realm. how then are
they foreine, and strange laws, and sinews of the Romish Cerberus, as the
Treatisour raueth? Secondly, if Courts Ecclesiastical may not deal according
to temporal Laws; why does the Treatisour threaten them with praemunire, for
that the policy of this Realm knows no such oaths, as he argues? What? may
they neither deal according to temporal Laws, nor yet in a different course
from them? Thirdly, the antecedent is untrue: for by that Commission, the
breach of four Statutes be enquirable and punishable: and the punishment also
may be other then Ecclesiastical, as is proved in the first part. Lastly,
none that stand in defense of these oaths do draw their reason only from the
practice of temporal Courts in that sort, as he surmiseth; but thus:
Whatsoever the Ecclesiastical Laws do allow and require being not contrary nor
repugnant to the Queens prerogative royal, nor to the Laws, Statutes and
Customs of this Realm, that may be lawfully practiced by Judges
Ecclesiastical. But this oath is such; by reason that sundry temporal Courts
(by law) hold the like course, and do not prohibit it in courts
Ecclesiastical: so that, not being so much as diverse courses, they can not be
contrary or repugnant: therefore these oaths are lawfully practiced in Courts
Ecclesiastical. or thus: That which is justice and equity in one court,
cannot be unjust, unequal, or cruel, in another court, that is thereunto no
less authorized, then the first: but such be these oaths, as appears by the
practice of the aforesaid temporal courts: therefore they are lawful and
equal also in Ecclesiastical courts. But for more particular and fuller
proof of these two minor propositions, I will speak first of oaths
prescribed by statutes: And in these, first of such as be taken in matters,
that may only bring damage to the takers of such oath: and then of oaths
taken in matters both criminal and penal to the party that takes them.

By the 13. Ed. 1. stat. Winton.
statute of Winchester, men within certain years of age, are to be assessed,
and also sworn; to have all such assessed armor in their houses.

The 17. Ed. 2. Praerog. Reg. ca. 4.
kings widows that have dower of lands holden in chief of ye king; must be
sworn, not to marry without the kings license.

By a 25. Ed. 3. de seru. ca. 2. and 7.
statute of king Edward the third, a tax is set, what laborers shall take:
and they are thereby appointed to be sworn, to do those labors, and to take
no more then is allotted them: And that they shall not in summer depart, to
serve in other places, then where they served in winter. This oath is to be
taken twice in a year: and if any of them refuse to take it, he is to be sent
to the stocks or jail, till he will reform himself.

Likewise by 27. H. 4. ca. 17.
another statute afterward, all laborers and servants are appointed to be
sworn both to do service, and to take for the same, according to the
statutes: And if they refuse; they shall be set in the stocks (for three
days) till they will agree to it; and if they do not, from thence shall be sent
to the common jail.

The 8. H. 6. ca. 7.
sheriff has power (by statute) to examine every chooser of a Knight for the
Parliament, upon the Evangelists; how much he may dispend by year.

Those that shall 27. Ed. 3. stat. stapulae.
go about to ship over any woolles, and other merchandises, the Mayor of the
Staple and Customer shall make them take oath; that they shall not keep Staple
of those merchandises on the other side the Sea.

11. H. 7. ca. 33.
Likewise, he that shall ship an horse (to carry over Sea) must swear; that
at the time of shipping him, and at that time he swears; he is fully purposed
not to sell him, but to have him for his use.

By the statute or awarde made at Kenelworth: all that had to do (in that
behalf) were appointed to 51. H. 3.
swear upon the holy Gospels of God; that they should not take reuengement,
etc. by occasion of the commotion.

For the Stat. de stap. 27. Ed. 3. ca. 6.
value of merchandise brought in by strangers, if they have not letters of
credence thereof, from their lords or companies; they are to take an oath.

The master, 23. Eli. ca. 6.
owner, or shipper, is to give true information by his oath, concerning the
burden of his ship; to the intent the money out of every tun allotted to
Dover haven, may be received.

All which oaths, though most necessary and equal; yet you see, how they
may bring great damage and loss unto the party.

Now touching oaths appointed by statutes that may tend and reach to make the
party discover even matter criminal or penal to himself: By the Statut. de
Exon. de Inquisitione super Coronatores. anno 14. Ed. 1. Rastall. tit.
Coroners. nu. 3.
statute of Inquisition upon Coroners, the Enquirors shall make all the
Bailifes swear, that they shall well and faithfully do that which they shall
have in charge by the King and his Counsel, and that they shall conceal
nothing of it.

Their charge is not only of misdemeanors, of Coroners; but also of
concealements of murders and felonies, and letting such escape, etc. done
(happily) in default of a whole towneship in general; and perhaps in default
of the very Bailifes particularly, who be sworn: and therefore criminal or
penal to them, yet by virtue of their oaths not to be concealed.

9. Ed. 3 stat. de ^oneta. ca 9.
Majors and Bailifes in every port (where merchants and ships be) shall take an
oath of merchants and masters of ships going and returning; that they shall
not do any fraud against that ordinance (touching money) in any point. By
which oath, it seems they not only are to promise not to do it (for they
are to take it at their going) but also that they have not done it being
abroad; because they must take that oath also at their returning. And this
being concerning fraud not to have been committed, touches matter of
discovering a man's own turpitude and offense; besides the penalty due to the
offender.

If a bill or information be put up in any court of Record, against a man,
upon the statute of 8. Ed. 4. ca. 2.
Liueries and Reteiners (being very criminal and penal to the offenders)
after the Informer has taken oathe, that his complaint is rightful (where by
the way we may see some use in these courts, of that iuramentum calumniae,
which is required by the Civil laws, if it be demanded by either of the
parties) the defendant shall be brought in, and put to answer to such bill or
bills, by such information. And the same Judges and every of them in every of
the said Courts shall have power in their several Jurisdictions, to examine
all persons defendants and every of them, upon such information; and to judge
him or them convict or attainted, as well by such examination, as by trial, as
the case requires after the discretion of the Judges.

Upon 11. H. 7. ca. 25.
complaint by any touching perjury, and certified by a Justice of Peace unto
the lord Chancelour: it was enacted in the time of King Henry the seventh,
that the party complained of, might be compelled to come before the Chancelour
and Treasourer of England, the chief Justice of either Bench, and Clerk of
the Rolls for the time being: and they had full power and authority, by their
discretion to examine him of all things in the bill of complaint; and by their
discretion, to punish such, as by examination should be found offenders,
as well in perjury, as in other offenses, viz. in maintenance, imbracerie, or
corruption in any Officer, etc.

In the said Kings days, a statute was afterward made, against Reteiners;
whereby 19. H. 7. (...). 14.
Justices at their Sessions of Peace, were authorized to examine all such by
their discretion, as they should think to be suspected of any Reteinour: and
their Certificate into the Kings Bench, against any examined and found faulty,
was against such, as a conviction; and against others, as an Indictment.

The same Ibidem.
statute also gives authority to diverse great persons, to examine defendants
informed against for certain offenses and breach of Statutes; as well by oath
as otherwise, by their discretion, and to adiudge, etc.

Likewise authority is given by 3. H 7. ca. 1. 21. H. 8. ca. 10. 5. Eliz. ca.
9.
two several statutes, unto certain great officers of the kingdom, Lords
etc. to call such grievous offenders (as there be named) upon bill or
information: and them, and others (by their discretions, by whom the truth may
be known) to examine.

That this examination is by a corporal oath taken, the continual custom in
that honorable court of Star Chamber observed, does show; for the breach of
the said statutes is there to be punished. And if examination were not so to be
taken for the parties own oath; then could it not so be understood of the
witnesses: For the word examine, is indiffererently used for them all. And
Brook tit examination. nu. 32.
Brook in his Abridgement does testify, that examination spoken of in law,
is upon oathe.

If a 24. H. 8. ca. 6.
Vintener shall refuse to sell his wine in gross (without just cause) unto
such as offers him the set price thereof in ready money, he shall forfeite as
much, as the price of the wine. Such vintener also may (at the discretion of
any Officer there named) be put to affirm and depose upon his bodily oath,
what, and how much quantity, and sorts of wines he shall have; and whether
he keeps them to sell by retaile or in gross and if after such affirmance
of intent to retaile them, he shall sell any of them in gross; he forfeites
the double value.

By a statute of 34. H. 8. ca. 4.
Bankrupts; the lords there named, may (upon relation to them given) call any
person, suspected to conceal such offenders goods, and may examine them by
their oaths, and otherwise (as in discretion they shall think meet) upon
the specialtie, certainty, true declaration and knowledge of such offenders
goods, or debts, owing to him. And if he show not the whole truth to be after
proved by witnesses, etc. then he forfeiteth double the goods concealed. The
like 13. Eliz. ca. 7.
authority is also given to certain Commissioners, to be appointed (by virtue
of a later statute) to tender an oath. But in this later, the double penalty
runs against him; If either he do not upon his oath disclose the whole
truth, or shall deny to swear.

The 5. Eliz. ca. 1.
oath of Supremacy or obedience is a necessary oath to be taken by such, as
the L. Chancelour shall think fit ex officio to have it tendered unto. Yet if
the party carrying a contrary persuasion shall refuse it, it becomes very
criminal, and penal unto him.

Such 13. Eliz. ca. 3.
as be supposed to be parties and privy to the fraud, collusion, and couin
used in conueyances by fugitives over the sea, which fraud, etc. are there
affirmed to be things detested and abhorred by all good laws; may be
Commissioners appointed, or by the Barons of the Exchequer; be examined upon
their corporal oaths; to open and declare plainly the very truth, to such
Interrogatories, as shall be ministered unto them touching the premises, and
the circumstances and dependances of the same: upon pain (if they shall
refuse) to loose such a fine and fines for the said contempt; as shall be
assessed by such, before whom such examination should be made. In which (as
in the other Statutes mentioned) it is evident; by how many ways it may
happen, that such oaths shall tend to the urging of them to discover matters
criminal and penal to themselves, that are appointed to take them. And the
four last alleged, concern oaths given; where neither bill, nor yet
information is preferred against the parties examined: and therefore to be
tendered, more then ex mero officio.

In matters that may induce damage to him that swears; there be sundry
examples at the Common law; one, or two may suffice. If T. 25. Ed. 3. fol. 44.
a woman couertbaron (being to acknowledge a fine) it be doubted, whether she
be 21. years of age or no, she shall be examined upon her oathe.

In an P. 3. Hen. 6. 38.
action of detinue of goods supposed to be delivered in Fleetstreete, the
Plaintiff was examined, where they were delivered. An H. 3. H. 6. 30.
obligation bare date in the County of Lincoln, and a Scriueners name was put
to it that remained in London; hereupon the Plaintiff was examined, where the
obligation was made. Besides the damage hereof; the circumstances of this,
might be such; as might have urged him to discover (perhaps) a forgerie.

It is a common practice in this land, straightly to examine persons holden
suspected of some crime or offense, and to urge their answers; or else the
Magistrate will and must needs hold them, greatly and violently to be
suspected, and little less then convicted. If an unlikely person (but suspected
at large) be found in a privy search; or stayed, as he passes, and be brought
before a Justice of peace or higher Officer: is he not straightly thereupon to be
examined of his ability, course of life, trade, and place of abode etc. which
may importe Roguerie, that is both criminal and very penal to him, if he be
such an one in deed, and shall choose rather to endure the penalty of law,
then to lie before God and his Magistrate? If to this it be answered, that such
examination is without oath; I replye, that this is but as it happens: but
admit it so be, yet the matter is hereby nothing helped. For as to this
purpose, of being urged to discover him self (which these men call accusing)
in a matter criminal and penal, it comes all to one pass: because he must
either hold his peace altogether, or confess the truth plainly: (both which
may bring him to punishment) or else he must lie, whereby he grievously
offends God, though not in so high degree (indeed) as in perjury,
nevertheless this bond of not saying untruly before a Magistrate must needs
be counted, a kind of causatiue urging of a man (that has any conscience) to
discover matter of crime against himself, if he be guilty in deed, of that
which is asked of him.

If a Sheriff, Steward of Liberties, Reeue, Bedell of Strayes and wayues,
rentgatherer, sheepe-Reeue, Baylife, Baylife of husbandry, or other accountant
to the Prince, or any great Lord, be urged by their Auditour to give up their
account upon their oaths, as is usually done: does not this (in case they
have done negligently, or deceitfully) tend to bewray, or (if ye will) accuse
them selves, in a matter ignominious to themselves, and in it self criminal?

The Treatisour himself, though he bend most of his ordinance against this
point; yet when he had more exactly a little waded into, and weyed the matter;
seems but only to find fault with sifting generally (by oath) of all men's
thoughts, words and deeds, and especially (says he in another place) in
matters, of life and death: which his issues if he will not waiue and
relinquish; there is none (I think) in this Realm, that will impugn that his
assertion, either by color of law, or by rigor of practice.

For even at the common law, oaths in matters criminal and penal to the
parties, be oftentimes necessarily to be taken, when they are enjoined. For
if Stanford. Pleas of the Crown. li. 3. ca. 14.
a man sue an appeal of murder against another; who will be tried by
battle, the defender that is appealed; must (before the battle) holding his
adversary by the hand, solemnly swear thus: Hear this, you whom I hold by
the hand, who call your self by such a name; I have not feloniously murdered
your father, etc. so help me God and all Saints.

Of Oaths ministered at the Common law, tending to the discovery of matter
criminal and penal to the party himself; I find these examples. One M. 34.
Ed. 3. fol. 3.
sworn of a Jury, did after depart from his fellows. In the mean time an
other was sworn in his room. But when the first returned, he was by the
Judges ex officio examined, upon his book oathe; whether he had talked with
the defendant or been in his company, since he was sworn. This (if he had
confessedit) as it is an offense, so had it been very penal unto him.
Nevertheless for his apparent fault of departure, he was committed and fined.

In an action T. 7. H. 4. fol. 19
of Formedon, the tenant of the land was supposed to confess the action of the
demandant by couin, and was thereupon examined by the Judges; and the couin
being thereby found; it was decreed, there should be no judgment, and that he
should be punished, by their discretion.

A P. 9. H. 5. 1.
woman brought an appeal for the death of her husband, but (as it was
supposed) by another name then she had in very deed: upon which couin, she
should have been fined, and thereupon she was examined.

A H. 35. H. 6. and Fitzh. Abridgem. tit. examinat. nu. 17.
Jury after they were gone together, were supposed to have received a letter
on the behalf of the defendant: which in law is said to be a grievous fault,
and it is to be grievously fined: yet all the Jurors were thereupon examined
upon their oaths.

A M. 35. H. 6. 11.
Sheriff returned, that certain witnesses, who should have appeared, were
dead: whereof it was desired, he might be examined, because the return was
razed, and two of the witnesses were said to be alive, whereof one was then in
the Hall, and had his remaining in the Country. Whereupon the Sheriff was
examined, which Prisot informed: and he deposed, that the return was made by
a Clearke, and neither by him, nor by his Vnder-sherife: and that he knew two
of the witnesses were living. Now if he could not (with a good conscience) thus
have cleared himself upon his oathe; had not this crime of razure and false
return, been very penal and shameful unto him, being so directly contrary
to honesty and to his oath, taken at the entrance into his office?

H. 10. Ed. 4. 16.
And it was (at another time) the opinion of the whole court; if the parties in
a cause, had then had a day in court; that they might have examined them,
touching their couin and lewd practice, tending to defeat another man, of his
lawful action.

They have a certain custom in London, and it is allowed for good by the
Common law of the Realm: Brook tit. ley gager. nu. 77.
That if the defendant think the plaintiff have made a false declaration in an
action of debt; he may desire to have the plaintiff sworn to the truth of his
declaration, and shall have it. If the plaintiff swear, the defendant is
condemned: and if the plaintiff refuse, he is barred. And may not this delation
of such decisorie oath, occasion, and (causatiuely) urge the plaintiff
(sometimes) to discover himself to have demanded a debt not due, which is
dishonestie and injustice: or (perhaps) induce him to perjury, partly for
filthy lucres sake, and partly that he may not seem to have dishonestly
demanded, what was not due unto him? if then a private person, nevertheless
may so defer an oath, but in a private money matter: how much more may a
magistrate in a public crime, these doubts and perils notwithstanding?

And the like decisorie oaths be not only received in that City alone, but
also at the common law. For 19. H. 6. 43.
when the defendant desires, that the plaintiff may be examined, or sworn,
this is peremptory to the plaintiff in this point. and so is the wager of
law, ex part defendentis.

In an action of 44. Ed. 3. 41.
detinue brought against a Deane, for a chest sealed with certain gold,
silver, and Charters in it, as being delivered to his predecessor; the Deane
tendered his law (that is his oath) quod non detinet: and the opinion of the
court was; that he should have it. Now who sees not, how many ways, this
course may no less induce men unto perjury? For does not common experience
teach us, how readily, for a trifling piece of gain, tradesmen in buying and
selling will swear falsely, or else cautelously, which is all one fault before
God: yea when as no such matter is required, or exspected at their hands?
therefore how much more strongly may perjury be feared, in a matter of good
weight; especially when men by the vexation and suit of their adversaries are
whetted on, and where as, they having (a good while) stood in denial; their
credits amongs other men, might otherwise be called in question, and seem to
be impaired? And yet this danger that perjury may perhaps ensue, is no
sufficient reason to change the common law, in this behalf. How then can
most of the Treatisours arguments hold; which are chiefly grounded upon peril
of perjury; which (he says) is likely a man will fall into, rather then have
his good name and honesty brought into question, and hazarded?

I have also credibly heard, that in the time of that Reverend Judge Dyer, the
court of Common pleas, examined certain by their corporal oaths, touching a
very lewd plat laid by some of them: and the names of the dealers pro and
contra, in that cause, were (as I remember) Greuill, Pyue, and Hockam, which
being so found out, was condignely also punished in some of the offenders,
both by perpetual infamy, and with other punishment.

CHAP. VII. Wherein are contained answers to such objections and reasons, as
be made for proof of a contrariety or repugnancie in these oaths, unto the
statutes, laws, or Customs of this Realm; and a Reply to the Treatisors
answers, made unto certain objections, supposed likely to be made, in
Justification of this kind of oath by the temporal laws.
IN this Chapter I purpose (God willing) to answer those points, which by the
Treatisour or Note-gatherer are brought, to persuade; that such oath (as here
we handle) is either plainly impugned, or closely contraryed by the laws
temporal of this Realm.

Under this consideration do fall certain bare affirmations about this
matter; their reasons for this assertion, and their answers to such
objections, as are by them supposed may be made, in defense of this kind of
oath.

Among their bare affirmations about this matter, I reckon some things, which
they imagine to be said or practiced, by Ecclesiastical Courts or persons:
and that which they affirm, the common law either holds or practices on
the one side; or else on the other side forbeareth to put in use, in this
behalf.

To the point of practice by persons and Courts Ecclesiastical; are referred
those the Treatisours imputations; whereby he surmiseth general oaths, for
all a man's thoughts, words, and works, to be ministered by them: and that
upon the Ecclesiastical Judges only jealousy and suspicion, without any
other lawful inducement precedent. Likewise that it is tendered in matters
tending to loss of life or of limme. All which I have elsewhere showed, to
be very untrue, and slanderous. Hither also is to be reduced another speech of
the Treatisours: for whereas the defenders of this oath do affirm it, as it
is practiced (but not in such a catholic or universal manner, as he sporteth
himself at) to be warranted by the temporal laws: he says; that this is a
foul sclander both to our laws, and to the Justice of our land.

The truth or falsehoode of which his foul saying, will appear; upon
perusal of the next precedent, of this, and of the next Chapters following.
And so will also these other his speeches to like purpose, viz. where he
calls it, an alien heretofore entruded, as a trouble some ghest into the
house of our common wealth. And where he says, that as Sir William Thorpe, by
his corrupt dealing, so much as in him lay, had broken the oath which the king
is bound to keep toward his people: so the ecclesiastical Judges practicing
in their Courts and tribunal seats, the self same unjust and unlawful manner
of proceedings, against the kings people; could not escape the severe sentence
of law, pronouncing them offensive butchers, and violatours of the king, and
injurious dealers against his Regalitie, crown, and kingdom; and so
consequently, etc. in a Praemunire.

But for any testimony of this corrupt dealing of Sir William Thorpes (which
here he speaks of) or of his breaking of the kings oath, and so severe
sentence of law passed in that respect against his butcherie and violation of
the kings Regalitie etc. though I have sought for it, yet can I not find;
neither does the Treatisour give us any direction for it. His meaning herein
(though covered with slye words) is easy to be discerned, through his
vizard. For if the oath were made by the king only, how could it be broken by
Thorpe, and the king be unblameable? for no man is simply bound (by oath) to
perform other men's integrities. and seeing he charge ecclesiastical
Judges, with the self same unjust and unlawful manner of proceeding: though
his conclusion (drawn from the likeness betwixt these cases) be only this,
videlicet, that they are thereby fallen into Praemunire: yet his very meaning,
and what conclusion was by him meant to have followed thereon, by the former
part of the comparison, is made apparent, videlicet, a covert, disloyal, and
most lewd charge; as if some now had no less broken the oath which they have
taken, howbeit procured or induced thereunto, by Judges and Courts
ecclesiastical. But if such Ecclesiastical Judges have neither endeavored any
such breach; neither yet their practice of the oathe by him here condemned, be
impugned by any law; then can it not be avoided, but that the Treatisour (in
very deed) had such an undutiful and slanderous purpose and reach, in his
words aforesaid.

To the second degree of their bare affirmations, such speeches of Temporal
Courts practice, or forbearing to practice (as these following be) do belong,
videlicet, that such a generalloathe or such like ex officio, was never offered
nor taken; for you may perceive, he is not resolved thoroughly; whether of these
two he had best insist upon, or take for his issue: And that, the common laws
have ever rejected and impugned it. Likewise, that it was never put in ure by
any Civil Magistrate of the land, but as it is corruptly crept in amongst
other abuses, by the smister practices and pretenses of the Romish Prelates and
Clergymen. which asseueration, as it is (in that part) void of all
likelihood, where it is surmised that the practices and pretenses of
Clergymen, did first shoulder this oath into Civil or Temporal Courts: so
is it yet, an implied kind of confession; that it is not such an Alien to the
Civil policy of the Realm, nor by it wholly rejected and impugned; as in
his treatise he bears us strangely in hand. Besides that, such implication
is flat repugnant and contradictorie, to ye Note-gatherer; who writes, that it
was never used here to make men accuse themselves: for by this accusing he
means giving of oaths to defendants, touching discovery of some their own
offenses. Lastly, that where loss of life, liberty, or good name may ensue;
the Common law has forborne oaths. As for loss of life, it is yielded to be
true, which he here says: but not so, for the other two. for the
Star Chamber (being a Temporal or Civil Court) imposes oaths, where both
infamy may and does follow for punishment; and where liberty is restrained
most often by imprisonment, and sometimes also by banishment.

Unto the other head of their bare affirmations, which is, what the Common law
holds, in this behalf: such of their speeches as these following, do
appertain, videlicet, to give oath (they mean to the defendants) in causes of
life and death, is contrary to the Justice of the land. This, albeit, it no
way impugn any practice Ecclesiastical: yet is it flat repugnant to the
Note-gatherers assertion, spoken unto in the ca. 10. page 93.
second part. Again, that the Common laws have not appointed an oath to be
used, but according to the right institution thereof: and that in causes
capital or criminal, these laws neither urge by oath, nor force by torment,
a thing most cruel and barbarous, and therefore against torturing, he
alleges master Fortescue in his book De laudibus legum Angliae. It is wholly
besides my purpose either to auow or disauow here, the course of finding out
truth by torture; yet much might on both sides (probably) be said therein,
both by reason, and also by grave authority.

That the defendants oath in causes capital, neither is used nor allowed by
the laws of this Realm, I do yield unto him, as before I have said; but for
torture, let me nevertheless put him in mind, that it may perhaps be thought
of very hard, to have it thus affirmed; that the torturing of supposed Capital
offenders, not only used in Camps, but also (within the Marches and
principality of Wales) even in time of peace, well warranted by her Majesty's
instructions, and by Act of Parliament, and in the Tower of London for matters
of treason: should all of them be accounted absolutely contrary to law; or
(which is more) to be courses most cruel and barbarous.

The other point thereof, which is of not urging a defendant by oathe in any
cause criminal; is the maine point here trauersed betwixt us; and therefore
may not be carried thus away by him, per petitionem principij, without some
sound reason.

All these aforesaid speeches I do muster amongst their bare affirmations;
and have the longer stood upon them, because themselves do not so much as
assaie or undertake to prove most of the^, by any colorable argument or
authority: and for that the reasons, which they tacke on, unto some of them,
do not hang together by any consequence; and for that diverse of them might be
granted, without any detriment to the cause which we defend. for they be but
voluntary speeches, let slip at random. this therefore comes under his
mistaking of the true issue. yet they be such, as seemed not unmeet to be
mentioned; least (if the Author of them do happily hold them for sound
reasons) he should complain to have a piece of wrong offered unto him, for
that all his book was not spoken unto, and answered.

Next do follow those their reasons to be discussed, which they take from the
laws of this Realm. and first concerning such of them, as be made out of
Statutes; and afterward we will come to their book cases. That which he
speaks of Magna charta, albelt he handle it last, yet for the ancientie,
seems to deserve the first rank. he avouches no particular part thereof:
but taking (as granted) a contrariety (belike in his opinion) not
trauersable, to be betwixt proceeding by this oath, and the said Statute; he
only (in high words) tells us, of a most just curse of Anathematizing,
laid by the Bishops then, against all wilful infringers of that Charter. If I
should guess what point thereof it is, which he intends to be so contrary
to these oaths; I would take the nineteenth chapter thereof (if any) to be
meant: both because putting to an oathe is there mentioned; and for that I have
heard it (to like purpose) alleged by some other. Howbeit the Treatisour
having far better insight (as seems) in law, then he that so alleged it;
thought good to skippe it over, without all allegation; for fear it would not
so well help his turn. The words are these, videlicet, No Magna charta. ca.
19.
Bailiffe shall from henceforth put any man to his open law, nor to an oathe,
upon his own bare saying; without faithful witnesses, brought in for the
same. I must confess, that these words are some thing too obscure and dark
for me to understand, what is positiuely and preciselie meant by them. and so
much the rather, because I know not the usage before that time; which (thereby)
was meant to be remedied: except I should conjecture, that the bare saying
(there) spoken of; is to be referred to the man, that takes the oath, and not
to the Bailife: and then would it seem to establish that practice, which is
used in waging of law with two or more witnesses or hands, concurring with
his oath that swears.

Howsoever it be (in very deed) to be understood; it is easy enough to
gather, what can not be meant by it. First therefore, it cannot any way be
extended to proceedings and courts Ecclesiastical. for whatsoever is in that
Statute granted, after confirmation of the Churches liberties (except it be
otherwise plainly expressed) is referred to Courts and matters Temporal:
between which and causes ecclesiastical (as is noted before) there was made
both in those times, and also long after; a plain seuerance and distinction,
in the grounds of their several authorities, and jurisdictions. so that the
one was called the Kings Court, and the other a Spiritual, or Court Christian.
and therefore as nothing was in that Charter anewe granted, but confirmed
only, unto the Church of England: so is it to be judged on all hands, that
the king would not make laws there, to restrain the courses of proceeding
ecclesiastical; because it could not be without disanulling and reuoking of
that which immediately before (even by the same Act) he had first of all
confirmed unto them.

Secondly, a Bailife only, is there mentioned, which should put or not put a
man to his oath; which cannot well and properly be understood of any, but of
some officer temporal.

Thirdly, these words are no way appliable, to the practice of courts
ecclesiastical: for albeit under the name of Bailife an Ordinary might be
understood (which were very harsh, insomuch as a Bailife is but a Reeue of a
Bail or Liberty) yet is it not holden by any law ecclesiastical; that upon
an Ordinaries own bare saying, whether he have witnesses after to be produced
or not; a man may be put to an oath. for there must be some better matter of
inducement, to open way to the inquiry, whereupon the oath ensues.

Lastly, this statute will rather hurt, then help forward these men's purposes,
if an Ordinary might here be understood by a Baylife. because (if I conceive
the matter aright) by this is employed; that so an Ordinary be able to bring in
good witnesses; he may then upon his bare saying put a man to his open law, or
to an oath. But hereupon would follow, that Criminal prosecution without any
accuser or other party, and so ex officio mero; yea and without any
presentment too, may be lawfully admitted: and (which is most to our present
purpose in handling) that an oath (in such case) by him may be imposed, in any
matter as well Criminal as other. For here is no distinction made of any one
kind of cause from another, and they which allege it, do bring it to impugn
proceeding by the defendants oath, against crimes.

The allegation of the Treatisour out of the statute of Marlebridge or
Marleborough falls next in time to be considered: the whole words Marlebr.
52. H. 3. cap. 22.
whereof are these: none from henceforth may distreyne his freeholders; to
answer for their free holds, nor for any thing touching their freeholde,
without the kings writ: nor shall cause his freeholders to swear against their
wills, for no man may do that, without the kings commandment. But the
Treatisour leaves out the first part which shows, how the second that he
alleges, is to be understood. And because (like the lapwing with her
diuerting c^ies) he would lead us further and further from the matter
(herein) chiefly to be respected: or for that he thought we would make some
advantage hereof; he says, that the kings commandment imports here thus
much, viz. according to the law and Justice of this Realm; and for this
quoteth a book thus: 2. R. 3.

The book he means (as I guess) is in Mich. 2. R. 3. sol. 11.
these words: wheresoever a man for offense, misprision or otherwise, is to
make fine or redemption all the Justices agreed, that those Justices before
whom he was committed, etc. should take surety and pledges for the fine, etc.
and after by their discretion they should assesse the fine, and not the king in
his chamber; nor otherwise before him; but by his Justices. and so is the kings
will (in statute) to be taken, viz. by his Justices and his law, which to say,
in effect is all one etc. Where you see, that the book speaking of Justices
(viz. the men before whom the conviction was made) he refers this to the
Justice of the land.

But though it be neither off nor on, to our Principal purpose; nevertheless
it seems, this book is not truly applied by him unto this statute: and that
by the kings commandment in the statute; the kings writ is to be understood,
(as in the first part of that statute is plainly expressed) rather then any
determination or Act of his Justices of the Bench.

Touching the statute it self; the words do evidently show, that neither
oath in cause criminal, nor any Court Ecclesiastical is thereby meant. there
is only forbidden, that lords of manors shall not enforce their Freeholders
that hold land of them, whether it be by distress or oaths, to answer in
their Courts baron, touching the estates they have in their lands. because
neither the lords own courts (in such a case) be competent or indifferent,
for fear of unlawful euiction; nor the goodness or weakness of the states
men hold, are meet to be fished out by their own oaths in satisfaction of
their lords greediness, to have their lands: except the king by his writ
shall so especially command. And yet hereby we see, the statute leaves it at
large at the kings pleasure, to warrant even this course: and therefore this is
not simply unjust, but inconvenient only, for lords so to urge their tenants.

He alleges further (against these oaths) a statute (as he says) made 43.
Ed. 3. ca. 9. that no man be put to answer without presentment before Justice,
or matter of Record, or by due process, or by writ original after the ancient
laws of this land.

But I do find no such statute either in that year, or in any other like
number of Chapter, of that king: and that Parliament which he voucheth, has
not so many Chapters. But admitting it, what is this to prove an unlawfulness
of oaths ministered unto defendants in matters criminal, whereof there is no
shadow of mention? it rather speaks of matters that ought to go before
proceedings criminal at the common law. and what makes this against Courts
Ecclesiastical? would he have them to proceed in the self same manner, that
common law courts do? he might as well exact of them, Indictments, and
afterward trials by Iuries of twelve. and yet Ecclesiastical courts put none
to answer, but upon more then one of these, or at least that which is
equivalent at that law, unto these at the common law. For first, courts
Ecclesiastical have great use of presentiments and complaints or denunciations
before the party be called to answer; as is showed in the second part. Then
the defendant is not called neither, but by due process; as by letters
missiue, or by attachment in Courts of Commission; and by Primarie citation,
in Ordinary Courts: which have a correspondence unto original writs at the
common law. So that of four matters, whereof some one or other of them is
thereby required; three of them be used in Ecclesiastical proceedings against
crimes.

His next proof (of this kind) coming to be discussed, is out of the 25. H.
8. cap. 14.
preamble of a statute of king Henry ye 8. which preamble (for brevity sake)
he omitteth: yet he omitteth not to gather therefrom, that which was never
scattered, viz. so we see (says he) that under cloked and covert terms (of
Canonical sanctions, viz. used in the statute 2. H. 4.) the clergy men
usurped (unjustly) jurisdiction over the people, ministering unto them captious
and snarling Interrogatories: and (as it should seem by histories) upon oath,
contrary to the true meaning of the law and lawe-makers, and against the right
order of Justice and all good equity: impugning thereby the royal
prerogative, the imperial Crown, the Princely scepter, laws, and policy of
this kingdom: for which cause he says it was repealed. These be imputations
of great and high matters; which he auowcheth to be by such oath impugned.
which though he say we see by that preamble (though indeed he would not let
us see it) yet when all is cast up, his proofs are no more but thus, viz. as
it should seem; but how much hereof may (in truth) thence be seen either
plainly, or by any seeming; I would the clearest sighted of that opinion,
would take the pains to peruse; that he may withal discern, with what
upright minds and sincerity, some of his chief accomplices do write of this
matter.

For the very true and only causes of repeal of the statute of heresy, 2. H.
4. by the preamble of the said statute 25. H. 8. (now likewise standing also
it self repealed) are assigned to be these, viz. the not declaring thereby
what should be heresy. The term of Canonical sanctions, and other terms
thereof, so general: that the best learned could scarce avoid the danger of
heresy, if he should be examined upon captious Interrogatories: the
unreasonableness of being put to loss of life etc. upon suspicion, and
without accusation or presentment: whereas for treason it must be upon
presentment, verdict, confession, or process of outlawrie: and, for that
speaking or doing against the Canons etc, of Popes (being but human, yea, and
many of them contrary to the kings Prerogative Royal) is by the said Canons,
made to be heresy. so that there is not one word mentioning, much less
tending to the condemnation of ministering oath; no not so much as in the crime
of heresy, which is capital: nor yet any of the other great thunderclaps
which the Treatisour pretends he saw or heard of in that Preamble, against
oaths in some criminal causes.

To this purpose he would have us further note, that the statute of six
Articles does not enact nor allow, but that it seems rather to disallowe,
and ^iect these oaths. Why Sir, it speaks not of them at all: and can you
therefore gather, that it does not allow, but rather disallowe them? you might
so reason against them, from all the statutes that ever were made touching any
different matter whatsoever. But (say you) it seems rather to disallowe them:
is not this seeming a sound demonstratiue argument, to overthrow a course so
long and so manifoldly used, and that in the courts of both sorts? but why
does it so seem? forsooth, because the king is by that statute authorized to
direct Commissions to Ordinaries and others, to take information and
accusation, by the oaths of two sufficient persons at the least, or by verdict
of twelve men. What then? therefore the examination of the party upon his own
oath (when he is found out) because it is omitted, is disallowed? Though this
loose reason should follow; yet none oath should thereby be touched, other
then ministered in matters of heresy. But if he might reason thus: because
those Commisioners might begin and ground their proceedings done by way of
special inquiry in processu punitiuo, upon such information, accusation, or
verdict; therefore they might not proceed afterward, according to any course
of the law ecclesiastical: then might he as well also argue, that they might
not deal upon an heretics own voluntary confession. for confession is no
more mentioned in that Statute, then the defendants oath is. But what if that
Statute had expressly disallowed that oathe, is it not now repealed? and is
it worthy to be alleged, seeing he elsewhere charge it, to be A bloody
and cruel Statute? I perceive it is very loose and badde stuff, which he
will not take hold of; where he may have but as much as a shadow or glimpse
of any thing to his purpose. May it be thought, that any man of judgment can
be (in deed) ignorant; but that such sharp and pregnant conclusions, as
throughout his whole Treatise he infers; cannot (possibly) be grounded upon
so feeble and vnconsequent premises? yet he sticks not upon these
allegations aforesaid, even as if he took them for good and sound arguments;
as a well-willer of Ordinaries, to dissuade them from further practice of such
oathe; least they be found thereby, not only impugners of the Royal
Prerogative, but discredited further by the breach of their own oaths, taken
to the Queens supremacy.

Nevertheless, least I be mistaken by any, it is to be remembered, that he
(commonly) limiteth all his hot conclusions with some wary words of
restraint, as these, videlicet, such oaths, and such like, etc. always
conueying under them, a reference unto general oaths, according to his first
untrue issue. Well, this helps his cause never a deal. for if none of his
reasons brought, do so much as overthrow those unreasonable oaths (which are
by no man defended) how much less can they touch those particular oaths to
matter in fact only, that we do reason and treat of?

The reasons which he sets down as taken from the Reports of the common
law, do now follow. which are partly by propounding some examples, how oaths
be there used: and partly by auouching some cases, seeming unto him, to infer
a condemnation of defendants oaths, in any causes criminal. Before he come to
the first of these two, there be sundry conclusions propounded by him: for
proof whereof, all his reports out of the Common law, be laid down. First,
that he may (as he says) deliver our laws and Justice of our land from so
foul a slander; as that they should be said to allow of such Catholic
oaths: Next, to assure others (like as himself is sure) that such a general
oathe, or such like ex officio was never offered by any Magistrate, nor taken
by any subject, by authority of the common law. Thirdly, that the Common
laws have not imposed, or appointed an oath to be used, otherwise then
according to the right institution thereof, and the godly rules before (by him)
remembered: What those rules are, I have noted in the Epistle to the Reader.
Now if by these words, videlicet, (such like ex officio) he mean only such
general oaths, as before he had (untruly) imputed to Ecclesiastical courts;
then will I not trauerse any of these conclusions, whether the oath shall be
ministered upon the Judges office only, or at a parties instance. Yet upon view
of his proofs for them, which shall follow; I would the Reader might be
pleased to consider; whether I had not just cause to put them down for bare
affirmations unaccompanied (in truth) with any reason. Fourthly, those book
cases are brought, to show; that the common laws, yea the common wealth it
self has ever rejected, and impugned this manner of swearing, whereof we now
entreat, as a thing unlawful, and injurious: But this last we may not so
easily yield unto him, without betraying the truth; as we yet (verily) take
the matter.

The examples then which he brings in proof of those conclusions, and
withal to show how oaths be ministered at the Common law, are of witnesses
deposing betwixt Prince and subject, or betwixt subject and subject: of
defendants waging their law in personal actions, with two other swearing with
them: which wager is never admitted, where there is witness (though but one)
or matter of record, or the parties own hand writing: of a tenant in a real
action waging his law of non summons, for safegarde of his land, as having
none other way to relieve himself against the false return of the Shiriffe:
Of examining the garnishours, returned (when the plaintiff recouereth in a
Scire facias by default) upon an action of deceit, brought by the defendant
against the Shiriffe: and of a Tenant in a Praecipe of land, casting an
Essoigne of the Kings service, where the Essoigner shall swear, that it is no
fained excuse.

Out of these being granted unto him, I trust neither he, nor any Logician in
the world, shall be able ever to draw any sound reason so much as against
those general and Catholic oaths; with which (throughout) he charge
Ecclesiastical Courts, howbeit very unjustly. but much less against those
special oaths of defendants in some criminal cause, whereof we here
entreat. for the reason from these, must thus of necessity be gathered: these
oaths are used, and are lawful, therefore the use of oaths in any other sort,
is unlawful.

Therefore to press us yet further by some examples out of that law, he
says: It has wholly forborne to minister oaths in criminal causes. for that
in wisdom it was foreseen (by reason of man's frailetie) what danger of
perjury a man was likely to fall into for safeguard of his life, for
preservation of his liberty, credit, and estimation.

The great presumption and danger of perjury, if a man should be sworn in a
cause Capital unto him, I can easily yield unto. and that the sentence out of
Job (to that end) is very apposite. but for avoiding some restraint of his
liberty for a time, or for the only retaining of his woonted credit and
estimation, that a man which has any fear of God at all, or but any slender
spark of godliness and true religion; would wilfully (through perjury)
throw his own body and soul into hell; neither law, nor yet any nation in
the world, that I can read of, did ever presume.

And if great likelihood and doubt of perjury be so effectual a motive for
all wise Magistrates to forbear giving of an oath: then must he also condemn
oaths, in most of the said examples by himself before alleged and commended.
for who is ignorant, but that (in most men) there is more danger of perjury by
swearing about debt and detinue to save their goods, then for their goodname,
as is somewhat touched Vide 3. par. c^
before? Hereupon then all wagers of law, should be unlawful, yea not only
for getting, or keeping of goods; but especially for lands, this danger of men's
own perjury is apparently great; in that it is much more common to suborne
others thereunto, for this end; then for preservation either of liberty, or of
good name and honesty, when these happen to be likewise questioned. so that,
for danger and presumption of perjury; the tenants oath of non summons (who is
otherwise to lose his land) should not be admitted by his own reason.

Again, if this fear and doubt be so forcible and necessary a ground of
forbearing to minister oath: then what will the Treatisour say unto those wagers
of law allowed of, and made (as by the books M. 8. H 6. fo. 15 H. 20. H. 6 fo.
16. H. 22. H. 6. fol. 41
of terms and years does appear) whereas both the plaintifes were upon their
intention, examined by their own oaths; and the defendants also were permitted
to wage their law? do not these crosse-oaths infer periculu^ periurij,
either on the one side, or the other (seeing thereupon oath may be against
oath, either directly or by implicatio^) much more then any oath does, whether
it be general or special, in criminal causes, that he or others do impugn?
Furthermore in these wagers of law upon actions of debt or detinue, or in
actions real; this danger of perjury is enforced, not only by the
consideration of ye extraordinary care, which most me^ have, of keeping, or
getting goods and riches by hook or crook; but somewhat also in regard of
their own worldly credites and honesty; if the retaining of that be of such
moment, to induce perjury, as the Treatisour imagines. For when one of these
defendants, has (a good while) stoutly and publicly stood in denial of the
matter, for which he is sued: will he not take it to be a reproach unto him, to
have it discovered (by his refusal to swear) that he has so confidently and
so long auowched an untruth, even to defeat another man of his due and right?
and therefore by all likelihood, what to avoid loss on the one side, and shame
or obloquie on ye other; will scarcely stick, to hazard an untrue oath.

Lastly, it is both lawful and received by practice also, when Brook titulo
Jurisdiction. nu. 105.
Iuries for trials of matters betwixt man and man, or upon life and death,
cannot agree within the time of the abode of the Justices of Assizes in that
County; that then they shall be carried along with the Judges in carts; till
they shall all condescend and agree; and in the mean time they are to be kept
from all meat, drink, and candle light. and may not this course, drive such
of them, as cannot satisfy and conform their own consciences to the rest of
their fellows; to yield (at length) even unto damnable and wilful perjury,
rather then miserably to famish, and to perish for want of food?

We may therefore conclude, that every presumption or peril of perjury ought
not to be holden sufficient; to take away the use of oaths (otherwise being
expedient) from amongs the societies of men.

The Treatisour brings one other example of oaths, out of the reports of the
common law: it is the vicar of Saltash his case, 2. H. 4. by which (he says)
the unlawful imposing of an oath upon him appears. But it is not any
unlawfulness (simply) of imposing an oath that there appears, or which was
condemned by denial of a consultation; neither was it imposed, but voluntarily
taken: but it was, for that the Popes Collector (who had in England no
jurisdiction) did convent the said vicar before him ecclesiastically (at the
suite of the Deane of Windsor) for breaking his oath taken before the said
Collector, to perform the condition of an obligation, that he the said vicar
had entered into, which is a temporal cause. What then does this make against
oaths imposed upon defendants in some criminal causes? For I trust (though
the Collector had unlawfully imposed it) the Treatisour will not thence reason
thus mightily against us, viz. This was an imposed oath in a civil cause, but
it was unlawful, therefore all imposed oaths in any criminal cause are also
unlawful: For this reason is ex meris particularibus, and has quatuor
terminos: and besides, is a fallacy of the Accident. Seeing is was not
therefore unlawful because it was imposed; but upon the other grounds alone.
Hitherto touching examples of oaths, alleged out of the reports of the common
law.

Now follow these reasons that are used, as for a more direct condemnation (by
the common law) of oaths imposed upon defendants, in some Criminal cases: in
which behalf, the Notegatherer says; that nemo tenetur seipsum prodere, is
the common custom of England. I will not greatly stick with him herein, so it
be truly understood. albeit this maxim being taken notoriously out of the
Interpreters of Civil and Canon laws: I think he would have much a do to
find it (by any book of the common law) to be the common custom of England.

It is true, that when a man's own fault is secret, and not any way bruted and
published abroad: he himself is not bound by law to make confession thereof,
to any Magistrate or officer Civil or Ecclesiastical; whether he be urged to
swear thereupon, or otherwise. for in such case, it is simply secret, and the
Magistrate (except he should minister a general oath, like unto the Popish
charge at shrift, not warranted by any law) cannot possibly in special or
particular manner interrogate him of that, whereof he never heard, nor once
dreamed.

But if a man be once discovered thereof by Presentment, denunciation, Fame, or
such like, according to law: then is not the fault simply secret, but revealed
(in some sort) abroad, or to the Magistrate. who for avoiding scandal to
Christian religion, and for reformation of the party, may thus enquire of the
offense, to see it redressed, and punished. and therefore to the former maxima
must be added thus much; sed proditus per denunciationem, Famam, etc. tenetur
seipsum ostendere. Any more exact or further discussing hereof, is not of this
place: I do 2. part. ca. 6. and 7 3. part. ca. 9.
therefore refer the reader, to the places of this Apology here quoted in
the margent.

The only case carrying any show or color of condemnation of oaths in any
cause criminal, at the course of proceeding by common law; is alleged by the
Treatisour out of the Li. Assisar. 4. 9. E. 3. Assis. 1. sol. 316.
book of Assizes. there, certain returned of a Jury, being ready to be
empanelled with others, were challenged: some of them, for that it was supposed
they had declared the right for the one party, and not for the other: thereby
(as it were) telling their verdict aforehand: And othersome were challenged to
be of Counsel or fee, to the parties. Now it is thereupon further reported;
that such of them as were (in the first respect) challenged; were sworn to
give euidience to the Jurors: and that it shall be so in like case, where the
challenge sounds not in reproof or dishonor of them. but for those which were
challenged, that they had received money of the party; this challenge was
tried by the tryours, without having any evidence by their own oaths, Causa
qua supra. whereby he would gather, that an oathe may not be given in any
cause at all, where the parties own honesty may be touched.

But he might with better reason have gathered (out of ye former part of this
case) the very contradictorie hereof. because it is very small honesty, for
any man, (in some sort) to offer himself to be sworn as an indifferent
Iurour: when he is (indeed) vnindifferent, and his judgment so forestalled;
as that he has taken upon him to scan the right for the one party, before he
be sworn, or have heard the evidence for the other. yet nevertheless these
challenged persons were put to give evidence (hereof) to the Jurors, upon their
corporal oaths.

Concerning the other persons (challenged to have received some money or fee of
the one party) that it was thought good, that they should not be examined by
oath hereof; (because it was a matter, that might tend to their reproach and
dishonestie) cannot infer this general conclusion, viz. that in no cause
whatsoever, a man may be put to an oath, whereby his own turpitude and
dishonestie, may be discovered. For this was, but in a particular point of
challenge, where the persons challenged were no defendants, but came in to be
Jurors, a kind of tryours and Judges; and against whom, there was no lawful
inducement for the Judges, to impose such oath; other then the challengers own
exception. But that is not sufficient to cast over the clearing or proouing of
the point objected; upon him, that is challenged, and so from the challenger;
who (by law) is to come prepared, and to make proofs of his own intention,
which he affirms: because nemo praesumitur malus, donec contrarium probetur.
and therefore the putting of the trial of the challengers assertion here, unto
the tryours: was a favor done unto him, by the Judges: more then the Civil
laws (used abroad in other nations) would have admitted. For he that will
except, must (at his own peril) of loosing the advantage thereof, without any
help of the Judges office or of the parties own oath, be able to prove his
exceptions. And therefore, if this very case had been in a Civil or in an
Ecclesiastical court, that is guided by those two laws: the parties so
challenged, yea, though they had been Accusers or witnesses, and much more
being returned for Jurors, who are a kind of Recuperatores or Pedanei
Iudices; should not, ne are bound to answer such exception touching their
crimes, upon their own oaths.

For further declaration of which point, that when an answer in a criminal
cause ought to be made by virtue of a man's oath, and when it may be refused; I
refer you to the ninth Chapter of this third part. So that the Judges did
(herein) very gravely, considerately, and but according to equity, and to the
common law of all other civil nations.

The Treatisours next objection to like purpose, is out of Judge 12. Reg. Eli.
fol. 288. titul. Periuric. nu. 51.
Dyers book, and it is in the very book it self, thus word for word: A
bill of perjury was sued in the Chancerie, as for perjury committed contra
formam statuti anno 5. Reginae nunc. and it was doubted, if the defendant would
plead not guilty, whether he should be sworn to his Plea and also to answer
to Interrogatories, as is used in the Star Chamber: And it was resolved by
the opinion of Catline, Dyer, Saunders, and Whiddon; that he should not be
examined nor sworn upon Interrogatories: except the court of Chancerie had
absolute authority, and had used to examine periuries in that court, before
the Statute: for then this is still reserved by the last Prouiso of the
Statute, as it is also for the Star Chamber: Otherwise if the court of
Chancerie will examine perjury, committed there (as it may by Statute) this
must be by Latin Bill, and be pleaded in Latin, and issue must be joined
there, to be tried in the Kings Bench, as in like cases is wont. In this whole
report, as there is nothing that tends to the absolute impugnation of oaths,
in some causes criminal: so is there not any point, which we do not willingly
embrace, and like of. For the Chancerie being a court (by the institution
whereof) to handle by Bill and answer in English, no crimes but ciuilly laid,
and not criminally moved, to the intents of any punishment: unto which Bill,
the defendants must answer upon their oaths: therefore it is no marvel,
when (by Statute) any new authority is given thereunto, as in this case; that
then the course of the common law should be followed; except such Statute do
otherwise determine. But hereupon might well be gathered, that defendants
oaths to English Bills (there always used) albeit criminal matters touching
their shame and dishonestie, be diduced; and in other courts thereunto
authorized, the continual use of such oaths, even for crimes criminally
moved: are no way, against the Law of the land. For we see, that it is here
yielded to be lawful, in case the Chancerie had used such course before. Also
that it is usual and lawful in the Star Chamber: and that these Judges
opinions reach no further; but that the party accused of perjury, should not
be examined by oath, upon Interrogatories in the Chancerie, for answering of
Interrogatories upon oath, is not used there; no not when the crime is but
ciuilly prosecuted; except the other party will be contented, to be wholly
concluded by his adversaries answers, that shall be so made, to his
Interrogatories.

Another case at the common law is alleged by the Notes. tit. the laws of
England.
Notegatherer thus: It appears (says he) by the Lord Dyers book, that one
Hind being called before the Commissioners Ecclesiastical, for usury;
refused to swear; whereupon he was committed; but upon an Information in the
common Pleas, he had a Corpus cum causa, to remove him: so (as it seems) that
the Judges were then of opinion that the Commissioners could not then give them
any such oath. hereof he gives us not any direction to find out the particular
place of this report. All that I can (to any such effect) hit upon; is only
this marginall note, viz. Simile M. 18. fol. per Hynde qui noluit iurare coram
Iusticiarijs ecclesiasticis, super articulos pro vsura. so that if this be the
place; being but a Marginall note, it can not (necessarily) be fathered, as a
Report of the Lord Dyers; the rather, because it is not likely that he would
term ecclesiastical Commissioners, by the name of Iusticiarij ecclesiastici.
for the perfitnes thereof it might seem rather, to be some note of the
Notegatherers own, then any of Judge Dyers gathering. Secondly, here is no
mention of Hindes commitment, nor of corpus cum causa, nor that the said writ
(upon information) was granted out of that court of common Pleas: so that
these be but the Notegatherers own surmises and gesses. Thirdly, before it
might be inferred thereof, that the Justices then were of opinion, that
Commissioners Ecclesiastical might not give any oathe in a matter of usury;
and so by like reason (as h^e gathers) in none other criminal cause: this
case in the Margent must first be made like unto that case, which is in the
text it self. Now that contains no more, but that one Skrogges appearing
before certain special Commissioners by (...) Majesty appointed to hear and
determine the validity of two several Patents of an Office; the one granted
to the said Skrogges, and the other to Coleshill; and refusing to make any
other answer, then a demurre upon the Bill, and to the Jurisdiction granted
them, by that Commission; and being committed to the Fleet for such contempt
by the said Commissioners; was nevertheless by a Corpus cum causa, out of the
common Pleas, removed from prison, because he was a person belonging to that
court, and a necessary member thereof. But where does it appear, that this
Hind was likewise a member of that court? Or how can these be like cases;
when as in Skrogges cause, none oath was urged, neither was the Plea betwixt
him and Coleshill criminal; as this was betwixt the office of the
Commissioners, and Hind? Or where may Hindes case at large be found in
Michaelmas Term 18. Eliz. seeing no such matter is in the L. Dyers reports of
that year? Or how can it be made to appear; that the Commission
Ecclesiastical was then perused; the Statute whereon it is grounded,
considered of; the whole matter argued, and debated; any such opinions yielded;
or yet that Hind was not by the court sent back again to prison (though it
were admitted he had once such writ) as many other (in like cases) before, and
since that time, have been? for all the similitude, which that Note mentions;
might rest in this one only point, viz. that as the one being committed for
contempt, by virtue of the Queens special Commission; had notwithstanding,
his writ of Corpus cum causa; so the other had it likewise granted.

But there might also be (in the eighteenth year of her Majesty) other good
cause, to deliver Hind clearly out of prison, being called before the
Commissioners into question for usury, if it were not above ten in the
hundred. and yet oaths in any criminal cause besides, ministered by
Commissioners Ecclesiastical; shall be no whit thereby impeached, or
prejudiced. because before that, viz. in the thirteenth year of the Reign of
her Majesty, a (...). Eliz. ca. 8.
Statute was made; forbidding any punishment, then that which is contained in
that Act, to be inflicted by laws Ecclesiastical upon usurers; so their
usury amount not above the rate of ten in the hundred for one year. therefore
it might well have been, that Hind was so delivered from his commitment; not
in respect of any unlawfulness by the Judges deemed to be in such oath; but for
that ye conysance punishment of his crime (by reason of that Statute) belonged
not then, and in that case, to an Ecclesiastical Court.

This point the Treatisour further enforces also; by the forms of a piece of
a precedent of a prohibition, and another of Attachment thereupon, laid down
in the printed Register; especially by these words of them; Recognitiones and
sacramenta, provoluntate sua; and ipsis inuitis. For full answer whereof, to
avoid unnecessary length and vain repetition; I must refer the Reader over
unto the xj. and xij. Chapters, in the first part of this Apology.

He affirms also: that the practisers of such oaths, are for that cause in a
Pramunire; and therefore gathers, the oathe to be contrary and repugnant to
the common law. I grant the consequence to be good and sound: but how does
he prove them to be thereupon in a Praemunire? For proof of this, he
assumeth; that this manner of oathe is contrary to the Queens regalitie and
crown. as if his reasons before brought, had sufficiently euinced so much,
which we do utterly and resolutely deny unto him. And yet, as if he had fully
cleared that point; he addresseth himself to prove that; whereof there was
less controversy, viz. that what is done by a Bishop, or by an
Ecclesiastical Court, against the Kings regalitie and crown, has been
heretofore adjudged to be within the compass of this word Alibi, contained in
the Statute of Praemuuire 16. Ric. 2. For this he alleges two books of the
common law: yet 5. Ed. 4. sol. 6. Praemunire.
the first of them, does but speak of an excommunication by a Bishop, and not
of every dealing whatsoever in a matter belonging to the Kings regalitie. And
what if it had been twice so adjudged; both of them in such corrupt times,
when as the royal prerogative of the Kings of this land, to be Supreme
Governors in all Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, due to them in right and by
Gods Law; was not de facto united to the crown. For the Bishops then, did not
claim their Jurisdictions Ecclesiastical, next, and immediately under God,
from the Crown, as now they do. But seeing this part of Regal power is now
no less truly and fully vested in the crown, then is the Temporal; so as
the Laws allowed for the government Ecclesiastical are termed by sundry
Parliaments, The Queens Ecclesiastical laws, and, Laws of the Realm; as
well as those which were first and originally made here. And the Bishops are
proved to have their authority, and Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, derived
down unto them from the Queens Highness, under the great Seal of England, as
upon fundrie incident occasions has been showed before: Is it then the like
reason still, to comprise their Jurisdictions and Courts, under that word of
Alibi; as if their Courts and Jurisdictions were not now the Queens; nor yet
belonging unto her Regalitie? Nay, let such as shall so affirm, beware they
incur not (hereby) the danger of implied, if not direct denial; of a part of
her Highness Royal style; and the breach also of their oaths taken, for
assistance and defense of all Prerogatives, etc. united or belonging to this
Imperial crown. Yea, and though this might be truly verified of ordinary
Courts Ecclesiastical, yet is there no color at all so to affirm; of the
Commission Ecclesiastical, exercised under the great Seal of England, by
force of the same Statute, that restores the Supremacy Ecclesiastical to the
Crown. I omit here, what is touched else where, viz. how by sundry learned,
it has been thought; that by Alibi, there was encluded or meant nothing else;
but matters of that quality there specified, which were enterprised by, and
under the Papal authority; though the Pope (perhaps) resided not then at Rome
it self.

Therefore (seeing this is not pregnant enough for him) to drive this matter
nearer home to his purpose; he says it is against the Kings Regalitie, and
so a Praemunire for an Ecclesiastical Court to hold plea of a matter
appertaining to the Judgment of a Common Law Court, or to deal in any cause
not belonging to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

The first of these he proves; by the pardon sued by Barlow Bishop of Bathe
and Wells in king Ed. 6. his time; by reason he had deprived the Deane there,
being a mere donatiue of the Kings. If there were but any probable doubt,
whether (thereby) he were fallen into a Praemunire; it was wisdom for him,
to procure a pardon (before hand) if he could. Alealitis, resincertissima. yet
depriving of one, placed by the King; is much more then bare holding of some
plea, that appertains to a temporal Court: besides that there was a further
matter in it, then I last here to open.

The other allegation of his to like end; taken from a 38. Ed. 3. of
Prouisours.
Statute, does make no show of proof thereof: for it is but thus, viz. the
King chiefly desires to sustain his people in tranquillity and peace, and to
govern according to the Laws, Usages, and Franchises of his land, as he is
bound by his oathe, made at his coronation. And are not Ecclesiastical persons
now part of the Queens people? Are not the Liberties and Franchises, that
be given and confirmed unto them, by the goodness of Princes, for holding
plea in certain matters, the vsages of this Realm? Are not the received
Laws, which lawfully they may practice, termed Ecclesiastical Laws of this
Realm, no less then temporal be? And is not the Prerogative royal, in and
for causes Ecclesiastical as high, and as rightfully settled in the Prince, and
incident to her Highness Crown and Regalitie; as the same is, for temporal
power and authority? What cause is there then, seeing seu Alibi in the
Statute; signifies (in true construction) any place whatsoever besides Rome:
that every holding plea by an Ecclesiastical Court of a matter wherein it
ought not to hold; should at this time be reckoned, a thing contrary to the
Queeenes Regalitie; more then dealing in an Ecclesiastical cause, should be
in any temporal Court at Westminster? For no Statute of Provision or
Praemunire, assigns these for causes; which have (indeed) but grown since
by collections; whiles the Popes usurpation was continued in this land; against
which (oftentimes) the remedy by Prohibition, could not serve the turn. I
grant it is a contempt or great misprision in any. but for this, a
Prohibition, and attachment thereupon, etc. (as before those Statutes they did)
might sufficiently serve the turn. Nevertheless, all these matters are wholly
impertinent to his purpose, till he shall have proved; the particular issue,
viz. that such oathe (as we treat of) is against the Queens Regalitie, etc.
But if that might be proved; then upon so general interpretation of Alibi;
these oaths would fall into the case of Praemunire; by what Court soever,
whether temporal or Ecclesiastical, they should be tendered.

And that which he vowcheth to the same effect, out of Saint Germans book of
Doctor and Student, receives the like answer.

In the next place, I set some of the Treatisors reasons, that are made by
collection, and discourse of reason. These collections he makes partly from
examples past; and partly at large. therefore touching the first of these two:
he impugneth these oaths, and would prove the Imposers of them to be in a
Praemunire, for incroching upon the Kings rights and prerogatives: and for
conuenting subjects by foreign made Laws: and for practicing Antichristian
Decrees, and Popish Canons: which (he says) appears, by the Praemunire
brought by Hunne, against a person suing the said Hunne for his young deceased
infants bearing-cloth (by the name of a Mortuarie) in an Ecclesiastical Court.
how does this infer, that it is Praemunire; either to encroch upon the Kings
rights and prerogatives, (though this peradventure by some circumstances may
amounte sometimes to no less) or to convent subjects by foreine made laws? It
may not be thought, that every intrusion, deteiner, or concealment (which is
incroching upon the Kings right) or rauishment of his wards, which he ought
to have by his Prerogative Royal; is straightway, and necessarily a
Praemunire. neither were the Kings Temporal Courts (in this case) encroched
upon; because they could not give remedy for deteining a Mortuary, if this
were so (in truth) to be accounted. neither yet is there so much as any
mention made of foreine laws, which the Ecclesiastical Court then proceeded
by, or practiced.

This course of the Treatisour, is rather to prophecy, then to reason; thus to
tell us before hand, upon the very bringing of the action of Praemunire by
Hunne: what the judgment was in that matter yea, and upon what ground the
judgment was given in a cause, which never received judgment, for any thing I
can learn.

To this point, he also mentions the Praemunire wherein blind Nixe sometimes
Bishop of Norwich, was condemned, and adds to the aforesaid two points; that
by that also appears; Judges Ecclesiastical are in Praemunire, whenever
they exceed their Judicial authority. But if every exceeding of authority
were a Praemunire; then what Judge is there of any court (of either sort) so
skillful, or always so advised; but might justly fear that at one time or
other he shall not escape this rigorous doom of Praemunire? In truth, this
example proves all his three points, just alike; that is, none of them at
all. I do verily believe, the Treatisour never saw that Record. if he have,
either he makes very bold with his Reader, or else with the Art of
reasoning, thus to collect.

I have perused the Record H. 25 H. 8. Rot. 42. Suffolk.
it self: it contains a suite of Praemunire brought against the said Bishop
by the Kings Attourny general, on the Friday after the P^rification, pleading
the Statute of 16. Ric. 2; and adding, that al Indictments, Presentiments, and
Impetitions in any court of the Kings, B. Nixe his condemnation in a Praemunite.
or in any Court of a subjects (which is in any sort derived or diduced from
the Kings crown) duly taken or found, are to be tried and judged in that
Court, where they were found, or in some of the Kings Courts; and not in any
Ecclesiastical Court: and that, whereas there was an old custom in the Town
of Thetford, that whosoever should trouble any of the Kings or Duke of
Lancasters tenants, commorant in that Town, and should call them by citation
into an Ecclesiastical Court, out of the Deanery of the said Town; should
thereby forfeit, and he also that should execute such process should also
forfeit 6 shillings 8. pence. which custom, by a Jury of twelve men, being
(accordingly) presented before the Mayor, the said B. cited the Mayor and two
others to appear personally before him, in his Manor and Chapel at Hoxne or
Hoxstone in Suffolk. The Mayor and the one of the other two appearing; and
having nothing objected but that presentment made; were by the B. enjoined,
upon pain of excommunication, at the next court of the Kings to be holden in
Thetford; to call the same Jurors together, and therepublikely to adnull and
revoke the said presentment, as being against Gods Law. so that (says the
Record) the B. did in an Ecclesiastical Court, judge of the presentment, being
duly made in the Kings court: and enjoined the reuoking and disanulling of it,
against the King, his regalitie, crown, etc. whereupon immediately, the Bishop
appeared, and desired liberty of imparlance till monday next after; and had it
granted, upon good mainprise, etc. On the prefixed monday, the B. appeared
again; and said he could not deny, but that he was culpable in all the
premises, and put himself thereupon, into the Kings hands, etc. and so had
judgment to be from thenceforth out of the Kings protection, and al his lands
and tenements, goods and chattels to be forfeited to the King; and that he
should remain in the custody of the Marshall, quousque etc. but presently
(upon special grace of of the Court) he was let to bail, in a far less sum
then before, for his appearance in Easter term next after. At what time he
appeared by his Attorney; and both he and his pledges were discharged, by
virtue of an Act of Parliament made the same year.

Whereby we may see, that encroching upon the Kings rights, etc. is not here
specially assigned, for any cause of such judgment; and much less, is the
practicing of any Canons, or foreign made Laws; for they are not once
mentioned: and least of all, that every exceeding of their authority by any
Court, should be a Praemunire. For the original and only cause hereof was;
the B. enioyning of the Mayor, and of another townesman of Thetford, upon pain
of censures; to adnull and make void a presentment, first duly made, in a
temporal Court of the Kings.

It is also to be noted out of the general Atturneys bill in this Record:
where it is said, that presentiments, etc. found or made in the Kings, or in a
subjects Court, which is (in any sort) derived from the Kings crown, must be
tried there, or in some of the Kings Courts, and not in an ecclesiastical
Court: that at this time, Courts ecclesiastical were not holden to be derived
any way from the Kings Crown, as no we they are, and so be acknowledged. and
(indeed) by conferring the times, I find, that this fault of the Bishop was
done in November 24. H. 8. he was attainted in Hilarie term 25. H. 8. which
is a year and more after, and it was in a Parliament time, that was continued
till 30. Martij next aster. Now the supremeheadship over the English Church,
was not yielded unto the King, until the Parliament (by prorogation) holden
the third of November, then next following, viz. 26. H. 8.

That which the Treatisour collecteth by Cardinal Wolseys Praemunire, and the
whole Cleargies also; for assenting to, and assisting the Court Legatiue, which
the said Wolsey had erected; he himself does sufficiently confute: for
albeit he do affirm; that Wolsey was in a Praemunire for preiudicing but
ecclesiastical Courts, and not the Kings; and thence gathers thus: How much
more those, which practice Antichristian Laws, and Popish Canons, repugnant to
the royal Matestie, and policy of this laend? yet does he (by implication)
contrary his own said affirmatio^; in that he confesses, Wolsey did grant
benefices by way of Provision. for thereby, he was within the very letter of
the Statutes of Provision, and Praemunire; and so consequently, he prejudiced
also the Kings regalitie and crown, and not Ecclesiastical courts alone.

Yea, and what is all this to the imposing of an oathe, that we treat of?
seeing (if it were true, that every practice of Antichristian decrees, and
Popish Canons, were a Praemunire) yet it may be truly affirmed, that the very
temporal Laws of this Realm, do allow unto Ecclesiastical Courts to
minister such oaths (as shall be proved in the next chapter) and therefore
not to be said to be practiced by virtue of Canons only. And also, for that no
Canons, that are agreeing to those conditions, and qualities which are required
by the 25. H. 8. 27. H. 8.
Statute of Submission of the Clergy, are Antichristian, or Popish, or
foreine Laws; but are the Queens Ecclesiastical Laws, and Laws of this
Realm; no less then such as were originally made within the land, as is before
(by occasion) Vide 1. part. ca. 14. page 102. and 103.
showed and proved. Insomuch, as the Note-gatherer himself calls them the
ecclesiastical Laws of England.

He also tells us, as to this purpose of a complaint by the Commons made 21.
H. 8. unto the said King touching grieuances by the Clergy offered: but
tells not, that it was this matter; nor how just or unjust the complaint was
found to be; nor yet of any remedy therein given. He discourses also of the
particulars of an other complaint likewise made 23. H. 8. but he does not
assign oaths tendered in some criminal matter, to be any part of that
complaint. The Note-gatherer says, the L. Audley then chosen Speaker, did
exhibit it; and that it was for proceeding ex officio: albeit the Treatisour
do tell us, of many points besides; which (belike) if he had pe^ned that
complaint, it should have contained: This I have answered in the second part of
this Apology.

Another reason by way of collection, the Treatisor makes at large thus, viz.
What if a Justice by color of his office, should offer this general oath, to
answer to all he will ask, and commit the party refusing; could any man
justify his doing; but rather cry out against him, as a subuerter, etc? Well,
how strange a course soever he makes this, and therefore so cries out;
nevertheless it may be, that little better has been used by some Justices
of Peace. But I neither accuse any thereof, nor will excuse either them or any
others, which shall so deal; either from the Treatisors, or from any other man's
outcries: so that (in this point) we both agree.

But in one part of his Treatise; he gathers also thus, against practicing of
Canons, in ministering oath: No Canons 25. H. 8. ca. 19.
may be practiced but such, as be not contrary nor repugnant to the Prerogative
royal, nor to the laws and Customs of this Realm: but this Canon Law, is
not any part or portion of such laws. Whereupon it seems he would have his
Reader to conclude; that no Canon at al may be practiced. First it is untrue
(if you take the Canon Law indefinitely for all Canons) absolutely and
indistinctly to say; that it is no portion of the Laws and Customs of this
Realm, as has bin before showed. yea, there was here an use and custom
thereof, long before it was accounted any part of the Law of the Realm.
Secondly there be quatuor termini in this reason. Lastly, it consists all of
Negatiues; In both which respects, it is utterly inconcludent.

So that by all hitherto delivered we may perceive; that albeit there be some
diversity in sundry the courses of proceeding, betwixt the Ecclesiastical,
and the temporal Laws: yet there is found not so much as any great diversity
in the very point; which is of ministering oaths in certain criminal causes:
and much less, is there any contrariety or repugnancie in that behalf.

Besides, there is not so great diversity, betwixt any part of the law
Ecclesiastical (being now of force within this Realm) and the Laws
temporal; as is betwixt sundry points of the customs of London, the customs
of the Stannerie, the customs of Kent, the customs of Halifax, both in trying
and executing offenders, and by dealing by virtue of the Queens Instructions
at the Counsel of the Marches of Wales, on the one side: and betwixt sundry
parts of the Common law, on the other side: as might (but for avoiding of
tediousnes) by sundry particulars, be exe^plified. and yet none of those which
practice the^; are by reason of any such notable diversity only, thus threatened
with danger of Praemunire.

In the last rank of matters brought by him to this purpose; I do marshall
the Treatisours shifting answers, unto such objections; as himself imagines
will be, or may be made by those, who defend this kind of oathe, whereof we
are now treating.

First, to the objection made, of the like oaths ministered to defendants in
causes criminal, both in the Courts of Star Chamber and Chancerie: he
answers, that, if it were granted, that the like oaths be there used: yet
would it not follow, that the same might be practiced in courts
Ecclesiastical. and why would it not follow? unless (says he) the like
allowance thereto, and consent of the whole Realm, might be proved. Belike,
if it were not most evident; he would also deny the like oaths to be used in
those two courts. The whole Realm is said to allow, and to consent unto
that, which is enacted by Parliament. Shall the same course then used also in
the Chancerie, that has none Act of Parliament to establish it, be unlawful
in his judgment? for he cannot say, that the whole Realm, either indeed or
representatiuely has given consent hereunto; albeit the prescription thereof
be most ancient; because al and every one in particular, have not had from time
to time, judicial matters there. But yet, since this prescription is good; and
will serve to maintain that course there: why shall it not also alike serve
for Ecclesiastical courts, which have retained the practice of such oath,
beyond all memory of man, and beyond most Records now extant?

Nevertheless, there be also Acts of Parliament to warrant the practice of
these oaths in courts Ecclesiastical; unless they could be proved; to be
either contrary or repugnant to the Prerogative Royal; or else to the
Statutes, laws and customs of this Realm. Neither yet are the examples of
Star Chamber and Chancerie, to any other end by us alleged: but thereby
only to show; that such defendants oaths, inferring confession of some his
own crimes; is neither to be holden unjust, unlawful, unequal, barbarous,
cruel; nor yet Antichristian or Popish, as they be challenged.

For a second answer hereunto, he says: that, examples and Precedents be
weak, where an express law, or certain policy, is to the contrary. as if
he should say, though these two high Temporal courts do practice it: yet is
it contrary to an express law, or certain policy. for else, he says just
nothing to the purpose. and yet he does no less dutifully say it; then he
proves it substantially; even out of the Civil law. viz. ius non ex regula
sumatur, sed ex iure quod est, regula fiat. I pray ye, who ever heard before,
that regula here signifies an example, or a Precedent. The true understanding
therefore of that part of Civil law, is this: when many cases run one way,
so that (for roundnes, or better memories sake) they have been (by Judicious
men) contrived into a summarie rule: then whatsoever might be comprised under
the generality of the words of such rule, was not straight way to be reckoned
for law. because it is not possible (in this great weakness of man's wit) so
to comprehend the law, being to guide such infinite variety of men's
particular external actions in a brief rule; as that it shall not have sundry
exceptions and limitations: and therefore raro est quin regula fallat. And
again in this place, non ex regula ius sumitur, etc. that is, you can not
conclude it necessarily to be law: because you may apply unto it, some rule of
law: but because the law runs accordingly in sundry cases: you may
therefore conveniently draw them into a short rule, which some do call
maxims in law, yet abusiuely.

Thirdly he says to this objection: that by better Logic we might conclude
thus, viz. because in these two courts, answers be put in upon oath;
therefore the same may be used in the Kings Bench, and common Pleas: which
nevertheless were an absurd conclusion. No Sir, it is so far from better,
that it is not any Logic at all so to conclude; except you add more unto it.
for if you could truly add, that the Kings Bench and common Pleas had time
out of mind used that course for answers to Bills in crimes not capital, nor
tending to mutilation of limme; which may be verified of courts
Ecclesiastical, besides the direction of that law, by which they proceed:
then, with very good Logic might you conclude thus: the same course has time
out of mind been used in all those courts, and it is not unjust nor cruel
etc. in the one, and therefore not in the other. for the diversity of places
where they sit, nor diversity of persons which do sit as Judges, nor any
other like circumstance; cannot make a matter just and equal, if (in his own
nature and simply) it were unjust, cruel, or barbarous, as this is often by
him, and others challenged to be.

Fourthly he says, that in the Star Chamber, there is a bill of complaint
formerly exhibited: and so be there Articles in an Ecclesiastical court.

Fifthly, that, there is also a known accuser: Not always an accuser; for the
office or common Interest of the Prince (whose the court is) oftentimes is
there excited and stirred up by her Majesty's Attorney or Solicitour; without
any danger of them, to be punished, or condemned in charges, though the matter
should not fall out fully against the defendants: even as it is in courts
Ecclesiastical, when they proceed of Office. albeit these more often
proceed, having a private Prosecutour (especially in the court of Commission)
then they do ex mero officio.

Sixthly; that, in the Star Chamber, they have a copy of the complaint: yet
he himself does limit it thus, viz. so it be not ore tenus. Well then (upon
some good occasion) it is none injustice; though the defendant want a copy
altogether, of the matter objected, but in all ordinary courts, and in the
Commission Ecclesiastical (at the furthest when they have answered the
articles) they have copies of them.

Seventhly, in the Star Chamber, the defendants are allowed counsel in
answering the Bill: and yet, when this is ore tenus, he knows they cannot
have counsel, neither are they there allowed any counsel for answering to
Interrogatories; nor yet to have a copy of them, til they have fully answered
to them. which Interrogatories upon crimes in that court, have a correspondence
unto articles criminal, preferred in Ecclesiastical courts.

Lastly, (says he) in the Star Chamber, if the Interrogatories be
impertinent; the defendant (without offense) may refuse to answer them: and so
may he refuse also to answer such articles in an Ecclesiastical court. But
who shall then judge, whether they be impertinent, or not? shall the party
himself? no verily, but, (as it is in the Star Chamber) the court it self:
or else some of them that are skillful in law; being thereunto required by the
rest.

Whereupon, what great difference there is in any circumstance, much less in
matter of substance, betwixt the proceedings in these courts, may easily be
considered: howsoever he do largely conclude thereupon (after his old manner)
that there be mighty and great dissimilitudes. For in his conclusion hereof,
he encludeth also other differences more bitterly, and not spoken of at all in
any his premises, whereupon he infers it, albeit that such his additions be
also very untrue: as that, Ecclesiastical courts give oaths without all
course of judgment: that the oaths there, are made suddenly, without all
discretion; upon uncertain demands: that their oaths do foolishly wander,
at the doubtful will of a subtle and slye opposer: and that the oathe in
Ecclesiastical courts, constrains the revealing of words, deeds, and
thoughts, though never offensive to any. Belike then, where others be offended,
he minds and will not stick to allow unto those courts, the ministering even
of these general oaths: which he so often (besides the purpose) harpeth upon.

Let us then lay aside these imputations (being utterly untrue) which he
coucheth together in his conclusion, made of this point, viz. concerning the
like course objected to be used in the Star Chamber. what then do all, or
any the former differences of proceeding by him noted; betwixt the
Star Chamber, and courts Ecclesiastical make, to prove the unlawfulness of
ministering an oath in a criminal cause, which is the matter only in issue
here betwixt us? yea, though they were admitted to be (indeed) differences,
which is showed, to be far otherwise? For albeit, these courts should differ
in many other points, yet such difference cannot prove an equity to be in
the very like oath, when it is used in the Star Chamber, and an iniquity to
be in it, when an Ecclesiastical court does (in the like case) minister it.
Truly, he might out of those differences as well conclude thus: the
Star Chamber is kept, and the oath is ministered at Westminster: and they have
in that court, but three or four Atturneys: therefore the very like oath
ministered in the Consistory at Paul's, where there be a dozen Procurators
sometimes present, is unjust, and unequal. This therefore falls into that
point, which (in the Epistle to the Reader) I affirmed to be his sophistical
answering of objections.

He also doubts, that the Statute authorizing the attaching of heretics by
Ordinaries, made 2. H. 4. ca. 15. which he terms, the twice damned, and
repealed Statute, and a bloody and boiling law: will be alleged, for proof
of these oaths. In truth we should be brought to a very strait exigend; if
we were forced (as he is) to run unto such repealed statutes, for proof of
any principal point in controversy.

Yet let us see how he assayeth to untie this knot; which he does two ways.
First he says, it appears not; that thereby any authority was given to
impose any such general oath. if then no such thing appear, why does the
Notegatherer, so confidently, Repugnancie between the Treatisour and
Notegatherer.
and so often affirm; that this oath was then first brought in and
established: and therefore he calls that, the statute ex officio, though ex
officio or oath be not once named there? thereby confounding the very course of
proceeding, with that one Act thereof, viz. of ministering an oath.

The Treatisour goes further, and says; it appears not, that any authority
was thereby given, to compel by oath, the prisoner to become his own Accuser:
for that (and especially in causes of life and death) had been against the
laws and justice of the land. By which restraint in this word (especially) he
seems little less then to yield, that in other cases not capital; this
oath is not against the laws, nor justice of the land. But it is very untrue
to think, that whatsoever is wholly forborne in Temporal courts, should
therefore (straight way) be accounted to be against them. For there is great
difference betwixt not using, or forbearing, and plain forbidding of a thing
to be done.

Furthermore, we are commanded in 1. Pet. ca. 3. ver. 15.
Scripture, to be ready to give an account to every one that asks us a
reason, of the hope that is in us, with meeknes and fear. If to every one,
much more to a Magistrate. What then if he (having also authority to impose
oaths) will exact it in this case? may he not as lawfully do it, as without
oath, he may ask and interrogate the party? Now it is no more lawful before
God, for us (being but asked of our faith, or hope, even by a private man) to
dally with him, or to say untruly, though it might save our life: then we may
say untruly, when we be sworn to tell the truth thereof unto a Magistrate.
Ecclesiast. 4. ver. 30.
do not gain say the truth in any case (says the wiseman:) and again, be
Ecclesiast. 41. ver. 21.
ashamed of untruth before a Magistrate; or a man in authority. So that
hereupon it may seem, to be against Gods law; to set any man at liberty from
answering truly, touching his faith and hope; and so in heresy: when, how,
and by whomsoever, he shall be interrogated; yea though danger of death might
ensue thereby unto him.

His second answer to that statute, is, that, if this oath be employed under
the word of Canonical sanctions, mentioned in that statute, then was it no
binding law; nor gave sufficient authority, etc. because all laws of man,
repugnant to the law of God, are merely void. Where he assumeth as granted;
that this oath is repugnant to Gods law, which shall (God willing) be proved
far otherwise.

The last point, which to this purpose he supposes will be objected, is; that,
the kings heretofore have granted Commissions to examine by oath. This, he
thinks, cannot be proved: and though it could; yet (says he) such
Commissions are against law, and therefore void. Therefore, until they be
proved to be herein against law, this answer will fall to naught; and the
objection will remain till then good and sound. And so I end this tedious
Chapter, made in answer of all that which I find brought for proof; that
these oaths (whereof we argue) should be contrary or repugnant, unto the
statutes, common law, or customs of this Realm.

CHAP. VIII. That ministering of such oaths, is by the Laws of the Realm,
allowed unto Judges of Ecclesiastical courts: and some few objections made to
the contrary, are answered.
THat the laws of the Realm allow it unto courts Ecclesiastical (which
point comes next to be declared) these few allegatio^s following, may suffice.
(...). H. 5. ca. (...).
Ordinaries are authorized, to enquire of the foundation, estate, and
governance of Hospitals (being not of the Kings foundation) and of all other
matters necessary in that behalf; and upon that, to make correction and
reformation: how? after the laws of holy Church, as to them belongs.

Now by those laws, Inquiry, touching crimes not capital, is made by the
defendants oath: as in the next Chapter following is declared. So that (if any
such faults be) the persons visited are to discover them, upon their oaths:
which cannot be intended, but that they may be criminal and penal to them
selves: because the statute says, that they are to be corrected and reformed.

If ^
Clerks be convicted before Ordinaries of incontinency, by examination, and by
other lawful proof requisite by the laws of holy Church, they may be
committed to ward. But it is showed before, that examination (even at the common
law, like as at the Ecclesiastical) is upon oath. So that such oath is (by the
judgment of that statute) deemed a lawful proof, requisite by the laws of
holy Church.

Executors and 21. H. 8. ca. 5.
administrators must give oath (before Ordinaries) of the truth of such
Inuentaries, as they do exhibit. Yet this may implye in it, either perjury,
or some discovery of a man's own fault; if he have dealt therein corruptly and
fraudulently.

And another 27. H. 8. ca. 10.
statute (though standing repealed) yet gives good testimony, that not only
Inquiry at an Ordinaries visitation; but also, that the parties own
examination, of whom the inquiry criminal ex officio is made; is holden for
a due course of the law ecclesiastical, not disallowed of by the laws of the
Realm. And such examination is done by oath, according both to that law, and
to the Temporal in like behalf; as has been showed out of Justice Brooks
abridgement.

Moreover 1. Eliz. ca. 2.
Ordinaries are authorized to enquire and to punish, etc. the violation of the
Act made for uniformity of common prayer: how? even, as heretofore has been
used in like cases, by the Queens ecclesiastical laws. But such inquiry
general is prescribed, and so was always practiced, by the oaths of men: and
the inquiry special is, and was used by the defendants own oath, in case he
should stand in denial.

The oath of 5. Eliz. ca. 1.
Supremacy may be given ex officio (by any Ordinary) to a Clerk, being
within his jurisdiction: yet if such Clerk do carry a contrary persuasion, it
urges him to reveal, and discover himself, and his erroneous opinion, by
refusal of the oath, or else to be foresworne. which if he list not to be, but
rather refuse; then falls he (thereby) into a Praemunire, which puts him
out of the Queens protection, forfeiteth all his lands, etc. and condemns
him to perpetual imprisonment.

In a statute made against 5. Eliz. ca. 9.
perjury the same time; this prouiso is contained: yt the said Act, nor any
thing therein contained, shall not extend to any spiritual or ecclesiastical
court, or courts within the Realm of England or Wales, or the Marches of the
same: but that al and every such offender and offenders, that shall offend in
form aforesaid; shall, and may be punished, by such usual and ordinary
laws, as heretofore has been, and yet is used and frequented, in the said
Ecclesiastical courts: any thing in this present Act to the contrary
notwithstanding. Where (I think) it will not be doubted, but that under that
word punish, is understood, the whole course also used by those laws, which
must neeedes go before and do tend to the conuicting of such faults, as be
(thereby) to be punished. It was never claimed, nor used by any Ecclesiastical
courts either before or after; to punish any perjury or subornation of
perjury; but either for breach of oaths voluntarily taken, called laesio
fidei (in sort as is showed in the first part) or else for perjury or
subornation thereof committed in an Ecclesiastical court, and matter. So that
it can not be intended; but that this statute, meaning to reserve unto courts
Ecclesiastical if not more, yet at least the punishment of all false oaths
there made, did mind withal, rather to establish then to prejudice oaths
there appointed to be taken, by such usual and ordinary laws
Ecclesiastical. For if oaths (especially in criminal causes) were never
there to be taken: there could then be none at all, or at least there would be
much less danger, of any perjury and breach of oath.

In the 5. Eliz. ca. 23.
statute de exco^municato capie^do, sundry grievous crimes (being of
ecclesiastical conusance) are reckoned up. thereby it is also provided, that
the significauit from the Ordinary, upon any of them, must co^teine, that the
excommunication proceeded upon some cause or contempt of some original matter
of some of the said crimes, there mentioned. Now it is sure, that after
appearance yielded; co^tempts most usually are committed, by not performing
something that is commanded, according to that law. as by refusing to swear;
or being sworn, to answer directly, as a man ought. So that this statute
leaves the determination of all such contempts to the disposition of that law,
by which the proceeding is made.

I have touched (before in the second part) certain cases; where the common law
not only allows, but also (in some sort above the other course) does
privilege unto courts Ecclesiastical the proceeding ex officio, against crimes
punishable by that Iuridiction. As namely, that in proceeding against an
offense, for laying violent hands upon a Clerk; Bryan and Littleton held (no
man gainesaying it) that the M. 20. Ed. 4. 10.
spiritual court may punish it ex officio, but not at the suit of the party,
least the beater be thereby kept from his absolution, till some temporal
duty, be contented and paid.

And T. 12. H. 7. fol. 22.
Mordant was of opinion; that if a man be sued by a party prolaesione fidei, in
not paying a sum of money promised; there shall lie a prohibition: yet if the
Judge ecclesiastical shall do it ex officio, that then no prohibition shall
lie. And a judgment given long before in the book of Lib. 22. Assis. fol. 70.
Assizes, seems to accord herewith, and to strengthen this opinion.

Fitzherbert in his Nouanaturabreuium, reports the Law to be: that an Nou.
not. breu. tit. consultation. fo 50. and deinceps.
Ordinary may cite, and proceed against a man ex officio. pro violenta manuum
iniectione in clericum. Likewise for tithes detained in the time of the
vacation of a Benefice: so also he may cite those, who refuse to mayntaine a
Curate or Chapleine, and for fornication and like offenses.

But by the law ecclesiastical, according to which the proceeding is, the
course of proceeding against crimes and offenses (for the most part) is by the
parties corporal oathe unto articles or positions of the very crime it self,
so there be precedent, a donunciation, a fame, notoriousnes of the fact,
taking in the manner, or any other matter, sufficient in law, to open a way to
such Inquiry.

That inquiry is allowed by common law unto Courts ecclesiastical (and so
consequently these oaths) appears also further, by two precedents of
consultations, set down in the Register. The Register. tit. Consultat. fol. 48.
a.
former of them mentions and allows of an Inquisition made by the Deane of
Yorkes Official, and of his proceeding thereupon, for defects in a Chancell,
and for want of sundry ornaments, and other requisites in a Church.

The Ibid. fol. 54. b.
other (beside a consultation) does contain also a commandment to the
Ordinary, to take full information, even by way of Inquisition, and by other
means, touching the value of tithes, and to certify into the Chancerie. Now
al Inquiry generally (as is showed before) is ex officio; and is by oaths of
other men in general inquiry; and in processu informatiuo: and may be by the
oath of the defendant, in processu punitiuo, so the crime be not capital, or
of multilation of limme.

But to speak more particularly for proceeding of Office; we find there, that
an Ibid. fol. 51. b.
Ordinary proceeded ex officio, as for a crime; against a parishioner for
tithes detained by him, whiles a benefice was vacant.

That it is Ibid. fol. 49. (...).
allowed unto them to proceed against crimes, ad correctionem animae, we have
a precedent there, of an Ordinaries proceeding against a lay man for usury,
even at the instance of a party grieved.

That against crimes, defects, and excesses, they may proceed and object
articles ex ossicio; Ibid. fo. 51. b.
appears by the precede^t there set down; where an Ordinary proceeded ex
officio, to the interdicting of a church; by reason a part of divine service
(as it was then holden) founded to be used in that Church, was withdrawn.

Where an Ibid. fo. 43. b.
Ordinary proceeded ex officij sui debito, to the correcting of crimes and
excesses of those, that were under his Jurisdiction: and among others, objected
articles against a Knight, for not sufficient reparations of a Church, tending
to the correction of his soul, by reason of his deteining of that which he
ought not: this is there allowed, to belong to the court Ecclesiastical, and
to the liberties of the Church.

Likewise we find there, an Ibid. fo. 51. a.
Ordinaries dealing allowed; who proceeded ex officio against one, that had
laid violent hands upon a Clearke, so far forth as he dealt but for
correction of the delinquent, to the excommunication of him, and punishment of
his sin, without adiudging any amends to the party wronged: for this
belongs to a Temporal Court.

Ibid. fo. 50. a. and b.
Upon a public fame arisen, that a certain parishioner did with hold his due
oblations, refused to be confessed to the priest, and to receive the communion
at least once a year: the Ordinary ex officio did call him, to the intent to
inflict some corporal pain upon him, for correction of his soul: and this
proceeding is there allowed unto Ordinaries, to be of their jurisdiction, and
lawful.

One Ibid. 54. b. and 55. a.
Lindsey a public Notary, being infamed as well of a crimeof fornication (for so
I take it, that it ought to be read) by him committed; as for conte^pts done to
that court: was ex officio proceeded against, by ye Deane of the Arches, for
correction of his soul and manners. both which are there allowed (together with
such proceeding) to belong to ye liberty of the church, and to eccles.
jurisdiction.

In which copy of consultation it is to be noted, that toward the end thereof,
and also in the title of it in the margent; this word defamationis, is used in
steed of the word fornicationis: for actions of defamatio^ be seldom, or never
sued ex officio, but at the instance of some party grieved. Besides mention is
there made of committing it within that jurisdiction; which, in desamation
(that is not properly said to be committed) is not material, so the defendant
remain then in that jurisdiction. and therefore, where in the beginning of
that Writ, the words are printed, Super formationis, etc. and conuerso (which
has no sense nor yet is any Latin) no doubt it ought to be super crimine
fornicationis etc. commisso.

As for the Ibid. fol. 45. (...).
crime of fornication, it is twice (besides) noted by the Register, that
Ordinaries proceeded against it, in that form. In the first whereof it is said,
that the Ordinary, proceeded ex officij debito (as bound by his office and
duty) against a chapleine that kept a co^cubine publicly to the danger of his
own soul, and with scandal of others. Therefore this crime was objected
against him ex officio, for his correction, and for reformation of his manners.

In the Ibid. fol. 57. b.
later of them, the Official of Canterb. proceeded ex officio against a vicar
(for the same crime, and for conte^pts also by him made against that court) ad
correctione^ animae suae. And there it is said of both the faults, as in all the
former co^sultatio^s to like effect: that this is cognitio spiritualis quae ad
foru^ Ecclesiasticum pertinet, in praemissis. And the said writ runs thus:
Cum vos nuper ex officio vestro, fama publica referente, quod T. etc. vestrae
iurisdictionis C. in amplexibus fornicarijs tenet: ipsum cora^ vobis in curia
christianitatis pro correctione animae suae, in hac part citari feceritis,
procedentes contra eum (ibidem) iuxta canonicas sanctiones etc. vobis
significamus, quod in causis praedictis ex officio vestro, quatenus ad
correctionem ipsius vicarij, and non concernunt placita de catallis and
debitis, in curia Christianitatis procedere, and vlterius ibidem pro salute
animae suae statuere and facere poteritis, quod ad officium vestrum speciale
noueritis de iure pertinere, prohibitione nostra praedicta non obstante.

So that by these so many precede^ts of consultations, by citations, and
proceeding against crimes etc. (being of that jurisdiction) by way of
inquisition or enquiry, and by ye authorizing of ecclesiastical judges in all
of the^, to proceed therein, and to do, quod ad forum ecclesiasticu^ nouerint
pertinere: and by the obiecting of the crimes to the parties enquired of, ex
officio iuxta canonicas sanctiones, ius, and libertate^ eccl. (which maybe by
oath, in matters as well prohibita quia mala, as mala quia prohibita) and
against lay, as well as ecclesiastical persons; we do conclude, and gather;
that by so many judgments of the common law for crimes of ecclesiastical
conisance (and consequently in matters neither Testamentarie, nor Matrimonial)
any persons, whether lay or ecclesiastical, being under that jurisdiction, may
be cited, (though against their wills) by Ordinaries and Judges Ecclesiastical
ex officio ipsorum mero. And upon appearance, may by censures ecclesiastical
etc. be urged upon their oaths unto examination; and to answer matter, though
it concern their own crimes. And therefore, that the laws of this land do
warrant and allow, the ministering of that oath (whereof we entreat) unto Courts
ecclesiastical.

We do only say, that the defendant may lawfully be urged, in due proceeding
of office to answer concerning some crimes of his own, by virtue of his
oathe. But according to the Treatisour, Note-gatherer, and others, who seem to
confound all proceeding ex officio; with the very ministering of an oathe to a
defendant, touching a crime objected against him; we might a great deal more
peremptorily conclude; that if these two (as they hold) be but (in truth) all
one thing, then wheresoever proceeding of office is, there such oathe (of
necessity) must be also ministered and taken.

These proofs (last alleged) are gathered out of Writtes of Consultation,
after that (by the parties conuented) Prohibitions had been brought, to
remove the causes from ecclesiastical Courts. And therefore no doubt, but
that the Law (before the Consultations awarded) was thoroughly debated; and
that the parties delinquent were cited, and proceeded with altogether against
their wills. For, can any be so simple, as once to imagine, that a man who is
cited to answer, in a cause criminal, and to be punished or corrected for it,
will willingly appear and answer; if he need not to come at all, and were
therein also, by Law protected? Or that he will be at cost, to procure a
prohibitio^ to stay the dealing; where he is willing enough to be proceeded
with?

But besides allowance hereof, by the Statutes and Common Law unto Courts
ecclesiastical; the practice also by time immemoriall has run accordingly;
as may positiuely appear by Acts of Ecclesiastical Courts, and (by way of
abnegation) may be showed from the Records at the common Law. In that (as I
think) it will not in them be found; that any Prohibition (has upon this
point only) been awarded thence: or at least, upon debate for obtaining of a
Consultation, such has not stood, nor been maintained.

And albeit, either upon this consideration, or some other as weak, certain
evil disposed and factious persons; have long agone disputed and maintained
opinion, against oaths ministered both in Courts temporal and
Ecclesiastical; yet upon general mislike of such fond opinions (as may be
gathered) a Provincial constitution was then agreed upon and concluded; to
make even all disputations, against oaths, ministered in either court, to be
heresy. which Constitution I have not hitherto found to have been misliked,
much less condemned at any time since; as contrary to any the laws or policy
of this land. Let Constit proud haereticis. c, nullus.
no man (says that Constitution) presume to dispute etc. against oaths which
are made either in Ecclesiastical or temporal Courts in cases accustomed,
and in usual manner, etc. and from henceforth, let it be commonly taught and
preached; that oaths may lawfully be taken by all (to whom it appertains) by
touching the holy Gospels, and upon them; in all cases by law expressed, and
which are usual in both courts. Seeing then it is most apparent, that the
oaths (which we here dispute of) are both expressed and prescribed by laws
Civil and Ecclesiastical; and were also there used, both at the very time of
such Constitution, and long before: it will hereupon follow, that the like oaths
were then also used in temporal Courts, and were (by that Constitution) as well
allowed unto Ecclesiastical courts, as they were in their own temporal
courts. Which thing is so much the more manifest, in that, a little Treatise
purposely compiled (I take it) by Saint German in the time of king Hen. 8. even
against sundry such Constitutions, both Legatine and Provincial; yet says
thus of this very point, viz. A Treatise concerning Constit. Provincial and
Legatine. ca. 23. printed by Tho. Godfrey.
though such a man's saying viz against usual oaths, in both courts be untrue;
yet it is none heresy. He yields then, that, in all cases then accustomed in
both courts; oaths might lawfully, and also ought to be taken.

The practice of this oathe (as in all former times) so was it also received
and used, in the time of king Henry the eight, as well after the Papacy was
overthrown here, as before: and so has it continued ever since.

And after his time, the Acts and Mon. 2. edit. 2. tom. fol. 1495.
Lords of the Counsel, finding Bonner the^ B. of London, something slack in his
duty; did enioine him to call before him al refusers to come to divine service,
and to search out, convent, and punish al adulterers, according to the
ecclesiastical laws.

The Ibid. fol. 1501.
kings commissioners visiting the Church of Paul's did examine al the^ of that
church by virtue of their oathe; touching their doctrine and conversation of
life. Whereupon one John Painter and others, did confess adultery even by
themselves to have been committed. yet this was a general inquiry.

The Kings Ibid. fol. 1511.
commission to proceed against Bonner, affirms; that the commissioner, shall
proceed, as well by mere office: as also by way of denu^ciation, and by either
of the^, or by any other means, by their discretions. By virtue Ibid. fol. 1512.
whereof, they charged him with a corporal oath, ex officio, in form of law, to
answer the positio^s, that should be ministered: which upon his oath taken, were
after ministered unto him. But Ibid. fol. 1516.
for that he would not answer them fully, he was pronounced contumax and pro
confesso, and was remaunded back to prison as before.

The Ibid. fol. 1536.
proceedings about that time also, against Ste. Gardener, and the oath
ministered to him, was ex officio, in matters criminal and penal: as appears
by the sentence of deprivation from his Bishopric of Winchester. And yet
besides Bishops, there were some of the Kings counsel, some Ciuilians, and
also some Judges of the land, and other common lawyers, who were then
commissioners in that cause: and knew the laws as sufficiently well; as any
does, which now impugneth this course.

In her Circa 3. aut 4. regni domninae Elizabethae reginae.
Majesty's time that now is, a special commission was directed forth by her
highness unto certain great persons both ecclesiastical, and lay; whereof diverse
were of the privy counsel, to proceed, by way of enquiry ex officio, against 2.
great and honorable personages, in a cause of correction for incontinency, for
so the commission did run. Whereupon they were accordingly called, and
proceeded with; and were put to answer the criminal articles, upon their
corporal oaths.

Not only at all general visitations holden in the beginning of her Majesty's
reign, by special commissions grounded upon the stat. 1. El. c. 1. but also
ever since, by virtue of the commissio^s ecclesiastical, this course of
exacting such oaths, has bin practiced and continued. was it then so long
together, against papists and other delinque^is, a most just, and necessary
oath, and such as against which, no good subject (bearing the name of a
professor of the gospel) ever did open his mouth in any dislike: and is it now
become on a sudden, a bloody, cruel, unjust, and more then Spanish Inquisition;
because a few vain, and factious Reformatists, are urged with the self same
manner of oath? Belike laws themselves are but partial, which in respect of
acception of some men's persons, do so quickly turn their nature, from sweet
to sower, and from just to unjust?

When D. Grindal late Archb. of Canterb. was B. of London; he complained to the
Lords and others of her Ma. most honorable privy counsel; for that by virtue of
the commission ecclesiastical, he could not so duly and thoroughly proceed, to
the discovery and punishment of certain knights, and other great possessioners
being Recusants (as he ought) because some Ciuilians and common lawyers
(supposed the^ by him to be like affected) did sinisterly animate and advise
them not to take oath, to answer unto any articles objected ex officio; unless
some fame by presentment, or such like, were first found against the^, which
would prove (said the B.) a long, troublesome, and chargeable course, if it
should be pursued; seeing some of the^ dwelt in remote places of the Realm,
where as the people also stood like affected; so that they would never be
induced, to make any such presentment or discovery. and yet that the matter was
by denunciations, by vehement presumptions, and by good evidence given unto the
commissioners; sufficiently otherwise detected; or was so notorious, as that
(by law) they might ground an Enquiry of office, against the^; as by others,
no less sound Lawyers, he was informed. For redress whereof, and for
furtherance of Justice, it pleased their honorable LL. to call some both of the
Ciuilians, and common lawyers before the^; to the Counsel board, that had given
such advise. and thereupon, three of the doctors, and one counselor at law,
were by the^ committed to the Fleet. which (I think) some of their honorable
LL. and others yet remaining, can and do well remember.

By all which here premised it does appear, how sufficiently and manifoldly our
intention (in this behalf) is grounded: and likewise to how small purpose the
Treatisor resoneth, where he gathers; that ecclesiast. courts must be
restrained by the Q. prerogative roial, and common laws, in that their
jurisdiction is from the Crown. Considering, none of the defenders of this oath
will deny, either the antecedent, or consequence hereof. But that which covertly
he would thence infer, viz. that therefore they may not give oths, but as the
common law does; will not any way follow thereupon: because the Q. prerogative
royal, and common laws, are so far from restraining or forbidding these
oaths; that (as it has been proved) they allow them. and the Temporal
Courts (in many like cases) use not so much as a different course from this;
which is in special controversy.

Now if it shall be said, which also some very learned men do hold (as the
Treatisour confesses) that the Statute law made the first of her Majesty,
warranteth, and allows this manner of oathe: then to show this to be (as he
conceiueth it) absurd; he tells us of some other points also defended (upon
the general words of that Act, and of the Commission) by the said learned
men; which seem unto him to be also no less absurdities, then is the
ministering an oath in a cause criminal; and therefore the one no better
warranted thereby, then the other, for to what other purpose then this, he
should bring them, I cannot possibly conjecture.

The first fault he finds with such learned men's sayings, is: for that they
judge it to be warranted by the Act, and by the Commission to put men to oaths;
none accusation, suit, or lawful informatio^, presentment, or indictment,
iudicially preceding, or depending. He may father upon such learned men what
he please: but is it likely that he himself would thus object; as if he
required bills of Information and Inditements (as it is at the common law) to be
used also in courts ecclesiastical, seeing both himself, and the Note-gatherer
do tie the Commission to causes only ecclesiastical, and they also to be dealt
in, only ecclesiastically? Such learned men's sayings, may well and truly be
defended: as namely, when either the offense is notorious, or is known to the
Judges themselves, to be dangerous and scandalous to be suffered. For these two
cases be out of all those that he names: yea though he should (most
universally) take suite for any prosecution by another, and information for any
private credible suggestion, or denunciation made.

The second error which he assigns to be holden by them: is, for that,
secret information may be admitted, suppresso nomine notificantis: and he
calls such informations, secret accusations, and the men malicious
calumniators: adding, that all good laws, and well governed common wealths,
have such hidden backbyters, for apparent accusers. But if all good Laws and
well governed commonweals do (indeed) hold such men for apparent accusers;
then does it follow; that, when such Information is given, there is no want of
an apparent accusation. Yet in very deed, every relation made to a Magistrate
by such, as will not prosecute, nor (perhaps) be seen in the cause, for some
good consideration; is not by any law, nor in any common weal that I know of;
holden for an accusation, for a malicious calumniation, or for any secret
backbiting, nor yet deservedly (by any necessity) is so to be accounted. For
besides other countries which I have read of; such private informations have
(oftentimes) their manifold good use, even in this Realm, yea and amongs each
degree of Magistrates. And if they should be Vide 2. part, page 85.
wholly rejected, or neglected; might (sometime) bring an whole subversion unto
us all.

I pray, were those that gave the first information of Babingtons damnable
conspiracy, to be misliked, as secret backbiters? or was the examination of
these traitors, and the proceedings unjust; because the names of the
intelligence-giuers, were to this day suppressed? By this example then you may
wey, and consider, of sundry the like. Howbeit such informations in ordinary
courts Ecclesiastical, be not holden for sufficient ground of Special
Inquiry; except they be very frequent, and the offense scandalous: and in
Commssion courts, they be as rarely received, as in any courts Temporal of
this Realm whatsoever, and then but from very great, and credible persons.

The third fault he finds with such learnedmens opinions, is; that, the Judge
may profess himself to be an Accuser: which lawless proceeding, the Justice
of this land (he says) detesteth: for that no man may be accuser, and witness:
or Inditour, and a Iurour: therefore much less may the Judge be an Accuser.
For answer whereof, first the laws civil and ecclesiastical, hold not the
Judge proceeding of office to be any accuser: but that whereupon the Enquiry is
grounded, to represent the accusation, and so there is no need for them to
plead such plea, as he here surmiseth. Secondly, that, an accuser may (in some
case and sort) be a witness, etc. is Vide 2. part. page 110. and 111.
elsewhere declared: and so his antecedent false. Thirdly, his reason follows
not: for why might not a Judge be an accuser: albeit neither an accuser could
be a witness, nor the Inditour a Iurour? Fourthly, if it were true, that the
Justice of this land, and the common law did not use something, which an
Ecclesiastical court does: may it thereupon be inferred, that therein is a
contrariety, and thereby (for such difference only) a detestation of the
other course? This manner of reasoning is more common with him and others, in
these causes; then any way sound and substantial. For the one court does it,
and the other does it not, be no contraries; nor yet propositions in any other
degree of opposition: in that, subiectum propositionis in both, is not the
same, and therefore do import no more, but a diversity. For is this (which is
the very like) any good reason, viz. an Ecclesiastical court reads
dissinitiue sentences de scripto, but a Temporal court does it not, in giving
judgment, therefore there is contrariety betwixt these courts? and so the
reading de scripto, in a court ecclesiastical utterly unlawful? Whereof I
thought it not amiss, once for all to advertise the Reader, because this
erroneous argument is so usual.

Lastly, if all these were to be granted unto the Treatisour, even as he
sets them down; yet what would it avail his cause? For admit these
collections were absurdly gathered, from the generality of the words of the Act
and Commission; would it therefore follow, that authority, to minister oaths to
defenda^ts in causes criminal, could not thence be argued without absurdities,
being wholly another point? why? if every thing cannot well be inferred
thereon, may therefore nothing at all be? Yet upon these and such like
speeches, rather the^ reasons of his, (elsewhere by sundry occasions touched)
the Treatisour wishes; the said learned men wiselier to advise these
Commisioners ecclesiastical, to respect the ends expressed in the statute,
viz. the pleasure of God, increase of virtue, conservation of peace and unity
of this Realm: rather then the ample and large words of the statute, and
height of their Jurisdiction, as if these ends, could not possibly concur,
with tender of such oaths. But whensoever, he, or any other learned or
unlearned, have sufficiently (indeed) proved, that these cannot stand
together; I doubt not, but that the Commisioners, will take it, as a great
benefit, to have bin instructed by the^ in a point touching the pleasure of
God, increase of virtue, and conservation of unity; which by most of their
large travels in Divinity, by themselves they have not hitherto found.
Howbeit, this last part of his saying seems unto me to sound; as if he would
not stick any more, to grant unto us, that the large words of the Act do allow
of this oath. So that we find nothing any way material by him alleged, to
impeach our former conclusion, viz. that the common laws, and statutes of this
Realm, allow such oaths to be tendered by Ecclesiastical Judges. and therefore
the oath of the party in some matter of crime, that may be da^mageable and
penal unto him; is both in practice, and is allowed also to be practiced (in
courts ecclesiastical) by ye laws of this realm.

CHAP. IX. That such oath touching a man's own crime is allowed, both by the
Canon and Civil laws: how far, and in what sort: and that the like is
established, and thought equal, by the laws and customs of sundry other
nations, as well ancient, as modern.
Seeing then the giving of an oath in a cause criminal, and penal to a man's
own self; is practiced by the laws of the Realm, and allowed by them, unto
courts Ecclesiastical: in both which respects, such Canons, as prescribe it,
are by statute warranted to be still used, as they were before the making of
the Act. 25. H. 8. and in truth have been always since: let us therefore see,
whether this course be justifiable also by Canon and Civil laws, and by them
allowed and practiced.

First, the laws of the realm, that do allow certain matters to be of
ecclesiastical conusance, cannot be intended, but to allow an ecclesiastical
form of proceeding, by such laws received. For it were as unreasonable to
bar them from proceeding in a cause ecclesiastical, according to that law:
as it would be to require of them to deal, by way of Inditements and Iuries.
Those laws are so plentisull in this point, that it were vain to set down
but a tenth part of that, which in this behalf, might be said. Therefore I
hold it best to show unto you, what is the law herein (agreeable also to the
practice in ordinary courts ecclesiastical) as I conceive it; in as great
briefnes, as I can. which may both declare, that by those laws it is allowed,
how far, and why it is lawful: and may also serve to answer (by true
distinction) unto all objections, drawn out of either of those laws, against
this course.

An oath touching a criminal position, or matter, is either taken by a witness,
or by a party. A witness (by the very nature of testimony) must depose
indifferently, as well for the party against whom he is produced, as for him,
which produces him. And therefore is to answer truly, not only to the
positions and articles, given in by him, by whom he is produced: but also, unto
the lawful and pertinent Interrogatories, ministered even by the adverse part.
In which Interrogatories, two several sorts of matters may be contained;
tending to disable him, from giving testimony. The first is an Interrogatorie
tending to the discovery of his own turpitude: and unto Felinus in ca. cum
causam. de testibus. nu. 10. per communem opinionem.
this, whether it concern any crime supposed to be committed by the witness, or
his confession thereof; or the fame and infamy against him of such crime; or a
sentence thereof; or an excommunication (thereupon) gone out against him, or
any such like matter; he is not bound to answer upon his oath, though he have
done penance for it, and thereby be presumed, to be reformed. The reason
hereof, is truly alleged to be this; Io. Andr. in ca. 2. de confessis. nu. 6.
per c. ex tu. arum. de purgat. Canon. etc.
because; the end of such a criminous Interrogatory, ministered by way of
exception or bar to a witness, or to an accuser; is only to disable him, from
accusing, or witnessing, and not to the acquitall or condemnation of the person
so challenged of the crime; as the end is, where a Purgation of a man's own
self, is to be enjoined: and therefore, no reason to ask it of himself. For
(as one well says) by the Alph. Villag. in Pract. Can. li. 3. c. 13. conclus. 3.
order of charity, each man is bound, to love his own body, and fame, one
degree sooner and nearer, then his neighbors: insomuch, as the love toward
our selves, is made the rule, how to love our neighbors; in which respect it
is said, that, ordinaria charitas incipit a seipsa. and therefore no man is
bound to furnish one that stands and opposes himself against him; even
against himself, in matter of crimes. but (says he) it is otherwise, when a
man is urged to the like, by a Magistrate, that is his competent Judge. Whereby
the reason of the Vide 2. Part. page 36.
privilege of an oath ministered ex officio; above that, which is at the
instance of a party, appears.

The second sort of Interrogatories; tending to the disabling of a witness, is
such, as contain no turpitude in themselves. as Felin. ibid. per Baldum.
Interrogatories, touching his condition, as whether he be bond or free, or of
his poverty, kindred, or aliance, and such like, and to these, he is bound to
answer.

When a criminal matter is objected, as to be answered by him that is party
unto the suite: it either touches the crime of some witness by him produced,
or else the party his own crime: if Specul. de test. iam. de interrogat.
it touches a crime of his own witness; he must answer it by the virtue of
that part of Iuramentum calumniae, by him taken; which is, that he shall not
burden (more then needs) his adversary, in making his proofs; but shall
himself confess a truth therein, when he is asked.

But when it touches the parties own crime, it is of two diverse
considerations: for either, the cause is Ciuilly moved for the private
interest of the prosecutor: or else criminally, for public punishment.

If the suite be but ciuilly moved, the criminous position or interrogatorie,
may concern such a crime; as being concealed, brings benefit, and commodity
to him, with another man's loss. And in Bartol. in l. Manellus.. qui rerum. nu.
30. ff. rerum amotarum.
this case (albeit there be no fame, or no detection precedent) the party is
bound to answer it upon his oath.

But if the concealing of it, cannot procure his gain, with another man's
loss; L. qui iurasse.. qui pater. ff. de iureiur. and ibi glo. l. si a te. ff.
de excep. rei. iudic.
then is not the party himself (in such case) bound to answer a position
criminous so moved by his oath. yet even in this Bartol. vbi supra remissiue.
case, if such crime be notorious, or be otherwise sufficiently discovered by
fame etc. then is he bound to answer it, upon his oath.

Now if it be moved criminally, to the intent of public punishment; it is
either touching a crime altogether hidden, or a crime which (in some sort) is
bruted abroad and manifested. if it be simply hidden, and secret, the L qui
iurasse.. si pater. d. c. inquisitionis ex. de accusat. c. dudum. el. 2. de
electione gl. and Innoc. ibi Specultit de Positionibus.. 7. nu. 40. and est
communis regula secundum Decium. L. sin. C. de edendo. c. qualiter. el. (...).
de accusat. c. si peccauerit. 2. q. 1.
rule is; that a man is not bound to answer such crime, upon his oath: quia
nemo tenetur, propriam turpitudinem reuelare.

And it is De poenitentis. did. 1. c. quis aliquando. ibi. non tibi dico.
alleged out of Chrysostom in the Decrees: Non tibi dico vt te prodas in
publicum, etc.

One reason hereof is; Arg. 6. q. 1. c. si omnia.
because mecre secret sins need not be published, but are to be left unto
God alone: De occultis Ecclesia non iudicat.

And another Canon to like effect, Vrbanus (...). c. erubescant. did. 32.
says thus: We speak of sins manifested: but as for mere secrets, God
(alone) is he, that knows them, and will judge them: where, by secret
sins, he understands such; as are by none inckling and probability
brought unto light, and therefore cannot possibly be denounced in any
particularitie, unto the Judge.

Therefore in general Enquiries (as at visitations) the law prescribes this
form of oath to be taken by them, who are to e. qualiter. el. 1. de accusat.
denounce and present, viz. touching such matters as they know, or believe,
and have in charge (excepting always crimes merely hidden) they shall say the
full truth, and nothing but the truth. In which respect, it is said, that if
Salicet. in l. ea quidem. 17. q. C. de accusat.
an Officer of a Town (as such, which be called in Italy Decani villarum) by
prescript of some statute, be to denounce al misdemeanors committed in that
town, upon a grievous punishment otherwise to be inflicted upon him: yet is
he not thereby bound, to present any secret offense committed by himself.
Nevertheless, I have heard it in the form of the oath (given to grand Iuries
at Assizes and Sessions) contained; that they should enquire of their own,
their fellows, and other men's misdemeanors, which they should have in charge.

A great learned Aquin. in quodlib. 6. q. 8. art. 12. in corpore quaest. vide
plura 2. part. ca. 6. page 42.
Schooleman (by distinction) does thus determine of this point: If the
Adultery be altogether secret, a man is not bound iudicially to confess his
sin: neither in this case, ought an oath of telling the truth, to be
exacted of him: because hidden faults are reserved to Gods own judgment,
according to the 1. Cor. 4. Chap. But when an evil fame runs of adultery
committed, or when there appear some evident tokens, which may induce great
suspicion thereof: or else when it is proved Semiplene, that is, by one good
witness, without exception: then ought an oath (to declare the truth) to be
imposed upon him, and he is then bound to confess the very truth.

Another reason thereof is; that a L. 8.. 1. and. illud. quaeritur. ff. de
interrog.
Judge may not interrogate iudicially: but where he is led thereunto by good
equity. But there is none equity to enquire, of faults that are absolutely
secret and hidden.

And yet there be also certain cases, which are excepted out of this rule: The
first d. c. inquisition is Barthol. in d. l. Marcellus. Abb. in c. cum super de
confessis. Specula. tit. de positionibus.. 7. nu. 40.
is, when the hidden crime is such, as does (by law) hinder the execution of
function Ecclesiastical, or the reteyning of a benfice, as Simonie,
Irregularitie, or such like.

An example Conc. Cartha. 4. relatum a Gratiano di. 50. c. ex poenitentibus.
hereof, we have also in the old Canons of Councels; where it was thus
decreed: Though he be otherwise a very good man, yet let not such be ordained a
Clerk, which is a solemn penitent, viz. such, as (for some crime) has been
put to such grievous and public penance, as was very usual in those straiter
times. But if such happen to be ordained, through the Bishops want of
knowledge of his state; let him be deposed from the Clergy; because at the
time of his ordination, non se prodidit esse poenitentem, he himself bewrayed
not so much. Then much more ought he to open it, upon his oath.

The reason, that in all Arg. 23. q. 5. ca. prodest. and de ^c. nunciat. c.
nisi cum pridem.. 1. and. propter conscientiam. Specul. ibidem. Panor. in c.
cum oporteat de accusat.
such matters, as do hinder the execution of an Ecclesiastical function, the
party himself is to answer, though it be otherwise secret; or that he have
done penance for it) is this: because, (thereby) his own good and safety of
conscience, is procured: least he should (else) wrongfully live upon, and spend
that, which (by law and right) belongs in deed and right to another, and not
unto him. And this holds Bartol. in d. L. Marcellus. nu. 3
generally, whether the matter be ciuilly, or criminally moved; in case by
concealing, the party, that is to answer, shall win and gain, with
another loss: saving, when by such answer of the party; some matter that
was fully before decided, is called (afresh) into question: for then is he not
compellable to answer it again.

The second Specul. ibidem. c. qualiter 2. extra. de accusat. 22. q. 1. c. si
quis per capillum.
exception of the aforesaid rule, touching not urging to reveal secret
faults; is: when as by concealing of the offense, great peril does grow, to
the Church, as in heresy, and dilapidating or spoil and waste, of an
Ecclesiastical living.

If here it be asked, whether a party be compellable to answer an
Interrogatorie, or position touching his own being excommunicated, or not? it
is to be remembered, there be (in law) two kinds of excommunication: One is,
Specul. ibidem. nu. 42. and 43.
excommunicatio Canonis, when as the law inflicteth that censure ipso facto: as
(by statute) for fighting with drawn weapon in the Church, or Churchyard.

Now because this censure so by law inflicted, is always presumed to be just,
and to bind: therefore, we are not bound (by oath) to answer unto a position,
or interrogatorie, diducing our own being excommunicated; no more then we are,
touching our secret faults. The second, is exco^municatio hominis, when as the
censure is but decreed by the Judge. which because it may be unjust, and
without good cause, (in which case it is called Clauis errans) or void and
erroneous (as being decreed, after an appellation is made etc.) therefore it
does not (necessarily) bind, and consequently ought therefore to be answered by
the parties own oath.

Hitherto of offenses merely secret. But when they are by signs or otherwise
(in some lawful sort) manifested abroad, they are then of a far different
consideration. And yet if they be but blown abroad, by reason of an Accusation
co^menced, or by one, who voluntarily makes himself a party, and so is
presumed to do it of malice, or for some other sinister respect: in this case,
the defendant is not to be urged, upon his oath to answer the truth of the
crime; nor yet any thing, which very nearly and presumptiuely infers it.
for no man is bound (simply) to furnish up his adversaries intention, who (at
his own pe^ill) ought to come (otherwise) sufficiently prepared. Nevertheless,
if the Accuser, or party, do make an half proof, as by one upright, and
untouched witness, or by any thing equivalent thereunto in law: then may the
Judge tender to the defendant an oath (which he cannotrefuse) de veritate
ipsius criminis, in way of his purgation, or more clear conviction: by reason
of the interest, which the common weal, or Church has, to have sin
punished, and all scandal thereupon arising, removed. To this effect, a Alph.
Villag. lib. Pract. Can. 1. cap. 5. conclu. 1.
Canonist writes thus: Seeing God alone does know, and is Judge of thoughts
merely secret: and that each man is bound to preserve his own good name,
according to that of S. Augustines, viz. that man is cruel, who is careless
of his good name: it does thereupon follow, that if nothing at all be proved by
the Accusour; that then a man is not bound to confess anything against
himself. And Diaz. cap. 140.
another to like purpose, viz. albeit when the Judge proceeds of office, and
the crime is not fully proved, he may enjoin purgation unto the defendant: yet
is he not bound to do it at the petition of him, who voluntarily offered
himself to be promotor officij: but it is otherwise, when a necessary
promotour, who is assigned by the Judge, does make such petition.

But when the proceeding is to be of mere office, and where the crime is
manifested, and discovered abroad, by some ways and means (sufficient to
ground an Inquiry upon) yet those means not proved before an Ordinary
Judge; the Judge is not thereupon to urge the parties oath, upon the very crime
it self: albeit Spec. ibld. c. qualiter 1.. finali. c. qualiter 2. V. nos
igitur. de accusationib.
he may require him to swear, whether he believe such an infamy do run of
him; or whether he have been adjudged by sentence to be convicted of it:
whether he have at any time confessed it, or whether he believe it, to be
notorious. If he shall deny to take oath to answer but unto these, upon his
credulity: he does thereby incur contumacie, and may be proceeded against,
as convicted of so much, as he wilfully refuses to answer. One reason hereof
is this: because he offends; to charge the office with proof of a matter of
this nature, being of it self no crime, and whereof he knows the very
truth. Another reason is, for that he is not hereby accounted to bewray
himself of any hidden fault; because these points import no crimes of
themselves, and (by common intendement) may be otherwise sufficiently known.

Now if the Specul. ibidem nu. 41. and 42.
party defendant shall deny upon his oathe, all these aforesaid matters,
whereof he is interrogated; and none other sufficient detectio^ besides, being
against him, the^ cannot the Ordinary Judge proceed; to give him an oath
touching the truth of the very crime it self objected: until he shall have
made proof by witnesses, that the party is (in deed) thereof infamed, has
elsewhere confessed it, is convicted thereof, or some such like. For when all
of these, or any of them, is either proved, or by the party himself
confessed iudiciallie: then may the Judge lawfully give unto the party
defendant, an oath; touching the truth of the very crime it self: to the Io.
Andr. in c. dudum. el. 2. de electione.
intent (if the matter fall out true) by due tokens of penitencie to be
enjoined him; he may be reformed, the scandal, and offense removed, and
others terrified from the like.

The equity hereof is manifest: for c. omnibus etc. Presbyter. 2. q. 5. de
purgat. canon. per totum.
upon such infamy, etc. running upon him, and so proved, or confessed, he may
be put to his oathe, with his Compurgators; which is Arg. c. ex part. 3. de
decimis etc per venerabilem. qui filij sunt legitimi.
much more and harder for him to do, then to deliver the truth, upon his own
only confession.

Nevertheless you are not to understand, that this compulsion here spoken of,
to take such oaths; is an absolute, simple, or precise compulsion, but only
causatiue, as Interpreters do call it: Arg. l. deaetate. ff. de interrog.. qui
tacuit. c. fin.. poena. de iura. calumniae.
that is to say, if he refuse to answer, or to purge and clear himself being
infamed, etc. and thereby scandalous, for some fault; he is but therefore to be
declared for convicted, to be suspended, or otherwise to be proceeded against,
as the quality of the cause and law requires: and none other corporal
violence to wring out his assent unto such oath, is to be used.

Yet to prove further, that by these laws, an oath is appointed and may be
ministered in some cases touching a cause criminal: I will (for avoiding of
tediousness) set down only the l. 13. idem Iulianus. ff. de Iureiur. l. 26.
and 28. d. l. vlt. ff. de in litem iurando. l. 11.. 1. ff. rerum amotarum. l.
qui peritorio. ff. de rei venditione. and passim alibi. l. vlt. C. de fide
instrumentorum. Leo. Aug. l. 6.. vlt. C. de his qui ad ecclesiam confugiunt.
Iustinia. A. l. vbi. C. de falsis. l. vlt.. licentia. C. de iure deliberandi.
idem A. l. vlt. C. de iure Dominij impetrando. idem A. Nou. constable. 124. and
Auth. nouo iure. C. de poena Iud. qui male iudicauit. Auth vt litigatores
iurent.. si vero. l. cum apud veteres.. sin autem, in fine. C. de bonis author.
iud. possidendis. l. penult. C. de probationibus. l. in bonae fidei. C. derebus
creditis, and iureiurando; and ibi Apostilla. Nou. 8. constable. 7. and ibid.
glossae and DD. Vide Decianu^. to. 1. 125. nu. 9. 11. q. 3. c. quisquis: and
ibidem q. vlt. c. 1. 35. q. 6. c. si duo. gl in c. ex poenitentibus. 2. q. 6.
in toto. 6. q. 5. c. vlt. Item in princ. cum c. sequ. 15. q 5. etc. si quis de
gradu. 4. etc. sequ. ex. de purga. Canonica. etc. 10. ibidem. c praesentium. 2.
praeterea singillatim cum sua gl. de testibus. in 6. c. cum I. and A. de sent.
and re iudicata. and est communis opinio. Bartol. in l. inter omnes.. recte. in
fine. ff. de furtis. Iul. Clar. q. 45. v. sed quaeso.
places of law by quotations: and first out of the Civil (before the
Emperors were Christians,) and then after they were Christians, as they be
reported in Cod^ce Iustiniani; and then out of the Canon law, taken especially
out of the ancient Fathers and Councels. that by perusal thereof (as your
leisure may serve) you may discern, unto what member and part of the former
distinction, each of them may severally be reduced.

This point might be further enlarged, both by authorities of law, and by
argument. If he that has l. Marcel.. 1. and fin. cum ll. seq. ff. rerum
amotarum.
action for embezelling his goods (which is but a private, yet a criminal
action at the Civil law) will put it to the defendants oath to swear; that
he has not embezelled them, the defendant then must either take it, or else
be convicted thereof: Neither may he return the oath back upon the plaintiff:
the like is observed in an action of theft: which is no public criminal
action, at the Civil law. And the defendant may not answer Bartol. ibid. and
in l. inter omnes. ff. de furtis. and in l. de aetate.. nihil. ff. de Interrog.
act.
unto these Interrogatories criminal by the word credit vel non credit, as he
may do in Civil actions: but is to answer them directly, yea, or no.

Though it be but at the suite of a l. de aetate. 12.. qui. tacuit. ff. de
Interr. c. si post. 2. de confessis in 6.
private person; if he that is iudiciallie interrogated, will not answer at
all, or does answer obscurely and peruersely; he shall be holden pro confesso,
and be condemned; no less, then if he had confessed it, because he therein
contemns the laws, and the Magistrate. Likewise, at a private persons suite
and petition, the oath of c fin. and ibi DD. de iuram. calumniae.
Iuramentum calumniae, de veritate dicenda, and purgationis, is given by the
Judge, and Abb. in. c. veritatis. nu. 27. de dolo and contu.
must necessarily, be taken by the party, albeit the matter be criminal; or
else he shall be taken, as convicted thereof.

And when the Accuser in a criminal cause, has proved nothing Gail. de pace
publ. ll. 2. c. 7. and est comm. opinio per Socin. seniorem in l. ait Praetor.
ff. de iur^ur.
besides probabilities and presumptions; the Judge if he will may minister of
Office unto the party conuented, an oathe, touching the truth of the crime,
called Iuramentum purgationis, according to a former distinction. And this kind
of necessary oath, and the former, have place in Clarus. li. 5.. fin 63. q.
per Anaman. and alios.
all temporal or Civil courts abroad in the world, as well as in courts
Ecclesiastical.

Then, if where but a common person sueth, either, for his own private
interest, or for revenge, the Judge (by the Civil law) may exact such
necessary oaths of the other party, importing oftentimes discovery of matter
criminal, and penal to the defendant: how much more then may the Judge, and
ought he to do it (after good presumptions, and probabilities had) where
there is a public interest grown unto the Church or Common weal, to have the
very truth known, for reformation of the party and suppressing of the sin
or offense? By all which premised, we may see the equity, necessity, and true
use of such oaths, by those two laws Canon and Civil.

Besides those laws, it is also received and used by the Municipall and
Customarie laws, of many nations of Chrstendome. By the law c. Sacramentum..
and cum datur. de consuetudine rectifeudi.
Feudall, or (as we here speak) of Tenures; such oath, has use in crimes. For
if the objected crime be denied by the party, and cannot sufficiently be
proved; he must then have twelve compurgators to swear of their consciences,
and credulities for his clearing, after himself have taken the oath, De
veritate vel falsitate criminis.

By the Ord. Camerae Imper. tit. de Purgatione.
ordinances and custo^s of the Imperial chamber (serving for all the Empire)
the like oath is used; saving, that a Nobleman is permitted to take it by his
Procurator, authorized by him, to swear in animamsuam.

By the Consuet. Hungariae de Iuram. Purgat.
customs of Hungary, there be many, and long constitutions made, for the
taking of it, and of the manner, of this kind of oath.

It is testified Marian. in c. qualiter. q. 84. Casonus in Pract. fol. 84. nu.
3.
also to be the usual practice of all the several dominions of Italy, that
the party conuented in Temporal courts, whether by way of Accusation, or at
the prosecution of another, or by way of Inquiry ex officio Iudicis: must
swear to declare the truth, in all those things, that shall be asked of him,
even of the crime it self.

Which proceeding, is far more grievous and strict, then is or may be used,
in any ecclesiastical courts, or any other in England. For at the suite of a
party, a man is not in any ecclesiastical court (here) to be sworn De
veritate ipsius criminis, except there be cause for the Judge ex officio, to
enioine him his purgation. And an other point of greater rigor there is; that
they give such an oath, not only, where some corporal punishment is to be
inflicted, as in the Star Chamber is used: but, where it is capital to the
party, or tends to the mutilation of limbs: a course not allowed by the
laws and policy of this land.

For Ordonnances du France. liu. 2. tom. 2. tilt. 14 du droict, de refue haut
passage, etc. page 1195.
merchandise to be carried out of the Realm of France, the Merchant must make
a declaration under his own hand, of the particulars thereof, and the weight,
or measure, in what ship, and whither he will carry it, and that there is no
more, then is there set down; and that there be no deceitful nor forbidden
merchandise there: and for the truth of such note, or declaration; he must
take an oath, upon the holy Evangelists.

They have also another ordonnance in France to like purpose of swearing;
reaching to all Plaintifes declarations, etc. and to all ^fendants answers,
etc. without any distinction, whether the same tend to discover any crime of
either of them, or no. For Ordonnance du France premier, an. 1539. art. 38.
the parties are bound by oathe to affirm, touching the factes contained in
their bills and additions: and by their answer upon oathe unto
Interrogatories, to confess those; which be within their knowledge.

In other matters criminal, it is reported to be the Marcus. decisione, 674.
custom of France, for the party defendant, only to make faith, when they
are objected. and he is thereupon to answer; whether he have committed them,
or not: but he is not to take a corporal oathe. betwixt which two (before
God) there is no difference. But by the Grand Coustu^er enter les coustumes, de
Normandy.
customs of Normandy, I find; that the appealed of murder, or such like,
(when it is to be tried by battle) must upon his oathe (holding his
adversary by the hand) solemnly swear, whether he has committed such
fact or no; in the very self same words, and manner, as Stanford (before
alleged) affirms to be the law of England, in like case of Appeal.

Generally, yt to give B^tol. in l. inter omnes.. re^. fl. de furtis.
an oath to the party conue^ted in a cause criminal, to tell the truth; is
the present usual practice of most nations abroad: and August. ad Angel. de
maleficijs: in ver. comparuerunt. Bertrand. consil. 321. nu. 3. li. 3. in prima
part. Marsil. in l. quaestio. habe^dae. nu. 72. ff. de quaestionibus. Conradus
in Practica, fol. 280. and Go. mez. ca. 1. Delictorum. nu. 65.
that the common opinion of writers in these two laws is; that it may be so
given, even by the law Civil (which is their common law) does appear by
the places of Authors here quoted, in the margent.

Amongst nations of far elder times (in most flourishing commonweals) we
find oaths in all causes, whether Ciuillie or Criminallie moved; to have
been taken, both by the plaintifes, and also by the defendants. Amongst the Ex
Polluce Sigonius. li 4. ca. 4. de republica Atheniensi. Suidas in verbo.
Athenians, both parties took oaths; and besides that, did lay down a
certain sum of money, to be forfeited by him that should be overthrown.
The Plaintifes, or Accusers oath was; that he would object nothing but true
crimes and matters. This was called: (...): and the defendant swear, that he
would deal, and answer plainly, not fraudulently, and cautelously, and this
was called (...).

When Aeschines accused Timarchus of a foul crime, supposed to be done upon
him by one Aeschines contra Timarchum. page 7. Graece.
Misgolas, he says thus: that if Misgolas being called, and urged to bear
witness, shall deny it, to the intent to gratify Timarchus: he shall
thereby do him no good, because Aeschines can prove it by witnesses: but
shall only for swear himself, and withal show how cunningly he can cover
such villainies. Whereby appears, that (in that common wealth) oaths might be
given in matters criminal, tending to the opening of their own turpitude, as
well as of other men's.

Radamanthus for his severe, and strict course of Justice holden; was fained by
Poets (like as Aeacus and Minos also were) to be a Judge in another world, over
ghosts deceassed. Of him Plato lib. 12. de legibus.
Plato thus writes to our purpose: I am persuaded (says he) that Radamanthus
deserved to be had in great admiration. for he perceived, how in those days,
all men confessed, that there were gods, which had regard over humane actions.
therefore he thought best, to commit deciding of matters in judgment, unto
gods, and not unto men. So that by a very plain and easy course, he ended
all matters of judgment; for he exacting an oath in every cause in
controversy, used thereby, no less speedily, then safely, to give his
judgments.

Libr. 3. Polit. c. 10.
Aristotle also Plato his scholar testifies the like; that in old times,
supposed offenders that were called into question, were some of them proceeded
with upon their oaths, and other without. and their oath was performed by
holding up of a scepter.

The history of Glaucus Herodotus in Etato. lib. 6.
an ancient Spartan, does give plain evidence; that amongst that most just
people of Greece, a man that would deny a thing to have been left with him in
deposito, that is, in trust to keep; was to take his oathe, whether it was so
left with him, or not; and consequently was to swear of matter tending either
to perjury, or to his dishonestie, and shame, having once unjustly denied it
before, to the defeating of his right, who had trusted him. For the said Glaucus
his whole house and posterity was rooted out by Gods vengeance; only for that
a while he denied it, and had once in purpose, to have forsworn the money,
which was (in deed) left with him, upon trust: and thereupon consulted with
the Oracle at Delphos, whether he had best forswear himself, or deliver the
money.

The use of an oath in matters criminal, amongst the people of Greece, may be
proved to be most ancient, by that purgation, which king Agamemnon made to
clear himself, that he had not lived incontinently with Hippodamia. this his
purgation is recorded to have been made in this form: Dicty^. Cretensis. lib.
2. belli Troiani.
He commanded two Sergeants to bring the host or sacrifice: which being by
two lifted up from the earth; Agamemnon drew out his sword, and therewith
divided it into two parts, and caused it in the presence of all, to be laid
down; then holding in his hand the bloody sword, he went betwixt the two
parts of the sacrifice, and when he was passed through, he then swear, that
he had never polluted Hippodamia, by incontinencie.

Homer Homer. lib. 19. Iliad. v. 257.
mentions, that the same king, in another form cleared himself, that he had
not violated Briseis. For at that purgation, a Boar was offered up by
Talthibius; then Agamemnon cut off some of the Boares bristles, and offered
them to Jupiter: swearing withal, that he had not violated Briseis, and the
Boar was after, tumbled into the sea.

For clearing men from suspicion of all lewd and sinister dealing, not only
those which came to strive Pausanias in Eliacis.
at the solemn exercises and games of Olympus, but their parents also, and
brethren, were sworn over the entrails of a sacrificed hog; that they had
used no fraud, or deceit whatsoever: nor done otherwise, then the ordinnances
for Olympus, did permit. So much then for the use thereof among the old
Graecians.

In the old Roman common Cato de re rust. ca. 144. and 145.
wealth, we read, that, even private householders did lawfully impose such an
oathe upon their laborers, that gathered Olives: videlicet, that, neither
themselves nor yet any other by their couin, or fraud, had stolen, or
embezelled away either oil, or olives: which oathe if they refused, they
neither had any wages, nor any oil or olives. For as it is by c. fin.. 1. de
iuram. calum. etc. inter solicitudines. d.
law, that when probable tokens or presumptions, etc. do appear; he that
refuses to take oathe (though the cause be criminal) is reputed convicted
thereof: So was it holden among the old Romans for an assured note of
guiltiness, to refuse to take such oathe. as may be noted by the history of
Victorinus, when he was lord General of Germany. for Xiphilinus in Commodo.
having his Legate or Lieutenant in some suspicion for corruption, he did
(privately) seek to persuade with him, to take an oathe; that he would not
suffer himself to be bribed. which when he could not obtain of him, the
General himself came into the Tribunal seat; and there did swear, that he
neither had, nor ever would accept of any bribes. then he commanded his Legate
to take and bind himself with the like oathe; which because he refused, the
General commanded, that he should give over his office and place. And that it
might be better discerned, whether any man upon guiltiness of his own
conscience, would at taking his oathe, blanch, and alter the very words of the
oath: they sometimes deuied to have a solemn oath, whereby he that gave the
oath, did utter certain set, and conceived words, as he thought fittest; which
he that swear was preciselie to follow, or else it served not his turn, as
before has been noted. This they called Conceptis verbis iurare, and the
Graecians termed it, (...), a solemn imposed oath. An example hereof in a very
foul cause, we read in Tacit. lib. (...). Annalium.
Cornelius Tacitus.

The Senate couceiued a form of oath, and the chief of them first beginning
to take it, provoked by their example all the rest of the Magistrates as they
were asked their voices, to call God to witness; that by their means, nothing
had been done, whereby the safety of any citizen might be hurt; nor that they
had gotten either reward or honor, through the calamity of any other
Citizens. but it was perceived, that such as had a guilty conscience herein,
did come but tremblinglie to it, and changed the set conceived words of the
oathe, like as those are wont to do, who swear falsely or cautelouslte.

When the Praetor one of the Lex Seruilia Glauciae, apud Sigonium. li. 2. ca.
6, de iudicijs.
chief Magistrates of Rome, had made choice of 450. Judges, for deciding of
causes; he was (by law, for his own clearing) to swear; that he had not
wittingly chosen any of them dolo malo, viz. by fraud, mal-engine, or for any
other sinister respect.

By all which the premises out of the Canon, Civil, and the laws, and
customs, of other nations, may appear; how lawful and equal a course it was
by them also holden (upon sundry occasions) to urge oaths; though some matter
criminal in the party himself, might thereby be disclosed.

CHAP. X. An answer to some objections, pretended to be made against this kind
of oath, from the laws Civil, or Canon.
IN this Chapter, such objections, as already are, and some which perhaps
hereafter may be made against this kind of oath from the Civil, or Canon
laws; come to be answered. Of these, most be made by the Treatisour, etc. and
some may hereafter be objected (perhaps) by others. The Treatisours, be either
against some circumstances about it; or else against the oath it self. But
first, touching his by-matters, or circumstances.

Because the private Schedule (concerning these oaths) which was set down by
certain Doctors, (as is mentioned in the epistle to the Reader) contains;
that, the defendant in a cause criminal, is to answer other Articles, so they
be not tending to the crime it self, though it be at the suite of a party:
he says, that the Maxim, of nemo tenetur seipsum prodere, is (thereby) so
weakened, as it will scarcely now serve for a Minime. For reason of this
consequence; he asks, if this be not to go like the crabbe, oblique, and to
proceed the same way, although not to tread the direct steps? and asks
also, what should be meant by other articles, but such as concern
circumstances, and inducements to the crimes?

He is therefore to understand, that at the suite of a party, a man (by those
laws) is neither to answer criminous articles diducing Angelus de maleficijs.
the very crime it self, nor yet such, as have any near coherence thereto, or
be propinqui Actus ipsi maleficio. But of other matters having none affinity
with the very crime; as whether he be of that Jurisdiction, and such like; the
defendant is by virtue of his oath (even at another man's suite) to answer: and
therefore no such crooked measure is offered herein at all. But he sees no
reason (he says) why there should be any difference between the suite, and
instance of the party, and the proceeding ex officio: in that, the reason
alleged for to make a difference, is but this: Penancies enjoined by
Ordinaries, are not taken in law for poenae, but medicina. If he see not this,
why there should be any difference between those two proceedings; I marvel
then, what cause he can see, so highly elsewhere, to magnify the course of
proceeding by an Accusour, as very equal, and just: but to condemn (simply)
all proceeding of Office, as unjust, foreign, cruel, heathenish, and
profane, and I know not what.

That he may therefore see great cause of difference betwixt these two; let him
a little weigh with himself, what the reason (at the common law) should be; why
an Appellee is allowed more freedom in sundry respects, then a man endited at
the Q. suite ex officio simply? and why, he may then put it to trial by
battle with the appellor; but cannot have that trial, upon an Indictment?
And also, why a defendant, against whom an Information is preferred for some
criminal matter in the Courts of the Q. Bench, common pleas, or Exchequer
(which nevertheless is by a kind of proceeding mixed of both the kinds) shall
not be urged to answer, the bill, or any interrogatories upon his oath, as all
defendants in Criminal causes, be forced to do in the Starchamber? He is also
to be put in mind, that men use not in such brief schedules as that was; to
allege for every matter, all the reasons they can: yet that one alleged, is
of it self a reason sufficient, of such diversity. for is there as great
reason, that I should upon mine oath discover my crimes, being no way thereof
duly infamed, or they otherwise proved, for the satisfaction only of mine
adversaries malicious humor by mine own more grievous punishment: as there is
(when these or some like be precedent) that I should to mine Ordinary or
Spiritual father; who in a far milder course, for his duties sake, and in
charity, seeks my good, by reformation of me, and amendment in me; and by
removing the scandal, which else might justly be taken against me? And (by the
Canon law) as is elsewhere touched, mitius agitur cum inquisito conuicto,
quam cum accusato conuicto. Seeing then upon conviction by way of accusation,
the very ordinary penalty by law appointed, is (for the terror of others)
imposed without any mitigation: therefore the oath cannot so reasonably
thereupon be exacted, as it may upon the Judges proceedings, by his mere
office, unto a far other more mild end, for ye most part.

But as if those Doctors had absolutely denied penances, which be enjoined ex
officio Iudicis, to be any punishments at al, because they are said to be
medicinae: he asks, whether penance, although it be but standing in a sheet,
as well as the standing on the Pillorie (in respect of public shame grievous
and odious to all men) shall not be accounted a punishment?

I answer, that neither the law, nor those Doctors in saying they be
medicinae, non poenae, do thereby deny absolutely (as he reasons) that they
be punishments. For this saying of the law, is a Negative by comparison only;
which the Treatisor either would not, or did not understand, to be none
absolute denial. and that penancies (in deed) be so, we may learn by S.
August. epistola. 159. ad Marcellum.
Augustine speaking hereof in this manner: quis non intelligit magis beneficium,
quam supplicium nuncupandum, vbi nec saeuiendi relaxatur audacia, nec
poenitendi salutaris medicina subtrahitur? Standing on the Pillorie which (as I
take it) by a word borrowed of the Graecians, may be termed catamidtatio; it
was even of ancient times, (as well as at this day) accounted an infamous
punishment unto the party, that endured it: and is allowed, for a good proof
of infamy by law. but he that has done public penance, is not (in law) to
be accounted therefore infamous: but rather to be a man amended and reformed;
and such, as at whose conversion, the Angels in heaven do rejoice. and
therefore his company is not afterward to be shunned or avoided, by any
discreet or moderate Christian; as if he were still a man of steined credit,
or conversation. So that the great diversity of the ends, whereunto these be
referred; do make a very notable difference in the punishments themselves. For
in the one of the^, the delinquent is propounded for a public spectacle of
shame and reproach, to be shunned of all men: the other, by these outward tokens
of humility and submission, testifies his inward sorrow and grief for the
sin, and as it were thereby craves (in pity and compassion) to be received
again, into the Christian fellowship, as a man (by repentance) fully
reconciled again unto God, and unto his Church. Hitherto in answer of his
objections made against some by-circumstances of such oath.

Against the oath it self, the Treatisour brings some reasons, some
allegations from lawyers, and some out of the laws themselves. First he says,
there is no Justice in the proceeding, at giving such oath: because there be
not three in Judgment, viz. the plaintiff, the defendant, and the Judge; and
thereunto alleges Bracton.

But what if the manner of proceeding ex officio were unjust, which in ye second
part is showed to be otherwise; can this prove the ministering of an oath to the
defendant in a Criminal cause, to be unlawful? For first, proceeding ex
officio may be, even where the matter is Civil, or criminal, howbeit but
Ciuilly moved, and there (for the most part) none oath is used. Secondly, it
may be, when none oath touching any crime, is to be ministered to the defendant
at all. Lastly, an oath in a cause criminal may sometimes be tendered, where
the proceeding is not of office at all, but having all these three persons in
judgment, and that not by implication or representatiuely only: but even
formally. and therefore (in all those respects) his argument does not follow.
yet for further answer, I must also tell him, that in all due proceeding of
office, there be three persons in judgment. For (as has been said) that which
opens way to such Inquiry, does represent, and stands in stead of a
Plaintiff, for preferring up of the matter.

Again, that an expressed and formal plaintiff to prefer up matter
criminal, is not always required; is Cap. 15. and 16. 2. part.
manifoldly showed, by often practices recorded in the word of God it self, to
the contrary.

He concludes also against general oaths, and against extorting (by oath) of
the ground and foundation of Inquisition from the party conuented: out of the
said little schedule of the Doctors. From which conclusion albeit not
following of those premises; we do not any way debar him; seeing no such
practice is either allowed, or (I think) in this Realm heard of. and
therefore he wrongeth all Ecclesiastical courts the more, who so often heapeth
up these untrue and unlikely imputations against them. An other of his
allegations, is out of Clar. in pract. Crim. q. 3.
Julius Clarus; to prove (forsooth) by Canons, and Canonists, this kind of
oath to be a profane, and more then heathenish manner of Inquisition, (for such
is the mildness of the man's spirit) and contrary (if he be not deceived) to
the rules and Canons of the Antichristian Church of Rome, which be more just
(he says) or less unjust a great deal then such, as have taken upon them to
judge, by color of the same. for procedere (says Clarus) ex officio mero, est
quando Iudex a seipso, and ex officio assumit informationes, contra
deliquentem, and contra eum procedit etc. whereupon, he gathers, that to
proceed by Inquisition, is not to make the party by oath or examination to be
his own accuser; but to receive information, and witnesses against him. This,
which he thence collecteth, of not compelling the party defendant by oath, to
become his own Accuser is true, if it be as truly understood, though it be
not inferred truly from that allegation. for no man is by oath, so compelled:
but rather by discovery of the whole truth, to clear himself of the crime
after he be (as it were) accused, and brought into question by some of those
lawful means, which open a way unto special Inquiry. Besides, this
allegation makes nothing for proof of the unlawfulness of such oath, after
sufficient detection. For Clarus in this place, speaks only of the process,
or inquiry informatiue, grounded upon some Clamosa insinuatio, or scandal;
and not of any part of process punitiue, which follows upon the former: at
what time the oath of the party, is to be taken. which thing, the same
Author, (thorowout his whole book) most plainly shows: if it had pleased
the Treatisour to have perused but a little more of it. This therefore is a
fallacy, of not disputing ad idem: besides, Ignoratio Elenchi.
inciuile est, nisitotalege perspecta, iudicare.

The next of his allegations, is out of a mere 10. Petr. Ferrar. forma
Inquisit. ver. forma publica.
Ciuilian writer and no Canonist, as he supposed: with whom he has the same,
and no better luck, then he had before with the other; for want of knowledge to
distinguish, betwixt Process informatiue, and Punitiue: for thereof only
Petr. de Ferrarijs there speaks, not once mentioning an oath: Albeit the
Treatisour do gather, both that and other things also thereof, which be not
there contained; which I will not now trauerse with him; because they tend
not to our principal purpose.

Out of the law it self, he takes hold of that Rule, which the said
Doctors did allege, viz. nemo tenetur seipsum prodere. but that proditus per
famam etc. tenetur seipsum ostendere and purgare, etc. (which they did also
adioyne) he cannot in any sort brook, or digest, as a gloss, (he says)
confounding the text. yet is it not any gloss, but as well warranted by law;
as the rule it self. neither does it confound, but show, how that rule is
(truly) to be understood: so that one part of the law (without any
antinomie) may stand with another. This himself might have remembered to be
law, even by occasion of his own allegation elsewhere, viz. that such as
refuse to swear or answer unto Articles, are by the Ecclesiastical law, to
be holden pro confessis. If then that law do so deeply punish the
contemptuous in that behalf; as to convict them therefore, of the very crime
imputed: may we not gather, that the laws Civil and Canon, require men to
answer even matters Criminal, upon their oaths?

But if the Canon lawe-shall be by others alleged, to avouch such oath, as we
here treat of: to this allegation in several places the Treatisour makes
these several answers following. First, he says, that such oath is against
Gods word, and therefore no binding law: for which consequence, he alleges
Saint German, in his book of Doctor and Studient. Secondly, that the two
statutes of Submission of the Clergy, made in king Henry the eight his time
(still 25. H. 8. 27. H. 8.
continuing in force) do take away the Canon law. Thirdly, that this kind of
oath is contrary to the laws of the Realm. All which asseuerations are
nothing else, but begging of that, which is the principal controversy.

Touching the first of these, it comes in the next Chapter to be disoussed;
whether, ministering of such oath, be against Gods word, or no. For the second,
those two statutes are so far, from taking the Canon law away, that both of
them do (in truth) establish, all Canons being of that quality, as is there
expressed; unto all which we auerre, this oath to be consonant. The Clergy
(in deed) do there promise, not to enact or put in ure, any new Canons, etc.
without the kings express assent: of which sort, this oath is none; for it
has been proved by far elder Canons, then that time. Concerning the third,
we have showed; that there is not any great diversity betwixt those two laws
in this point: and therefore much less, can there be any contrariety, or
repugnancie.

Lastly, hereto he answers; that if any man shall seek by long practice and
continuance, to give a new probate unto the Pontifical law, after so public
a condemnation, and firing thereof by Doctor Luther: such must understand from
him, that this kingdom is not subject to any foreign made laws, save such,
as 25. H. 8. ca. 21.
agree to the Preamble of the statute, establishing dispensations. A man would
think, if any part of Canon law should swerve from those conditions required
to make them English laws: that dispensations, (which of all other are most
strict, and never before that time spedde in this Realm) should be holden for
foreign laws, rather then this kind of oath, so usual before and since in most
courts. yet these dispensations are also there approved for English laws.
Let him therefore understand; that, all those things there required (viz.
sufferance, consent, and custom:) to make the Canons establishing such oaths
to be accounted the customed, and ancient laws of this Realm, originally
established as laws of the same; do in these oaths so aptly concur (as
has been proved) that none of his confident denials thereof, can or shall
be able any more, to empeach them from so being: then the burning of the Canon
law at Wittenberge by Luther (when the Pope had burnt his books at Rome)
either did, was meant, or yet could abrogate the continual use of a great
part thereof in Germany, even until this day; or then it could, or ought to
have any force to disanull it here in England. for the statute establishing
such Canons as there be mentioned, was made in the self same Parliament and
Session thereof; that this Preamble was before the statute of Dispensations,
whereby he would now overthrow the Canon law wholly. And both of those
statutes, at the beginning of her Majesty's reign, were revived again in one
Act. How can there then be any such contrariety, or abrogation general of
the Canon law, as this man dreameth of: except all that were present in those
two Parliaments, had been fast on sleep, when they twice passed them both
together for statutes?

Others perhaps (to as good purpose) will object; that ancient custom of Rome,
viz. Gell. lib. 10. cap. 15. Fenest. de Sacerd. cap. 6.
Virginem Vestalem, and Flaminem Dialem, in me a jurisdiction iurare non
cogam. hereof Plutarch. probl. 43.
Plutarch does set down three reasons: first, that an oath is a kind of
torture to a free man: Secondly, for that it is absurd in smaller causes not to
credit their words; who for the highest matters touching God, are credited,
and put in trust. Thirdly, for that an oath draws after it, an imprecation or
curse, in case he should be forsworn: which seems to be a detestable
omination, toward the Priests of God.

First, then we see hereby, in so much as this was a peculiar privilege
granted to these: that therefore all others might (by Magistrates) be put to
their oaths. And secondly, that it was from all swearing absolutely; and not
in matters criminal only, which is our present controversy.

For so Liuie also Liuius lib. 32.
testifies hereof, where he says, that Flamen Dialis amongs the Romans,
might in no case at all swear, least at any time he should for swear. which
in him was holden, as the most heinous thing, that could happen. Thus far in
answer unto objections, made out of those two laws.

CHAP. XI. That not only such an oath may be taken, but also being by
Magistrates duly commanded, ought not to be refused, is approved by
Scriptures; by practice of the Primitive Church; and of late times; together
with a Reply unto certain answers, made unto some proofs here used.
THe Innouators finding but small relief in the laws (being rightly
understood) do flee, (as it is meet) unto the word of God. yet as hoping
(fall worst that may) to be judges thereof in their own causes; and so to
shroud their disobedience in refusing to be examined upon oath; under pretense
of conscience, and of a religious care not to offend God thereby.

And therefore they hold; that, they are by Gods law bound, not to answer
(in that sort) upon their oath: which is more then if they had only said; that
they are not bound, and so left at liberty, either to answer, or not, as
themselves should think good. whereby they would leave a dangerous impression
in the peoples minds; that such laws of this land (wherein they are borne
subjects, and by which they are to be governed) may not be obeyed of Gods
people, with a safe conscience; as being contrary to the word of God. A matter
assuredly of most perilous consequence, to leave unto the only scanning and
final determination of every private subject; how far he need to obey the
positive laws of his country. As it comes therefore orderly in this place,
so is it also a matter most fit to be discussed: whether the oath of a party
in a cause criminal, and penal to himself, may be exacted, and urged by the
Magistrate, without breach of Gods law: and consequently not to be refused by
the subject.

It is said in Romans 13. ver. 1. 2. and 5.
Scripture, that every soul must be subject unto the higher powers, for there
is no power but of God; and the powers that be, are ordained of God: and
therefore whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and
that they which resist, shall receive to themselves judgment: That we Tit. 3.
ver. 1.
must be subject, not because of wrath only, but also for conscience sake. And
1. Pet. 2. ver. 13.
we are commanded to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to be
obedient. And to submit our selves (...), to all manner ordinance of man, viz.
public government, for the Lords sake. By which power, ordinance of man, or
public government, are not only understood all kinds of Magistracy, and
superior authority; and that we may not resist, do violence, or offer
contempt to their persons; but much more, that we are to fulfill, and observe
all their politic laws, without wilful breach of them, so they be not
repugnant unto Gods word. For if this happen, then that has Act. Apost. ca. 5.
v. 29.
place, It is better to obey God then man. And if they command contrary things,
we must remember that we Matt. 6. v. 24.
cannot serve two masters.

Yet Godsword does not abrogate laws, common wealths, nor civil policies,
but does establish them. Therefore, except they which refuse to take such
oath, can show some direct Prohibition either expressed, or to be necessarily,
and immediately gathered out of Gods word against it; they must know, that
their contempt and disobedience (in this behalf) reaches unto God himself;
whose ordinance, both the Magistrate, and his laws be.

S. August. de verb. Domini sermon. 57.
Augustine hereof writes thus; contumaciae crimen est, quod iubetur
contemnere; quod praecipitur nolle; quod imperatum est, declinare. But more
particularly to our purpose in handling, it may be proved by a general
Council; that he which holds his peace, when he is asked, or will not
directly answer; is wilfully disobedient, and may be convicted for such his
stubbernnesse. For Synod. General. 8. Action. 5.
when as one Photius was demanded by the Council, whether he would admit of
the ordinances of the holy Fathers, and he answered not any thing thereto; the
Presidents of the Synod signified unto him, that by his silence, he should not
escape from being condemned; which (thereby) was made more manifest. And to
like purpose, a late Schooleman writes: Sotus de just. and iure. lib. 5. q. 6.
When any thing is asked of the defendant, but according to order of law, he
is vponpaine of deadly sin, bound to reveal the truth, yea though he be not
sworn, but much more upon his oath. Therefore is it well gathered, that he,
which being duly interrogated (though it be touching an offense) and refuses
to answer as he ought: first offends against Justice, and against the Iosu.
7.
glory of God. Secondly, he offends against the reverence of the Judge,
whom he is bound to obey, if he be under his jurisdiction. Lastly, against the
Commonweal, which has l. ita vulneratus.. ad l. Aquil.
a great interest to have crimes discovered, and punished. Concerning the
second of these; it is by great, and (some of them) ancient Cyuus and alij in
l. 2.. quod si actor. C. de iuram. calum.
Civil interpreters delivered: If a man (who has sworn that he will never
take oath) yet having a suite, shall be commanded by the Judge (according to
law) to take iur amentum calumniae, and thereupon does take it; that he shall
not (thereby) be accounted to be perjured, because such commandment of the
Judge, does excuse him.

For mine own part, I have always taken it to be a T. C.
gross error in Divinity to affirm; that a man may not hold any humane
matter with a certain persuasion, nor do any thing in external actions, but
such only as we have a positive, or affirmative warrant for, in the word of
God. For if this were a true position; then a man might believe no history to
be true, which is not in the Bible; no Maxims, or grounds of any sciences, nor
common principles, left known unto us by the light of nature (as that two and
two make four) nor that there is any such country as America, etc. neither
might a man (with safe conscience) do infinite many things permitted by humane
laws, and sundry of them also commanded to be done: because all these
histories and Principles, and the most of these laws be such; as can never (by
any sound reason) be positiuely, immediately, and particularly proved out of
Scripture: but only by this generality, that therefore they may be believed,
or done; because they are not contrary to Scripture, are agreeable to the
uncorrupted light of nature, or to sundry credible men's experience, or are by
the politic laws of our country, received.

For who can give any other sound reason directly drawn from the Scripture;
that theft shall be punished with death: that matters of fact shall be tried
by a Jury of twelve, led sometimes not by witnesses, but by circumstances and
probable inducements: that the eldest son shall have all his fathers land (by
descent) from the rest of his brethren, though they be never so many; who no
less then the eldest are descending from him: that my kinsman removed
(perhaps five or six degrees) descending of the whole blood from my fathers
brother, shall, and lawfully may inherit my land, before mine own fathers
son by another wife: that at one and twenty years, a man may effectually
sell his land, but not the day before, albeit he have received my money: that
the wrecke of the sea, albeit the owner of the goods be certainly known,
shall be confiscated, and belong to the Prince: that a straie proclaimed
(according to law) after a year and a day, shall belong to the lord of the
Manor, where it was taken up: with infinite such like?

Therefore, it is no good, nor safe ground, that the Innouatours do stand
upon: when as (being pressed to take such oath according to the laws of the
Realm) they allege; that in conscience they may not do it, because they
find no direct warrant for it by Scripture, whereupon to stay their
consciences. For if it were granted unto them, that there be no
commandments, no examples, no footesteppes or traces thereof in Scriptures:
yet if it be not by them prohibited, or condemned, the general obedience of
subjects will tie them thereunto.

But I purpose also (here) to show, the lawfulness of it, even positiuely out
of the word of God. First, declaring that Magistrates may lay oaths upon
their Subjects, which are necessarily by them to be taken: Then that they may
be tendered and taken in causes criminal and penal to the parties themselves:
and lastly, I mind in the next chapter (God willing) to answer the
objections, that I find brought to the contrary.

That when an oathe is duly imposed, there is a necessity enjoined the
subject to take it; does appear by the commandment of God himself:
Thoushalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear by his name.
which words being dispositiue, not only to the manner of the oath, viz. by
Godsname; but also to the action it self offwearing: does argue evidently,
that there be oaths, as well necessary, as there be voluntary.

The like commandment is given by the Lord in the prophet Iere. 4. v. 2.
Jeremy: O Israel, thoushalt swear, The Lord lives, in truth, in judgment,
and in righteousness. Wherein, there is both a commandment, of that action;
and an instruction, in what sort, an oathe is to be taken, and with what
necessary adjuncts.

In the charge that Josh. 23. v. 2.
Joshua gave to all the Magistrates of Israel; viz. to their Elders, to their
heads, their Judges, and their Officers, this (amongst other things) is
contained; that, they shall not make mention of Ver. 7.
the Gods of other nations, nor shall cause to swear by them. And therefore
Magistrates have authority, to cause (those that be under them) to swear, and
to take oaths.

For an example of such charge given, we have that of king Saul, who not only
1. Sam. 14. v. 24 and 28.
charged the people with an oathe; but made them vow with a curse, not to eat
any food that day till night. Therefore one of them reported thus to Jonathan,
Saul's son; that his Father had made the people to swear.

The most wise king Solomon, when he meant (for a punishment) to confine and
imprison Shimei, within the compass of Jerusalem, for his reuilings of king
David; tells what he did 1. Reg. 2. v. 42. and 43.
unto him: Did I not make thee (says he) to swear by the Lord, and protested
unto thee, saying, etc. why then have thou not kept the oath of the Lord, and
the commandment, wherewith I charged thee? And yet this oath and promise was
without excepting of any cause (though most important to him, and most
necessary,) that might happen, to occasion him to go out of the City: and
therefore did bring apparent danger with it, to entangle him as deep as his
life. And albeit the cause which he had of going afterward out of the City,
might seem something reasonable, in that he Ibid. v. 39. and 40.
went forth but to fetch home two of his servants, that had run away from
him: yet did this breach of his oathe, and of the kings adiuration to him,
(wherewith he had charged him) most justly cost Shimei his life. So king Saul
1. Sam. 24. v. 22. 23.
urged David to swear unto him; that he would not destroy his posterity after
him.

For a private offense and injury, only between neighbor and neighbor, king
Solomon testifies; that a necessary oath of purgation, may be required by the
1. Reg. ca. 8. v. 31. and 32.
complainant: When a man shall trespass against his neighbor, and he lay upon
him an oathe to cause him to swear, and the swearer shall come before thine
altar in this house: then hear (O Lord) in heaven, and do and judge thy
servants, that thou condemn the wicked, to bring his way upon his own head,
and justify the righteous, according to his righteousness. Where we see, that a
private person upon a supposed offense, and trespass against him; may urge his
adversary unto a necessary oath, albeit the matter be criminal, and penal
to him, if either he shall refuse it, or be afterward otherwise convicted. How
much more then may a Magistrate urge it, for the public interest, especially
for an offense supposed to be done, against the Church or Commonwealth?

King Josias also meaning to reform religion, and to restore the true worship
of God, greatly then decayed; did make a 2. Chro. 34. v. 31. and 32.
covenant and vow, and caused all that were found in Jerusalem and Benjamin to
stand to it.

So Ezra. ca. 10. v. 5.
Ezra the Scribe (being also a Magistrate) caused the chief Priests, the
Levites, and all Israel, to swear; that they would, do according to this
word. which oathe, that by virtue of his office, it was imposed necessarily
upon them; and not only voluntarily by them taken; we have good testimony,
in the words Ibid. v. 4.
next going before: Rise (says Sechaniah unto Ez-ra) for this matter
belongs to thee, and we will be with thee, or assist thee: confirmare, be
thou resolute, and effect it. And likewise out of the book of 1. Esdr. Apocr.
ca. 8. v. 92. 93.
Esdras Apocryphal, where that story is reported, for it is there said thus:
To thee it does appertain, and we are with thee to make thee strong.
whereupon is added: And Ibid. v. 94. 95.
he made them swear. By which we may gather; that if any of them would not
have sworn upon his commandment; they should have been compelled thereunto,
by some Civil constraint.

When the richer Jews had received the lands of the poorer sort to Morgage,
and they were forfeited unto them; yea and their very sons and daughters were
drawn into bondage, for satisfaction of such things, as they had borrowed for
their necessary sustentation: Nehe. 5. v. 11. 12. and 13.
Nehemias caused the Priests to swear, to restore these again, and to forgive
the hundredth part of the very principal, due unto them. So by the premises,
we see; that Magistrates may exact oaths of those that be under them, which
ought not to be refused.

The Treatisour himself will not be strait with us in this point. for he
yields that the Magistrate may impose oaths, so these conditions following,
be observed, videlicet, that either the glory of God be thereby maintained,
or the good of the Common wealth, or of our neighbors furthered: also that it
be not in matters of trifles: which though it be true, yet he proves it,
even triflingly: because (says he) de minimis non curat lex. Likewise, that
it be not over frequent: that, it be not touching matters impossible or
beyond a man's power: that the Deponent be not circumuented with captious
questions; and that it be not given to men of suspected faith, or credit.
which last, is neither by any law, nor Divinity (that I know of) required:
except he thus understand it; that an oathe is not to be ministered unto any
who is probably suspected to be likely, to forswear himself. For a man may
be suspected, yea and diffamed also for conversation of life, and yet without
just cause: yea, and though there be cause of the fame and suspicion; yet is
it not (in charity) to be presumed that every one, who (through frailty) has
offended; will therefore forswear himself, when he shall be put to an oathe.

These before recited, be his proofs, and all his premises (taken from
Divinity,) whereupon he builds his frequent and vehement conclusions against
the oathe which we speak of, to make it contrary unto Gods word. which
premises and conclusion, I believe, can never be truly drawn together, into
a good consequence; by any strength of man's wit, or by art of reasoning. For
though these mayor propositions may be such as will be yielded; yet his
assumptions will always be untrue, and not to be proved.

The next point to be handled, is, that oaths may lawfully be taken, even in
matters criminal and penal to him, that takes them.

If an oathe must be kept, though it be to a man's own hinderance and damage,
then may it also be taken. For that which we need not keep, and may lawfully
break, was unlawful at first, to be taken. But sundry oaths made, though
happily tending to our own hinderance, must be kept; for so it is commanded
indefinitely, and indistinctly, by God. And it is Number. 30. v. 3. Psalm. 15. v. 4.
assigned for a special mark of a godly man, to swear to his neighbor, and
not to disappoint him, though it be to his own hinderance. How much more then,
must it be kept, being commanded by a Magistrate; then when it is made to a
private person only? and being by virtue of his obedience imposed, then when
it is only voluntarily taken? And therefore being to be kept, may also
(lawfully) be taken.

Genesis 24. v. 3.
Abraham said thus to his servant, I will make thee swear by the Lord God of
the heavens, and of the earth, that thoushalt not take a wife unto my son, of
the daughters of the Canaanites. whereby appears, that a Superior, may cause
him, that is under him, to swear to do his endeavor in a private matter
appertaining to him. Much more therefore, may a public Magistrate, cause those
that be under him, to swear: touching a matter, wherein the common wealth or
Church of God, has interest, to have it sincerely dealt in.

When Genesis 25. v. 33.
Esau was greatly distressed by famine, so that he was almost dead; Jacob
moved him to the sale of his birthright, and took an oathe for confirmation
of it: and the right continued thereby ratified in Jacob. which argues, that
an oath may be kept, and shall stand, even where he that swears, is thereby
greatly endammaged, prejudiced, and ouer-reached, so it be not by fraud and
mal-engine.

We are forbidden to Col. 3. v. 9.
speak untruth, or to lie one unto another, even in private affairs amongst
our selves: and are Ephe. 4. v. 25.
commanded, not only to cast off lying, but also to speak the truth every
one to his neighbor, because we are members one of another. Signifying
thereby, that in all matters this is to be done, where it is expedient for our
neighbor, and he has interest, to know the very truth. How much more then,
ought we to tell, and manifest a truth, being commanded by a public
Magistrate, for a common benefit, seeing we are all members of one
Commonwealth, and of one Church; howsoever it may turn to our private
damage, or of our friends? For if a man be bound to avouch the truth
(oftentimes) even with his blood; how much more is he to do it, in his words?

Where a man is supposed to have borne falls witness against another, and is
thereof brought into question: ye law of God appoints the Deuteronomy. 19. v. 17.
18. and 19.
men which strive together, to stand before the Lord, eue^ before the Priests,
and the Judges which shall be in those days: and the Judges shall make
diligent inquisition: and if the witness be found false, and has given false
witness against his brother, then shall ye (says God) do unto him, as he
had thought to do unto his brother. Now, how can this diligent Inquisition be
made, or the witness by any possibility, or likelihood be ever found false,
but by reexamination of him again (as Daniel did with the two Elders) touching
every circumstance, for the boulting forth of the truth? For it cannot be
imagined that more good witnesses may be had in every matter of perjury, that
are able to depose in the flat contrary. But because the matter is criminal
to condemn him of perjury and very penal (even as deep as the punishment of
the other should have been, if the matter had been found true,) which may
happen to be capital: It will (perhaps therefore) be said, that the supposed
false witness, may not be urged to answer his reexamination, upon his oathe.
But the very like reason and allegation may be made, that he may not be urged
to answer either yea, or nay, to any question at all thereabouts. For if the
question demanded be true, it is no more lawful for him in the sight of God
to deny it without oath, then it is with an oath. And so could there be no
likelihood of any possible means, ever to find out a false witness. and then
that law of God should serve to none use; which were absurd and impious to
imagine. And what cause, (I pray) have the Judges of that Inquisition to
believe him upon his own bare word, (if he list to answer at all, which is to
do more, then by the Innouators is thought needful) whose very oath, they
have just occasion to suspect, and do therefore make Inquisition against the
truth of his former oath? So that hereof it must needs (by due consequence of
reason) be gathered; that it may happen, a man may be examined upon his oathe,
in a matter criminal, of his own turpitude, and very penal to himself, and
that justly.

There seems to me a very direct and plain place in the Proverbs of Solomon;
for proof, that an adiuration and curse made but indefinitely, and generally
against any who^soeuer, that had committed an offense: did before God, bind ye
offender (for avoiding of sin) to reveal ye matter, though it concerned,
even his own turpitude. He Prou. 29. V. 24.
that is partener with a thief (says Solomon) hates his own soul; he
hears cursing, and declares it not. To be partner with a thief, is (no
doubt) a filthy crime. and such a man cannot be aptly said, to hate his own
soul, unless the fault it self were a grievous sin. The reason, why such
one is noted by the holy Ghost so grievously to sin, as that he is thereby
accounted an enemy to his own soul, is; because he hears cursing, and
reuealeth not the theft, wherein he is partaker. It rests then only to
know, what that cursing is, which in this place is meant. The Hebrewe
interpreters (as I have learned of those, who be very skillful, and conversant
in them) do expound it of that curse with adiuration; which the Priests
usually gave against any, whosoever had done or known of some certain
offense, which was committed; if they would not reveal, who were the
offenders. whereupon does follow, that even the partner with a thief, upon
such a general and indefinite curse; was bound in conscience, to reveal the
theft; though it touched, both another, and also his own shame, and
dishonestie: and albeit he was not called into question, nor (perhaps) had in
any suspicion thereof. Then how much more, when Gods Priest, or the Judge (who
is Gods Lieutenant) upon probable grounds and inducements before discovered to
him, does charge a singular person with such a crime, is he bound before God,
to reueile the whole truth?

This kind of Adiuration with curse, to the intent to have revealed, by whom
goods were stolen; was also in use, amongs private persons in the people of
God: and they had a conscience (being but charged indefinitely amongs others,
without any discovery or cause of suspicion against any of them in particular)
not to conceal the theft: as Iudic. 17. ver. 1. 2, 3.
appears, by the history of Michah, and his mother. for that which the latin
interpreter there, reads thus: quos separaueras: Arias Montan. ibid. in lib.
de varia Republica.
Montanus, by the Hebrewe, Chaldee, and Greek copies, proves; that it ought
to be expounded in this sort, viz. quos furto amiseras, viz. the 1100. sicles,
or half ounces, which were stolen from thee, and for which thou did curse, or
adjure (faith Michah her son) I have them. Furthermore we are 1. Cor. 10. v.
31.
bound to do all to the glory of God; but it belongs to the glory of God,
for a man (by due presumptions burdened with a crime, and charged by the
Magistrate) to confess of himself, as appears by the history of Achan.
For, albeit the lotte fell upon him; yet was this nothing but an inducement to
ground a special Inquisition against him, being so detected upon the general
Inquiry. For if hereupon only, he might have been executed (because the
discovery by lotte, was by divine providence directed to fall upon him) then
Joshua needed not to have required any further confession of him. Yet he does
not rest in that detection, but goes further with a most solemn adiuration
(in those days used for Leuit. 5. ver. 1.
an oath; the Hebrew word signifying both, and being translated sometimes
iuramentum, and sometimes adiuratio) in this Josh. 7. ver. 19.
manner: Son, give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto
him, and show me now, what thou have done. urging him upon this general
detection by lot; to a particular confession of the hidden crime, and the
circumstances thereof; albeit the punishment of it was capital. In which
history we find; first a fear conceived by Joshua: but at large, upon the
badde success they had in battle; that it was likely, God was offended with
them: then a care in him to enter into a general inquiry, for the finding out
of some probable and presumptiue matter of inducement, against particular
persons, who were likely, to be the offenders, that had stolen something which
was accursed, and for which God was so displeased. therefore, according to the
direction given by God himself, and the custom of those times, when as God
did more miraculously, and extraordinarily work among his people; knowing,
that albeit the lots were cast confusedly together into the lap; yet God by
his wonderful providence disposes of them, as to his own divine wisdom
seems best; he followed that course in his general Inquiry, of casting
lottes. A general Inquiry, I call it, because, albeit it was most probable,
some heinous offense to have been committed amongst them; yet was it not known
(till God himself revealed it) what kind of crime it was, nor who was likely
to be the committer of it. But after the lot was fallen upon Achan, whereby a
sufficient inducement was given to proceed specially against him: Joshua then
entered into a special Inquiry; by examining and charging him, as he tendered
the glory of God, to tell the whole truth, what he had done. For as yet,
albeit by the lot fallen upon him, there was good probability against him, to
be that grievous offender: nevertheless Joshua had no conjecture, what the
very particular thing was, which he had stolen, nor whether he had any
partners, nor yet knew he any other circumstances of place, time, etc. so
that this second Inquiry was special in respect of the person, but (in some
sort) general in respect of the manner of the fault. which consideration
greatly fortifieth our cause in handling: wherein, after good inducements
found, these Enquiries are special both for person, and for particularitie of
crime.

Whereby, is also argued a fortiori, that whereas by fame, or other good
presumptions and evidence; a man is detected of crimes most secret before: there
the Magistrate may exact the parties own confession: especially if it be not
so penal, as either life or limme, which this of Achan, was. Next may be
gathered, that to confess unto a Magistrate duly charging a man, is to
confess unto God: thirdly, that to make such confession to God, is to glorify
him: And lastly, that in like cases, the party is bound to disclose the
particular circumstances, though perhaps he be not severally and in particular
interrogated of every one: for it is there said, show me now what thou have
done. Whereupon Achan being touched in conscience, and knowing his duty to
the Magistrate; confessed his fault, with all the particularities thereof. If
this were done upon his oath (as many learned interpreters do hold) then may an
oath be urged in a matter criminal, and most penal to the party. If he thus
confessed, and was bound so to do, though it were without oath: then how much
more, when the party is tied by an oath, given by the Magistrate, as it is
proved, it may be lawfully.

And albeit the Treatisour himself confess the effect of that which we have
gathered touching this History: yet he says, the Magistrates charge unto him;
that (remembering the glory of God) he should confess the truth: is none
oath. For it were a hard conclusion (says he) togather, that he is peri^red,
who being so charged, confesses not the truth. For answer whereof, if being
so charged, the party answer not at all, then incurreth he wilful
disobedience; which is no less a crime then Perjury: and is (thereby) also,
to be convicted. But if he answer untruly; then falls he into another
grievous sin. for (as it rests hereafter to be showed) it is no more
lawful or tolerable, to lie unto Gods Magistrate; then it is to swear falsely
before him. And if this were an Adiuration (as himself seems to incline) and
were lawfully done of Joshua: then by the charge of an oath was Achan bound, to
discover the whole truth, for so we read in the place of Ezra before
alleged, according to Iunius and Tremellius translation: he Ezra 10. V. 5.
adjured the chief Pr^stes, Levites, and all Israel, that they should do
according to that point, and they swear. Whereas Calvin, by the form of ^ose
conceived words, which were used in other oaths, ^ongs the people of God,
gathers in his Institutions, that Achan there took an oath: the Treatisour
nevertheless, to confute that excellent, and learned light of Gods Church (for
so he calls him) writes thus, viz. though that form of words, give glory
to God etc. were used in oaths: yet it follows not, that wheresoever it was
used, that was an oath. In deed it must be confessed, that it follows not ex
ipsa vi consequentiae: but by reason of the matter, for that these, or such
like were the conceived, or set words of solemn oaths amongs the people of
God: And because in this action, being for finding out of a truth (otherwise
kept secret) it was necessary to be done as sincerely, as might be: therefore
the argument of Calvin is very probable; to prove that it was done by his oath.
But the Treatisour seems also to admit it, and herein to let this hold go:
and withal little less; then to yield up the whole cause. For an offense
being made known, which is dangerous to the state, and the party being found
by due, and lawful trial: if after (says he) these rigorous exacters in so
mild, and courteous manner, in the name of God shall entreat, or (if they
think good) depose him to reveal the truth in particular (he means, give
him an oath to that effect) no man (I suppose) would find himself grieved,
with their proceedings. Whereby, saving, that he here seems to suppose the
falling of the lot upon Achan, to be a trial and a full and sufficient
conviction of it self: he does in these words, as plainly establish the
oaths that we defend, as may be. But when a trial, and full conviction is
already made; to what purpose, (other then to feed the hearers curiosity)
were it; to minister an oath to the party condemned, (especially having no
accomplices more then in this case) that he shall unfold and recount up every
particular circumstance, of the crime that was by him committed. But if by
those his words, of due and lawful trial, he means nothing else but some
lawful discovery, opening way, and occasioning the Judge, to enter into the
parties special examination by oath: then is he come home iumpe unto them,
whom he so vehemently shaked up before.

When a man is Deue. 21. v. (...). vsque ad 9.
found secretly murdered in the field, and the murderer is not known, nor
suspected: God appointed in his Law, that all the Elders of the next City
thereunto, should use certain ceremonies before the Priests (by whose Ibid.
ver. 5.
appointment, each controversy of blood, and of wound was determined) and then
swear, according to this conceived form of words, viz. Ibid. ver. 7.
our hands have not shed this blood, neither our eyes have seen him who shed
it: that is, none of us (every man swearing severally for himself) have done
it, nor any of us know, who is the murderer. Where we see, there was none
other detection, nor cause of presumption, but the only vicinage, and neerenes
of place. yet even hereupon, the wisdom of God thought good to press them of
the next City, with this necessary oath, partly of purgation, and partly of
Inquiry, even in a crime capital. For if any of those Elders were the
murderer, or were an accessory thereunto: was he not thereby driven, either
to damn his soul by perjury: or else to reveal his own shame, to the loss,
not of his honesty only, but also of his life? If this being Gods own law,
be but equal, then how can the exacting, of parties oaths, being upon far
more probable, and strong presumptions detected, and called in question, and
that for crimes not tending to any mutilation of limme, and much less
capital: be thus absolutely challenged for tyrannical, or unequal; as they
be by some, now of late times?

But this argument of ours, the Treatisour goes about to answer by a very
strange question, viz. where is (says he) oath (in this case) given to any
particular person? as if that oathe, which were lawful to be imposed upon many
for one matter; were not also lawful to be given unto one alone, where he
only is suspected thereof? Where there be many several persons, there must
needs be some particular persons, I think. Well, he will then (belike) allow
this oathe to be given, so there be many defendants in one cause. But (says he
further) where is oathe to answer Interrogatories upon unknown, secret, or
barely suspected matter? for the felony is apparent, the offender only lies
hidden: whereas the Inquisitors ex officio have the man before them, whom they
will examine; but the matter (for the most part) is secret, etc. and many times
but a fame of a crime never committed. As if this difference (though it were,
as it is not general) could make any diversity for proving a lawfulnes in the
one, and an unlawfulness in the other? This therefore falls under that head of
his Sophistical devise of such differences, as touch not the very point in
controversy. Besides, there be Enquiries of office (which absolutely he
impugneth) some, as well where the offender unknown, is enquired of in respect
of the apparent crime; as for example in Forgerie, Libelling, Murder, etc. as
there be, when the Crime (being but presumptiue) is enquired of; and the person
suspected, is apparent, as in adultery. Has not the treatisour learned to
note the difference which is, betwixt Crimina transeuntia, viz. where no traces
of the crime do remain after the fact, as of secret conspiracies, seditious
words, and adulteries, etc? and such crimes, as be Permanentia, viz. where
some evidence of the crime committed, does still remain and continue; as in
Murder, Forgerie, lybelling, etc? and yet ye inquiry by the parties
examination upon his oathe (so it be neither Capital, nor for Mutilatio^) is no
less lawful and necessary in the one, then it is in the other.

In (...) Leuit. 5. v. 1.
Leuiticus, a sacrifice is appointed to be made for certain sins, amongst
which this is one, according as Arias Montanus does translate it forth of the
Hebrew. And if a soul, or a man shall have sinned, and have heard the voice of
an Ad uration or oathe, and he a witness either has seen it, or does know
it: if he do not reveal it, he shall bear his own iniquity. That which is
here said; If he have heard the voice of an oathe, the Geneua translation
utters thus in the Margent, (as if it were nearer to the Hebrewe then the
other in that text) viz. If the Judge has taken an oathe of any other. If this
then be the meaning, we are hereby bound to reveal what we have seen, or
known touching that; which the Judge seeks to find out, by another man's
Oathe: yea, though we be not at all pressed therein; much more ought we then to
tell what we know or have seen, touching the matter; when we our selves are
particularly so commanded by the Judge.

Saint Ang. in quaest. Leuit. ad ca 5. quaest. 1.
Angustine expounds it of this case, viz. where a man hears another swear,
and depose falsely. For (says he) this, that place seems to say, that a man
sins, who hears another swear something, that he knows to be false, if
he hold his peace. But he is then said to know, either when he is a witness
of the matter deposed of, or did see it, or was privy to it, that is, did by
any means know it, as either by seeing it, or by hearing him speak of it,
that now swears otherwise. So that he leaves it at large, to extend to
Oaths (falsely) taken, either before a Magistrate; or privately, or how else
soever.

Iunius in his second edition of Annotations upon this chapter, restrains it
only unto such vain, and rash oaths, as men swear extraiudicially: making
him that hears another to swear (without reprehending him) to be guilrie of
sin himself, as no doubt he is. But surely this interpretation of his,
cannot be grounded upon this place: at least the place cannot (by any means)
be only restrained unto this case. For the matter concerning which a man
hears another swear, is the thing (here) principally considerable; and not
the very Oathe it self: because it is not only said: If a man hear the voice
of an oathe: but it is also added (as most material) and ipse testis vidit,
and sciuit, which matter he, as a witness has seen, or otherwise, by some
means has knowledge of; if he shall not declare it, or reveal it, he shall
bear his own iniquity and sin. Therefore it is the matter which the
by-stander is able to witness of (by reason of his sight, or some other means
of knowing it) that (for the avoiding of sin) must be declared.

Again, if it were only meant of him, that hears another blaspheme, or
vainly, and falsely, swear, and does not reprehend, and rebuke him for it:
then could not the verb of Declaring have been used, but rather some word of
rebuke, or reprehension. Thirdly, if it were meant only of the Act of swearing
that is not rebuked; then needed no mention to have been made, of any other
sense, but of hearing only. But we see, that there is mentioned seeing; and
also (with a disjunctive) any other means of knowing it, besides hearing of
the oath: and therefore, that meaning which Iunius gives thereof, cannot
(possibly) be the very true sense of this place. Nay Iunius himself in his
first Annotations, confesses the most to hold, that it ought to be understood
thus: viz. that he sins, who hears an oath given to another man touching
any matter, whereof he has knowledge; if he do not therein disclose what he
knows. So that whether the other depose vainly, falsely, or not, is not here
spoken of, or to be attended: but whether a man conceal his knowledge of a
matter in question, that is convenient to be known unto a Judge. for it is he,
that has authority to use the voice of an oath, or of that adiuration or
charge unto another, which is here spoken of.

By this sense hereof, given by the most, and flowing easily from the very
words themselves, may be gathered; that an oath may be given to the party
enquired of indefinitely, as the Judge (according to law) shall think good to
proceed, even before any witnesses be produced against the party: that this
voice of an oath and charge to swear, may be given; before it be known
whether any, or what witnesses can testify therein: and that a man knowing the
truth touching a matter whereof another is enquired of by oath, ought (for
avoiding of sin) to testify, and to declare his knowledge therein.

Yet because in that place, no mention is (expressly) made, of any other
person but of him, that hears such oath, who also has seen or known
something, and who is to declare and reveal it, or else to bear his own
sin: therefore it is also (very probably) by some taken to have place, when a
man's own self is adjured or charged by the Magistrate, to take oath. For the
person of the Magistrate, or some other must needs be understood besides,
though none be expressed; because it is said: If a man have heard the voice of
an oath, whereby some other person, then the hearer himself, is necessarily
implied. For albeit the Hebrew interpreters do understand it of that adiuration
with curse, which was done by the Priest: whereby he (usually) cursed any
whosoever had committed some particular apparent crime, though the person were
unknown and unsuspected, if they would not reveal it, according to the place
before alleged, out of the 29. Chapter of the Proverbs: yet the Chaldee
Paraphraste, that writ in, or before Christ's time, and of all Interpreters is
of highest and most uncontrolled authority, understands it of the Judge, and
reads it thus, viz. the voice of Adiuration or Execration made by the Judge.

And then out of both these Interpretations does follow: that (without sin) a
man cannot but testific, both against another enquired of; for it is said,
whether he have seen: and also against himself (if it be required) for it is
said, or have known of it. which may as properly be referred to a man's own
fact, as to any other man's: and the rather to his own; because, a man is least
ignorant of his own facts. And upon this latter acception of the place, it
does follow; that a Judge, and Magistrate may lawfully tender and urge such
oathe, and a subject ought not to refuse it: because he shall bear his own
sin, for hearing the voice of an oath given, and for not revealing his
knowledge in that matter.

When a man does deliver money or stuff, of trust, Exodus 22. V. 7. and 8.
to be kept by his neighbor; if it happen to be embezelled away, and therefore
thought to be stolen, if the thief be not certainly known, or found: he, to
whom they were so delivered in deposito, though he had nothing for his pains,
nor there be any presumptions against him, that he has withdrawn it: yet (by
the law of God) must take a necessary oath, of purgation and Inquiry (upon
the other man's only suspicion) before the Judges; not only, that it is
stolen (which might justly perhaps be doubted) but also, whether he himself
has put his hand; that is by any direct, or indirect means have fraudulently
dealt, touching his neighbors said goods, or no?

The same is also a little after established by God, touching any Ibid. V. 10.
and. 11.
quick goods, happening to be left in deposito: For if a man deliver unto his
neighbor to keep; ass, ox, sheep, or any other beast, and it die, or be
hurt, or be taken away by enemies, and no man see it: An oathe of the Lord
shall be between them twain, that he has not put his hand unto his
neighbors goods, and the owner of it shall take the oathe, and he shall not
make it good. where appears, that upon the mutual suspicion only, of the
one against the other, both the parties are to take such oathe, which, though
it do tend to the discovery of a man's own shame, dishonestie, fraud and
damage (if he happen to be guilty) yet is he of necessity to take it, or
else to be holden pro confesso and conuicto; and is so well allowed also to
be given by the Judges, and to be taken by the parties; that it is there
called, an oath of the Lord.

Now that he must necessarily take such oathe, though the cause be
criminal, so that he must either discover his own turpitude, be sinnefully
forsworn (if he be indeed guilty thereof) or else be convicted as guilty
for his contumacie; does very plainly Leuit. 6. ver. 2, 3. 4 and 5.
appear by Leuiticus: where a sacrifice of atonement for such a sin of
perjury is prescribed, besides satisfaction unto the party wronged. If any
do sin (says the Lord) and deny unto his neighbor that which was taken
him to keep, or that which was put to him of trust, or does by robbery or by
violence oppress his neighbor, or has found that which was lost, and
denies it, and swears falsely: for any of these things that a man does,
wherein he sins: when (I say) he thus sins and trespasseth, he shall
then restore the robbery, etc. So that hereby is manifest, that in sundry
criminal matters, even of a man's own turpitude such as be prohibita quia
mala, he may be urged to a necessary oathe, and namely touching his
deteining (with denial) of goods left (upon trust) with him: also touching
robbery, violence, and oppression by him supposed to be committed against his
neighbor. But there could never be any possibility in a matter secretly
carried, either of bewraying a man's self to his own shame, loss, or else for
swearing himself, as is noted by this place; if he might safely, nay if he
were bound in conscience to do (as these Innouators now pretend, and practice)
viz. to refuse to answer directly, and particularly, to any of these crimes
that be asked of him, with oath, or without his oath, but might lawfully put
it over to be proved only by witnesses. and then were it wholly in vain to
appoint sacrifice for a sin: into the danger of which sin a man could not
possibly fall, except he would first commit another sin.

Seeing then by the equity of Gods own Judicial Law, in a matter criminal,
and of a man's own turpitude, he may be examined, and must necessarily answer
by oathe, or else shall be holden convicted, even upon a private man's suspicion
alone, seeking therein but his own particular interest and satisfaction: how
much rather upon sound, and good detections, and presumptions, may this be
urged by a Magistrate, and ought not to be denied by the subject, where a
common good to an whole Christian state is sought, and the parties own
reformation, by due correction and punishment, concurring besides, with the
laws of the Land, that iequireth this part of obedience in all subjects?

This Judicial, and decisorie oathe here spoken of, the Treatisour calls a
public oathe, in respect (as it seems) it is openly, and Iudicially given
before the Magistrate; and confesses it to be necessary: notwithstanding it
be but touching a private matter of goods, betwixt party and party. and
therefore a minori ad maius: or (as Lawyers speak) a fortiori, it must needs
be more necessary for a public crime, then for a private trespass; because
the poison and malignity of the public, may prejudice, and plague the whole
common weal: if not always directly, yet by the lewdness of the example,
and may give cause of offense unto the well disposed.

If a man Number. 5. ver. 14.
bemooued with a jealous mind, or (as the Hebrewe utters it) if the spirit
of Jealousy come upon him, so that he is jealous of his wife, that
(perhaps) is defiled: or if he have a jealous mind, so that he is jealous
over his wife which is not defiled, and so the matter doubtful: Ibid. verse.
13. Ibid. verse. 15. Ibid. verse. 19. 20, 21 and 22.
then the Lord in such case appoints, that the man shall bring his wife to
the Priest, etc. and the Priest shall charge her by an oathe, and say unto the
woman: If no man has lain with thee, neither thou have turned to uncleanness
from thine husband, be free from this bitter and curssed water. But if thou
have turned from thine husband, and so thou art defiled, and some man has
lien with thee besides thine husband, (then the Priest shall charge the woman
with an Oathe of cursing) and he shall say unto her: The Lord make thee to
be accursed, and detestable for the oathe, among thy people, and the Lord
cause thy thigh to rotte, and thy belly to swell: and that this c^rsed water
may go into thy bowels, to cause thy belly to swell, an^ thy thigh to rotte:
then the woman shall answer, Amen, Amen.

In which course of proceeding, I observe to the purpose in handling, that this
strait Inquiry most dangerous to the body and soul of the woman, if she
swear falsely: is grounded only upon the jealous suspicion of her husband:
that it is in a crime capital to her, if she be guilty, and shall choose to
confess it; rather then to forswear her self (with hazard of soul, and of a
most loathsome disease of the body) for an adultresse (by the same law) was
to be stoned to death: and that it is of great turpitude unto her, and is
prohibitum quia malum: and lastly, that it is in a hidden, and secret crime
even in thesi, of his own nature, and in general. For the slender remnants of
honest, and dishonest, left even to the very reprobate, ever since the fall of
our first parent, does remove this action (even where it may be lawfully
committed) from the sight, and knowledge of others, so much as may be.

And in this Ibid. V. 13.
place, it is hidden and secret exipsa hypothesi: because the case is put, that
there neither be witness, nor she taken with the manner, and yet the husband
has her in jealousy. So that if God (in his divine wisdom) found it equal
and just, for satisfaction only of the strange humor of jealousy, not only
(upon pain of conviction) to make her undertake so perilous a kind of
purgation, but also to charge her by an oathe, and a most solemn curse, to
declare the truth in a crime of this quality, and consequence to her life:
how can the wisdom of those, that challenge oaths of far more apparent
mildenes in diverse points noted, stand so opposite to the wisdom of an whole
Realm for many ages together: and being so strongly warranted by the wisdom
of God, both in this, and the former Iudicialles, serving for the governance of
his own peculiar people?

In answer of this example out of Gods law, the Treatisour says, that the
woman is not here called for ex officio: but upon the complaint of her
husband. But if it be convenient and equal, upon that most slender ground of
jealousy, and upon the husbands suspicious denunciation, who perhaps is
weary of his wife, and minds to put her away, if his jealous humor in that
behalf, be not satisfied: how much more then is it equal and just upon the
Judges office to be done, who is no way privately interessed, and for the
satisfaction or preservation of the church, or common weal, to remove a common
scandal and offense, by the parties clearing, or by his punishment? The
consequence of this mine argument to be good, for proof of a far greater
equity, in the one then in the other, viz. rather to minister such oathe of
office, then upon an Accusers complaint, the laws, both Civil and Canon, and
the customs of all nations abroad, do warrant unto us. all which, do permit
an oathe touching a crime, to be ministered unto the defendant ex officio
Iudicis, and yet they all do deny it upon an accusation, or upon a complaint
made by a voluntary and private party. And therefore this difference by him
taken is such, as makes flat against him: without working of any diversity,
to infer an equity in the one, and an injustice in the other, as is
pretended. therefore untruly, and vainly does he surmise, that out of this
example we will conclude, that every Judge Ecclesiastical, to satisfy his
jealous suspicion of any crime, may appose by oathe, and compel men to their
purgation: a matter repugnant unto reason, unto law, and unto all practice.
For no man's only bare suspicion, besides an husbands; can (by any equity)
work an interest to drive an other to purgation of such a crime, by his, or
her oathe.

The examples also of godly men reported in Scriptures, do sufficiently
condemn the froward disobedience of refusers of such oaths, in these days.
For they being asked (sometimes) particular questions dangerous to themselves
(if they had not stood clear) and, sometimes charged (even but in generality)
to answer what should be demanded of them, they used not any such frivolous
tergiuersations, and euasions, as this sort of people, and as Seminary
Priests do. that is to say; Let me know every point before, that you will
ask me, and then I will tell you what I will do: or I will answer so far as
I am bound by law, and by a good conscience, whereof (by your leave) I my self
will be Judge. or I will not swear to accuse my self, or my brother, for that
is contrary to charity: or where be mine accusers, let the^ stand forth? or
if you have any thing against me, prove it by witnesses: with such like a
number.

For when the Prophet Jeremy Ierem. 38. verse. 14, 15.
was charged by the King in a generality, to answer that which he would
ask him; he stood not upon refusal, till he might know what it was, but
made this doubt only, whether if he told truth, the King would not kill
him. which when the King had promised he would not, then Jeremy condescended
to answer what he would demand of him. signifying thereby to us, that
being asked by a Magistrate, if it were not a matter capital unto him, he
ought, and would discover it. If this were done upon an oathe, then must we
do the like, in the like case also. If he did yield to answer unto
Interrogatories uncertain, and unknown unto him both in generality, and also
in particularitie, and yet thought himself bound to say the truth without
oath: then much the rather would he have done it unto those, whereof the
quality he should have known before hand; but especially upon his oath. And so
ought we, being so deeply charged. Yet these questions so generally to be
propounded unto him, might have been of matters, both criminal and very
penal unto himself, and unto others also.

When the same Ierem. 37. verse. 13. and 14.
Prophet was charged, with a particular crime, of intended defection and
fleeing to the Chaldeans, by Irijah a chief officer, sitting Iudicially in the
gate of Benjamin: he did not refuse directly to answer, by putting him off to
prove it by witnesses, or by any such like dilatorie: but answers roundely,
and truly, in the very contradictorie (as it were joining issue with him) and
says: That is false, I flee not to the Chaldeans. Now, if the Prophet had
been guilty, would he have falsely denied it, or have made any shifts to
avoid it, think ye? or would he say untruly, being unsworn, more then
being sworn? I think no man will so imagine of the holy Prophet. and
therefore (by this example) a Magistrate in authority or a superior, must be
directly dealt with, in questions pertinent, that he shall ask; whether upon
oathe, or without oathe; so far as godly Laws do require, albeit the
matter be criminal, (as it was in this case) unto the party Interrogated.

When 2. Reg. ca. 5.
Elisha the Prophet (upon none other detection but divine revelation) entered to
the examination of Gehazi his servant, touching a criminal matter; and that
without any accuser formal, or representative, besides himself: did he not
require an answer of him; and was not the servant (before God) bound to
answer him, and that truly? If here it be said, that he ministered none
oathe unto him, it is true: yet was it no more lawful for Gehazi being his
servant, and under his authority, to deny it by falsehoode, (as he did) or to
have answered not directly, or else nothing at all; then it would have been for
him, to have slatly forsworn it. So that every one in authority, that
requires an answer of a guilty person (being under his power) in a matter of
crime: must needs either drive him to a lie, which Sapient. 1.
slays the soul; or else to accuse himself of a matter dishonest, as these
men speak, and gainesay.

When Peter, and John Act. 4. V. 7. and 8
were examined in the great Council upon this Interrogatorie; By what power,
or in what name they had done that miracle? Peter full of the holy Ghost,
answered plainly and truly; though (happily) it might have been capital
unto him. Then what are they full of, who being required by authority to
answer unto matters of no such danger, unto them; do nevertheless refuse to
answer directly, or who will not answer at all? for upon a man's own
confession Judicial, though he be not sworn, he may as well be convicted, as
if he had answered upon his oathe.

In the proceeding Act. 6. verse. 11.
against Saint Stephen, there were (in truth) none Accusers, but those, who
(by subornation) denounced him to the Priests, and who are twice Ibid. V. 13.
and ca. 7. verse. 58.
called witnesses, because they deposed against him. yet when the high Priest
asked him Act. ca. 7. verse. 1. etc.
thus: Are these things so? Stephen refused not to make answer, and that
truly; howbeit, they made his Apology to be capital unto him.

Likewise when the Act. 21. verse. 38. and 39.
Captain asked of Saint Paul, whether he were not that Egyptian, which had
made a sedition etc. Paul answered directly, and slatly denied it.

Likewise the same Saint Paul Act. c. 24, 25. and 26.
in all his other several conuentings before authority, mentioned in the Acts
(even at the suite and accusation of a party) refused not particularly, and
truly to answer to all that was objected, by confessing some, and denying other
some of the crimes, by his adversaries, and accusers imputed to him. But if he
had learned the ready way that is now devised, not only to answer accusers
objections, but the Magistrates own questions: he might have wiped them off
quickly (without such long Apologies) and have willed them only to prove
what they said: yet neither (expressly) affirming, nor denying any thing. No
doubt, though the Apostle, or any of those other godly men mentioned, had been
guilty of any thing: yet being duly asked, they would not have stood mute,
nor have answered doubtfully, neither would they have affirmed more without it,
then they would have done upon their oaths, if the course of the proceeding
had admitted it, and that their oaths had been required.

It is therefore well Chromatius in 5. Matthew. facit. can. 36. council. Tolet.
quart.
said by an ancient, and learned Writer thus: Dominus inter iuramentum, and
loquelam nostram, nullam vult esse differentiam: God makes no difference
betwixt our speech, whether it be without oath, or upon our oath. And Thom. 2.
secundae. qu. 69. art. 1.
Aquinas says; if he which is brought into question, and interrogated by the
Judge without his oathe, shall answer untruly, that therein he sins deadly.

The old Christians in the Primitive Church, were as far off from these
shifts of answering unto most dangerous Interrogatories demanded of them, even
by heathen Magistrates; as they were from all untrue answers thereunto. which
point I mind to make apparent out of such of the Ancient Fathers especially,
as be auowched by the Note-gatherer, for condemnation of these examinations,
and of exacting men to confess their own crimes. so that hereby it may be
the better judged, how sclenderlie their Writings by him quoted, do serve
this turn.

Tertullian herein is very plentiful, especially in his Book called
Apologeticon: yet is he quoted by the Note-gatherer, for a condemner of
examining and interrogating men, touching their own crimes, of which sort ye
very profession of Christianity was then accounted to be. A Christian (
Tertull. in Apolog. cap: 1.
says he) if he be endited, or denounced to the Magistrate, he rejoices in
it: if he be accused, he propounds no defense, when he is interrogated, he
most willingly confesses: and when he is condemned, he gives them, or God
thanks. By his complaint in the same place, for that Christians were not dealt
with as other offenders were, he both shows, what then was practiced in
Criminal proceedings, by the laws Civil: and also, his own good lyking
thereof. At the Chrstians hands ( Tertul. ibidem.
says he) that only is expected which suffiseth to stir up the peoples
hatred against them; that is, an only confession of the name of a Christian,
not an examination of his crime: whereas if you hold conisance against any
offendour, as a mansleaer, sacrilegious, incestuous person, or public enemy
to the state, (these being usual praises given unto us Christians) you do not
pronounce sentence upon the bare confession of the name of the crime: but you
enquire also of the quality of the fact, the number, place, manner, time
priuies, and partners. But concerning us, you observe no such matter, which you
ought no less to do, then with those others. And again: Ibid. Apolog. cap. 7.
We are still said to be murderers of infants, and incestuous persons: yet you
have no care to find that out, which of so long time has been said of us.
Therefore either get it out of us, if ye believe it: or else refuse to believe
it, because you cannot find it to be so. Then Ibidem.
follows this: You command Christians by a far stranger kind of torture,
viz. not that they should declare, what they do commit: but that they should
deny themselves to be the men, which in deed they are. Which urging of
Christians to declare what they had committed, that Tertullian does not
disallow, if the Magistrates would have taken that course with them, appears
also by Tertull. Apo log. cap. 3.
another place. Whatsoever we are charged (says he) to have committed
secretly, though by others the same be committed openly: yet we will answer it
point by point, or every jot; yea even that, for which we are reputed as
pestilent persons, as vain, and as men, worthy to be scorned and condemned by
others.

Saint Augustine also in his very book alleged by the Notegatherer, does
plainly establish and allow of Oaths taken concerning a man's own offenses,
being in deed such also in their own nature. If perhaps (says he) August.
sermon. 28. de verbis Apostol. cap. 6.
thine oathe be urged, (meaning a Decisorie oathe be exacted of thee by a
private person) say not, I will not swear: for it comes of evil which thou
do, but yet of his evil, that does exact it of thee. Insomuch as thou have
none other means but thine oathe, to purge, and clear thy self, of the
matter in handling. But it may (perhaps) be said, that the oathe here meant,
may be as well in a cause pecuniary, as criminal: hear therefore his judgment
in that August. ibid. cap. 10.
pointalso. When one that is in deed a wicked thief (says he) hears
another, who knows not whether he have committed that theft, say unto him;
swear, whether thou have stolen it or not: if then he shall answer and say,
it is against my conscience, for a Christian may not swear: then watch me such
a fellow; turn from him but a little; let that matter alone which thou wast
then in hand with; talk with him, of other by-matters: and (no doubt) thou
shall take him swearing a thousand times: who (under color of godliness)
refused before, but to take one oath. And the same Father again, touching the
self same crime of theft: August. ep. 137.
We knew (says he) at Millaine in that place where the memory of Saints is
celebrated, and whereas devils very strangely, and terribly do confess and
discover themselves: that a certain thief that came to that place, with
purpose even there to forswear the theft, and so to deceive him, that put him
to the oathe: yet was compelled to confess the theft, and to restore again
the things stolen. both which places do plainly show, that even for matter
of theft, (a crime not simply capital by the Civil laws which there ruled) it
was both lawful, and usual to tender oaths. And the same father speaking of
those who denounce other men's crimes to have them reformed; he notes unto us,
the use of oaths therein at that time: August. in qu. Leuitic.
In denouncing others (says he) this moderation is always to be used by us,
that we relate it unto such, which may rather help then hurt him, (in case
the party shall swear falsely) either by correcting him, or by deprecation to
God for him: so that he will by confessing his fault, apply this remedy unto
himself.

Saint Chrysostom albeit he advises men (as unto the better) rather to loose
a piece of their money, then to tender a Decisorie oathe, or wager of law unto
him, whom they see forward enough to swear, though perhaps it be falsely: yet
does he not deny, but they also might lawfully do it: and withal testifies,
that such necessary oathe was in those times imposed to exact men's
confessions, whether they had stolen some certain thing or not. It is
Ch^ysost. Homil. 16. ad pop. Antioch.
better (says he) to loose your money, then to tender that oathe to your
neighbors: for to remitte this when you might, is no small honor given to God.
For when thou shall say to God, that for his glory I have not adjured, or
urged an oathe of him, who had done naughtily by stealing from me: for such
honor, God will give thee great meed. By the which sayings of the said ancient
fathers it is made manifest: that oaths, touching not only matters supposed to
be offenses and crimes; were, and might then be imposed upon defendants, by
Magistrates: but also touching mere crimes in their own nature, and that upon
the Instance of a plaintiff particularly interessed, but in his goods, and
chattels. And yet be all these places (almost) quoted by the Note-gatherer, in
condemnation of such oathe: so hard was his hap to heap up such store of
places out of Authors, which make directly against his own intention.

This sort of oath was not only thus allowed in the old church: but commanded
to be put in ure (as lawful and consonant unto Gods word) against persons
conuented, and had in suspicion for some offense, even by the discipline of one
Church; which the most, and hottest oppugners of this oathe, do reckon to be
best, yea, and (almost) to be the only reformation, that may rightly be so
called. For in the discipline of France concluded of in the National Synodes
there, holden in the years 1559. 61. 63. and 65. it was Tit. Eccles. Senate or
Consistory art. 12.
thus decreed: the faithful may be constrained by the consistory to tell the
truth; so far forth as it derogateth nothing, from the authority of the
Magistrate. They may be constrained, says that discipline: but there is no
compulsion but either Civil, which they will not arrogate to themselves, as
torture, or racking, imprisoning, fining, etc. or else by the parties oathe,
which upon pain of perjury, if he once swear, or upon pain of conviction,
if he will not; does, as it were, constrain a man to say truth.

And that an oathe is meant (indeed) by this Canon, of the French Churches;
we are taught both by the history of Camperell a Minister of Geneua: and also
by that, of those who daunced in one widow Balthasars house, there. For by this
Cities example and model, the French discipline, was (almost wholly) plotted.
For as I have touched (howbeit to other purposes in the second part of this
Apology) the said Camperell was Inter epistola^ Calvin. in fol. page 421. and
422. vide 2. part. page 91.
appointed by the consistory of elders there, to be examined upon his oath,
touching 3. Interrogatories; whereof also two concerned what he had in his very
purpose, and intention of mind. The dauncers (because at first they denied it)
were Calu. Farello. page 64. epistol. in fol. vide 2. part. page 139.
put to their corporal oaths to declare the whole truth of that meriment. But
that all Dancing is holden there as an offense, and grievous Crime; appears
by the Ordonnances of Geneua; and by the very last frame of Discipline
concluded 1571. by the French Churches. So that we may conclude this place,
that this oathe in a Criminal matter, tendered by one in authority, being
warranted by the politic laws of the Realm, or the Church: ought not to be
refused, except there were some direct Prohibition thereof, by the law of God.
But least of all, may it (without the wilful sin of Disobedience against the
Ordinance of God) be refused by any, being so manifoldly thus approved unto us
even positiuely; by the holy Scriptures, by the ancient Fathers, and by other
Modern Churches reformed, in every of the points before challenged.

CHAP. XII. An answer to such objections, as be pretended to be gathered from
Divinity, Divines, and from the Examples of godly men; against ministering
oaths unto parties, in matters of their own crimes.
AFter so many, and (to mine understanding) plain proofs made out of the
word of God, with some testimonies of the practice, and allowance of this
oathe in the Primitive Church: it may be maruailed (perhaps) that any thing (as
from Divinity) should to ye contrary be alleged. Nevertheless, besides four
discrepant opinions, one of the^ varying from another, and holden by the
Innouators about this matter, howbeit, each of them tending either to the
abridging, or else to the whole condemnation of this oathe; (which four come to
be discussed in the next Chapter) there be also sundry other objections made
against it, which are here to be considered. Whereof some are pretended to be
gathered out of the word of God; and some are taken from Divines. And of these
later sort, sundry are by way of Allegation out of their writings; and some
others are brought from their Examples. Of those reasons that are pretended to
be drawn from the word of God, I place that of the Treatisour in the first
place, as most general; wherehe says; that by this oathe Gods
sacredinstitution is greatly perverted, and forced to another end and purpose,
then he in his divine wisdom has appointed. And the Note-gatherer says, it
is contrary to Gods word. But why, and how it should be found contrary to Gods
institution in his word, otherwise then is in part before showed, in mine
Epistle to the Reader, and in other places of this Apology, as occasion has
been offered; they bring no proof at all. And yet without any better
underpropping, the Treatisour affirms this; even for proof of another point;
viz. that by this oathe, no due honor can be given to God, but that he is
thereby rather dishonored. In deed if it were contrary to Gods institution;
then, no doubt, God is thereby dishonored. For having laid down, that the
true use and end of an oathe is, that due honor may be given unto God, the
truth confirmed, Justice maintained, Innocence protected, and an end had of
strife, and controversy: he thereupon avouches his said former assertion.

It seems to me, that all these ends cannot concur, and meet in every
oathe, though otherwise it will be yielded most lawful. For in case the party
himself, by an Assertorie oathe do untruly swear (being guilty of some
crime or offense) or whether witnesses shall truly swear touching the said
parties guiltines: it is most clear, that (by such oaths) none Innocence is
protected, but nocencie either more heaped up upon the party himself; or else
discovered by the witnesses. Besides, when Abraham's servant swear to him, that
he would not take a wife for his son, from amongst the Infidels of other
nations: Or when a man swears allegiance, homage, or fealty: or faithful
service and obedience to his general, or takes oathe of her Majesty's
supremacy, and such like: what strife and controversy (I pray) do these make
any end of? Yea, or what Innocence is thereby protected? seeing these oaths
be rather for reteyning the party in his Innocence, if he stand (before)
well affected: or else do serve, for discovery o his hollow, and treacherous
heart; in case he shall make refufall of them. But let us see how he proves;
that the oathe which we treat of, answers not unto the other ends, which
are by himself propounded. The truth in controversy (he says) is not
thereby confirmed, since there is none issue joined in this case, between
parties affirming and denying. As if the truth of no matter need to be
confirmed by oath, saving where there is first a judicial controversy. Yet he
himself speaking before of the ends of an oath, made no mention of this truth
in controversy; unless he will say, that he confounded the second of these
ends with the last. Furthermore, what controversy was there betwixt Abraham,
and his servant: or betwixt one that tendereth, and a Justice of peace, or
other, that takes an oath to the Supremacy? Nevertheless, it has been often
declared, that the very means, or inducements which open way to Inquiry in
proceeding of Office; are as a party that charge the other; and so a
judicial controversy depends. And that there need not to be any other
formal party always in judgment, is many ways showed in the second part,
even by Vide part. 2. ca. 15.
criminal proceedings mentioned in Scripture. yea what Scripture is there to
require always a party promouent, as of necessity? Thirdly, there is even
here a kind of co^testatio litis, or joining of issue in ye proceeding of
mere Office: viz. betwixt the denunciation, fame, or some other inducement as
it were affirming, and charging: and the parties denial, that is conuented.
which point answers also to that other argument of his, by which he would
prove; that Justice thereby is not maintained, because there be not three
persons in judgment. Furthermore, if such Justice and Judicial course by
three, were necessary in every lawful oath, by the word of God: then should
all Promissorie oaths be utterly unlawful. In which, there be but the party
promising, and he to whom the promise is made: yet not iudicially, for the
most part.

He goes further, and to prove that an end of controversy cannot ensue upon
such oath; he uses (in effect) his next precedent reason, viz. because no
quarrel, nor complaint is anyway depending. First there is a complaint made,
and depending, before such oath be tendered; and I have showed how. Secondly,
if there were not, yet an end of controversy might thereupon ensue, in that
the party burdened by presumptions; might (perhaps) thereupon be cleared and
dismissed; and so the matter in question, ended. Thirdly, do not the Lords of
the Counsel, and do not Judges and Justices of Peace (oftentimes) lawfully
examine sometimes parties only, and sometimes witnesses; even where no
Judicial suit depends? Lastly, he mistaketh the place in the Epistle to the
Hebrews; if he imagine that upon any single man's oath taken, every
controversy, should (thereby) presently be decided and determine, according to
that oath: which matter rests to be showed Cap. huius part. vltimo.
hereafter.

He says also, that it rather makes more contention, then ends
controversy. Indeed, he, or such other mislikers have thereupon (of very
late time) taken occasion to make great stirs and contentions in this Church,
and common weal. But assuredly, this oath (otherwise) tends to ending of
matters doubtful, and in question; either by the punishment, or else by the
clearing of defendants; and not to procure any accusation as he surmiseth, and
calls it: which is known and entered into, before any oath be tendered.

Yet Innocents hereby (says he) are not cleared, since there is no complaint
or accusation, iudicially exhibited. as though a man privately charged with
some offense toward his neighbor; may not also privately clear, and approve
his innocence, and integrity unto him, by his oath; except there were first a
public judicial complaint, or accusation presented up betwixt them. Besides,
I have before showed, that many oaths may lawfully be tendered and taken, where
none end of clearing Innocents, but rather of charging nocents, is propounded.
Thirdly, it may fall out, that by such oath, Innocents shall be cleared; in case
no pregnant proof shall afterward be brought.

But if all these ends must concur unto every lawful oath; how is the
Treatisour constant with himself: at least, how does his former argument
hold, whereby he would confute these oaths, for that they were neither (says
he) for assurance of duty, covenant, contract, or promise, neither yet for
confirmation of truth in controversy? for if any one of these last recited
will serve, to maintain the lawfulnes of an oath; then what need all the other
ends jointly? and if some one of these must (necessarily) be found in every
lawful oath; then to what purpose serve those other several ends of oaths, here
not required, nor mentioned: viz. that honor may be given to God, Innocence
protected, and Justice maintained? Seeing there may be assurance of duty,
covenant, contract, or promise given, without any seeking to glorify God
thereby: as heathens oaths of obedience to their superiors; and any other men's
oaths, for assurance of promises, etc. without respect to protection of
Innocence, and without such Judicial course; namely, as may happen in private
co^merce, betwixt man and man. From these reasons by him simply propounded; I
will now come to his reasons, by way of comparison. He condemns this oath by
comparing it to Herod's oath; that as that was general, to give whatsoever the
damsel would ask; so these are to answer, whatsoever shall be demanded.

This his imputation unto Ecclesiastical courts of tendering such general
oaths, which he so often, and almost only beats upon, to the intent to give
a better luster to the weakness of the cause he defends: I have (as several
occasions have been given) declared to be a mere slander. Nevertheless, it
was not the generality of Herod's oath which was condemned. For the prophet
Jeremy made unto ye king, as general a promise of answering what he would
demand of him; as Herod made of giving, unto the dancing damsel. But it was
the rash unadvisedness of it, rising upon a carnal delight: and when he had
made it, a more unlawful performance, of a thing simply wicked: which are the
things, therein to be condemned.

Next to his collections by discourse of reason, I place his answers unto
objections; which are supposed may be made for establishing general oaths, or
other more particular, yet in causes criminal to the party examined. The first
of which; is that of Ioann. 18. v. 19. 20. 21.
the high Priests, who examined Christ of his disciples and doctrine: and he
put them of, to those that heard him: saying, he had spoken nothing in secret.
But, neither answering to interrogatories being so general, as this was, nor
general oaths are defended. And if they were, yet it is not the example of the
high Priest, refelled by Christ, that any would allege; as he pleasantly does
insinuate, to burden them, and the cause with the greater weight of envy, and
prejudice. But touching this objection and the true understanding thereof, more
fully in the next Chapter, as in a more fit place.

Touching the next supposed objection, (he says) It is not any sufficient
allegation to say; that the party deponent is no further bound to answer,
then the law requires, how general soever his oath be; since it is not safe
for the conscience of such a deponent, to stand upon terms, and questions; how
far by law, and by what law, he is bound to answer.

Not safe for his conscience, etc? is not this plainly and directly to leave it
unto the liberty, and free choice of each deponent, in every cause whatsoever,
to refuse to take any oath? the^ which, what can give greater strength unto
that detestable error of Anabaptisme? for if it be not safe for his conscience,
to put it upon the question, how far by law he is bound: then may, and also
ought the Anabaptist, and every other fantastike, to be a Judge for himself;
whether to take any oath at all, or only so far, and in what cause himself
lists, under pretense of his conscience. In that he says, how far by
law, etc. it seems to me, that he is in doubt; both, that Gods law and all
the laws of the land are against the refusal of such oathe; and yet that he
would (nevertheless) arm all deponents against taking this oath, because it
may not be done (forsooth) with a safe conscience. In yt he further adds, and
by what law; it is probable, he would thereby insinuate; that howsoever it will
not be thought good by many of the^ to be resused, when it shall be imposed in
courts of the temporol law: yet if the same oath be imposed by force of
ecclesiastical law, that it cannot then be so safe, unto the deponents
conscience. Assuredly, it is most strange, that men pretending such piety, and
sincerity; will teach others thus to dally, with laws, and with their own
consciences. as if the thing were godly enough to be exacted in one court; but
perilous to conscience in another Court: albeit as well authorized unto the
one, as it is unto the other.

Insomuch, as here he yields, that this condition of not being bound by any
such oath taken further then law requires; is observed, or understood, in
ministering the oths which he impugneth: does he not thereby plainly discover
himself, to be an oppugner of that, which is but by law urged? and an
encourager of others to oppose themselves against laws? or else it must
follow, that none that be in authority do know the law therein, besides
himself; or at least will not deliver it truly. does he not also therein
imply, that (in some cases) the laws allow of such oaths; and that his
charge, of ministering oaths that are general, unto all a man's thoughts, words
and deeds, is a plain slander? insomuch as no law requires that, and yet the
takers of this oathe; are no further bound, then the law it self binds.

And lastly it appears hereby, if these oths (restrained but unto that which
law requires) be nevertheless unjust, cruel, ungodly, and tyrannical. that then
the laws of this realm establishing the^, must needs endure, his like hard,
untrue, and disloyal censure.

It has bin often, and no less truly said; that none but Jesuits, Seminary
priests, and such like obstinate Papists have refused this oath in her Majesty's
time, or have charged it to be ungodly; until these new reforming Innouators
did start up: and that both the sorts of the^ do build upon the self same
grounds of argument. In answer of this, he says; that by the ancient and godly
writing entitled, The prayer, and complaint of the Plowman, it appears; that
this kind of general oaths, and examinations ex officio mero were not first
misliked by Jesuits, and Seminary Priests; and from them derived to others,
that mislike government, and would bring the Church to an Anarchie; as the
world has been borne in hand.

For general oaths, we stand not: but who first misliked examination ex officio
mero, or which of these two sorts of mislikers have trodden in the others steps
by imitation; is not so material: as with what truth, or soundnes of reason,
it is misliked by either of the^. I have not the Ploughmans book to peruse,
what is (indeed) there said here of; neither greatly skilleth it, though he
were (perhaps) a good divine, disguised under a ploughmans title and style. If
he had used any reason for his saying, I doubt not but the Treatisour would
have enforced it. But it follows not, that whatsoever in elder times has bin
by some one, (though otherwise learned, and godly) misliked (happily) upon some
particular occasion, or upon private pique of humor: that thereupon the thing
it self should be simply condemned. and if the condemnation by one, have any
such great force; I hope the allowance thereof by many, and the manifold
reasons which commend the lawfulness, and necestie of it; will be of much more
force, then one man's breath, and bare saying can be.

Now follow the Note-gatherers quotations of divines against this oath: how
beit without any allegation set down. But first let us speak of those, which
are from the ancient Fathers.

In the treatise of Origin in. 5. Matthew. tract. 35.
Origin, which he quoteth; I find two sayings touching oaths, the one of which
it is likely he meant. Indeed we find (says Origin) in the law, the use of
Adiuring; as in the book of Number. 5. V. 19.
Numbers, and in the book 1. Reg. 2. V. 16.
of Kings, but I am of opinion, that a man which will live according to the
Gospel, ought not to adjure another. for not to adjure at all, is like to that
commandment of the Lord himself in the gospel; thou shall not swear at all.
And again, it had not been seemly, that the Lord, upon the adiuration of the
high priest, should have answered him, as though he had been thereunto
compelled against his own will: and therefore he neither denied himself to
be the Christ the son of God, nor yet plainly confessed it.

But if here by adiuring be meant all urging of any other to swear in what
cause soever, whether it be by a Magistrate, or by a private person; for a
private, or a public cause; in judgment, or out of judgment, as the first of
them, by the generality of the words may import: then does this saying
condemn all oaths simply (other then such as be voluntarily taken) no less
then it does those oaths, that are imposed, touching a man's own crime, whereof
we speak. so that, in such an understanding, the Notegatherer himself (I
trust) will not allow it: least both his own, and the judgment also that he
imputes to Origin; be both touched, with a spice of Anabaptisme.

Therefore for clearing of Origin, and also some other of the fathers (hereafter
by occasion of his quotations to be alleged) from so foul an error; and from
contrariety also unto themselves in other places: the generality of certain
their speeches, as it were in an absolute condemnation of oaths, as might seem
at first sight; must be all of them restrained, either unto accustomable vain
swearing, which men use in common talk; or else to the exacting and driving of
defendants, to swear, and to wage their law by necessary decisory, and
judicial oaths, for a trifling piece of money, or goods: notwithstanding, the
plaintiff perfitly knows asoreha^d, that if the defendant take it, he is
thereby induced into perjury: Or lastly unto rash, and unadvised oths, or not
being in ye takers power to perform. That al their speeches seeming absolutely
to condemn al oths, ought none otherwise to be understood; you shall have
clear testimonies from themselves, even in those very places (for ye most
part) that be quoted by ye Note-gatherer. So far is it of, that any of them
directs his speeches against this kind of oath that we defend.

Now then for the clearing of the first point; that is to say, that diverse of
such their Inuectiues, are directed against vain, and customable swearing in
common talk. Saint Aug. Ser. de decoll. S. Joan. B. p. Ser. 10.
Augustine says, it is no sin to swear truly: but in that it is agreeuous
sin to swear that which is false; no doubt he is far from the sin of
perjury, who swears not at all.

Saint Chrysostom, who in every of his Homilies (almost) to the people of
Antioch, is most earnest against swearing; insomuch as in one place he Chrysostom.
Homil. 15 ad pop. Antioch.
says, the nature of an oath is to pierce further, and more dangerously, then
a sword: yet he she weth how his speeches thereof (in part) are to be
expounded; and that he does not condemn all oaths simply. which absurdity,
the Note-gatherer must first yield unto; before he can make one drop of that
his own thick mist of quotatio^s, to serve the turn that he ente^deth.

It is no masterie (says Chrysostom. Homil. 4. in sine, ad pop. Antioch.
Chrysostom) to overcome the custom of swearing, if we will but afford a
little endeavor to that end. And a little before that thus: Cast out of your
mouths that wicked custom of swearing. And elsewhere, to like purpose: an oath
(says he) has this evil in it, that whether it be broken, or kept, it makes
a man subject to punishment. But that he here means only the private custom
of swearing; appears by the reason added; for Idem. hom. 14.
the continual swearer, sometimes willingly, sometimes unwillingly; sometimes
when he knows it, and sometimes when he knows it not; when he speaks in
earnest, and when he speaks in jest; and ofientimes being carried away by
anger, or other perturbation; can not choose but for swear himself withal.

To the second point, viz. that their meaning elsewhere is of waging law, by
Judicial and decisorie oaths, tendered by private men about debts, and
chattels, when by such oathe, the party to swear is most likely to be
forsworn: First Athan de pass. and crace Dom. col. 3.
Athanasius says; Let your yea be yea, and your nay nay: thus far we that be
Christians may confirm our speeches: but let us not proceed so far as to fly
unto oaths, and to call God unto witness, for corruptible moneis sake. And in
that sense is it to be taken, which he says a little after: men do Athan.
Ibidem.
not swear only for worldly business sake, ^ut rather to confirm truth; and to
show that which they say to be void of falsehood. therefore if he that swears
be true, and to be trusted, what need is there of his oathe: but if he be not
to be trusted, why do we commit such wickedness, as that for wretched, and
mortal men's cause, we should call God, who is above all, unto witness?

S. Chry. Hom. 15. ad pop. Antioch.
Chrysostom also says thus in this behalf: Let us not drive our brethren to
an oathe. O man, do thou know what thou do herein? in that thou make him
swear upon the holy table, where Christ offered up, is laid: will thou even
there sacrifice thy brother? And again, it Idem. hom. 16.
is better that we lost our money, then to offer our brother an oathe, that he
had it not from us, or owes it not unto us. Likewise, if a man say unto me
(says Chrysostom. hom. 26. ad pop. Antioch.
he) take thine oathe: let him hear, that Christ has forbidden it; and so I
shall not need to swear. But how this is meant by him, is declared in the
same Homily: but Ibid. hom. 26.
you will say unto me (says he) there be many, which if they be not sworn,
will not stick to defraude me of my money: yet will they not deny it upon
their oaths. Man, thou deceiuest thy self; for he that is used to steal,
and to injury his neighbor, will not make doubt (for the most part) to for
swear himself. Where, we may note, that albeit Chrysostom disswadeth
plainetifes from it; yet oaths in those days lawfully were tendered to such,
as were sup^osed to have stolen other men's goods. Which kind of oathe for
stolen goods decisorily, or iudicially tendered; that Chrysostom did not
simply condemn; may be gathered by his words then next following. But Hom. 26.
ad pop. Antioch.
what should I speak (says he) of such oaths, and omit Judicial oaths,
that are used in courts, for which so much can not be said: for there, even
for a matter of ten half pence; oaths are taken, and periuries also be
committed. And therefore a little after; Lo, I say unto you and protest, that
ye reform these superfluous Judicial oaths, and bring rather all such matters
unto me.

Saint Aug. sermon. altero viz. 11. de decollat. sanct. 10. han. Bapt.
Augustines allowance (in some sort) of the like oaths, is also manifest. If
any (says he) shall provoke thee to swear, as (happily) supposing he may
thereby be satisfied, if thou shall swear touching such a matter which he
suspecteth thou have committed, and (perhaps) thou have not done it: if in this
case (I say) thou shall swear, to remove that false suspicion from him, thou
do not sin, as he does who provoked thee.

But an other more full determination of Saint Augustine, touching that which
is meant to be condemned in imposing oaths in private causes; seems to me, to be
apt, and very sound. In him that exacteth an Aug sermon 28. de verbis Domini.
oath (says he) there is great difference, whether he know not, that the other
will swear false, or indeed knows that he will. For if he know not, and
therefore do say, swear unto me: it is not sin then to swear for his
satisfaction, howbeit it is an humane weakness in the exacter. But if the
case be so, that he which exacteth it, knows the other party to have done it;
and yet will compel him to swear, who is ready thereupon to swear falsely;
then is the exacter a very murderer. for though the one do murder his own
soul, by his perjury: yet the other that so exacted it, did Manum interficien:
is impressit, and pressit.
thrust forward, and harden the said murderers hand.

Touching the third, and last point, viz. if their writings by him quoted
against oaths, be not directed against them in any of the 2. former respects:
then it is, in regard of the unadvisedness of such oths taken, or for that the
matter whereof the party swear, was not in his own power to perform. This may be
showed by a place yet unexamined, which he quoted out of Chrysostom. For he
Chrysostom. hom. 14. ad pop. Antioch.
says, Not only those who forswear, but also those, that impose such
necessity of perjury upon others, and those who swear, are guilty of the like
crimes, That this is spoken of rash oaths, not lying in their power to
perform, and imposed also by private persons, his words following do show. In
shops (says he) in stage plays, yeathe Artificer of his apprentice, the
Schoolmaster of his scholar, the Mistres of her maid servant, do now adays
exact oths, for performing of their task enjoined.

And Saint Ambros. in psalm. 118. ser. 14. col. 4.
Ambrose in the place quoted, speaks to none other purpose. for writing upon
these words, I have sworn, and have purposed to keep the judgments of thy
righteousness, says thus: No man swears well, but he that may know what he
swears: to swear then is the judgment of knowledge, and the witness of the
conscience, etc. have light, that is the knowledge of the truth before thee,
when thou disposest thy self to take an oathe, so shall not the bond thereof
hurt thee. The Lord, who came to teach the young ones, to instruct nouices, and
to confirm the persite; says in the Gospel, swear not at all: because he
spoke to those, that were weak. to be short, he spoke not this to the
Apostles apart, but to the multitudes. for he therefore would not have thee to
swear, lest thou for swear etc. and a little afterward thus: Follow not
therefore any man's example in swearing, if it lie not in thy power to observe,
and fulfill what thou swearest.

But the Note-gatherer wills us also (for this purpose) to see an example of
Chrysostom, refusing the oath (as he speaks) and thereto quoteth two
Ecclesiasticallhistories. That Sozom. l. 4. c. 17
which is found in Sozomen, is so far from noting Chrysostoms refusal of an
oath, in respect it concerned some crime imputed to himself; that there is not
so much as mention of an oath, nor of any particular crime. For there is
declared only, how the Synod under Theophi^us cited Chrysostom to appear. and
that he sent unto them a Bishop signifiyng; that he refused not to be judged:
but that he was ready, (so he might know who accused him, and of what crime)
to defend himself; yet always provided, that it should be in a more ample
Synod then that was. for he was not (he said) so foolish, to endure them to
be his Judges, who were his manifest enemies.

The two Chapters by him also Tripartit. hist. li. 10. c. 14. and 37
quoted out of the Tripartite history, have no more color then the other, of
Chrysostomes refusal of an oathe. for none oathe is mentioned at all in either
of them, much less to have been ministered, and therefore none could be
refused by him. The first of them contains, the return, and calling home of
Chrysostom forth of banishment, and the particular occasion of the tumulte
that thereupon ensued. For his enemies being incensed against him, for that
he preached to the people, they sought to depose him from his Archbishopricke,
upon color that he had ordained one Heraclides, whom they (though in his
absence) accused to have caused certain to be whipped, and carried about bound
in chains through Ephesus. so that when Chrysostomes friends desired to have a
more due course of proceeding used in accusing Heraclides; which the faction of
Theophilus of Alexandria withstoode; there fell out thereupon, betwixt the two
factions great bloodshed, and some murder.

The second of these 2. places shows, how when Chrysostoms accusers were much
afraid, lest (to their great peril) he should be acquitted: yet his partial
Judges were content to co^demn him: only upon pretense; that without the decree
of a Synod, he had (being indeed disorderly before suspended) taken upon him to
sit in the Episcopal chair. These two points (I assure you) are in mine
understanding the nearest in any of those chapters; to yt purpose, for which
they are brought, in which respect, I am ashamed, that we which profess the
gospel, should (by perturbatio^) so far be carried: as either not to discern,
that no refusal of oath ca^ hence be gathered, or if we will understand it; should
so untruly, and friuolously by number, and not by weight; quote places that
look nothing yt way.

Of Gregory's writing upon the book of Kings (which he also quoteth) I find no
mention in my book. But I find it noted, that he writ such, and others also,
which were burnt after his death upon emulation, as Johannes Diaconus in
Gregory's life, co^plaineth. His other quotation out of Gregory, touches not
this matter of oathe, and is answered elsewhere. And so what here, and what in
other places before (as they fell in most fitly) I have answered (I trust) althe
Note-gatherers quotations taken out of the ancient Fathers, and other old
Writers.

Whereby (I hope) is justified that which I writ in the epistle to the Reader;
that most of the^ that pertain to this matter of oaths; may seem to have been
collected together, against al taking of oaths whatsoever (though being truly
understood as the same places do expound, no such matter follows thereon)
rather the^ to make any show against oaths in criminal causes; which some of
those places do (in truth, as you have heard) plainly establish, and none do
condemn or disallow. And it appears likewise, that they can no way be
retched out, to touch oaths in causes of crimes; except we expound them
absolutely to condemn all oaths: which to impute unto those fathers were
great injury and untruth; and yet no way aduantageable to this cause.

But both he and the Treatisor, do also assail us (in this point) with some
allegations out of Canons, and later divines: as first, where 6. q. 5. c. quod
autem.
Gratian alleges the said Gregory's authority, that no reason does lay
necessity of proof upon the defendant. What he imagines may follow hereof to
his purpose, I know not: except he think the defendants confession upon oathe,
being first burdened by fame, presentment, or such like; may be accounted for
a proof, undertaken against himself. Besides, that place speaks, when there
is an accusation preferred; and then may not the defendant (by Law, or Canon)
be examined of the crime upon his oathe, unless it be at the time of his
purgation.

He likewise quoteth 2. q. 4. c. consuluisti.
Gratian; alleging an epistle of Steven the fifth, a Bishop of Rome. the words
thereof, which he means, I take it, are these: public crimes are committed
to my judgment, upon the parties willing confession, or upon proof by
witnesses: but those that are hidden, and unknown, are to be left to him, who
only knows the hearts of the children of men. In that the confession (here
spoken of) is required to be voluntary; perhaps he meant absolutely to
infer; that no man may be urged (by his oath) to confess a crime. But what
the matter was, and the circumstances, are first well to be weied. The doubt
there propounded, and to be answered, was this: When young infants are found
dead in bed with their parents; whether the parents were to be put to the
vulgar purgation, of enduring hot burning iron, or scalding water, thereby to
t^ye whether they had not oppessed, nor smothered them? And the answer is;
that these kinds of vulgar purgation, are superstitious, and condemned by the
Canons, as being a tempting of God: and then follows that which is before
alleged. The case then being such; the parents might not (by law) be put to
any purgation at all. For the vulgar aforesaid, is unlawful; and they could
not be put to their Canonical purgation: insomuch as thereby c. quotiens de
purgat. Can.
they should be sworn, touching the very truth of the matter, and that would
induce anceps periurium: in which case an oathe L. Videamus. ff. de in litem
iurando.
may not be imposed. For if they should directly have sworn that they did not
oppress, or smother their infant; in so great uncertainty thereof (as must
needs be, whiles men be on sleep) it might happen: that thereby they should
(in deed) be perjured; though not knowing certainly, whether they had so done
or not. And Archid. m. d. cap. consuluisti. nu. 2. Geminianus ibid. nu. 2. and
3. Praeposit. ibid. nu. 5.
Interpreters do wholly agree, that this was the only reason, why an oathe
might not (in that case) be imposed: and not any regard which was had (simply)
to condemn all urging of men, unto confession of their crimes.

That which the Notegatherer c. vlt. de purg. vulgari.
alleges out of the decretall Epistles only touches the condemnation of
that vulgar purgation, in those times much used. We may read even in our own
histories of a Q. mother in this land before yt conquest; who being charged (by
great presumptio^s) of incontinent life, with the then Bishop of Winchester: is
said in the course of vulgar purgation to have cleared her self, by going
barefooted and unhurt, over nine red-hotte plough-shares, if we may believe
stories.

Oflater Divines, he also quoteth Tyndall, in several places of his works. In
ye first of these, I take it these Tyndall in 5. Matthew. page 208.
words of Tyndal be meant: neither ought a Judge (says Tyndall) to compel a
man to swear against himself, that he make him not sin and forswear. he
yields then (by implication) that in some cases a superior may compel his
inferior to swear: and so much do his words next precedent importe. Indeed
we all confess, that where there is great and apparent probability, that the
party is such a man, who will rather for swear, then confess a truth against
himself; upon such a man, an oath should not be imposed: But where the penalty
is not capital, nor of mutilation, nor none other particular strong
presumption to induce such suspicion touching the party; and especially where
he stands before charged upon good, and probable grounds, to have (in deed)
committed such a fact; there the law will not intend, or presume; but that he
will make further discovery, rather then to be forsworn: quia nemo praesumitur
immemor salutis aeternae, as before has been aleaged.

Albeit Tyndall seem in this place to insinuate (and that truly) that in some
other cases, an inferior may be compelled to take an oath: Yet in the next
place quoted, he takes away all necessary oaths, and leaves none but
voluntary. whereby his judgment in this matter of oaths (though otherwise a
godly martyr) is much lightened. No Judge (says he) ought to make a man swear
Tyndall in resp. ad Morum. page 309.
against his will, for many inconveniences. If a man receive an office, he that
puts him in the room, ought to charge him to do it truly, and may, and
happily ought, to take an oath of him. If a man offer himself to bear
witness, the Judge may, and of some (happily) ought to take an oath: but to
compel a man to bear witness, he ought not.

I would gladly hereupon ask a question of the Notegatherer (who presses us
with this man's judgment) whether he himself do (as the words lie) allow
absolutely of this, and of other his writings; both concerning oaths and other
matters? If he do not, but somewhere reject him; then must he give us leave
also to leave him; and not to believe him; in case he condemn all necessary
oaths imposed by Superiors upon inferiors, so well warranted unto us by
Scripture, both in humane, and in divine matters. But if Tyndall mean but
hereby to disalowe, absolute compulsion to take oaths in worldly matters, then
may his speech be better accepted. For upon refusal thereof in these matters,
the laws appoint not the parties to be tortured till he do it, which were an
absolute compulsion: but either do punish his contumacie, and disobedience, to
the example of others; or else do pronounce him pro confesso, which is but a
causatiue compulsion. And if Tyndall be thought in his words (before) to
condemn also every causatiue or inducing compulsion: then does he contrary
himself. for in his own example of an oath given at taking of an office,
there is this causatiue compulsion to be found. because there is no man but by
his good will, had rather omit such oath, then to take it: and if he take it
not, then is he to be put back, from bearing that office; which is at least a
causatiue compulsion in case he desire the office. but if he be unwilling to
have such Office, and yet may have (as Tyndall says) an oath imposed, then
some oaths may be exacted, and all be not voluntary only.

It is not safe, nor sound, to embrace without all choice, or difference,
whatsoever any godly, or learned man has holden. for being men, sometime they
fail, and sometimes (through heat of co^tradiction) they have their
affections like unto others. And there is no kind of men (I think) now
living, who with greater facility, yea and disdain too; do shake off all
learned writers authorities, not only new, but also of the oldest, (where they
fit not their purposes) then such as now be the chiefest, and almost the only
oppugners of this kind of oath; amongs those, who make profession of the
Gospel.

If this our plea (nevertheless) will not be accepted: I wish the
Note-gatherer would tell me, whether he also will allow of Tyndals judgment
in the points following, viz. though the Obed. of (...), Christian page 137.
kings (says he) by the fal^hood of the Bishops and Abbots be sworn to defend
the liberties of the Church: yet ought they not to keep their oaths, but to
break them. then (in his judgment) not only they may, but they ought to
break their oaths taken, for observance of Magna Charta, and other matters,
at their Coronations.

He elsewhere also writes, Tyndall. page ope^m. 209.
that the lie of David unto Achish king of Gath, whe^he had killed the people,
and sacked the countries 1. Sa^. 27. v. 10.
of the Gesharites, Girsites, and Amalekites; was no sin in him: In that, to
persuade a sick man, that bitter medicine is sweet, is charity. and no sin:
And by the like 2. Sam. 17. v^ 7. etc.
example of the dissimulation of Chushai.

Furthermore Tindall thus Tind page 207.
writes: If a man go out of the country from his wife, and come not at a
certain day to be prefixed, as within a year, or so; let his wife be free to
marry where she will. And again, Tin. page 208.
If the woman depart causeless, and will not be reconciled; though she
commit none adultery; the man ought (of right) to be free to marry again.

And toward the end of his book of practice of Prelates, as it was first
printed in octauo in a Dutch letter; he not only defends it to be lawful
for a brother to marry his deceassed brothers wife (dying without issue)
albeit carnally known by him: but urges it vehemently, as a matter of
necessity, and of Gods moral law, at this day to be performed of all
Christians. which (no doubt) he writ in hatred of king Henry the eight, and
of his then marriage, with the Q. Majesty's mother. In which respect (I think)
those who after gathered together, and printed his whole works; did leave out
all that unsound disputation of his.

But if the Notegatherer, or any other will say, they have good reason to
dissent from him in those points: let them then permit it like wise unto us
(in this behalf) upon no less reason; especially, if Tindal meant to condemn
all oaths simply, which are not merely voluntary.

From their allegations out of Canons, and later divines writings, I come to
their examples. some whereof be urged positiuely, and some negatiuely, that is,
where this oathe was omitted. Of positive, that example of Sir John Oldecastell
L. Cobham and martyr; mentioned by the Notegatherer, comes here to be
handled, for his mislike and refusal of this oathe, as is pretended. Yet M.
Fox (...). Vol. page 666. 2. edit.
mentions no such refusal of an oathe by him, in respect it was criminal;
but for that he would not be sworn in all things to submit himself to the
Church, and so take what penance the Archbishop would enjoin him.

The Notegatherer further says, That many examples of like refusing might be
showed out of the books of the Dutch, French, and Spanish martyrs, so that it
is no new thing. He that voucheth so many quotations before, to so small
purpose; if he had had such ready; it is likely would not have spared his
pains herein, though in truth, it would have given small furderance, or
advantage to his cause. for vivendum est legibus, non exemplis: Every refusal
of a matter by a godly man, cannot bring in an absolute condemnation thereof.
But if those examples he could have brought, be like (as he says) to that of
Sir John Old-castles, Philpots, Cranmers, or Lamberts: then are they not like
to serve his turn; for none of the^ refused, in respect they were to be
examined of matters criminal, as it comes to be discussed hereafter.

But he says also, that all the late fiery Placarts in case of heresy, in
France, Flanders, Germany, and Spain were by inquisition upon the parties
oath, post accusationem, and denunciationem, so as the party knew the matter
first. If he had showed this which he says, to be true; and that oaths in
case of heresy were not given in those countries to the defendants, to the
contrary whereof we have direct evidence from writers of those nations: yet
serves it nothing at all to prove an unlawfulness in this oath, much less
absolutely: for a non facto ad non ius, will prove but a sorry argument. And
this answer may serve unto all his quotations touching examples of omission;
as of William Swinderby, and others, which are brought by him to show,
proceedings to have been in England against Heretics, without exacting an
oath. Besides, it is not the exacting of an oath in heresy, but in other
crimes Ecclesiastical, that we do principally maintain: howsoever he do
seem, rather to allow it in matter of faith, then in others of less moment.
Thirdly, if when they were proceeded with in those countries, they knew the
matter first: then is not that true which he said before of them, viz. that
their refusals were like unto that of the (aforenamed) martyrs of England. And
by this word first, he seems at unawares, to implie a confession, that they
were nevertheless examined afterward by their oaths: howsoever in the self
same sentence he deny it. Fourthly, if by the copulative which he puts betwixt
accusation, and denunciation, he means both them jointly together; then does
he affirm impossibilities: for they be diverse courses of proceeding.
Fifthly, the ground of his mislike, is rather upon the order of time, when the
oath is ministered; then for the Criminal matter, which we speak of. Lastly,
upon an accusers instance, an oath cannot be ministered in any crime by the
Civil law, which those Countries mentioned, do most follow; much less then
upon an accusation of heresy. Furthermore, in that (he says) no Martyr in Q.
Mary's time was forced to an oath until the statute exofficio (so he calls
2. H. 4. then revived for attaching of heretics) and the Popes authority
were restored: which authority is now abolished. It seems he would collect,
that to minister an oath in a criminal cause is ungodly, as being only
builded upon the Popes authority. Indeed, if it were only so grounded; then
were it no less impious in this Realm to build it upon ye unlawful
authority, then his other usurpations are. But there were none martyred, nor
(I think) so much as examined of heresy, till that statute was established,
viz. in the 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. ca^. An. 1554.
Parliament begun 11. Nouemb. and ended 16. Ianuar. For the sentence against
Rogers, who first of all was condemned to be burned; was Fox. page 1030. (...).
edit.
pronounced 19. January 1555. viz. the year after. Then what marvel is it,
when as further then imprisonment, they were not dealt with, or examined:
though an oath were not ministered to any of them? But that in any ordinary
Ecclesiastical court, from the commingin of Q. Marie, till the end of that
Parliament, wherein that statute was revived, such oath was not, for any other
crimes tendered: is (I believe) over pregnant a Negative, then that it can be
proved by him, or by any man. And therefore neither the examples of those who
are pretended to have misliked it, nor the supposed omitting of it, unto some
that were dealt with for heresy; do not, nor can serve to prove any
unlawfulness, or ungodliness to be in such oath, as we defend. So that we may
conclude, that our former reasons used to prove the lawfulness of it by Gods
word; do rest yet unshaken; notwithstanding any objections hitherto made to
the contrary.

CHAP. XIII. Four several opinions of the Innouators, against the parties
taking of oath in criminal causes, with answers also unto their reasons, and
objections.
AGainst the ministering and taking of this oath by a man's own self; the
Innouatours do also hold sundry opinions; and do make many other objections
and arguments, meet to be viewed, and briefly, as may be, answered.

It may not be looked for, that I should touch them all; because not many of
them are come to mine hands; neither (if they were) will leisure serve, nor if
it would serve, were it worth the while, they be so frivolous. but especially
because their conceits, and opinions (in this behalf) are so manifold, so
variable, and intricated with such contradictions one against another, and of
the same man against himself; as (I do assure you) it is a work of more
labor, to set down certainly, what they hold about this matter; then to
confute them. But it is meet that errors should so be, viz. divided into many
heads, one of them hissing against another: howsoever they be tied together by
the tails like Samsons foxes, to set both Church and Common wealth on fire.

So near as I can collect them, their opinions be of four sorts. The first
is of those; who being required to take such oath, truly to answer the
matters, whereof they be brought into question (the chief heads whereof, are
also made known first unto them) will answer neither yea, nor nay, either
touching the truth of the matters, or what they resolve to do, but only
thus, viz. if you have matters against me that be manifest, then proceed to
prove them by witnesses: if they be hidden, then tarry till the Lord come, who
will 1. Cor. 4. V. 5.
lighten things that are hidden in darkness, and make the Counsels of the
hearts manifest. And these (commonly) will call for an accuser. And if it be
told them, that the common voice, a presentment, or other judicial
denunciation, or the public interest etc. is their accuser, that brings them
into question, then come they again to the first point, and bid their
accusers, and their witnesses to come, and stand forth against them.

This dealing, as it is most peremptory and frantic of all the rest, so it
is most unreasonable and dangerous: for it tends to the taking away of all
Judicial courses, both criminal, and Civil. To what purpose should a man
produce witnesses, before the defendant has answered directly, what he
confesses, and what he denies, and would have proved?

Neither is this to deal sincerely, justly, and uprightly, as we would have
others to deal with us. For we should speak the truth one to another, and
not seek to circumuent any, by cautels, and frustratorie shifts; but least of
all in matter of judgment: where, by law, and by the Magistrate (that is lex
loquens) we are required, and be (in conscience) also bound to procure, that
controversies doubtful, may be composed with least ado, and trouble. to the
intent, that which is right and truth in every cause (expedient to be known)
may quickly be known, and come to light. Such froward answers as this is, do
rather put off the Judge with contempt and disda^e, then yield any good
reason, why such oath should be refused.

This pretended dilemma of theirs, has many media or means, to make it easy
to be dissolved. First, a crime may be so manifested, that the supposed
offender becomes (thereby) noted, infamed and scandalous; and therefore fit to
be enquired of; albeit happily the thing be done so covertly, or of his own
nature be so hidden; as it cannot be exactly proved by witnesses. For wicked,
and lewd persons make all provision that may be, that there may be no
witnesses, of their wickedness. And therefore it is meet, that such (being
probably touched) that witness instar omnium be used, and called on by them;
who knows all things, and before whom the whole world stands as a Apocal. 4.
v. 6.
sea of pure Crystal. Some examples of such crimes are showed in the eleventh
Chapter, by the Scriptures.

And what shall witnesses need, if the party himself will not deny it? Or
what if the witnesses be not meet to be known at first, least the party upon
his oath, or otherwise, discover no more (when he once knows them) then he
supposes by them can be deposed? Or what if (at the parties first conuenting)
no witnesses be known, that can testify, but do come afterward unto the
Judges knowledge?

Touching hidden crimes (if they be simply hidden, and in such sort, as is
meant by that place of S. Paul, and by the like rules in law) it is very true;
that they are not to be enquired after, by any Magistrate, neither is any man
bound to reveal such. Therefore it may not be asked of any man (as was done
in Popish shrift) what faults and sins he knows by himself. Such be the
counsels, and secret thoughts of men's hearts, spoken of by Saint Paul in that
place, and all actions also not come abroad at all, nor manifested, either by
fame, or by other good presumptions, or evidences. For before they be (at
least) so manifested, it is not of any possibility, to make inquiry or
question after particular crimes, when they be not so much as supposed to be
done. Concerning which crimes, what the law Ecclesiastical, and practice is, I
refer you to the ninth chapter of this third part. But if they shall be once
so manifested abroad, (as before is declared) then is not the fault simply
hidden, but in part is manifested, and brought to light; and therefore is it
fit, and convenient; that the party be either cleared of it, or corrected for
it.

Besides, that place of S. Paul is not meant of any Judicial proceedings; but
of private, rash, and uncharitable judging of our brother (in the worst part)
without any just ground thereof; as if we would take upon us Gods own office,
and would judge the inward cogitations of another man's heart. Such perverse
judging, our Savior Christ also Matthew. 7. v. 1. Romans 2. v. 1.
condemns in the Gospel. But it pertains nothing unto such inquiry by
oath, as the Magistrate has good enducements, and presumptions for, to enter
into.

Another sort, no less pernicious then the former are those, who will pretend
not to refuse to take an oath in a cause criminal: but yet they will do it
with this limitation and protestation, that they entend not thereby to be
bound, either to accuse themselves, or their brethren. By accusation, meaning
the revealing of any thing; for which they, or their brethren, may be troubled
or punished.

Upon what ground, other then the general reasons of the rest, and of the
Jesuits (as if it were against nature, and charity, etc.) these should build
this opinion; I (for my part) cannot well conjecture. But it sorteth to this
pass; that seeing we are all brethren, and members one of another; therefore
it shall not be lawful for the Magistrate to punish any sin or transgression,
saving where himself does take the offender with the manner: yea and scarce
then too. For they will hardly (I believe) allow, that the same man shall be
accuser, witness, and Judge. For they conceive (howbeit erroneouslie) the
Judge who proceeds of office; to be an accuser. This plainly follows of
it, because no sin may lawfully be punished, but where the party is
convicted. There can be none other conviction, but either by the parties own
confession, or upon depositions of witnesses. So that if no Christian be bound,
nor ought (before a Magistrate) to reveal either his own, or his brothers
offenses; then does it follow, that crimes shall never be punished, till the
offenders themselves (being moved in conscience, if happily they shall even
then, by these men be suffered, to accuse, or discover themselves) shall
wilfully come in, and desire (for Gods sake) to be hanged up, or otherwise
punished; as the quality of their offense leads.

Amongst the heathens, I read of no nation, but they used and had oaths in
great estimation, and necessary practice; saving Alex. ab Alex. Genial.
Dierum. li. 5. cap. 10.
the foolish Phrygians, who only condemned them. And amongst Christians, the
old heretics Manichees; of later times, the Anabaptists; and now lastly
these fellows. who (albeit not in plain words) yet in very deed, do (upon
the matter) take away all oaths in matters criminal, and consequently all,
both Civil, and Ecclesiastical punishments and censures, from among men. For
Cyprian. in exposit. Symboli.
Manes the old heretic taught; that it was not lawful for Christians to
swear at all.

The third sort of opinions (being delivered by diverse of the more learned
sort of the Innouatours) are of such, as hold; that they may reveal both
their own, and their brothers crimes and offenses, to remove evil from the
land (as they speak) when they are duly charged thereunto by oathe. But some
actions there be, which they believe to be well, and lawfully done; and yet by
law, or iniquity of the time, they hold to be such, as may bring trouble,
and punishment upon them. And those, (they say) they are bound in conscience,
not to declare at all. This opinion for ye first part thereof, is directly
contrary, to the next before precedent.

But who shall judge, whether such matters, as they be enquired of, ought to be
accounted for faults and offenses, and which being punished, will remove evil
from the land; or whether they be (in deed and truth) good and virtuous
actions? I greatly fear, that these men will not (in this point) be content to
be ouer-ruled, either by the laws of the Realm, or by the Magistrates, and
Judges, that be interpreters of the laws. But (no remedy) an oathe they will
not take, till they shall be satisfied, and resolved (which they can make as long
in doing, as them selves lust) that such actions be justly and lawfully to be
condemned, for Crimes and offenses, by Gods law. So that this is nothing else,
then to permit unto every private subject the judgment how far, in what
causes, and against whom he needs to declare his knowledge, of anymatter: how
expedient soever for her Majesty, and unto the whole commonwealth it be, to
be known. Is not this to put a sure buckler into the hands of Jesuits, other
traitors, murderers, felons, and every lewd companion, to hold forth against
the lawful examination of Magistrates, touching themselves, or their
accomplices? For if they need not declare any thing by oathe; much less will
they have conscience to do it, when they are not sworn: which forbearing of
the parties own oath in examination of crimes (that may be capital to him) is
always observed in this Realm.

Perhaps, unto this absurdity, following of their opinion, it will be said;
that those above rehearsed, are known and manifest crimes to allmen, even by
the light of nature: but so are not their Disciplinarie, and Synodicall
Constitutions etc. It is true, that treason, murder, theft, and such like;
(...), even in their general nature, are condemned for crimes by all men. Yet
when men come ad (...) to the particular application of their own factes unto
the general crime: they are then contented to flatter with their consciences,
and to please them selves in their own actions; and so with such, and such
circumstances to deny theirs, to be in any like degree. Do the Jesuits
(think ye) when they are conuented, condemn their lewd seducing of her
Majesty's subjects, as treasonable? did the damnable conspirators with
Babington the traitor (albeit they were not ignorant, what the laws of the
land did adiudge of their actions) when they went about their treasons,
condemn themselves as traitors: and not rather lewdly flatter them selves upon
some circumstances, which they thought should assoyle them of all guilt before
God? Therefore this opinion, though it carry a colorable show of some greater
obedience: yet when the reckonning is cast up, it iumpeth (in very deed) with
the second. For it comes to this point, that every man shall be his own Judge,
how fa^e he need to obey laws, and Magistrates, that require him to deliver
his knowledge, touching his own or other men's factes; so he himself will
account them, lawfully done.

Besides the absurdities, that follow this opinion, it is also in it self
very unreasonable: For if a man may reveal his brothers, or his own sin,
may he not much more his virtue? If God be glorified in detecting of sin,
much more in making virtues known. If truth must needs be uttered of sin,
much more of virtue; for wisdom is justified of her children. If their doings
be good, and instifiable, then to conceal the truth, is (in very truth)
nothing less, then to betray and forsake the truth.

And that this is but a vain gloss, devised, in truth, to cover their
misdemeanors, and to escape from deserved punishment: may appear, by the
desire they carry (by all ways, and means) to cloak their said actions.

If their works were not of darkness, and secrecy; they would not fly the
light. For it is a property of those which do evil, to fly from the light.
If their doings be works of the light, let that light shine forth before men,
that they may see those their goodworks, and glorify their father which is in
heaven. If they stand assured, they have done but well, what punishment soever
should light upon them for it, they should confess their obedience, and T. C.
practice of the whole Gospel of Christ, (whereof they make their discipline a
necessary part) and rejoice with the Apostles, that they are found worthy to
suffer punishment, for the Disciplinarian part of the Gospel.

But is not this strange, that where the most part of this Disciplinarian
humor, do think that they ought to discover nothing of themselves, nor of
their brethren, that is criminal: that yet these others, being fewer, shooting
at the same marks, will (as they say) reveal their crimes only, but nothing
else; no not their own, and their brethrens virtues and good deeds; belike
for fear, least they should be counted to do it, upon some vain glory.

Yet this opinion gives us this advantage, that if a man may lawfully reveal,
and discover, not only his brothers, but his own crimes and offenses, if they
beetruely crimes: then have they no color, but they must do it, when by the
Magistrate, (according to law) and upon their oath, they are so commanded.

That which they may lawfully do, that may the Magistrate lawfully enjoin:
and they (without disobedience to Gods ordinance) may not refuse. So that for
the lawfulnes of ministering an oathe to a party, in a cause verily criminal,
and thereby penal to himself (being a maine, and principal controversy
betwixt the State, and them) we have allowance by some of their accomplices own
positions; but yet we cannot get their practice unto it. But more hereof in
the next Chapter.

The fourth and last of their opinions touching such oaths; seems to be
something better, (and even perhaps Classicallie or Synodicallie) digested by
them. Yet it caries no small contradiction in it self. which (to their most
advantage, that they can possibly have it understood) I will seek, (by
distinction) to reconcile, and to make stand together.

These therefore may be thought generally to hold, that for anything, whereof
witnesses may be had, the party may not be examined upon his oath. Out of
which general, they diduce this: that the Judge may not examine a Preacher
upon his oathe, touching his doctrine delivered in public place. And if he go
about it, the Preacher without breach of duty to the Magistrate, may lawfully
refuse to swear. But if the crime be so hidden, and secret, that witnesses may
not be had; then a man may be charged (say they) by oath. But this they also
limite, and restrain thus: so it be not to draw matter of accusation against
themselves. And to this purpose, they do use seven reasons. Albeit the same
men also say, that to remove evil from the land, they will take such oathe.
They will, etc. But they tell us not plainly whether they take themselves
bound to do it, or not. So that I cannot see, how to make these their opinions
dwell peaceably together; except their meaning herein be this: that for crimes
which be hidden, being in themselves evil (that is prohibita quia mala) they
will be pleased to take an oathe to reveal them: but things that be secret,
where no witness can be had, and be none otherways evil, but because they be
prohibited; such they may, and will refuse to declare, by oath. which if they
mean in deed, (as it is very probable they do) then do they run quite
contrary to the opinions of all men besides. For if it might be left to most
men's choice; they would rather discover of themselves and others, some breaches
of Statutes, not directly sorbidden by Gods law: then such their own crimes
as be forbidden, and therefore contain more turpitude in them, as adultery,
perjury, and such like. But it must be remembered, that these men have an odd
grace in framing opinions of divinity, Pro re nata, even as present occasions
do lead them. And they temper not their actions (oftentimes) unto their
former conceived opinions; but they conceive opinions, and coin conceits: as
may best stand for defense of their own, and their favorers present actions.
Now, because many of them hope to be found clear (in their own persons)
from gross and actual crimes so expressly forbidden by Gods law; but not so
clear (perhaps) in breach of the laws of this Realm, and peace of the
Church: therefore is this new opinion stamped by them, to stop up this
gappe. For the proof of this their assertion; that where winesses may be had,
there a man may not be examined upon his oathe: First they say, for Judges
finding out by Inquisition what is spoken, or done, they find two ways in
Scripture. One by witness of others, where they may be had; which they go
about to prove by these Deuteronomy. 13. v. 12. and 15. Deuteronomy. 17 v. 2. and 7. Number. 35.
v. 30. Deuteronomy. 19. v. 15. Joan. 18. v. 20. and 21. 1. Tim. 5. v. 19.
places quoted in the margent. The other way, by the parties own testimony,
where witness cannot be had, for the thing spoken, or done, whereof necessary
inquisition is made, which they would prove, by these other Iosu. 7. v. 19.
Exodus 22. v. 7. 8. 10. and 11. Number. 5. v. 13. and 19.
places, here also quoted.

But is this a good consequence; these two ways be mentioned in Scripture:
Ergo, there be no more but two? or if it were admitted, there be no more ways
mentioned for Inquisition of crimes; does it follow, that therefore all
positive laws of Commonweals, and kingdoms, for inquisition, and trial of
crimes, in any other sort are unlawful, and against Gods word? what is this
else, then plainly to ouerthowe, and condemn (as ungodly) not only the
Inquisition and trial by Iuries and verdicts of twelve men, used in this
Realm, and not mentioned in Scripture: but also the proceedings Judicial of
all ye world besides, if they do not wholly iumpe in manner and form; with ye
Inquisitions and trials mentioned in scripture? This erroneous couceit Barrow
held, in his last book printed at Dordrecht.
And so (instead of all our positive laws) to bring in place, the Judicials of
Moses (given only to the people of the Jews) not only for the equity of
the^, but for the very substance, and form of them also? whereby the Priests
shall be Judges what is law, in every difficult, and controuersed point; in
whose judgments (upon pain of death) every man must rest contented.

Nevertheless, by this their own position, I thus prove against themselves;
that they do wickedly in refusing to take their oaths. Wheresoever in an
Inquisition of a crime, no witnesses can be had, there (by the law of God) the
parties themselves must take their oaths, and declare the whole truth. But of
their framing of a book of new Discipline Ecclesiastical, and Synodical; of
their subscribing to it, of putting some of it in practice; of meeting in
Classical assemblies, or Conferences; in Synodes, and general assemblies; of
matters there treated of, and concluded against the laws and government of
this Church of England; of secret writing, and dispersing of their slanderous
books, and libels, containing erroneous, and heretical opinions, and
seditious incitements: which last points are Prohibita quia mala: And touching
the circumstances of these, and every of them, no witnesses can be had (as
experience it self shows) for they were kept as close, and secret, as could
be; they were done in private places, and chambers; from whence all other were
secluded, saving the very parties themselves (being all principal delinquents)
and not called thither, or being there as witnesses. Therefore (by the law of
God) they ought hereupon to take their oaths, and to declare the whole truth
in these matters. For so is their own position.

Now I will examine their several proofs, brought for this opinion. The
first is this: Deuteronomy. 13. v. 12. 13. 14. 15. etc.
If thou shall hear say concerning any of the cities which the Lord thy God
has given thee to dwell in: wicked men are gone out from among you, and have
drawn away the inhabitants of their City, saying, let us go and serve other
Gods, which ye have not known: then thou shall seek, and make search, and
enquire diligently: and if it be true, and the thing certain, that such
abomination is wrought among you, thou shall even slay the inhabitants of the
City with the edge of the sword; destroy it utterly, and all that is therein,
and the cattle thereof, with the edge of the sword. Where you see, the
punishment is universal (though the first persuasion came happily from a few)
and therefore the defection from God unto Idolatry, was there, amongst the men
also general. For the justice of God is; that Ezech. 18. v. 4.
the soul which sins, that shall dye. How can this prove, that no party
to the sin was examined, but that they were convinced only by witnesses?
Nay, the contrary rather is manifest. For who is so fit, and so likely to have
knowledge of things done in a City, as those that dwell in it? and therefore
the law allows Citizens, for good witnesses of matters there done, even when
it is for their own benefit: because (by common entendement) others cannot be
had. I will ask then, whether this general condemnation and execution against
a whole city, might proceed only upon hearesay? this were very unjust and
cruel; and it is said in the text, it must be known certeinely. But if upon
certain, and sure conviction; then cannot it be otherwise, then by the
examination of some persons of that city, who only can know the certeintie
thereof. But these are all parties, Quia quos par culpa, eosdem tenet and par
poena, and e conuerso. For God has appointed this negative Justice in his
law: that Deuteronomy. 24. v. 16.
the father shall not be put to death for the children, nor the children put to
death for the father: but every man shall be put to death for his own sin.
And in the Affirmative, it was decreed in a Council thus: Council. Tolet. 4.
Can. 78.
Oportet vt vna poena teneat obnoxios, quos, similis error inuenerit
implicatos: such as be guilty of the same fault, must needs be subject to
the self same punishment. And therefore it follows, that this Inquisition
here spoken of, was found out by some of the parties own examinations: rather
then by any other witnesses dwelling abroad, and therefore not able to deliver
any certeintie. But in so penal a matter, a man will hardly confess, without
torture or oathe: and Hebr. 6. v. 16.
an oathe is for confirmation. And therefore it may happen (by the equity of
Gods law) that a man (in a matter criminal, and even capital to himself)
may be examined by his oathe. How much more then, of a crime not so penal?

That other place of the 17. of Deuteronomie, is left at large, without
expressing, whether the party condemned there of Idolatry, were to be
examined upon his own oath, or not. Besides, in matters capital, and where
there is an Accuser (as in some sort is there) no man in this Realm urges an
oath. But it is necessarily to be gathered, that at least the party
conuented, did answer the Accusation, or Inquisition there, by denial, before
the witnesses were produced: which many of this sort of men will not do,
either the one way, or the other.

The other two places of the 30. of Numbers, and 19. of Deuteronomie, do only
determine; that no man shall be condemned upon one witnesses deposition only:
and do make nothing to prove either off, or on; whether a party may be
examined by oath, where witnesses may be had, or not had? except they mind to
gather it thus: there be mentioned only depositions of witnesses, to the
conviction of a matter: therefore no course besides, or in any other form,
may be used. But this cannot be; for though the party deny it, (yea with
oath) yet upon two witnesses, shall the matter be established.

And if such collection were consequent upon these two places; then albeit a
man would willingly confess the matter against himself, he might not be cast
and convicted, till witnesses also should depose no less. But this is absurd;
in that nullae sunt parts Iudicis in confessum, nisi vt ferat sententiam: and
in the Gospel, ex ore tuo teipsum iudico. Besides this, the condemnation by
Iuries, were then quite to be condemned, for ungodly. For they may give
verdict sometimes but upon one witnesses testimony, and sometime without any;
upon violent, and strong presumptions only, which (in hidden crimes) are good
proofs. Neither are they of the Jury to be accounted as witnesses; but are
as a kind of Judges of the fact. Therefore in Magna Charta, it is called
Iudicium per pares, and they much resemble Pedanei Iudices, or Recuperatores in
the Civil law, and pares Curiae in the Feudall law, which is practiced
(chiefly) in Italy, Germany, and France.

The place in the John 18. ver. 19, 20, 21.
Gospel of S. John, where Christ being asked by the high Priest, of his
disciples and doctrine; does answer thus: Why ask thou me, ask them that
heard me: for I spoke openly in the world: I ever taught in the Synagogues, and
in the Temple; whither the Jews resort continually, and in secret have I said
nothing: they do greatly insist upon, and urge; as a commandment to this
purpose: viz. that where any witnesses may be had, there a man may not be
examined himself; but especially touching doctrine publicly delivered. but
they are manifoldly deceived.

Every action of Christ is for our instruction says S. Augustine, but not
every one for our imitation. Therefore of any particular action done or not
done, according to several circumstances by our Savior Christ (being the
wisdom of his Father) we may not gather a general doctrine of imitation;
except we were sure of all the causes and circumstances then concurring, that
so did move him, at that time.

When Matthew. 26. v. 62, 63, and 64.
Jesus was falsely charged by untrue witnesses, he answered nothing, though he
were urged greatly thereunto by the Priest, but held his peace. And of holding
our peace in like case, Origin Origin. tract. 35 in Matthew.
thus speaks: to what purpose is it, to gainesay those, who gainesay and
overthrow themselves, by their own contrarieties: especially seeing it is
more worthy, freely and resolutely to be silent; then to stand in defense to
no purpose: for so shall not false, and lewd witnesses insult over us? Yet
when the Priest presently thereupon, adjured him by the living God, to tell
them if he were the Christ, the son of God: he made them an answer; albeit
in his divine wisdom he knew, that they meant to make it capital unto him.
Now, shall we hereupon gather that whenever our words before a Judge, be
calumniously detorted by false witnesses, to our great danger; and we urged:
by him to make answer, that we are therefore bound to hold our peace?

When Saint John Baptist was Joan. 1. v. 19. and 20.
asked by the Priests and Levites, a dangerous question, such as if he had
been (as they seemed to doubt) the Messiah; might have turned him to great
danger: viz: what he was: he confessed, and denied not, but said plainly,
I am not Christ. So that we see, such a general doctrine as they gather, may
not be collected out of the former answer of our Savior.

We are therefore to know, that the answer was very apposite and fit unto:
the question, which was infinite, and general, touching his doctrine. which no
man (otherwise then in generality) can answer, and therefore the answer was
correspondent to the question. For it was, as if he had said thus unto them:
you ask me of the whole doctrine by me taught, this is impossible for me to
answer, and to recount up unto you. If you think any thing therein
(particularly) to be erroneous, or seditious; enfourme your selves by those
that have heard me, and then what you shall so object, I will be ready to
answer. This you may easily do: for that which I have taught, I have done it
publicly in the Temple, and in Synagogues, and not in corners. so that you
shall not need to make me take upon me, such an endless, and impossible
work, as you might have just occasion to do, and to make me yield account,
if my teaching had been in secret. Whereupon thus I gather against them: if
Christ being willed to give an account of his whole course of doctrine, did
therefore refuse, because it was too general a question to be answered, and
also because it was in public places only delivered by him, (so that they
might easily first enfourme themselves what they took to be amiss, and
worthy to be objected against him) in so much, as he had said nothing in
secret; which if he had, might have given (in truth) just cause unto them to
examine himself, what points they were, that he so carefully did avoid the
light to teach them in: then these men, that be asked not of their doctrine in
general, but of their particular actions in this and that point, in this
place, at that time, done not publicly, but (of set purpose) so covertly, as
might be, so that no witnesses (but such as be also parties) can be had:
have no just defense nor color of it, out of this place. And therefore of such
hidden crimes (by their own position) they ought to answer by their oaths.

Besides, Christ was not detected (before) of any particular matter, wherewith
they might charge him: neither if he had been, was it his principal purpose
(otherwise then that he would leave testimony, that he died an innocent) to
stand to clear, and excuse himself particularly; that the determinate
Counsel of God, might take place with him.

By the premises may appear, that the three reasons which they bring, to
prove this manner of question, and Inquisition, moved by the Priest, to be
unlawful; are altogether needelesse, seeing no man defends the like. But for
proof either of that more general position, viz. where witnesses may be had,
a party may not be examined: or of the more particular, viz. that a Preacher
may not be asked of any points of his doctrine, by him publicly delivered:
neither does this example of Christ, nor the places which they bring, and are
here 1. Cor. 14. v. 30. 32. 1 Thessalonians. 5. v. 20. 21. Amos 7. v. 14. Genesis 19. v.
20. and 10. 12. 2. Tim. 2. v. 2. 1. Tim. 5. v. 19.
quoted, make any thing at all. I would those that have leisure, would but
turn to them; that they may know, with how little either judgment, or else
sincerity, these men do handle the word of God.

The place to Timothy, that against an Elder or Priest, an accusation shall
not be admitted, without two, or three witnesses: makes neither hot, nor cold
to prove, that wheresoever witnesses may be had, the party may not be examined
upon oath. I have heard it brought, to exempt them from being enquired into at
al; except two witnesses did first verify the accusation, before it be
preferred. But it serves both these turns alike. First, that place is meant,
that it shall not be holden otherwise as sufficient to convict him: the word
is (...), allow it not. If it were meant of the first enterteining of an
accusation, then these inconveniences would follow. that the accuser who at his
own peril debet venire paratus, should (by the very receiving or rejecting of
it) know before hand; what his witnesses have deposed, or can depose. Secondly,
that witnesses might be examined to a man's prejudice, part rea non citata, or
else that they must be twice examined; once before the accused do appear, and
once afterward. which is a needelesse trouble, where process informatiue is
not used.

Besides, those men (that claim it) are proceeded with, not per viam (...). of
accusation, as Saint Paul there speaks, but by way of Inquiry. And yet there
be witnesses (in sort) of their crimes, before the accusation be received. For
if upon the fame they be called, then a multitude (as it were) testifies
against them. if upon Iudicia, Evidences, or presumptions, the like is to be
said: because these are equivalent unto a fame, as has been touched before.
And to satisfy them the more herein, the law requires not upon an
accusation; that the party should be examined upon his oath, touching the
crime. But they (because they will be wayward, and ouerth wart in all things)
pretend it to be lawful in a court ecclesiastical, for a man (when there is a
prosecutor, as in the Starchamber) to be put unto his oath, for the truth of
the very crime: but not when it is ex officio Iudicis. which, if the law
ecclesiastical, would warrant; the Judges thereof might soon have the oaths
of these men, by their own position, and grant. For who knows not, how
easy it were to enjoin any officer of the Court, or one of the Commissioners
friends, or servants; to prefer the matter, and to stand forth (as they term
it) an accuser?

The two places remaining out of the 22. of Exodus, and the 5. of Numbers, I
have touched in the eleventh chapter before. showing there, how they prove,
that a man may be examined upon his own oath, in a criminal cause, though
there be no witness, but a bare suspicion of the adverse party. But that a
man may in no other case besides, be examined, where (perhaps) witness may be
had (which is their purpose in this place) there is no color, nor shadow in
either of them: execpt they have learned to reason out of every single place of
Scripture, both affirmatively and negatiuely thus, viz. This may be done in
that case: and therefore, nothing else may be done.

For the proof of that second position, viz. that if a Magistrate do require
a Preacher to answer upon his oath, touching any doctrine by him publicly
delivered, he may without breach of his duty, lawfully refuse to swear: I
do see nothing further by them brought, that is worthy the answering. For
whereas Calvin, and other Divines say, that the use of oaths is upon
necessity, and for matters hidden: it is not meant by hidden, that an oath
cannot lawfully be given, where witnesses may be had: but where the thing is
neither notoriously apparent, nor confessed by the party. For so long is it
hidden to the Judge who must proceed secundum allegata, and probata.
otherwise, it would follow hereof, that an oath might not be given to a
witness, because the matter is known, and not hidden unto him. And for the
necessary cause of giving it; what can be more necessary, then the discovery
and suppressing of sins, and offenses, both in Church and Common wealth? But
these men's grief is, that themselves are not made the Judges; whether the
things they are to be examined of, be necessary, and of importance to be
declared. All that is spoken of the conuentings of S. Paul before several
Magistrates, in the Act. capitibus 24, 25, 26.
Acts of the Apostles, is spoken unto before, and no way fits this purpose. For
where there be accusers, there the parties oath, is not required. And yet S.
Paul there, does answer particularly; confessing something, and denying other
some, of doctrine, and actions objected. Neit^er is it to be thought, that he
would say otherwise being not sworn, then he would have done though he had bin
sworn.

Now whereas they say, that to remove evil from the land, they will swear
(though the sin be secret) but restreine it thus: so it be not to draw
matter of accusation and conviction against themselves, out of their
confession: it is (in effect) as if they had said, that in whatsoever cause
criminal, and penal to themselves, they will take none oath at all. except they
mean that mala quia prohibita, be no such evils, as are to be discovered or
removed at all from the land. And according unto this interpretation; their
seven reasons (being all that I have hitherto happened of) do indistinctly
tend. First, they say, it is an approved maxima of the law: Nemo tenetur
seipsum accusare vel prodere; sieve propriam tur pitudinem reuelare. But I have
Cap. 9. 3. part.
showed before by true distinction (out of the same law, whence this is drawn)
that it is to be understood in crimes simply secret, and which are no way
disclosed, or come to light. For when those that were secret before, by some of
those ways (that do open a way to an inquiry, of a person supposed
criminous) are come abroad, and so (in some sort) are manifested: then those
former rules, and that of Chrysostom, Chrysostom. hom. 31. ad Hebraeos.
Non tibi dico vt te prodas in publicum, neque apud alium accuses, has no
further place. for then the law says; Sic proditus, tenetur seipsum ostendere,
and suam innocentiam purgare. and this is for avoiding of scandal, and that
the party may be reformed.

Therefore does Aquinas himself very gravely resolve thus: Thom. 2. 2.
Cum quis (says he) secundum ordinem iuris, a iudice interrogatur, non ipse se
prodit, sed ab alio proditur: dum ei necessitas respondendi imponitur per eum,
cui obedire tenetur. And again, very pertinently to this purpose, of giving
and taking an oath: Quicunque facit contra debitum iustitiae, peccat: sed
pertinet ad debitum iustitiae, vt quis suo superiori obediat in ijs, quae
exigit, secundum formam Iuris.

This distinction of the said rule, is strongly confirmed by that, which is
alleged of the oath of Jealousy, and of him which is depositarius in the law
of God, handled in the eleventh Chapter before. For if they that be bewrayed by
the only (perhaps) vain suspicion of another party pretending grief; must
undergo so strait a course of purgation, or else bewray themselves, to their
app^ant shame, and dishonestie, besides the grieuousnesse of the punishment:
how much more then is it equal; that those, who by fame, or vehement
presumption, or such like arisen; are discovered to the Magistrate; and by him
(not for any private satisfaction, but for the public good and benefit of the
Church) are urged to such oath, and for their own reformation: should either
take it, or else (according to those examples, and to all good laws) be
reputed convicted, by their own implied confessions?

To this point, is that not impertinent, which is alleged by De poenitentia.
did. 1. c. quia aliquando. in fine.
Gratian out of an ancient Father: Taciturnitas peccati, ex superbia nascitur
cordis: ideo enim peccatum suum quisque celare desiderat, ne iniquitas sua,
alijs manifesta fiat: ne talis reputetur apud homines foris, qualem se,
tamdudum exhibuit diuino conspectui.

Their other six reasons to this purpose (I assure you) I do blush (in their
behalf) once to mention them: they are so childish, so vain, and flashie. the
very rehearsing of them does carry a sufficient confutation, and answer on his
back: as that, he which is put to this oath, is bound to prove a Negative,
against law: that it does pervert the end of the Civil law, which is to be
safe: belike, they mean the last law of the twelve tables: Salus reipub.
suprema lex esto. that it transferreth the glory of God unto man, by searching
men's consciences: that it is contrary to the equity of Gods law, in that
witnesses should stand forth, and not he accuse himself. this is coincident
with the first of the seven. that it is of the nature of auricular confession:
that it is a nowrisher of sclanderous persons, because not the sclanderer, but
the party accused, must take his oath. If the reasons hereupon to be framed
were to be put into form of Syllogismes; then these propositions must be used
for assumptions. but they are not only very untrue, and to be denied; but are
not at all proved by their Prosyllogismes, or reasons; which are joined unto
them; to uphold, and underprop them.

So that to conclude this maine point of ministering oath to a defendant
touching his own crime or offense: these their four opinions against this
kind of oath are neither reasonable; nor their, or any others reasons used
against it, are of any force or weight; and therefore, though no further
confirmation had been used by us; such oath would have been justifiable:
which is now (as you have heard) otherwise also manifoldly approved.

CHAP. XIIII. That a man being charged by authority to discover his knowledge
touching some offense which his Christian brother is supposed to have done, is
bound to reveal it, though it may breed trouble, and punishment to his
brother. and the reasons to the contrary are answered, and refuted.
IN the general distribution made in the Preface before the second part, for
matters after to be handled; and which are challenged of unlawfulness, or of
impiety by the Innouators: I there noted; that fault is found by them, not
only because oaths be given (in criminal causes) unto the parties themselves:
but because they are examined as witnesses also, touching other their
accomplices, and brethrens actions. This their challenge is made, in this
respect: for that it is sought (they say) by virtue of their oath, to draw out
of them, such their brethrens actions; as albeit the laws of the Realm, and
those who are their Judges, do hold to be crimes, and offenses, and mind to
punish them in that quality; yet they who are to be examined, are persuaded;
that they are well, and commendably done, whether by themselves, or any other
their brethren. And therefore they do think, that they are bound in
conscience, not to take an oath; whereby they may be tied to so ungodly a
discovery of their brethrens good actions, whereby they shall bring them to
trouble, or punishment. For if they were offenses, and crimes, then (say some
of them) to remove evil from the land, they would be ready to reveal them
upon their oath. but being, as they take them to be, (whatsoever other men do)
by no means they may discover them. And this point is now by most of them
(that seem to be of any skill) chiefly rested upon (letting other more easily
go) albeit they deliver it abroad charily, and somewhat fearfully. But the
absurdities, and inconsequence of this opinion; I have somewhat also (by
occasion) touched, in the 13. Chapter of this part.

Howsoever it is now newly taken up, and an opinion, which they greatly please
themselves in: yet did the Fathers in the Primitive Church condemn it for
erroneous, and the practice of it, as ungodly. Both are Augustine. ad Casulanum.
guilty (says S. Augustine) that is as well he which hides the truth, as he
which tells an untruth: because the first of these will do no good, the
other seeks to do hurt. So that these two are matched together by him, as
being not much unlike. A sufficient reason hereof in crimes, may be taken from
those 2. Timoth. c^, 3. v. 13.
words of the Apostle, where he says: Evil men, and seducers will go
forward from worse to worse, both continuing in error themselves, and leading
others into it. And therefore their wickedness, is meet to be discovered; that
ye mischief may be prevented. But to this it will be said, that the case is
put, and the controversy is made, only where ye parties to be examined, do
not think such their brethrens actions, and practices to be evil, or their
opinions erroneous: howsoever the Magistrates do otherwise conceive of the^.

Let us therefore consider, what is to be thought, and determined concerning
the bewraying of our accomplices and friends, about matter of heresy, and
error in faith. In which crime of all other, such as know their heresies, and
join therein with the^; are most resolutely persuaded, their cause to be
passing good. Nevertheless, if this crime also ought to be discovered and
manifested, then much more are all other sorts of criminous persons,
especially when (in some sort) they be discovered before, unto the Magistrate.
S. Jacob. ca. 5. v. 20.
James says: let him know, that he which co^uerteth a sinner from his
erroneous way, viz. being before seduced from Ibid. v. 19.
the truth; he saues that soul from death, and shall cover a multitude of
sins. This covering of sins is no merit of the conuerters; as if his sins
were thereby to be wiped a way in the sight of God; as the Papists have
dreamed: but it is the hiding and covering of the sins of him, who is
converted. That this is the true sense of the place, appears by the
circumstance of Salomons words, from whom yt phrase is borrowed: hatred (says
he) Prou. ca. 10. v. 12.
stirs up strife, but charity covers a multitude of sins: even so far
as with a good conscience may be done, as Tremellius notes. If then upon a
seduced man's conversion, a multitude of his sins are kept hidden by him, who
converted him: it will follow, that if he be not converted, but still go on in
his error, such his sins may; yea, and ought to be manifested abroad, and
discovered. Therefore much more, when (in some degree) they are before revealed
unto the Magistrate, that makes the Inquiry.

Nay, a persuasion unto Idolatry (which is a kind of heresy, and also is a
putting of it in practice) we have an express commandment of God, voluntarily
and of our selves to reveal it, how secretly, or by how dear a friend soever
it be committed, or we by him intised unto it. If thy Deuteronomy. 13. v. 6. 7. 8.
brother the son of thy mother, do secretly entise thee; or if thine own
son or thy daughter, or thy wife, that lies in thy bosom, or thy friend,
which is to thee as thine own self: saying, let us go and worship other
gods, etc. thou shall not consent unto him, nor hear him; neither shall thine
eye pity him, nor show him mercy, nor thou shall not keep him secret.
Where, albeit we be commanded not to consent unto such seduction: yet is that
other part of the precept of not concealing him, simple, and absolute in it
self; and without any distinction, whether the party intised, take hold of
the persuasion, or not. For shall not the concealing, be as well a sin to him
that yields unto the seduction, as it is to him who resists it?

Saint Augustine says: let Aug. ep. 74. ad Deuterium.
us then, and not before, trust an heretic, who desires to be received upon
his repentance: when he shall be content to reveal unto us, such other; as he
knows to be of the same opinion. Therefore to discover their secret
accomplices, was by him holden to be no sin, nor yet performance of any bad
office. S. Chrysostom to the same effect Chrysostom. in psalm. 5.
says: This is the office of an especial wise mind, not to revenge his own,
but to prosecute mightily the injuries done to God. And else where Chrysostom
hom. 5. in opere imperf.
more fully: let us learn (says he) by Christ's example, courageously to
bear the injuries that are done to our selves: but not to endure so much as
the hearing of injuries done to God. For it is commendable to be patient in our
own injuries: but to dissemble the injuries which are done to God, is ungodly
and wicked.

Leo the great, an ancient Bishop of Rome, thus exhorts men to the revealing
of heretics: Leo magnus ser. 4. de collectis.
wheresoever the Manichees do hide themselves, show it unto your priests: for
it is a great part of godliness, to bewraye the lurking places of the wicked,
and to vanquish the devil him self, in those who serve him. And the same
Father Idem. sermon 4. de ieiunio decimi mensis.
elsewhere more fully: Dearly beloved, I beseech and warn you; that if any
of you do know where any heretics do dwell, where they teach, whose
company they frequent, and in whose society they are delighted; that you
would truly show it unto me, who am most careful hereof. And further a little
after: Those who think such are not to be bewrayed, are to fear; least at the
Judgment day of Christ, they be holden guilty by reason of their silence,
yea albeit they be not defiled with assenting unto them.

The same, which he taught by doctrine, he also Prosper. Aquitan. in Chronico.
put in ure, by his practice: for it is reported of him, that when Paternus,
and Maximus were Consuls; by the careful diligence of the said Leo, it was
brought to light; that many Manichees lurked privily in the City: Who bringing
them forth of their secret corners into the public sight of all the Church;
he made them both reveal all their foul opinions, and also to condemn or
abjure them: and withal he burned their books, whereof great quantities were
taken. It seems that this care of that holy man, was inspired into him from
God; for it did much good, not only in Rome, but throughout the whole world.
Insomuch as by the confessions of such as were apprehended in Rome; it was made
manifest, what doctors or teachers, what Bishops and what Priests those of
that sect had, and in what provinces and Cities they were. And many Bishops of
the East parts followed this careful, and good example of this Apostolic
Bishop. For as Thom. Aqui. 2. 2. q. 33. art. 7.
Thomas says; By the very law of charity, the good of religion is always
to be preferred, above the fame, yea, or the very lives of the wicked.

Plato. li. 10. de legibus.
Plato but an heathen Philosopher, thought good to tie, all in his
commonwealth unto this law: viz. If any man deal impiously or ungodly,
either by words, or deeds; let him that is present stand in defense of Gods
cause, and also relate it unto the Magistrates.

Saint Hierome Hierom. in 15. cap. Job.
requires of all humble Christians, this duty, of revealing, not only
heresies, and erroneous opinions of other men; but also other offenses. those
(says he) are truly wise in Christ, who being converted unto God, do
faithfully confess, and do by public repentance satisfy the Church,
whether for their sins or their heresies: and who not only do this, but
also discover those that are means to bring them into those crimes, or
erroneous opinions.

I have not hitherto heard of any, besides certain heretics; who at any time
held the like opinion unto this of the Innouatours, and factious persons in
this Church. Saint Augustine reports, that the old August. in lib. de
haeresibus.
heretics called Priscillianistae, did te^che their scholars, not to reveal
the doctrine which they learned, yea though they were examined thereof upon
their oaths. affirming withal, that rather then fail, it were better to be
for sworn, then to discover it: And therefore this saying was rife in their
mouths; Iura, periura, secretaque prodere nolt: Swear (say they) yea and for
swear your selves too, rather then reveal these secrets. This heresy was
also afterward holden, by an Bernard. Sermon. 65. and 66. in canticum.
other sort of heretics, in the time of Bernard, that were termed
Apostolici. And by certain other (as it is written) that were called
Flagellantes where (by the way) we may observe, that none in those days had
learned absolutely to refuse an oathe in a matter made by the Examiners
criminous unto the parties examined; or yet to their accomplices, and brethren.
But for not revealing their own, or their brethrens secrets, those heretics
of old time had learned perfitly enough to conceal the true^h; yea, albeit
they incurred flat perjury, by such their concealment or denial of the
truth.

I will now assaye, to answer the reasons, which I have heard brought, for ye
establishing of this their conceit. But first I must put you in mind, how
unreasonable, and inco^uenie^t it is to be accounted, in all practice of laws.
For when the defenda^t has denied a crime objected, or refused to answer yea
or nay, if it might be free (for all yt by likelihood can testify thereof) to
make such pretense, to ye intent to excuse themselves from that necessary
duty unto ye commo^-wealth; what criminous person could, or were likely to be
ever directly convicted? whereas, (by the civil (...). 6. 4. C. de his qui ad
eccles. consugiunt.
laws) sometimes, he that is supposed to have appointed the delinquent to do
the fact; he that is his surety; he that is called into question for the same
crime; he that is fellow, or familiar with the suspected person, may be
compelled to swear and depose of a crime. By the common law, if such (as are
supposed can give euidaece for the Queen) should not oftentimes be compelled
thereunto by authority; would there not (in many causes) want due proof, for
iusticeing and for execution of offenders? But to this it is said, that men are
but bound in an obligation or recognizance to prosecute the fellonie. It is
true: what other bond should any man enter for his appearance? But if he
refuse that, may he not be sent to the jail himself? And when he comes
before the Judges, he is bound also by a necessary oathe, to give true
evidence (to the utmost of his knowledge) against the prisoner, or person to be
tried. Which, if he shall refuse; he is like to stand in boltes with him, whose
fault he minds to conceile, as he well deserves: and happily may be
condemned to pay a round fine besides, for his notorious contempt, and for
abbetting of offenders, in their lewdnes.

If it be said (as some have objected) that it is not amiss to certify, so
the party be willing: but that it is hard to bind him (upon his oath) to
testify, whatsoever he knows against the defendant, touching that matter:
truly I cannot guess whereunto this speech may tend; except witnesses might
say what, and how little they list of the truth; or else that they would have
men's words to be believed against others (to their co^uiction) without any
oath. But what matter can be confirmed without oathe in any outward actions of
men, not known by some sense unto ye Judge? it is the law of nature and
nations, to believe no man against another, without an oath. For why should not
any man's bare denial for his own clearing; be as strong as many other men's
bare words, for his condemnation? quia proniores esse debemus ad absolue^du^
quam ad co^demnandu^. Therefore the holy Ghost noting it to be a law of
nations, that no man's word (unsworn) should be received, thus testifies; that
an Heb. 6. v. 16.
oath for confirmation, is amongs men (indefinitely, and therefore most
universally) an end of all strife.

It is Alex. ab Alex. Genesis Dierum. Lib. 5. cap. 10.
told as amaruaile of one (only) amongs ye heathen, named Zenocrates, for whose
bare word, the Athenians (by alawe) decreed; that it should be holden of as
great force as his oath, in all matters: such was his rare and singular
uprightness, and integrity.

Touching their reasons, I make this to be the first, as most general: viz.
Because they have not justly incurred the Magistrates displeasure by any
offense, therefore they cannot hold themselves bound in conscience, to be the
Magistrates iustruments against such; as be none offenders. To which may be
added, that they are bound to seek rather the deliverance of the Innocent,
because it is said: Proverb. 24. ver. 11.
Deliver them that are drawn to death: and will thou not preserve them, that
are led to be slain? And it is noted as a sin in S. Paul himself, that he
Acts 22. v. 20.
stood by, consented to Steuens death, and kept the clothes of them that slew
him.

As if they should say, We have gone (in this matter) as far as our brethren;
we know our course to be good, whatsoever the laws or the Magistrates
determine or think to the contrary; that do but seek to punish us for it.
And seeing we are so well persuaded of all our innocencies, we may not be any
instruments of our own or their further detection: for this were to consent,
to have guiltless men punished. But is not this to take upon the^ (being but
witnesses of the fact) to judge also, of the law, what it ought to be, and to
condemn it as it is? and is it not (in effect) as much, as to condemn the
laws of injustice, and the magistrates of tyranny, persecution, and of seeking
the vexation of innocents?

But if the laws were such, yet (at the commandment of the magistrate) to
tell the particulars of these their actions, so justifiable (as they think)
whereof the Magistrates already know the generality; is not to consent, unto
the punishment of innocents. Does every one that confesses his own crime, and
pleads guilty in a cause capital, consent to his own death, or is thereby
guilty of his own blood? then why is he more consenting or guilty to their
punishing (due by law for these actions) who only declares them truly as
they are; more the^ he that confesses (being in deed guilty) may be said to
be guilty of his own death? It is a subjects duty (most especially in causes
not capital to himself) if he be required by authority; not to dally, nor to
lie unto the Magistrate, but to tell the fact truly as it was; whomsoever
besides, it may concern. Now, if thereupon, either the Magistrate punish it
where he ought not, or more grievously then law permits; or if the law
punish that as a crime, which is a virtue the fault and guilt before God is not
in them that declare the truth, but either in the Judges, or in the law.

Nay, to enforce this point a little further; I would ask this question of
every of the^ that be of ye side: A man being of necessity to plead either
guilty, or not guilty to a crime capital unto him, or else to be pressed to
death; if he be guilty of the fact, and yet (happily) he knows there can be
no pregnant (no nor any likely) evidence brought against him: whether in foro
conscientiae, without any sin, may such a man plead not guilty unto the
matter of indictment? for the time, place, and other words of form and
course, are not trauersable. on the other side, if (in this case) he plead
guilty (being so in deed) whether is he (thereby) guilty of his own death,
or not?

But if for avoiding of sin before God, such one ought (in conscience) to
plead guilty, rather then lye^; and yet shall not (thereby) be made guilty of
his own death: why shall ye declaring of the truth, touching other men's
actions, make him yt reuealeth it (being charged thereunto) guilty or
co^senting unto their punishments, how unjust soever (otherwise) they might be
surmised to be? for if any man's faults may be spared, a man might most lawfully
spare himself: quia Ordinaria charitas incipit a seipsa.

And to press this reason (a Paribus at least, if not a fortiori) a little
further: If such a man should choose rather to be pressed to death for standing
wilfully mute, and not answering directly unto either; should he not de iure
poli (even in true terms of Divinity) be accounted guilty of his own death,
and to be (in the sight of God) a murderer of himself? the very like therefore
is to be judged of these persons, viz. that their punishment (as co^uicted of
the crime) is most just; that their blood is upon their own heads; and that
none are causes of ye punishment inflicted upon them, but themselves; for
standing obstinately mute, without direct answering (in form of law) as they
ought: though it were admitted, that such their actions, whereof they be
interrogated, were all good, and they innocents.

And as the revealing of other men's actions (when we are duly charged) makes
us not guilty, or consenting to their punishment: so our refusing to answer,
neither is any means (in deed) nor yet is so appointed of God, to serve for
their deliverance. For God will not allow to have innocents delivered, by our
disobedience to his Lieutena^ts on earth; nor by concealeme^t of any truth,
expedient to be known, and (according to law) commanded to be declared. And
therefore ye place of the Proverbs by the^ brought, fitteth not this purpose.
For if they for their obedience sake, with a single heart and without intent to
hurt the innocent, and being charged; shall deliver but the very plain truth
(how unjustly soever the magistrate may seem to deal afterward) yet shall not
the discouerer of the truth, be a partaker of the magistrates sin. For it
is but he Proverb. 24. ver. 8.
which imagines to do evil, whom men shall call an author of wickedness,
as is recorded in the same Chapter.

The other place out of ye Acts is nothing like to ye matter and case, that we
have in hand. For Paul was not there charged by authority, to bewray any thing
he knew against Steven, much less to deal at all in that action. But he
(willingly) as one forward of himself and of a malice against the very
profession (which he then detested) did thrust himself into the cause, and
rather then he would not be some stickler in it; he thought good to do some
office of kindenes unto the torme^ters and executioners of that holy Martyr,
though it were but by keeping their clothes: and thereby he directly, gave
approbation and consent, unto Steuens death. Yea, this their opinion is without
any other like example in any text of Scripture; except perhaps they will
gather it from an observation and note pretended to be collected from the next
Chapter following. For I find an opinion collected thence, which iumpeth with
theirs, in this behalf. Rhemish Testament, in annotat. cap. 23. Act. A. post.
ver. 12.
If thou be put to an oathe (says that note) to accuse Catholics for serving
God as they ought to do; or to utter any innocent man unto Gods enemies and
his: thou ought first to refuse such unlawful oaths. But if thou have not
constancy and courage so to do, yet know thou that such oaths bind not at
all in conscience, and law of God: but may and must be broken, under pain of
damnation.

They will not confess, that they have sucked this opinion from hence: and
they may not be endured to flappe us out with T. C.
their old dog trick; and to say they borrowed it not of the Papists, but
observed so much themselves, by reading of the Bible. For this were both to
justify their own; and with-all, this corrupt doctrine of the Jesuits, as if
they both (so well agreeing together) were arightly grounded upon the word of
God.

But they bring several places and examples, whereby they think this is
proved. The officers of the children of Israel, that were appointed by
Pharaohs taske-masters, to look; that the people should make as much Brick
by day (and gather the straw themselves) as they did when straw was found to
their hands; seeing that the people were not able to perform it, and yet
were beaten for not doing it; did signify the impossibility and
unreasonableness of this, unto the king. But the king gave them a resolute
answer; that they should do it; vpbraiding them, that it was but idleness,
which made them pretend, that they would go to offer sacrifice unto their God.
Which thing was the ground of Moses and Aarons suite unto him, that the people
might have leave, to go into the wilderness. So when these officers coming
with this hard answer from the king; did meet with Moses and Aaron, they
expostulated thus with them: Ye Exodus 5. v^. 21.
have made our savor to stink before Pharaoh and his servants, in that ye
have put a sword in their hands to slay us: meaning that their suit for going
forth to sacrifice, did so discontent ye king; that he would (in that respect)
oppress them, even unto death.

But what is this to purpose? does this phrase of putting a sword into another
man's hand so please these men, that they will imagine; by what occasion soever
a wicked man pickes quarrel to oppress Gods children; that such a thing
whereupon the occasion is taken (of necessity) is unlawful to be done? from
the best actions of godly men, tyrants will oftentimes take occasion, to
persecute the whole Church. shall therefore all exercises of religion be
intermitted?

Even in this place, the message that Moses and Aaron brought to Pharaoh
(which occasioned such oppression to the children of Israel) was put in their
mouths by the Lord. And therefore they sinned not, albeit this was like to
have turned to be as a sword, to destroy up all the children of Israel: but
rather these officers did offend, that thus did mutine and grudge against
those, who fulfilled Gods commandment, and did but as they ought to do. Even
so shall they offend likewise, that shall be displeased with such, as do what
they are lawfully commanded; albeit trouble and punishment by that occasion
shall happen unto them, that so take offense. So that this example does make
flat against their own purpose and intention, and can no way help them.

Another example they bring, of 1. Reg. 1^. ver. 4, 13.
Obadiah: who hid 100. Prophets in two caves secretly, and sustained them with
necessaries, when Iesabel slew the other Prophets, whom she could hit upon.

But this comes far short of the purpose, for which it is brought. For who
ever denied it to be lawful to show charity unto the Lords Prophets? then,
there appears no commandment to the contrary, but that he might receive
them. again, it does not appear, that he was ever (by authority) charged to
reueile them; or to tell his knowledge what was become of those Prophets: and
therefore it is unlike to the case in handling. furthermore, it was (wholly) an
unjust, wilful, and tyrannous persecution, without warrant of law, or color
of any judicial proceeding. besides, if he had been charged by Iesabel to
discover where they were, or had been commanded by her to relieve none such;
yet had it been no disobedience toward the Magistrate. for it is not noted to
be the doings of the king, but that Iesabel slew them. Now, the kings wife is
no sovereign; but a subject her self. Moreover the killing of the Prophets,
for no pretense or color of cause at all; is in it self so apparent an evil,
as no man can have any shadow, to give a lawful consent unto it. Lastly, a man
cannot gather a general doctrine (in a matter doubtful, and not plainly
delivered else where in Scripture) out of any particular man's fact: because all
the circumstances which then fell out, are not known. But most especially, an
example can never serve to the overthrow of the general commandment, of
obeying the Magistrate. And, viuendum est legibus, non exemplis.

Out of the first book of Samuel, they bring three other examples. 1. Sam. 19.
ver. 1. 2.
The first, that Saul spoke to Jonathan his son and to all his servants, that
they should kill David: but Jonathan Saul's son, had a great favor unto
David, and bade him take heed etc. The second, when Saul said to Jonathan:
Send and fetch David unto 1. Sam. 20. ver. 31. and 32.
me, for he shall surely die: Jonathan answered, Wherefore shall he die? What
has he done? the third, that when Saul commanded his servants to fall upon the
Priests of the Lord, and to slay them; they would 1. Sam. 22. ver. 17.
not move their hands, to fall upon the Priests of the Lord.

To these three, one answer may serve, and therefore they are thus set
together. First, these commandments (though of the king) yet they were, when
he was enraged and in a fury; after the Lord was departed from him, and an
evil spirit was come upon him. Again, it is apparently ungodly in it self for
any to kill an Innocent, upon the tyrannous and unadvised commandment of the
king; even without all color of any lawful Judicial course. Lastly, David was
known unto them, to be before appointed, yea, and their anointed king from the
Lord; howsoever Saul was tolerated de facto to continue in place: till the
measure of his iniquity was fulfilled. And therefore (in this respect) was it
unlawful to kill, either him, or those that favored him; especially the Lords
Priests: whose linen Ephod should be a protection unto them, against Ibid.
ver. 18.
al such precipitate executions: where neither conisance of their cause, nor
any due conviction and judgment, was precedent.

Another example they bring, of the mid wives of the Israelites, to prove their
intention. It is thus written, they feared God, and did Exodus 1. ver. 17.
not as the king of Egypt commanded them, but preserved (alive) the men
children.

This objection carries his answer with him. For it is said, they feared God,
and therefore did not herein, as the king commanded: noting unto us, that the
commandment was such, as could no way stand with the fear of God. There is no
Prince in the world to be obeyed, when he commands any thing directly
forbidden by God: for it is better to obey God then man. The Prince is no God,
nor yet Gods Lieutenant, but a mere man; in that which he commands directly
contrary to God. That this was of that kind, it appears: for to kill, is
(manifestly) by ye moral law of God and nature, forbidden. Yet this has his
exception: viz. that it is no murder, when we execute the penalty of law,
upon murderers and other wicked persons, duly convicted and condemned. For he
that Gene. 9. ver. 6.
sheddeth man's blood, his blood shall be shed by man, says the Lord. But there
could be no color or appearance of any actual wickedness in children newly
borne, why they should be executed: being but by a general judgment condemned
most wickedly and tyrannously; even before they were. non censetur existere
(says the law) qui adhuc est in vtero matris.

Now let us compare these last four examples, with the scope and purpose, for
which they are used. The very act of murdering a person notoriously innocent,
in that he is neither convicted, nor condemned, is malumper se: a thing simply
and absolutely in his own nature evil, without any further circumstance. But
to declare what a man knows to be done by another; the very authors
themselves of this opinion, must needs confess to be sometimes lawful and
requisite: and therefore they must at least grant it to be medius Actus: such
as (by circumstance) may be lawful; howsoever by the circumstances of this
case (as it is propounded) they will (perhaps) hold it unlawful. And therefore
there is such dissimilitude and diversity betwixt these examples, and that
which they hold; as they can never serve this purpose.

Therefore to fit their turn, in the very point of the issue, they must prove
unto us: that it is ungodly, for any man (though charged by lawful authority)
to declare his knowledge of another man's actions; if he that is urged so to
make declaration, do judge aforehand; that the Magistrate minds to punish
such action, either where he ought not at all, or in other sort, then Gods law
permits.

For this purpose, they allege as strongest, the example Josh. 2. ver. 3. and
4.
of Rahab: who would not tell the king of Jericho, where the two spies of
Israel were; though she were by him commanded to bring them forth; and she is
commended for it, by the Heb. 11. ver. 31.
holy Ghost.

In answer hereof I say: we read not, that the king asked her, whether they
were there still, or not; albeit she Iosu. 2. ver. 5.
answered that they went out: but she was commanded to bring them forth; which
is something more, then to tell where they were, if she had been so asked.

Secondly, by Heb. ibid. and Iosu ibid. V. 10.
faith (upon hearing the miracles that God had done, and wrought for the
children of Israel) and by special revelation; Rahab knew, that God, Ibid. ver.
11.
even the God of heaven above, and earth beneath, whose the earth is, and the
fullness thereof, and who (according to his providence and wisdom) does
translate and establish kingdoms, as it seems best to his divine pleasure:
had before that, given that whole Iosu. Ibid. V. 9.
land, unto the children of Israel. So that in very right and truth, she did
owe no more obedience to the late king of Jericho; but was by God discharged
thereof, and lawfully might (as she did) submit her self, and capitulate (for
her safeguard) with the ambassadors of those; to who^ (of very right) her
subjection then belonged, and therefore could not (without sin) have betrayed
them, being sent from Joshua her lawful sovereign; into the hands of an
usurper; who^ she knew perfitely the Lord had deposed, and Ibid. ver. 13.
meant soon after, to destroy accordingly.

This interpretation is evidently and very strongly confirmed by that place of
Scripture, where she is, for this, commended. By Hebr. ibid.
faith (says that place) the harlot Rahab perished not (...), with the
disobedient, when she had received the spies peaceably. If then the rest of
Jericho were disobedient (in respect of which, Rahabs obedience and peaceable
receiving of them are commended) and therefore they perished by the hand of
Joshua and the people: is it not manifest, that Joshua was their lawful
Magistrate in right, and that they ought to have taken knowledge thereof, and
to have obeyed him, at their own perils?

Lastly, there is in this fact something extraordinary, as done by spectall
economy, which, by us may not safely be followed. As the lie that she made,
in Ios. 2. v. 4. and 5.
saying, she wist not whence they were, and that they went out in the evening.
And likewise, it is not to be presumed by any subjects in these days (when as
miraculous, and special revelations are ceased) to adiudge themselves either
wholly, or in some particular actions and circumstances, to stand discharged of
their obedience and alegeance toward their Sovereign or vndermagistrates;
when, and how far, themselves will fancy. For if by this and such like
extraordinary examples (or by that of Obadiahs hiding of the hundred Prophets)
such presumption were lawful or tolerable: what a goodly color might all
disobedient and rebellious subjects have, namely unnatural fugitives over sea,
Jesuits, Seminarimen, recusants, concealers and harberours of these, and such
like boutifeux and bellows of sedition, for all their godless attempts? are
they not, or at least will they not pretend, to be as assured and resolute of
the goodness of their cause, as the Disciplinarians are touching theirs, and
their designements? so that for these men, that would be counted most sincere
professors of the Gospel, to hold the like dangerous positions, and to seek
to confirm them, with the same and no better reasons and examples then the
Papists do theirs: for my part, I do reckon it to be the practice and part,
neither of grounded and judicious Divines, nor of well advised or duetifull
subjects, quorum vestigijs insistunt, eorundem exitus perhorrescant.

But they say further: that by such oath, they should be drawn to discover
unadvised speeches, that sometimes pass men in private fellowship, as at table
etc. or such as come unto them for counsel, and for private resolution of
their consciences.

First, there is no man bound to answer more matters then be contained in the
Article or Interrogatorie, whereof he is examined. But if any matter be therein
laid down in such sort, as it leads (pertinently and directly) to such
discovery: then is it likely, that by some means it is detected unto the
Magistrate before, and by him thought expedient (for some necessary public
cause) worthy of such Inquiry. Again, if such private talk or asking of
counsel have been concerning some platte or practice laid or to be laid, that
shall (in discretion) be adjudged by the Magistrate expedient (for the common
wealths sake) to be known and discovered; and therefore if they shall enquire
directly of it: I can not see, how it may stand with any man's duty to God,
unto the Prince, unto Laws, and to the Common wealth to conceal it, being
charged to the contrary. But of other secret speeches, treaties, and
resolutions of men's consciences; no Magistrate is of so slender discretion, as
to enquire; nor can by law (though he would) for want of those indicia and
special presumptions and inducements that are required, to ground an inquiry
upon: and therefore this is but matter devised, ad concitandam and conflandam
inuidiam, against lawful authority.

They allege also, that by their discovery, some that be very poor may be
undone: and that the most of the matters and persons being already known unto
authority, there can be none use for them to appeach any, but to alienate
their mutual affections, and to have one another in jealousy.

This is very loose and simple, to reason upon a casual event which may
happen, thereby to prove a thing unlawful. for of a good matter, an ill event
may, and does often fall out, and e conuerso. Careat successibus opto,
quisquis ab euentis facta nota^da putat, could the very heathen Poet say. And
why should a man withdraw his duty to Magistrates, only for particular and
private respects touching himself, and some few other private persons?
Whatsoever may happen, let him do as he ought: Fiat iustitia, and ruat mundus.

Particularly to the first, why should any man pity his poverty, that pitieth
not himself, but wilfully runs into danger of laws? and shall a man hold a
poor man more dear unto him, then the common quiet and peace of the Church
and Common wealth both?

The second part implies a contradiction in itself: for if the matters and
persons were sufficiently known; then (in truth) were it of no use, for the
Magistrate to enquire further, yet if they be so known already, then what
wilfulness is it in these men, thus obstinately to persist to their own hurt,
and yet to do others no good thereby?

They object further, that to discover their brothers secrets, is condemned as
a fault, by the Holy ghost: for Prou. 11. v. 13.
he that goes about as a slanderer, discovers a secret, but he that is of a
faithful heart concealeth a matter. And seeing they have met in some men's
houses that did it for good affection and opinion unto them; if they should
discover such, it were a very unthankful requital (they say) toward them.
And for that their fellowship is in the truth, and the course they walk holy,
therefore (even by the law of love and fellowship) they may not detect one
another: for that were a note of a false brother.

As for the truth of the matters that they meet about, and the holiness of the
course they walk, it is not of this place to discuss: how holy and true
soever it is, it dare not look out at noone days: and yet we live in a state
professing the Gospel. Number sic Apostoli? number sic Martyrs, etc? but ye more
true and holy it is, the less ought they to be ashamed to reueile it (being
called into question for it) as is signified before. Here (we see) that the law
of their love and fellowship, and ius hospitale, toward such their private
friends, as have received them; is by them, more esteemed and accounted of;
then either the public laws and statutes of the realm, or, then their duty
to the Christian Magistrate, and to their country, quae Cicero offic. li.
(...).
omnes omnium in se charitates complectitur.

As for the discovering of a secret, of concealing a matter, and false
brotherhood there spoken of; who does not see, that it is meant of needless,
slanderous, malicious, and treacherous bewrayings of our friends, or of others
secrets; and not of any judicial deposing of our knowledges, when we are
brought before a Magistrate? For if this were not lawful and godly, then might
no witness testify a truth in any matter whatsoever, that is not known
abroad before, or unto the Magistrate: for that it can not but turn to the
declaring of some matter, doubted of or not perfitely known. The common
translation fortifieth this interpretation, viz. qui ambulat fraudulenter,
reuelat arcana, qui autem fidelis est, celat amici commissum. Therefore Aquinas
The. Aquin^ 2. 2.
expounding the true meaning of that place of the Proverbs, says: that such
matters as tend to the corrupting either of the souls or bodies of a number;
or to the great detriment of any one private person, a man that knows them,
is (in conscience) bound straightway to reveal them.

Thus far in answer of their reasons, who (of such as profess the Gospel)
gave the first example of disobedience in our days, by refusal to take oath,
in this respect; viz. for that they were urged to testify of their fellows,
as well as of their own actions, whereof they were interrogated.

But an example of William Thorpe, who is said by ye Treatisor to have refused
an oath, about 160 years since, upon this consideration amo^gs others: does
most aptly (I think) take his place here.

For when Fox. fol. 146. 147. 148. 1. editi.
Archbishop Arundell (before whom he was conuented, under pretense of
Lollardie) offered him favor, if, amongs other matters he would be sworn to
forsake his opinions, to withstand all such as should hold the same opinions,
and (in case they should not be reformed) to put them up in every Diocese,
where he came unto the Bishops: he refused this favor upon any such condition:
because, he would not (as he said) become every Bishops epsy, and Summoner of
all England: nor give such offense, as to be accounted to have forsaken the
truth.

In answer whereof, I say, that this was but a favor voluntarily offered unto
him upon that condition; and that oath was none otherwise exacted of him, nor
yet by law might be exacted. Insomuch, as no man is (by law) bound to make any
such promise, or to enter into such a course. Again, there was no special
opinion in particularitie charged upon him, which he should be sworn to
forsake, and should detect others of; except he should be bound to forsake all
that he had learned in Scripture concerning the fear and service of God. and
therefore it is nothing like unto the case, against which, we do here argue.
For those Innouators, which were authors of this opinion, had particular
articles concerning their own, and others actions, treaties and conclusions
objected unto them: which were also aforehand conveniently (though not in
every necessary particular) known, and discovered before unto the Magistrates.
unto which (albeit after many tergiuersations, and much a do) they answered at
last in the Star Chamber upon their oaths that which touched their own
facts only: yet unto no more thereof would they answer, then they presupposed
and gathered to be before known, sufficient for their conviction, though they
should have concealed it. But what other company they had, the^ those who were
defendants at that time, or in whose houses such Synodes, and treaties were
held; they pretended themselves bound in conscience, not to answer. And yet
the Judges of the land, twice, or thrice ouerruled it, and signified so much
under their hands; that (by law) they ought, and were bound, to answer the
Interrogatories preferred concerning each of their accomplices and partakers.

It may be, that the Note-gatherer also by one of his quotatio^s, meant to
enforce Tindal. in respons. ad Moru^ page 309.
Tindalls authority against us, in this behalf. For he writes, that if a
wicked Judge ask him that has sworn, of things hurtful to his neighbor,
and against the love that is in Christ: then he must repent that he has
sworn, but not sin again to fulfill his oath. I make no doubt, nor do
gainesay it, but if mine answer shall be, both against the love that is in
Christ, and also to my neighbor hurtful: that an oath cannot tie me, to answer
in such a case; yet if Tindall thought, ye whatsoever may bring punishment upon
my neighbor is of that nature: then must he give me leave to doubt of the
soundnes of his judgment herein; no less then, the Note-gatherer himself
will do upon the points before touched; and many other contained in Tindalles
works; and no less then he will do upon the Rhemish note agreeing wholly
with Tindall here, and touched by me before.

He seeks also to overthrow (howbeit but general oaths, which none
defends) by co^paring them to the doings of Longland sometimes Bishop of
Lincoln, against whom he most bitterly inueieth, for constraining children (by
oath) to accuse their parents etc. of heresy: whereof some (he says) chose
rather to be forsworn: and brings Master Fox his condemnation thereof. But
I guess what it is which chiefly pincheth the man in this sort: belike, because
certain of his Clients whom he would patronize; were lately required to
discover their accomplices in their disciplinarie assemblies.

I can easily yield, that where great presumption or peril of perjury is,
rather then a man will discover a truth, that there, and unto such, it is no
good discretion to minister an oath. but especially against the life of those,
who attain so near unto us in proximitie of blood, or other no less strong
affection. For the civil law says, Filius no^ torquetur in caput patris; a
child ought not to be tortured in a point of peril, unto his fathers life. And
the like reason, which is in torture, may (by some perhaps) be thought to be
also in an oath. against his fathers life. But we may not make this a general
doctrine; as if in no case whatsoever a child, or such like might be examined
in a point capital to his father etc. For if the matter do concern treason
against the Prince, or the common wealth; I make no doubt, but that, a man may,
and ought to be tortured, even against his natural father, and others, how
near soever. But if this be lawful for treason against man, much more then,
for that which is heresy indeed; being no less then treason against the
divine majesty of God himself, who is King of kings, and Lord of all lords.
Thus far touching their reasons, and allegations from d^uinitie and divines.

So that al their objections being refuted, I will now press them in this
point, but with one pregna^t place out of Leult. 5. verse. 1.
Leuiticus; which is also handled more fully by me in the 11. chapter of this
third part, viz. If any have sinned, that is, if he have heard the voice of an
oath, and he can be a witness whether he has seen, or known of it. if he do
not utter it, he shall bear his iniquity. But these (of whom we speak) have
heard the voice, and form of the oath, have been adjured in God, and in her
Majesty's name; and by authority charged and recharged, and they can bear
witness, for they have seen, and know the matters (whereof the charge is, as
themselves do confess) and yet they will not utter them in particular, but
obstinatly, without any good ground (as may appear) do persist in refusal:
and therefore they do grossly sin, and shall bear their own iniquity,
indistinctly; whether the matters to be uttered be commendable in their
brethren, or not; and whether they shall (thereby) be brought into trouble, and
unto punishment, or otherwise.

Much might be alleged out of the common law, and statutes to prove thereby,
the lawful exacting of a necessary oath, for discovery of our christian
neighbors crimes and offenses; as well such of them, as be but mala quia
prohibita; as those which in their own nature be evil, and be therefore
forbidden.

As that grand Iuries at Assizes, and Sessions are urged by oath to enquire,
and present treasons, murders, and other felonies, breach of the peace,
violation of sundry laws and statutes, common Nusances etc.

That if a 10. H. 6. 7.
tythingman, etc. refuse to make presentment, the steward of the Leete may
amerce him: And in an action of debt brought he shall not wage his law, upon
that amercement.

That by a 19. H. 7. ca. 14.
Statute, chief constables, and bailifes were to give evidence upon their
oaths, touching unlawful retainers within the precinct of their offices: and
upon concealment, were to be punished. with such like a great number.

But because the Innouators, who are now the most especial defenders of this
opinion, both by argument and practice, do make no account at al of any humane
laws: whenever they list to fancy unto themselves a condemnation and
contrariety of such laws unto the word of God, as in this case they do:
therefore I will no further trouble myself, or the Reader, in that course.

CHAP. XV. Their arguments are answered, that condemn the ministering and
taking of an oath as unlawful, because they have not distinct knowledge given
unto them of every particular before the taking of it, and the like course (by
examples) is approved lawful, and godly.
ANother challe^ge of theirs, made unto the manner of proceeding against crimes
in Ecclesiastical courts (and co^curring with the very tender of the oath) is:
for that they are urged to take the oath to answer truly, before sight and
perusal of the articles and Interrogatories by the^ had; whereby they might
have special, and distinct knowledge, of every particular, therein contained.

The cause why this exception is by them taken, is not for that al such
refusers do purpose to take the oath, when they shall have seen the articles;
but if they shall find them to be such as they think either cannot be proved
(in case they shall deny them) or to be of that sort, as they can easily wade
through with the^: then some of the^ (heretofore) have not stuck, nor made any
bones to take their oths, whatsoever they will do now. And therefore certain of
the^ will not so much, as promise by their word to take oath, to answer the^
after perusal. So that it may appear, this is but a quarrel picked by them,
(of purpose to advertise their accomplices how far they also may be touched)
rather then that there is any serious matter of scruple herein, which they
stand upon.

Some of the causes why it is not thought convenient (by those that be in
authority) to let them always know the several particularities aforehand, and
so to leave it in their liberty either to refuse, or to take oath afterward to
answer them; are sufficient, and weighty. One is, because it is sometimes
impossible in it self; for that one Interrogatorie often rises of an other,
especially where a man answers affirmatively: so that the oathe cannot
conveniently be in each case restrained unto such of the^, as are set down
before; seeing necessary occasion of circumstance ministered, may lead unto a
further examination. Another is, because (as some of them have done when this
favor has been showed) they use it but as a means, to instruct their
confederates for concealing, or disguising of the truth: which may appear,
for that after perusal, they themselves remain as obstinate in refusal, as
they were before.

And albeit no law (that I know) does of necessity require articles to be
showed to them, at such proceeding, before they resolve, whether they will take
the oathe, or not: yet if any will swear (before) but thus; that he will peruse
them, and after he has perused them, he will then take the oath, directly, and
truly to answer them, so far as by law he is bound: assuredly then, the sight
of them aforehand neither has bin, nor will (I think) at any time hereafter
be denied unto any, in such a case.

Some reasons I have heard to have by the^ bin used, to prove it ungodly. It is
thus written in the1 Proverbs; He that answers Prou. 18. ver. 13
a matter before he hear it, it is folly, and shame to him. Much more then
(say they) is it folly, to swear to answer a matter, before a man hear it.
In very deed, it is not possible directly to answer any matter, before a man
hear it, and know what it is. But the meaning of the holy Ghost there, is to
tax such; as upon a pretense, or for ostentation of pregnancie of wit, and
quicknes of conceit, or upon some other rashness; will take upon them to
understand a matter and to answer to it, before half the tale, and material
points of it, be opened unto them. Whereupon grossly (ofttimes) mistaking the
whole matter; such a man is shamed, and folly is also justly imputed unto him
for it.

Besides; this their collection hereof is out of the rule, that is in
controversy, and practice. For there are never any sworn to answer a matter
before they hear it. But (indeed) they take an oath (aforehand) to answer the
matter truly, when they shall come to their examination: and then they do
hear all the matters objected, before they need make answer unto them.

The grand Enquests do take alike, yet a lawful oath; which is, that they shall
diligently enquire, and truly present al offenders against any such point, as
shall be given unto them in charge, which charge is given, after their oath is
taken.

Their next reason is, that for a man to take an oath; without a sure persuasion
that it tends to Romans 14. ver. (...)
glorify God, and to further his brethren, is sin: because whatsoever is not
of faith, is sin. And that this oath is such for that a man knows not what
the matter is, whereof he takes his oath.

Herein, the assumption is to be denied, and prosyllogisme or reason, which is
brought to prove it: for it is of, and also according to every honest man's
faith, to believe himself bound in conscience, to obey the positive laws of
his country (which require him to take such oath) so they be not contrary to
Gods commandment.

And albeit every particular neither is used to be, nor yet is meet, nor
(indeed often times) can be aforehand declared, which is requisite to be asked of
him, as one question will grow of another: nevertheless, the general heads are
signified and opened unto him. and it is withal declared, that he shall but
answer matters of his own fact, or knowledge: that they touch neither his
life, nor limme, and that (if he think good) he may challenge any of the^ at
the time of his examination, as not being bound by law to answer them, and he
shall therein (if law do not bind him) be allowed to refuse. For the Judges of
each court are appointed to yield unto every man indifferent Justice, according
to law. So that the examinate may have as sure persuasion hereof by this
course: as if every particular were read unto them.

Their third reason is: that this kind of oathe is infinite, and therefore a
snare to a man's conscience, and not like the oath that Abraham Genesis 24. a
princip. vsque ad versum 9.
gave to his servant.

Though it be not like in this point, because that was but a promise to do one
particular matter, whereas in our case, the oath, albeit at the taking of it,
to answer, it be promissorie; yet the performance of it is assertory, by
telling the truth of matters, either past, or present: nevertheless such
dissimilitude does not hinder, but that this may be no less lawful, then that
promissorie oathe was, which Abraham made Eleazar his servant to take.

There is none infinitenes in it: for it is not general, either concerning his
own, or other men's thoughts, words, or works, as very untruly, and
slanderously is (by some) given forth: but it has sufficient certainty, upon
the certain reference unto articles before exhibited; which also are the^
declared, to contain particular diducing, and laying forth of such, and such
especial misdemeanors, with some of their pertinent circumstances, of time
person, place, and manner.

Their fourth and last objection is: that a man ought to swear, Ierem. 4.
verse. 2.
the Lord lives in righteousues, in judgment, and in truth. This judgment,
and discretion (they say) they cannot use in such swearing, because they know
not every particular aforehand, whereunto they must answer. And this
objection is also propounded and enforced by the Treatisour. But (if it be well
weighed) it is a childish fallacy, of the ignorance of the Elenche; by want of
due distinction of times. For by reason the matters are many; and the articles
oftentimes long (besides sundry other inconveniences, and infinity of trouble,
which would else grow unto the Judges) it is therefore meet, that the defendant
be examined apart, at some leasurable times, and out of the court. In which
respect, though the oath be given openly in Court, yet the very examination is
dispatched afterward, by the examiner: and then it is acknowledged before a
Judge, as in diverse Courts temporal is usual, in like cases of Articles or
Interrogatories.

The Iudgem^ (spoken of there by the Prophet) that ought to be used; is not to
be referred only to the very action of the oath, when we take it corporally: but
it is specially meant of the advised maturity, and consideration that we ought
to use; in ye depositions and setting down of our answers. so that ye not
knowing of every particular, when by oath we only promise to answer truly at ye
time of our examination, does no way impeach or hinder the judgment, which is
meet, and required to be used, in our answering: at what time, we may consider
fully and deliberately, of every particular point.

That this is a true and no forced sense of the place, may be also gathered by
the last point, required there by the prophet unto an oath, viz. that we swear
in truth. for in the very action of taking the oath, that truth there meant,
cannot be used; but must be showed by the upright and faithful answering, at
the time of the examination; yea though the examinate know them all so well, as
that he had them without book, because, as he that gives the oath, does but
charge; so by the receiving of the oath, a man does but promise to answer
truly, afterward. And a promise does neither affirm nor deny the truth of a
matter: but is to be made a true vow and promise, by the due performance of
it, according as the promise runs, and it is truly meant.

It may be, that one of the Note-gatherers quotatio^s out of Tindall, was by
him set down to enforce also this point; namely where he thus writes: If
Tindal in resp. ad 3. lib. Mori page 309.
a Judge put a man to an oath, that he shall answer to al, that he shall be
demanded of, he ought to refuse. Is it any marvel that he which holds a
little before, that no Judge ought to make a man swear against his will in any
case; should also infer thereupon, that such a general oath, as this he
speaks of, which no law or practice (simply) requires, need not be taken?
But what is this to the refusal of oathe, when it is not general, but
restrained unto certain articles, and points; the heads whereof are also
opened before unto him, who is to swear? or what serves it, to justify a
refusal; for that the defendant may not first peruse every Interrogatorie
particularly, before he will resolve whether he will take the oath, or refuse it?

The Treatisor also alleges (to this point especially as I gather) a saying
of Ioh. Lambert. Martyr in his Fox page 565. 1. edit.
answer unto the 41. article ministered unto him: The fault which (in this
behalf) he finds, is; for that a man is charged by virtue of the contents of
the Euangely, to make true relation of all, that they shall demand of him: he
not knowing, what they will demand, neither whether it be lawful, for to show
them the truth of their demands or no: for such things there be, that are not
lawful to be showed. This he exemplifieth thus: as if (says he) I were accused
of fornication, and none could be found in me, if then they should require me
to swear to bewray any other, that I have known to offendin that vice; I
suppose it were expedient etc. not to follow their will etc. He also further
finds fault with such Judges for that sometimes not knowing by any due
proof, that such as have to do before them, are culpable; yet will enforce them
by an oath, to detect themselves, in opening before them their hearts.

For answer hereu^to: First there is none that defends any such general
exacting of an oath, to answer whatsoever shall be demanded. Besides, what is here
any way sounding to the comdemnation of ministering an oath for answering to
particular Interrogatories. touching certain known points, opened before unto
ye party? Seco^ndly, the judgment of La^bert, that a man is not bound (in
distinctly) to bewray who^soeuer he knows to have offended, is also
allowable. For a man being so generally asked, is not bound (by any law that I
know) to take oath, to bewray whatsoever he knows, touching al other men's
faults; so they be merely secret, not manifested at al abroad, nor bringing
any scandal or apparent danger, either to the church or common weal, or unto
the souls of a multitude, and where of he may and ought (in charity) presume;
that the offenders be repentant. Thirdly, I take this judgment also to be very
sound both in divinity and law; that a man may not be urged in any humane
court, to disclose what he thinks in his heart: unless by word or deed, it be
come unto some ouert Act. For if it come so far, there may be then sundry
occasions, why a man should be examined, what he thinks or believes. As if a
man will allege iudicially something, and desire it to be admitted which ought
so to be, in case he propound it bonafide, and not calumniously: the Judge may
here urge him, to declare by his oath; whether he believes the said matter to
be true, and that he thinks it may be proved. Likewise, he that shall be
detected to have spoken like an Atheist; or an Heretic against God, may be
examined upon his oath touching his belief. neither is the bewraying of
himself herein, capital unto him, unless he shall wilfully persist in his
error, and blasphemy. and therefore I think, that by the laws and policy of
this realm, it is otherwise in a person, which has once abiured, and is
again relapsed. and that he ought not to be examined by oath, touching his
heresies by him uttered and holden. because if he be convinced to have
relapsed; he ought (by law) to be burned, notwithstanding he shall then again
pretend reuocation of his error and hearty repentance.

Out of this answer of Lamberts unto that article; I observe, that the
Treatisour (in my copy at least) has some what changed these words, viz. and
none could be found in me, if then they should require me, etc. for insteede of
if then, he has put these, viz. or if: because he would not have them sound
any way, as if Lambert meant, that a man might be sworn touching the crime of
fornication imputed to himself; albeit he were not bound to bewray all
others, whom he knew to have offended that way. Besides, by Lamberts said
answer it appears, that he thought, Magistrates might cause subjects to
swear (though against their wills) and that they are bound to obey them
therein: which he exemplifieth by that which Solomon might have done with the
two women, which contended about the child; if otherwise he could not have
found out the truth thereof. And he concludes his answer to that article
thus: viz. that he thinks it lawful at the commandment of a Judge to take
an oath to say the truth: specially if the Judge require it duly, and in
lawful wise. whereby we see Tyndals judgment by Lambert to be controlled,
where he writes absolutely; that no Judge ought to make a man swear against
his will. Lastly, Lambert there concludes, that a Judge may cause a man to
make an oath in any other case convenient, and that also for purgation of
infamy, when any infamy is lawfully laid against a man. So that the
Treatisour himself, who condemns all such oaths of clearing, as purgations
poysonfull, for that they may induce perjury; is by this his own allegation,
(which he may notrefuse) well confuted.

The Notegatherer avouches also three examples, where men were proceeded with,
for matter of pretended heresy; and yet had a copy of the Articles delivered
unto them. But he tells not, whether they were before that, or afterward
sworn. But howsoever some were then thought good to be proceeded with; yet
cannot this prove, that it was holden to be unlawful, to do otherwise. For I
have also known the like favor used, unto sundry pretending scruple in this
point: who (in very deed) little deserved it: for they were never the nearer
afterward, to make oath to answer them.

The equity of this proceeding, yea far above the lawful practice of courts
on the other side the sea, in their proceeding against crimes (even capital)
by the course of the Civil laws may appear; by comparing of them in some
points together.

They have there, two Processes in most criminal matters: the first is called
processus informatiuus, which contains all the Indicia, or the Euide^ces,
presumptions, and sayings of those, which can testify against the party
enquired of. These be taken aforehand for the private instruction of the Judge,
even in the absence of the party, and serve for to ground his Inquiry. The
other, is ye very Process criminal or punitiue, whereunto the party
conuented is to answer: and resembles much our Inditements at the common
law. which inditing in France, they call making a man's Process.

Now, it is by Conrad. fol. 255. and Foller. in Pract. crim fol. 165. nu. 9.
and Iodoc. in Pract. fol. 24. nu. 18. Maranta in Specul. fol. 8. nu. 8.
a general custom observed (where the Civil law in that behalf has place)
that the supposed delinquent is interrogated, and examined; and the witnesses
also (after production in his presence) are again upon their oaths repeated,
in the process punitiue: before the party may have a copy of the euid^nces
and presumptions, that were taken against him; upon the process informatiue.
And it is testified; that the Judge should do evil, if he should otherwise
observe it. For In^oc. in c. bonz. el. (...). na. 5. de elect. B^us in l. edita
in repetit. Patau. nu. 30. C. de edendo. and in l. ea quidem. r. u. 42. c. de
Ac^sat. and al. j pluri^ni.
that which has received interpretation, and approbation of equity, by
continual practice, and long custom; ought not by any singular person, to be
changed.

The reason of this course by them holden is weighty: For Clarus lib. 5. fin.
q. 49.
otherwise by the publication and copies of the Process Informatiue given up
unto them; the supposed delinquents (being instructed thereby, what Evidence is
to be used and given against them) might, and by likelihood, would (for their
own safeguard) practice with the witnesses; and either withdraw them clean
away, or else suborne, and corrupt them.

This Process informatiue; I mean the particular points of the evidence and
presumptions (yea and sometimes also the witnesses names, that can testify,
and may be used) in the court of Commission, and in ordinary courts
ecclesiastical, are inserted into, and contained in the Articles objected.
Now as soon as the conuented party has answered the Articles; in this Realm
(of course) he is, if he will, to have a copy delivered; both of them, and of
his answers made unto them before any witnesses be called, or used: albeit
(indeed) great inconueuience of subornation (for avoiding punishment) might
thereby happen, and be occasioned. So little cause have these men to complain,
of any rigorous or strict course used toward them: as by the example of the
general custom of the world abroad, might be followed. Neither have they any
cause to complain hereof, as of a thing unusual: for not having (other then a
general knowledge) of the matters against them, before they do swear.

If that c. qualiter and quando. ^l. 2. de accusat.
Canon be objected; viz. exponenda sunt ei illa capitula de quibus fuerit
inquirendu^, vt facultatem habeat seipsum defendendi: I answer; that in
ecelesiastical courts of this realm, this is observed, even before the oath is
tendered and after the party has answered, he has a copy not only of the
heads of the matters objected; but of every particularalso. Howbeit this Canon
distinguishes not at what time these are to be opened unto him: otherwise,
then when he is to use his defense: which (commonly) is after the witnesses be
published: when as he chalengeth and excepteth against their sayings or persons.

But if the Civil law be also urged (to this point) which L. vnius..
cogniturum. ff. de quastionibus. L. 3.. si ad diem ff. de ^e militari.
requires copies indiciorum of the inducements, or evidences to be given to
defendants: I answer, that it is but before he is tortured; that he may have
opportunity to answer, and to avoid such presumptions, before he sustain so
irreuocable a damage: which reason has no place in that matter, which we now
handle.

Besides, this rule has many limitations, or excepted cases: For first it
Campeg. in addit. ad Zanchinu^ de haeretic. ca. 9.
is otherwise, when the party enquired of, or accused, was before that time of
evil fame. Secondly, when a copy of them, is not desired by the defendant.
Thirdly, when he purposes no defense, but only would labor to prove the
Indicia to be false. Fourthly, when the proceeding is by Inquiry, according to
the form of somestatute. Fifthly, where there may be probable fear, that the
witnesses shall thereby be hurt, or prejudiced. Sixthly, when the crime is
notorious. Seventhly, when the proceeding is of mere office. Eighthly, when the
defendant varieth and faultreth in his answers. Lastly, when he before refused
to answer to ye Interrogatories. By all which we see, both yt the said rule is
to be understood of delivering copies, after publication of witnesses, and not
before the defenda^ts first examination: and also, yt such disobedient persons,
as refuse to answer ye Interrogatories as they ought (though they were not
proceeded with of Office) yet are by law debarred, from having copies of any
necessity, otherwise then of courtesy.

And if the oath to be taken were so general as they pretend, whereas it is
(indeed by way of reference) very particular, and certain: yet they might
find examples for approving of the equity of oaths more general then this;
both in the laws of the Realm, and in the word of God: whereof all the
particularities neither at the taking of it were, nor could be judged of, before
the oath taken.

First, at the common law, is not the oath of Jurors in the grand Enquest at al
Sessions, and assizes; to enquire, and present al within that shire, that be
culpable of breach of any the laws and statutes which they shall have in
charge (afterward to be given:) as large, yea and a more general oath, then to
swear to answer half a dozen, or a doze^ articles, or interrogatories
remaining before in court, preferred?

By statute it is appointed, that Statut de Exon. de Inquisit. super
Coronatores.
Enquirors against Coroners, shall make all the Bailifes swear, that they shall
well, and faithfully do that, which they shall have in charge by the king and
his Counsel, and shall conceal nothing of it.

Justices of Peace (by an old 12. Ric. 2. ca. 7.
statute of Richard the second) are to be sworn, duly, and without favor, to
keep; and put in execution, all the statutes and ordinances, touching their
Office.

The like oath, and somewhat more general is appointed unto them by a later
27. H. 8. ca. 5.
statute, to be taken; viz. that they shall keep all statutes made, and to be
made.

The oath established to be taken by great Officers of the State and of Justice
(upon another occasion before alleged) is also of greater generality. For it
is 15. Ed. 3. ca. 3.
enacted, that great Officers about the king, and in his courts of Justice,
shall from time to time forward be sworn (when they shall be put in office) to
keep, and maintain the privileges, and franchises of holy Church, and the
points of the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest, and all other
statutes, without breaking any point.

The oath appointed by the now repealed statute against heresy was very
general: and yet that point, thought agreeable enough, to equity. for this
was not any ground of the repealing of it. By it was determined that the 2. H.
ca. 7.
Chancellor, Treasourer, Justices of the one Bench, and of the other, Justices
of Peace, Majors, and Bailifes of cities and towns, and al other Officers
having governance of people, should make an oath; to put their whole power, and
diligence to destroy all manner of heresies, and errors, etc. and to assist the
Ordinaries, and their Commissaries: and them favor and maintain, when they
shall be required.

The circumstance of time (in that the oath is tendered before the defendant
has particularly perused the Articles, or Interrogatories) is sufficiently
justified by the like general practice in the Star Chamber, and Chancerie;
and in examinations criminal made by other Judges and Magistrates. In all
which, the oath (as I am credibly informed) is taken, before the examinates
have any copy, or may peruse the Interrogatories, where written Interrogatories
be used: and where they are not written, there is no possibility of knowing
all (particularly) that shall be demanded; insomuch as one question
(necessarily) rises upon the answers, that shall be made to the former.

I read a report of the Canon law, where in an 15. E. 4. (...).
action of debt brought against the husband, and his wife for the wives debt
before the couerture; the woman without the husband could not be suffered to
wage her law. And is not this oath of the husbands part (though lawful) as
far from that assured persuasion of the very truth thereof: and is there not
as great want of the husbands certain judgment herein, as when an oath is
taken to answer articles (in themselves finite, and certain) though
particularly not perused by him before? For nothing to the contrary can be here
(I think) alleged; saving that it may be, the husband himself had, before
the wager of law, paid the said debt of his wife.

There is a 2. H. 5. ca. 9.
statute (says the Notegatherer) which requires a copy of the Libell (put up
in a court Ecclesiastical) to be delivered to the defendant: and thereupon is
there a writ framed, and put in the Register, pro copia libelli deliberanda.
It is very true which by him is alleged. the reason was, for that the
defendants could not then procure prohibitions from temporal courts without
their view of the Libell: which (in that respect) was sometime by Judges
Ecclesiastical denied; and the law (as it seems) was at that time so taken.
but if the law were not only so taken, but so practiced still; for my part, I
should hold it more agreeable to reason, and that it would prevent many long
delays, and other great inconveniences. Nevertheless, when one thing seems
(cautelously) to be in demand by the Libell, and another thing (in truth)
not incident to an Ecclesiastical court, is under hand shot at: then, and in
such case only, upon apparent probabilities thereof showed unto the temporal
Judges; it cannot be thought inconvenient for them to grant a Prohibition, yea
though the Libell be not viewed before by them, nor co^teine expressly any
matter, belonging to a temporal court.

But seeing the statute speaks but of a Libell; it cannot be extended to all
articles or Interrogatories whatsoever, ministered in a Criminal cause:
especially, where there is no likelihood, or color, but that the cause is
merely Ecclesiastical: or where it is handled by virtue of Commission under
the great Seal of England grounded upon the statute. For if her Majesty's
Supreme Royal authority and power Ecclesiastical granted by commission to
others, be as highly vested in her crown as is her Temporal: then will it be
probably gathered, both of them being in their several kinds supreme, and the
exercise of them committed over to others, under the great seal; that the one
of them is not to be abridged, restrained, or controlled by the other.

In Genesis 21. V. 23.
Scripture, by the oath that Abimelech ministered to Abraham, and which he
took, appears; that thereby Abraham, was to deal well with him, (or as the
Hebrew word is, not to deal falsely orlye) unto him, nor unto his children: and
that he should deal well both with him, and the whole Country, according to
the mercy and kindness (there) showed unto him. which points be of greater
largeness, and generality; then that all the particulars (falling under that
oath) can possibly before-thought or called to mind, at the very taking of it.

By Jacobs Genesis 25. V. 33.
requiring an oath of Esau, for confirmation of the sale of his birthright (a
thing of greater generality, yea and consequence also, then Esau could, or did
then consider) may be gathered; that an oath may be ministered, though every
particular included therein, be not specially rehearsed: for this oath was
approved, and stood ratified.

The like general league, and covenant, that was betwixt Abimelech and
Abraham; was also Genesis 26. v. 29. and 31.
made, and sworn, betwixt Isaac, and the said Abimelech.

And albeit, it be not directly set down, that the king exacted an oath of the
Prophet Jeremy; yet we Ierem. 38. ver. 14. and 15.
find a promise of the said Prophets then made (after the kings charge was laid
upon him) of answering truly, what he should ask him: yea without expressing
any particular matters aforehand, what ye king would ask. Yet may we not
therefore charge the Prophet to have done this without faith, or foolishly;
unadvisedly, or without Judgment.

And it is sure, that a godly man ought to have no less regard to perform
what he promises, and to deal truly (when by his Sovereign Prince he is in
like sort charged) then if he were to answer it, upon his Corporal oath. So
that we may conclude, that it is not unlawful, or ungodly, to take an oath:
that we will perform some such matter, whereof every particular is not
aforehand, or at the very time remembered unto us; or then can be called to
mind or known by us, in distinct and special manner.

CHAP. XVI. That after the party has answered upon his oath, it is neither
unusual, unlawful, nor ungodly; to seek to convince him, by witnesses, or
other trial; if he be supposed, not to have delivered a plain and full
truth: and somewhat also in approbation of Canonical purgations, with answer
to the Treatisours objections against them.
THeir next exception (set out before in this order to be spoken of,) which this
sort of men do make unto the manner of proceeding Ecclesiastical, (being of a
thing ensuing after the oath and examination) is; for that Judges
Ecclesiastical do not always rest in that which is affirmed or denied, upon
the parties oath: but do often times proceed to a further inquiry, by
examination of witnesses, upon the points denied by the party.

A man might justly marvel; what should move them thus to require all other
men to think so well of their single oaths, (and especially in their own
cause) as if they had some indignity offered unto them, only because their
own single oaths are not perfitly believed; but that proofs (by witnesses)
are after made to convince them, of that, which is denied by them.

But for this they bring also some pretense (as for the rest of their opinions)
out of the Scriptures. It is said in the Epistle to Heb. 6. v. 16.
the Hebrews: that an oath for confirmation, is amongst men, an end of all
strife. Whereupon they gather, that whatsoever they shall deliver upon their
oaths, it ought to be final and peremptory, to conclude the cause of
necessity, without any more ado.

The use of the oath, which is in that place spoken of, is (especially and most
properly) appliable, to two kinds of oaths. The first is an oath Promissorie,
when (for more assurance of the promise to be kept) the parties agree, that it
shall be taken. which thing is argued by the circumstance of the place, as
being brought to prove the certainty of the Promissorie oath, which God made
unto Abraham: and also by the word of Confirmation there used. Secondly, this
place has use very properly also, in an oath Decisorie: when Azo. in Summa de
rebus creditis.
as either the one or the other of the parties is contented, to put the matter
that is in variance, upon his adversaries own oath: which if he thereupon
shall take, it makes an end of the whole suite and strife. For in this case,
he that so offered it, shall not be permitted to use any contrary proofs
afterward: because he made choice to have the whole cause in variance betwixt
them, composed in that forte.

It may also truly be answered to that place, that an oath indefinitely taken;
is (in deed) a means provided, and tending to make end of all strifes
amongst men: but not that in every cause and matter whatsoever, one man's single
oath should therefore be sufficient. because many absurdities would follow of
such an interpretation. as namely, that a man's oath in his own cause, should
be as good and forcible; as any other two men's oaths touching the same matter.
But the law says: dictum vnius, dictum nullius. One singular deposition,
though of a witness (who is not interessed in the cause, and therefore the
more indifferent) is not to be taken for a full proof. Then how much less
should the parties oath (whom the law presumes to be partial in his own
cause) be admitted for a concludent proof, especially to his own clearing or
benefit?

Besides, if such their interpretation of that place should be followed; then
were this place contrary, to sundry other places in the Scripture; which is
blasphemy to imagine. For Number. 35. v. 30.
one witness shall not testify against a person to cause him to die, but
witnesses, therefore more then one. And by consequence, a man's own witness (in
his own behalf) is not sufficient. At the Deuteronomy. 17. v. 6.
mouth of two or three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death, die: but at
the mouth of one witness, he shall not die. Again: Deuteronomy. 19. v. 15.
One witness shall not rise against a man for any trespass, or for any sin,
or for any fault that he offends in: but at the mouth of two witnesses, or at
the mouth of three witnesses, shall every word be established. Matt. 18. v. 16.
Like-wise in the Gospel: by the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word
may be confirmed. Furthermore, it is John 8. v. 17.
written (says Christ) in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. 2.
Cor. 13. v. 1.
Moreover, S. Paul says: in the mouth of two or three witnesses, shall every
word stand. And Heb. 10. v. 28.
again: he that despises Moses law, dies without mercy, under two or three
witnesses. And to 1. Tim. 5. v. 19.
Timothy in like manner: receive none accusation against an Elder or Minister,
but under two or three witnesses. Much less then (of any necessity) shall a
man's own testimony of himself, and for his own benefit or clearing, be
received for an undoubted truth. The blind Pharisees could see so much; that
it was absurd, for any sinful man to arrogate so much to himself, that his
own witness touching himself, should suffice. Therefore they say Joan. 8. v.
13.
to Christ, whom they took to be but man only; thou bear record of thy
self, thy record is not true. And Christ himself signifies the like, for he
says: Joan. 5. v. 31.
If I should bear witness of my self, my witness were not true. meaning,
that where there is no further testimony for a man, then his own: there is
nosufficient cause, that other men should hold his speech for true, or rest
in it, as certain.

And therefore we see; that albeit the woman, whom her husband has in
Iclousie, is put Number. 5. v. 22. vsque ad 28.
unto a most strict oath (with an imprecation and curse) that she is not
defiled: yet is there (by the law of God) appointed a further trial, and she
is also to drink the cursed water. which (by Gods secret operation giving
might unto it) was of force, both to reucale, and to punish her perjury (if
she were forsworn) by making her (most lothsomely) to rotte above the ground,
being yet alive.

Of further inquiry and the equity of it, after the oath taken, and denial
or qualifying of the matter by the party: we have also sundry examples in the
l. 13. C. derebus creditis and iureiur.
Civil law of the Romans.

If an oath be taken by any man touching a legacy left unto him by a
Testament, or of the truth of any other instrument; this oath is not so to be
rested in: but that all may be again revoked upon proofs, made against that
oathe; least the laws should seem to permit a man to reap benefit by his
own wicked perjury.

So l. admonendi. 31. ff. de iureiur.
if the Judge (and not the party) do tender and defer an oath to the other
party, if by some public instrument, (viz. matter of record) or any like
sufficient matter proof may afterward be made, of the falsehood of such oath:
it shall be revoked, and all that depends upon it. The reason hereof Duarenus
2. disp. anniuers. cap. 33.
is assigned, for that the parties own oath is but a kind of doubtful proof.

Furthermore, Auth. nouo iure. C. de poena iud. qui male iudicauit. Novel.
constable. 124.
if either of the parties suing, do take oath that he has neither given, nor
promised any thing to the Judge; yet if within ten months (after the sentence
given) it shall be proved, that herein he has sworn falsely: both the giver
and the taker, shall have all their goods and lands confiscated, and shall be
banished. So is that Jason in l. scimu^.. licentia. C. de iure deliberandi.
number. 1.
law also, after an oath is taken of the truth of an Inuentarie: and (in
respect of the proof) is daily practiced. For any of the Creditors or
Legataries, may take upon them to prove, that something is left out of the
Inuentarie. Which if they do, the heir or executor shall forfeite double as
much by that law, where (in this behalf) it has his place, and use.

Yet that which in the two former examples is said of punishing; is Alex. in
Apostil. ad Bartol. in l. 1. nu. 1. ff. de bonis little, etc.
special unto those two cases, and to such like; as the law does (specially)
so determine of. For (ordinarily) the rule is, that if it happen, (and so fall
out upon proofs afterward) that the defendant has deposed falsely in his
personal answers (the cause being moved by way of litigious jurisdiction)
thereupon he is not to be punished as a person Bossius. tit. de Periuris. nu. 3.
perjured; but is left unto the vengeance of God, to fall upon him for it. And
so is it usually practiced in Courts of that nature.

According unto which laws of enquiring by witnesses, after the defendants
oathe taken; we also Ord. Came. Imper. tit. de Purgatione.. vnd so er sollich.
find the customs and ordinances of the great Court of the Imperial Chamber
in Germany, to be. For if a man clear himself (there) by his oath, of any
crime imputed unto him; yet may any man take upon him to accuse, and to prove
it afterward against him. In which case (by those Ordo^nances) if the party
defendant happen to be convicted, then shall he be punished, not only for the
principal crime; but for his perjury also that he has committed, in denying
it. This their municipall law, is agreeable to the Civil and Canon laws,
there practiced. For (as has bin touched asore, by other occasion) a purgation
shall not so finally clear a man; but that if good proofs may be (after)
made of the truth of the very crime it self, he shall be punished; both for
that fact, and for perjury also: and therefore an oath of the party, yea,
though his co^purgatours do join with him (upon their credulities) is not
final, nor can debar further procedings.

I had occasion before, to allege out of the Tom. 2. liver 2. des Ordonnances
par Henry 2. page 1195.
Ordonnances or statutes of France (touching a corporal oath to be taken)
concerning the number, weight, measure, and place (intended) for vnlading of
marchandises, to be shipped out thence: and that there was no deceitefull or
forbidden wares amongst them. Yet (this oathe notwithstanding) it is there
further provided, that if upon inquisition to be made, any thing shall be found
contrary to the declaration made by the party upon his oathe; he shall lose
his merchandise, he is grievously to be fined, and besides shall be punished as
a forger, called Falsarius, in the Civil laws.

By the laws of this Realm, such further trial is usually practiced; and
proofs are very often made to the contrary of that, which the defendant has
delivered in, upon his oathe. In the Court of Chancerie, if plaintifes should
always rest, and might proceed to no further proofs, after the defendant
has answered upon his oathe: they should (for the most part) have very cold
suites, and small relief or remedy could be given, by that high Court. The
like is to be thought of the Courts before the Queens Counsels established in
Wales, and in the North parts, and of the Court of Requests.

In that most honorable Court of the Star Chamber, the defendants do not
only answer the Bills preferred (by virtue of their oaths,) but also unto
sundry Interrogatories, serving to the like purpose. And yet after all this, it
is thought necessary to use further proofs also by witnesses; and not to be
convenient, to rest only upon the honesty and conscience, of the supposed
delinquent.

Besides this practice and long continued custom (quae est optimus legum
Interpres) there be also statutes in the very point.

By the statute of 34. H. 8. ca. 4.
Bankrupts in K. Henry the 8. time, authority is given to certain there
named, to call and examine such as are suspected to conceal such offenders
goods; and to examine them by their oaths, and by other ways (as in
discretion they shall think meet) upon the specialtie, certeintie, true
declaration, and knowledge of such offenders goods or debts owing to him: and
if he show not the whole truth (to be after proved by witnesses, etc.) then
he forfeiteth double the goods concealed. 13. Eliz. cap. 7.
And the very like clause in that matter of Bankrupts, is established by a
statute, made in her Majesty's time.

At the Common law, the Judges do not always rest in an oath of a party;
but do sometimes enquire further of the truth of it; and do punish him also
for taking a false oath, if he be thereof convicted. P. 5. H. 6. ^ol. 25.
One was brought into the Court as a pledge, and did swear he might dispend
forty shillings land by year: yet the Court rested not in this oath, but
examined the matter more straightly; upon occasion that one then present, and
dwelling in the same place, did affirm that the other might dispend nothing,
and it being found, that he could dispend but twenty shillings by year, he
was committed to the Fleet, till he had paid his fine. So that (both by divine
and humane laws) we see neither reason, equity, nor practice; for Judges
(necessarily) to rest in a man's answer made upon his oath; without proceeding
to the taking of any further proofs, whereby, the lawfulness of that oath
(which I termed partly of Purgation and partly of Inquiry) is more
particularly also approved.

But the Treatisour condemns all Canonical purgations, as contrary unto
equity: and therefore terms them deadly purgations, not healthful but
hurtful, and poisoning purgations, dangerously given for preservatives. Which
if it were true, would take away not only our reason taken from proofs which
may be made, even after the parties Canonical purgation; but also the oath
which I termed partly of purgation, and partly of Inquiry.

What his reasons to that purpose be, it will not therefore be amiss, briefly
to consider: and to add also somewhat, for clearing of laws and courts
Ecclesiastical from injustice herein; and for the defense of the use of
purgations, by the parties own oath, etc.

The conclusion which (in this behalf) he takes upon him to prove: is, that
proceeding ex officio, to forced purgations is hard, and unjust dealing toward
men; and a great abuse of the name and majesty of Almighty God, cloked and
shadowed nevertheless, under glorious and painted glosses, etc.

But he mistaketh the matter greatly, to think that those matters which (in
the aforesaid doctors schedule) he challenges for no better then painted
glosses, beautiful shows, and fained pretenses, were by them set down, for
justifying of purgations: for they were (in deed) principally by them
mentioned, to show the necessity of Enquiring by oath, and of punishing
offenders. If I thought, that in his setting forth of the state of this
question, he fixed any force in that point for that the proceeding is ex
officio: I would then remitte the Reader unto that, which has been spoken
thereof, in the second part.

For proof of Injustice thereby offered unto men; he presses those Doctors
with their own maxim, viz. Nemo tenetur Vide cap. 9. 3. part.
seipsum prodere. But why he that is otherwise very presumptiuely detected;
should not be driven to show, and declare his innocence upon his oath, or
else yield to the detect (which they also add for the true understanding
thereof) he shows no reason: other then that, as a gloss confounding the
text, It wholly (he says) destroys that rule and principle. But how can it
be verified, that this principle is thereby wholly destroyed: when as the
detection made by fame, by denunciatio^, or presentment, etc. comes from
others, and is not a man's own detection of himself? therefore it is not so
much as a limitation properly: but rather a true exposition, how that rule
ought to be understood. By as good reason it might be said; that because a man,
is not at first, by any course of Justice, bound to discover the very fact
against himself; that therefore, being called into question, and touched by
great presumptions, and arraigned for it; there is no Justice to urge him, to
plead either not guilty, and so to lie; or else guilty, and so to bewraye
himself.

For proof of an abuse of Gods name and Majesty by purgations: he says, to
offer an oathe unto persons diffamed, concerning their own corrupt life;
argues a lightness, and want of good discretion in the Magistrate. For that he
wittingly does minister an occasion of perjury. I have spoken of this point
(by occasion) before: and I trust the Readers will pardon my necessary
repetitio^s (sometime) of one matter in diverse places: considering the
Treatisour upon one reason, seeks very often to build many several, and
distinct conclusions.

First no man ought by any occasion whatsoever, be drawn to go against his
oath, or to periure himself; a word (most properly) verified in an oathe
Assertorie, such as that of purgation is. Secondly, it is to be denied, that
whatsoever a man of a bad mind, may take for an occasion to forswear
himself; that in every such case, it is lightness, and vndiscretion in the
Magistrate to offer an oathe. Which may appear, by decisorie oaths, or wagers
of law in actions real, or personal for lands and goods: being such things,
which be as deeply (by most men) tendered, and affected; as their own good
names, or honest reputations. Thirdly, it is too grievous a charge, to bring
every lightness or vndiscretion of a Magistrate, within the compass of abusing
Gods name and majesty; though this were admitted to be such lightness.
Fourthly, no law presumes so uncharitably, as though every one detected, or
presented of corrupt life, were straightway, of necessity, and in very deed,
guilty of such crime: nor yet is it to be intended, that most which be (in
truth) guilty, will rather forswear themselves then confess the truth:
considering the penalty inflicted by courts Ecclesiastical are not very
grievous; and the chief end therein aimed at, is but an inducement unto, and a
testification of the delinque^ts repentance. Fifthly, every one who upon a fame
is detected or presented, cannot be truly said, to be thereupo^ diffamed,
infamia iuris. For a fame may rise, yea, and very probable cause of suspicion
of a crime, may also be given; where, nevertheless the fact is not at all
committed. Lastly, it is not every person suspected of any crime, who in
discretion of the Magistrate, is not to be urged with an oathe: but it is such
an one who is probably suspected; to be more likely to forswear himself, then
to confess a truth.

But herein he presses us yet further, with a piece of old counsel, viz.
Dedecus magis quam periculum vites. Whosoever gives this counsel, if he
should mean, that the peril of a man's soul were rather to be embraced, then
any worldly shame: it were very unsound, and wicked counsel. For it is
better, to loose, not only our whole credites in the world, yea, and all the
world besides, rather then our own souls. It is (in truth) but an
exhortation unto valor, and courage: and that a man in a good cause, should
rather incur any bodily peril, then empaire or distaine his honor, and
loyalty to his country, by cowardice. Besides, in matters spiritual, and
belonging to the soul; there is a shame which brings honor, as
Ecclesiasticus writes.

He inueigheth also against them ex absurdo: because if purgations should be
used (he says) at the Common Law upon Enditements of felony, or other
criminal causes; perjury would ouerflowe the land. I am also of this mind,
that if for matters of life and death a man might be acquitted upon his own
oathe, and his Compurgators: that many wilful periuries would be committed.
But oaths of purgation be not imposed, any more at the Ecclesiastical law,
then they be at the Common law, in any matters capital. And as purgation, is
only a presumptiue kind of clearing, to remove the offense, and for safeguard
of his credit, who being infamed, can justly and truly perform it: so is it
no such final acquitall, but that the party purged may again be conuented
for the same: if any man (by law allowed) will undertake the proof, not of
the same, but of the very crime and offense it self, whereof he was before
purged. As for other criminal causes, which endanger not life, nor limme:
diverse Temporal courts (though not upon Enditements) without such fear of
driving men to perjury, do minister, and urge the parties oaths, as has bin
showed. Yet not holding them purged, or cleared thereby, albeit they deny the
crimes; but enquiring further, and examining witnesses also afterward,
touching the truth of the offense. Besides, such oaths be ministered in those
Temporal courts, upon no detection of fame, or other presumption, grounded
upon the oaths of any: but upon the private vindicatiue mind of him, which
puts in the bill, and prosecuteth. Lastly, there be few or none of the
crimes called transeuntia, and not capital, which be enquirable in any courts
temporal: or if any be, they are not (in their own nature) so secretly and
without possibility of direct proof performed: as the crime of incontinencie
is; touching which, most purgations fall out in Ecclesiastical courts. There
was therefore small cause of that his question here, viz. Why Ecclesiastical
courts offer not to the laity, the like good measure, and upright, and
sincere Justice; that themselves find in courts temporal? Besides that by the
same question, he indirectly also taxes all courts whatsoever, that impose
oath on the party; for want of good measure, and of upright and sincere
Justice.

Upon the former reasons against purgation, he grou^deth another question also,
viz. Why these ordinaries (which challenge, or assume to themselves the goodly
name, and title of spiritual men) do not proceed to condemnation, by good
proof of lawful witnesses: and again absolve the party diffamed, where such
sufficient proof fails them? I answer, first, Ordinaries do not in these
days, either challenge, or assume to themselves such goodly name, as he
solaceth himself at: but rather, the title of persons, or Judges
Ecclesiastical. In deed, that other name (in times past) was willingly
embraced by the Clergy: and (as they thought) without any injury to other
callings, in respect of the subject matter of their profession, which is
spiritual. And by no man's writings or speeches, is it more often attributed
unto them, even until this day; then it is in statutes of the Realm, in
reports, and usual speeches at the Common law. Therefore was there ye less
color, that Ordinaries should be vpbrayded with it: as if they of their own
heads did vainly arrogate, that title unto themselves. Secondly, Ordinaries
do in all causes not confessed; proceed to condemnation upon witnesses, and
matter of Record: or unto absolution, upon failing in proof: saving in
crimes, which be of that secrecy in their own nature; so as witnesses of the
very crime, by no likelihood can be had: yet always, where such probable
inducements thereof do lie; as do infer a fame, or give scandal to the
well affected, and are evil examples to the weak, and unstayed. Thirdly, if
no condemnation of a man be just in any court; but upon good proof of lawful
witnesses, deposing of their own sightes and knowledges; then does he withal
impugn, the usual, and lawful Justice of this land, by Iuries: who in crimes
of very high quality, are often, and may be led, sometimes by one witness: yea,
and he, the party that preferres up the Indictment: and sometimes though by
more witnesses then one; yet all deposing upon probabilities, presumptions, and
other pregnant, or likely inducements, to prove the party to be guilty. Like
wise he overthrows also hereby, all waging of law by the parties Judicial
oath, taken in courts of the Common law, about chattels, debtes, and lands.
For a man having but two hands of Compurgators, swearing for the truth of his
oathe, upon their own credulities: shall be thereby relieved and acquitted
against his adversary, without any witness at all. For the Treatisour
himself tells us; that wager of law is not permitted, where any one
witness, or writing may be had. and if the party will not take such oathe,
being offered; then is he (without witness, writing, or other confession)
condemned for the matter, in demand. Now, saving that it is not in a cause
cryminal; what does this wager of law else, differ from a purgation? and what
less danger of deadlines, poison, or perjury, is there herein, especially, if
the matter be of any weight and moment; then there is in purgations, at the law
Ecclesiastical? and yet nevertheless, both of them be good measure, upright,
and sincere dealing, in all course of good Justice. Lastly, if in crimes of
that hidden nature, he would have all diffamed persons without more ado,
discharged and absolved; where two witnesses of the very fact cannot be had: he
might then in steed of fear, that perjury (in the other case) would ouerflow
the land: stand well assured in this, that adultery, and lechery, might, and
would more freely ouerflow it, without all touch or co^trolment.

Admitting that which the Treatisour further alleges, out of the grieuances
of Germany to this purpose, to be truly by him set down: yet there is nothing
there objected, which co^de^neth these purgations. For the first fault there
found, is only, for that men upon false reports and sclanders being brought
before Ordinaries, and having purged themselves; do nevertheless pay for their
letters of absolution, which ought rather to be paid by such, as falsely accused
them. Whether any such thing were practiced then in Germany or no, I know not.
heat of opposition, and sharpness of humor, makes men sometimes, either
wilfully, or by mistaking, to misreport matters happening even at their own
doors. But I stand not to defend abuses, by any man offered against law. The
law is, that upon an accusation, a man shall not be put to oath of purgation:
except the proofs made (though they do not convince) yet do greatly burden
and charge him, by vehement presumptions, or scandal. And if he do then purge,
and clear himself, the accuser is to be condemned in charges. And though by
Accuser here, any private prosecutor were to be understood, yet (upon the
purgation) even such must likewise, defray the charges; because it is calumnia
praesumpta. But if public Officers, that are appointed to present, do make
denunciation; then are they to pay no charges: unless not only the presumed
calumniation, and conspiracy; but also, a true and formal calumniation, be
found against them.

The next grieuances there pretended, and by him alleged, are: for that upon
diffaming one of another through anger; both the party that did diffame, must
take oath, that what was spoken by him, was not deliberately, but upon
displeasure uttered: and the party diffamed, that he or she, is not an
adulterer, etc. as they were by the other slandered to be. whereby is inferred,
as inconuiences; that both unlawful gain, is thereby sought, and wilful
perjury forced.

It is no marvel in deed, though such, and greater inconveniences also should
happen, where due proceeding in law is not observed. for neither of these two
last courses, is warranted by any law, nor yet followed by any practice in this
Realm, yt I know, or have heard of: therefore culpateneat autores. So that
Purgation in it self, is not assigned (we see) for any of those German
grieuances.

But because the Treatisour surmised, his reasons could not otherwise be
answered, nor Purgations justified; unless Compurgators (who concur in that
action, and swear upon their credulities) were thereunto vouched, to help the
cause: therefore to meet also with this point; he says, the matter is thereby
no whit amended; but rather made worse, and empayred. because compurgators do
(in effect) justify him to be honest, whose fame, and the former depone^ts
have proved to be dishonest, and very near (the circumstances considered)
convinced of the crime objected? where may be observed, how light account
soever els-where he do make of fame without direct proofs; and therefore would
have the party dismissed, without more ado: that nevertheless, he makes it
here, to be very near a conviction. Albeit a fame and those who depose
thereof, do burden and charge a man's honesty: yet do they not convince him of
the fact, and therefore do not prove him to be dishonest. Furthermore, the
number of Compurgators cannot make worse nor impair (any way) either the
credit of the man, or of the matter: though it were granted, that there oaths
(for his reason before alleged) were rash, and inconsiderate. whereas, in
truth, the fame or such like inducement, being but a charge, importing some
presumption against the party: is most aptly cleared, and taken away as with a
more strong presumption, viz. by the party himself, who takes oath of his
own innocence from the very fact: and is besides assisted with the oaths of
sundry others (who are privy to his former conversation, and fear of God)
deposing upon their credulities; that weying the whole matter indifferently,
they verily think the party has taken a true oath. Again, if by fame, and
by the presenters oaths thereof; the party be in deed proved dishonest: why
does he say, that it is but near unto a Conviction? for if dishonestic were
thereby proved by him; why should he not also stand thereupon convicted? But I
would have thought till now, that none who thinks reverently, and but as he
ought of the common laws of this his own country, howsoever he do of all
other: could thus absolutely, and advisedly have condemned all kind of
purgations by oath, for what (I pray) is wager of law, (as I said before)
differing from purgation; but that this concerns matter of our good name, and
credit, and wager of law, is touching our lands, or goods?

Nevertheless, the common law is not wholly destitute neither, of example of
this purgatory oath, even in matter of secret crimes. For the party appelled
of murder or robbery, who puts it to trial by battle (as has by other
occasion been before alleged) before the combat, must take an oath; that he
has not committed such offense. and herein the law yet rests not, but
requires also afterward, a further trial by battle, betwixt them: whether
the appelled party, will thereby fall out to be tried clear, or culpable.
And if either the party appelled refuse the one, or be vanquished in the
other: the law pronounces and holds him for a man convicted of the hidden
crime it self, that was imputed to him. If c. 1. and 2. de purgat. vulgari. 2.
q. 4. c. monomachiam.
this oath of purgation, with such further trial; being both of deadly danger,
and of great doubt, (when all is done) in a matter capital; yea and upon the
appeal, or accusation of another; be but good measure, sincere, and upright
justice, a trier, and preserver of innocencies, not hurtful, but healthful to
the common weal, nor no poisoning purgation; whereof (I hope) the Treatisour
will make no scruple: then, where the purgation for a secret crime, and upon
no less presumptions is imposed, not by an enemy, or accuser, but by the
Judges office; not importing any danger of bodily death, but tending to the
good of his soul, and satisfaction of other Christian men's consciences,
wounded, and grieved; there must needs be much less cause, of any such
challenge.

For further justifying of Purgation by the parties oath with Compurgators: I
mind not to allege the authority, either of Canon, or Civil laws, because
they are like with such great facility to be rejected by him. For he says,
that it is no matter what their laws presume or teach; but with what reason
they do it. Well, there be not a few, nor those unwise nations in the world:
where the authority of the laws he means is such; as that they are even
presumed and intended, to be grounded upon good reason: albeit a reason of
every law, cannot well, and aptly be yielded, as those laws doc testific.

The received use of this purgation, amongst most Civil nations; does make it
to be little less then Ius gentium, and therefore by moderate and grave men,
it is not meet, so lightly, and slightly without good grounds, to be condemned.

Besides, purgation Canonical, is so far from being condemned by good, and
godly Bishops in ancient times: that by whole Councels it has been prescribed.
Let Council. Tribur. Can. 21.
a lay man (says one Council) if need be, purge himself by his oath: and
let a priest by the Consecration of the holy Sacrament be interrogated. And
another Council thus: Iuo. li. 5. ex Council Agathensi.
Let a Priest (if he can) purge himself of the crime with seven of his order:
and a Deacon with three. So was it decreed by a third Council: Iuo. ibidem ex
Council. I^densi.
if a Priest or minister, be infamed amongst his charge, and it cannot be
proved before the Bishop, by witnesses; let him be suspended, until he
perform due satisfaction, least the faithful people be scandalized. But (as
our Elders have taught) then is the satisfaction due, and orderly, when
according to the Canons, or as the Bishops shall judge fit, he joins unto
him seven Compurgators, and swears by the holy Gospels laid before him, that he
has not committed the crime laid unto him, and when he is thus purged, then
let him again freely execute his office. And in another Council. Worm^c.
Council, we find purgation prescribed for theft, and also for adultery.
Besides these, sundry others also might be alleged. and according to the
prescription of such Canons; examples have gone. for sundry ancient Bishops in
the Church, have themselves made their own purgations, for avoiding, or
removing of scandal and offense. 12. q. 4. c. manda^is.
Sixtus, the third, an ancient Bishop of Rome, but upon the accusation of one
Bassus, did willingly make his purgation upon his oath in a Council; which (in
that case) was more then he needed to have done. And so did Iuo. Car. li. 5.
Leo another ancient Bishop of the same See, purge himself with twelve Bishops.

Gregory the great enjoined unto Greg. ep. 23. ad Iustinum. presbyt.
Leo, Idem. ep. 8. li. 2.
Memius, and Idem. ep. 8. li. 7. and ep. 75. li. d.
Maximus three Bishops, to clear and purge themselves of several crimes by
their oaths: whereof the last was for Simonie. Innocentius also caused the
Bishop of Trent, to purge himself of the like crime of Simonie.

And what be the oaths, touching goods stolen, or embezeled which were left
with a man upon trust; appointed in Exo. 22. v. 7. 8. 10. 11.
Exodus: and those in Salomons prayer, at the 1. Reg. ca. 8. ver. 31. 32.
dedication of the Temple: other then oaths of purgation of a crime, imposed
by the party, having an interest? Likewise, the oaths mentioned in Leuit. 6.
ver. 2, 3, 4, 5.
Leuiticus concerning goods denied, that are pretended to have been left in
deposito; or goods gotten by robbery, or by violent oppression; or casually
found after they were lost, yet by the finder denied; are they not for
purgation, and clearing of the party, from the crimes imputed? and (in some
respect also) decisorie of the whole controversy; unless sound proofs
touching the true guiltines of the party, may be afterward found out and used?

Again, the Number. 5. v. 14. etc
oath of jealousy taken with a further solemnity of purgation, and imposed by
the Priest a public Magistrate in that behalf: is an oath not only of
Inquiry, but of purgation to the woman denounced for suspicion of adultery,
by her husband. Lastly, the Deu. ca. 21. v. 1.
oath imposed by Gods law upon the Elders of the City situated next unto the
corpse of a man which is found secretly murdered: is a plain and most direct
oath of purgation, even in a crime (in his own nature) evil, and capital to
the offenders.

To conclude therefore; we do find it lawful, and godly, sometime to make
further Inquiry, and trial, then a defendants own oath, who thereupon
denies the matter: and that purgations Canonical be convenient, allowable,
and manifoldly lawful, yea, by the very word of God it self.

The Epilogue unto him, for whom the first draught of this Apology, was
privately addressed.
THus have I as plainly as I could, and as briefly as the matter would suffer
(in my rude manner) showed unto you, my simple opinion, in the points aforesaid,
lately called into controversy: and (by the way) in others also, wherein you
have so earnestly (almost) importuned me to travel. If it do (but as it is
like) not satisfy you; impute it to the shortness of time, lack of good
leisure, and chiefly to your own bad choice of me. If any thing be mistaken by
ignorance, or ouerslipt (as I doubt not but very much is, and may be) keep you
promise with me: and let this simple Treatise have no more, nor other readers
of it, then I wish. and so shall I have less cause to doubt, but that the
censures of it, will be nothing so sharp, as (I fear) they may be just, for
want of skill in me, to deal in matters of this quality.

FINIS.


QVAESTIONIS:

NVNQVID PER IVS Diuinum, Magistratuiliceat, a Reo Iusiurandum exigere? and id,
Quatenus ac quousque liceat?

Theologica Determinatio:

Habita In publica Schola Theolog. Cantabrigiae, mense Iulio, Anni 1591.

Per LANCELOTVM ANDREW: S. Theologiae Doctorem.

NVNQVID PER IVS diuinum Magistratuiliceat a Reo Iusiurandum exigere? Et id,
quatenus ac quousque liceat?
DE quaestione in reos habenda sub religione iuramenti, deque eius per reos vel
susceptione, vel declinatione legitima; nuper quaesitum est: Nunquid per ius
fasque diuinum, Magistratui liceat a reo iusiurandum exigere; and id quatenus,
ac quousque liceat? Eam ego quaestionem, ne qua memoriae vestrae, ne qua meae
confusio fiat; sic pote, quasi quinque in propagines, diductam volo. Neque vero
in hoc tam succincto bidui spacio, methodus mihi magis distincta, in mentem
venit. 1An exigere iuramentum liceat? 2An Magistratui liceat? 3An a part rea
id liceat? 4An omni in causa liceat, an vero non in Capitalibus; sed quae
mitiore poena luuntur? 5Quousque hoc liceat, and quatenus? Equibus priores
illae tres quaestiones, nihil quaestionis habent: si sani sumus in Theologia.
Expediam ergo paucis.

Ac primum, exigi licere iusiurandum ius sacrum est. qua in re, plurimum
Christus fecit in causa diuortij) qualis quaeque res ab initio fuerit, id
primum inquirere. Aetatis flexu multa mutantur: Principium Index certissimus.
Quaero igitur, vbi, and quando, prima iuramenti mentio in sacris literis?
Reperio Genesis 24. Abrahae scilicet a digentis ad iusiurandum seruum suu^ sub
hijs verbis, hacque caeremonia: Pone nunc manum sub femore meo, vt iurciurando
te obstringam, accepturu^ te vxorem filio meo, e cognatione mea. Ita; quod
primum est in sacra pagina iuramentum, expressum est.

Ac vt antiquissima and prima; ita frequentissima and pene so la huiusce
mentio. Hoc ipsum (iurare,) vix reperias vsquam in Testamento veteri, nisi vel
sub Hiphil: i. coniugatione praeceptiua, ratione deferentis: vel sub Niphal: i.
coniugatione passiua, ratione suscipientis. Eodemque iure and Graeci sunt, apud
quos (...), Iuramenti nomen est; quod fere solum in Testamento Nouo Spiritus
sanctus agnoscit. Est in ea voce coarctans quaedam necessitas, and (vt
loquuntur) exigentia, non minus quam in (...). Ab eadem enim voce, vox vtraque,
nempe (...), coarctandi. Moxque prouerbio decantatum est, (...), Bellum and
iusiurandum, (...), i. spontanea mala esse: and vt bona sint, (...), esse
debere; id est, pressa and expressa (vt site Augustinus de iuramentis) vel
auctoritate deferentis, vel saltem duritie non credentis. Vt nisi aliquo saltem
modo, atque aliqua (nec leui) causa, exigatur; peccetur, tum iureiurando, tum
belligerando. Exigi ergo posse, vel debere potius; ipsa naturae, ipsa vocis
vis, euincit.

Sed nunquid a Magistratu? (secunda iam haec propago est.) Certe a magistratu.

Sic olim Theologi, Non modo quodque corpus, sed animam adeo quamque,
Potestatibus subiectam esse, Romans 13. 1. Esse igitur Potestati, factam
potestatem, vt corpus tradat custodiae incarcerando, ne quo aufugiat: Esse
itidem, vt animam quoque tradat custodiae suae, iureiurando; ne quo scilicet
subterfugiat. Quo nomine aptissime Deus ipse dixit, Iusiurandum (...). i.
animae vinculum sieve carcerem. Nu. 30. 13. quo quasi constringatur anima:
constricta apposite and expedite respondere teneatur. Verum intro adhuc magis.
Si Domino hoc licet in seruum, vt Abrahae, Genesis 24. 3. si patri in filium, vt
Iacobo in Iosephum, Genesis 47. 29. si fratri in fratrem, vt eidem Iacobo in
Esauum, Genesis 25. 33. nempe adigere ad iuramentum: Vtique meliore id iure
licebit Magistratui in subditum, cuius imperium omni alio imperio excellentius
est. Addo etiam, si de rite collocando in matrimonium filio, id liceat, vt
Abrahae seruum: si de commodo sepulturae loco deligendo, vt Iosephum: si de
iure primogeniturae transigendo, vt Esauum; priuatis in causis, addo etiam and
minutissimis, si cum publicis conferantur: vtique meliore hoc iure licebit
magistratui, in communi Reipub. causa, cuius interesse, est maius omni alio
interesse.

Idque cautu^ est lege diuina, Exo. 22. 8. disertis verbis. In causa depositi,
sistant se coram Magistratibus, ait Deus. Quo in loco, Dei ipsius nomine,
nomina^tur Magistratus: Nec quouis nomine, sedillo ipso quod ab (...) -- i.
adiurandi vi transumptum est. Quasi dicat, Coram Iuratoribus se sistant, aut
ijs, qui (cum Dei vice, ius dicant) in iudicio ipsius, ipsius nomine,
iuramentum ipsius exigere possunt. Nempe Vicarij Dei, Psalm. 82. 6. in iudicio
Dei. 2. Chr. 19. 8. iuramentum Dei. Eccl. 8. 2. Magistratui ergo licet;
Magistratui (dico) cum Ecclesiastico, tum Civilly. Coram illo, nempe
Ecclesiastico, lege purgare se iuramento iubetur mulier, in causa suspectae
fidei coniugalis. Nu. 5. 19. Coram hoc, Civilly scilicet, lege purgare se
iuramento, iubetur vir in causa suspectae fidei socialis. Exo. 22. 8. Cuius
praxim videmus (est autem praxis sanctorum, interpres praeceptorum)
Ecclesiastici quidem in Esra, qui iuramentum exegit in causa matrimonij, Esr.
10. 5. Ciuilis vero in Nehemia, qui ad iuramentum adegit in causa foenoris,
Neh. 5. 12. Neque vero Magistratui solum pio and religioso, hoc iuris est;
verum and Ethnico; idque in populum Dei. Praestitit Nebucadnezzaro iuramentum
Zedechias de fidelitate praestanda. 2. Chr. 36. 9. adactus praestitit; rite
tamen si Ezechieli credimus. idque cum post, ausu sacrilego, violare tentaret;
non tulit impune. Ezech. 17. 13. Addo denique; Non hoc tantum illis licere in
populos suos; verum and in hospites ac peregrinos quoque, intra ditionem suam,
sieve commercij, sieve alia de causa haerentes. Quo ipso nomine, Josephus AEgypti
iam prorex iuramentum defert fratribus suis, etsi legibus and natura
Chananaeis, in causa suspectae proditionis. Genesis 43. 3. Ex hoc ergo iam liquet;
tum exigere licere; tum licere etiam Magistratui.

Sed vtrum-ne a reo? (Quod sum pollicitus tertium.) Nec id in dubium sieve mala
fide amici rem procurauit, sieve rem repertam, repetenti non restituit, Leu. 6.
3. sieve (vt mihi quidem videtur) vllo praeterea in crimine (indefinite enim
ponitur, 1. Reg. 8. 31. (...) -- i. quicquid peccauerit) licuit actori (...),
id est, iuramentum reo impingere, vel leuare super eo iuramentum (Hebraica
phrasi.) Nec reo detrectare licuit, ab actore quidem ipso, nedum a magistratu
delatum. Equidem incidere non negem tempora, vt vel ipsi actori deferri
expediat, non solum reo. vtrique namque praeuaricari contingit; Actori,
calumniando; Reo, tergiuersando. sed si ius, e caelo petimus, i. e sacris
literis; reo magis. Exempla quidem ab ea part fere sunt. vix vnquam reperias
in lege, delatum actori iusiurandum; Reo reperias quam saepissime. Rationem
reddit Moses: Actori (quippe qui plaerunque pars laesa sit) incalescit animus,
totus in fermento est, irae, vindictae, maleuolentiae aestro percitus,
acceleraret ore suo; quod in iuramento vetat sapiens. Eccl. 5. 1. Quare inepta
plane materia iuramenti. Reus, quem falsi criminis reum, lex semper autumat,
quoad constet contrarium, multo aptior. Minus in eo praeiudicij, minus
affectionum, praeter forte timoris, qui ipse cos est quasi iuramenti. Quare, a
reo exigi, and licet, and vero par est.

Accedo ad quartam: Qua tandem in causa isthuc par sit; quae paulo spissior
naturali morte moriatur: sieve Civilly, id est, exilio: seu (vt sacrae literae
loquuntur) eradicatione. Esr. 7. 26. (Quibus congeneres sunt (...), id est,
causae sanguinariae: quales erant, Deu. 25. 12. Membri amputatio; and ibidem
versu 2. plagarum inflictio. Illae vero alterae non perinde graves, partim
pecuniarum mulcta constabant, (...), partim vinculis (...) Esr. 7. 26.

E^quis in ijs quae capitis sanguinisue poena luuntur, iuriiurando locus? Non
sane suadeo. Primum, scripturae praxis contra venit. Video enim, cum de Achanis
capite ageretur, Iosuam sic agentem: Narramihi fi^imi; non iura mihi. Cum de
Ionathanis, Saulem identidem: Dic mihi Jonathan: non deiera mihi. Spontanea,
non expressa confessione; interrogatione simplici, non religione iuramenti.
Quin (quod caput est in hac quidem causa) video prophetam ipsum Ieremia^ ab
ipso rege interrogatum, Peto abs te verbum, ne celato me illud; stipulante,
(nec id sane sine spiritu dictante) Tantum ne capitale mihi sit responsum meum.
Ac si in ijs quidem causis immunitatem Deus dedisset respondendendi. Iere. 38.
14. Ac ratio quidem fauet. Sic enim (quoad eius fieri potest) quaestiones a
Magistratu habendae sunt; vt manifesta absit iactura animarum. Cumque ex ore
maxim mendacis, illa vel maximae veritatis sententia prodierit, (Pellem pro
pelle, and quidquid est viro, daturus est pro vita sua. Job. 2. 4.) verendum,
ne illud (Quicquid) tum conscientiam ipsam iuramenti, tum timorem numinis, tum
quicquid praeterea religionis est (vt homines sunt, vtque mentem habent)
comprehendat. Quare, etsi nihil definio: tamen (nescio quomodo) in hijs quidem
causis, propter periurij periculum praesens, iuriiurando parcendum censeo;
legesque quibus vtimur ((...) saltem idem hoc ce^suerunt. In alijs vero ijs,
quae minore noxa cum sint, mitiore poena plectuntur; non censeo. Nisi forte,
comicum quoque illud iam in Theologia receptum sit: Iuramentum rei seruandae,
non perdundae conditum est. Cautum est enim lege generali, Leu. 5. 4. Quod qui
iurauerit sieve been se facturum, sieve male id fuerit; teneri debitorem, vt
faciat: Idque cum de malo culpae intelligi ne queat (vt in scholis loquimur) ne
sit enim sacramentum pietatis, vinculum iniquitatis: in malo poenae teneat
necesse est. quo in genere nec renuere iuramentum licuit, nec datam in eo fidem
post rescindere.

Non renuere: Sciens prudens exegit a Schimeio iuramentum Solomon, in Cedronem;
legitime exegie. cumque post Schimei (iuratus ne transiret) transijsset tamen:
capite luit, and licite quide luit, non tam transitu Cedronis, quam iuramenti
sui, 1. Reg. 2. 43. Quid quaeritis? Quanquam prophanus Schimei, iuramentum
nullus detrectauit; etsi in dispendium libertatis suae. Neque vero Micheas, qui
iurame^ti religione obstrictus a rege; (neque aut semel id, aut tum primum, sed
aliquoties ante factitatum) quod solutus renuit, adiuratus non renuit, sed
respondit; etsi certa illi poena ante oculos, etsi amandandus ob id responsum
in domum carceris. 1. Reg 22. 16. Quo exemplo, tum id constat, in more
institutoque positum fuisse Israeli in responsa iurare: tum id, quanquam
prophetam Micheam, non ausum tamen (inscitia id forte iuris diuin^) quod nos
hic hodie facimus; aut stipulari, ne fraudi sibi sit iuramentum suum, libertati
suae; aut si id non detur, tergiuersari.

Non rescindere: Quod ipsum summo scilicet argumento est, legitime praestari:
Augustinus: Iniusta vincula, rumpat iustitia. Non erit (spero) deteriore iure
magistratus, quam quiuis de plebe. Atqui priuati cuiusque ea demum virtus non
infima; Si iuratus in damnum suum, non mutet tamen, quod vicino pepigit. Psalm.
15. 4. and, si non, quod vicino; nec quod Magistratui: Meliori quidem iure,
pari saltem. Quid quaeritis? quanquam prophanus Esau, iuramentum nullus
reuocauit, etsi in dispendium haereditatis suae. Verum enim, vt quo iure sint
priuati, hac in re semel sciant; neque regi fas istud. Iurauit in damnum suum
Zedechias, idque prima facie; seruitutem scilicet, tum suam, tum populi sui.
Ezech. 17. 13. mutauit; sed and detestante factum Deo, and vindicante. Neque
vero reipublicae. Respub. Israelis, iuramenti interuentu, foedus cum Gibeonitis
sanciuit. Contra venit illud, tum commodo suo, tum politico Dei praecepto. Non
censuit mutandum, recte censuit. los. 9. 15. Idemque cum Saulus post a
mutandum censeret, etsi zelo id Israelis factum, periculo id primum regni sui,
excidio post posteritatis expiauit. 2. Sam. 21. 2. Non regi, non reip. nec
priuato igitur. Concludo iam; Absit modo capitis periculum: in rebus causisque,
quaeve mulcta, quaeve carcere plectuntur; Et subdito praestare iuramentum fas
esse; and magistratui postulare.

Verum in eo haesitationis plurimum; hoc ipsum quousque liceat, and quatenus.
processus iudicialis obeundus est; vt, qu^tandem prodire tenus, vbi non datur
vltra, cognosci possit. Ac illius quidem (quod ad praesens hoc institutum
nostrum attinet) parts tres: quas hijs nominibus in sacris literis designatas
video. Prima, Admissio litis, (...) dixere Hebraei: id est, ingressum causae ad
iudicium; ex Esaiae 1. 23. Diuus Paulus (...). 1. Tim. 5. 19. Secunda, Status
causae, eiusque positio (...), id est, basin litis Hebraei nomen fecere, ex
Deuteronomy. 19. 13. Graeci (...). D. Paulus (ni fallor) (...). Heb. 6. 16. Tertia,
Probationum inquisitio (...), id est, peruestigationem litis Iudaei appellant,
ex Job. 29. 16. Graeci (...): D. Paulus (...). Heb. 6. 16. (Nam cum quarta,
quam (...), id est, sententiam omnes vocant, nihil mihi negotij.) Tria ergo
haec insunt in omni iudicio; Legitime quis vocari in ius debet: Post status
causae fieri: Probationes demum inquiri.

Ac in prima quidem, haud vllus (quod sciam legerimue) iuramenti vsus. De ea
tamen vt inquiram, facit quorundam error, minuendus mihi hodie (si fieri modo
possit) qui non satis sibi accusati, imo qui seipsos accusaturi sibi videntur;
nisi prodeat in medium ac conspectum accusator quispiam: quique, quod ab ijs
iuramentum requiritur, ad status positionem, id est, partem secundam; illud ad
primam hanc, id est, litis admissionem requiri, falso id quidem and temere
arbitrantur; sed tamen arbitrantur.

Propono itaque sic: Omni in lite, vel ita in aperto rem esse; ut constet tum
Zamri facinus, Nu. 25. 8. In quibus ita propalam gestis, nihil accusatore,
nihil test opus est: vel sane e^usmodi, vt aut de facto constet incognita
persona, vt in cadauere reperto, cuius percussor ignoratur. Deuteronomy. 21. 1. aut de
Achanis. Ios. 7. 18. Qua quidem in re sie

Etenim vel indicijs prodi quis poterit, vt in prima illa iustitia diuina (quam
Adamum, sine delatore, solis indicijs: quod se scilicet proripuisse^ in fugam,
atque inter densa a^borum abdidisset (conscij nimirum animi indicium.) Genesis 3.
8. In secunda illa, contra Cainum, ex indicijs itidem, (nempe Abele nusquam
comparente,) reperta effusione sanguinis, praegressa in Abelem sieve ira, sieve
inuidia Caini. Genesis 4. 6, 10. Primus hic modus est.

Secundus; vel insimulante altero prodi quis poterit; vt illa ipsa in iustitia
Adam citatus: sed is in quaestione (vt fit) Euam insimulauit; Eua itidem
serpentem. Genesis 3. 12. Atque ita illi quoque rei peracti sunt.

Tertius, vel porro infamia, (vt plaerunque improbo^um facta suspitio
consequitur, Sodom^tas. Genesis 18. 20. Cl^mor Sodomorum cum multus sit; descendam
and inquiram, (inquit Deus.) Eodemque modo, quaestiones habitae, tum in lege:
Siperlata ad te fama fuerit, aut si fando forte inaudie^is. Deuteronomy. 17. 4. tum in
Euangelio, vt contra incestum. 1. Cor. 5. 1. (...).

Quartus, vel denique suggestione seu querela, vt in Iobi causa. ca. 1. 11. vbi
Johannes nuncupat) sanctum illum virum, hypocriseos, falsi quidem criminis, sed
tamen criminis, reum, fecit. Eaque partim iuridica; quo nomine fuerunt apud
Hebraeos, qui (...), id est, magistri litis dicebantur. Esa. 50. 8. vbi poena
rei quaeritur, vt laesae parti satisfiat, in causa iniuriae: partim (vt
loquuntur) Euangelica, qua Ecclesiae denunciatur quispiam. Mat. 18. 17. vbi
medicina tantum rei quaeritur, vt Ecclesiae satisfiat, in causa scandali. In
prima, res ipsa loquitur (vt dici solet) reumque insimulat. In secunda, reus
alter alterum. In tertia, populi vox delator est. In quarta, vnus quispiam,
proprij verique nominis accusator.

Addo etiam hijs quintum adhuc, verum non (vt haec) ordinarium expediendae
litis remedium; quin plane extraordinarium; nec adhibendum, nisi in valle
Achor, id est, contra perturbatores Israelis (hoc enim sonat vox Achor:) nempe
atroci aliquo in scelere, aut periclitante Ecclesiae regnique statu. In ijs
enim decurritur ad extraordinaria, ad sorts scilicet, a Joshua, quod quibusuis
in causis, non datum est. Ios. 7. 16. In ijs, sua solum suspitione fretus
Joseph; Nae vos exploratores estis (inquit) and ad nudas terrae parts
detegendas venistis. Genesis 43. 9. Cumque illi negarent; sine indicio, fama,
delatore quoquam; quaestione habita, Simeonem detrudit in carcerem, reliquos
adigit ad iuramentum. Nec illi ad ius gentium prouocant tamen, aut contra ius
fasque secum agi conqucruntur. Vbi enim de reipub. pace agetur, tanti illa est;
vt non dubitem, Deum, suum Magistratui zelotypiae spiritum permissurum esse, de
salute Israelis sui: non minus quam marito suum permisit, de castitare coniugis
suae. Number. 5. 14. Nam and res de qua agitur in summo gradu periculosa est, vt
dissimulari non debeat: and personae, quibuscum agitur, nisi conscios suos,
testes nullos adhibere solent, per quos argui possint. Et scelus-ipsum, quo de
agitur, ex eo genere scelerum est, quae impressa post se vestigia, aut notas
non relinquunt, per quas manu teneri queant. Quare in istis non minus
suspitione sola accusare, quam per Equuleum, Cippum, Scapham, quaestionem
habere fas: (cui rei fuerunt illa in diuina repub.) Quorum vtrumuis, in alijs,
sieve litibus, sieve criminibus, Iere. 29. 26.
nemo permiserit. Recte (si been memini) Seneca reirationem reddit. Vbi scelera
per abruptum eunt, iniquum est iustitiam ad gradus teneri. cui non valde
dissimilis est, (eius qui in scelere Achanis abrupto ad sorts decurrit)
quaestio plane extraordinaria. Perturbari vult illos Israelis Deus, qui
perturbare nituntur Israelem Dei: eiusque rei vallis Achor, perpetuum
monumentum.

I am vero quemcunque in ius vocarit magistratus, praeeunte ex quatuor illis
vno (aut, si de Reipub. Ecclesiaeve pace agatur, quinto etiam) legitime vocatus
est. Nec est, quod metuat, ne se accuset aut prodat; accusatus i am and
proditus legitime. est quod curet, quo modo se accusatum sic proditumque,
legitime defendat. Atque hactenus de iure accusatorio.

Assumo i am secundum. Re, sic, sub iudice, in dubium vocata, vel fatetur reus
Achan; ac tum in confessum, nullae sunt Iudicis parts, nisi vt
feratsententiam: Vel, (quod fere fit,) negat; quod eleganter inprimis expressit
Solomon, Pro. 18. 7. Iustus est, qui primus in lite est, donec superueniente
proximo, peruestiget eum Iudex. Negante iam reo per depulsionem, actore per
intentionem affirmante, oritur Paulina illa (...), de qua ad Heb. 6. 16. Cuius
(...), seu contradictionis terminus, illud est, quod in omni iudicio quaeritur,
vt ibidem Apostolus animaduertit. Terminus autem nullus reperietur, donec in
aequilibrio res; id est, nisi altera causa vberiorem habeat (...), quam altera.
Apostoli ea vox est eodem in loco. Eam ergo, qua part lareat inquirere,
iudicis parts sunt. Tenuis enim labor, tenuis laus, lites dirimere quae in
procliui sunt. Illas, quarum obscuru^ ius est and perplexum, excutere; id demum
Iudice dignum. Causam quam non cognoui, peruestigaui eam, de se ait Job cap.
29. 16. idque ipsum dextre commodeque praestare, honor est magistratus, ait
Solomon Prou. 25. 1. Cui ipsi, honori sum mo fuit, sententia, quam tulit in
lite omnium difficillima, inter caupon as de incerta matre pueri superstitis 1.
Reg. 3. 27. At enim priusquam adhiberi, aut debeant, aut possint (...) illae,
id est, probationum statumina: status aliquis fiat necesse est, and quasi cardo
quispiam sit, in quo causa vertatur, acid, omnium primo constare, quid and
quousque affirmet hic, neget ille; in quo pedem ponere vterque ac sese iure
manu-consertum, vocare possint. Dicit Iudaeus, omnino prudenter dicit: Ante
omnia repone mihi litem supra basin suam, (...). Quod nifacias, erit (vti apt
quidem loquuntur ex Proverb. 21.) actio tota (...), id est, mera vanitas, inter
actorem and reum, hinc illinc, vltro citroque agitata. Quod cum nec in scholis
hic ferri possit: multo minus in iudicio debet, cuius esse debet, sacer ac
solennis processus omnis, ipsaque iustitia iustitiae, vt est Deuteronomy. 16. 20.

(...) iam hoc, sieve status (seu quis appellare malit) (...), aut est ex part
rei quaerendus, aut ex actoris. Non ex Actoris: Non potest saepe, quia is saepe
nullus; vbi aut Indicijs quis in ius vocatur, aut fam a. Et cum est;
transuersus fere rapitur: sieve odio, sieve cupiditate aliqua obliqua impulsus
est, ipse vt sine statusit, vt frustra ab ipso starum quaeras. Quare reo facta
haec gratia, seu potius hic honor habitus est (qui and semper persona est
certa, que^que lex non conuictum habet, pro insonte) vt ipse sibi sua vel
affirmatione vel negatione statum figat: imo vero vt illius solo responso
totius controuersiae status fiat: nec status modo controuersiae, sed (nisi
falsi conuincatur sub test duplici, omni exceptione maiori) controuersiae
finis quoque. Sed enim ne statu sic a se desixo, si solutus and liber eat,
statui post suo non stet; sed tergiuersetur, ac recedat ab instituto: adhibetur
illi vinculum (...) animae vinculum (vt Deus ei nomen fecit) religiosa scilicet
iuramenti affirmatio; qua nempe, illius anima quasi constricta vinculo,
veritatem, (non eam quidem absolute) sed proutipsam sciuerit, credideritue,
sancte and sincere tenetur eloqui, nec contra mentem ire (quod mentiri dicimus)
sed quasi cum Deo agat, ita cum magistratu agere, Dei and locum tenente, and
vices gerente, and ius exigente.

Israelis hoc instituto niti, and populi Dei, (vt nempe iuretur in responsa)
euincunt and illa Micheae praxis (de qua ante mihi mentio) and vero multo
aptius, altera illa in quaestione de Elia 1. Reg. 18. 10. vbi cum diserte
respondissent, non est apud nos, non eo contentus rex, adegit eos insuper ad
iuramentum, quod non inuenissent eum: quasi nulla lex cogeret, responso
acquiescere hominis iniurati. Quare vt aequum omnino est, constringi reum, ne
elabi denuo and statum mutare pos^it; vt subinde alius atque alius, atque ita
(reuera) nullus sit consistendi locus: ita constringi non aut nudo responso,
aut (vt alijs videtur) pecuniae mulcta (animae haec vincula no^ sunt; quae sola
interpres est veritatis) sed solo, vero, and vnico animae vinculo, id est,
iureiurando. Atque ita demum cardine totius causae sic (vt par est) posito; ad
illas quas nominat Apostolus (...), progredi fas.

Neque vero (quod quosdam criminari audio) reum sic astrictum esse conuenit,
actorem omni modo liberum. Neque vero hoc iure vtimur. sed, vt iureiurare
actorem, non sane tutum, propter, quas bis iam nominaui, causas, (and Deus ipse
Satanam, quem (...) id est, calumniatorem esse scit, (...), id est, accusatorem
esse permittit.) ita refer tamen in codicem tenetur delationem, Apoc. 12. 10.
suamque insuper syngrapha fidem obligare, sub certa mulcta pecuniae, sub certa
nota infamiae, sub precio reddendae cessationis (vt loquitur lex) ni quam
suggessit, accusationem and prosequatur, and probet. Ita vtrinque Exodus 21. 19.
cautum est; illinc iurisiurandi religione; hinc mulcta duplici, infamia no^
simplici; ne aut calumniari actor, aut reus tergiuersari possit.

I am vero iureiurare reum primo, ac dein respondere (quod no^nullos male
habet) ideo ius est; quia si iniuratus id faceret, nugatorie faceret (nempe
solutus religione) si qua in codice clausula paulo magis premeret; abnueret
responsum, versaret se huc, illuc, ambages, diuerticula, cautelas quaereret;
nihil aut explicit, aut apposite, responderet. Id quod religio erit facere,
postqua^ iuramento obstrinxit se, sancte tum omnia, candideque facturum.
Iniuriae scilicet, quam periurij reus esse malit: and damno se potius
subijciet, quam damnationi.

Formulam e lege petimus and sacris literis? Nulla mihi aptior ad institutum
hoc videtur Esrae quaestione illa, Capitibus Esrae 9. and 10. in qua rei
respondent, sed prius iurati. Cuius totius iudicij ordo hic. Accedunt viri
primarij, atque rem referunt ad Es^am, de inito per nonnullos (centum put^ and
december) cum alienigenis co^iugio, c. 9. 1. Adigit Esras reos ipsos, etiam
plerosque ne reos quide^, ad iuramentu^ c. 10. 5. Adigit autem, in causa, in
qua conuinci testibus poterant. Sed tamen primo adigit, Post eiusdem cap. V.
16. Esras cum reliquis, quib. delegata eius rei cura, sedent ad quaestionem
habendam, quam tertio demum mense post effectam dederunt. Quae forma cum Esrae
fuerit scribae prompti and periti in lege Dei sui; respondere poterit votis,
non iniqui hominis, ad legis practicam (vt loquuntur) and instituta
cognoscenda. Atque hic iurisiurandi vsus prior; iustus ac legitimus, in basi
nempe l^tis stabilienda.

Alter est, cum de argumentis agitur ad fidem auspicatae iam liti faciendam.

Indicia; qualia proferuntur a parentibus in causa traductae virginis, Deuteronomy.
22. 17. Testimonia; quorum sub fide itidem, omnis actio confi^matur, Deuteronomy. 19.
15. Quorum ego in numero (testimoniorum dico) iusiurandum pono; and ipsum
(...), sieve (vt loquuntur) litis decisorium, Heb. 6. 16. Iurisiurandi aute^ ex
veteri canone, Hebraei parts duas, seu malit quis, genera duo, fecere.

Priorem (...), i. solennem contestationem, qua quis aliorum defectutestiu^,
sieve qui non possint, sieve qui nolint, testimoniu^ far; Deu^ ipsum vbique and
in omnib. praesente^, ac ius testis habente^, testem aduocat. Viuit Ieboua
coram quo loquor, contestationis formula, Iud. 8. 19. Posteriorem vero (...) id
est, dicam execrationem, qua quis contestationi suae fidem facit, oppignorata
quasi salute sua, and abdicato, quicquid sibi in Deo aut spei, aut tutelae est;
si falsi teste^ fecerit. Sic faciat mihi Dominus, and sic addat: execration is
formula. 1. Sa. 14. 44. Neque vero minus interesse put aru^t Theologi, neque
minus teneri reum, sieve alterutr a vtatur, sieve vtraque. Addo etiam; sieve
contestetur reum magistratus, aut execretur adiurando; sieve ipse se, iurando.
Perinde enim esse, fiat hoc, an illud: leuetur iuramentum supra reum a Iudice;
an leuet ipse supra se. Idque constare volunt tum ex Prou. 29. 24. ratione
(...): tum ex Iud. 17. 2. ratione hypotheseos. verum lis ista aliam in litem in
currit. Non prosequor: prosequor quod institui, de argumentis.

I am vero Iudici a Deo potestas facta, tum inquirendi criminis argumenta, tum
citandi testimonia; tum deferendi iuramenta, idque ad causae (...) colligendas.
Potestas illa fit, Deuteronomy. 13. 14. Inquires (inquit Deus) idque in genere, primo
(...) Cuius duas species subiungit. Primam, (...), id est, Inuestigabis,
indicia nempe and argumenta. Secundam (...), id est, interrogabis, testes
nimirum, and qui rerum gestarum conscij fuerant.

Argumenta. Sic Iosepho licuit manticas fratrum perscrutari, vt sublatum furto
calicem depraehenderet. Gen 44. 5. Sic Magistratui nostro, aedium penetralia

Testimonia. Sic cautum est lege diuina, Leu. 5. 1. Si vocem quis audierit
adiurati^nis Chaldaeus legis interpres long antiquissimus, necubi erretur a
nobis, apposuit; nec dubium, quin de sensu veteris Ecclesiae, etiam quae ante
Christum) a Iudice factae veldelatae; and ipse eius rei testis esse possit, vt
qui viderit ipse, sciueritque (quo loco sciuerit Septuaginta vertunt (...)) si
quis ita conscius ad testimonium euocatus sit: ni indicarit, feret iniquitatem
suam. Quaestionem ergo habere licet, vel sub iuramento.

Ac primo quidem, quaestionem habere de reo apud alios quantumuis fratres,
quantumuis religiosos. sic Obadias Eliae, 1. Reg. 18. 10. Non est prouinciae
aut regni locus; quo no^ miserit Dominus meus quaesitum te, cumque
responderent, Non est apud nos; etiam adiuramentum adegit prouinciam illam,
quod non inuenissent te. Ac mihi quidem verisimile fit; cum toti regno commune
hoc iusiurandum fuerit; etiam in religiosos illos incidisse, quorum nec genua
Baali curuata, nec ora ipsum osculata sunt: nec eos tamen hac in re (etsi in
Eliae sui praeiudicium, etsi apud Magistiatum iniquiorem) testimoniu^ dicere
detrectasse. Neque vero de reo tantum apud alios habere quaestionem fas: sed
and apud ipsum de se. Exemplo magni Iudicis in lite omnium prima. Genesis 3. 9.
Quis indicauit tibi, nudum esse te? Et, nunquid comedisti de fructis arboris
interdictae? Sic Principes Baruchum interrogant de libro Ieremiae. Indica
nobis, quomodo scripseris verba haec. Ier. 36. 17. Sic Esras reos ipsos de
facto suo. Esr. 10. 11. sic Pontifices a Paulo^ custodiam dato, (...),
postulabant: Act. 23. 20. Fatiscunt enim saepe accusatores (quod olim Ethnicus
animaduertit:) non omnes possunt; nonnulli nolunt accusare. Quid agimus?
Quorundam scelera, quia vere opera tenebrarum sunt, nec possunt prodi: Ephe. 5.
11. quia manus in manu est, nec se volunt prodere, Prou. 16. 5. quia durum est
Doegi nomen; and hoc ipsum, prodire ad insimulandum quempiam, frigidum atque
odiosum iam: tes sumptus, periculi, infamiae, Pro. 25. 8. Sinimusne latere and
scatere scelera, and mora vires acquirere, donec erumpant tandem ad perniciem
Reip? An quia nemo aut potest, aut vult: (perinde enim est nolit quis accusare,
an non possit) interrogare datum est? Datum est certe. Atqui absque sacramento
interposito iuterrogare, pro nihilo est. Quare and adiurandi ius fecit. Quam
vocem Spiritus sanctus in veteri (...). Reg. 22. 16.
testamento, per (...) exprimit, sicque Micheam rex adiurauit: In Nouo per
(...), sicque Pontifex Christum Matt. 26. 63. and vtrique religio fuit, ad
quaesita non respondere. Ac de Hebraea quidem voce quaestio nulla, quin and vi
nominis, and vsu, iuramentum deferat. Addo nec de Graeca. si recte vertant Beza
caeterique interpretes Daemonis postulatum illud, quod est Matt. 5. 7. Adiuro
te, ne me torqueas: id est, Confirma mihi iureiurando interposito, fore, vt ne
me torqueas: vt illis videtur. Sed ego adiurandi vocem mitto. Sumo alteram,
leuandi super reum ipsum, iuramenti (si altera modo sit) id est, vel inuitum ad
iuramentum adigendi, permissam in lege, vel actori. Exodus 22. 8. 1. Reg. 8. 31.
Ac proin, plus etiam quam permissam, Magistratui. Certe enim periniquo loco res
foret; si cuiuis de plebe actori, exigendi a reo iuramenti potestas foret; non
foret Magistratui. Si in causa depositi id liceret, in causa regni non liceret:
si adigi quis posset ad iuramentum, non extendisse se manum ad remproximi sui:
adigi non posset ad iuramentum, non extendisse se manum ad pacem Reipub.: si
potior illius ratio, quoad ius; qui turbas. dederit in Ecclesia Dei, quam
illius qui aliquid interuortit de pecunia amici. Confer mihi haec tantum inter
se. primo Magistratum ipsum, and actorem de vulgo quemlibet. Post, causam
pecuniolae cuiusdam, and causam Reipub. Dein, depositum illud alicubi quandoque
deprehendi posse; clandestina ista colloquia non posse (nisi sic interrogare
detur) abire enim in auras, impressionem post se nullam relinquere. Aut valde
me fallit animus; aut (sieve personas spectes, sieve res, and rerum sieve momenta,
sieve exitus) mayor hic necessitas, mayor aequitas incumbit iuramenti. Quare and
interrogarireum in causa sua, ius fasque diuinum est; and id interuentu
sacramenti fieri, fas quoque. Atque hic iurisiurandi vsus posterior, iustus ac
legitimus, non modo vt quaestioni status fiat ex responso rei (quod ante
positum est:) sed etiam vt (...) quoque causae, id est, probationum statumina
colligantur, quibus ludici fides fiat, ad litem ex altera part terminandam.

Possent haec iam satis esse huic instituto; nisi quod restet adhuc vnus
(credo) aut alter, vix dignus vindice nodus: nisi quod (vt est hoc seculum
nostrum) quorundam hominum quiuis scrupulus, scopulus est. Causantur adigi hoc
pacto homines ad iusiurandum infinitum; nisi ante, quaestionem habere; post,
iuramentum defer liceat. Eiusce rei ratio iam ante a me reddita. Nolo iam hic
recoquere. Tantum id contendo, quod defertur ijs, de more, iuramentum,
infinitatis nomine declinari non posse. Dum enim Ieremiae illi, (qui semper in
Theologia habiti sunt iurisiura^di limits and quasi fines) adhibeantur, Ier.
4. 2. In veritate, iustitia, iudicio, abunde satis circumscriptum est; nec
alios scriptura fines aut agnoscit, aut postulat. 1. In veritate, vere
scilicet; Micheae delatum est. 1. Reg. 22. 16. Ne eloquaris mihi nisi
veritatem, in nomine Domini: Aut si cui magis Paulina placeat attestatio. Romans
9. 1. Veritatem dic^m, per Christum, non mentiar, attestanie mihi simul
conscientia mea per spiritum Sanctum. sat a prima part finitum est. 2. In
iustitia, just scilicet, nempe vt, and de possibili Abrahae Genesis 24. 5. (...),
id est, Fortasse nondabitur. Ethnici quoque ipsi: De quibus sciam poteroque. Et
de honesto, de quo cauerunt illi, Esrae 10. 3. (...), id est, prout forma iuris
exigit. Diuus Paulus quoque Act. 23. 3. secundum id quod in lege est. Sat a
secunda part finitum est. 3. Iniudicio, id est, mature (sic enim distinguunt
interpretes) vt ne temere. De quo Solomon Eccl. 5. 1. Ne proferens quid coram
accelerare orecogatur; sed spatio ad deliberandum interposito, ita demum
respondere. Hij sunt quos iuramenti fines sacrae litterae agnoscunt, nec
praeterea quicquam postulant, vt definitum sit. Tres isti si adhibeantur: 1.
Non loquar nisi veritatem in nomine Domini. 2. De quibus sciam poteroque, and
prout a me forma Iuris exigit. 3. Sumpto tantum ad cogitandum spatio: nullum ab
infinitate periculum. Etsi de singulis quaestiunculis non constet (quae saepe e
re nascuntur) sat tutus erit intra hos fines; non responsurus quicquam aut
falso aut temere; nec nisi de ijs, quae and ipse meminerit, and lege teneatur;
Nempe, quod citra iuramentum facere tenetur, id faciet. Et qui tutior esse
vult, mihi quidem infinitam potius licentiam captare velle, quam infinitum
iusiurandum declinare, videri solet: aut (scilicet) sibi male conscius; aut
illud, quod dicere nolo.

Iam vero, dum ne peccetur iureiurando, haud quicquam credo interest,
promissorio; an post deieres, te dixisse (...). Eodem redit; priusquam
respondeas, profitearis te id sine fraud facturum, praemisso: an postquam
respondisti, attesteris, te id sine fraud fecisse, submisso iuramento. Dixi
quidem, and dicam; Feci, and faciam; duo sunt tempora: iuramentum idem est.
Quare ad rem quidem, haud quicquam interesse puto: interesse tamen hoc, quod
plurimum conducat hoc litibus; tum vt explicitae sint, tum vt expeditae, si
omnium primo iuretur. Vt explicitae; ne (si reo praeuaricari libeat, cum nondum
sacramento obstrictus sit) fluctuet lis rota, nec basin cardinemque
consequatur. Vt expeditae; ne (si nolit reus vbi respondit, in responsa iurare)
easdem saepe quaestiones itera^e, atque ita actum agere, iudex cogatur.
Interesse denique quod in illa iudicij formula, diuinae legiinprimis
consentanea, and nostrae huic quae in dubium vocatur, quam maxim affini: is
ordo sit; iuramenti primum, dein, quaestionis: Esra. 10. 5.
Idque ipsorum postulato, de quibus habita est quaestio. Cum enim de litibus
expedie^dis accuratissime diuina lege caueatur; neque prior in scriptura mentio
iudicij, vt fiat; quam vt cito fiat, ne si diu sit in Fieri, acetosum fiat:
Exodus 18. 14.
recte postulant illi, Esr. 10. 13. ne sibi necesse sit pro tribunali ad omnia
quaesita respondere: longum opus esse, nec vnius diei. Quare post praestitum a
se loco solenni solenne iuramentum, venturos se post per otium, (...), id est,
designatis temporibus: vt in singulas facti circumstantias, virtute prius
praestiti iuramenti, inquiratur. Eadem nunc praxis apud nos; idem mos obtiner;
and quidem sieve consilium spectes, aequissimus; sieve institutum, diuino quam
simillimus. Nam si iuramentum praecedere debeant quaestiones (cum nisi pro
consessu iureiurare quemquam nefas:) certe vix vnus dies, vni causae sufficiat,
cogaturque (quod Iethro factum damnauit) ast^re iudicio populus a mane vsque ad
vesperam.

Vltimum id est: quod quidam (vitio mentis procul dubio) deferri sibi
postulant; Paulinae sententiae fiducia; Cuiusque contradictionis terminus,
iuramentum. Mitto, quod id ita interpretari Heb. 6. 16.
liceat, vt (...) illud status potius sit, quam exitus controuersiae. Verum, ne
liceat; sed esto sane. sit terminus iuramentum; at non qualecunque tamen, aut a
quocunque, quomodocunque praestitum (vix hoc sani cerebri postulatum:) verum
eiusmodi (spero) vt de eius fide nulla sit contradictio; si modo contradictio
per illud terminari debeat. Quare si litem sine contradictione terminare debet;
ita liquidum esse debet, vt ei nemo vel citra examen, vel post, aut velit, aut
possit contradicere. Iusiurandum enim quoduis cuiusuis, omni inquisitione
liberare velle; quid aliud est quam periurij causam agere? quid aliud, quam
quasi signo dato, ita authoramento hoc; profligatae fidei homines, ad scelus
hoc sollicitare? Cum enim sieve id actor, sieve reus, seu testis praestet; eadem
iuramenti religio, idem valor sit: actum est, si quis iurare in litem velit,
statim causam obtineat, post autem, rectene iuratum an secus, inquirere nefas:
Quippe i^siurandum omnis controuers^e terminus. Isthuc quidem si sic detur,
periuris been sit; Cum Deo transigant si possint; certe a lege nihil metuant,
nec aure luant, quod ore peccarunt. Quanto id aequius? Imo vero si bonae fidei
est iusiurandum; bis, terve, inquiratur; vel septies, si libet. semper quasi de
furnace, liquidum magis, purumque exibit: ipsaque semper inquisitio, vberioris
fidei acquisitio futura est. Sin non bonae, vel dubiae fidei sit, vel
suspectae; inquiratur, and tum; quo iniusta vincula rumpat iustitia. Ratio
quidem haec, ratio-ne sola? Nonne and lex eadem dicit? Sieve quis in sua causa
pro se, seu in aliena contra alium, sacramento contendat. Pro se: suspectae
pudicitiae mulier cum eiurasset adulterium dira execratione sui ipsius: nunquid
dimissa statim? (finis namque omnis controuersiae iusiurandum) imo vero rectene
iurata an secus, quaestio noua. Cui rei, ebibendas habuit aquas amaras,
iuramenti sui, vel very indices, vel falsi vindices futuras. Number. 5. 24.

Contra alium. Cum enim statam rem fore cauisset lex ex ore duorum triumve
testium, qui iurati testimonium dixissent in quempiam, Deuteronomy. 19. 16. ne quis
humana testimonia quasi diuina oracula haberet; proximo versu edicit, sisti
tamen posse denuo testem suspectum; and inquiri adeo, an cast integreque
versatus fuerit in testimonio ferendo: sin falsi conuictus fuerit, eodem
prorsus supplicio afficiendum fore, quo fuerat is, quem reum peregerat. Sed ego
peccem in tempus, etiam in templum quoque (cuius nos iampridem vox auocauit) si
vlterius insecter hasce ineptias, quas quiuis cum volet, obterere poterit
argumentis, ita sua sponte diffluunt. Reddo igitur vos vobis, and concludo.

Si (vt ait propheta) disponatur iudicium hoc, (quo vtimur) ad lineam; and Es.
28. 17.
iustitia haec ad perpendiculum verbi diuini; nusquam in ijs peccari: Exigere
posse magistratum, idque a reo, (praesertim dum ne capitalis causa sit, aut
sanguinaria) iusiurandum suum: idque eousque posse, sieve vt lis basin suam
obtineat, dum status quaeritur: sieve vt probationum veritas elucescat, dum
quaestio habetur. Neque vero iuramenti aut fines, aut ordmem, aut examen
peccare in Theologiam: ac proin detrectari non posse. Qui detrectant; primum
inscitia diui^ iuris id facere: periculoso dein exemplo, si sic liccat animi
gratia, in iudicia publica, sine iudicio inquirere; si caeteras regni res,
momentaque reipub.; denique ius ipsum (si pro nobis non faciat,) in ius vocare.
Quod auertat a nobis Deus opt. max. ad quem conuersi precemur, vti det nobis
modeste sapere, and sentire in omnibus, cernere animis quam non religiosum sit,
quam non Christianum, inclinare iudicia gentis nostrae: quin ea potius quae
remp. nosque omnes sustentant, omni conatu nostro, omnibus ingenij neruis ac
viribus sustentare. Proxime enim post Deum, Deique cultum; verissimum est Elihu
verbum: Duo haec, iustitiam ac iudicium, sustentare omnia. Job 36. 17.


Atque ita determinata mihi sit lis ista, atque vtinam etiam terminata.
Faults escaped.
In the Epistle to the Reader.
In E. j. in the 9. line, for honor read hauour. In the next leaf before D.
line 19. for employing: read implying.

In the 1. part.
Page 3. quotation 3. for ca. 4. read 8. Page 27. lin. 13. betwixt the word
those, and the word opinions, add great. Page 35. line vlt. in steed of for
tithes, read, from paying tithes. Page 37. lin. 4 after the word three: add
these, need be paid. Page 41. lin. 21. for it, read in. Page 50. lin. 2. for
And: read As. Page 53. lin. 23. after his: add, heirs. Page 65. lin. 22.
betwixt the words otherwise and does, add And. Page 72. lin. 19. for causes,
read cause. Page 73. lin. 8. for euiden^, read evidence In the twelfth Chapter
in most places where it is goods and chattels: read debts and chattels. Page
85. the quotation should be referred to the 28. line. Page 88. lin. 29. for
therefore, read thereof. Page 108. lin. 14. and page 109. lin. 15. for 10.
Eliz. read primo. Page 110. lin. 29. after this word Law, add these, if this
so did, and blot them out of the beginning of the next sentence. Page 122. lin.
24. for the, read that. Page 126. lin. 31. after this word king, add these,
is not. Page 127. lin. 34. for de drawn, read be drawn.

In the 2. part.
Page 2. lin. 11. for these, read those. Page 4. lin. 13. for practices, read
practice. Page 15. lin. 14. for wro^sully, read wrongfully. Page 34. lin. 27.
for ever read even. Page 35. lin. penult. put out the first a. Page 36. lin. 2.
for pers^cuter, read prosecutour. Page 43. lin. 31. for proceed, read
praeceede. Page 45. lin. 24. for or, read no. Page 87. lin. 11. for
retaliatio, read retaliation. page 92. lin. 14. and 16. for Cumperell, read
Camperell. Page 96. lin. 28. for M. in the quotation, read T. but the whole
case it self, was mistaken by me. Page 100. quotatione 7. make it thus, Vide
3. part. c. 8. Page 100. lin. 17. for ipsam, read ipsum. Page 107. lin. 4. and
23. for 1. H. 4. read 2. H. 4. Page 110. lin. 9. betwixt be, and one, add
but. Page 127. lin. penult. for Accuser, read Accusors. Page 134. lin. 30. for
Enquire read Inquiry.

In the 3. part.
Page 11. lin. 3. for that, read of. Page 65. lin. 14. for Piue, read Pine.
Page 75. and so on, is quoted for 73. etc. Page 81. lin. penult. put out that.
Page 109. lin. 14. for these, read those. Page 114. lin. 33. for benfice, read
benefice. Page 120. lin. 9. for policy, read polity. Page 123. lin 25. for
deuied, read devised. Page 165. lin. 21. for temporal, read temporal. Page
172. lin. 4. for will, read well. Page 184. lin. 19. these letters T. C. should
be in the margent. Pa g. 186. lin. 29. for ouerthowe, read overthrow. Page
201. lin. 6. for certify, read testify.


