VIRGINIA'S God be Thanked, OR A SERMON OF THANKSGIVING FOR THE HAPPY success
of the affairs in VIRGINIA this last year. Preached by PATRICK COPLAND at
Bow-Church in Cheapside, before the Honorable VIRGINIA COMPANY, on Thursday,
the 18. of April 1622. And now published by the Commandment of the said
honorable COMPANY. Hereunto are adjoined some Epistles, written first in Latin
(and now Englished) in the East Indies by Peter Pope, an Indian youth, borne in
the bay of Bengala, who was first taught and converted by the said P. C. And
after baptized by Master John Wood, Dr in Divinity, in a famous Assembly
before the Right Worshipful, the East India Company, at S. Denis in Fan-Church
street in London, December 22. 1616.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for William Sheffard and John Bellamie, and are to be
sold at his shop at the two Greyhounds in Corne-hill, near the Royal
Exchange. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND HONORABLE EARLS, BARONS, And Lords; And to the right
worshipful Knights, Merchants, and Gentlemen, Adventurers for the Plantation
in VIRGINIA; all happiness, external, internal, and eternal in Christ Jesus
our blessed SAVIOVR.
AFter I had discharged the charge laid upon me by your Honorable and
Worshipful Court; and was presently after, solicited by some of your
Honorable Society, to present to the eye, what I had delivered to the ear.
Though at first, I was indeed very unwilling, at their entreaty: yet, being
commanded by your Honorable Court to publish what before you had entreated me
to Preach; and weighing well with my self, that words spoken, are soon come,
soon gone; but that written withal, they make a deeper impre^^ion: for, by
striking as well the Eye of the Reader, as the Ear of the Hearer, they pierce
his heart the better, and save his soul the sooner. Hereupon, that I might
testify how much I honor your lawful Commandments; and withal, that I might
confirm with my Pen that grace, which it pleased God to work by my Voice; I
have now yielded to all of your Requests, making that common to all, which then
was imparted but to some: only in desire some way to witness my dutiful
respect ^o your Honorable Court, and love to your Noble Plantation. For,
seeing many of your Noble and worthy Company have spent a great part of their
painefully gained estates upon this honorable Action; and rejoice in nothing
more then in this, that God has given them a price in their hand, and a heart
to use it for the furthering of this glorious Work; How could I, at so earnest
entreaty, refuse to adventure this Mite of mine, among so many worthy
Adventures of theirs? How could I (I say) refuse to make their public
Bounty, and your public Thanksgiving, yet more public?

If your Honors will be pleased to take in good part what now I impart; it may
prove a spur unto me, to undertake some better piece of service for the good
of your noble Plantation; at least, if it lie in my poor power to bring it to
pass. Thus entreating your Honors favorable acceptance, I rest

London this 22 of May. 1622. In all humble duty to be commanded P. C.

Virginia's God be thanked.
Psalm, 107. verse. 23.
They that go down to the Sea in Ships, and occupy in the great waters;
24. They see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep:
25. For he commands, and raises the stormy wind, and it lifts up the
waves thereof.
26. They mount up to the heaven, and descend to the deep; so that their soul
melts for trouble:
27 They are tossed too and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and all their
cunning is gone.
28. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble; and he brings them out of
their distress.
29. He turns the storm to a calm, so that the waves thereof are still.
30. When they are quieted they are glad; and he brings them to the haven
where they would be.
31. Let them therefore confess before the Lord, his loving kindness; and his
wonderful works before the sons of men.
32. And let them exalt him in the Congregation of the people, and praise him
in the Assembly of the Elders.
THE occasion of our present meeting (Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and
dearly beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ) is to celebrate the goodness of our
good and gracious God, and to give him public and solemn praises for the
sa^e arriving of your Fleet of 9. Sail of Ships in Virginia, in November, and
December last: And for the happy (yea, and in a manner miraculous) landing o^
800. people M^n, Women, and children, all in health: As also for the hopeful
and good success, wherewith Almighty God has crowned your Colony in that
Heathen-now Christian Kingdom.

This Task being laid upon me (the vnworthi^st of many, who could and would
have performed it better) I have endeavored to discharge, according to the
scantling of time, and measure of grace vouchsafed unto me.

The Prophet in this Psalm, magnifying the Providence of God, against all
profane Epicures, and carnal Worldlings (who ascribe all things, either to
blind Fortune; or their own Industry) sets down four kinds of men,
which are most indebted unto God for deliverance from Dangers: The first is of
those, who in their Journey by land have escaped a Dearth, from the first verse
to the tenth. The Second, is of Prisoners enlarged and set at liberty, from
the tenth verse, to the seaventeenth. The Third, is of such, as are freed from
a desperate and mortal Sickness, from the 17. verse to the 23. The Last, is
of Mariners, Sailors, and Seafaring men; who have escaped a storm, and have
got into the wished haven, from the 23. verse to the 33.

This last part, being the Text appointed for my present discourse; I have for
my better proceeding in it; and your Memories sake, reduced to these three
heads, A Danger, A Deliverance, A Duty.

The Danger is set down verse, 25.26.27. (for the other two verses, are but as
it were, an Introduction into it) for he commands, and raises the stormy
winds etc. The Deliv^rance from the Danger is set forth by the Means that
these Seafaring men use to be freed from it, viz. faith^ull and fervent
Prayer unto God, verse 28.29. 30. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble
etc. The Duty, is delivered verse 31. 32. Let them therefore confess before
the Lord his loving kindness etc. To speak of these in order; the first thing
we have to note is this, that Great is the Danger of Seafaring men. D. Great
is the danger of Seafaring men.
A lively Image of their uncertain and variable lives is here set down by
the Prophet. And if we mark well the comparison; It is next to famine,
Imprisonment, and a deadly Disease to be a Seaman: Pittacus.
for as one says Navigantes neque inter vivos, neque inter mortuous. Sailors
are neither amongst the living, nor yet amongst the dead: as having but a few
inches of planke between them and Death, they hang between both; ready to
offer up their Souls to every flaw of wind, and billow of water wherein they
are tossed. The immovable rocks, and the mutable winds; the ouerflowing
waters, and swallowing sands; the tempestuous storms, and spoiling Pirates have
their lives at their mercy and command. Mariners living in the Sea, almost as
fishes, having the waters as their necessariest Element: are commonly men void
of fear, ventrous and contemners of dangers: yet when God on a sudden
commands a ^^orme, and sits himself in the mouth of the tempest: when
their Ship is foundred with water under them; when Life and Soul are ready to
shake hands, and depart this present world; then, even these nought-fearing
fellows, these high stomaked men tremble for fear like faint-hearted women
that shrink at every stir in a wherrie on the River of Thames in a rough and
boisterous Tide: or like unto a young Soldier, which starteth at the shooting
off of a Gun.

I remember what Aeschi^es spak of Demosthenes at Rhodes when he read the
Defense that Demosthenes had framed to his Accusation; the people wondering at
the strength and validity of it. Quid si ipsam andissetis bestiam sua verba
pronu^cia^tem^ What would you have tho^ght (said he) if you had heard the Beast
(for so he speaks disgracefully of Demosthenes) pronouncing it with his own
mouth?

You wonder at the hearing of the dangerous storm, described here by the
Prophet; but what would you say, if you had seen it your selves with your own
eyes? Jonah, a Seafaring man, when he writes of the storm wherein he was;
his pen wrote nothing so effectually, as his heart felt: and being the Scribe
and Orator only, he is nothing so fluent and copious as when he is the
Patient. The style of his history is simple and plain Jonah prayed unto the
Lord his God out of the belly of the fish. Jonah 1. 1.
What one word therein is lofty and magnificent, and lifted above the common
course of speech? But the style of Jonah himself speaking from a sense and
feeling of his own woes, is full of Ornament and Majesty, full of tr^nslated
and varied phrases, as if a sentence of ordinary terms were not sufficient to
express his extraordinary woes: for being in Affliction, and in the danger it
self; verse 2.
it is not said as before that he prayed, but that he cried, praying is turned
into crying; not from the belly of the fish, but from the belly of hell: a
maru^ilous transformation: And the trouble he speaks of, verse 3.
is said to be a casting of him into the bottom of the midst of the Sea; and a
compassing of him about with floods, surges and waves, which went over and over
his head: Nay, verse 5.
a compassing about of his soul, and a very melting of it for tro^ble, as
here in this Psalm. verse 26. and a wrapping about of his head with weeds, and
a going down unto the bottom of the Mountains. Let the Scriptures be
thoroughly searched again and again, from the beginning of Genesis, to the end
of the Revelation; and we shall hardly meet with the like description of
Misery, so emphatically and pathetically set out as this of Seafaring men, set
down both in that second Chapter of Jonah, and in this 107. Psalm.

The miseries of Job, you all know how vehement they were, and he never more
kind^ly expressed them then by this translation. Am I a Sea, or a Whale-fish
that thou keep me in ward? Job 7.12.


Will you yet see the great danger of Sea men, I will lead you along to weigh
it by an experience and trial of mine own, In a Typhoon, or cruel tempest that
I met with off of the Islands of Macqa^, adjoining to the Continent of Chyna.
In this Typhoon or storm, our goodly Unicorn (a ship of 800^ T^nne) was cast
away upon the Continent of Chyna; but all the people (blessed be God) saved;
and though at their first landing upon the Chyna shore, they were rifled by
some of the baser ^ort of the Chynae^; yet upon the coming of the Mandarins,
or Governors, they had good entertainment of diet and house-roome for their
money, and were very kindly used by those of better note. In this Tempest we
lost also our Pinnace, with 24 or 30 men in her which we had sent before us to
Firando (an Island adjoining to Iapan) to give notice of our coming, of whom
we never heard news: we cut off our long Boat, and let her go; we sunk our
Shallop with two men in her, who were swallowed up by the waves. Such was this
Storm, as if Jonah had been flying unto Tharshish. The air was beclouded, the
heavens were obscured, and made an Egyptian night of five or six days
perpetual horror: The experience of our Seamen was amassed; the skill of our
Mariners was confounded; our Royal James most violently and dangerously leaked;
and those which pumped to keep others from drowning, were half drowned
themselves with continual pumping. But God that heard Jonah crying out of the
belly of Hell; and who, here is said to turn a storm into a calm; he
pitied the distresses of his servants; he hushed the Tempest, and brought us
safely to Firando, our wished Haven. O that the Tempest of Macqau may never out
of my mind, but that this wonderful Deliverance and al other Gods mercies,
may still be iogging me at the elbow, and putting me in mind to confess
before the Lord his loving kindness, and his wonderful works before the
Sons of men; that I may exalt him in the congregation of the people, and
praise him in the Assembly of the Elders.

But you will say, what needs all this Discourse, touching the Danger of
Seamen; we are met together for another purpose, to give thanks unto God?

Beloved, I do confess indeed it is so, that the end of our present meeting
is for Thanksgiving. But how can wee^er be feelingly thankful, as we should
in word and deed, if we know not the Danger wherein we are, and the
Deliverance vouchsafed unto us? Will not the true knowledge and deep
consideration of these, make us put so many the more thanks into our Sacrifice
of Praise?

Wherefore I beseech you to take to heart, first, the Danger of your people in
their passages both to Virginia, and after their landing. Secondly, the Danger
of your whole Colony there. Thirdly, The Danger of your selves here at home.
And left others, that are not of your Honorable Company, may think this point
impertinent to them; Let all of us consider the Dangers wherein we were, and
still are; and the many Deliverances vouchsafed unto us (for I must entreat you
to give me leave to join Danger and Deliverance together, for the better
stirring of you up unto your duty.) And then I doubt not, but all of us shall
have cause to confess before the Lord his loving kindness, and his wonderful
works before the sons of men.

And first, to touch the Danger of your people, both in their passage to
Virginia, and after their landing there, may I not say in the words of Job, Job
16.3.4.
Will ye give the words of him that is afflicted to the wind? As if he had
said, when affliction it self, and the inmost sorrows of my heart tell my
tale, will you not regard it? O that your souls were in my souls stead, that
you felt as much sorrow as I do: L^quor in angustia mea; quer^r in amaritudine
animae mea, I speak that that I speak from a world of trouble; I make my
complaint in the bitterness of my soul. Surely, if some hundreds of those
that mis-carried in the infancy, and at the first beginning of your
Plantation, (which is exceedingly bettered within these 2. years) were now
alive, I think they would speak no otherwise than Job spake^ Will you give the
words of the^ that are afflicted to the wind? Will ye not believe in what
Danger we were, Summer Islands.
when some of us made Shipwreck upon the supposed enchanted Islands; when
others of us encountered with bloody enemies in the West Indies; when many of
us dyed by the way; and when those that were left alive, some perished a shore,
for want of comfortable provisions, and looking unto, and others were killed
with the Bows and Arrows of the Savages upon our first landing there? I
presume, I speak to melting hearts of flesh, as tenderly sensible of your
brethrens woe, as heartily thankful for your own good.

And now, beloved, since the case is altered, that all difficulties are
swallowed up: And seeing, first, there is no danger by the way; neither through
encountering of enemy, or Pyrate; nor meeting with rocks, or Sholes (all which
to Seafaring men are very dangerous, and from all which your Ships and people
are far removed, by reason of their fair and safe passage through the maine
Ocean) nor through the tediousness of the passage; the fittest season of the
year for a speedy passage, being now far better known then before; and by
that means the passage it self made almost in so many weeks, as formerly it
was wont to be made in months; which I conceive to be, through the blessing of
God, the maine cause of the safe arrival of your last Fleet of nine Sail of
Ships, that not one (but one, in whose room there was another borne) of eight
hundred, which were transported out of England and Ireland for your Plantation,
should miscarry by the way; whereas in your former voyages scarce 80. of a 100.
arrived safely in Virginia. And secondly, seeing there is no Danger after their
landing, either through wars, or famine, or want of convenient lodging, and
looking too, through which many miscarried heretofore; for, blessed be God,
there has been a long time, and still is a happy league of Peace and Amity
soundly concluded, and faithfully kept, between the English and the Natives,
that the fear of killing each other is now vanished away. Besides, there is
now in your Plantation plenty of good and wholesome provisions for the
strength and comfort, not only of the Colony, but also of all such as after
their passage do land ashore. There is also convenient lodging, and careful
attendance provided for them, till they can provide for themselves; and a fair
Inn for receiving and harboring of Strangers, erecting in James City; to
the setting up of which, both your worshipful Governor, Sir Francis Wyat, and
your worthy Treasurer, Master George Sands do write, that they doubt not, but
there will be raised between fifteen hundred and two thousand pounds; to
which every man contributeth cheerfully and bountifully; they being all
free-hearted, and open-handed to all public good works. Seeing, I say, that
now all former difficulties (which much hindered the progress of your noble
Plantation) are removed, and in a manner overcome: And that your people in your
Colony (through Gods mercy) were all in good health, every one busied in their
Vocations, as Bees in their Hiues, at the setting sail of your Ship the
Concord from Virginia in March last. O what miracles are these? O what cause
have you and they to confess before the Lord his loving kindness, and his
wonderful works before the sons of men?

But to pass from the Danger and deliverance of your people, who endangered,
yea, lost their lives in settling of your Plantation, consider, I beseech you,
in the second place, the Danger wherein your whole Colony stood, at the time of
Sir Thomas Gates arriving in Virginia from the Summer Islands, when it was
concluded a few days after his landing, by himself, Sir George Summers,
Captain Newport, and the whole Counsel, by the general approbation of all,
to abandon the Colony (because of the want of provisions) and to make for
New Foundland, and so for England. And will not the hopeful settling of your
Colony there, now under the Government of a worthy and worshipful Commander;
and a wise and wel-experienced Counsel, stir you up to confess before the
Lord his loving kindness, and his wonderful works before the sons of men?

But, if neither the Danger of your people; nor the Danger of your whole Colony
abroad, and the Deliverance vouchsafed to them both be enough to stir you up
to confess before the Lord his loving kindness: Then I beseech you, in the
third place, to consider the Danger of your own selves here at home. What
mass of money have you buried in that Plantation? How many of you had it not
made to wish that you had never put your hand to this Plough? Nay, how many of
you had it not made to shrink in your shoulders; and to sink (as it were)
under the burden, and to be quite out of hope for ever seeing penny of that you
had so largely depursed?

And now, Beloved, is not the case altered? Are not your hopes great of seeing;
nay, of feeling, within a few years of double, treble; yea, I may say of
tensold for one? Do not all of you know what that Religious and judicious
Overs^er of your College lands there writes unto you from thence? Master
George Thorpe in his Letter written from James City May 17. 1621.
No man (says he) can justly say, that this Country is not capable of all
those good things, that you in your wisdoms, with your great charge have
projected, both for her wealth and honor: and also of all other good things,
that the most opulent parts of Christendom do afford; neither are we
hopeless, that this Country may also yield things of better value then any of
those? And surely, by that which I have heard and seen abroad in my travailing
to India and Iapan, I am confirmed in the truth of that which he does write.
for Iapan, lying in the same latitude that Virginia does; and if there be any
ods, Virginia has them, as lying more Southerly then Iapan does: Iapan (I say)
lying under the same latitude that Virginia does, abounds with all things for
profit and pleasure, being one of the mightiest and opulentest Empires in the
world, having in it many rich Mines of Gold and Silver.

And had you not a taste of some Marchantable Commodities sent unto you from
Virginia some years ago, whilst that worshipful and worthy Governor, Sir
Thomas Dale sent home unto you samples of above a dossen several good
Commodities from thence? Have you not now great hopes of abundance of Corn,
Wine, Oil, Lemmons, Oranges, Pomegranats, and all manner of fruits pleasant to
the eye, and wholesome for the belly? And of plenty of Silk, Silk Grass,
Cotton-wooll, Flax, Hemp etc. for the back? Are not you already possessed
with rich Mines of Copper and Iron, and are not your hopes great of far
richer Minerals? Master George Sands in his Letter written from James City
March 3. 1621.
Have you not read what of late your worthy Treasurer does write unto you? If
(says he) we overcome this year the Yron-workes, Glasse-workes, Salt-works;
take order for the plentiful setting of Corn; restrain the quantity of
Tobacco, and mend it in the quality, plant Vines, Mulbery-trees, Fig Trees,
Pomegranats, Potatoes, Cotton woolles; and erect a fair Inn in James City
(to the setting up of which, I doubt not but we shall raise fifteen hundred
or two thousand pounds: for every man gives willingly toward this and other
public works) you have enough for this year.

And a little after, in the same letter^ Master Pory deserves good
encouragement for his paineful Discoveries to the Southward, as far as the
Choanoack, who although he has trod on a little good ground, has past through
great forests of Pynes 15. or 16. mile broad and above 60. mile long, which
will serve well for Masts for Shipping, and for pitch and ^arre, when we shall
come to extend our plantatio^s to those borders. On the other side of the River
there is a fruitful Country blessed with abundance of Corn, reaped twice a
year: above which is the Copper Mines, by all of all places generally
affirmed. He has also met with a great deal of silk grass which grows
there monthly of which Master Harriot, has affirmed in print many years
ago, that it will make silk Grow-graines^ and of which and Cotton woll all
the Cambaya and Bengala stuffes are made in the East Indies.

Heard you not with your own ears what M. John Martin an Armenian by birth
(that has lived now 6. or 7. years in Virginia, and is but very lately come
from thence, and purposes (as all others that are lately come over, who also
far prefer Virginia to England) to return thither again, with this
resolution, there to live and die) said in the audience of your whole Court the
8th of this Instant? I have travailed (said he) by Land over eighteen several
kingdoms; and yet all of them in my mind, come far short of Virginia, both
for temperature of air, and fertility of the soil. All this thoroughly
considered, O how great cause have you to confess before the Lord his loving
kindness, and his wonderful works before the sons of men?

And that all of us here present may confess before the Lord his loving
kindness, and his wonderful works before the sons of men; Let us take to
heart our private, our public Dangers and deliverances: from how many Dangers
eminent and imminent has the Lord delivered us and our whole Land in
eightie-eight; and in the Gun Powder Treason? Have we not then all of us good
cause to exalt the Lord in the Congregation of the people, and to praise him in
the Assembly of the Elders? Nay, have not Elders and Yongers, and all good
cause so to do?

But, alas, I am afraid, that we have forgotten the loving kindness of the
Lord, and his wonderful Deliverances bestowed upon us. Beneficij memoria est
brevissima; (...). May not England justly be charged with Isreal's sin, whose
Prayers and Praises ended so soon as they passed the red Sea? Amongst the
Tribes, there was one named Manasse, which signifies, Forgetfulness; I pray God
the Tribes, even the heads of our people forget it not; but that we and the
whole Land, may confess before the Lord his loving kindness, and his
wonderful works before the sons of men; and se^ke to exalt him in the
Congregation of the people, and to praise him in the Assembly of the Elders.

Verse 28. Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble etc. THus having
spoken of the Danger, I come now to speak a word of the Deliverance, and the
means which these Seafaring men used to be freed from their trouble, which is
faithful and fervent Prayer, Then they cried unto the Lord, etc.

Faithful and fervent Prayer unto God, D. There is no danger so great, out of
which faithful and fervent prayer will not help a man.
in the name of Jesus Christ, is a sure means to procure help in trouble, and
to free us from the greatest danger that is, or at least from the evil
thereof. These Mariners going unto God, not with a cold and careless devotion;
nor with a dombe Spirit: but with as earnest and impatient a voice, as the
affection of their heart, and affliction of their body could send forth: they
thus crying unto the Lord in their trouble; he brought them out of their
distress, he hushed the storm: he brought them to the haven of their desire,
and made them glad at the heart. As David gave charge to his Soldiers that
they should not kill Absalom his Son, though he sent them against Absalom to
stay his rebellion: So God forbids his crosses to destroy his children, though
he send them against his children, to purge out their corruptions. As John
after the voice of Thunder heard the voice of Harpers; so when the Saints have
heard the noise of sorrow, they shall hear the sound of joy. As the viper
leapt upon Paul, and leapt off again: so troubles leap upon the righteous and
leap off again, as though they had mistaken the party, and rapt at the wrong
door. One calls Affliction the Trance of the righteous, because they seem
dead for a while, but they wake again.

Now all this comes to pass, because the Lord sends the Spirit of Prayer
into the hearts of his Children, whereby they cry unto him in the time of their
trouble, and therefore no marveile, when they cry unto the Lord in their
trouble, that he brings them out of their distress.

The most ef^^ctuall spe^ch to the secret ears of God comes not from words,
but from sighs and groans: he that hears without ears can interpret our
prayers without our tongues^ he that saw and fancied Nathaniel under the
fig tree, before he was called, he that saw and sanctified John Bap^ist in his
mothers womb before he came forth, he s^eth, and blesses our prayers
fervently conceived in the bosom of our Consciences before they be uttered.
But if they be faint and faithless, 1 King. 18. 26^ 27. etc.
they shall be answ^red of God, as the Prayers of Baals Priests were, who
though they cried loud from morning to noone, and to the offering up of the
evening Sacrifice; and cut themselves till the blood gushed out upon them, yet
there was none to hear, nor to regard their roarings.

Give therefore but thy prayer a voice to cry: for, it must not be dumb, nor
tong-tied; give it an eye to seek: for, it must not be wandering and careless;
and give it an hand to knock: for, it must not fear to molest and disquiet;
and not only shall thou be freed from Dangers, but the doors, yea, all the
treasures and jewels of the kingdom of Heaven shall be open unto it.

But some, it may be, will say, My danger is great; yea, so great that it
makes my heart to ache within me, and my soul to melt for sorrow.

I answer, the greatness of our Danger cannot be a stop to our Deliverance;
If we can but call and cry unto the Lord in our trouble, He will bring us out
of our Distress. The Seafaring men here described, had their hearts to melt
for sorrow, yet crying unto the Lord in their trouble, He brought them out of
their distress? The word here translated, Distress, Vmimmitskothebem.
is by Arias Montanus translated de coarctationibus; and by Iunius and
Tremellius, ex angustijs. So that the trouble here spoken of, is not properly
trouble, but narrownes and straights. Be our case then never so desperate, the
Lord can help it: for, nothing is impossible to him. The Israelites groaned
unto him in Egypt, he heard and delivered them from the tyranny of Pharaoh:
The young men in the Fiery Furnace called upon him, and were delivered: The cry
of Daniel stopped the mouth of the roaring Lions; Paul and Silas being in
bonds, prayed, and their chains fell loose from them; the doors opened and
gave them passage. Although we be plunged never so low, that we know not where
to seek, nor where to find; although the floods of troubles run clean over
and over us; in so much that we seem to our selves past help and recovery;
yet are we not indeed past help, so long as we are not past desire to be
helped. Men indeed are altogether amazed, and in a manner bereft of wit and
understanding, when they feel themselves dangerously tossed too and fro, as
here these Seafaring men did; but when they cried in their trouble unto the
Lord, he brought them out of their distress. There was never affliction so
great, but the hand of the Lord has been able to master it; There was never
storm so fierce, but his power has been able to allay it. Therefore, if out
souls do even melt for trouble within us; we must not take discomfort at it.
The lord sits above the water-Floods; the Lord commands the Sea, and all
that is therein; the Lord that turns the storm to a calm (blessed be his
name, and let the might of his Majesty receive honor for evermore) he will
never forsake his children that cry unto him; neither in health nor sickness,
light nor darkness, storms nor calmes; in the land of the living, nor in the
land of forgetfulness. Therefore, let us resolve with holy David, Psalm. 23.4.
Though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear
no evil. I will fear no evil (says David) neither great nor small: for it
is all one with God to deliver from the greater storms, as well as from the
lesser. Some difference there is indeed of Dangers and Deliverances out of
them, but it is only such as in Books printed on large and less letter and
paper, the matter not varying at all; for example. When God brought some of the
ships of your former fleetes to Virginia in safty; here Gods providence was
seen and felt privately by some; and this was a deliverance, written (as it
were) in quarto on a lesser paper and letter. But now, when God brought all of
your 9. ships, and al your people in the^ in health and safety to Virginia: Yea
and that ship Tiger of yours, which had fallen into the hands of the Turkish
men of war, through tempest and contrary winds, she not being able to bear
sail, and by that means drouen out of her course some hundreds of miles: for
otherwise of it self the passage from England to Virginia, is out of the walk
of Turks, and clear and safe from all Pirates, who commonly lurk near
Islands, and head-lands, and not in the maine Ocean. When this your Tiger had
fallen, by reason of this storm, and some indiscretion of her M^ster and
people, who taking the Turks to have been Flemmings, bound for Holland or
England, bore up the helm to speak with them: for they needed not if they had
listed to have come near the Turks, but have proceeded safely on their
voyage) into the hands of those merciless Turks, who had taken from them most
of their victuals, and all of their serviceable sails, tackling and anchors,
and had not so much as left them an houre-glasse or compass to steer their
course, thereby utterly disabling them from going from them, and proceeding on
their voyage. When (I say) God had ransomed her out their hands, Esa. 43.4.
as the Prophet speaks, by another Sail which they espied, and brought her
likewise safely to Virginia with all her people, two English boys only
excepted, for which the Turks gave them two others, a French youth and an
Irish. Was not there the presence of God printed, as it were, in Folio on
Royal Crown Paper and Capital Letters, that, as Habacucke says, Hab. 2.2.
They that run and ride post may read it. O then how great cause have you
and they, to confess before the Lord his loving kindness, and his wonderful
works before the sons of men?

Verse 31.32. Let them therefore confess before the Lord, etc. HItherto of the
Danger and D^liuerance; now of the Duty, which, in a word, is thanksgiving.

The greater our danger i^; D. The more and ^reater Gods blessings are upon us,
the larger and heartier ought our praises and thanksgiuings be unto God for the
same.
the more joyful is our deliverance, and ^he more cheerfully ought we to
confess before the Lord his loving kindness, and his wonder^ull works before
the sons of men. Thanksgiving is the end of our Deliverance. This duty
carefully performed, is a singular exercise of faith, when men standing upon
the shore, and beholding the dangerous and tumultuous Seas which they have
passed, are stirred up to sacrifice praise and glory to him for the some. Genesis
8.20. Exodus 15.1 Psalm. 50.15. This service is a further work of faith then
petition: for they which are but illightned against death may serve in a sort
to make some petitions to God; but they never bethink them at-all of the duty
of thanksgiving, when they have received benefits from him. And for this cause,
nine of the ten leapers which Christ cleansed, are defamed to all posterity by
the Holy Ghost in the Gospel.

Let us labor to purge our selves of such a wickedness, spending much of our
time in songs of thanksgiving, Confessing before the Lord his loving kindness,
and his wonderful works before the sons of men. For thanksgiving is, as it
were, the homage or rentcharge, which we are to return to God for all his
mercies, especially for our right to our inheritance in heaven. And we know
that if men refuse to do their homage, or pay their rent to their earthly
Landlord, they shall deserve thereby to be turned out of their farms, and
others to be put in their room, which shall discharge the duty better. So, if
we prove unthankful to the Lord of heaven, shall we not justly deserve to
lose our inheritance? Wherefore let us do as men, which are bound by bond to
make tender of a sum of money upon great penalty in a certain place; and, at a
certain time named in the bond, they will be sure to tender the payment in the
place, and at the time appointed and specified in the bond, lest they incur
the penalty. Even so, etc. Let us beware we do not forslow our thankfulness
upon light and slight excuses, lest we forfeit Gods loving kindness, and our
own salvation. Let us weigh, what God has done for us, and lay all Gods
benefits together, thereby the be^ter to sti^re us up unto thankfulness. Leah
bears one son, and calls his name Reuben; a second son, and called his name
Simeon, Genesis 29.32. 33. etc.
and a third, and called him Leni; but when above exspectation she conceiueth,
and bears the fourth time, she purposely calls his name Judah, and expressly
protests that she will praise the Lord. If one benefit move you not, many should
if many have not done it, yet this last and late mercy passing all the former.
O call it Judah, and now of set purpose praise the Lord, and confess before
him his loving kindness and his wonderful works before the sons of men.

Which that you may the better do, give me leave I pray you to show you how
your thanksgiving ought to be qualified, that it may be a sweet savor unto God.

It must be accompanied, 1. with confessi^^. 2. with exalt^tion. Confession
again, is either of Gods loving kindness; or of his wonderful works.

There are two things in which Gods loving kindness is to be seen, 1. In
giving. 2. In forgiving.

Gods loving kindness in giving, is to be praised: for is not God a great and
good benefactor or ours, and do we not greatly praise our benefactors? O let
us confess his loving kindness as he is our Benefactor.

Gods loving kindness in forgiving our sins is also to be confessed. I
showed you before the danger of your people sent to Virgini^, the danger of
your Colony planted there, and the danger of your own selves here at home. And
now if you look to the Primitive and original cause of al these your great
Dangers, and many dis-asters that have heretofore befalne to your plantation, I
suppose you shall soon find the cause to be sin. The Mariners in the
transportation of Jonah, Ionah^ 1.7.
made no question hereof. Let us with these Mariners cast lots that we may
know for whose cause this evil came upon your plantation in Virginia.

Was it for the sin of our land in general, either because (as it is said of
M^r^^) it came not out to help forward this work of the Lord with their
Prayers and Purses; Judge. 5.23.
or was it because (as the Prophet speaks Isay 1.5.
,) The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is heavy, from the sole of the
foot to the crown of the head, there is nothing whole therein, etc. Surely,
surely, the sins of our land are crying sins; and is it any wonder if they
do awake the Justice of God, and turn the mercies of Heaven into rods of
Indignation? Or was it for the sin of your own society at home; because you
have either too much affected your gain? or too too seldom called upon the
name of God in prayer for giving his blessing to your plantation? or too
faintly depended upon God by faith and patience for the issue? or too much
neglected God in thankfulness for the success? I can not excuse nor accuse
you; you need not care to be judged by man's day: 1. Cor. 4:3^
your consciences can best tell you, whether the lot fall upon you or not.

Or, was it for the sin of such as you have transported to your Plantation,
because (most of them at the first, being the very scumme of the Land, and
great pity it was that no better at that time could be had;) they neglected
Gods worship, lived in idleness, plodded conspiracies, resisted the government
of Superiors, and carried themselves dissolutely amongst the heathens. If in
any of these they have offended, was not Gods rod of Mortality justly upon
them for their sins?

But now (beloved) Almighty God has graciously looked upon you and your
people, in passing by their and your sins; The Lord has said to the destroying
angel, 2. Sam. 24.16.
It is sufficient, hold now ^hy hand; the mortality of your people is ceased
abroad: and the hope of your good returns is increased at home: O therefore,
ought you not to confess before the Lord his loving kindness, both in giving of
mercies, and forgiving of sins?

Another confession there must be, of Gods wonderful works. And both these
confessions are again and again repeated in the amebe, burden or foot of
this psalm.

It is most true, Psalm. 40.5. and 66.3. and 10 4. 24.
that all Gods works are wonderful (for he has made them all in wisdom, in
number, weight and measure) and that the Lord declares himself to be great
and wonderful even in the least of them amongst the sons of men. This
Pharaohs Inchanters did confess, This is the finger of God, Exodus 8.19.
in the little lowse. But unthankful man takes no notice of ordinary favors,
common protection, health, plenty, rest, pleasure, which are usual with them,
and therefore Gods name is not praised for them: for except Christ work
miracles, they will not believe; John 6.30.
What sign (said the fleshly hearers of Christ's word) show thou, that we
may see it, and believe thee? What do ^hou work? No sign, no faith: yea
except God do great things for them, Psalm. 147.20. Mark 2.12.
that they may be able to say, that he has not done so to any, and we never
saw such a thing; they will not confess his loving kindness, but rather
smother both it, and his wonderful works.

Let us therefore consider and weigh well the Wonderful works of the Lord:
for, is it not a work of wonder to command the creatures against the course of
nature? as to cause the wind to cease with a word, and to quiet the Seas only
with a beck? To stay the fire that it do not burn; and the hungry Lions that
they do not devour? to mollify the hearts of Saluages, and to make some of
them voluntarily to remove from their own warm and well seated and peopled
habitations, to give place to Strangers, whom they had never before seen: as
P^whatan at the first plantation of the English, to remove from his own
station, and now of late the Mattaw^mbs to depart from their cleared and rich
grounds; and to make others of them (as Opachancano) to sell to the English and
their Governor sir George Yeardly the right and title they had to their
possessions? Yet all these has the Lord done, and are they not wonderful
works indeed? O then let us stir up our selves and others, and call upon them,
saying, Psalm. 66.16.
Come and hearken all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what the Lord
has done to my soul. O let us confess before the Lord, as his loving
kindness, so also his wonderful works before the sons of men.

But alas, I am afraid, that it is with us concerning Gods wonderful works,
as it was with the people of the Jews, concerning the wonders of Gods Law, of
whom God by his Prophet complayneth; Hosea 8.12.
I have written to them the great things of my Law, but they were accounted as
a strange thing. God had vouchsafed to teach them the wonders of his word, what
greater bounty? They passed by them, as things not worthy to be wondered at and
regarded; what greater impiety? O that it were not with us touching his
wonderful works, as it was with them concerning the wonders of his law?

Our thanksgiving, if it be good, must be accompanied with exalting of the
Lord. Now, to exalt the Lord none can properly be said to do it; for who can
exalt the Highest that exalts all, and is exalted of none? To exalt the Lord
then in the congregation of his people, is nothing else, but as David expounds
it, Psalm. 122.8.9.
to wish prosperity unto Gods Church, and to procure the wealth of Gods people.

O then (beloved) would you have God to accept of your thanks, and to give a
blessing to your Colony abroad, and your selves at home; study to wish well,
and to do well to Gods Church and people.

Labor first, to procure faithful, honest, and peaceable Preachers, and send
them over to your people (as you have sent some already, both of good learning
and sanctified life, and many more such may you send,) that they may Open their
eyes, Act^ 26.18.
that they may turn from darkness to light; and from the power of Satan unto
God; that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance amongst
them which are sanctified by faith in Christ. If you provide not spiritual
food for your people, as well as corporal, what better provision make you,
then you do for your brute beasts which feed in your pastures? Nay, do you
make so good? For, has not an Ox therein what he needs; but a man without
this, is he not left unprovided of the far better part, even his Soul? Yea,
and if you have no care to provide good Preachers for your people, but send
over unto them such as offer themselves hand over head; you provide not well
for your selves: for, what assurance can you have of them, who have no
assurance of themselves? what service can you expect from them which perform
none unto Almighty God? will they ever be faithful unto you, that are
unfaithful unto him? And how can they be faithful unto God, if they have not
faithful Preachers to bring them unto him? Surely, the best you can look from
them, is but eie-seruice, which how good this will be, I leave it to yourselues
well to consider of, who have felt the smart of it by your slow returns.
Nothing can cast a sure knot upon the hearts of your people, but the true
knowledge and fear of God: so as when you advance religion, you advance
together with it your own profit. The neglect of this has made your hopes in
your long looked for Returns, to this hour to be frustrate. 1. Sam. 6.11.
Deuteronomy. 28.5. Hag. 1.19.30.
Obed Ed^m prospered the better for the Ark of God. The Jews had no good
harnest whilst they left off to build Gods Temple; and they amended in their
estate when they amended that fault, and reformed themselves.

Amongst other of the causes, that it has not pleased God to be succesfull
unto your Plantation at the beginning thereof, and in the infancy of the same.
That worthy ouer-seer of your College Lands before mentioned, gives this as
one; That you have not as you ought (for these be his very words) preferred
Gods glory by your serious endeauo^rs of converting the Natives, who (as he
writes) do live so peaceably amongst us, and round about us, as they do even
seem to groan under the burden of the bondage of Satan, and to want nothing
but means to be delivered. And this he confirms by a discourse which he had
with Opachankan^, their great King, who has succeeded Powhatan, whose daughter
Pokah^^ta^, one master John Rolfe, an English Gentleman of good worth,
married: for he found that the said Opachankano had more notions of religion in
him, then could be imagined in so great a blindness, since he willingly
acknowledged that theirs was not the right way, desiring to be instructed in
ours: And confessing that God loved us more then them; and that he thought the
cause of his anger against the^, was their custom of making their children
Blacke-boyes, or consecrating them to Satan. He found also that the said
Opachankan^ had some knowledge of many of the fixed S^arres, and had observed
the North Star, and the course of the Constellations about it, and called the
great Bear Manquahanum, which in their language does signify the Sun.

I might here speak something touching my own experience, of the
willingness of the Heathens in gen^rall in all the Eastern parts of the
world, where I have travailed, how ready they are to receive the Gospel, if
there were but Preachers amongst them that could and would instruct them by
their Doctrine and Life. And of one of them in special, Peter Pope, so named
by his Majesty.
which I brought with me out of India to England, and taught him (I not being
able to speak otherwise to him, nor he to me, but by signs,) to speak, to
read and write the English tongue and hand, both Roman and Secretary, within
less then the space of a year, so that his Majesty and many of the Nobility
wondered at his hand; and within the compass of three years, I taught him the
grounds of Religion, and to learn most of Saint Pa^les Epistles by heart, and
to give a public confession of his Faith the day he was baptized in a famous
assembly here in the City, before the right worshipful the East India
Company, and since to write the Latin Epistles heereunto adjoined.

I could here say much of the double diligence of Jesuits their poisoning
with the Coloquintida of Popery many thousand souls in the E^st I^dies and
Iapan, and other the remotest parts of the world: All which might be Motives
strong enough to stir you up to have a greater care of the planting of the
Gospel in your Plantations.

But Time now calls upon me to excite you, as to labor to procure and send
over honest and painful Preachers, so in the second place to have a care (as
I know you have) to procure and send over skillful and pianefull Tradesmen and
Husbandmen, to follow their trades, and to cultiuate the ground.

Our Country abounds with people; your Colony wants them: you all know
that there is nothing more dangerous for the estate of Commonwealths, then when
the people do increase to a greater number and multitude, then may justly
parall^ll with the largeness of the place and country in which they live. For,
even as blood, though it be the best humor in the body, yet if it abound in
greater quantity, then the vessel and state of the body will contain and
bear, does endanger the body, and oftentimes destroys it: so although the
honor of a King be in the multitude of people (as wise King Solomon speaks)
yet when this multitude of people increases to over great a number, Pro^.
14.28.
the common wealth stands subject to many perilous inconneniences, as famine,
poverty, and sundry other sorts of calamities.

Thus having fallen into this point of exalting God in the congregation of the
people, and the assembly of the Elders, I have here good occasion offered to
me to bless God for the prudence and providence of this honorable city, the
honorable Elders thereof, the honorable Lord Mayor, and the right worshipful
the Aldermen his brethren; who seeing this City to be mightily increased, and
fearing lest the ouer-flowing multitude of inhabitants should, like too much
blood in the body, infect the whole City with plague and poverty; have
therefore devised in their great wisdoms a Remedy for this Malady, to wit, the
transporting of their ouer-flowing multitude into Virginia; which was first put
in practice in the Maioralitie of that worthy and famous Lord Mayor Sir George
B^wl^^, who sent over a hundred persons, the half of their charge being borne
by the City; the other half by the Honorable Virginia Company; which worthy
course was afterward followed by the right worshipful Sir William Cockins, in
whose Maioraltie were sent over a hundred more in the like nature. And now
likewise the right Honorable, the present Lord Mayor, with the right
worshipful the Aldermen his brethren, intend to con^inue this course, that
they may ease the City of a many that are ready to starve, and do starve daily
in our streets (to the great grief of all tenderhearted and merciful men)
for want of food to put into their mouths. This course, I say, they have
taken already, and mean to prosecute it, as I am informed, to the end they may
preserve this famous City in greater Peace and Prosperity: Herein wisely
imitattng the prudent and provident husbandman, whom they see thus to deal
with his grounds, when they are ouercharged with cattle: For, as he by removing
the^ from one ground to another, provides well both for his cattle and for his
ground: so they in their wisedoms, by removing their super-increasing people
from the City to Virginia, have provided well both for this City and their
people: for, whereas many of those which were sent over, were a burden to this
City, they are now through the good government there, and Gods blessing upon
the works their hands) become men able to live of themselves in good sort and
fashion in Virginia; being before their sending over like to unconverted
Onesymus, vnp^ofitable unto all; Philem. ver. 1^.
and now by their being there, like unto the same Onesymus, but truly
converted, profitable to the Plantation, and to the City; to the one by their
pains, to the other by their prayers, blessing God from the bottom of their
hearts that they were sent from London to Virginia; yea, blessing also the Lord
Majors, in whose time they were sent over.

I may say of this singular prudence and providence of this honorable City,
what our Savior said of the fact of Marie Magdalen in pouring her costly
ointment on his sacred head (howsoever some sons of Beliall malign this
worthy work, as Judas the Traitor, and some of hell, maligned ^^at act of
Ma^ies anointing of Christ, pretending ^^e good of the poor, but intending it
as much as his own salvation, which was little or nothing at all,) Ioh.
12.3.4. ^c Mat. 26.13.
Verily I say unto you wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached,
throughought all the world, there shall also this that she has done be spoken
of, for a memorial of her. So verily, I say of this honorable City and worthy
Elders thereof, that so long as there shall continue any English in Virginia
(and we hope their race shall continue there till the second coming of our
blessed Savior) transported from this City thither, they shall not c^ase to
pray for the prosperity of this famous City, and worthy governors thereof.
Wherefore let me beseech so many of the right. Worshipful and worthy
Governors of this famous City, as are present, (and I humbly entreat them,
to stir up all such as are absent) to proceed as they have begun, Pro^.
4.18.
that their Way may shine as the light that shines more and more unto the
perfect day; that what was spoken of Ruth, may be verified in them; Ruth 3.10.
Thou have showed more goodness in the latter end, then at the beginning: and
that that may be their praise, which is recorded to be the commendation of the
Church of Thy^tir^; Re^. 2.19.
I know thy works, and thy love and service, and faith and patience; and how
thy works are more at the last then as the first.

Right Worshipful, ye are plentiful in other good works, the maintaining of
your Ho^pitals, and other public works in this famous City, preach your
munificence through all the world, R^^^ ^. 8. and 16.19.
as the faith and obedience of the Romans was published abroad among all. O be
rich in well doing this way likewise, that it may be said of you, Many have
done worthily for the plantation in Virginia, but the honorable City of
London surmounteth them all. Your City (as I said) abounds in people (and
long may it do so) the Plantation in Virginia is capable enough to receive
them; O take cour^e to ease your City, and to provide well for your people by
sending them over thither; that both they of that Colony there, and they of
your own City here, may live to bless your prudent and provident government
over them. For, I have heard many of the painfullest laborers of your City,
even with tears bemoane the desolate estate of their poor wives and children;
who though they rise early, taw and tear their flesh all the day long with
hard labor, and go late to bed, and feed almost all the week long upon
brown bread and cheese, yet are scarce able to put bread in their mouths at
the weeks end, and clothes on their backs at the years end; and all because
work is so hard to be come by, and there be so many of the same Trade, that
they can not thrive one for another. Right Worshipful, I beseech you ponder
(as I know you do) the forlorn estate of many of the best members of your
City, and help them, O help them out of their misery; what you bestow upon
them in their transportation to VIRGINIA, they will repay it at present with
their Prayers, and when they are able with their Purses; and GOD in the mean
while, will plentifully reward your liberality this way with his blessing upon
your famous City, upon your selves, upon your posterity: For does not your
merciful God, the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 3. ^0
bid you prove him, if he will not open the windows of heaven unto you, and
power you out a blessing without measure?

And that I may bend my speech unto all, seeing so many of the Lords Worthies
have done worthily in this noble Action: yea, and seeing that some of them
greatly rejoice in this (as I have heard it from their own mouths) that GOD
has enabled them to help forward this glorious Work, both with their Prayers
and with their Purses, let it be your grief and sorrow to be exempted from the
Company of so many honorable minded men, and from this noble Plantation,
tending so highly to the advancement of the Gospel; and to the honoring of
our drad Sovereign, by enlarging of his Kingdoms, and adding a fifth Crown
unto his other four: for, En dat Virginia quintam, is the Motto of the Legal
Seal of VIRGINIA. And let me, in a word, shut up all, unto you all, that has
been spoken with that exhortation of the Apostle; 1. Cor. 15.5^.
My beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, immovable, abundant always in the
work of the Lord: for as much as you know that your labor is not in vain in
the LORD.

FINIS.
To the most Illustrious Knight, Sir Thomas Smith, the most prudent Governor
of the East-Indy Company, eternal felicity in the Lord.
Right Worshipful,
IN many respects to be reverenced by me. May it please your Worship to pardon
my boldness in visiting you with this rude Epistle, to the end that I may show
my thankfulness toward you for your great and many benefits bestowed upon
me: As soon as God shall enable me to make a greater progress in the Latin
tongue, you may expect a longer; yea, perhaps a more elegant and eloquent
Letter. In the interim I doubt not but your Worship (in regard of your
Clemency toward me) will accept in good part these witnesses of a thankful
mind. The Almighty and all powerful God preserve you long in health, that you
may be (as you are) a grace and ornament to the Company of Merchants, that you
may attain to high Honor here on earth, and most ample glory hereafter in
Heaven: Farewell.

From your Royal James, this 24. of April 1620. A Favorite of your Illustrious
dignity. Peter Pope.

To the Worshipful and worthy Captain, Martin Pring, Commander of the Sea
Navy of the East India Company in India.
I Shall peradventure seem bold (most Illustrious Mecoenas) daring to trouble
your learned ears with this rude Epistle, but your humanity toward all, and
beneuolent love toward the learned encouraged me, though the least of the
learned, yet most desirous of learning, and a lover of learned men, to present
unto you these first fruits of my wit, and first trial in the latin tongue;
to the end I may testify how much I love both you and the excellent gifts and
graces of God bestowed upon you. Now if you will be pleased to take in good
part, and have respect to these unpolished lines, you may perhaps ore it be
long, expect from the some more learned and better digested Letters. Farewell
Worshipful Sir.

From the James Royal.22. January 1619.
To the same.
Worshipful Sir,
IN regard of late it was your pleasure to witness your love to me by a gift,
to the end that hereafter I might account you not only a special friend, but
also a worthy supporter of me in learning; it was most acceptable unto me: and
as I embrace this pledge of your benevolence, so interchangeably I promise my
self to be respective toward you, according as your piety and liberality
deserve. Of both which toward all, especially toward me, this token is a
sufficient witness. For the present I have but little, which I may render for
your great liberality toward me (and to return nothing at all, were
altogether a sign of an ungrateful mind) unless it be this small Paper-gift.
Now if I may perceive that any gift of this kind shall be acceptable to you, I
will satisfy you either with these or the like even to the full. Farewell
Worshipful and worthy Sir: The Lord always guide you with his Spirit, and
uphold you with his mighty power, and every day enrich you with the rich graces
of his Spirit.

From the James Royal, the 20. of May. 1620. Your Worships in all dutiful
obedience. Peter Pope.

Illustrissimo equiti aurato, Domino Thomae Smit^, societatis Mercatorum Indiae
orientalis gubernatori prudentissimo, aeternam in Domino felicitatem.
CLarissime Domine, multis nominibus plurimum mihi colende, libet si licet
epistolio te hoc, rudi licet, in^isere; quo gratitudinem in te m^am, ob magna
multaque tua in me collata beneficia tester. Vbi Deus maiores in lingua latina
dederit progressus, longiores fortassis etiam elegantiores a^ magis disertas, a
me expectabis literulas. Interea non dubito quin cels^^do vestra, pro ea quae
tua in me est ^lementia, ha^ grati animi testes, aequi bonique consulat. Deus
opt. Max. te long multumque incolumem seru^t ^ quo illustri Mercatorum
Societati sis decori ac ornamento eximio, atque ita hic fauorem assequaris
ampliorem, and in coelis amplissimum.

Vale ex Regali vestra Iacobo.24. Aprilis 1620. Illustrissima amplitudinis ^^a
studio ^iss^^^s. Petrus Papa.

Clarissimo Domino D. Martino Pringo, Nauticae Classis societatis Mercatorum
Indiae orientalis, praefecto vigilantissimo, Petrus Papa. S. P. D.
AVdax fortassis videbor (Mecoen^s Illustrissime) qui a^deam doctas ^uas aures
r^d^ hoc epistolio interturbare; sod quae tua est in omnes bamani^^s, and in
li^era^^^ ben^^^l^us amor, me (literarurum licet minimum, literaru^ tamen
studio fissim^^^, and literatorum amantissimum) induxit, vt has ingenij mei
primitias; and in lingua latina primum specimen tuo ^^mini inscriberem, quo
testatum faciam quami ^e, and eximias in te collatas Dei dotes, colam. Quod si
inexpolit^^ has literalas aqu^ bonique consulueris, e^l^iores fort^ss^ breui
and magis comptas a nobis expectabis. Vale pl^rimum mihi colende.

Ex Regati Iacobo 22. Ianuarij 1619.
Eidem.
QVOD ^uper mihi per donum innotescere voluisti (Domine plurimum mihi colende)
vt posthacte non inter amicos solum, sed and inter beneficos Mecoenates
cens^am, gratum mihi fuit: ac sicuti amplector hanc beneuolentiaetua tesseram,
ita viciss^^ p^lliceor me beneuolo erga te fore animo, prout and tua pi^tas,
and liberalitas merentur; cuius vtriusque in omnes, me preserti^^, tantis tuis
d^nis ill^st^^ specimen apparet. Inpresentiarum parum est quod protanta tua in
^e liberalitate referam (nihil autem refer animi esset (...) i^gratissimi)
praeter chartaceum hoc mun^scul^^. Quod fih^i^sce^odi mu^mosyna persp^xere tibi
gr^ta ess^, ^is a^t (...) similib^s te ad satietatem, (...) ad fastidium vsque
satiabo. Vale Domine eximie, and plu^imum mihi ex anim^ colende. Dominus
Spiritu te suo semper gubernet, sustineat inuicta virtute and suis donis indies
locupletet.

Ex Regali Iacobo May 20. 1620. Vestra celsitudinis studio fissi^^^, Petrus
Papa.


