THE Art of Riding, containing diverse necessary instructions, demonstrations,
helps, and corrections apperteining to horssemanship, not heretofore expressed
by any other Author:

Written at large in the Italian tongue, by Master Claudio Corte, a man most
excellent in this Art.

Here briefly reduced into certain English discourses to the benefit of
Gentlemen and others desirous of such knowledge.

Imprinted at London by H. Denham. 1584.

To the right worshipful Master Henry Mackwilliam, one of her Majesty's
Gentlemen Pensioners.
SIr, I had rather you misliked my labor, than mistrusted my good will. And
therefore being often pressed with your desires, I have here briefly
collected the rules of horssemanship, according to Claudio Corte in his second
book.

I have not Englished the author at large, nor meddled with his manifold
digressions; neither have I spoken of all things contained in the said second
book: but only those that concern the making of horses for service. I have
also left that part untouched, which entreats of bitting the horses, because
the same has been long since very substantiallie handled by Master
Blundeuile.

And surely, albeit in this her Majesty's most prosperous and peaceable
reign, the Gentlemen of this land have studied to make horses more for
pleasure than service: yet who so shall truly consider to what end
horssemanship tends, must needs know, that the principal use of horses is,
to travel by the way, and serve in the war: whatsoever your horse learneth
more, is rather for pomp or pleasure, than honor or use. Yet do I think it
allowable and therewith commendable, that some horses (cheeflie of Princes and
great personages having store) should be instructed in those singularities, and
exquisite motions for pleasure, as well to delight the lookers on, and make
proof of the riders excellency; as also thereby to show the capacity of the
beasts.

By these few words you can conceive the substance of my labor, which I have
taken in hand rather to content you, than acquit my self with commendation.
For although some men suppose it an easy thing, to reduce the conceit of any
author into an other language; yet am I assured it behooves him not only to
have an exact understanding in that tongue, wherein the author writes, but also
apt words, and fit phrases in his own, to express the same. Which is also the
more hard, if the matter be demonstratiue and artificial (as this is)
containing diverse particular terms in our English not to be expressed.

It seems therefore, that whosoever shall, either by way of translation or
abbreuiation, set down the conceit of this author, it behooves him to be
fully informed of his meaning, and well exercised in the Art of Riding: in
both which I must confess either absolute ignorance, or simple knowledge. In
respect whereof, I pray you repress this book when you have perused it, or
else preserve it at your own peril. From the Court at Greenewich, this 18. of
May. 1584.

Your poor friend and fellow in arms, T. Bedingfield.

To the right worshipful, my very loving companions and fellows in Arms,
her Majesty's Gentlemen Pensioners.
Many books have been excellently well written by Italians concerning
horsmanship, a fit study for Gentlemen to bestow some time and travel in.
Which has moved me (diverse times) to wish, that some one able to perform it,
would take in hand to translate into English some part of those works, for
common benefit, thereby to encourage our Gentlemen to practice horsemanship,
not only for the service of their country (if need so require) but also for
their own exercise, as an ornament of greatest commendation in men of their
profession. Among others, whom I sometime moved to undertake this labor, I
entreated of late my very friend M. Thomas Bedingfield, our fellow and
companion in Arms, to afford his pains in the reducing of these few
precepts, gathered out of a larger volume written by Claudio Corte, into our
English tongue. Who having with all courtesy satisfied therein my request, and
finding the work very well worthy the printing, I could not in any wise
consent it should be suppressed, but have presumed (as you see) by my friends
leave, to cause it to be published, and to make a brief dedication thereof unto
you above others, as Gentlemen best able to judge of it: as also for the
benefit of those which have any gentlemanlie disposition to attain to
perfection in horssemanship. And for M. Bedingfield, I need use no further
speech, nor make any particular mention of those commendable parts which we
all know to abound in him, but only wish him that imploiment I think he is
worthy of. For the matter now in hand, I refer you to the work it self;
which (I hope) you will think well worth your labor in the perusing of it,
and rest of my opinion, that hereafter in short time by experience we shall
find very many of our countriemen much profited thereby. From the Court at
Richmund this first of June. 1584.

Your affectionat friend and companion in Arms H. Mackwilliam.

To the Reader.
Since contrary to my desire and expectation this tretise of horsemanship is
happened into the Printers hand, I have thought good to remember the readers,
that albeit Xenophon, Grison, Claudio, and others (men most excellent) have
prescribed sundry rules and means how to handle horses, and ride them with
good grace and seemelines; yet if the same be not confirmed by use and
practice, it proves unprofitable and to none avail at all. I wish therefore
that all Gentlemen and others desirous of that knowledge, should not only
read, but also exercise the rules in this book prescribed. For as in all other
sciences demonstratiue, so herein use and experience surmounteth all conceit
and contemplation, which is apparentlie perceived in those that have thereunto
applied themselves.

And surely I suppose (be it spoken without offense of time past) that this
art has never been (I mean within this realm) of that perfection it now is;
neither were the horssemen of former ages, equal or comparable to some now
living, since they wanting both demonstrations, and skillful instructors, could
not by possible means atteine thereunto. For, before M. Blundeuile, I find not
any that have written in our tongue: neither were the teachers of that time of
much knowledge. Where now, chiefly within her Majesty's most prosperous reign,
(encouraged by the valorous disposition of so excellent a Prince) diverse have
adventured to write, and many virtuous Gentlemen with singular commendation,
atteine to great knowledge.

Ouerlong it were to reaccount the names of all Noblemen and Gentlemen, that in
this age have aspired to singular skill in horsmanship, which I impute cheeflie
to the imitation of great personages. I wish therefore that they, and al other
Gentlemen should (both for private exercise and public respect) apply
themselves to the study and practice of this art, following the example of
that honorable person the Earl of Leicester, who among many other virtuous
qualities both of mind and body, has endeavored to atteine so great excellency
in this art, as for his judgment, cunning and co^lines in riding, he meriteth
the prise of perfection. Which appears not only in his own person, but also
in his choice of the esquires and riders of her Highness stable, all men of
great knowledge: and some of them of such excellency as may not be matched. I
could also recite the names of diverse other Gentlmen very skillful and
commendable, which the rather to avoid envy I omit. Yet may I not forget the
praise due to those that be teachers of this art in the city of London; for by
their industry and virtue, the number of serviceable horses and horssemen is
daily increased: and should be more, if other skillful men would apply
themselves to teaching in that manner.

Thus much I have thought good to say, as well to excuse my self (having
written this work only to satisfy my private friends request) as to admonish
the Readers thereof, in any wise to accompany their study and reading with
daily use and experience, whereof assuredly great knowledge and excellency
will ensue.

T. B.

CHAP. 1.
In what sort to handle a colt being made fit to be ridden.

FIrst you shall understand, that so soon as your horse has been haltered,
and is made gentle, you may mount on his back, and following an other horse
(if need be) trot him in some way, or other ground, sometimes straight
forth, and sometimes overthwart, without order or respect, which you shall use
by the space of ten days; ever remembering that in the end you bring him into
some furrow or place where he is forced to set his body straight, and there
fair and easily make him to retire. But all this while the rider shall sit in
the pad, with his legs stretched out, not bending them toward the horses
body, or touching his belly; but as though he stood on the ground, yet
keeping his thighs and knees just to the sadle, and holding the raines of the
Cauezzan at such a length, as the horse may conveniently go forwards. This
order must be observed and continued till the horse be well settled, and will
suffer his rider to mount and dismount at his pleasure: which he will quickly,
being gently used and fair handled. It seems also in mine opinion a thing
most commodious and commendable, that the horse being a colt should be taught
after the Persian manner to The Persian manner of teaching a horse obedience.
kneel down to his rider, to the end he may with the more ease go to and from
his back.

When the horse is become somewhat settled, and bears his sadle well, M.
Claudio wills he should be pased forth the length of three yards, or there
abouts, and there stay to cherish him a little with your right hand, yet not
any whit at all slack the reine of his headstraine. From thence you shall go
straight forth into some field or large way, and for a few days not do
other than in this sort: Trot him right out, and sometimes make him retire
fair and easily, to the end his head may become staid, and his neck
strengthened. Being thus settled, and standing a while still, you shall offer to
pase or trot round about fair and softly, ever remembering that these turns
at the beginning ought to be exceeding large, and at leisure; least the horses
neck be made weak, or pulled on one side: which error is often committed by
ignorant riders and handlers of horses at their first backing.

Having thus done diverse times and diverse days, you may put your colt to
trot the wheels or rings, marked out by some other perfect horse. And I would
wish, that at the beginning a colt should follow an other horse, for that he
will take his way the more willingly: and the rider shall be less occasioned
to writh his neck in turning. First he shall make three turns on the right
hand, and then three on the left hand, in the upper ring; and then return to
the other ring beelow, and make therein three turns; which turns your horse
shall continue so long, as by the riders discretion shall be thought good: not
forgetting that in the beginning the horse must be mildly and gently used,
chiefly in trotting these rings.

Note that commonly all horses do turn Why horses do commo^lie turn more
willingly on the left than on the right hand.
more willingly on the left than on the right hand; either because that nature
does so lead them, or that the motion from the right to the left hand is most
agreeable with the disposition of all creatures; or that we commonly hold the
reins in our left hand, or that the horssekeeper leading him does most
commonly hold him on his right hand and turns to the left, and likewise in
dressing him in the stable, most usually turns him on that hand. Since then
eueric horse has this property by nature, by ordinary motion, and the hand
of man; it is necessary that ever (or for the most part) he should begin and
end his turns on the right hand. And for as much as every motion is more
violent toward the end than in the beginning or midst thereof; it seems
that the horse will end his turns over speedily on that hand, whereunto he is
by nature most inclined, unless he be discreetlie restreined by the riders
hand.

I would likewise advise you, that when so ever any horse, either at his
first riding, or after, shall What is to be done, if a horse lean more on
the one side than on the other, etc.
lean more on the one side than on the other, or that he holds his neck on
the one side (for some horses be foled contrary to that we have spoken, with
there nose or neck turned rather to the right side than the left) that then
you shall use to turn him from that he is naturally inclined, and so both in
the beginning and ending make his turns. As for example: if he leans or
turns his head toward the left hand, then shall you in turning or managing
begin and end on the right hand; and contrariwise, if he leans to the right
hand, then to begin and end on the left hand. Now having finished the number of
turns in the large rings, you shall with some speed and more frankly trot
your horse straight forth the length of a just manage, stopping him betwixt
the two small rings; where pausing a while, and cherishing him with your hand,
return him in that ring which is on the right hand, and then pase him two or
three turns, changing your hands as you did in the large rings: saving that in
the end you ought to be in the same place where you stopped, and began to enter
the turn.

You must also remember, that as well in the large as the narrow rings, your
horse in the end ought ever to go and turn with more franknes and speed. Then
having stayed a while, to cherish him; you shall cut the narow ring in the
midst, and from thence trot your horse to the ordinary place of dismounting:
yet before you alight, fail not to make much of him, and once or twice
advance your self in the saddle, to the end your horse may stand firm,
which done you may gently alight, but not presently suffer the horse to
depart from the place. Thus it appears, that the conditions and nurture which
you teach your horse at the beginning, ought to be good and profitable. I
desire therefore, that above all things horses should at the first be taught
gently, and with great patience.

CHAP. 2.
Of the largenes of the rings and their uses.

THe rings to serve all sorts of horses (as M. Claudio says) ought to be
four elnes at the least in their diametre: and if they be somewhat larger, a
colt at his first riding will like them so much the better. Now to make some
demonstration of the form of the said rings, behold this figure which is the
ring: and the line that divides it in the midest is the largeness or
wideness thereof. But you must note, that the wideness of the small rings
ought not to be much more than one elne. And to the end you may the better
conceive how the rings should be made, where to enter, where to come out, and
how to exercise your horse in them, behold the demonstration or figure set
down in the end of this chapter.

Sure I am, that some riders accustomed unto two rings will account this figure
of three large and three small, to be a thing most strange: and where they
commonly do use four turns on every hand, I would have only three, or
rather but two. Notwithstanding, if they please to consider mine intent, they
shall find I have framed this form of turns, to eschew wearisomnesse both in
the rider and in the horse, who (chiefly if he be young) will lightly
forget what he ought to do. Wherefore in my judgment, these rings (though
more in number) will not so much busy the memory neither of the horse nor
the rider. Besides that, you may perceive how in these three large rings you
may conveniently handle two horses at one time: which within two rings cannot
be so conveniently done. I shall not need to set down any entry or going
out of these rings or turns; for wheresoever you enter, you ought also to
pass out: and in mine opinion every horse in the beginning, and after, does
prove better, being used to few turns than many on one hand. I have set out
the three small turns, to be used with the same order: which you may exercise
or not, as by your discretion shall be thought meet.

Touching the profit which proceeds of The profit of trotting the rings.
trotting the rings, I say that it brings the horse to be well breathed, it
makes his shoulders and legs nimble, it setleth his head and neck, it
makes him to bear light on the hand, it gives him heart and courage, it
makes him willing to turn on either hand indifferently, it corrects all
evil conditions, and the horse becomes more apt and disposed to the short
turns, and every other kind of manage.

The use of the ring is necessary for skirmish, The manifold use of the rings.
for battle, and for combat, either offending or defending. It is also a
comely sight in the rider, and stands him in steed for the exercise of the
turneie, and all other feats of arms. Moreover, it is a thing that naturally
horses do love: which is proved, in that the young foles, so soon as they
are borne, do presently run about, plaieng as it were in circular wise. I
do therefore conclude, that the ring turns are things of much importance.

The form of the foresaid rings.


CHAP. 3.
How to teach your horse in the figure like unto a snaile, which Master
Claudio calls Caragolo or Lumaca.

AFter you have used your A description of this Caragolo or Lumaca see page 12.
colt unto the rings aforesaid, till he trotteth perfectly well; then shall
you put him upon a cannon made fit for his mouth and stature: which done,
having ridden him twenty days therewith, you must fair and easily trot him
in a large ring, and by little and little bring him into a straight compass,
first pasing, and after trotting him. Then when you have brought him as it were
within the compass of an elne, you shall change hand, by little and little,
enlarging the ring till you come unto the same wideness wherein you began: and
there upon the same hand you shall put him straight into the other Caragolo;
wherein being, you must use the same order which you did in the former;
restraining or drawing in the horse as before. This done, turning toward the
right hand, you shall gather into the streightnes of the other Caragolo: which
order you ought to observe, so long as by your discretion shall be thought fit.
Then shall you (having first given your horse breath in the midst of the
Caragolo) put him forth and stop him.

Then pawsing a while in that small ring, you shall give the horse two or
three turns, leaning on that hand which you think fittest. From thence you
shall pass forth, passing in the manage path, until you come into the other
small ring, when making proffer to stop, you shall put him forth two pases,
and so first in the one and after in the other interteine him, turning him in
the one end and then in the other of the manage, wherein as you pased him, so
may you trot him eight or ten times. But in trotting, I wish that so soon as
you be come to the ring, you should end with a stop, and then suddenly
thrusting the horse forward half the way, make an end upon that hand which
seems most necessary, there stopping him for good, and presently dismount.
This manner of lesson M. Claudio calls Caragolo or Lumaca, because it
resembles the form of either. But for the better conceiving thereof, behold
the figure it self.



The profit that comes by this kind of manage is great, and much greater than
that proceeds through use of the rings aforesaid: for it works all those
effects which they do, and with more facility reduces the horse to good
order in turning and managing. Besides that, the same is a motion sightly and
pleasing: for it cannot be denied that to turn in the beginning large, and so
by little and little restraining the horse, first pasing, next trotting, and
lastly galoping easily or frankelie, is a motion very sightly and
contentfull to the lookers on. Also such an artificial kind of manage shows
great aptnes, nimblenes, courage, strength and obedience in the horse,
likewise much skill and order in the rider. I may say more over in
commendation of this manage, that by use thereof only, a horse may be made
ready and perfect, which by use of the two or the three rings may also be, but
with much difficulty. Who so shall also consider well thereof, may perceive,
that by mean of this Caragolo, a horse is taught to turn upon the ground,
which the Italian terms Raddoppiare terra terra. I do therefore persuade
every horseman to exercise his horse more in this than any other kind of
manage, as well for the reasons aforesaid, as the rather thereby to give him
breath, make him obedient, and for many other respects too long to be here
expressed.

CHAP. 4.
How to teach your horse the manage resembled unto the letter S: and the
commodity thereof.

ANother kind of manage A description of this double S see page 16.
there is, which may be likened unto an S: made in this manner. First you shall
pase and after trot your horse as it were in the form of a ring; but before
you come to close it, you must turn on the contrary hand, and pressing
forward take a larger compass; from whence you shall come back through the
midst of the mark ready made, and from thence enlarging return upon the
same hand you began, till you arrive at the place where you entered: which in
the end will prove the just proportion of the letter S doubled: which figure
ought to be made somewhat long, cheeflie to teach a young horse or ignorant
colt.

And to the end you may the better conceive what has been said, you must
imagine two wheels or rings to be put together, and that the said rings were
not fully round, but somewhat longlike unto an eg, where passing from the one
to the other you make one only turn upon one hand. Now when you have ridden
your horse so long as is convenient in this manage, you must ever end upon the
same hand you first began. Then going forth by the same way, you shall keep
straight, and stop your horse without the figure, the length of a short
manage. But if you please to end within the S it self, it will not be amiss,
but rather more cunning and sightly to behold.

The way so to do, is to cut the S in the midst, and at the end of the
turn make a straight ring, and from thence pass right forth to stop at the
end of the S, cutting the figure in the midst, which doing two or three
times in the self same path, at the last you must make half a turn and then
departout. The form of this figure may not be longer than a just manage, nor
longer than four elns. Also the small rings in the end of the manage, within
the S, or without the S, should not be in wideness much more than one elne.

The commodities proceeding of this manage The commodities of the foresaid
manage of S S.
are diverse, and so apparent as need not be discoursed. Only I say that it
may be made at first large, then straiter and straiter, according unto the
order of the Caragolo: whereby the horse shall be informd how to com into his
manage with the half or hole turn, without rest or with coruettes, or in
turns with iumps, that will have the grace and fashion of such a manage.

CHAP. 5.
How to manage your horse in and out, which Master Claudio calls
Serpeggiare, with the profit thereof.

THe commodity that comes A description of this manage, see page 19.
of this manage is not a little: because in use thereof the horse becomes
well breathed, nimble, and ready on either hand. It causes him also to know
the bridle, the hand, and the heel. Moreover it is necessarily used in all
skirmishes, to avoid the danger of the harquebusse, and other small shot. Also
every horse delights in that kind of manage, and the more, if he be fierce
and courageous. The proof thereof is found true, in that all horses of great
courage do of themselves naturally trot, turning their bodies under the man
to and fro: as I said before they delighted in turning. The Italians do term
this manage Serpeggiare, because the horse therein does use a motion like unto
the snake sliding in and out, as in the figure hereafter is expressed.

I know well that this kind of manage, without any demonstration or figure,
is easily conceived: yet I think it not amiss to entreat thereof, to inform
the ignorant that be desirous to know, and the rather, for that I find the
same much discontinued, and as it were banished the schools: where now adays
nothing is almost used but sundry sorts of superfluous dansing and pransing,
which M. Claudio calls Coruette and pesate vaue.

The manner of this manage is first to bend your horse toward the right hand,
and wheeling to The manner of the Serpeggiare.
and fro forward as it were the length of a short carriera, shut up a ring on
the left hand. Then returning after the same manner, close the other end on the
right hand. Which you may continue so long as by your discretion shall be
thought good. And when you determine to leave, being at the one end, you must
put forth the horse straight the length of six elnes, there stopping him in
such order and fashion as best becomes him; where having paused a while, you
shall make him retire presently: then staieng again, cast him first on the
one hand, then on the other, large or straight, fast or slow, as you shall
think fittest for the force and skill of the horse. You may also (if you
think so good) teach your horse in doing this manage to false and mock in
turning, which the Italians call Volte ingannate and Rubbate. A description of
the manage in and out, called the Serpeggiare; for the further meaning whereof
look before in the xvij. page.
It will also make him more ready and lively on each hand, when he shall
manage without rest.

CHAP. 6.
What lessons are to be taught the horse after the turns before said.

WHen you have brought your horse to be well stayed, and that he understands
both the large and narrow rings, bearing himself comely upon the cannon; you
shall trotte him straight forth the length of a short carriera: and at the end
thereof fair and easily stop him, so as he may stand and stay himself
firmly. For by so doing (cheeflie if you hold the reins even) he shall be
forced to bear his neck and head stayed: which I would wish you to do, till
such time you find he is become firm and just in his stopping. But if you see
that he stops not straight and just as he ought to do, then without turning
of any hand, put him again straight forth the length of half a manage, and
there again stop him with help of your body, and drawing one of the reins
of the Cauezzane more than the other, put him back: which order well observed
shall bring the horse to stop straight and just, either at the second or third
time of stopping. And remember, that as in the other, so in this lesson you
must use much patience; since every horse is more easily won by fair
handling than by force.

After you have thus awhile informed your horse to stop, and bear his body
straight and just; you may return to the exercise of his former lessons, and
in them continue so long as your self shall think good: ever remembering you
leave him in good breath and courage, for by that means he shall not become
abject of mind, but be sound of body and lively of spirit. Nevertheless, if
the horse commits any disorder, you shall before you dismount, solicit
and practice him, till you find him to amend and do that well which you would
have him. As for example, if he stop not just, and firmly, holding his head
in the due place, you may not cease to stop him so often till you see he does
every thing as you desire. In like manner he must be handled committing any
other error, for till you have brought him to amendment, he may not in any
wise be suffered to depart.

CHAP. 7.
By what means to teach a colt to understand the helps of the rod, the heel,
and the voice.

WHen you have brought your colt to trot well straight forth, stop firmly,
and make his large turns justly: I would have you remember that as yet you
shall not stop him upon the decline of any hill or steep place. From this
time forth you may use a rod; and when so ever he commits any fault,
presently correct him therewith, and accompany your correction with your
voice. As for example: if he goes not well forward, you may with a certain
cherk of your lips provoke him forward, adding thereto a stripe or two with your
rod upon his belly, just betwixt the sursingle and your heel: whereby he
shall at one instant, or at sundry times, taste of three corrections.

So soon as the horse trotteth well, stops and can make his large rings
justly, you may put him upon the cannon, which would be somewhat worn before,
suffering the curb to be very loose, and the reins very slack. But after
from time to time you may gather them up by little and little, drawing them to
the just length, making the curb and cannon to stand in the true place.

And to the end the horse may become the more assured and accustomed to the
bridle, you must (while he is warm and doing his ordinary lessons) fair and
easily by degrees draw the reins to the true length, and then with
discretion strain them more or less, till the reins be brought to the just
length, and the curb unto the true place.

If the horse shall not go in the rings as he ought, but leans more on the
one hand than on the other, or goes out of the path; then must The use of the
rod, the heel, and the voice.
you help him both with the rod, your heel, and voice altogether: which must
be done in this case, according to the rings and the quality of the fault
committed. As for example: if you would encourage the horse to go with more
speed, say, Via, via, beating him on the contrary shoulder with the rod: and
if you would yet increase his speed, then say, Via, via, via, and in the same
instant strike him on the contrary shoulder, and likewise with the contrary
heel.

Moreover, it seems in mine opinion very convenient, when you trot the ring
upon the right hand, that then notwithstanding you keep the reins just, yet
you should raise the right hand some what above the left, and also a little
aloof from it; to the end you may carry the rod with the point thereof
toward the left shoulder. Besides that, whenever a greater help is
required, you must raise your right hand much higher, beating the horse as it
were with the whole rod upon the same shoulder. Then changing hands, with the
self same order you shall turn the rod toward the right shoulder, from time
to time touching the horse upon the same shoulder, and (deserving it) to use
greater correction.

True it is, that these corrections ought to be The use of the forsaid
corrections.
used, rather to inform the colt how to understand the first lessons, than for
the correction it self. For afterward you shall daily increase your
corrections, and become more sharp and terrible in voice, and otherwise, as
the colt gives occasion.

CHAP. 8.
How to teach your horse to retire or go back, and the commodity thereof.

Because I am hereafter to speak of retiring, it seems fit to inform you
what profit it carries, and how to make your horse do it. When you have gone
forward so far as we have before assigned, you must assaie fair and softly
to draw in the reins of the Cauezzan, which must be done with both hands even
together, holding them low toward the horses shoulders, drawing him back
two pases. But if the horse resists, then do not in any wise enforce him,
but cause some footeman that has knowledge, to come near, first to cherrish
the horse, and then fair and easily to lay hand upon the reine of the
Cauezzan, gently putting him back: which your self must also do at the same
instant. But that not sufficing, let the said footeman with a rod lightly
strike him on the knees and forelegs, not rating him, but speaking gently, and
then he will perhaps with less a do than we have spoken retire willingly.

But though it fortune that all these means will not prevail, yet vex not
the horse in any wise, either with pulling or beating; but after you have
trotted him a good space about, and stopped him, do thus. First offer him to
go back; which if he refuse to do, cause him to trotstrait forth in some
even ground; and having stopped, suddenly offer him to retire: and I am sure
he will either the first, second, or third time do it, though not the same
day, yet the next day after.

But note, that if the horse, which has worn a The use of correction when
necessary.
cannon and a sadle, do hap to have so great obstinacy or disobedience, as he
refuses to go back, you may not then use so many fair means or respects,
but shall emploie the corrections due unto that disobedience: as beating on the
legs, quiching with the Cauezzan, sometimes with the one, sometimes with the
other hand, and sometimes with both together: and also give him a chocke or two
with the bridle, saying; Retire, retire: or, Back, back.

And if it so be, that all these corrections will not force him to retire, then
must ye dismount, and take one reine of the Cauezzan in your hand, causing an
other footeman to lay hold on the other, and betwixt you force the horse
gently to go back, and in the same instant strike him upon the knees,
accompanieng those stripes with your voice.

Moreover, if all that you can do will not bring him to retire, yet stay
firmly in the same place, and assaie once more patiently to put the same
correction in ure, offering the horse to go back: and if he so do, put him
forward again to the same place, and then mount on his back, and you shall
find him presently content to retire: which doing, you must make much of him,
both by your voice and hand, and once more put him back. Marie if he refuse,
then presently alight, and do as you were wont, correct him on foot, till he
becomes obedient: for ye shall be sure within two or three mornings, he will
do as you will have him, or perhaps within an hour. You must in no wise use
these extreme corrections, as chocks with the bit and Cauezzan, to any colt
that wears no bit, seeing they are fit for horses of more continuance, and
used to the bridle: but I think for horses that bear the bit, and become
disordered, correction would be performed with terror.

Touching the commodities that proceed of The commodities of retiring, etc.
retiring, or putting the horse back, they be more than every man
conceiueth. For retiring makes the horse light upon his stop, and nimble in
bestowing his legs in all his doings. Beside that, if he happen into such a
place as he can neither go forward nor turn, it stands him in great steed to
retire directly. It helps him also in the motion of his shoulders and legs,
to make him slide on his heels and stop well. And above the rest, it is of
most necessity to make him firm and stayed upon the bridle, and also go light
upon the hand. All which things, with diverse others, how necessary they are,
I leave to the consideration of every discreet horsseman.

CHAP. 9.
How the colt after he has been ridden two months ought to be gallopped.

IT seems that to make your horse trot well, and settled of head, M. Claudio
thinks two months a time sufficient. Notwithstanding, he would have him
continued in his ordinary lessons, thereby to increase his breath by little
and little; also to use him to stop and retire, not forcing much, though all
this while he be not stopped upon any hanging ground, because it makes a colt
fearful in stopping, and also streineth his sinews, ioints and loins. But
when he knows perfectly how to stop and go back, you must ever after every
stopping make him retire two or three pases, forthwith putting him as much
forward, and then for a while stand firm.

And for as much as I suppose, that in these two months, your horse will go
well and stayed upon the canon, I would wish you to bring him into some place
of good ground for a carriera, having on the one side some wall, pale, or
bank. It were also very convenient, that at the end of the carriera, the
ground were somewhat declining: wherein having trotted your horse two or three
times after his ordinary lessons, you shall stop, retire, and cherish him,
which done, you shall return back, pasing him somewhat lively, advancing your
body, and suddenly put him forth upon his trot, and frankly fall into a
gallop, till you come at the end of the carriera.

Then having there stopped and made him go back, as he was wont, you shall
return upon a short and lively trot. And being come to the end of the stop,
again in the same order and turning back you shall put the horse forth in
his gallop, and toward the end of the carriera increase his gallop with some
franknes: which I wish you should continue to do two or three mornings, every
day increasing the number of your galloping courses.

And because it may be that the horse before he has passed half the
carriera, will of him self force to make more speed than is fit, not staieng
till you put him forth, you shall hold him in with a staid hand, till such time
as your self thinks good, and then suddenly thrust him forward to gallop,
holding both the reins and Cauezzan firm and well, even toward the end,
forcing him to go with more speed and liveliness, and then at the due place to
stop. Which you may do, in thrusting the horse by little and little forward,
keeping your body somewhat backward, and holding your legs straight stretched
out, drawing the reins and Cauezzan fair and easily, till the horse
stops just.

Then having stopped and done all those things before said, you shall return
to the other end of the carriera, observing the like order: where having stayed
a while, and turned and settled both your person and horse, you shall put him
forth with more speed than in the former gallop, and being half way, fall
into his full carriera, and therein continue to the end, helping him rather
with your voice than otherwise. Then the next morning if you please (observing
the same order) force him to run out the whole length of the carriera.

Thus much I have thought good to say, not because I would have you use to run
your colt, nor that I like you should so do; but to find the will and
disposition of the horse, not only in his trot, but also in his gallop,
carriera, and stop: for to run swift and sure, and stop firm, is an excellent
Signs of a good horse
sign of a good horse.

CHAP. 10.
How to ride a horse with the sadle, and what observations are therein to be
used.

AFter you have thus handeled your colt two months, and ridden him in the pad;
you may put on a sadle, which you shall first in the stable do fair and
gently, letting the stirrups hang close to his body. Then you shall suffer
the sadle in this sort settled to stand upon the horse back the space of one
whole hour, with the reins turned up upon his neck, and the curb hanging by
loose. The head of the horse must be turned downwards from the manger, and
his head tied on either side with the cords of his Cauezzan. But before you
thus do, remember to anoint the mouth of the bit with vinegar and honey in
the winter, and in summer with wine and salt.

The next day you shall tie up the curb as it ought to be worn; and therein
you must take great heed: for commonly the horssekeepers and footmen are
utterly ignorant how to place the curb, because for the most part they make
it straiter than it ought to be: whereby the horse being much pinched, does
grow angry, putting down his head, and making many unseemly motions.

I would therefore advise you, to let your curb, when it is loose, hang on the
right side: and when you will make it fast, then without writhing it at all, to
put it upon the hook on the left side, in the first or second chain, as you
shall think most expedient. Marry here I must warn you, A caveat touching
the curbing of a colt, etc.
that in curbing a colt or young horse that knows not the bit well, or any
other horse that is choleric or tender of berd, you shall in no wise make
the curb straight, but rather over loose, ever fastening it on the left side.

Surely some men (being much deceived in the conceit) would have the curb to
be shut on the right side, supposing thereby to remove that fault, which the
Italians do call La credenza: which is a certain obstinacy of not turning
willingly on either hand: which fault may be sometimes removed by mean of
the curb, but not in that sort of transposing it. I do therefore judge that
custom very unfit in sundry respects, and cheeflie in that you should be
forced to make fast the curb with your left hand, or very incommodiouslie
with the right hand.

Now your horse being made ready and in good order, as he should be with his
curb, you shall ride him to the accustomed place of teaching: where after you
have made much of him, you shall exercise him in his ordinary lessons,
wherewith you must interteine him for fifteen days together, but in no wise
put him to run any carriera.

But for so much as to ride in the sadle is a thing Of sitting in the sadle and
pad.
more commendable and comely than in the pad, also of much more judgment and
skill; I will put you in mind to sit in the saddle with better grace and
regard, and also with better disposition of body than you were wont to sit in
the pad; yet ever eschuing all curiosity and affectation. Which you may do,
if before you depart from the place of mounting, you settle your self just in
the midst of the sadle, letting your legs fall in their due order, neither
putting them too much forward, nor too much backward, nor too near, nor too
far from the horse belly, staieng your feet upon the stirrops, as they
ought to be, turning your toes somewhat toward the horses shoulder, and
settling your self upon the stirrops, yet not so hard as though your feet were
grown out of them.

Touching the length of the stirrops, they The length of the stirrops.
ought to be neither ouer-long, nor ouer-short for your legs; but conveniently
fit and of even length: but hereof we will speak more at large in another
place.

The surest hold and stay you must have on The surest hold on horseback.
horseback shall consist not in the stirrops, but in your knees and thighs,
which ought to be ever as it were made fast or nailed in the sadle: but from
the knees downward let your legs be loose and at free liberty, to move as
occasion shall require. But to return to that I said first, let not your legs
be overmuch cast forward, or backward, neither over near to the horse
belly, nor holding your foot in the stirrup so far toward the horse neck
as you possibly can, nor put your feet so little as only to set your toes
within the stirrup, for the one is like unto a fool, the other seems to
proceed of affectation, as though a man would counterfeit S. George: but you
shall do best to observe the mean, since in all actions the virtue rests in
the midst, and extremities are ever imperfect.

The rest of your person must be kept straight at liberty, and disposed so,
that your neck wrieth not either forward or backward, or more on the one than
on the other side. Yet is it not amiss, but sufferable, to look down to see
your horse how he stands, or whether he brings orderly the one leg over
the other, and other helps necessary, whereof we will entreat hereafter: yet
will I allow those motions the less, if they be used in the presence of many
strange riders and lookers on; because you may both stop and manage your horse
otherwise without declining, writhing, or other unseemly gesture of body, so
long as you keep measure with your hand and heel.

You must also use your hand and arm with a certain just and comely motion,
and cheeflie your right arm ought to be a little bowing: though some riders
do make therewith sundry gestures and crosses not unlike unto coniurors in
the circles; yea some do bear both the arm and all the rest of the body
with such curiosity and affectation, as in deed they seem to be men made
rather of wood than otherwise. You may not be one of that number, but in all
things show dexterity without affecting, likewise measure, with order, and
seemly boldness.

Thus your horse being brought to bear the sadle comely, and you to sit well
on his back, you may exercise him daily in his woonted lessons; wherein you
shall practice him fifteen times more without running him at all: in which
lessons I wish, that so often as you trot the large rings, you should at the last
put him to gallop somewhat furiously, to the end that in stopping he may
gather his body, and stop as it were on his buttocks. I would you should also
accustom your horse to make more speedy turns than he was wont in the
straight rings.

In all these 15. lessons you may not run your horse more than once or twice
in one morning, and that must be in the accustomed place of carriera: unless
that returning home you hap to find some good ground, which has in the end
some pretty fall, where you may do well to gallop him frankelie, and stop him
fair and easily at the decline of the place, so as he may bear his head
firmly, and stop upon his heels. Yet never forget to bring home your horse
in good breath and without sweating.

CHAP. 11.
How to exercise your horse, the next fifteen days.

WHen you see that your horse is brought to gallop well in the end of his ring
turns, and that of himself he goes swiftly and as he ought in the straight
turns, and that he will run and stop perfectly, which he may well do in
these two months and a half wherein he has been taught; I would then you
should trot him less than ye were wont, and put him to gallop daily more and
more, as well in the rings as straight forth. Also in gallopping I wish ye
should make much of him, and endeavor your self to bring him to gallop short,
round, and lively, helping him with a voice fit for that purpose.

Then would I have you also to make him gallop in the straight rings, yet in no
wise to hasten him with rating or beating, but with a soft voice meet for that
turn encourage him: but if he grow slack in his gallop, then must you
solicit him presently with the due corrections: or if he become hot, and
make overmuch have, then gently cross your rod over his neck, and restreine
the reins and Cauezzan a little: also if you think so good, give him a pretty
twich or two with the Cauezzan, which must be done with no fury, but with
moderation and patience.

In these lessons you shall exercise your horse fifteen times, which makes
up three months complet. But you must in no wise force him to do any thing
more, though I know well he might be drawn in much straiter, and shall be after:
for I desire he should do all things justly and assuredly, which he will
undoubtedly do, so soon as he can perfectly perform all these things
before recited.

CHAP. 12.
Certain particular things to be observed by the rider, and used the first
month he rides the horse with the sadle.

WHen the Rider perceives that his colt begins to do his lessons
indifferently well, and that he understands the helps before said; then
being on horssebacke, having paused and settled himself, he shall put the
horse three pases forward; and staieng there, make him retire a little: which
done, being again put forward, he shall give him two or three turns on either
hand.

From thence you may go on to the place of riding, where your horse having
finished all his lessons, and stopped: you must offer him to turn, and
therewith lean forward with your body, to see whether he brings over his
contrary leg as he ought to do: for both in pasing, trotting, and galloping,
the outward leg in the turn should as it were cover the other which is next
that side whereon the horse turns, which the Italians do call Incaualare.
Also in turning, you must take heed that the horse do bear his body even,
and make his turn just in one tracke: which he will do, if the rider sits
staiedlie and aptly, and handles the horse heedefullie, always helping him
when need requires: of which helps we will hereafter speak at large.

Thus, when you have ridden your horse, and stayed him again, making him
retire, and then go forward three pases as he was wont; you must once more
look down on either side, to see How your horse must stand, etc.
whether he stands just upon his legs, and bears his head well. And if you
find he stand not just, but puts one leg before the other, resting his body
more on one side, than on the other, you shall fair and softly with your rod
beat him on that leg that stands out of order, to the end he may remove it
into the right How the horse should stand at his stop, etc.
place: for in deed the horse ought to stand just upon all four legs, so
soon as he is stopped and stayed. This correction you may also use in the
stable, when so ever you see the horse puts one leg more forward than the
other, or stands more firmly upon one than the other: which seldom
chances, if he be pastorned as he should be.

You may not think, that to look downwards, to behold the justness of your
horses legs and body, does serve to small purpose: for it also is a mean to
let you understand, if your horse in doing his lessons has hurt his legs,
his feet, or his mouth. Besides that, you may the more easily and perfectly
know the motions The motions of the horses body and mind appear by his eyes.
of his body and mind, which do cheeflie appear by his eyes. For if you see
his eyes look fiery, that is a sign that choler abounds in him: if
discolored, then is he discouraged, and faint of courage: if they be wet with
tears, then he complains of wearines, or some other such cause. So that
knowing his grief, you may easily provide the cure thereof, as by your
discretion shall be thoughtfit.

Thus after you have made two or three strait turns on either hand pasing your
horse, or otherwise as he can best do, with that iustnes that is required;
you shall ever depart from thence to the place of riding, trotting him lively
and roundly, keeping your bridle even, and the reins of the Cauezzan more
strait on the one than on the otherside, as you find the horse inclined: in
that sort trotting him cheerefullie along the way, you shall sometimes with a
soft voice encourage him, and sometimes with the point of your rod touch him on
the crooper of his buttocke, and sometimes lightly strike him overthwart the
neck upon his shoulder, to the end he should raise him self, and take his
pase with spirit and courage: which done, you may fall into your ordinary
lessons, first on the trot, and after on the gallop.

CHAP. 13.
How the rider ought from henceforth to exercise his horse in the Caragolo.

IF you see that your horse does gallop well, I wish (not having used him
thereunto before) that you should in any wise, for twenty days together, use
him unto the Caragolo: for it will greatly help a horse to make the turns
upon the ground, and likewise bring him unto the manage without rest. During
the time you practice your horse in this lesson, you shall utterly leave the
rings; saving that you must still trot and gallop sometimes straight forth, and
then stop as you were wont.

When so ever you trot the Caragolo, you must Aduertisements touching the
trotting of the Caragolo.
at the first go fair and softly; and after toward the straight turns, and
also in the enlarging, trot with more fury: which you shall do the space of
five or six mornings, and all the rest of twenty days. In the end of the
swift trot, you must put the horse to gallop, at the least once on either
hand: yet so, as you make an end on that hand, which your horse is least
willing unto.

And now once more, that you must always end amids the Caragolo in the narrow;
and after stop straight in the ring which you see in the figure. Then having
stopped in the order before said, you shall there turn in that sort we have
heretofore prescribed, ever taking heed, that in turning, the contrary leg of
the horse do come over the other: as for example. If you turn on the right
hand, see that his left leg may go before and cover the right leg: and turning
on the left hand, the right leg of the horse must do the like.

Having thus done, and seeing your horse head in the end of his turns toward
the straight rings of the Caragolo, pausing a while, you must pase, or else trot
(as your self thinks best) into the said ring, where stopping the horse
strait, you shall make an half turn, and put him forth to the other ring, so
long exercising him, as to your discretion shall be thought sufficient.

CHAP. 14.
How and when to teach your horse to turn upon the ground, Terra terra.

WHen your horse can stop well, gallop the straight rings, the S, and the
Caragolo; I would have him brought either into new rings, or into a Caragolo of
much more straightnes than the other whereunto he was before used, and there in
the end draw him as strait as possibly you can: first pasing him, then
trotting, and in the end gallopping, using all necessary helps, and cheeflie
that of the bridle hand, which must ever lead the reins with due measure and
discretion.

But if you will exercise your horse in the small rings, you may for certain
mornings only trot him, and then afterward increasing the speed of that trot,
fall into a gallop: so long continuing both on the one and the other hand, till
the horse does that you desire. Then finding he is brought to such pass, you
must for fifteen days continually gallop him only in the same rings,
straiter and straiter, helping him with the due helps, whereof we shall
hereafter entreat at large. Thus much your horse will easily be brought unto,
and perform with a good grace, if you observe time, changing hands as you
ought, and at every change thrust him forth one pase.

And note, that within the circuit of the self same rings you shall both stop,
stay, and make the horse retire, if in the end of his turns he has forced
too much forward out of the place of turning: but if he has swarued out of
any hand, or gone backward in turning, then must ye presently put him
forward, or at least so soon as you have stopped.

But now I must warn you, that in no wise you A caveat to avoid toiling of
your horse, and the reason why.
should toil your horse long in this kind of lesson; because it is laboursome
and painful: yet have I seen many riders (forgetting themselves) that ceased
not to ride their horses so long in one self place, till they were all in
sweat and foam, scant able to fetch their breaths, or stand upright: whereof
does proceed so many diseases of the sinews, the legs, the loins, the head,
and other members. I do the rather forewarne you, wishing you should teach
your horse to turn, some while in one, and some other while in an other
place, which he will perform without labor or any danger at all, and become
so perfect as you would have him: besides that, your self shall be reputed
among other gentlemen, of judgment and discretion.

So long as you please to practice your horse to these turns, you may not
trouble him with any other lesson, save only in the S: which must be made
more strait and short than it was wont, and therein you may not do much.

Touching the commodity of turning upon The commodity and use of turning upon
the ground.
the ground, it serves to many good ends, as well in skirmish as battle, in
combat and triumph; besides that, it is a thing of much commendation and
pleasing the beholders: for after the horse can thus turn on the ground, he
may do it for more pleasure aloft, or above the ground as we call it, with, or
without iumps and yerks as your self best likes.

CHAP. 15.
Of that motion which the Italians call Coruette or Pesate, whereof in our
language there is not (for ought I know) any proper term yet devised.

Master Claudio is of opinion, that this motion is of less necessity than
any other, and that no horse should be learned to make the Coruette when he
is over young, nor till such time as he be perfect in all the lessons
aforesaid: since it behooves that the horse should be firm of head, strong
necked, raised in his pase, and just in all his doings, which he will be by
observing the orders before expressed, and using the helps which shall
hereafter be set down: for thereby he is brought to so great perfection, as in
such a short space may be atteined; that is, to trot nimbly and lightly, to
gallop roundly and willingly, to stop before hand firmly and justly, and
make his turns swiftly, comely, and assuredly: all which are things so
necessary as more they may not.

Wherefore your horse being reduced to that forwardnes, as to perform the
lessons beforesaid; I would, that after he has been a while exercised in
turning and stopping, doing them according to your desire firmly and
justly, that then you should put him to make the Pesate and Coruette, which
you may do in this manner.

You must go into some strait way that has The manner how to put your horse
to the Coruette or Pesate.
a wall or bank on either side, and the ground somewhat declining. Then
coming from the higher end downwards, you must put your horse forward,
pasing two or three elns: where making proffer to stay, you must with your
voice encourage him to advance before, accompanieng him with the due helps
thereto belonging, holding your body a little backward, and the reins both
of the bit and Cauezzan somewhat straiter; yet so just, that if the horse
would force forward to shun the advancing, or for that he understand not what
he should do, yet he could not.

You may also put your hands a little forward, and so raise the horse before,
which will be a mean that he may with more ease lift up the fore part of his
body; yet must this help be used with great discretion. And thus you must do
at the end of every three elns, till he does advance before, or at the least
seems desirous so to do.

But if he happen to advance over hie, and force Faults in your horse
deserving correction.
forward more than he ought (chiefly if he sprall with his legs) then must
you forth with correct him with your rod, by beating him upon the knees. Or if
he commit any other disorder, as casting down his head, or leap overthwart,
yet force not thereof at all: but after you have corrected him for the same,
return to make him advance, and you shall be sure he will in one morning, or
percase in less than the third part of one hour fall from one advancing to
make many Pesate: which doing you must presently make much of him.

Other means there are to bring your horse to make the Pesate, as in the
strait path of a ring, or in a plain way; yet still observing the same order:
also in some right up furrowe half an elne wide.

For certain days you may exercise your horse in the Pesate, without
forgetting his other ordinary lessons. But so soon as he is perfect in them,
both upon the pase and trot, to the end he should not become ouer-busie in that
motion, as many young horses are, you must use him commonly to be brought
into some long carriera; where pasing him two third parts thereof, put him to
trot the rest swiftly, till coming near the end, you may a little draw the
raines, and putting thereto your voice, strike him gently upon one of his
shoulders, so causing him to Coruette, and therein (if need require) help him
otherwise.

I would not (unless great necessity so requires) The use of the spurs.
that in these Coruette you should use the help of your spurs. Nevertheless,
if the horse be naturally heavy, hard of head and cold, then is it meet you
should strike him toward the flank, with the just stroke of the spurs,
thereby to raise him, and remove his heaviness, stubbornes, and dulnes. But at
what times the spur is to be used I have not yet spoken, but reserve to entreat
thereof hereafter.

Now, since that many young horses do easily learn the Coruette; and having
learned them, use them willingly; imagining that so soon as they have made a
few Coruette, they are not to do any thing else, or being corrected with the
spur continue still to make more Coruette, even against the riders will, and
when they ought not, and in places unfit, doing them many times higher than
they should: therefore use your spurs very seldom, and likewise spare to
emploie the calves of your legs. For it is an evil sight, that for this
purpose you should set them so busily a work, cheeflie in coruetting and
stopping, at which times you should show rather to sit firmly and lively,
which were to more purpose both to become the horse and your own person. For
in all places, with the only helps of your rod, your voice, and a little
raising your bridle hand, the horse will advance thick, and do what you
would have him.

And albeit the helps of the voice and spur ought to be used at the
beginning, when the horse learneth; yet M. Claudio thinks both the one and
the other may afterward be discontinued. For (besides the reasons alleged) it
is no seemly thing in the presence of lookers on, to use so many artificial
motions and affectations as diverse daily do.

It shall therefore suffice, that when your horse can make his Coruette well,
you use only a little help of the bridle hand, accompanieng the same by
holding your right hand somewhat high; putting thereto such a soft, sharp, and
speedy voice, as that motion requires.

But if the horse would stay to make his Coruette, where you would not have
him, the remedy is to put him forward with the due correction of the voice,
the rod, and the spur: besides that, it is necessary to put down your hand
angerlie upon the horse neck, and so trot him the whole length of a carriera,
in the end stopping him with two or three Coruette: and then before you make
much of him, return him to trot in the same way, and there again put him to
make a few Coruette justly: by which few I mean the number ought not exceed
three, because more were vain and superfluous. Which order you shall ever
observe in stopping, and all manages which require to be done with Coruette:
which if your horse will do with his forelegs comely, yet not over hie from
the ground, so as the one do not tarry for the other, you shall leave, and
make much of him.

Likewise, if in his former lessons he gallop and stop well, with the helps
thereto belonging; and increasing the gallop chiefly in the end, that is to
say, the third part of the gallop ought to be as it were running: and at the
stop you shall fair and easily interteine him, leaning your body somewhat
backward, and holding your legs in their place stretched out and firm, helping
the horse with your voice and rod, by striking him fair and softly upon that
shoulder: for by so doing he will bow his howghes, and stop upon the heels,
as he ought to do.

But if he comes to his stop, with his legs cast right forth and
unwillingly, his correction ought be the more; and cheeflie upon the
shoulders: yet not so great, as to make the horse angry, but let him know
that you correct him only because he should do what you would have him.

Master Claudio says, that sithence the Coruette are as it were the children
of the Pesate; so soon as the one is learned, the other will forthwith follow.
And betwixt them there is no other difference, How the Coruette and the Pesate
do differ.
than that the Pesate must be performed with more speed in good time and often,
handling the matter so, as the horse may always at the first go faster
forward in his coruetting.

In this motion you may use the calves of your legs, and likewise the even
stroke of your spurs, yet lightly, and sometimes one spur and sometimes the
other, as ye shall see occasion: which order you may observe in the Pesate,
using all other helps likewise in that case required.

The motion of coruetting cannot be comely, unless the Coruette be done
short, low and thick. And it shall suffice thee to make ten or twelve at one
time: for I allow not of those that enforce the horse to go from the one to
the other end of the streate, upon the Coruette, forgetting that too much of
one thing is displeasing. Besides that, much coruetting brooseth both the
horse and rider.

Master Claudio therefore affirms plainly, that he misliketh many
Coruette both forward and backward, and most of all if they be made sidewaies:
neither does he allow them forward in manage-wise, unless it be with
determination to make a turn in that order, for so they are commendable. Yet
(says he) let no man marvel, that the turns upon the Coruette are done with
more difficulty, and are more pleasing to the beholders, than to turn without
pausing and swiftly; for therein he should be deceived. For every horse may
be taught to turn upon the Coruette, and may do it easily, by reason he may
therein take breath and time: but to the other turn he shall never atteine,
unless he be of more force and spirit, seeing he is constrained to hold his
breath longer, and use more strength of his back, with the stiffnes of his
neck, and firmenes of the mouth. Of one thing you may be assured, that when
your horse can trot well forwards, he is easily learned to do it every
other way.

Now it remains to inform you why those Whereupon the Coruette has his name.
motions be called of the Italians, Coruette and Pesate: and how to name them
in English I know not, where with I will declare the commodity and
discommoditie they carry with them.

Coruetta is that motion, which the crow makes, when without flieng she
leapeth and iumpeth upon the ground: for Coruo in the Italian tongue signifies
a crow, and a leap in that sort is called Coruetta. Pesate I suppose were so
called of the verb Pesare, which in our language is to way or balance. And
the Italians having tried the wait of any thing, do commonly say Ecosa
pesata: so likewise metaphoricallie and by way of resemblance, they called
those liftings up and lettings down of the horse feet in just time and
order, Pesate. This motion was in ancient time among the Italians termed
Orsata, because the bear uses such a heauing up and down with his body.

The commodity proceeding of these Coruette The commodity and discommoditie
coming by the Coruette.
and Pesate, is, that thereby we may conceive of what obedience, lightness, and
valor the horse is: for in deed they do greatly procure the horse to
become nimble and light. But the discommodities proceeding of the Coruette are
diverse, and often found in the war, in combat, in turnements, and other
exercises on horseback. They are also hurtful to the horses body, being
used overmuch; because it weakeneth the sinews, and hurts the loins,
forceing their humors to fall into the legs and hooues. Also it makes the
hoof to break into quarternes, specially if the horse be put to make his
Coruette upon stony places, or often in any other place.

All these lessons before recited, the horse may be taught to do, within
four months next after he is first ridden: during which time he shall be
ridden with the Cauezzan and Canon; but ever after to be handled otherwise.

By that which has hitherto been said, it seems that M. Claudio supposes
four months sufficient to make an horse serviceable and perfect upon the
ground: which is many times and in many apt and docible horses proved true;
cheeflie in Italy, where they are commonly of great spirit and aptness to be
taught: but in horses of these countries do assuredly require more time, in
respect of their constitution; yet the diligence and discretion of riders do
many ways supply sundry defects of nature.

CHAP. 16.
How to make up an horse upon the ground, and of the manage without time.

IT is the opinion of Master Claudio, that within the space of four months a
horse may become perfect in all the lessons aforesaid, unless by some accident
he be hindered. For the horse may be within this time brought to such
staiednes and obedience, that the Cauezzan may be taken off, and in steed
thereof you shall use a false reine. During all this time, I would not have you
in any wise to put your horse to manage with half or whole time, no nor with
the swift turn: neither would I have him put to turn hie, with or without
yarking. Moreover, you may not in any wise meddle to make him do the
Capreola, to leap, or gallop galliard; no although the horse do show great
spirit, or desire to do those things, for it is utterly vain to teach them,
till such time as he be firm and perfect in all things upon the ground.
Besides that, because the horse does want his full strength, you may work an
effect contrary to your desire.

But being reduced to this ripenes in four months, I would not have you (as
diverse men do) never leave off the Cauezzan, continuing there with, months,
years, and whole ages of men, before they make up the horse: but finding him
firm and perfect in the doings abouesaid, you shall presently take away the
chain, and in all his lessons exercise him with the false reins, at the least
one whole month. Then if you see that he goes well, you may put him
altogether to manage without rest: where unto ye may easily induce him to do
it both justly and swiftly, by observing that has been often said; which
is, if by little and little you draw in the horse, and make him go with more
speed: wherein, to exercise him often unto the S, being made somewhat short and
strait, does help much in this respect; as I have at large before discoursed.

The manage without rest, called of the Italians Maneggio di contra tempo,
requires great Maneggio di contra tempo, and Maneggio di mezzo e di tutto
tempo.
firmness both of hand and body, and perhaps more time and measure is
therein to be used, than in any of the other manages with half or whole rest,
which they call Maneggio di mezzo e di tutto tempo. All which manages are very
discreetlie englished by Master Blundeuile; a manage with half rest, whole
rest, and without rest.

It seems more over, that M. Claudio thinks the manage without rest is both
most commendable, and most difficult; chiefly when the turns are made not
upon the soft gallop, but swiftly and furiously. Also when the horse is in
stopping, if you suddenly at the midst of the turn put him forth with a
good grace, closing the next turn swiftly, and close as it should be; and if
from thence the horse do depart suddenly, making have to the other end of
the manage, there doing the like, and so continue without stay or disorder.

You must never forget that this manage must be taught the horse in the order
before said, which is; first pasing, next trotting, and lastly gallopping, by
little and little drawing him to that swiftnes and frankenes that is required,
according to the force of the horse; remembering in the end to stop him
comely, with two or three Pesate made well, and with breath enough. And
surely, if you continue thus to do, you shall make your horse so perfect,
that if you please to put him to do more, he will learn it easily. You must
also, during this month, use your horse much to the turns Terra terra, which
I would have him learn, before he be brought to manage, to the end that both
in them and all other doings, he may come more readily and justly to his
half turns.

But if it fortune that your horse does not every thing firmly and justly
as you desire, yet ought you not be discouraged; but presently in the same
place where he commits the fault, correct him by all means due to that
fault: neither shall you cease so to do, till such time as he amendeth. And
truly, either the first, second, or third morning he will be brought to do
according to your own fancy, so that you give him not over at the first. This
we have said shall suffice, to inform you how to make your horse perfect in
all his doings upon the ground.

CHAP. 17.
How to help the horse with your voice.

THe helps required in horsmanship Helps in horssemanship reduced to nine in
number.
are diverse, and may be reduced to nine: as the voice, the rod, the bridle, the
calves of your legs, the stirrops, the spurs, the body, the ground, and the
water.

As touching the voice, you must understand Of varieng the voice in diverse
respects.
it may vary, louder or softer, as the doings of the horse and his
disposition alters. So that, if you should always use one voice, your horse
could never conceive your meaning, and consequently your helps become vain.
It shall therefore behooue you to use one voice to a coult at his first
handling, an other when he begins to go well, another when he stops,
another when he gallopeth at leisure, an other in his gallop galliard, an other
in his turns upon the ground, an other when he turns hie with yarkes or
without, an other in his carriera and leaping.

Likewise, whenever you teach him his ordinary pase or order of going, a
particular voice ought to be then used. You must also be prepared to have a
voice for your horse, when he is over light behind, stubborn or disobedient;
and one other, if he do obedientlie, willingly, and courageously. All which
M. Claudio does labor to express in his language; yet for that they be in
all toongs rather significant sounds than words of express meaning, I commit
them to the riders discretion: it shall suffice that the horse thereby may
conceive your meaning, and be forced to obeie in that you would have him to do.

Yet now, that this help of the voice may not A caveat touching the voice,
when you ride before a prince, a noble personage, etc.
be used mnch, if you ride in presence of the Prince, or other great persons;
chiefly when the horse is ready: for at such times and in such places it were
unseemly to open your mouth, and utter voices of diverse sounds and meaning.
In sted of those voices, you shall imploie certain secreat helps and motions
artificial. But the most comely grace on horssebacke (if you ride in so great
presence) is not to help the horse at all, otherwise than to accompany him
with your hand and body, whereby you shall covertly declare much cunning,
without apparent helps or inforcement.

CHAP. 18.
How to help your horse with the rod.

THe help of the rod is used by one of these means, by whisking, by striking
with the whole rod, with the point thereof only, with the midst, and also
with the end under the hand, or with showing the rod. Touching the whiske, it
ought not be used, till such time as the horse knows well all other helps
of the rod, and can manage perfectly on either hand. The rider may use this
kind of help in steed of the voice, and it stirs up the spirit of every
horse, but chiefly of those which are of courage and great life.

Striking with the whole rod is required, when you would have your horse go
forward lively, either in his trot, his gallop, his carriera, his half or
whole turns, either upon the ground or above, with yarkes or without: for then
you shall strike him upon one of his shoulders, his flanks and buttocks, his
legs or thighs. This stroke of the rod shall help much, being given in due
time; and the more, if the same be accompanied with the other helps, and
chiefly that of the voice.

You may also first use this help in pasing your horse, sometimes striking
him on the shoulder, to the end he should the more raise himself. And you must
strike him, first on the one, and then the other shoulder, whereby he will
gather his legs the better, go with more life, and bear his head the higher.
The like order you must observe in his trot and ordinary gallop. But in his
carriera you shall beat him either upon his shoulders, or upon his flanks,
very sharply: you may also sometimes use the whiske.

In offering him to make Coruette, you may likewise help the horse with the
rod, striking him upon one of his shoulders at every turn and every
Coruette, yet only when need so requires. It seems not good, that the
horse should be continually stricken upon, when you offer him the Coruette:
for it may be he will writh his mouth and neck the rather toward the left
side; you shall therefore strike him on that side your own discretion does
think good. If you will raise your horse to leap at his stop; then, so soon
as you have stricken him on the shoulder, incontinent turn your hand, and
strike him also upon the flank. The like you may at occasions do in the
gallop galliard, or turning above the ground. But if your horse be light
enough before at his stop and leap, then without either beating upon the
shoulders or flanks, you may make him to yarke, by letting the point of your
rod to touch the horse behind in the midst of his buttocks.

An other way to help your horse by the rod, is, when you would have him
stay in one place; for then you shall lay it overthwart his neck, and then
he will, as he stands, lift first one, then the other leg, with a certain
grace and comely countenance. And marvel not though this one manner of holding
the rod does work two contrary Two contrary effects in holding the rod, etc.
effects, for in the one you do solicit the horse to go by beating, still
beating, in crossing his neck: but in the other you do only lay the rod
cross, but not move it otherwise.

Touching the great end of the rod under your hand, you may therewith make much
of your horse, if you scratch him therewith fair and easily upon the neck,
in sign he does well. Moreover, the show of the rod is in the turns an help
unto the horse, and a grace unto the man. For in turning the horse on the
left hand, you must put the point of the rod within one handful of his eye, or
else let it fall downwards somewhat toward his right shoulder; yet never
suffering your hand to remove far from the true place thereof. And if you will
manage your horse on the right hand, you shall put your rod down toward the
left shoulder, yet never remoouing one hand far from the other. For in deed,
over much moving of the right hand, and lifting up the rod, sauoureth too much
of affectation, yet at this day it is of diverse men much used.

CHAP. 19.
Of the help of the bridle hand.

THe horse is helped by the bridle hand, when in his doings he puts down
his nose more than becomes him; or else if he hangs too hard on the hand,
or trotteth heavily: for in all those cases you must give him certain chockes
with the bit, more or less, as occasion does require. The like may be done,
when at the stop or end of any lesson, you find the horse bear his head
lower than he ought. But if he leans therewith, more on the one than the
other hand, then must you with the two last fingers of the right hand (holding
the contrary reine) give him a chocke or two, or more, as you do find the
horse deserves to be corrected.

You may also help your horse with your bridle hand, in the midst of his
manage, and likewise his turns, by giving soft or hard chocks, as occasion
shall require. This correction will also serve to make your horse retire, and
hold him direct and light upon the hand. Neither will it be amiss, but rather
a good help, if in leapes of all sorts, and likewise turns, opening your
hand to raise the horse, you put the same forward toward the bending place of
his neck, so as your thumbs be nearest thereunto, and consequently the little
finger furthest off, and nearest unto your sadle: yet may not your hand be from
your sadle farther off, at any time, than two fingers; unless it be at some
extraordinary times and occasions. For then it is not amiss, to raise your
hand much higher, and farther from your body, as it were putting it as far as
the midst of the horses neck. And in this manner by little and little
unfolding your hand from turn to turn, and from leap to leap, you shall
help the horse more or less, as need requires. But such helps must be
performed in very due time and measure. Therefore in using them you shall be
heedfull and diligent. This is (I think) the true counselling of M. Claudio
touching the help of the hand, whereof M. Astley has largely discoursed M.
Astley in his discourse of horssemanship. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, chapters.
more at large, and very skilfullie set down not only the helps of the hand
according to this author, but also unto the opinions of Xenophon and Gryson
added his own knowledge and experience. For which respect I have endeavored my
self to say the less.

CHAP. 20.
Of the calves of the legs, the stirrops, and the help by water.

THe help of the calves is only to be used unto horses of great life,
spirit, and courage, in all sorts of turning, by putting the calfe of your leg
to the contrary side of the horse. As if you will have him to lean or yield
toward the left hand, then must you lay your leg close to the rightside of
the horse; and likewise, if he should go on the right hand, then put your leg
to the left side. But M. Claudio holds this kind of help to be of no great
importance, neither does he make much account of the stirrup: yet being at
sometimes used it is to good purpose. That help serves to touch the horse
under the shoulder, to the end he should hold his neck and nose as you would
have him.

The water is exceeding good, to bring your Of helping your horse by water.
horse to gather his legs, and become light if you use to trot him therein. The
water fit for this purpose should be so deep, as the horse may feel it to
touch his belly, the bottom where of must be sound earth, or rather perfect
good gravel.

CHAP. 21.
Helps of the ground.

AN apt place for riding, and a ground fit for that purpose, are things very
profitable and necessary to make your horse go well and speedily. A plowed
land, a ground rising, and a ground declining, are places fit to give the
horse breath and lightness. The ground declining is also exceeding apt to
bring your horse to stop well, make his Coruette, and do all things required
in the managcs both with and without time. The ground like unto the back of a
knife, serves well for the manage turns above the ground. The plain ground
having on either end pretty small hills, helps the horse to make the half
turn, and also to yarke therewithal. The ground that is round and high in the
midst, is fit to bring your horse to lightness, and make him go well on that
hand whereofhe is hard. It will also bring him to go more just in the rings,
lift his legs, and put one leg over the other. The ground like unto a boat, not
being above three or four spannes wide, serves well to make a horse to
turn, to cast his legs, and put one over the other in good order. The ground
adioining to some wall or pale, is good to make the horse go just and strait.
The same is also fit to amend him, if in his manage turns he disordereth his
hinder parts. The ground most fit for the carriera would be plain without
stones or other stays, not soft, nor over hard: and if at either end it be
declining, it will be by so much the better.

CHAP. 22.
The help of the man's body.

Because this help shall hereafter be spoken of among the corrections, I say
only that the body helps much, and thereby the rider is esteemed of the
looker on, to be a man skillful and cunning in that profession, if he Notes of
a good rider.
use that help in good order and times convenient. For whosoever sees a rider
leaning somewhatforward, when his horse trotteth or gallopeth, will (being of
any knowledge) forthwith conceive he so does, the more aptly to help the
horse to be firm of head, and not raise himself higher than he should, but
bear his body even, by reason he feels his burden counterpeised.

Likewise when the horse comes to stop, the rider shall greatly help him,
by casting his body backewards, which will cause him to stop low behind, even
as it were upon his buttocks. Also if the rider does lean toward the one
side, it is to be thought that he would have the horse to yield that way. If
the rider in passing his horse strait, sits short on the one side, and
leans hard upon the other stirrup, it is to be thought that he so does
purposelie to bring the horse to hold his neck and head that way. Whenever
in turning the rider yields his body more on the one than the other side, it
is to be thought, that the same will help him to go more easily and speedily
by that hand.

CHAP. 23.
Of the help and correction of the spurs, and how and when they must be used.

Master Claudio affirms, that the spur ought not be used to any horse,
until such time as he is become firm and well stayed of head. For if you do
otherwise, it will be a mean to make him more unstaid, and consequently the
longer before you can settle him.

And it is apparent, that when so ever a colt unsettled of head does feel the
spur, he will offer to resist and disorder his head much more than any other
horse settled and perfect in his lessons. Yet his meaning is not you should
defer At what time a colt is to be spurred.
to spur him till he be five or six years of age, but so soon as you find
him brought to be staid and settled (which I hope may be done in four months)
then you may boldly give the spur unto your horse: which you shall not first
do in any street or way, but in some deep plowed ground, or sandy place,
after he has done his ordinary lessons. First you must make him feel the
one and after the other spur, fair and gently, as he paseth or trotteth the
large rings, forthwith ceasing so to do, and cherish him, laieng your hand
upon his neck, and uttering some courteous voice. In this sort you may prick
him sometimes on the one and sometimes one the other side, after he has been
warned well in his lessons. And hereof you may be assured.

CHAP. 24.
How to help your horse in the rings, and at his stop.

I Have here to fore discoursed of helping your horse, yet did I not
particularly inform you at what times and what places the same helps ought
be used: which is done to the end I might proceed in order, and you the better
retain them in memory. But now having accomplished what order and helps are
required, here will I let you know how and when they shall be used.

And first you must remember, that when so How and when the foresaid helps are
to be used.
ever either in the large or strait rings, in the Caragolo, in the figure of S,
or in the manage in and out, which (as is before said) the Italians call
Serpeggiare, your horse does put out his but tocke; then must you forth with
correct him on that side with your rod, with your heel, and with your spur (if
you wear any) which you must continue till the horse amendeth his fault. The
like you must do, if turning of any hand, or in going forward, he casts his
hinder part out of order. You may also in that case use this subtlety; first
to make proffer to go on one hand, and then suddenly put the horse to turn
on the other. You may likewise for this fault correct him well, if you pase or
trot him near unto a wall, and when he turns putting out his hind part, he
must of force hurt himself, unless he holds his body strait, which he will
not do often, but for fear thereof leave his fault, which he shall do the
better if you ad there unto the other helps.

In gallopping the rings you may help the horse with your body, by carrieng
your legs put forward more than ordinary. And there is nothing that makes a
man to sit so comely on horssebacke as the gallop: for in gallopping he may
take time to settle his feet in the stirrops, to hold his legs in their due
place with his thighs and knees closely, and his whole body strait and
disposed, with either hand bestowed in their places. Therefore M. Claudio
(perhaps contrary to many other good riders) thinks best that the stirrops
should be even of one length, which The stirrops should be of even length.
will be a mean that the rider shall sit with the better grace, and more
conveniently help his horse; much maruelling why the right stirrup should be
shorter than the other.

In gallopping you must somewhat yield your person toward that side you would
have the horse turn, yet not move your legs but when need requires. As for
example. If you gallop turning on the right hand, you must stay your self
somewhat more on the right than the left stirrup. The like order shall you
observe on the contrary hand, holding your body a little forward toward that
side. Also in turning you must put your contrary shoulder somewhat more
forward, resting your body on that stirrup more than the other: for by that
means you shall swaie your horse toward that side, and be the more ready to
help him. But in his trot or gallop strait forth, you shall not so do, but
sit equally in the midst, without leaning: unless the better to help your
horse you bear your body somewhat forwards.

It is also at sometime permitted, you should lean your body to the contrary
side, from that the horse is inclined, thereto to enforce him to lean the
same way your self leans. Also if upon that occasion you use the help of
the stirrup, striking his shoulder therewith on the contrary side, and
likewise give him a twich or two with the false rain on the same side, it will
be a good mean to draw him that way.

But in stopping you must cast your body a little backwards, suffering the
horse to slide forward as it were alone, drawing the reins fair and easily,
till such time he be come unto that place you would; then having stayed his
fury, you may stop him firm, and stay him there. This I would have observed,
with those horses that understand how to be handled upon the ground. But if in
stopping the horse leans more on the one than the other hand, then must you,
leaning back, give your self most toward that side, whereto he leans not,
helping him all other ways: and so gallop him and stop him strait forth, till
you find his fault amended. But note, that gallop shall not exceed the length
of an ordinary manage. At the end whereof having stopped, if the horse
stops not strait as he ought, put him forward again, and at his stop
correct Corrections diverse ways for not stopping, etc.
him on that side he yields not, with your stirrup, the calfe of your leg,
your spur, and your person, till he be content to yield and stop as you would
have him.

CHAP. 24.
How the stirrops ought to be of even length.

WHo so ever rides with one stirrup longer than the other, does seem therein
to proceed contrary to nature, having made man two legs of one just length.
Therefore if you make one stirrup shorter than the other, it is not possible you
can sit so comely or justly on horsbacke, as if they were of equal length:
or how can you use your spurs commodiouslie or euenlie? For in striking the
horse with the spurs, you shall of force spur him higher on the one than the
otherside, so long as the one stirrup be longer than the other: which thing how
unseemly it is, I refer to your judgment.

Besides that, how can you with your body so conveniently help your horse
in his doings? Since you do not sit with your body just in the saddle, or
rest your self equally upon the stirrops, justly counterpeised? which is the
thing that makes you seem fair and firm in the sadle, by not leaning more on
the one than the other hand, and such a seat will best become you in all sorts
of turns, either on the ground, above with yarkes, and every other motion.

And albeit it is the opinion of some, that to The opinion of some, that the
right stirrup should be shorter than the left, etc.
break lances it behooves a man at arms to have his right stirrup shorter
than the other by two fingers, yet do I not conceive the reason thereof; since
both in running at the ring, or course of the field, an horsseman ought to sit
even, without leaning more on the one than the other side, or turning any of
his shoulders: for thereby he shall show the more cunning, and gain advantage
in the length of the lance, which is some help at the encounter.

Moreover, although it seems that leaning more on the one than the other
stirrup, and that thrusting forward of the one shoulder, does make the man
stronger, both to meet the adversary, and receive his reinconter; yet is it
certain, that thereby he is the more apt to commit the errors beforesaid, by
sitting loose in and uneven in his stirrops.

Furthermore, since every man stands most strongly upon the ground, when he
rests upon both his feet: so do I think that an horsseman, staieng his
body upon both stirrops equally, shall be better prepared both to assail,
and receive the encounter of his adversary, than if he should do otherwise.

For these reasons Master Claudio resolves, that the stirrops should be of
equal length, whereby the rider may (as he thinks) sit more comely and
assuredly. Nevertheless, it is (as beforesaid) permitted, that the rider
should at occasions, to help the horse in his lessons, rest more on the one
than the other stirrup, but not otherwise. It is not also to be disallowed,
though The left stirrup to be longer than the right.
to fight in combat or turnie, the left stirrup be made longer somewhat than
the other: because the rider is to emploie his right arm, and turn on the
right side, in respect whereof the left stirrup would be the longer.

CHAP. 25.
In what sort to help your horse in every manage.

Whenever you will manage your horse without rest, you must trot or gallop,
till you come to the place of turning; where making as it were a seeming to
stop, you must raise him, and therewith suddenly put him forward one pase,
leaning your body, and casting your bridle hand a little forward: then by
moving your leg, you shall warn him to return an other pase, and in the
turning easily you shall put him forward at the half turn Terra terra,
helping him with your voice, your heel, and spur. And if you will have him
to turn on the right hand, help him on the left side; and on the left side,
with the right spur: and remember to help him much or little, as you see
occasion require.

Remember also, if at the half of his turn he comes about hard, as it were
hanging on the contrary hand from that he turns, that then you must forbear
to strike him with the contrary spur, that is to say without the turn, and
strike him with your spur within, on that hand you do turn. The like order
you shall observe both in gallopping and the frank manage. But if you find
your horse comes over fast about to his half turn, not setting himself
just in the same path from whence he came, for (to make the turn just he must
bring his head where his hinder feet were) then so soon as you have given him
the spur on the outside, you must presently answer the same with an other on
the inside: both which must be near unto the girths, unless you find occasion
to give them nearer unto the flanks; which is, when the horse does turn with
his buttocks more on the one than the other side. But if he turn overmuch,
bending on his legs behind, and over low with his buttocks; then must you
forthwith thrust him forwards, striking him near unto his girthes with both
spurs together; accompanieng that help with the rod upon the horses flank,
and likewise your voice, if need does so require.

The stroke of the rod does also help much in turning, if the same be given
when need requires upon the contrary shoulder of the horse: but if no such
need be, it shall suffice if you put your rod over the horse, so as the same
may hang on the left shoulder, to make him turn toward the right hand, and
likewise on the right side, when you would have him turn on the left hand.

But you shall help him much more, and with better grace, if when the horse
slideth upon his heels, you sit somewhat with your body leaning backward; and
suddenly putting him forward, turn the point of your contrary shoulder
toward that hand you would have the horse to turn. As if you would have him
come on the right hand, then must you put forward your left shoulder; or if you
would have him turn on the left hand, then put your right shoulder somewhat
forward.

In turning, you must also remember that your bridle hand may not be far
removed from the bending of the horses neck, ever holding it right against
the midst of the pommell.

If you ride a horse that is already made, and perfect; then, to make him
turn on the left hand you must turn your bridle hand, yet not moving it from
the place; so as your thumb be downwards, and your little finger (which is
betwixt the reins) be uppermost: and turning on the right hand, you shall
turn your fist contrariwise; so as all the other fingers be upward, but the
thumb not so high as the ring and little fingers. This motion of the hand is
not easily expressed; and therefore M. Claudio remitteth it to the discretion
of the rider, so that he keep his hand firm in the due place prescribed.

But if your horse be not brought unto perfection, but wears his Cauezzan or
false reine, then these points of cunning are not required; because you are to
emploie all necessary helps, to the end the horse may hold his head strait,
and go just with his neck, chiefly when he turns: ever helping, as need
requires. As if you turn on the left hand, then fair and easily you shall
(according to necessity) draw the right false reine: or if you turn on the
right hand, then must the left false reine be holden and drawn strait, and the
other as you think good.

These half turns in the manages without rest, I wish to be just, and with
good grace; for so being, M. Claudio says they are the most seemly and
necessary motions the horse can make. And if the horse can do these turns
exactlie well, you may easily make him also to do them (as it were) mocking
(which for want of english words to express the same) I will use the Italian,
calling them Volte ingannate and rubate. The way Volte ingannate and rubate.
to manage your horse with these Volte ingannate is, that when he comes unto
the place of turn, ready to stop, you must proffer him to turn on the one
hand, and suddenly turn him on the other.

If you like to use the same order in turning your horse, you may do it in
this manner. When you have set your horses head strait in the same path and
place where he stood with his heels, without putting him any whit forward; you
must force him to make a whole turn round in the same order you observed in
the half turns: so as at every end of the manage you shall make one whole
turn and a half upon one hand. And remember that the horse do not pass
forward to the other end of the manage, till you have ended the turns, but
tarry till you will have him so to do. You may also (if so you think good)
having given your horse an half turn on the right hand, presently return
him with the like time on the left hand, to make an whole turn, in the order
before prescribed. But remember that in these doings you may not labor your
horse much, unless he be of great force; and more than ordinary strength.
The like order you shall observe in helping in managing your horse with rest;
saving that you must then turn him at the first or third advancing. This
manage may be made with half turns, and whole turns mocked: but they must be
above the ground and aloft. For I have often told you, that I like not the
whole turns that be made over high, the horse resting only upon his two
hinder feet. And if in ending the half turn or the whole turn with the
half, you put your horse to one or two Pesate, or as many Aggroppiati
rileuati, before you come to the other end of the manage, the same will be
pleasing to the beholders; you shall be also thought to show much skill, and the
horse more obedience. Note that in this manage with rest above the ground, and
high, you must at every turn (for the most part) help the horse with the
even stroke of the spurs: yet not hard, unless need so requires.

CHAP. 26.
How to help your horse in his Coruette, Pesate, and Raddoppiare.

ALbeit we have heretofore spoken of turning, and likewise of the Pesate and
Coruette, yet did I not particularly inform you of the helps to them
belonging. I say therefore, that neither in the Coruette nor the Pesate you
must in any wise move your legs, to help the horse so busily, as thereby
to seem rather a weauer than a rider: for you may help him sufficiently
otherwise. But you shall hold them strait and forward, and your body right up
in the sadle; and not leaning forward, as some curious riders do, raising
their buttocks behind, and lifting them up and down more than the horse
either in his Pesate or his Coruerte does.

Master Claudio therefore does counsel you, that without any imitation of
these men, you shall in coruetting sit firm in your sadle; with your legs in
their due place, holding a constant hand upon your bridle. Nevertheless, if
your horse do bear hard, and not make his Coruette lightly, then may you
help him with the even stroke of your spurs; or first with the one, and after
with the other, and (if need so requires) with your bridle hand, turning your
fist in such wise, as heretofore I told you; that is, at every Coruette, your
ring finger, which is under, may turn upward, and your thumb at the same
instant may fall somewhat downward, toward the bending of your horse neck.

It will be also a good grace, if in coruetting you hold the end of the reins
in your right hand, holding it up from the other hand two spans: but you may
not, during that time, use your rod, but in steed thereof betwixt your two
hands open the reins, and at every Coruette shut them suddenly, making
thereby a certain sharp sound, which will somewhat awake, stir and put
forward the horse. You may also use the voice fit for this purpose as is
before said.

Likewise at occasions you shall imploie your rod, striking the horse
sometimes on the one and sometimes on the other shoulder, lightly or
sharply, as by your discreation shall be thought meetest. You may in like
manner with the middle part of your rod strike the horse upon the bending of his
neck, or with the point thereof upon the midst of his buttocks, letting the
rod fall backwards over your shoulder. It will moreover be good to use the
whiske of your rod, sometimes before, sometimes behind: for that shall help
much to hasten the horse to advance, and bear his body with a seemlie grace,
and beat the time fast.

Now you must understand the reason, why M. Claudio misliketh so much the
motion of the The motion of the legs and person misliked, and why?
legs and person: because (says he) it is a thing discommendable in the
presence of many lookers on (cheeflie if they be of knowledge) to use so much
art, or bring into their presence a horse that cannot without help, and as it
were alone make the Coruette and also the Pesate.

I wish also, that when your horse turns, you should sit strait and firm
with your body, holding your legs in their place, helping the horse in due
time; somewhiles with the even stroke of your spurs, sometimes on the one
side, and sometimes on the other. It may also happen, that the help of your
legs alone will suffice, and that your spur shall be needless; for that your
horse is of too great life and spirit. Therefore that help joined with your
bridle hand, your voice and your rod shall work the effect of your desire, and
make him turn as you would have him.

If you will turn your horse upon the ground Terra terra, we have heretofore
told you how to do it: if half above the ground (which the Italians call
Amezzo aere) the same helps shall serve, yet somewhat increased. But if his
turns be lofty Di tempo in tempo, then in turning you must help him with a
great voice and stronger helps: which the horse will perform at every turn,
whenever it please you, if among other helps with the point of the rod you
beat him betwixt his buttocks, adding thereunto your voice.

But note this one thing, that in what sort soever you turn your horse, you
must not in any wise transgress or go out of the place. As for example. If you
turn Terra terra, the hinder Orders to be observed in the turns Terra terra,
and A mezzo aere.
legs of your horse may not remove, but the forelegs only go about: the
like order you must observe in his turns A mezzo aere.

In the turn wherein the horse moves as well his hind as his foreparts
(which the Italians call Raddoppiare a groppette) he must of force first move
his forelegs, and next his hinder legs: yet ought neither the forelegs press
so far forward, nor the hinder legs so much backward, as to exceed the bounds
of the beaten circle, which must not be in widenes more than the horses
length. Yet though the horse does not preciselie keep the compass, it shall
be no great fault: for it were a thing almost impossible, to measure the
motions of an horse by the geometrical compass, or the watch of a clock.

Now to the end you may better conceive what is said, behold this figure, and
imagine that the hinder feet of the horse do stand in the center, which is the
midst of the circle, and the forefeet in the circumference. Then, when so
ever you put the horse to turn, you must make him to move his feet from the
place where he stands, unto the next line of the cross, and so from thence
to the other without loss of time: so in four remooues of the horse feet, he
shall ever make one round turn complete; first on the one and then on the
other hand. But if it happen, that either you or the horse do not keep the
just remooues of his feet, it shall not be any great fault, so long as you
observe time, and close the turn comely.

To turn loftilie, with or without yarks, you shall observe the same order:
but therein you must be wary and well advised to keep your body, and
chiefly your back well knit, to the end that when the horse rises or
sets, you yield not more on the one than the other side. And above all
things, you must keep your legs firmly stretched out, not touching the
horse with your spur, but with great measure.

The way to do so, is to raise your horse first with his hind parts, as it
were a iumpe or two, and then at the second or third iumpe to draw him to
turn aloft, and every fourth turn help him with the even stroke of your
spurs, with your rod on the contrary shoulder, and suddenly with the point
of the rod upon his crooper; adding thereunto the help of the bridle hand and
body, if need requires. The like you may do on the other hand, never
forgetting that in the end of every turn (of what sort so ever) you must use
greater speed.

It is also a great help to make your horse to turn high and above the
ground, if you use him to turn in some ground that has the sides somewhat
higher than the midst: for therein you turn the horse, for not hurting his
legs upon the hill, he will lift his feet with a good grace, casting out his
legs as he should do, and let them fall again in the just time and place: and
therewith also at the half turn yarke out behind, as you would wish,
according unto the helps you put unto him. The same hills will also serve well
to teach your horse to put one leg over the other, which the Italians do call
La ciambetta. But note, that this place ought not to be between the hills more
than three or four spannes at the most.

Thus much concerning the Coruette, Pesate, and turns, both upon and above
ground. All which things (the turns Terraterra excepted) may seem superfluous
in a horse for service: yet since you may happily desire to know M. Claudio his
opinion in them, I have thought good to make this short discourse. There with
adding the difference betwixt the Coruette and the Pesate, as thus. The
Coruette are those motions, which How and wherein the Coruette and Pesate do
differ.
the horse makes like unto the iumps of a crow forward: and the Pesate are
the same, not so much remoouing forward, but stirring the horse feet both
before and behind, in the same place, like unto a pair of balance.

CHAP. 27.
What is to be observed in the Carriera, and every other manage.

FOR so much as your horse ought to run surely, swiftly, and nimbly
increasing his speed, you shall sometimes use him to pass a carriera, which
ought to be rather over long than over short, chiefly if in the end thereof you
will raise the horse to leap with yarkes: which must be done upon no hard or
stony ground, but without impediment or peril: and above all, look the place
be plain, rather ascending than descending, yet if at the end it be a little
declining, your horse may stop so much the better.

Note that all horses generally do run more surely and better upward than
downward. When so ever you will run your horse, remember to go unto the end
of the carriera, where settle your self a while; yet so, as the horse may
notstand stark still with his feet, but sometimes moving the one, and
sometimes the other: for that is a comely sight, and shows the horse to be
courageous and fierce, chiefly if he do it naturally, beating the ground
often with his feet.

Thus being settled, you may put forth the horse swiftly, and speedily; yet
look that he run not scoping, but rather low with his belly near the ground.
But before you put the horse forward, warn him a little by some sort of
making of him, gathering up the reins in your righthand, bearing the same some
what high, to the end of the carrierra. You must also carry your body strait
and firm, with your face upward, and your legs comely: not striking the
horse, either with spur or rod, more than twice, if you find occasion so to
do.

In the end of the carriera, you shall by little and little gather the horse,
so as he may slide up his heels unto the stop: which will be a mean he will
ariue with his head the more firm, and fit to make the Pesate or leapes as you
desire. If in gathering up the horse, not having carried your right hand in
the course as before, then must you take hold of them with the same hand,
holding the left hand firm, yielding your body backwards, which will be a
grace and a sign of skill. Note also, that when so ever you pass a carriera,
or otherwise manage your horse, that in the end you turn your face toward
those lookers on, which be of most honor and reputation.

CHAP. 28.
In what sort you should use and exercise horses of service for the war.

IF so be you desire to have your horse made fit for the war, you must be sure
to keep him well breathed, and run him often times up and down among hills and
uneven grounds. You shall like wise put him to leap ditches and Means to make
horses venterous and hardy.
hedges: but remember, that at the first, those leapes be not great, but as you
find the horse able and disposed, so you may put him unto larger and hier
leaping. You must also many times bring him unto the turnie and fight with
swords, against another man armed. Which you may first do disarmed, with your
sword drawn, trotting or gallopping to and fro against another man, having
like wise his sword in hand: so as first used to this fained fight and noise of
arms, he may be bold to do the like in earnest. Also to in courage your
horse, let the horse of him that comes against you, retire and seem
afraid, as though he would flee for fear.

You must labor also to make your horse to love the lance and sword, by
showing them to him when you ride: and in steed of a rod, lay them overthwart
the horse neck, and betwixt his ears. It will not be amiss if in like sort
you draw your sword upon the horse, when he comes out of the stable, and
suddenly (as it were for fear) retire from him. And if then the horse do
take courage, and come toward you, put up your sword, and give him some thing
to eat, making much of him: so shall you find he will become courageous and
careless of weapons. The sword prepared for this purpose would be without point
or edge, yet bright and glittering.

The strokes which offend horses most, are those that be given upon their
faces. Therefore, to the end your horse may bear them without harm or
impatience, you shall do well to arm him with a shaffron; and in the stable
use him unto the sounds of trumpets, drums, and rattling of armor: which being
first done, the rest will fear him the less.

Above all things you must accustom an horse of service to hunting, where
many other horses are assembled, and where is great noise and shooting; as
horns, drums, and harque busses. Also accustom him to fires, waters,
swimming, and to behold men both armed and disarmed, alive and dead, and pass
among them. You may also ride him among coches, carts and other carriages, and
all things used in the war. It is also to good purpose, if you put your
horse sometimes to endure hunger and thirst, cold and heat, and suffer him to
stand the whole day with some burden on his back.

Moreover, it were good to ride sometimes in the night, to accustom an horse
unto the noise of arms and warlike instruments, which shall make him the more
courageous, bold, and assured. Fail not likewise to let him eat all sorts of
meat, to drink wine, and be bridled and sadled willingly, and to let you
mount and dismount at your pleasure. But above the rest, make him to love your
person, and (as it were) be in love with you.

A horse for the war, ought to be a swift Properties required in a horse
for service in war.
and sure runner, a good eater, light upon the hand, strong, nimble, and
valiant, without fault or imperfection.

CHAP. 29.
How to correct a restie horse that rereth and yarketh behind.

ARestie horse is he that refuses or resists to obeie Corrections for
horses.
his rider, either in not going forward, or turning on which hand you would
have him. The beginning of this stubborn condition is easily perceived. For
whenever you find your horse to go, as it were in two minds, seeming he
doubts whether he should go or not: then shall you forthwith use some sharp
correction of voice, and (if he be restie) accompany the same with some sure
strokes of the rod, upon his shoulders and loins. But beware in any wise to
strike the Not to strike the horse on the head.
horse upon the head, and cheeflie betwixt his ears, for so he may be easily
slain. To strike him on the head, may also bring other inconveniences, as hurt
of the eyes, and make an horse so stricken, for ever after to be fearful of
the sword, and cowardly.

Besides the correction of the voice, the rod, and spur, you may cause two
footmen (that have some skill) to stand with goads in their hands, and when the
horse refuses to go forward, then to rate him terriblie, and prick him
behind, till he do go as you would have him, and then cease. But during all
this time, the rider shall sit quietly, and say nothing, and so soon as the
horse goes forward, or amendeth his fault, make much of him.

An other way to correct your horse for this Sharp corrections for a restie
horse.
fault, is, that when he goes arsward, and refuses to do as you would, then
to pull him still back, till he be weary, and then let a footeman come behind
with a long pike, having a wispe burning at the end thereof, and therewith
prick your horse till he go forward; which doing, you must make greatly of
him. But unless the horse be more than ordinarily restie, I would not wish
you to touch him with fire, or tie chords to his stones, or cats to his tail,
as some men do; because so cruel corrections do deforme the horses skin,
and make him desperate: besides that, such helps are over base, and unfit to be
used by gentlemen.

Remember also, that if an horse having this fault does wear an hard bit,
you must take it away, and in steed thereof put on a canon or scatch. You
must likewise foresee, whether your horse has this fault through want of
sight: for if his eyes be not good, then will he be fearful to go forward in
respect thereof: in which case you may not proceed with such rigor, but rather
by all fair means, and much making of, give him courage to look well upon
the thing he fears. M. Claudio therefore does counsel riders to walk their
horses abroad, as well in the night as the day, and bring them in streets and
other places, where is much noise, and other things to be feared, as smiths
shops, pewterers, brasiers, and such like places.

If your horse reareth, you must forthwith Corrections if the horse rereth,
etc.
look what is the occasion thereof, to the end you may provide a remedy. As if
you bear too hard an hand, you must hold it more temperatlie. But if the fault
be in the horse, then beat him surely overthwart his shoulders: which
correction is also necessary, when the horse does make his Coruette more
high than you would have him, or in doing them cast his legs strait forth. It
is also necessary, that at such time as the horse does go about to rear,
you bear a light hand upon the bridle, and have the curb more slack than
ordinary.

But if your horse be over light, and apt to yarke behind, then shall you
correct him well: if at every yarke you give him a chocke with the bridle;
accompaning the same with a stripe of the rod, ouerth wart his body and
shoulders. Note also, that the crooper of such horses should be very slack,
and likewise the quiseill.

If the horse does yarke when he is spurred, then must you continue to spur
him the more, till he leaves that fault: yet so, as the same be done in due
time, first with the one, and next with the other spur, mixing thereto a chocke
of the bit, with the corrections of the rod and voice. Till such time as the
horse be brought to leave this falt, it were also good to have a strong bit,
and sometimes put him forward a great way in a swift gallop, and therewith
tire him.

CHAP. 30.
How to correct an horse that wrieth his mouth, or that is not willing to
turn on either hand indifferently.

SOme horse will draw up or wryth the one lip more than the other, the cause
thereof may be, either that the bit does hurt him, or rests not in the true
place; or else may proceed of some evil custom. Touching hurting the horse
mouth, or evil placing the bit, the remedy is easy. But if the fault
proceeds of evil custom, you must then correct the horse, sometime with
your heel, sometime with your stirrup, sometime with the rod, sometime with
the spur, and sometime with drawing in the contrary side of the bit: which
corrections you must use more or less, according to the obstinacy of the
horse: and till such time as you see him to leave the fault; which doing, you
must cease from correction, and make much of him. Also to carry the musroll
strait, will help well in this case.

If your horse refuse to turn of any hand The fault in an horse called in
Italian La credenza.
(which fault the Italians do call La credenza) or bears his neck more on
the one side than the other: then would I wish you to put a string unto the
chief eye of the bit, and tie the other end thereof to the girth, at such
length as your discretion shall think good: which done, you must continually
solicit him to turn on that hand you have tied the string, helping him with
your heel, your rod, and spur on the same side. But the best correction for
this fault is, first to alight, and tie the horse head fast to his girths, on
that side he refuses to turn or go, so leaving him to stand one whole hour:
and after with your voice and rod force him to turn on that hand. Other
corrections there are which for shortness I omit; and the rather, because some
horses subject to this fault are therein naturally so obstinate, as they are
unworthy of the riders labor.

CHAP. 31.
How to correct an angry horse, and tender of mouth, that does wryth his
head from one side to the other.

I Have here to fore told you, that an horse being naturally angry, must be
much made of; but that not sufficing, assure your self it proceeds of evil
nature: and therefore fail not to afford him stripes enough, rating Sharp
correction for an angry horse.
him with a terrible voice, and correcting him by all other means due to that
error; unless his anger proceeds of the tenderness of mouth, for then you
shall entreat him with more patience. And if you find that the horse mouth is
tender upon the bars, or in the curbing place, then must you use a gentle
bit, and a curb accordingly.

And note, that sometimes an horse puts down his head, for that some tooth
is more long or more sharp than it should be, pricking the gums, or the inside
of the lip: which may also be a cause that many times he eats not well, and
consequently becomes lean: which must be amended, by filing that tooth, or
otherwise as the ferrer can devise. If an horse having a gentle mouth do
wryth his head, he may happily amend that fault, if you put in his mouth a
soft bit: but if his mouth be hard, then must you What is justly the hardness
of the mouth, read M. Astley his book of riding: cap. 1. page 8.
use an hard bit, correcting him with the spurs, the stirrops, and twitches
of the bit, sometimes on the one and sometimes on the other side, ever
accompanieng the said corrections with a voice fit for that purpose, holding
your hand firm and temperatlie; and if need be, draw the reine of the Cauezzan
to the uttermost straitness. The like you must do, when so ever either in
pasing, or trotting, he does bear his head over low, or puts it down
suddenly.

And if he lets his head fall more on the one than the other side, then must
you use the chock of the bridle, and twitch of the Cauezzan with one only
reine, and on the contrary side, together with the other corrections. But if
the horse puts down his head euenlie on either side, then must the
correction be given with both reins equally, with both heels, and the even
stroke of the spurs; or at the least, so soon as you have stricken him on the
one side, you must do the like on the other.

CHAP. 32.
Of horses that run away, and are hot mouthed by means of evil riding.

SVch horses as have been evil ridden, and put to run much in their youth,
will commonly run away with their riders. Which was the respect I have
heretofore told you, that very sildome you should run your horses, if
before they were not made firm of head and mouth, and therewithal fully
grown. You must also refrain to Notes of angry horses.
run your horse, the rather if you know him to be naturally full of life, and
evil mouthed: for so are all cholerike and angry horses, as sorell, adust,
and roane, and every other horse that has his snowt reddish, or their whole
heads so colored, if that color proceeds not of age. You must likewise
refrain to run all slack and heavy horses, and those that have weak backs,
weak legs, and evil feet.

But if the horse be well made, and colored as he should be, and therefore
runs away only because he has been evil ridden: then must you by little
and little (and not all at once) reduce him to order, not by mean of sharp
bits, but by using many days to pase and trot him forward, and stop him often
upon the decline of an hill, putting him still back, without making him after
to go forward, but then stand still. During these lessons, your horse must
wear the cannon and Cauezzan, adding thereunto (if need be) a martegall of
leather, or iron in steed of the Cauezzan.

If your horse at any time does well in these lessons, you must in any wise
make much of him, and at the stop suffer him to slide a little at the stop, as
well in his trot as his gallop, unless he be a great horse, and bends his
houghes with difficulty: for such horses ought to be stopped short, and you
must cast your body backward more suddenly than is required in riding other
horses.

To reduce an horse from running away, it To keep a horse from running
away.
will help much to stop him before a wall. It were also good to bring him into
some deep ditch that were in length almost as long as a carriera, and at
either end place a footeman, holding a cudgill in his hand: who finding when
the horse refuses to stop, shall presently rate him (and if need be) beat
him upon the shoulders. It were not amiss also, for reforming of this fault,
to set some kind of thing to stop at the end of the ditch, so as the horse
should of force stay there: but if he be so devilish, as he doubts not to
run against that provision, then let him be incountered with a pair of
harquebusses, or some burning wispes. All these extremities may be used, but M.
Claudio thinks that horses so desperately disposed, are unworthy the
stable of Princes or Gentlemen.

CHAP. 33.
How to correct a dull and cowardly horse, that runs not willingly.

A Cowardly horse must be corrected courteously, least wanting courage, he
may be made restie. And you must never forget to cherish and make much of him
when so ever he does well. But if the horse be both dull and churlish, then
must you use great and sharp corrections, yet at occasions make much of him.

If your horse will not run out his carriera, A deceit of the rider to make
his horse run, etc.
being ordinarily corrected: then shall you deceive him in this sort. First
you must trot and gallop him to and fro at large, a good while, without
observing any order at all, and then put him strait forth, where you mean to
stop him: and being there, by little and little make the gallop, so speedy, as
in the end you force him to run: but at the first, when you use this subtlety,
you may not make the horse to pass in full carriera more than the length of a
manage. Afterward using the like craft, you may increase the course, till it
be a full carriera.

But if all this suffice not to raise the horse to run courageously as he
should do; find means to run him often in company of other horses, and cause
an other horsseman to follow him, rating and striking him with a cudgel upon
the crooper, and the rider likewise beat him, and help him with his voice. It
is also good, if after you have gallopped the large rings, you put your horse
forward with fury, till you come unto the place of stopping: because he being
desirous to leave his laboring in the rings will make have to the stopping
place.

CHAP. 34.
How to correct an horse that lifts not his legs, and how to make him put
one leg over the other.

IF your horse either in his Pesate or other doings lifts not his legs as he
should do, then must you with your rod beat him on the knees, chiefly if he
lift them over high, or put them strait forth. But in the half or whole narow
turns, you must strike him only on the knee, on that side you do turn, and
also help him with your stirrup on the same side. It will help much also to
ride him in some ground like unto a boat, ever turning the horse against the
hill, and helping him as before said.

If you will have him put one leg over the other (which will greatly help a
horse, and is a comely sight) then trot him about very strait, first on the
one then on the other hand, without suffering him to take breath; yet helping
him as before said, and leaning down, to see how he moves his shoulders: but
finding that the leg on that side the horse turns not to go under the other,
then must you beat him most thereupon with your stirrup and rod. You may
observe the like order in pasing your horse. And the ditch made like unto a
boat will help much to bring the horse to cast one leg before the other:
which motion the Italians do call La zampetta, or gambetta.

CHAP. 35.
How to teach your horse the Gambetta, and what that is.

THe Zampetta, or (as M. Claudio calls it) Lagambetta, is when the horse
does put forward one leg before the other, either in his manage upon half
turns, the Coruette, or at the stop standing firm: which leg would be
somewhat lifted up from the ground, whenever the rider does so require.

A horse being perfect in this lifting and putting forward of his leg, does
become himself the better, not only in his turns upon the ground, and the
other somewhat above ground (which the Italians do call Volte raddoppiate a
mezzo aere) but also in the manage turns, and when he is cast about swiftly,
narrow, and as it were without rest or time.

You may teach your horse the Gambetta in an hollow ground, made like unto a
boat or muskell shell, having little hills on either side: so that the plain
ground betwixt the hills be not larger than three or four spans: you must
thereunto put the helps beforesaid.

But you may teach him better in the stable, Where and how to teach your horse
the Gambetta.
by striking him with a rod upon the inside of that leg, which you would have
him lift or put forward, adding there unto your voice, as; Up, up: which you
must continue, till the horse lifts his leg. But so soon as he so does,
remove your rod, and give him some bread or grass, in sign he does content
you.

This order you must daily observe, till you see the horse willing to lift
and put the one leg forward, whenever you move him thereto with your voice
only: which he will do, so soon as you come toward him. The like you must
after cause him to do with the other leg.

When you will have your horse hold up his leg, not letting it fall till you
will have him, then hold your rod still at his leg, so long as you would have
him to do it. But if he set it down before you would, then with the same
voice and rod fail not to correct him, without remoouing the rod, till he has
stood as long as you desire, and in such sort as you would have him: for after
that correction he will, at your only voice, lift and put forward first one
then the other leg, as you would your self wish, and so hold them above the
ground a good while. You may likewise in riding your horse, help him to do
the Gambetta, if you strike him on the leg with your toe or stirrup.

CHAP. 36.
How to teach your horse to kneel down, and that he shall suffer his Master
only to ride him.

FOr so much as Master Claudio has in the beginning of this book commended
an horse that will kneel down, when so ever his rider would have him, either
when he mounteth or dismounteth: I think good to inform you what mean he
would have you use to bring the horse thereto.

First you must do unto the horse in the stable, as you did in teaching him
the Gambetta; saving that you shall now strike him on the out side of his knee,
putting thereunto a contrary voice. For as you said before; Up, up: so shall
you now say; Down, down.

But if being upon the horse back, you will have him kneel on both knees;
then must you strike him with your rod on the right knee, and in the same
instant strike him with your foot upon the left leg, adding thereunto the
voice you used to make him kneel. When you have brought the horse with these
corrections to understand how to kneel down, first with the one then with the
other leg, and then with both at once: to cause him stand so still, so long as
you would have him, you must hold downwards your rod toward his knees,
saying; Stand firm, or, Stand still. When you will have him arise up, lift up
your rod from his legs, beating him lightly upon the bent of his neck, and
you shall say thrice; Up, up, up. Also if you have before taught him to leap
and yarke, then may you suddenly, at his rising, put him thereunto, by using
the voice and help required in leaping and yarking.

If you will make your horse so coie, as not to Bucephalus the horse of
Alexander Magnus had this property.
suffer any other than your self to ride him; then let every other man that
rides him, rate him, beat him, and entreat him the worst he can devise:
besides that, let them labor him extremely, and when they dismount, beat him
and threaten him the most that can be devised. In the mean space, you must
make your self well acquainted with the horse in the stable, and then so
soon as others (having rigorously used him) do dismount, you must come unto
him with a cheerful countenance, giving him pleasant things to eat, and put
them aside that have offended him.

You shall likewise please him much, to cherish him with your hands, when you
wear sweet gloves, wiping his face, and chiefly his nosthrils with perfumes
and sweet handkerchiefs: for neatness and sweetness be two things wherein a
horse Two things wherein a horse delights.
does singularly take pleasure. Having thus done, you shall mount upon his
back, first staieng a while; then making much of him, both before and behind:
put him forward pasing, and then alight, not suffering any man but your self
to lead him into the stable, and give him some pleasant thing to eat when he
is dressed.

But note, that whatsoever has been said of kneeling down, and not suffering
others than the master of the horse to ride him, must be used only upon
horses of great spirit, understanding, and aptness thereunto.

FINIS.

