The Spanish GRAMMAR: With certain Rules teaching both the Spanish and French
tongues.

By which they that have some knowledge in the French tongue, may the easier
attain to the Spanish; and likewise they that have the Spanish, with more
facility learn the French: and they that are acquainted with neither of them,
learn either or both. Made in Spanish, by M. Anthony de Corro.

With a Dictionarie adjoined unto it, of all the Spanish words cited in this
Book: and other more words most necessary for all such as desire the
knowledge of the same tongue.

By John Thorius, Graduate in Oxenford.

Imprinted at London by John Wolf. 1590.

REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO PATRI, PRAESVLIQVE PRAESTANTISSIMO, DOMINO IOHANNI
WHITGIFT, S S. THEOLOGIAE DOCTORI, CANTVARIENSI ARCHIEPISCOPO, ET TOTIVS
ANGLIAE PRIMATI, VIRO OMNI PIETATIS, MORVM ET LITTERARVM LAVDE ILLVSTRI;
JOHANNES THORIVS HANC GRAMMATICAM A SE EX HISPANICO AD ANGLORVM VSVM CONVERSAM,
ET DICTIONARIOLO LOCVPLETATAM; IN GRATI ANIMI TESTIMONIVM CONSECRAVIT.

The Epistle to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, many supposing their Books to be no books, unless they be
enlarged with tedious prefaces; they abuse the Readers courtesy with
superfluous relations: filling the first sheet with vain praises of the
matter and subject of their Pamphlets. I therefore unwilling to stay you with
needless praises; mean not hear to write an (...) in commendation of the
Spanish or French tongue: leaving the consideration thereof unto every one his
liking, to think of these tongues according to their own opinion or pleasure.
But thus much I thought necessary to advertise the Reader of; that this
Grammar was first written the greater part of it in Spanish, and a little of the
end in French; in such manner that none could reap any benefit by reading of
it, but such as were acquainted with both the foresaid languages. In so much
that I being requested by diverse, but especially moved with love and
affection toward my country men (being most ready at all times to undertake
any labor to procure their ease, and employ my dearest time to do them
pleasure) have in such sort translated and altered this book, that any English
man may use it to his profit. And to the end that the one language may easily
be known from the other, I have caused it* to be printed in three sundry
kinds of letters. Besides this, for better order and to avoid all confusion,
I have divided it into sundry parts and sexions: and at the end added a
Dictionarie of all the Spanish words set down for example in this Grammar, and
also many other words most used. Which pains (gentle Reader) I shall think
well imployde if it may do you good and redowne to your profit: requesting no
other meede for my labor, then to have it accepted as a token of my good will
and meaning. And thus I commit you to your accustomed exercises, and the
further reading of our Grammar.

A Table comprehending the contents of each Sexion and division of this
Grammar.
OF the pronunciation of the Spanish and French Alphabet. Page 1 The vi^ision
of the letters. 13 Of the Apostrophes. 15 Of the Diphthongs. 16 Of the Nowne.
18 Of the declensions of Nownes. 19 Of the Comparatiues and Superlatines. 21 Of
Nownes diminutiues. 22 Rules of Nownes in the Spanish tongue. 23 Rules of the
Nownes in French. 27 Of the Pronownes. 33 Rules for the Pronownes. Rules for
the French Pronownes. 40 Of the Verb. 55 Of the Presentense of the Indicative
mood generally. 56 Of the Presentense of the indicative mood in the first
conjugation. 57 Of the Presentense in the second and third conjugation. Ibid.
Of the Preterimperfectense. 58 Of the Preterperfectense. Ibid. Of the Future 59
Of the Imparatiue mood, Ibid. Of the Optatiue mood. Ibid. Of the Subiunctiue
mood. 60 Of the Infinitive mood. 61 Of the Genders. Ibid. Of the Supins.
Ibid. The Verb Habeo, in the Spanish tongue. 70 The Verb Sum, in the Spanish
tongue. 65 Rules belonging to the Coniugations of the French tongue. 67 The
Conjugation of the Verb Habeo, in French. 75 The Verb Sum, in French. 76 The
first Conjugation in Spanish. 78 The first in French* 81 The second Conjugation
in Spanish. 82 The second in French. 89 The third Conjugation in Spanish. 86
The third Conjugation in French. 85 The irregular Conjugation of the Verb
Facere in Spanish. 91 The irregular Conjugation of the Verb Facere, in French.
93 The irregular Conjugation of the Verb yr. 94 The irregular Conjugation of
the Verb Aller. 96 Of Verbes Passiues. 98 An example of the Passive in
Spanish. 90 The same in French, in the Article Masculin. 101 The same in the
Article Feminin. 103 Of the Verbes Impersonals. 104 Certain Observations both
about French and Spanish Verbes. 106 Of the Participles. 110 Of the Aduerbes.
112 Of the Prepositions. 114 Of the Interiections. 116 Of the Conjunctions.
Ibid. Of the Construction or Syntaxis, of the Spanish and French tongues. 117
FINIS.
The Spanish Grammar.
I Would think it superfluous and needelesse at this time to treat of the
number and pronunciation of the letters of the Spanish tongue, unless in the
prolation of some of them, this tongue did greatly differ from all the other
languages commonly spoken in Europ. And therefore to take away all occasion of
error which may be committed in the pronunciation by the strangers that are
desirous to speak this language, I will entreat of the power which each letter
has, and how it ought to be pronounced.

The Spanish tongue has seven and twenty letters, with those which are
written double: and these be they.

A. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. j. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. s. t. u. x. y. z. And
these be the double letters. chapter ll. n^.

Some men marvel much why the Spanish tongue being descended from the Latin,
has gotten more letters than the Latin Speech it self: Unto this I answer,
that although the Spanish tongue in our time be corrupt and broken Latin: it
was nevertheless before derived from some other ancient language* Besides, it
has sought letters to utter all the prolations which the instruments which God
has given man could articulate and pronounce. Now then let us see the valor
and pronunciation particulerly of every letter.

Of the letter A.
This letter, the Spanish tongue pronounces after the same order as all other
tongues do: To wite, with only opening the mouth without using any violence at
all with any of the other instruments.

Of the letter B.
This letter, keeps the pronunciation of the Lattine B. and will not be
pronounced as some Grecians do: (I call those Grecians thae now a days teach
the same tongue in Europe) who pronounce the B. touching the under lip with
their teeth, as if it were V consonant Vita. But the perfect pronunciation of
this letter is, joining both the lips together. And so the Hebrews call it
litteram labialem, the labiall Letter.

The French men pronounce these two letters after the same manner as the
Spaniardes.

Of the letter C.
This letter must be pronounced by applying the tongue to both the ranks of
the teeth, making the wind go out by force, like many of the Grecians
pronounce the letter ^. The pronunciation of this letter is answerable (as I
think) to a letter which the Hebrews have, which they call cadic The
pronunciation whereof, because it has been unknown to some: that letter has
been thought superfluous in the Hebrewe Alphabet. I am persuaded that it is
correspondent to the pronunciation of this Hebrewe letter: seeing that the
Spanyardes when they borrowe a word from the Hebrewe tongue to use it, they
write it with a C. as we may take example by this word cagnero, which is as
much to say as the word postrero (in English the latter,) which the Hebrewe
properly pronounces cagnir.

But leaving this a side we must note that this letter has two pronunciations
according to the vowell which is adjoined unto it: For if an A fellow, then it
is pronounced as the letter K. So does it also when o. or u. follows* Example
castidad, ca^^ad, cara, c^rdu^a, costumbre, cantar, cantaro, cuchillo. And this
as well in the middle of the word, as in the beginning, as Escama, es^ondido,
sacudir, acabar, escudrin^ar, escudrin^ador, escuchar.

But if e. or i. follow the c. then she takes the first pronunciation, of
which we have spoken above, as cena, cenat, ciudadano, ciudad: But if the
necessity of the word require, that though a. o. or u. do follow the c. and
yet notwithstanding it must be pronounced as if e. or i. did follow, then we
must put a little note under the c. being as it were a half circle drawn
toward the right hand, which is called cerill^, c And this ought to be
observed as well in the beginning of the word, and middle, as in the latter
end. Example, cereca, capa^o, acor, cedaco, camarro; cacador, carca, maca,
alabanca, cumo, cun^o, caquicami, etc.

The Frenchmen use the same pronunciation in this letter c. as well in the
beginning of a word, and middle, as in the end: except, when the ^. is noted
with the little half circle beneath, then it is to be pronounced as if it were
an s. In so much that they say, Francois, as if it were written Fransois: as
for example: ^ appercoy bien, que cest homme la est souspeco^n eux. Car il ne
fait qu' aller sa and la, pour scauoir la facon des Francois, etc.

The Spanish tongue has another letter compounded of c. and h. thus chapter The
pronunciation whereof is so proper and particular unto the Spanyardes, that the
French men can scarce and that with great difficulty immitate the same
pronunciation. In so much, that it is as a token whereby the native Spanyardes
are known from the strangers that can speak the Spanish tongue. For the same
chapter is as it were a stumbling block unto them, and especially unto Frenchmen.
Like as among the Israelites they werr known of what Trybe they were by the
pronunciation of an Hebrewe letter which is called Schin.

The right pronunciation, and which commonly is used among the Spanyardes is,
when you put the thickest of the tongue to the upper end of the throat, with
the pick end of the tongue touching both the ranks of the teeth, breathing
with violence, as we pronnunce in English: chickens, chamber, chatfield.

And because in all the French tongue I cannot find any such pronunciat^on, I
cannot declare it by example, whereby they may learn to pronounce this Spanish
letter right, which Englishmen may easily do. And hence it comes that a
French man coming into England, when he will say chickens, he says shickens.

And even as they cannot pronounce Chickens but Shickens, so in the Spanish
tongue, when they will say cuchillo they say cushillo, not able to immitate
the right pronunciation of the same letter chapter And therefore I counsel them
Frenchmen that will pronounce the same letter well, to learn the pronunciation
of it, of some natural Spanyard.

When I do attentively consider from what tongue the Spanish nation has taken
this letter, I conjecture that it was taken from the Hebrewe speech, and that
this letter chapter is correspondent unto the letter which the Hebrews call Schin,
when they set a point on the top of the right side of the letter, which in
their tongue they call Schin-jamin: For when they set the tittle point over the
left side of the letter, then they call it Schinsemol.

To the end, that the strangers may exercise themselves in the pronunciation of
this letter chapter I will set down all the words which for the most part are
found in the Spanish tongue written with this letter: chismear, chismero,
chismeria, muchacho, china, mancha, achaque, chueca, chapin, machucar, chupar,
chiste, chistar, charlatan, chamarra, chinche, pichel, chozno, chimenea,
tachar, etc.

The Frenchmen have the same letter also, but they pronounce it after another
manner: For they make it sound as the Spanyardes are accustomed to pronounce
the letter x. and as English men pronounce Sh. and so they say cheual,
cheualier, as if it were written sheual, sheualier. And among the Spandardes
xeual, xeualier: For so is the letter x. pronounced in the Spanish tongue as
we shall afterward more at large speak thereof.

In the mean time this is to be noted, that all the words which the Frenchmen
pronounce with this letter chapter the Spanyardes utter them with a single c.
only, as for Example, cheualier, cauallero, cheual, cauallo, etc. And this is
only observed in the beginning of the word.

Of the letter D.
This letter is pronounced alike in both tongues, the Spanish and the French,
to wite, putting the end of the tongue against the teeth half open.

Of the letter E.
This vowell in the Spanish tongue is pronounced as in the Latin tongue.

But as for the French tongue, note that there be two kinds of e: the one is e
acuta: the other e grauis: or the one e masenlin, and the other e feminin.

The e Masculin is always noted with an Accent on the top, as in these
words, charity, grauite, aim, juge.

But when the ^. is not accentuated with the title over head, that e. the
French men call the e Feminin: For the sound of the same e is not so sharp
and acute, as the Masculin e. As for example, Sap^ence, divine, immortelle,
eternelle, euangile, etc.

It happens sometimes that this letter e. is sometimes set double in the end
of the word, especially in the Participles of the Feminine gender. And then
the first e. is e Masculin, and the latter is e Feminin: As for example,
Espousee, animee, rachetee, enseignee, arrousee, etc. In so much that the e
accentuate or Masculine is pronounced as the Lattine e. But the e Feminin is
pronounced among the Frenchmen, almost as if it were a Latin a.

The stranger must diligently note the difference of these two kinds of e.
For otherwise they might be terribly deceived in the significations of many
French words. Example, cestuycy est juge, is to say: This man is Judge. But
cestuycy est juge, signifies; this man is judged: So in this word il est
aveugle, is to say: He is blind. But thus, il est aveugle, it is to say: He is
blinded. contes, accountes: but contes, counted: charges, is to say Charges,
or cares: but charges signifies Charged.

Furthermore, this must be noted, that all the Spanish Participles passiues in
the Masculine Gender and singular Number, the French men form them with e
Ma^culine: As for Example. comprado, achete, herido, bless, amonestado,
amoneste, acusado, accuse, despedido, conged^e, contado, conte, etc.

The Frenchmen, as we have above noted, pronounce their e Feminine, as if it
were an a. And also they use the same order in uttering their e. as if it were
an a when the e. comes before m. or n. as we shall hereafter show by
Examples.

Of the letter F.
This letter is pronounced by the Spanyardes, as in the French and Latin
tongues. Yet notwithstanding, this ought to be noted by the way: that when
there is any word which descends either from the Latin or Greek tongue,
which is written with ph. the Spanyard writes it with the same letters,
pronouncing it like an f. writing phylosopho, and not filosoto: philosophia,
and not filosofia. In truth, the pronunciation is all one, but yet it is
better to keep the Ortographie, because it may be known from whence the word
takes it beginning.

Of the letter G.
This letter in the Spanish tongue is pronounced as the Hebrews pronounce
their letter which is correspondent unto this, and they call it Gimel: which
pronunciation also the Latinistes and French men use.

But this must be noted that the G. when it comes before a. o. or u. is
otherwise pronounced then when it comes before e. or i. For before a. o. u.
it is pronounced as we pronounce it in this word gauntlet, god, good. As for
example: ganar, ganado, gonces, golpe, governar, angustiar, gustar, etc. But
when the g. is set before e. or i. it is pronounced as g. in English in this
word, Gentleman, George, etc. As for example, gesto, genti^^c^, gemido,
gigantes, etc. And if the necessity of the word require that the g.
notwithstanding a. o. or u. following, yet it is to be pronounced as if e. or
i. followed, then it is written with j long: ^s for example jarro and not
garro, johan, and not goan, j^^^o, and not gusto, cerrojo, and not cerrogo,
jubon, and not gubon, etc.

Note also, that if after the g. an u. follow with a also* the u. shall be
distinctly pronounced, and not as the French tongue which soundes not the u.
when it stands bewixt g. and a. So that you must in the Spanish tongue give
the u. her full sound and pronunciation, and sound it lengua, averiguar,
fragua, tregua, mengua, pegua, agua, as if it were written with a double w:
l^ngwa, etc. but not as if it were written lenga, averigar, fraga, etc. like
the French men do.

Of the letter H.
This letter of aspiration retayneth the common pronunciation of all other
tongues. Yet this may be noted, that in the Spanish tongue, it is pronounced
with a more vehement sound in some words then other. And hereof no certain
rule can be given, but only by marking and learning it by the common use of
speaking. Yet this is plain, that in the beginning of every word, it is
pronounced more vehemently, then in the middle or end of the same.

Of the letter i.
The Spanish tongue has three kinds of I.

The first has a small form, and is pronounced as a vowell.

The other is called the long j. and that is an j. consonant, which serves in
steed of g. when it comes before a. o. or u. as we have before said.
Example: jamas, and not gamas, etc.

The third I. is a y. commonly written in words that descend from the Greek
tongue and are used in the Spanish tongue. But it is pronounced like the little
i.

This v. is also put, when it comes before another vowel, like as yo, ya,
dezya, avya, comya, embyo, etc.

Of the letter K.
The Spanish tongue uses this letter when a Lattine or Greek word requires
it. And it is pronounced like c. when it comes before a. o. or u. as is
Kalendas, etc.

Of the lette^s L. and ll.
This letter, when it is not double, is pronounced after the same manner as in
all other languages: But when it is doubled, then it is pronounced, putting the
end of the tongue in the concaue and hollow place of the upper teeth, as the
Italians pronounce gl. As for Example: llamar, llovar, llegar, espinilla,
llorar, tollo, sollocar, xervilla, llave, etc.

Of the letter M.
This letter retains the same pronunciation as well in this tongue and the
French, as in all the other languages.

Of the letter N.
When this letter is written without a note on the top, then it is pronounced
as in all other languages.

But when it is noted with a tittle over the head as n^. then it is to be
pronounced putting the tongue in the concaue place of the upper teeth something
high toward the throat, in such order as the French men and many Latinistes
do pronounce g^. But the right pronounciation of this Spanish letter n^. is as
we in English would pronounce nia, making but one syllable of it, and something
drowning the i. and sound it as we sound the y. in English coming before
another vowell, as in this word, yea, yet, yonder: then putting an n. before
it, we make it nyet, nyate, Monosyllabum and so hit upon the A word of one
syllable.
right pronunciation of this Spanish letter n^. which they pronounce n^a. n^e.
n^i. n^o. n^^. as we would pronounce nya. nigh. nyi. nyo. nyu. As for example,
an^^dir. an^o. pan^o. esen^ar. man^a. ren^egar. man^ana. as if it were written
anyidir. anyo. etc.

Of the letters O. P. Q.
These letters are pronounced among the Spanyardes as among other Nations. This
only may be noted, that ph. coming together must be pronounced as if it were
f. as we have heretofore showed.

As for this letter q. Note that whenever it comes before u. the u. is to
be pronounced, and loses not her sound, as we have noted also in the letter
g. And say, quando, and not as if it were written qando: quatro, and not
qatro* quanto^ and not qantos: quales and not qales. But if after the ^.
immediately follow e. or i. then the u. loses her sound, and you must
pronounce the word as if there were never an u. in it. As for example quinze,
quitar, querer, quemar, as if it were written, qinze, qitar, qerer, qemar, etc.

Of the letter R.
This letter, if it be single in the middle of a word, it is pronounced with a
sweet aspiration, arador, h^redero, orador, haron. But if it be in the
beginning of a word: then it is pronounced with a great vehemency: As for
Example, rodar, ren^ir, redemptor, ruido* risa, reir, ruinar, etc* as if it
were written rhodar, rhen^ir, rhedemptor, etc. Thus is it also pronounced in
the middle of a word if it be a double rr. as in these words, errar, herrero,
corregir, correr, carreta, etc. as if it were written errhar, herredero, etc.
For in this letter the Spanyardes immitate and follow the pronunciation which
the Grecians do use in their letter Rho.

Of the letter S.
This letter is correspondent to two letters, which the Hebrews have: the one
they call Same^^: and the other Scin. When this letter is in the beginning of a
word by it self, single, or in the middle of a word double ss. then it is
pronounced with something a vehement sound, as in these words salud,
sanctidad, sanidad, saltar, saltear, sufrir. Example, when it is double in the
middle of a word: fuessemos, dixessemos, ^uviessemos. But if this letter S. be
alone and single in the middle of a word, then it is to be pronounced sweetly
with a mingled sound betwixt the pronunciation of S. and z, which the French
men do with great dexterity, which adds a marvelous grace unto their
tongue. The same sound has the S. in the end of the word. Example: Dios ama
a sus hijos, escojelos, llama los, para a la fin, glorificar los, which is as
much to say as: God loves his children, chooses them, calls them: in the
end to glorify them.

Of the letter T.
This letter retayneth the same pronounciation which is used in all other
languages. As for Example: tomar, tutar, tirar, ^oro, ti^ta. In the like sort
it is pronounced when it is added to H. in these words which the Spanish
tongue borrows of the Greek: as Theologia, ethimologia, etc. pronouncing it
as if it were written Teologia, etimologia. etc.

Of the letter V.
This letter serves sometimes for a vowell, sometimes for a consonant.

Being a vowell, it retayneth the common pronunciation used in all tongues, as
in these words: guardar, gusto, fuero, ygualdad, and is correspondent to the
Hebrewe vowel vaf^u^ec^.

But v. being a consonant it must be pronounced touching the under lip with
the upper teeth, as some Grecians pronounce the second letter of their
Alphabet, which they call vita. And as the English men pronounce the v. in
these words: over, vaunt, valiant, very, etc. The Latinistes that are
something precise in writing, make this distinction of the v. that when it is a
consonant, they write it thus v. when it is a vowell thus, u. as in these
words valde, servare, ^overe, Consonant. But Vowels in these: ullus, musicus,
etc.

But they that are not so skillful in making difference betwixt the v.
consonant, and the u. vowell. They commonly use this kind of v. when the word
begins with an u. and in the middle of the word they use this u. And thus
much of this.

But before I pass to the other Letters, I will set down some examples of
Spanish words written with v. Consonants: Vianda, vida, voto, vestido,
envierno, llevantar, etc. And this v. is aunswerable to the Hebrewe vaf. and
the Greek Ypsilon, as it is noweadayes much pronounced in Europ.

Of the letter X.
To pronounce this letter well, a man may note how the French man pronounces
chapter which is much like to the English sh: So that the Spanyarde pronounces his
X. as the English man pronounces sh. and the Frenchmen chapter For betwixt the
English sh. and the French chapter I can find but small difference. Examples:
xaquima, xara, xerinlla, xaral, mexilla, texillo, lexia, texer, lexos, axime^,
axuar, etc. As if it were written shaquima, shara, sheringa, etc.

Of the letter Z.
The Spaniards pronounce this letter as the Hebrews their letter Zaim. And as
the Frenchmen pronounce their s. but with more vehemency. And as we pronounce
our English z. Example: Dezir, rezio, azeite. And it keeps the same sound,
though it be put in the end of a word: as raiz, perdiz, boz, enzina, zarco,
razimo, zacharias, etc.

Of the division of the foresaid letters.
These letters are divided in two parts. Six of them be vowels, A. E. I. O.
V. Y. All the other besides these six, are called Consonants, because they do
as it were consound, that is sound with the Vowels, for without they be joined
to some of the Vowels they have no sound.

And as for the French tongue, the strangers that are desirous to attain to
the knowledge of the same, must note that among the Consonants in the French
Alphabet, there is one sort that be called, quiescen^es: That is as much to
say: as that though they be written, yet ought they not to be pronounced;
which thing makes the French tongue seem something harder to be learned. And
in deed it discourageth many of other Nations from learning of the French
tongue, because it is almost impossible unto them to immitate such a kind of
dissimulation in letters, and passing by them without pronouncing them: unless
by use they are acquainted after what manner the French men use to let them
escape vnpronounced.

True it is, that this manner of writing of certain letters though not
pronouncing them, was left in the French tongue, by the grave counsel and full
consent of ancient men: to the end that every one might the playnlier see,
from what tongue the vowels descended: and that the writing of the words might
show the right Etymology of them.

Yet notwithstanding this reason, some Neoterical writers of these our times
have attempted to deliver their speech from this difficulty, writing the
words as they commonly were by every one pronounced. Which alteration, or
reformation: whether it be good or no, I leave it to be judged to the learned
of France. But this I say, that for all their reformation and alteration of
letters, yet remains the difficulty of S. unreformed, and not as yet
altered: So that the pronunciation of the same letter is left in doubt, when it
ought to be sounded, and when to escape vnpronounced. And in deed without
great difficulty can no man give rules thereof.

And as much as I could observe in the learning of the French tongue, I marked,
that when the S. comes before a Vowell, then she is sounded: But if she
come before a Consonant, then she is dissembled, and the word is pronounced,
as if it were written without S. Example: If the word be written Epistre, the
French man pronounces it, epitre, etc.

This general rule has one exception, and that is: that all the words, that
are half Lattine, in which, if after the S. a C^nsonant follow, the S. for
the most part retayneth her scunde and is pronounced. As for Example:
Baptiste, Euangeliste, Organiste, chaste, domestique, Fantastique, esprit,
just, celeste, terrestre, satisfaction, restitution, and such other words,
which are pronounced as they are written, and not as if they were thus:
Baptite, Evangelite, Organite, etc.

And yet there are some words taken and borrowed from the Lattine tongue,
which nevertheless pronounce not the S. but are uttered as if they had not S.
written. as these words, feste, pasque, fenestre, estoille, espine, espange,
espee, etc. which are pronounced, as if they were written: fete, paque,
fenetre, etoille, epine, eponge, epee, etc.

We may also note, that if this letter S. be in the beginning of a word which
is borrowed from the Lattine tongue, and immediately after the same ^. if a
Consonant follow, the French men use to add an E. before the S. and pronounce
the word, as if it were written without S. As for ex^mple: Estienne, estude,
estudier, escole, es^rne, espoux, espouse, espouser, estable, etc. which words
are pronounced, as if they were written: etie^ne, etude, etc. But there be some
words that are excepted out of this rule: as Sphere, scribe, science, style,
sterile, etc.

Of the APostrophes.
We call that an Apostrophe, when as two Vowels coming together, the first is
taken away to make a pronunciation and sound fit to the ear.

As for the Spanish tongue, there is no use of Apostrophes in it. For the
Spaniardes do speak so bread and leasurely, that notwithstanding any
^oaccurrens or meeting together of Vowels, yet it breeds not any (...) or ill
sound to the ears. But in deed in their verses and meeter, the Spanyardes
sometimes use to eclips a Vowell to have their verses equal touching the
number of syllables. The Italians also use the same collision of letters.

Touching the French tongue, the strangers may note, that they shall find
many Apostrophes used in the same, as well in prose as in verse. And the
Frenchmen therefore use them so much, because of the (...) or good sound, which
beautifyeth their speech much. For unless they should cut off the first Vowell
of the two when they concur and meet togeether, it were impossible that they
should sound well, because they speak so fast: for in truth, they speak so
fast that they cannot pronounce one Vowell first, and then another after. And
therefore two Vowels coming together, the first of the two is cut off. As you
may see in this example: j' aim l'homme, qui sadonne, a l'stude de l'escriture
sancte, and qui porchasse d'auancer l'honneur de l'eternell.

Out of this general rule are excepted all the Participles ending in e
Masculine: which though they come before an other Vowell, yet they be not taken
away, whether they be Participles or Nownes. As for example, on a juge en
verite. vous avez este eleve en prosperity: and aves blaspheme contre le ciel:
mais vous serez humilie en brief etc.

Of the Dipthongs.
The Grammarians defyne a Dipthong to be the conjunction of two Vowels which
sound as if they were but one Vowell only. Yet the Spanish tongue has not
any Diphthong, but every Vowell is pronounced by it self, not joining or
mingling it sound with any other.

But in the French tongue, the stranger must observe that there are eight
diphthongs: which is as much to say, as a co^junction or joining together of
two vowels, which sound as if there were but one. And these be the eight
diphthongs used in the French speech, ay. oy. oe. au. ei. eu. ou. and uy. The
first, the second, and the third are pronounced as if both the vowels were but
one only, e. As for example: mayson, orayson, foy, loy, coeur, oeil, aeuvres,
etc. Which words are pronounced, as if they were written thus: meson, oreson,
foe, lo, keur, eil. In the other five diphthongs both the vowels are almost
sounded; as in these words, Feu, eau, peine, jour, nuyt. An example: Aujourduy
j'ay eu grand peine. which is to say: This day have I had great pain or
trouble, etc. Item, Les richesses de l'esprit, ne peuvent perir, ne par feu, ne
par eau. that is to say, The riches of the mind or spirit cannot perish neither
by fire, nor by water. But to be short, I am of this opinion, that no man is
able to pronounce these well, unless he hear some French man speak.

These rules have I set down, and noted as shortly and compendiously as
possibly may be, touching the letters, sillables, diphthongs, and apostrophes;
by the use and aid of which rules any man may easily learn to read the Spanish
tongue. But as for the French tongue, I would exhort them that are willing and
desirous to learn the French tongue, to take the lectures and help of some
natural borne French man: And then they may of him learn how distinctly to
read and pronounce the French tongue. Which I take to be so difficult for many
reasons, that I think a man shall or may hardly (nay and scarce so too) learn
the pronunciation thereof, unless he hear a French man pronounce it.

But now I will hy to the second part of this Grammar, wherein I treat of the
parts of speech, as well in the French as in the Spanish tongue.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS TREATISE.
Of the parts of speech.
IN the Spanish and French tongue there be eight parts of speech, as in the
Latin tongue. And I will treat particularly of each one, noting the necessary
rules.

Of the Noune.
ANd to begin with the nounes note that they be of two sorts; nounes proper, as
Iuan, Pedro, Francesco, etc. and nounes appellatives, which are also of two
sorts: some substantives, and other be adjectives, as maestro, discipulo:
bueno, justo, etc.

There are two numbers: the singular that speaks of one, and the plural
which speaks of mo than one: the plural number is made of the singular after
this manner: When the singular ends in a vowell, the plural is made by adding
thereto s, as donzella donzellas, hombre hombres, sancto sanctos, hermano
hermanos, justo justos, padre padres, etc. But if the last letter of the
singular be a consonant, then to form the plural you must add es, as verdad
verdades, maldad maldades, arbol arboles, ladron ladrones, animal animales, etc.

Some are excepted from this rule, which ending with a vowell do form their
plural as if they ended with consonants: but these are very few, as Ley leyes,
fe fees, Rey Reyes, and some such other.

The nounes pronounes and participles are not declined with cases: but the
articles show of what case every noune is.

They have two genders, masculine and feminine, but they have not the neuter.

The articles are thus declined:

Nominat. Genit. Accusat. Ablat. Masculino S. el del a el de el P. los delos a
los de los Foeminino S. la de la a la P. las de las a las

To know the right use of these articles is so necessary for them that would
learn the Spanish tongue well, that such as cannot apply them aright, commit
thereby a thousand incongruities and faults, as we see the Biscains and
Portugals daily do, because they take upon them to speak the Castiglian
language before they have learned it.

Besides this, there are other signs whereby the cases may be known, as you
shall see in the example following of the declensons.

After the same manner you must consider the articles in the French tongue
declining them with three cases: as for example.

Nominat. Genit. Accusat. Masculino Foeminino sing. Le Du Au La De A Plural.
Les Des Aux.

Here you must note that in the plural one termination serves both genders,
masculine and feminine.

Of the declensons of Nounes.
THe Spanish and French toongs have not any declensons, but all the nounes are
indeclined: for the diversity of cases is made by means and help of the
articles. But that you may better understand the difference of genders and
cases we will set down an example in each of the toongs. In the Spanish we
will put six cases, and in the French three, notwithstanding that even in the
Spanish it self there is small difference between the dative, accusative, and
ablative.

An example of the masculine singular in Spanish.
Nominat. El doctor. Genit. del doctor. Dativ. para el doctor. Accusat. al
doctor. Vocat. o doctor. Ablat. del doctor. French Le docteur. French du
docteur. French au docteur.
An example of the masculine plural.
Nominat. los doctores. Genit. de los doctores. Dativ. para los doctores.
Accusat. a los doctores. Ablat. de los doctores. French Les docteurs. French
des docteurs. French aux docteurs.
An example of the feminine singular.
Nominat. la doctrina. Genit. de la doctrina. Dativ. para la doctrina. Accusat.
a la doctrina. Ablat. de la doctrina. French la doctrine. French de la
doctrine. French a la doctrine.
The feminine plural.
Nominat. las doctrinas. Genit. de las doctrinas. Dativ. para las doctrinas
Accusat. a las doctrinas. Ablat. de las doctrinas. French les doctrines. French
des doctrines. French aux doctrines.
After the same manner be all other nounes declined, as you see in this example,
so that knowing how to decline your articles, you may be able to decline any
noune.

Of the Comparatives and Superlatives.
THe Spanish tongue has no comparatives: but to make a comparison they make it
by this particle, mas, and in the superlative, muy. When they will use a
comparative, they put the positive, and add this particle, mas, or mayor,
thus: Pedro es mas blanco que Iuan; La gracia de Christo es mayor que la
condemnacion que nos ca^so el peccado de Adam. Menores son los hombres que
hormigas, comparados a la grandeza de Dios.

So that the particles where with comparison is made, are: mas, mejor, peor,
mayor, menor, etc.

The Superlative is made with this particle, muy, (which answers to the
English, Most, etc.) as when they say; Dios es muy piadoso, etc. God is most
pitiful. Notwithstanding they do in exaggerating and magnifieng a matter use
to form superlatives from nounes adjectives, as: El rey es humanissimo;
serenissimo principe; illustrissimo Sen^or: La princesa es una hermosissima
donzella, etc.

And here I must advertise such as would attain to good knowledge of the
Spanish tongue, that they learn how to apply their epithetons, and know of what
nounes they may form superlatives: for herein is some difficulty in this
tongue.

In nownes proper there is no comparison: but by adding unto them some
quality, as Iuan es mejor official que Pedro. The adverbs of quality do
receive comparison as the nouns whence they come, by adding to them these
particles mas, and muy, as mas instamente, muy sabiamente, etc. There are also
prepositions that admit comparatives and superlatives as the adverbs do, as
cerca, mas cerca, muy cerca. mas adelante, muy adelante.

Of Nounes diminutives.
The Spanish tongue has also nounes diminutives (which are derived from the
principals,) as the Latins have: as chico, chiquito; pequen^o, pequen^ito*
chica, chiquita, pequen^a, pequen^ita, as bien pequen^ita es la compan^ia que
sigue las leyes de dios. When this particle Asaz, or this particle muy is added
to these nounes it does aggravate the thing spoken of, as Asaz os he
amonestado. muy bien os lo havia dicho.

Touching the French tongue.
YOu are also to note that it has neither comparatives nor superlatives, but
they supply the want thereof with these particles plus and tres (as the
Spanish does with mas and muy) as Heureux, plusbeureux, tresheureux. which is
in Spanish dichoso, mas dichosa, muy dichoso. In English happy, more happy,
most happy.

From this rule are excepted two, good and naught, for the French says, bon,
meilleur, tresbon, bonne, meilleure, tresbonne, mauvais, pire, tresmauvais, etc.

Here you are to note that no nounes substantives, but only adjectives do
admit comparison.

After the same manner also Adverbes of quality admit comparison with plus and
tres, which adverbs do always end in meant in French, and in Spanish mente: as
justement, justamente, etc. In which adverbes it is to be noted that the l
before n is pronounced of the French men as if it were an a.

There are also some prepositions in the French tongue which receive
comparatives after the same manner, but not superlatives, as pres plus pres in
Spanish cerca mas cerca. But the French man says not tres pres, as the
Spaniard says muy cerca, etc.

There are besides some other particles which being joined to this particle
plus does much increase the comparison, and these are beaucoup, trop, partrop,
as if you should say in Spanish, en grande manera, sobre manera, as for
example. la lecture des saints livers est bien plus honest and beaucoup plus
profitable a l'homme que celle de les fauses fables d'Amadis de Gaul. where
beaucoup plus profitable, is much more profitable.

The French tongue has also diminutives, as femme femmelette, chamber
chambrette, etc. And sometimes they form them with this word petit, which is
little, as petit Iean, little John, petit chastea^, etc.

Rules of Nounes in the Spanish tongue.
The first rule.
ALl nounes pronounes and participles are undeclinable in the Spanish tongue;
but the difference of cases is known by the articles adjoined to them.

The second rule.
THe nounes appellatives have their articles in all cases singular and plural.
And the nounes proper in all cases except the nominative, which is always
without any article. Wherefore it were absurd to say, el Pedro, el Iuan. And
heerehence is, that surnames are so much used by the Spaniards.

The third rule.
NOunes adjectives feminine are made of the adjectives masculine only by
changing the last o into a* as bueno, buena. hermoso, hermosa. sancto, sancta,
etc. This rule has no place in nounes substantives proper, but it is true in
some appellatives: as maestro, maestra, and in verbals in dor: as vendedor,
vendedora; comprador, compradora, etc.

The fourth rule.
IN the genders of nounes the Spaniards for the most part follow the Latins. So
that such as are masculine in the Latin, are masculine in the Spanish: and
they that are feminine in the one, are so in the other. But those words that
are neuters in the Latin, are in the Spanish sometimes masculine and sometimes
feminine: as el hombre homo, el varon, la muger, el templo, la camara, etc.

The fifth rule.
NOunes adjectives have their articles in all cases according to their genders,
as well as the substantives: as Lo negro conserva mas la vista que lo blanco.
Los misericordiosos alcancaran misericordia. But in these examples the
substantives are understood.

In the Spanish tongue the names of trees for the most part are masculine: and
the names of fruits feminine: as el mancano, and la mancana. el ciruelo, and
la ciruela. el perall, and la pera. el naranjo, and la naranja. el nogal, and
la nuez. el castan^o es arbol rezio. el naranjo esta verde todo el an^o. del
moral se haze la seda. In some nounes it is contrary: for the trees are
feminine, and the fruits masculine: as La hyguera, and el higo. la palma, and
el datil. la parra, and el razimo, etc.

The sixth rule.
WHen the Spaniards would use any Latin word, and transfer it unto their
own language, they do it in one of these three sorts.

The first is by adding thereto letters: as by adding n unto those nounes that
in Latin end in io they are made Spanish: example, religio, religion:
inuentio, invention: comparatio, comparation: and such others.

The second is by taking away some letters: as such words as in Latin end in
mentum are made Spanish by taking away m and changing u into o, as sacramentum,
sacramento: instrumentum, instrumento: unguentum, unguento: etc. Those words
also which end in alis, by taking away is are Spaniolized, as liberalis,
liberal, general, principal, etc. Those nounes also which end in o, no vowel
going before, by changing o into e and adding n, as ordo, orden: origo, origin,
etc.

The third manner of spaniolizing Latin words, is by transposing letters or
sillables, which way is much used by the French men in franchising of Latin
words, but seldom used by the Spaniards, as dextera, diestra: terra, tierra:
porrum, puerro: cista, cesta, etc.

The seventh rule. Of Nounes numerall.
NOunes of number may be divided into three kinds in Spanish, as they are in
Latin. The first kind is cardinal, or principal: as

uno, dos, tres, quatro, cinco, 1 2 3 4 5 seys, siete, ocho, nueve, diez, onze,
doze, treze, quatorze, 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 quinze, diez y seis, diez y
siete, diez y ocho, diez y nueve 15 16 17 18 19 veinte, treinta, quarenta,
cinquenta, sesenta, setenta, 20 30 40 50 60 70 ochenta, noventa, ciente,
dozientos, trezientos, 80 90 100 200 300 quatrozientos, quinientos,
seiscientos, sietecientos, 400 500 600 700 ochocientos, nuevecientos, mill,
dosmill, tresmill, 800 900 1000 2000 3000 quatromill, cincomill, seismill,
sie^emill, ochomill, 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 nuevemill, million. 9000 10000.

The second kind is ordinall, as primero, segundo, tercero, quarto, quinto,
sexto, septimo, octavo, noveno, dezeno, onzeno, dozeno, trezeno, quatorzeno,
quinzeno, etc. The first, the second, the third, etc.

The third kind may be called adverbials joining the cardinals with these two
words, vez vezes, as una vez, one time: dos vezes, two times: tres vezes, three
times, etc.

This word Dios, God, because it agrees with none but one only God the Lord,
is reckoned by the Spaniards amongst nounes proper, and therefore they put no
article before it. And those who in speaking Spanish do set an article before
it, are of the Jews race and stock, whose predecessors for dios did say El
dio, retaining herein the articles used in their Hebrew tongue. But yet when
there is any other epitheton joined to it, then it has an article, as el dios
fuerte humillara los sobervios. el dios padre de Jesus Christo cumplira sus
promesas con los que le fueren fieles.

The eight rule.
THe Spaniards in construction do always put the substantive before the
adjective in the beginning of a sentence: as el hombre justo tiene firm
esperanca en dios. el pan blanco es de mas rezia digestion que el Rectus casus
is the nominative, and Obliqui casus be all the others.
moreno. So likewise the right cases are put before the oblique. For the
Spaniards do not say, de juan la cabeca, (as the Biscains when they begin to
learn the Spanish) but la cabeca de juan. And this agrees with the order of
nature, which first and chiefly does respect the substance, and afterward the
accidents. The Welsh or British ^oong uses the same natural order of placing
the substantive before the adjective, but most other toongs, as Italian,
French, Dutch, English use the contrary.

These two words, bueno and malo, do indifferently either go before or come
after the substantive, as buena casa, pero mal vezino, buena ley pero malos
guardadores, etc.

The nounes isntrumental, by which we denotate the cause of some work, and by
which as it were a thing is done, we sometimes put the same in the nominative
case, with his article joined to it, and sometimes in the genitive case, with
the article of the genitive case by it. As for example: Los discipulos son
ensen^ados por los preceptos: and el cuerpo esta sustentado de la vianda, etc.

The ninth rule.
WHen we demand any thing in Spanish, we must put the thing asked in the
nominative case: (the French men put it always in the genitive) as dadme
dineros para comprar libros. dadme pan que tengo hambre. But when we demand a
part or piece of a thing we put it sometimes in the genitive with a limitation:
as dadme una vara de razo: dadme un poco de queso.

Rules of the Nounes in French.
The first.
THe nounes pronounes and participles in French are undeclined, but the cases
are known by their articles, as in the Spanish.

The second rule.
NOunes appellatives have always their article before them, and that in all
cases and numbers: nounes proper and apropriated have there articles only in
oblique cases. Nounes apropriated in French are of themselves appellatives, but
being joined with a noune or pronoune Videlic. nounes appropriated.
proper, are so called, such are called by the Logitians Individua
Artificialia: as monsieur Louys: maistre Iean. cest homme, mon pere, ta mere,
son friar, mes soeurs, etc.

The third rule.
NOunes proper, and apropriated, do not require masculine articles, but
feminin^: as l'evangile de Jesus Christ, not du Jesus Christ. done cela a
Philippe, not au Philippe. La doctrine de cest homme est bonne, and not du cest
homme, etc. Item, tell honneur and amity te porteront tes enfants, comme ta
auras port a ton pere, and a ta mere, and not au ton pere, etc.

So that nounes proper and apropriated do always follow the rule and nature of
feminines which strangers ought to observe very diligently for avoiding
incongruities in speech.

The fourth rule.
Because that proper and apropriated nounes want the plural number, it is to
be noted that these nounes which we call appropriated being in the plural
number, require the articles that are of the same case in the singular number:
as la faveur de mes amiss ne me sert de guere en cest endroit. But they say not
des mes amiss. Il me fault servir a mes seigneurs, and not Aux mes seigneurs.
Item, nous devous obeir a nos princes, and a tous nos superieurs, selon que
dieu le nous comande. But they say not, aux nos princes, or aux tous nos
superieurs, etc.

The fifth rule.
NOunes feminine appellatives have in their oblique cases besides the article
proper to the same case, also the article of the nominative, but this is
understood only in the singular number: as donnons honneur a la parole de
Dieu, and not only a parole de dieu: cest une sentence de la saint escriture,
que tous hommes sont subjets a la mort. The same rule may be given of nounes
appellatives masculine that begin with a vowel, but then it is done with an
apostrophe to the end that two vowels concur not together. Example, Ie suis de
l'ordre ou class troisiesme. Guard toy bien de l'homme flatteur, car il j' a
morse pour j' envenimer.

The sixth rule. Of Genders.
THe French tongue does often imitate the Latin in genders, so that those words
which are masculine in Latin, are masculine also in French: and so likewise
for the feminins, as le liver, la plume, le pain, la chair, etc. But those that
are neuters in Latin are sometimes masculine and sometime feminine in the
French, as le temps, le banc, la parole, la semence, etc.

The seventh rule.
THe feminine of every noune adiective is made by adding an e at the end of the
word, which the French pronounces as if it were an a, as bonn bonne, mauvais
mauvaise, blanc blanch, etc. The same rule serves also for the participles
active and passive, as aimant aimante, aim aimee, enseignant, enseignante,
enseigne ens^ignee, etc. Notwithstanding there are some nounes adjectives which
with one only termination serve to both genders: as just, chaste, honest,
sage, docile, amiable, etc. The same is also said of these pronounes, Ie, toy,
and others like. Yet note that they are not to be termed to be of the common
gender.

The eight rule.
NOunes adjectives take articles in all cases according to their gender: and
that is, because in ordinary course and manner of speech, the substantive is
understood, though the adjective be only expressed, as le blanc est meilleur,
que le rouge: understanding vin. le just receura justice and les
misericordieux obtiendront misericorde, understanding hommes, etc.

The ninth rule.
IN the French tongue the names of trees are masculine, and of fruits feminine,
as le pomier, la pomme, le poirier, la poire, le pescher, la pesche, le
figuier, la figue, les figuiers sont a Marseille, and les figues a Lion. Le
noyer est un grand arbre, mais la noix est un bien petit fruict.

The tenth rule.
THe French words that end in all, are Heteroclites, or irregular, because they
form their plural in aux, as animal, animaux: general, generaux: cheval,
chevaux, etc.

The eleventh rule.
WHen the French men speak of flesh, fish, or money, they use to speak in the
singular number, and not in the plural (as the Spaniards do) as Ie veux
acheter du poisson: and not des poissons. La chair and le poisson sont
extremement chers en ceste ville, and not les chairs and les poissons, etc.
Item, I'ay done tout mon argent aux pouures, and not tous mes argens, etc.

The twelfth rule.
THe French men have a mavelous dexterity and grace in enriching their
language out of all other toongs, and especially by the Latin, and that in
three sorts: The first is by addition of a letter: as unto words ending in io,
they add n. as religio, religion: redemptio, redemption, etc. The second is by
diminishing the letters, especially in words ending in mentum: as of
sacramentum they form sacrament: of juramentum, jurement, etc. And so likewise
words ending in Latin in alis, by taking away, is, are franchised. As for
example: general, principal, liberal, nuptial, hospital, etc. The third, by
changing or transposing of letters. And this manner is much used among French
men, and that not only in nounes, but also in verbes. And after this manner the
Latin words that end in a, being changed in e, are made French words. As of
propheta, they make prophet: of poeta, terra, porta, fenestra, they make
poet, terre, port, fenestre, etc. And sometimes Latin words are made French,
by changing of sillables, thus: agilis, fragilis, debilis, utilis, inutilis,
tempestas, caelestis, terrestris, etc. agile, fragile, debile, utile, inutile,
tempeste, celeste, terrestre, etc. Example in verbes by changing the last
syllable by decrement: justificare, justifier: sanctificare, sanctifier:
edificare, edifier, magnifier, glorifier, venir, servir, fortifier, dormir, etc.

The xiij. rule.
THe French tongue has the like names to express the numbers as the other
toongs: which numbers are reduced to three kinds; for others are cardinal or
principal numbers: as un, deux, trois, quatre, cinq, cix, sept, huit, neuf,
dix, onze, douze, treize, quatorze, quinze, seize, dix and sept, dix and huit,
dix and neuf, vingt, trente, quarente, cinquante, soixante, septante, huitante,
nonante, cent, mill, etc.

Others be ordinall numbers, that signify and betoken order; and they are
formed of the cardinal numbers, by adding ieme unto them: as unieme, deuzieme,
troizieme, quatrieme, cinquieme, etc. They say also, primiere, second, tiers,
etc. but very seldom quart, quint. or higher, to say sext, sexts, huyts, etc.

The last sort of number be adverbiall numbers, adding to the cardinal number
this word, foys, as un fois, deux fois, trois fois, quatre fois, etc.

The xiiij. rule.
Because in the French tongue this word (head) is diversely termed, note, that
when French men speak of the head materially, as it is taken for the head of a
man's body, then they term it test; but if they speak of a head, as of the
head of an army, a college, a country, a city, and so forth figuratively and
metaphorically, then they call it chef, as for example: Ma test me fait mall,
taken really: but l'homme est la chef de la femme, le Roy est le chef du
royaume; and le captain est le chef de l'armee. Intentionally.

The xv. rule.
THough the name of God be not a proper name, and declares not his essence nor
being, but only taken from his office (as Plato writes in his dialogue which
is called Cratilus, and Dionysius in his book De divinis operibus) yet in the
French tongue, as in many and almost all other toongs, we use it as a proper
noune, and so never ad the article to it, but when it has some other epitheton
joined with it: as le Die eternel, le Dieu fort, just and misericordieux a
parle, le Dieu d'Abraham, d'Isaac, and de Jacob. Le Dieu de nos peers. but when
they name him simply without any other epitheton, then they say, Dieu a parle,
Dieu a command, Dieu est un pere misericordieux, etc. without the article, le.

The xvj. rule.
THe French men in construction do set the nouns substantives always before
the adjectives, and the nominative case before the other cases. And so they
say, Le pain blanc, and not blanc pain: and le Vin rouge, not le rouge Vin.
Item, la main de Iean, not de Iean la main: and le march du ble and du
poisson, not du ble and du poisson le march.

Out of this rule these two words bon and mauvais are excepted; for they say,
Bon pais, and mauvaise gent, Intention bonne and aeuvre mauvaise; bon
conseiller and mauvais conseil.

The xvij. rule.
ITem the ablative betokening instrument or cause, commonly is put in the
accusative case with a preposition, and so they say, Nous sommes rachetes par
le sang de Jesus Christ, etc. Sometimes in the genitive case with the article
de; O seigneur rempli nos coeurs de ton S. esprit, Item, le peuple s' approach
de moy de sa bouche, and m'honnore de ses leures, mais leur coeur est bien
loing de moy. dit le seigneur, etc.

The xviij. rule.
THe French men when they ask a part of any thing, in stead of the accusative
case, they put it in the genitive case, with the article of the gender which is
pertaining to it: as Ie vous pry, prestes moy de l'argent, pour acheter des
livers. Item, donnez moy du pain, and je vous donneray de l'argent, donnes nous
du poissen, du formage, du vin, etc. And not, le poisson, le vin, le formage,
etc. But when they ask all, and the whole thing, and not a part of it, then
they put it in the accusative case: as Rendez moy l'argent, que je vous ay
priest. Item, priest moy vostre liver, vostre cheval, etc.

THE THIRD TREATISE. Of the Pronounes.
THe Spanish tongue uses the same pronounes that the Latin tongue has. Which
are divided into three sorts: The first sort, of pronounes demonstrative, the
second of pronounes possessive, and the third of pronounes relative.

Of the first sort, there are but three, Yo, tu, and aquel; I, thou, and he,
which are declined as the nounes with their articles.

The declension of the first person.
Singu.
Nom. yo. Genesis de mi. Dat. para mi. Acc. a mi. Voc. Abl. de mi.
Plural.
Nom. nosotros. Genesis de nosotros. Dat. para nosotros. Acc. a nosotros. Abl. de
nosotros.

The second person.
Singu.
Nom. tu. Genesis de ti. Dat. para ti. Acc. a ti. Voc. Abl. de ti.
Plural.
Nom. vosotros. Genesis de vosotros. Dat. para vosotros. Acc. a vosotros. Abl. de
vosotros.

The third person.
The pronoune sui, sibi, etc. is declined in Spanish after this order.
Genitive singul. de si. Dative para si. Accusative a si. Ablative de si.
The pronoune (este) is thus declined.
Singu. Masc.
Nom. este. Genesis de este. Dat. para este Acc. a este. Voc. Abl. de este.
Plural. Masc.
Nom. estos. Genesis de estos. Dat. para estos. Acc. a estos. Abl. de estos.
Sing. foem.
Nomin. esta. Genit. de esta. Dativ. para esta. Accus. a esta. Vocat. Ablat. de
esta.
Plur. foem.
Nomin. estas. Genit. de estas. Dativ. para estas. Accus a estas. Ablat. de
estas.

The declenson of Aquel.
Sing. masc.
Nom. aquel. Genesis de aquel. Dat. para aquel. Accus. a aquel. Vocat. Abl. de
aquel.
Plur. masc.
Nom. aquellos. Genesis de aquellos. Dat. para aquellos. Accus a aquellos. Abl. de
aquellos.
Sing. foem.
Nom. aquella. Genesis de aquella. Dat. para aquella. Acc. a aquella. Vocat. Abl.
de aquella.
Plur. foem.
Nom. aquellas. Genesis de aquellas. Dat.para aquellas. Acc. a aquellas. Abl. de
aquellas.


These pronounes sometimes be compounded with this word mismo: as yo mismo, yo
misma; tu mismo, tu misma; este mismo, esta misma and so throughout all the
cases, adding the articles to them: as de my mismo, de my misma; para mi mismo,
para mi misma; a mi mismo, a mi misma, etc. Examples: yo mismo a mi mismo no me
conozco, viendo los diversos desseos y contrarios que mi mismo coracon
produeze. Item, No es maravilla que tu misma muger te sea infiel, pues tu lo
eres a tu mismo: y al mismo sen^or que te crio. Like examples might likewise be
given in the other pronounes.

Rules for the Pronounes.
The first rule.
WHen pronouns demonstrative are joined with nounes appellatives they serve in
steed of articles: as este hombre, this man: aquella muger, yonder woman: mi
hermano, tu prima: vuestros criados y los nuestros han ren^ido hoy: my brother,
thy cosine: thy servants and ours have scolded to day.

The second rule.
THese pronounes yo, tu, and aquel, do not vary; but whether they come before a
verb or before a noune; they be written still after one manner. But the French
men (as I will show when I set down rules for the French pronounes) do write
these three pronounes otherwise when they come before nounes, than they do when
they come before verbs; as afterward we will by examples declare.

The third rule.
THese pronounes este and aquel, many times are put in the neuter gender, as
for example. When we ask about some thing that is happened: Quien a hecho
esto? quien tiene la culpa de aquello? quien sabe esso?

Of the second sort of Pronounes, called Possessives.
THe Spanish tongue has five pronounes possessives, mio, tuyo, suyo, nuestro,
vuestro, which are declined after the same manner that the nounes be declined
with their articles. The feminines correspondent to them are these: mia, tuya,
suya, nuestra and vuestra. And of the singular to form the plural, add only
one letter s at the end, and you have the plural: as mio, mios; tuyo, tuyos;
mia, mias; tuya, tuyas.

But he that learneth the Spanish tongue, must learn the use of these
possessives, and when he ought to use them, least in speaking he be noted of
discourtesie: for the common people thinks it an ill saying and discourteous
to say, lo mio, lo tuyo, lo suyo: which the French men use, and which seems
to them a most courteous kind of saying. But the Spaniards use to join some
other word to these pronounes, which does express the sense of them: and say
not, lo mio yo lo dare bien a pobres: but they say, la mia hazienda yo lo dare,
etc. So that the use of these pronounes will be surest, if we use them as
adjectives, and not substantives. Where is to be noted, that when they be used
as noune adjectives, then they lose the last letter. For they say not, mia
capa, but mi capa: tuyo coracon, but tu coracon. But when it is put absolutely,
then the last letter is also written and pronounced. As for example: as if one
should ask, Cuya es esta casa? answer, mia; not mi. de quien es este castillo?
tuyo, not tu.

Again to make the plural number of mi, tu, su, do nothing but add s to each
one. Example for all: Mi hijo; oye mis palabras, inclinando a ellas tus orejas:
ama a Dios esperando en sus promesas, y temiendo sus amenazas: estando cierto
que el es tu Dios: y tu eres su creatura.

The fourth rule.
WHen these pronounes make any relation of any thing, then they be always
written at the end of the sentence, claud, or period, and that without any
letter taken away or diminished. As for example: Esta doctrina no es mia, mas
de aquel que me embio; para que mediante ella fuessedes hechos suyos.

The French men use these pronounes oftentimes in the dative case, when they
betoken possession, saying a moy, a toy, etc. But the Spaniards say not, este
es a mi, (or) a ti, (but) esto es mio, tuyo etc. And all cases with their
articles according to the purpose whereof one speaks. As they say, Este
present viene para mi, pero la carta es para ti, a mi me viene el provechio de
gosarlo, mas a ti la molestia de responder, de mi no viene quexa alguna, pero
de ti creo que toda la carta esta llena. Enbiale mis encomiendas, diziendo, que
los frutos de sus arboles me han sido agradables.

The fifth rule.
THe Spaniards imitate the French men in this, that in those above named
pronounes, they form the accusative cases: saying, me, te, se, setting them in
steed of datives. For where they should say, (speaking according to the right
rules) mi padre a escripto a mi, they say, mi padre me ha escripto. Tu hermano
te embia encomiendas. El hombre se piensa que es algo, pero Dios dize que es
vanidad, etc. And such accusative cases are always set before the verb.

Of the third sort of Pronounes, called Relatives.
The first rule.
THe Spanish tongue uses these relatives, lo, los, la, and las, which are
referred to the adverbs of place, alli and alla, which adverbs are declined
with cases and articles as nounes, example of lo, and los, tememos el mundo,
pero Christo lo vencio. Para los que estan en Christo, no ay condemnation: las
quales no andan segun la carne, mas segun el spiritu, porque las obres de la
carne, son de las quales resulta la muerte, pero de las del espiritu, resulta
vida y paz: Examples for alla, and alli, Ninguno subira al cielo para traer
ensen^amiento a los hombres, si no aquel que baxo de alla, para ser doctor y
ensen^ador.

The second rule.
THis adjective, qual, is made a relative of name or person, by adding the
articles to it in every case thus, Christo el qual es hijo de dios nos libro
del peccado, del qual eramos herederos, pagando la pena, a la qual estavamos
condemnados, por aver trespassado el mandamiento de dios del qual se desviaron
nuestros, padres, por el consejo de sathanas. And so we also say, Nuestros
primeros padres los quales fueran criados con libre voluntad, despues de aver
peccado la perdieron, dexando por herederos de captiverio, a todos aquellos los
quales no recibieron el espiritu de regeneration.

The third rule.
THese words, aquel, aquellos, aquella, aquellas, are also declined with
articles through all the cases, and so become relatives. As for example:
Aquellos son hijos de Dios, que son guiados, por el spiritu de Dios: de
aquellos es el reyno de los cielos, que padecen por la confession de la verdad.
Aquellas se llamaran verdaderamente virgins, que lo fueron de coracon, y de su
cuerpo; porque de aquellas, cuyos desseos son deshonestos, poca esperanca puede
haver que sus hechos sean castos: o lo seran por fuerca y encerramiento.

The fourth rule. Of the Pronoune, Quien.
THere is in the Spanish tongue another pronoune, which they use when they ask
for any one, and the same is also declined with articles in all the cases as
the other before. As for example: Quien es el hijo de Dios? quien es el hijo de
la virgen? para quien vino? answer: Para los peccadores que creyeren en el. A
quien se manifiesta? a los contritos y humildes de coracon: de quien huyo: de
los incredulos, etc.

Note that the cheifest difficulty of the Spanish tongue consists in the use
of these pronoun^s: and therefore they that will attain to the knowledge of
this tongue, must diligently mark the use of these pronounes in the authors
which he reads.

And now I will set down rules for them that learn the French tongue, touching
the French tongue: and show the difference that is betwixt the Spanish and
French pronounes.

Rules for the French pronounes.
ANd first of all they be divided in three sorts, as the Spanish were, vz.
Demonstratives, Possessives, and Relatives.

The table of the pronounes, I, and You, in French:

Singular.
Nominat.
le or moy. Tu, or toy.
Genitive,
de moy. de toy.
Dative,
a moy. a toy.

Plural.
. Nominat
Nous. vous.
Genitive,
de nous. de vous.
Dative,
a nous. a vous.

The pronoune, Sui, is thus declined:

Singular
Genitive, soy. It lacks the plural. Dative, a soy. It lacks the plural.
Accusative, se. It lacks the plural.
Dec^e^sion of Iste and Ista in French.

Mas^. gend. sing. number.
Nominative, ce. Genitive, de ce. Dative, a ce.
The French men use also to say, cest, de cest, a cest, when they come before
words beginning with a vowell, as hereafter, etc.

Plural.
Nominative, ces. or ceux. Genitive, de ces. or de ceux. Dative, a ces. or a
ceux.
Feminine singular.
Nominative, Ceste. Genitive, de ceste. Dative, a ceste.
Feminine Plural.
Nominative, cestes, or ces. Genitive, de cestes, or de ces Dative, a cestes,
or a ces.
The declension of Ille and Illa in French.

Masculine singular.
Nominative, Il, or luy. Genitive, de luy. Dative, a luy.
Plural.
Nominative, ils, eux, or leurs. Genitive, de eux, or de leurs. Dative, a eux,
or a leurs.
Feminine singular.
Nominative, elle. Genitive, de elle. Dative, a elle.
Feminine Plural.
Nominat. else, or leurs. Genitive, de else. or de leurs. Dative, a else. or
a leurs.
They say also, leur, de leur, a leur, as well in the feminine gender as in the
masculine, when they speak of any thing only in the singular number: as sois
tell a tes amiss estans en adversite, que tu estois en leur prosperity. Item, Ces
gens de bien ont perdue tous leurs biens and expose leur vie pour soustenir la
verite, etc.

There is another pronoune, which is thus declined:
Masc. sing.
Nominat. Celuy. Genitive, de celuy. Dative, a celuy.
Masc. Plur.
Nominat. ceux. Genitive, de ceux. Dative, a ceux.
Fem. sing.
Nominat. Celle. Genitive, de celle. Dative, a celle.
Fem. Plur.
ceux. de ceux. a ceux.

Note that these prenounes are sometimes compounded, and that in both genders.
Example: Cestuy ci, celuy la, ceux cy, ceux la. Nevertheless, the compounds in
signification differ nothing from the others, but only in use, as hereafter,
etc.

Rules of the first sort of Pronounes, to wit, of Demonstratives.
The first rule.
IF the pronounes be set before nounes appellatives they serve in steed of
articles and of nounes appellatives they make them nounes (as the French men
call them) apropriated. As for example: Cest homme, ceste femme, mon ^stude,
tes livers, mes auditeurs, ton cousin, ses serviteurs, etc.

The second rule.
THese pronounes I, thou, and he, in French, if they be joined to a verb, then
they be all pronounced after this manner, le, tu, il: as for examp^e: I^ say une
s^^le chose (^it Socrates) cest que j^ n^ sayr^^n. (...), S^ tu argues le
^eschant, and il re^^it ^^ correction, tu as gaign^ s^n ^^e, m^^^ ^' il ne ^oit
point, ill mourra en son impiete, and ta s^^as excuse devant le seigneur, etc.

But when they be set by themselves, then they be written thus, moy, toy, luy,
like if one ask, who has done this? the French man answers, moy, toy, or
l^y, but no^, ^^, tu, il, And if he join any verb to the pronoune, then he
says, je l'ay fait, or tu l'as fait, etc. And this is only understood of the
nominative case, for in the other cases they use to say, moy, as for example.
Mon ami ^scoute moy, fay moy ce bien, cognoy toy mesme, and guard toy bien de
mesdire d'autruy: si ton ennemi a fun, done luy a manager: s' il a soif, done
luy a boyre, car en ce faisant, tu luy assembleras charbons de feu sur sa
test, etc.

The third rule.
THe pronounes, Iste and ille, in French, if they be set by themselves without
any substantive by them, then they be thus pronounced, Cestuy ^i, celuy la, as
we may see in this example. Cestuy ci est homme de bien and cestuy la est un
meschant. Cestuy cy dit quela science est sobriety aux jeunes and soulas aux
vieils, richesses aux poures, and honneur aux riches; mais celuy la le
contredit. Item, if one ask, who did this? the French man answers, cestuy
ci, or celuy la. But if these pronounes be joined with any noune substantive
expressed, and the some noune begin with a vowell, then they pronounce cest,
and when the noune begins not with a vowell, they say only ce: example, ce
pain est bon, mais ce vin est mauvais, ce conseil me plait, and cest honneur me
deplait. Cest homme pense manger les charettes toutes ferrees, mais tout son
cas tombera en fumee, etc. The same is to be understood of the pronounes, Ista
and Illa, which being set by themselves without any noune are written, ceste cy
celle la. Example: Ceste cy est la femme vertueuse, la quelle Solomon a
descrite, en ses proverbs, and celle la, est un debauchee and inconstante, etc.
But if those pronounes be ^oined to some noune substantive, then they say only
ceste, or celle; example, Ceste science ne s'apprend point en dormant; ceste
doctrine est veritable, and celle est fause: but they say not, ceste cy
doctrine ou science, etc.

The fourth rule.
THese pronounes ce, and cest, have but one signification, and one of them
betokens no more than the other; but yet they be diversely used: for if the
word which follows begin with a vowell, then the French men use cest, if with
a consonant, then ce; example. Ce grand dieu eternel a envoye cest ange a cest
homme pour luy signifier sa volonte: and not cest grand dieu, ce ange, (or) ce
homme. The cause of this is because the French tongue does as near as possibly
it can shun the concurrence and meeting of two vowels, which are never
pronounced both, but the o^e taken away.

The fifth rule.
WHen these pronounes demonstratives, Iste and ille in French, show any
inanimated things, then the French men declare them by these words, cecy, cela:
example, Qu'est cecy? que signify cela? Cecy duit bien amoy: and cela a vous.
Item, Faites cela vous, and les autres feront cecy, etc.

The sixth rule.
NOte that the French men in their composition use cy, when they show things at
hand, hard by, but when they show or demonstrate things a far off, they use la;
example, ce belitre cy me faschefort, mais cest hypocrite la me fasche encore
d'avantage. Item, cecy est bon, mais cela est mauvais.

The seventh rule.
THis pronoune, suus, if it be set at the end of the word, the French men write
it soy, but if it be set before the word, then they always say, se, as for
example, Se sage (dit Bias) port tous ses biens avec soy. Item, l'hypocrite se
justify soy mesme, mais le just n'estime rien de soy. Item, Qui bien se mire,
bien se void, and qui bien se void, bien se cognoit, and qui bien se cognoit,
peu se prise, and qui peuse prise, sage est.

IF you add this word mesme, unto the former pronounes, they will be
answerable and correspondent to those pronounes which the Spaniards form with
this word mismo (or) misma. Example in French: Moy mesme, toy mesme, soy mesme,
nous mesmes, vous mesmes, eux mesmes, cestuy cy mesme, cestuy la mesme, ceux
mesmes qui vous ont dit cela, l'ont dit aussi a moy mesme, etc. In Spanish, Yo
mismo, tu mismo, etc. I my self, thou thy self, etc. Out of this rule are
excepted, je, tu, il, which admit no such composition. For the French man says
not, je mesme, tu mesme, il mesme: but, moy mesme, toy mesme, etc.

Of the second kind of Pronounes, which the Latins call Possessives.
THe pronounes possessives in the French tongue are five: Mon, ton, son, nostre,
and vostre. These are uttered and declined in two manners, in all genders and
numbers, because sometimes they be pronounced possessively betokening
possession, and sometims relatively betokening relation. The three first
possessives are pronounced after this sort in the masculine gender, mon, ton,
son, and in the feminine, ma, ta, sa. But when they be taken relatively, then
they be written thus, mien, tien, sien, in the masculine gender: and in the
feminine, mienne, tienne, sienne: and to form the plural number you must add
an^. In the tables following you may plainly see an example for all. In the
which we will set down the declension of each pronoune by it self with it
cases and articles.

A table of these pronounes, Mine, Thine, and His, taken possessively.
Masculine gender singular number.
Nominative,
Mon, ton, son.
Genitive,
de mon, de ton, de son.
Dative,
a mon, a ton, a son.

Plural masculine.
Nominative,
mes, tes, ses.
Genitive,
de mes, de tes, de ses.
Dative,
a mes, a tes, a ses.


The table of these pronounes, Mine, thine, and his, taken possessively in the
feminine gender.
Singular feminin
Nominative,
ma, ta, sa.
Genitive,
de ma, de ta, de sa.
Dative,
a ma, a ta, a sa.

The plural is like to the masculine.
Table of the pronounes, Mine, thine, his, taken relatively.
Masculine singul.
Nominative,
le mien, le tien, le sien.
Genitive,
du mien, du tien, du sien.
Dative,
au mien, au tien, au sien.


Plural masculine.
Nominative,
les miens, les tiens, les siens.
Genitive,
des miens, des tiens, des siens.
Dative,
aux miens, aux tiens, aux siens.

Feminin singular
Nominative,
la mienne, la tienne, la sienne.
Genitive,
de la mienne, de la tienne, de la sienne.
Dative,
a la mienne, a la tienne, a la sienne.

Plural feminine.
Nominative,
les miennes, les tiennes, les siennes.
Genitive,
des miennes, des tiennes, des siennes.
Dative,
aux miennes, aux tiennes, aux siennes.

The other two pronounes possessives, Our and Your, possessively and absolutely
taken, are pronounced after this order: nostre, our: vostre, your. But in the
plural number the French men say, nos, vos. And when they be taken relatively,
then they be pronounced in the singular, nostre, vostre, and in the plural,
nostres, vostres.

The table of these pronounes Nostre, vostre, taken possessively.
Masculin singular
Nominative,
Nostre, vostre.
Genitive,
de nostre, de vostre.
Dative,
a nostre, a vostre.


Plural masculine.
Nominative,
nos, vos.
Genitive,
de nos, de vos.
Dative,
a nos, a vos.

The table of the same pronounes, nostre and vostre, taken relatively.
Masculin singular
Nominative,
le nostre, le vostre.
Genitive,
du nostre, du vostre.
Dative,
au nostre, au vostre.

Plural masculine.
Nominative,
les nostres, les vostres.
Genitive,
des nostres, des vostres.
Dative,
aux nostres, aux vostres.


The feminine is declined like the masculine, as well in the singular number as
in the plural; only changing the masculine articles in feminine.

Rules of the second kind of Pronounes.
The first rule.
THese three pronounes, mon, ton, and son, absolutely set, coming immediately
before a noune substantive, the French men pronounce them thus, mon, ton, son;
in the masculine termination: and in the feminine, ma, ta, sa. And in the
plural number, mes, tes, ses, in both genders. And this is to be understood as
well in a speech or sentence, as in the bare words. Example: Mon fills escoute
ma voix, and enten mes paroles: Aye en admiration l'eternel ton Dieu, en toutes
ses aeuvres. cognoy le en sa parole, and te dedie totalement a son service:
lors il beniray toy, ta feme, tes enfans, etc. Tell amity te porteron tes
enfans, comme tu auras port a ton pere, and a ta mere. Item, ne reproach a
aucun sa poverte. Aim ton Dieu sur toutes chooses, and ton prochaine, comme toy
mesme.

But if these pronounes be taken relatively, without any noune substantive
expressed but only understood, then be they set in the end of the sentence, or
reason, and are pronounced thus, Mien, tien, sien, in the masculine gender, and
in the feminine, Mienne, tienne, sienne; as may be seen in this example: Ceste
doctrine, n'est pas mienne, mais de celuy qui m'a envoye. Item, les arbres sont
tiens, mais les fruicts sont miens; car je les ay achetes a poids d'argent.
Item, nous diviserons tellement cest oeuf avec nostre compagnon, que le ^aune
sera mien, and le blanc tien, and lo cocque sera sienne, etc.

And out of proposition or sentence in bare words they say after this order: De
qui est ce conseil? To this they answer: mien, tien or sien. De qui sont ces
enfans? they answer: miens, tiens, or siens.

And according to the opinion of those that mean to speak after the purest
and finest manner, in steed of saying, mien, tien, sien, we ought to say, a moy,
a toy, a soy. and a luy. as in this example: C^ste doctrine est a moy: ces
arbres sont a toy: mays le fruict est a moy. Nevertheless in the common use of
speaking the French men use much to say, Mien, tien, sien, etc.

The second rule.
THese pronounes feminines, Ma, ta, sa, are never put before nounes of the
feminine gender which begin with a vowell: but in steed of feminine pronounes
they put the masculine, mon, ton, son, which they do to shun the (...) or ill
sound, which the French men think committed when two vowels concur and meet
together. Example: Mon ame son eglise, ton ingratitude: and not, Ma ame; sa
eglise ta ingratitude; but this word, amie is excepted out of the rule. For
they say m'amie. The strangers that will learn to speak the French tongue must
take great heed and diligence in observing this rule, least they commit some
incongruitie when they speak, in joining the pronouns with the nounes.

The third rule.
THe French men almost continually use these pronounes, me, te, se, in steed of
saying A moy, a toy, a soy, etc. For whereas following the Grammar rules they
ought to say, Vous aves escrit a moy, they commonly and corruptly say, Vous
m'aves escrit. Item they say, Ie te ren ce que tu m'avois priest, where they
ought to say, Ie ren a toy ce que tu avoyt priest a moy. Item: Cest homme la se
plaict en ses paroles, and se faict plus de mal, qu'il ne pense etc. This manner
of speaking now adays is the commonest and most used among the French men,
saying, me, te, se. And therefore the strangers and such as learn the French
tongue, must note this diligently.

In the plural number they are accustomed to say. Ie ne vous donneray rien, in
steed of je ne donneray rien a vous. Item, Cela nous appartient, in steed of,
cela appartient a nous, etc. This order of speaking is now so much in use, that
if a man do leave it and pronounce according to the rule, he should be
accounted ignorant and one not skillful in the tongue: besides it were a thing
impossible, to correct the same manner of speaking by art, because the
comminalty and people has received it as it were for a fine kind of speech.

The fourth rule.
THese pronouns, me, te, se, of what case soever they be, dative or accusative,
they be always set before the verb, wherewith they be joined. And that
without interposing or putting any word betwixt any of the said pronounes and
the verb. As in this example appears: je me tay* and tu te vantes trop: ^e
te fie point en ta prosperity. je ne te failli^ay jamais Vous me faites tort.
Item, se meschan se flat, and se trompe en ses paroles, etc.

And note that what we have said of these pronouns in the singular number, it
ought also to be understood of the plural, nous vous, leur. As in this example
following: je vous done cecy a la pareille. Item, je vous pry de nous fair
ce plaisir maintenant; and une autrefois nous vous en ferons un autre. Item,
vous nous servez fidelement, aussy nous vous payons tres-bien: faites venir vos
enfans, and je leur donneray une piece d'argent; ce sera pour leurs estraines,
etc. So that these genitives plural, Of them, or Of you, and the datives are
always expressed and declared by one of these two words, leur, or leurs. As in
this example we may note: les hommes imprudens, mal avisez and mal conseyllez,
souvente fois mettent leur corpse and leurs biens en grand hazart. Item, les
meschans servent a leurs convoitises, ausi mal heure leur en advient, etc.

The fifth rule.
IN the French tongue there be four manner of words, that immediately after them
require a verb. And first these pronounes, me, te, se. Secondly, the
relatives. Thirdly, the negations. Fourthly, those which the Grammarians call
(personas agentes.) Example for all. As if one should ask, Me voulez vous
reveler vostre secret? The other answers negatively, le ne le vous reveleray
jamais. And affirmatively, Ie le vous reveleray quelque jour, etc. Vostre fault
est si grande, que je ne la vous puis perdonner, t'adresse donc a ce grand Dieu
immortel, qui a toute puisance au ciel and en la terre, etc.

The sixth rule.
THese two pronounes Our and your, possessively and absolutely taken, are
declared in the French tongue by these two words, nostre and vostre, in the
singular number: and nos and vos, in the plural number. But being relatively
taken they say, nostres and vostres in the plural: with the article belonging
to their case. As may easily be seen in this example: Nos amiss sont venus, and
les vostres sont demoures. Reformes un peu vos moeurs, and nous reformerons les
nostres: vostre parole est bonne, mais vos moeurs ne valentr^en. Item, faites
raison a nos serviteurs, and nous le fairons aux vostres, and.

The seventh rule.
THe five said pronounes when they be taken possessively and absolutely,
always require a noune appellative expressed, and in the nominative cases put
of the article, but not in the other cases, imitating the proper nounes. But if
the said pronounes be taken relatively, then contrary to the former rule they
keep their articles and be very seldom joined with a noune appellative. As in
this example: Mon honneur est le tien, and ton profit le sien. Son bien est le
nostre, Nostre salut est le vostre: and vostre salut est nostre gloire.

Of the third kind of Pronounes, which are called Relatives.
IN the French tongue their be diverse sorts of pronounes relatives. Others be of
name and person only, as qui, le la: others be of place, and of such there is
only one, and that is, y. as in this example appears: Nous estions esgarez
de la voye de justice and verite: mais Christ de sa grace nous y a ramenez.
Item, j'ay este une, fois sur la mer, mays je n'y returneray jamays, etc.

Rules of these Pronounes.
THese pronouns, le, and la, when they come by a verb, then they be always
relatives, but when they come before a noune then they be articles, as for
example: A tard se repent le rat, quand par la queve le tient le chat, that is
to say, Very late repents the rat, when by the tail holds him the cat. Quand
orgueil precede, la honte and le dommage le suyvent de bien pres. Item, la
vraye sapience vient du ciel, and le seigneur la done aqu'il veut, etc.

The second rule.
THe adjective quel, (which the Spaniards call qual, and we in English say,
which,) is made a pronoune relative of name or person in all genders and
numbers; by setting any of these articles, le, or la, before it. As for
example: Cest par un seul Jesus Christ, que nous sommes sauves; le quel nous a
este fait justice, redemption, satisfaction, etc. L'apostre S. Paul nous a
presche une doctrine entiere, la quelle nous menera a perfection: si nous la
voulons suivre: mon enfant amasse toy les richesses, les quelles ne perissent
jamays.

The third rule.
THe pronounes which the Spaniards pronounce, el, and English men, he, the
French men call celuy, which also is made a pronounce relative of name or
person by setting the letter i before it, at the beginning. As for example:
celuy qui est beau, and parle vilainement, iceluy tire un eousteau de plomb
d'une gain d'yvoire, dit Diogenes. Item, celuy qui fera bien, iceluy trouvera
le bien et celle qui fera mal, icelle aussi trouvera le mal, et ceux qui se
meront benediction, iceux recueillir^nt mal heur et malediction.

The fourth rule.
LAstly note that the pronouns relatives in the French tongue are nine:
videlicet, five single or simple ones, le, la, qui, y, en. and four compounds,
which are these, lequel, laquelle, iceluy, and icelle: which are declined after
the order of the nounes in both numbers and genders. Like as lequel, duquel,
auquel, lesquels, desquels, ausquels, iceluy, d'iceluy a iceluy, iceux,
d'iceux, a iceux, etc. The same is to be understood of the feminine gender:
like as laquelle and icelle. And also of the relative, qui, which is thus
declined: qui, de qui, a qui, and that in both genders and numbers. As
appears by this example: Longue cord tire, qui la mort d'autruy desire: that
proverb do the Spaniards thus write; Luenga cuerda menea, quien a otro la
muerte dessea. In English, A long third does he frame, That another death does
claim. Item, Sage est, qui par autruy se chastie, etc.

THE FOVRTH TREATISE.
Of the Verb.
THe Spanish tongue has the same kind of verbes, moodes, tenses, numbers, and
persons, as the Latin and French tongue. There is this only difference betwixt
them, that it has not any passives, as hereafter we shall show.

The conjugations by the which the Spanish verbs be declined, are three: and
they be known by the infinitives. For the verbs of the first conjugation form
their infinitive mood always in ar: as adorar, orar, invocar, comprar.

The second conjugation forms the infinitive in er: as leer, vender, poner,
tener, etc.

The third forms the infinitive mood in ir: as regir, oir, sentir, permitir,
etc.

Because the chief difficulty of the Spanish tongue does consist in the
knowledge of well declining the verbs, and finding the moodes and tenses: that
the stranger may somewhat the easier attain to the knowledge of the same; I
will here set certain general rules, which shall stand them in steed of
advertisements and notes, before they come to the conjugations.

Of the present tense of the Indicative mood.
TO find the conjugation of every verb, we must only mark the second person
singular of the indicative mood: for if the last letter of the same person
being an s, be turned into an r, then is the infinitive of the same verb
formed, and the conjugation known. Like as, Amo, amas, amar: adoro, adoras,
adorar; the first conjugation. Como, comes, comer: defiendo, defiendes,
defiender; the second conjugation. But in the third conjugation the e must be
changed in i, and the s in r: as, Oygo, oyes, oir: escrivo, escrives, escrivir:
induzgo, induzes, induzir, etc.

They that are acquainted with the Latin tongue, shall learn to know the
conjugation by this means. All the Latin words that be used in the Spanish
tongue, if they be of the first conjugation in the Latin, then they be also of
the first conjugation in the Spanish.

Item, all such verbs as in the Latin tongue be of the second or third
conjugation, they be referred to the second conjugation in the Spanish tongue.

And all the verbs of the fourth conjugation in the Latin tongue, are put in
the third conjugation among the Spaniards.

Furthermore, me thinks it were not amiss to make a certain agreement and
correspondence betwixt every tense and mood, that they may the easier and with
less pains be formed, and declined.

So that each present tense is formed of the present indicative, and of the
first preterperfect tense, each other preterperfect tense: and of the first
future, also each other future.

Of the present tense in the Indicative mood, and that in the first
conjugation.
THe first person singular of the indicative mood, what conjugation soever,
always ends in o. As for example: Posseo, vendo, oygo, etc.

The second person of the verbs of the first conjugation always end in as: as
tu deseas, tu compras.

Now, taking away the last letter s. you form the present tense in the
imperative mood: as amas; take aways, and remains ama.

But to form the present tense optative you must add to the second person
present indicative this syllable, se: as amas; put se to it, and it is amasse,
etc.

The present tense subjunctive is also formed of the same person of the
indicative mood by taking away the last letter s, and changing the a next
before it into e: as amas; take away s and there remains ama: now turn the
last a into e; and it is ame; But the present tense infinitive is formed of the
said second person, by turning s into r: as amas; turn s into r, and the
infinitive is formed: amas, amar; compras, comprar; andas, andar, etc.

Of the present tense in the second and third conjugation.
THe verbs of the second and third conjugation form the second person of the
present tense indicative alwai^s in es; and the third person in e.

The present tense imperative is formed of the second person singular of the
present tense indicative, taking away the s.

The present tense optative is formed of the said person interposing this
letter i before the last e; and joining this syllable se, after the e; as for
example: vendes, interpose i before the last e; and it will be, vendies: add
se, and it makes the present tense optative vendiesse; corres, corriesse.

The present tense infinitive is formed, by changing s into r vendes, vender,
etc. But in deed to form all the tenses after this sort, it were difficult, and
very hard: for there are so many exceptions that without great trouble to the
learner one might hardly set down rules for all. So that I wish them to learn
this rather by use than by art: and especially in the verbes of the third
conjugation.

Of the preterimperfect tense.
THe preterimperfect tense is formed of the second person singular of the
present tense; changing s into va; as for example: Amas, amava; compras,
comprava; en sen^as, ensen^ava, etc. But the verbs of the second and third
conjugations form their termination in ia. As for example: hazia, dezia,
corregia, etc. As we will at large show when we come to speak of them. The
imperfect tense of the optative is formed of the said second person of the
indicative mood; changing the letter s, in the syllable ra; as for example,
amas, amara; ensen^as, ensen^ara, etc.

Of the preterperfect tense.
THe formation of this tense is the hardest of al others; insomuch that there
can be no certain rules given of it: because of the multitude of exceptions.

But for the most part commonly all the preterperfect tenses indicative in the
first and second conjugation end in e; as anduve, truche, tome, etc: and in the
third conjugation in i; as corregi, oy, consenti, etc.

The formation of the other persons may be easily learned by use, reading the
tables that shall follow here after.

The preterpluperfect tenses of the infinitive and all the other moodes, and
the preterperfect tenses also are compounded with the Latin verb called,
habeo, habes, etc. and also with the participle of the verbs. As for example:
Yo avia amado, uviesse amado, avia dicho, abre hecho, abre comprado, uve
traido, aver dexado. As we say in English I had loved: I would to God I had
loved, etc. But at the end of these rules among the other conjugations, I will
set down the conjugation of the same verb habeo, in Spanish: that ye may be
acquainted with the use of the same word.

Of the future.
ALl the futures of the indicative mood always end in e; and have the accent
on the last syllable, being formed of the infinitive by adding an e; as for
example: amar, amare: comer, comere: dormir, dormire: saltar, saltare:
defender, defendere: comprar, comprare: juzgar, juzgare: acabar, acabare, etc.
And this in all the three conjugations.

Of the imperative mood.
THe imperative mood has one only tense in the Spanish tongue. Which tense
serves indifferently, and is sometimes used as the present, and sometimes as
the future tense: as occasion is offered unto them that speak, which will
soon be known by them that are a little exercised in the tongue.

Of the optative mood.
THe optative mood in the Spanish tongue has five tenses as in the Latin tongue.

The present tense of the first conjugation ends in ass; as for example:
amasse, comprasse, etc.

The present tense in the second and third conjugation end in iesse; like as,
hiziesse, tuviesse, dormiesse, anduviesse, prometiesse, etc.

The preterimperfect tense in the first conjugation is in ara; as amara,
mirara, contara, tratara, comprara, etc.

In the second and third conjugation the preterimperfect optative does end in
era: like as hiziera, pusiera, dormiera, corriera, etc.

The preterperfect and pluperfect tenses are formed with the verb Habeo, and
the participles passives. Example: uviera amado, uviera comprado, uviera
dormido, uviera marescido, etc. And in the pluperfect tense, uviesse comido,
uviesse bevido, uviesse traido, etc.

The future when it is of the first conjugation, then it begins in e: as
compre, temple, ensen^e, maxque, etc. In the second and third conjugation the
future ends in a: haga, duerma, corra, defienda, etc.

Of the Subjunctive mood.
THis mood has his tenses like the optative.

The present tense has the selfsame terminations as the future optative.

The preterimperfect tense is like the present and preterimperfect tense in the
optative.

The preterperfect and pluperfect tenses are altogether like the same tenses in
the optative mood, in termination: but in sense nevertheless much different.

For in the optative, when we wish for any thing in Spanish, we use this word,
Oxala, or this word, plugiesse, joining it to the verb. And in the subjunctive,
Como. As for example, in the optative mood, we say thus in the Spanish
language: oxala yo amasse tanto a Dios, como el dessea que yo le ame, plugiesse
all Sen^or, que jo fuesse ya de^atado deste cuerpo mortal.

Example for the subjunctive mood. Como yo uviesse oydo munchas vezes las
bozes de Dios, nunca le qui se responder; como yo supiesse bien la voluntad de
Dios, hize contra ella.

Of the Infinitive mood.
WE have already in a manner showed all the formations of the infinitive above,
for,

The first conjugation ^^ds in ar* The second in er. The third in ir.
As for the preterperfect tense and the future, they be compounded with the
verb, Habeo, habes, and the participles passives.

^^^e that the presentense of the infinitive mood does almost always require
de, or en; as for example: Tenga el hombre cuenta, de huyer de los vicios:
acuerdese de reverenciar a Dios, etc.

Of the Gerunds.
THe French tongue has no gerunds, but utter them by circumloqu^tions: But
there is great use of them in the Spanish tongue. As they say in Spanish: Vengo
de oyr la palabra de dios; en acabando de orar, ire a tratar mis negotios.
Haziendo, comiendo, dormiendo, etc. And in deed these gerunds in do, of the
ablative case be the commonest, and most used. The other terminations, may be
rather called infinitives than gerunds.

Of the Supines.
AS touching the supines; the Spanish and French tongue have no use of them.

The Spaniards in steed of the supine use the infinitive by putting the
preposition a before it; as for example: Voy a oyr sermon, ire a hazer cuentas,
etc.

And thus much I thought to note of the verbs generally, before we come to the
conjugations of them, that I should not be driven afterward to repeat one thing
oftentimes.

Now we shall not do amiss, if we set down an example of each conjugation
particularly, that according to the same all the other verbs of the same
conjugation, may with less difficulty be learnd, how it ought to be formed
and declined.

But because the verbs of the active voice and such as signify action, must be
declined with the verb habeo; and the passives of the other verb sum, es,
est; I think it best first to set down the manner how them two verbs ought to
be declined: that afterward we may learn the easier to decline and form all
the other verbs.

The verb habeo, in the Spanish tongue. The present tense.
Sing.
Yo he, Tu has, Aquel ha.
Plu.
Nosotros hemos, Vosotros haveys, Aquellos han.

The present tense of the indicative in French, shall follow afterward, and in
English also.

The preterimperfect tense.
Sing.
Yo avia, Tu avias, Aquel avia.
Plu.
Nosotros aviamos, Vosotros aviades, Aquellos avian.

As touching the orthographie and right spelling of this verb in the Spanish
tongue, some write it always with an h, in each termination, and others without
h; according to the pronunciation used in each several shire, where they be
borne in. Item some say uve, and others, ove. But as for this diversity in
writing, every man may freely do as it pleases him: But here we do observe
the Andaluzian and Sevillan manner of pronuntiation.

The preteperfect tense.
Sing.
yo uve, tu uviste, aquel uvo.
Plu.
nosotros uvimos, vosotros uvistes, aquellos uvieron.

The preterpluperfect tense.
Sing.
yo avia avido, tu avias avido, aquel avia avido
Plu.
nosotros aviamos avido, vosotros aviades avido, aquellos avian avido.

The future tense.
Sing.
yo aure, tu auras, aquel aura.
Plu.
nosotros auremos, vosotros aureis, aquellos auran.

Imperative mood, present tense.
Sing.
tu ayas, aquel aya.
Plu.
vosotros aved, aquellos ayan.

The first termination of this mood commonly is taken from the verb teneo,
tenes, etc. So likewise the future tense of the optative and present tense of
the subjunctive. So that the Spaniards commonly use this imperative,

Ten ^u, Tened aquel, etc.
The optative mood.
In the optative we must observe this, that in all terminations as well
singular as plural, we must use this word, Oxala, or else this, Pluguiesse a
Dios, in steed of that the Latinists say Vtinam, the French men, Pleut a Dieu
que, and the English men, Would to God, etc.

The present tense.
Sing. oxala que
yo uviesse, tu uviesses, aquel uviesse.
Plu.
nosotros uviessemos, vosotros uviessedes, aquellos uviessen.

The imperfect tense.
Sing. oxala que
yo uviera, tu uvieras, aquel uviera.
Plu
nosotros uvieramos, vosotros uvierades, aquellos uvieran.

The preterperfect tense.
Sing. oxala que
yo aya avido, tu ayas avido, aquel aya avido.
Plu
nosotros ayamos avido, vosotros ayays avido, aquellos ayan avido.

The pluperfect tense.
Sing. oxala que
yo uviesse avido, tu uviesse avido, aq. uviesse avido
Plu
nosotr. uviessemos avido vosotr. uviessedes avido, aquellos uviessen avido.

The future tense, Oxala que
Sing.
yo aya, tu ayas, aquel aya.
Plu.
nosotros ayamos, vosotros ayays. aquellos ayan.

Of the subjunctive mood.
The subjunctive mood is altogether like the optative, for, The present tense
is like the future tense in the former mood. And the preterimperfect, perfect,
and pluperfect tenses be all a like in this and the former mood: but that in
steed of oxala, they use in this mood, quando: visto que. which the French men
call, quand; veu que. and in English we say, When, seeing that, etc.

The infinitive mood.
The present tense, Aver, Some men The preterperfect tense, Aver avido. write
with h.

Note that when the Spaniard will say or express any thing by the future tense
of this infinitive mood, he does not only use this word aver, but also adds
some other strange word unto it to shun the (...) or ill sound; for else he
should say: Aver de aver, which repetition does seem absurd to the ear: And
therefore in steed of repeating this word, he takes some other verb, and
adding it to the present tense, supplieth the future. As for example: Espero
aver bueno conclusion de mi negocio: Cierto estoy de aver paz exterior, si yo
la tengo con Dios en mi conscientia, etc.

Now follows the conjugation, which the Latins call Sum es fui, etc.

The indicative mood, and present tense. Indicativo present.

Sing.
yo soy, tu eres, aquel es.
Plu.
nosotros somos, vosotros soys, aquellos son.

The preterimperfect tense. Praeterito imperfecto

Sing.
yo era, tu eras, aquel era.
Plu.
nosotros eramos, vosotros erades, aquellos eran.

The preterperfect tense. Praeterito perfecto.

Sing.
yo fue, tu fueste, aquel fue.
Plu.
nosotros fuemos, vosotros fuestes, aquellos fueron.

The pluperfect tense compounded. Praeterito plusquam perfecto compuesto

Sing.
yo avia sido, tu avias sido, aquel avia sido.
Plu.
nosotros aviamos sido, vosotros aviades sido, aquellos avian sido.

The future tense.
Sing.
yo sere, Futuro.
tu seras, aquel sera.
Plu.
nosotros seremos, vosotros sereis, aquellos seran.

The imperative mood, present tense.
Sing.
se tu, Imperativo present.
sea aquel.
Plu.
seamos nosotros, sed vosotros, sean aquellos.

The Optative mood, present tense.
Sing. O si
yo fuesse, Optativo present.
tu fuesses, aquel fuesse.
Plu. O si
nosotros fuessemos, vosotros fuessedes, aquellos fuessen.

The preterimperfect tense.
Sing. O si
yo fuera, Imperfecto
tu fueras, aquel fuera.
Plu. O si
nosotros fueramos, vosotros fuerades, aquellos fueran.

The preterperfect tense.
Sing. O si
yo aya sido, Praeterito perfecto.
tu ayas sido, aquel aya sido.
Plu. O si
nosotros ayamos sido. vosotros ayays sido, aquellos ayan sido.

The pluperfect tense.
Sing. O si
yo uviesse sido. Plusquam perfecto.
tu uviesses sido, aq. uviesse sido
Plu. O si
nosotr. uviessemos sido. vosotros uviessedes sido. aquellos uviessen sido.

The future tense.
Sing. O si
yo sea, Futuro.
^u seas, aquel sea.
Plu. O si
nosotros seamos, vosotros seays, aquellos sean.

The Subjunctive mood, present tense. The present is alike with the future of
the optative. Subjunctivo present.


The perfect and pluperfect of this and the former mood are alike also. But in
steed of O si, and Oxala, or Pluguiesse a Dios, they say, Quando, or Como.

But the preterimperfect tense is not like the preterimperfect tense or any
other in the optative mood: but is thus declined:

Singular.
como yo fuera seria, y fuesse, tu fueras, serias y fuesses, aquel fuera,
seria, y fuesse.
Plural.
fueramos, seriamos, y fuessemos, fuerades seriades, y fuessedes, fueran,
serian y fuessen.
In the French tongue the subjunctive mood is altogether like to the indicative
mood: only in the subjunctive mood they use to add these words, veu que,
and quand, before the verb in all persons and numbers: as we shall afterward
show.

The infinitive mood.
The present, ser. The preterperfect tense, aver sido. The future, aver de ser,
etc.
The knowledge of these two verbes, Habeo, and Sum, how to decline and form
them as they ought to be, is the principalest and cheifest foundation to speak
both these toongs. So that the strangers ought in any cause to exercise
themselves very well in the flexio^ and declining of them.

Rules belonging to the conjugations of the French tongue.
THe French tongue declineth her verbes by four conjugations: three regular,
and the fourth irregular. The tokens and signs whereby they be distinguished
the one from the other, are taken from the preterperfect tense in the
indicative mood, and also from the infinitive mood.

The verbs of the first conjugation form their preterperfect tense in e, and
the infinitive in r: like as aim, aimer; enseigne, enseigner; chante, chanter,
etc.

The verbs of the second conjugation form their preterperfect tense in i, and
the infinitive in ir: as dormi, dormir; oui, ouir; souffri, souffrir.

The verbs of the fourth conjugation form the preterperfect tense in u, and
the infinitive in re: as leu, lire; creu, croire; vaincu, vaincre, etc.
Insomuch as e, er, i, ir, and u, re, are the signs and tokens of all the
conjugations regular.

As touching the fourth conjugation it is so out of order and diverse, that it
cannot by rules or any certainty be set down: so that the strangers must
learn it more by use than by art. And for because that in the French tongue the
cheifest difficulty consists in the verbes, I will here set down certain
general rules concerning the formation of moodes and tenses, as before I have
done in the Spanish tongue.

Of the present tense of the indicative mood.
TO find the first person of the present tense and indicative mood (which is
called Thema) you must look for the second person of the same tense: which, if
you deprive it of the last letter s, makes the ( thema) that is to say, the
first person of the whole conjugation; and from which all the conjugation is as
it were drawn and fetched. As for example: tu aims; take away s, and
remains aim, j'aime, tu aims, il aim: tu dors, take away s, and remains
dor: tu croys, take away s, and it is croy, etc. Item, the ( thema) may be
found after another rule also, vz. That all the verbs of the first conjugation
in the first and third person of the present tense and indicative mood in the
singular number end in e feminine. As for example: j'aime, il aim, etc. But
the verbes of the second and third declension have sundry terminations.
Nevertheles, the third person singular of the present tense, and indicative
mood, always ends in t: which t being taken away, the ( thema) is formed.
As for example: il dort; take away t, and it is dor: and this is the ( thema)
or first person of the whole conjugation. As for the other verbes, they are
under this rule also: as il lit, je ly: il croit, je croy: il boit, je boy, etc.

Of the preterimperfect tense.
ALl verbs of what inflexion or conjugation whatsoever in the first person of
the singular number alwais end in the diphthong oy, the second person in oys,
and the third in oit. As for example: je prioy, tu priois, il prioit: j'avoy,
tu avois, il avoit. And in the plural number it is like the plural of the
present tense, but that in the last syllable it has one letter interposed viz.
i. in the first and second person, but in the third this diphthong oy, is
interposed, as nous aimons nous aimions, vous aims, vous aimies, ils aiment,
ils aimoyent, etc.

Of the preterperfect tense.
THe French men imitating the Greeks, have two preterperfect tenses, the one
may be called simplex, single, because it is not joined to any other verb: as
j'aimay, tu aimas, il aima, je dormy, tu dormis, il dormit, je fu, tu fus, etc.
The other is called compositum, compounded, because it always is joined to
some other verb.

This preterperfect tense is formed of the participle passive of the same
verb, and the verb habeo, habes, or fum, es, etc. As appears in this
example: j'ay aim, tu as aim, il a aim, j'ay dormi, tu as dormi, il a dormi,
etc.

The terminations of the first and single preterperfect tense in the first
conjugation are these: ay, as, a, ames, ates, arent: as j'aimay, tu aimas, etc.

In the second conjugation these, i, is, it: imes, ites, irent: as dormi,
dormis, dormit: dormimes, dormites, dormirent. In the third conjugation these,
eu, eus, eut: eumes, eutes, eurent: as je leu, tu leus, il leut: nous leumes,
vous leutes, ils leurent. Insomuch that the termination and last syllable of
the first person, in the first and second preterperfect tense is alike; as well
in the second conjugation as in the third. Example: Ie dormi, and j'ay dormi.
Ie leu, and j'ay leu, etc.

Of the use of these two preterperfect tenses.
AMong all other difficulties that are in the French tongue, one of the most is
to know the true and ready use of these two preterperfect tenses, and therefore
I counsel the novice diligently to learn the same, and remember it. The
French men use the first preterperfect tense whenever these adverbes of time,
dernierement, ier, jadis, and such others come before or after it. As for
example: Nous passames ier par my les brigans, and fumes en danger d'estre
destroussez.

Item, they use the same preterperfect tense, when they speak of things past
long since. The second preterperfect tense is used among the French men, when
it comes before or after adverbs of time signifieng and betokening presence
as auiourd buy, maintenant, desja, etc.

Item when they speak of things already done, but not long ago, as appears
in this example following, wherein the verb sum, es, and habeo, habes, make
the conjunction: j'ay creu, and pource ay-je parle, Tu as delaisse le mal, and
j'ay faict le bien. vous avez rejecte la doctrine saint, and nous l'avons
receue. Ces gens-cy, sont venus about de leurs affairs: and nous ne sommes pas
venues a la fin de nos entreprinses, j'ay tous jours ouy dire qu'il ny a rien
si precieux que le temps, etc.

Of the preterpluperfect tense, etc.
THis tense does not any thing differ from the second and compound
preterperfect tense, but that in steed of the present tense of the verb Habeo,
habes: it has the preterimperfect tense of the same verb. As for example:
j'ay creu, I have believed: j'avoy creu, I had believed. In the optative mood
they say, Pleut a Dieu que j'eusse creu, Would to God I believed. In the
subjunctive mood, Veu que j'avoy creu, seeing that I have believed: Veu que
j'avoy dormi, seeing that I have slept. And in the infinitive, avoyr creu, to
have believed, etc.

The same is to be understood of verbs neuters absolute signifieng passion;
which form their preterperfect and pluperfect tenses with the help of the
verb, Sum, es, est. As for example. Ie suys venu, IN estoy venu: je suis
monte, j'estoy monte, je suys descendu j'estoy descendu. In the optative:
Pleust a dieu que je fusse venu. In the subjunctive, Veuque je suys venu,
veuque j'estoy venu. In the infinitive: Estre venu.

Of the future.
THe future of the indicative mood, of what verb soever, does always end in
ray diphthong, and it is formed from the first person of the present tense, by
adding ray, unto it, as for example: je chante, add ray, and the future is
formed: Ie chanteray, jecroy, croyray, je mange, je mangeray, etc. Where this
may be noted, that the future tense ever requires an r, which is to be added
to the present tense.

Of the imperative mood.
IN the French tongue the imperative mood has no more tenses than the present,
which is commonly like to the present tense of the indicative mood, especially
in the plural number. But sometimes it does not require the pronoune, which
always in the indicative mood is joined to the verb; and when it does use
the pronoune, then the pronoune does always follow the verb, as we use in
English sometimes: Rise you, go we: ride you, run we: and so forth.

The French men either commanding or asking, speak after the same manner: as
levez vous, and allons nous en d'icy. Item, Ne favoriserons nous a la verite?
Perdrons nous courage au milieu de la victoire?

Sometimes without the pronoune: as Servons a Dieu, and obeissons a ses loyx,
oyez and entendez la parole du seigneur: Mon fills honnore les enciens: hante
les sages, aye pity des po^vres: visit les bons livers, fui les vices, and
ensuy toute virtue. Item, mangeons, beuvons, dormons, allons, allez: venez,
montez, etc. In which examples the pronoune is understoode, but not written or
set down: But I doubt whether a man may set down any rule, when it ought to
be written with the verb, and when not: For I have asked of some men that were
very skillful in the French tongue, and they could not tell me; and therefore it
must be learned by use.

Of the optative mood.
THis mood in the French tongue has but three tenses, for the present and
preterimperfect tenses be formed both alike with double ss, and i, for every
preterimperfect tense has an i, in the first and second persons of the plural
number. The preterperfect and preterpluperfect tenses are also formed both
alike with the preterimperfect, tense of the optative mood of the verb,
habeo, es, joined to them, as Pleusta Dieu que j'eusse dormi, que tu eusses
dormi, qu'il eust, etc.

The future tense is by it self, and is commonly formed and declined as the
present tense of the indicative mood.

Of the subjunctive mood.
THis mood in the French tongue is almost altogether like the indicative mood
in all tenses, this excepted: that at every person they add in the subjunctive
mood, either veuque, or qua^d, and sometimes si.

And for because the subjunctive mood has no particular tokens, there be some
that would have the subjunctive mood formed diversely, according to the variety
and difference of the conjunctions that are joined with it: but that would
breed but a confusion in mingling the inflections and declensions, and so as it
were induce a new difficulty.

Indeed in the preterimperfect tense they use little variety when quand
comes before it not else: and then at the end of the last syllable they
interpose an r, as quand j'aimeroi, for aimoy, and yet sometimes they say also,
quand j'aimoy, etc

The future tense, when this word si comes before it, then it is formed as
the present tense in the indicative mood; as for example: Si je peche, vous me
pardonnerez: but they say not, si je pecheray, etc. Si vous espousez une femme
plus rich que vous, vous avrez trousjours un maistre: but they say not, vous
espouserez, etc. Sometimes the preterperfect tense of the indicative mood
joined with the future tense of the verb, habeo, makes the future of the
subjunctive mood; as for example: Quand vous aures fait tout ce que Dieu vous
a command humiliez vous, and dittes, nous sommes serviteurs inutiles. Item,
Quand nous aurons receu la Doctrine de Christ, par vray foy, lors nous serons
vrays enfans de Dieu, etc.

Of the infinitive mood.
THis mood does vary in terminations according to the diversity of the
conjugations: because the first ends in er, the second in ir, and the third
in re: Insomuch that if the tokens how one might know the verb were only
taken from the infinitive mood, there would be no verb irregular, because all
verbes whatsoever are reduced into these three terminations.

The preterpluperfect tense is compounded of the second preterperfect tense of
the indicative mood and of the infinitive of the verb habeo: as avoir aim,
avoir dormi, avoir creu, etc.

The French tongue has no future tense in the infinitive mood, but forms it
as the future tense in the indicative mood, and it is to be noted, that the
infinitives demand this particle de: as for example: Ce n'est pas honte
d'apprendre, ains c'est honte de rien savoir. Item, mon enfant, prenpeine de
fuir les vices, and d'ensuivre la virtue, guard toy d^ mesdire, etc.

Of the gerunds.
THe French tongue has no use of gerunds, but they declare them by
circumloquutions.

The gerunds that ends in di, they declare them by the infinitive: as il est
temps de fair bien, ou jamais non, etc.

The gerund in do, they declare by the participle of the active voice of the
same verb, and the preposition en; as en contemplant les oeuures de Dieu, je
ne me laisse jamais, etc.

The gerund in dum, is declared by the infinitive, adding this preposition
pour, to it: as je vien pour advancer l'honneur and gloire du seigneur, and tu
viens pour l'empecher, etc

Of the Supines.
THe French men lack supines, but they express them by circumloquutions.

The first supine is declared by the infinitive of the same verb it does
descend of: as vat'en dormir de bonne heure, and te leve de maine de grand
matin. Item, allons combatre pour la denfense de nostre pais, etc.

The second supine by the preterperfect tense of the indicative mood of the
same verb, and of the infinitive of the verb, sum, es, est, etc. like as, Ce
livre est digne d'estre leu. Vostre doctrine est digne d'estre ouye et receue
de tous etc.

Thus much of the rules how to form the moodes and tenses in the French tongue.
Now we will set down the conjugation of the verb habeo, in French, that the
strangers may know how it is declined in French.

The Indicative mood, present time. Indicatif temps present.

Singular
j'ay, tu as, il a.
Plural
nous avons, vous avez, ils ont.

The preterimperfect tense. Preterit imperfait.

Singular
j'avoy, tu avois, il avoit.
Plural
nous avions, vous aviez, ils avoyent.

The first preterperfect tense. Le preterit perfait premier ou single.

Singular
j'eu, tu eus, il eut.
Plural
nous eusmes, vous eustes, ils eurent.

The second preterperfect tense or compounded. Le second preterit perfait ou
compose.

Singular
j'ay eu, tu as eu, il a eu.
Plural
nous avions eu, vous aviez eu, ils ont eu.

The preterpluperfect tense. Preterit plus que perfait.

Singular
j'avoy eu, tu avois eu, il avoit eu.
Plural
nous avions eu, vous aviez eu, ils avoyent eu.

The future tense. Futur.

Singular
j'auray, tu auras, il aura.
Plural
nous aurons, vous aures, ils auront.

The Imperative mood, present time. Imperatif temps present.

Singular
ayes tu, a il.
Plural
ayons nous ayes vous, ayent ils.

The Optative mood, present tense and preterimperfect tense. Optatif, temps
present, and preterit imperfait.

Sing. Pleut a Dieu que
j'eusse, tu eusses, il eust.
Plural
nous eussions, vous eussies, ils eussent.

The future tense. Futur.

Sing. Dieu veulle que
j'aye, tu ayes, il ait.
Plural
nous ayons, vous ayes, ils ayent.

The subjunctive mood is altogether like the indicative mood: but you must
put veu que, or quand to each person, etc.

The Infinitive mood. Infinitif.

Singular
avoir, avoir eu.

We have showed before how the French tongue has no gerunds or supines, but are
declared by circumloquutions, etc.

The verb, Sum, is declined after this manner.

The Indicative mood present time. Indicatif temps present.

Singular
je suis, tu es, il est.
Plural
nous sommes, vous estes, ils sont.

The preterimperfect tense. Preterit imperfait.

Singular
j'estoye, tu estois, il estoit.
Plural
nous estions, vous esties, ils estoyent.

The first preterperfect tense. Preterit perfait premier ou single.

Singular
je fu, tu fus, il fut.
Plural
nous fumes, vous fustes, ils furent.

The second preterperfect tense compounded. Preterit second ou compose.

Singular
j'ay este, tu as este, il a este.
Plural
nous avons este, vous avez este, ilz ont este.

The preterpluperfect tense. Preterit plus que perfait.

Singular
j'avoy este, tu avoys este, il avoit este.
Plural
nous avions este, vous avies este, ilz avoyent este.

The future tense. Futur.

Singular
je seray, tu seras, il sera.
Plural
nous serons, vous serez, ilz seront.

The Imperative mood present time. Imperatif temps present.

Singular
sois tu, soit il.
Plural
soyons nous, soyes vous, soyent ils.

The Optative mood, present and preterimperfect tense. Optatif temps present
and preterit imperfait Pleut a Dieu que

Singular
j'eusse este, tu eusses este, il eusset este.
Plural
nous eussions este, vous eussies este, ils eussient este.

The future tense. Future.

Sin. dieu veulle que
je soye, tu soys, il soit.
Plural
nous soyons, vous soyes, ils soyent.

The subjunctive mood is altogether like the optative, but that in steed of
Pleut a Dieu que, they add to all the persons of each number of every tense,
Veu que, or quand, etc.

The Infinitive mood. Infinitif.

Estre; Avoir este: To have been.
The same exhortation which I used touching the Spanish tongue, I also repeat
here, wishing every one that is desirous to speak the French tongue, to bestow
no small pains in the declining of these two verbs: to wit, Habeo, habes, and
Sum es, etc. Now to the Spanish conjugations.

Of the first Conjugation.
THe first conjugation is of those verbs, which form the infinitive mood in
ar; as for example: Comprar, andar, cambiar, acotar, hablar, pasear, etc. And
that the novice may see how the verbs of the first conjugation are declined, I
will set down the form or declension of one of them. For after the same order
are all the other verbs whatsoever of the first conjugations declined also.

The Indicative mood, present tense. Indicativo present.

Sing.
yo amo, tu amas, aquel ama.
Plu.
nosotros amamos, vosotros amais, aquellos aman.

The preterimperfect tense. Praeterito imperfecto

Sing.
yo amava, tu amavas, aquel amava.
Plu.
nosotros amavamos, vosotros amavades, aquellos amavan.

The preterperfect tense. Praeterito perfecto.

Sing.
yo ame, tu amaste, aquel amo.
Plu.
nosotros amamos, vosotros amastes, aquellos amaron.

The preterpluperfect tense. Praeterito plusquam perfecto.

Sing.
yo avia amado, tu avias amado, aq. avia amado.
Plu.
nosot. aviamos amado, vosotr. aviades amado, aquellos avian amado.

The future tense. Futuro.

Sing.
yo amare, tu amaras, aquel amara.
Plu.
nosotros amaremos, vosotros amareys, aquellos amaran.

The Imperative mood. Imperativo

Sing.
ama tu, ame aquel.
Plu.
amad vosotros, amen aquellos.

The Optative mood. Optativo

Sing. oxala
yo amasse, tu amasses, aquel amasse.
Plu.
nosotros amassemos, vosotros amassedes, aquellos amassen.

The imperfect tense. Imperfecto

Sing. oxala
yo amara, tu amaras, aquel amara.
Plu.
nosotros amaramos, vosotros amarades, aquellos amaron.

The preterperfect tense. Praeterito perfecto.

Sing. oxala
yo oviera amado, tu ovieras amado, aq. oviera amado.
Pl.
nosotr. ovieramos amado. vosotr. ovierades amado. aquellos ovieran amado.

The preterpluperfect tense. Preterito Plusquam perfecto.

Sing. oxala
yo oviesse amado, tu oviesses amado aq. oviesse amado.
Pl.
nosotr. oviessemos amado. vosotr. oviessedes amado. aquellos oviessen amado.

The future tense. Futuro.

Sing. oxala
yo ame, tu ames, aquel ame.
Plu.
nosotros amemos, vosotros ameys, aquellos amen.

The subjunctive in the Spanish tongue, is altogether like the optative, except
the preterimperfect tense and the future tense. And also whereas they say,
oxala in the optative: here they use como, or quando: as quando yo ame, etc.

The preterimperfect tense of the Subjunctive Imperfecto del Subjunctivo.
mood.
Singular quando
yo amare, amaria y amasse, tu amares, amarias y amassedes, aquel amare, amaria
y amasse.
Plural.
nosotr. amaremos amariamos, y amassemos, vosotros amares amariades y
amassedes, aquellos amaren amarian, y amassen.

The preterperfect and pluperfect tenses are like to the same tenses of the
optative mood.

The future tense. Futuro.

Sing.
quando yo avre amado, tu avras amado, aquel avra amado.
Plu.
abremos amado, abreis amado, abran amado.
The infinitive mood. Infinitivo.

Amar aver amado, aver de amar.
The gerunds. Gerundios

De amar, en amando, en siendo amado, a amar, or ser amado.

The Spanish tongue has not any use for supines. Supinos.


After the same manner are all other verbs of the first conjugation declined: as
Euangelizar, predicar, annunciar, disputar, perdonar, rescatar, libertar,
dexar, desechar, escalentar, quemar, trabajar, limpiar, etc.

The first conjugation in French.
THe first conjugation forms the second preterperfect tense in e, and the
infinitive in er: as aim, aimer; chante, chanter; mange, manger, etc.

An example of the first conjugation through out all moodes and tenses.

Singul.
j'aime, tu aims, il aim.
Plural
nous aimons, Indicatif temps present.
vous aims, ils aiment.
Singul.
j'aimoye, tu aimoyes, il aimoit.
Plural
nous aimions, Preterit imperfait.
vous aimiez, ils aimoyent.
Singul.
j'aimay, tu aimas, il aima.
Plural
nous aimantes, Preterit perfait premier.
vous aimastes, ils aimerent.
Singul.
j' ay aim, tu as aim, il a aim.
Plural
nous avons, aim Preterit perfait second.
vous avez, aim ils ont. aim
Singul.
j' avoye aim, tu avois aim, il avoit aim.
Plural
nous avions, aim. Preterit plus que perfait.
vous aviez, aim. ilz avoyent. aim.
Singul.
je aimeray, tu aimeras, il aimera.
Plural
nous aimerons, Futur.
vous aimerez, ils aimeront. Imperatif temps present. Optatif temps present,
and preterit imperf.

Singul.
aim tu, aim il.
Plural
aimons nous, aims vous, aiment ils.
Singul. Pleut a dieu que.
j' aimasse, tu aimasses, il aimast.
Plural
nous aimissions, vous aimissies, ils aimassent.
Singular
j' eusse aim, tu eusses aim, il eust aim.
Plural
nous eussions aim, Preterit perfait ou plus que perfait, pleut a dieu que.
Futur Dieu veville que.
vous eussies aim, ils eussent aim.
Singular
j' aim, tu aims, il aim.
Plural
nous aimions, vous aimies, ils aiment.

The subjunctive mood is altogether like the infinitive mood, except only
that in steed of, dieu veville, or Pleut a dieu que, you must here say veu que,
or quand.

Aimer, avoir aim. Infinitif.


After this manner are all other verbs of the first conjugation declined: as
Evangelizer, precher, annoncer, disputer, perdonner, racheter, delivrer,
delaisser, abandonner, monter, passer, demourer, manger, chanter, eschauffer,
brusler, labourer, travailler, gaster, edifier, netoyer; and like more that
form their preterperfectense in e. and the infinitive in er.

Of the second conjugation.
THe second conjugation is of those verbs, which form the infinitive in er, as
leer, creer, bever. etc.

An example of the second conjugation. Indicativo modo tiempo present.
Imperfecto

Sing.
Yo Leo Tu lees Aquel lee,
Plu.
nosotros leemos vosotros leeys aquellos leen.
Sing.
yo leya tu leyas aquel leya
Plu.
nosotros leyamos vosotros leyades aquellos leyan.
Sing.
yo ley tu leyste aquel leyo
Plu.
vosotros leymos Praeterito perfecto.
vosotros leystes aquelle leyeron.
Sing.
yo avia leydo tu avias leydo aquel avia leydo
Plu.
nosotros aviamos leydo. Praeterito plusquam perfecto.
vosotros aviades leydo. aquellos avian. leydo.
Sing.
yo leere tu leeras aquel leera.
Plu.
nosotros leeremos Futuro.
vosotros leereis aquellos leeran.
Sing.
lee tu lea aquel
Plu.
leamos nosotros Imperativo modo tiempo present. Optativo modo tiempo
present. imperfecto
leed vosotros lean aquellos.
Sing.
oxala yo leyesse oxala tu leyesses oxala aq. leyesse
Plu.
nosotros leyessemos vosotros leyessedes aquellos leyessen.
Sing. oxala que
yo leyera, tu leyeras, aquel leyera.
Plu
nosotros leyeramos, vosotros leyerades, aquellos leyeran.
Sing. O si yo
aya leydo, tu ayas leydo, aquel aya leydo.
Plu.
nosotros ayamos, leydo. Praeterito perfecto.
vosotros ayais, leydo. aquellos ayan. leydo.
Sing. O si
yo oviesse leydo tu oviesses leydo aq. oviesse leydo
Plu.
nosotros oviesmos, leydo. Preterito Plusquam perfecto. Futuro.
vosotros oviessedes, leydo. aquellos oviessen. leydo.
Sing. O si
yo lea, tu leas, aquel.
Plu.
nosotros leamos, vosotros leays, aquellos lean.
Sing.
como yo lea, tu leas, aquel lea.
Plu.
nosotros leamos, Subjunctivo present
vosotros leays, aquellos lean.
Sing.
como yo leyera leerya y leyesse, imperfecto
leyeras, leeryas, y leyesses, leyera, leerya y leyesse.
Plu.
leyeramos, leeryamos, y leyessemos, leyerades, leeryades, y leyessedes,
leyeran, leeryan, y leyessen.
Sing.
como yo aya leydo, tu ayas leydo, aquel aya leydo.
Plu.
ayamos leydo, Preterito perfecto.
ayades leydo, ayan leydo.
Sing.
como yo oviesse leydo, Preterito plusquam perfecto.
como tu oviesses leydo, como aquel oviesse leydo.
Plu.
como nosotros oviessemos leydo, como vosotros oviessedes leydo, como aquellos
oviessen leydo. leer aver leydo. Infinitivo.


AFter this manner are all the verbs declined of the second conjugation, which
in the French tongue are of the third conjugation: as it seems by them that
have written French Grammers. As in these verbs following. creer, croire, bever,
boire, vencer, vaincre, hender, fendre, romper, rompre, torcer, tordre, coser,
coudre, morder, mordre; and many such more, which the Latin tongue places in
the second and third conjugation: Furthermore that ye may the easier confer
this conjugation with that French conjugation which is correspondent unto it,
we will next set down the French verb of the last conjugation, noting that it
is the third conjugation in the French tongue, which forms the preterperfect
tense in u, and the infinitive in re.

AN example of the third French conjugation, which is correspondent to the
second Spanish conjugation.

Singul.
je lie, tu lies, il lie.
Plural
nous lisonz, Indicatif temps present. Preterit imperfait.
vous lyzez, ils lisent.
Singul.
je lisoye, tu lisois, il lisoit.
Plural
nous lisions, vous lisiez, ils lisoyent.
Singul.
je leu, tu leus, il leut.
Plural
nous leumes, Preterit perfait premier.
vous leutes, ils leurent.
Singul.
j'ay leu, tu as leu, il a leu.
Plural
nous avons leu, Preterit perfait second.
vous avez leu, ils ont leu.
Singul.
j'avoye leu, tu avois leu, il avoit leu,
Plural
nous avions leu, Preterit plus que perfait.
vous aviez leu, ils avoyont leu.
Singul.
je liray, tu liras, il lira.
Plural
nous lirons, Futur.
vous lires, ils liront.
Singul.
ly tu lise il.
Plural
lisons nous, Imperatif temps present.
lisez vous, lisent ils.
Sing. Pleut a Dieu
que je leusse, Optatif temps present and preterit imperfait.
tu leusses, il leusse.
Plural.
nous leussions, vous leussies, ils leussent.
Sing. Pleut a Dieu que
il esse leu, Preterit perfait and plus que perfait.
tu esses leu, il eust leu.
Plural.
nous eussions leu. vous elissiez leu, ils eussent leu.
Sin. dieu veuille que
ie lise, tu lises, il lise.
Plural
nous lisions, Future.
vous lisiez, ils lisent.

The subjunctive mood is like the indicative mood, only adding veu que, or,
quand to each person.

Lire, avoir leu.

Infinitif.
After the same sort be all the other verbes of the third conjugation
declined, as, croire, boire, vaincre, vivre, abatre, combatre, fendre, fondre,
vendre, descendre, rompre, tordre, coudre, mourdre, and such others that form
the preterperfect tense in n, and thinfinitive in re.

Of the third Conjugation.
THe third conjugation is of those verbs, which form the infinitive in ir; as
Dormir, sentir, oyr, etc, which in the French tongue the Grammarians place in
the second conjugation.

Sing.
yo duermo, tu duermes, aquel duerme.
Plu.
nosotros dormimos, Indicativo modo tiempo present. Preterito imperfecto
Prererito perfecto.
vosotros dormeis, aquellos duermen.
Sing.
yo dormia, tu dormias, aquel dormia.
Plu.
nosotros dormiamos, vosotros dormiades, aquellos dormian.
Sing.
yo dormi, tu dormiste, aquel dormio.
Plu.
nosotros dormimos, vosotros dormistes. aquellos dormieron.
Sing.
yo avia dormido, tu avias dormido aq. avia dormido.
Plu
aviamos dormido, Preterito plusquam perfecto. Futuro.
aviades dormido, avian dormido.
Sing.
yo dormire, tu dormiras, aquel dormira.
Plu.
dormiremos, dormireys, dormiran.
Sing.
duerme, duerma aquel.
Plu.
duermamos nosotros Imperativo.
dormid vosotros, duerman aquellos.
Sing.
oxala dormiesse tu dormiesses, aquel dormiesse.
Plu.
nosotros dormiessemos, Optativo modo.
vosotros dormiessedes, aquellos dormiessen.
Sing.
oxa. yo dormiera tu dormieras, aquel. dormiera.
Pl.
nosotros dormieramos, Preterito imperfecto
vosotros dormierades, aquellos dormieran.
Sin.
oxalayo oviera dormido tu ovieras dormido, aquel oviera dormido.
Plu.
ovieramos, dormido Preterito perfecto.
ovierades, dormido ovieran. dormido
Sing.
yo oviesse dormido tu oviesses dormido, aquel oviesse dormido,
Plu.
oviessemos dor. Plusquam perfecto.
oviessedes dorm. oviessen dormido
Sing.
oxalaque yo duerma, tu duermas, aquel duerma,
Plu.
nos. duermamos, Futuro.
vosotros dormais aquel. duerman.
Sing.
yo duerma, tu duermas, aquel duerma,
Plu.
nos. duermanos. Subjunctivo present como.
vosotr. dormais. aquel. duerman.
Sing.
como yo dormiera, dormiria y dormiesse, Preterito imperfecto
tu dormieras, dormirias y dormiesses, aquel dormiera, dormiria y dormiesse.
Plu.
dormieramos, dormiriamos, y dormiessemos, dormierades dormiriades, y
dormiessedes, dormieran, dormirian, y dormiessen.
Sing. como.
yo aya dormido, tu ayas dormido, aquel aya dormido.
Plu.
nos. ayamos, dormido Preterito perfecto.
vosotr. ayays, dormido aquel. ayan. dormido
Sing. como.
oviesse dormido, oviesses dormido, oviesse dormido.
Pl.
oviessemus dormido, Plusquam perfecto.
oviessedes dormido, oviessen dormido,
Sing.
quando yo aure dormido, Futuro.
quando tu auras dormido, quando aquel aura dormido.
Plu.
nosotros auremos dormido, vosotros aureis dormido, Auran dormido.

This subjunctive mood in the French tongue is altogether like the indicative
mood, in the terminations or last syllables of each person in all tenses and
numbers: but only this: that to the subjunctive mood they add one of these
particles, veuque, or quand. After the same order that the last example is
declined, are also all other verbs of the same conjugation formed, as these
which follow, oyr, sentir, sufrir, abrir, descubrir, arrepentir, partir, dezir,
produzir, venir, destruir, contradezir, and others, that form the infinitive
mood in ir.

Now will I set down an example of the French conjugation, which is
correspondent to this Spanish conjugation; advertising the novice, that those
verbs which the Spaniards form in the third conjugation, the French men place
in the second inflexion, forming their preterperfect tense in i. and their
infinitive in ir. as for example, Dormi, dormir: senti, sentir.

An example of the second French conjugation which is correspondent to the
third conjugation in the Spanish tongue.
Indicatif temps present.
Singul.
je dor, tu dors, il dort.
Plur.
nous dormons, vous dormes, ils dorment.

Preterit imperfait.
Singul.
j' dormoye, tu dormois, il dormoit.
Plur.
nous dormions, vous dormies, ils dormoient.

Preterit perfait premier.
Singul.
je dormi, tu dormis, il dormit.
Plur.
nous dormimes, vous dormistes, ils dormirent.

Preterit perfait second.
Singul.
j'ay dormi, tu as dormi, il a dormi.
Plur.
nous avons, dormi. vous aves. dormi. ils ont. dormi.

Preterit plus que perfait.
Singul.
j' avoy dormi, tu avois dormi, il avoit dormi.
Plur.
nous avions, dormi. vous aviez, dormi. ils avoyent. dormi.
Singul.
je dormiray, tu dormiras, il dormira.
Plur.
nous dormirons, Futur.
vous dormires, ils dormiront.
Singul.
dors tu, dorme il.
Plur.
dormons nous, Imperatif temps present.
dormes vous, dorment ils.
Singul.
je dormisse, tu dormisses, il dormist.
Plur.
nous dormissions, Optatif te^ps present and preter imperfait Pleut a dieu que.
Preterit perfait plusque perfait pleut a Dieu que. Futur Dieu veulle que.
Infinitif.
vous dormissiez, ils dormissent.
Singul.
j' eusse dormi, tu eusses dormi, il eust dormi.
Plur.
nous eussions dormi, vous eussiez dormi, ils eussent dormi.
Singul.
je dorme, tu dormes, il dorme.
Plur.
nous dormions, vous dormiez, ils dorment.

The subjunctive mood is like the indicative mood, except only that veu que,
or quand, is to be added unto it in the conjunctive.

Dormir, avoir dormi. After this manner are all other verbs of this second
conjugation formed, as are, ouir, sentir, assaill^r, occir, cuellir, offrir,
souffrir, bastir, aguandir, eslargir, amoindrir, acour^ir, ouvrir, descouvrir,
noirir, blanchir, rugir, garentir, punir, faillir, repentir, and others which
form the preterperfect tense in i, and the infinitive in ir.

I would willingly in the Spanish tongue have followed the order of
conjugations, which the French Grammarians show; but because the disposition
and order of the Latin conjugations is more common and used of most, I thought
good to follow the Latin order, reducing the verbs which form their
infinitive in ar, to the first conjugation, and those which form their
infinitive in er, to the second, and lastly those which form their infinitive
in ir, to the third.

Of the fourth conjugation.
IF we add any other conjugation to the former, it shall be of the verbs
irregular, which are not many in number; and all the difficulty in knowing how
they ought to be declined, consists in knowing in which tenses they change
their characteristicall and formative letter, which is the last letter of the
Thema, which is the first person of the indicative mood present tense, and
singular number, example. This verb Facio, in Spanish is written, Hago, the g,
before the o, is called the formative letter, which is varied and changed in
many tenses, as in this verb Hago, which in the present tense is formed Hago,
but in the preterimperfect tense it is formed Hazia, etc.

And because the novice shall not be troubled and hindered through the
difficulty of these verbs, I will set down the hardest of them, among which
are, Hazer, yr, in French, Fair, aller, and by the formation of these they may
easily form the rest which are not many.

The conjugation of the verb Facere.
Sing.
yo hago, tu hazes, aquel haze.
Plu.
nosotros hazemos, Indicativo modo.
vosotros hazeis, aquellos hazen.
The preterimperfect tense.
Sing.
yo hazia tu hazias, aquel hazia.
Plu.
nosotros haziamos, vostros haziades, aquellos hazian.

The preterperfect tense.
Sing.
yo hize, tu hiziste, aquel hizo.
Plu.
nosotros hezimos, vosotros hezistes, aquellos hizieron.

The preterpluperfect tense.
Sing.
yo havia hecho, tu avias hecho, aqu. avia hecho.
Plu.
aviamus hecho, aviades hecho, avian hecho,

The future tense.
Sing.
yo hare, tu haras, aquel hara.
Plu.
nosot. haremos, vosot. hareis, aquellos haran.

The imperative.
Sing.
has tu, haga aquel.
Plu.
hagamos nosotros. hazed vosotros, hagan aquellos.

The Optative mood, present tense oxala.
Sing.
si yo hiziese, tu hizieses, aquel hiziese.
Plu.
nosotros hiziessemos, vosotros hiziessedes, aquellos hiziessen.

The imperfect tense.
Sing.
si yo hiziera, tu hizieras, aquel hiziera.
Plu.
nosotros hizieramos, vosotros hizierades, aquellos hizieran.

The preterperfect, and preterpluperfect tense.
Singular
oviera y oviese hecho, ovieras y ovieses hecho, overa y oviesse hecho.
Plural.
ovieramos y oviessemos hecho, ovierades y oviessedes hecho, ovieran y oviessen
hecho.

The future.
Sing.
yo hago, tu hagas, aquel haga.
Plu.
nosotros hagamos, vosotros hagais, aquellos hagan.

The subjunctive in Spanish is formed as the optative, saving that in the
subjunctive in stead of this sign oxala they put como and quando.

The infinitive. hazer, aver hecho, aver de hazer.
NOw as touching the French tongue the strangers shall note that it has but
three regular or perfect conjugations, and if we add the fourth thereunto: the
verbs which commonly are called by the Grammarians irregulars, may be accounted
of that conjugation: whereof the foresaid is one, the example whereof we will set
down in French.

The example of the conjugation of the verb, Fair.
The indicative present tense.
Sing.
je fay, tu fais, il fait.
Plu.
nous faisons, vous faites, ils font.

Preterimperfect.
Sing.
je faisoye, tu faisoyes, il faisoyet.
Plu.
nous faisions, vous faisies, ils faisoyent.

The preterperfect of the first kind.
Sing.
je fie, tu fis, il fit.
Plu.
nous fimes, vous fites, ils firent.

The preterperfect of the second sort.
Sing.
je ay fait, tuas fait, il a fait.
Plu.
nous avous fait, vous avez fait, ilz ont fait.

The preterpluperfect tense.
Sing.
j'avoye fait, tu avois fait, il avoit fait.
Plu.
nous avions fait, vous aviez fait, ils avoyent fait,

Future.
Sing.
je feray, tu feras, il fera.
Plu.
nous ferons, vous ferez, ilz feront.

The imparative present.
Sing.
fay tu, face il.
Plu.
faisons nous, faytes vous, facent ilz.

Optative present tense and preterimperfect. Ple ut a dieu que.
Sing.
le fisse, tu fisses, il fist.
Plu.
nous fissions, vous fissies, ils fissent.

The preterperf. and preterpluperf. tense. Ple ut a dieu que.
Sing.
j'eusse fait, tu esses fait, il eust fait.
Plu.
nous eussions fait, vous eussies fait, ilz eussent fait.

Futur. dieu vueille que.
Sing.
je face, tu faces, il face.
Plu.
nous facions, vous faciez, ils facent.

The subjunctive is altogether like the indicative only adding these sign,
veu, que, or quand, unto every person. Infinitive. fair, avoir fait.

The conjugation of the verb Aller, which in Spanish is yr.
Indicative present.
Sing.
yo voy, tu vas, aquel va.
Pl.
nosotros vamos, vosotros vais, aquellos van.

Preterimperf.
Sing.
yo iva, tu ivas, aquel iva.
Plu.
nosotros ivamos vosotros ivades, aquellos ivan.

Preterperf.
Sing.
yo fue, tu fueste, aquel fue.
Plu.
nosotros fuemos, vosotros fuestes, aquellos fueron.

Preterpluperf.
Sing.
yo avia ydo, tu avias ydo, aquel avia ydo.
Plu.
nos. aviamos ydo, vosotros aviades ydo, aquel. avian ydo.

Futur.
Sing.
yo ire, tu yras, aquel yra.
Plu.
y remos, y reis, y ran.

Imperative present tense.
Sing.
ve, va, vaya.
Plu.
vamos nosotros, yd vosotros, vayau aquellos.

Optative present and imperfect tense. oxala que.
Sing.
yo fuesse, tu fuesses, aquel fuesse.
Plu.
nosotros fuessemos, vosotros fuessedes, aquellos fuessen.
Sing.
yo fuera, tu fueras, aquel fuera.
Plu.
fueramos, fuerades, fueran.

Preterperfect tense. oxala que.
Sing.
yo aya ydo, tu ayas ydo, aquel aya ydo.
Plu.
ayamos ydo, ayais ydo, ayan ydo.

Preterpluperfect tense. oxala.
Sing.
yo fuesse ydo, tu fuesses ydo, aq. fuesse ydo.
Plu.
fuessemos ydos, fuessedes ydos, fuessen ydos.

Future.
Sing.
yo vaya, tu vayas, aquel vaya.
Plu.
vamos, vais, vayan.

The subjunctive is formed like the optative, saving that in in stead of the
sign oxala, it has the sign como, or quando.

Infinitive.
Yr, aver ydo, aver de yr, after the same manner is the verb dezir declined,
digo, dizes, dize, dezimos, dezis, dizen. Ie die, tudis il dit, nous, disons,
vous dizes, ils disent. The spanish tongue in some tenses changes the c latin
into g, in some other into z, but this diversity is to be learned by the use
of reading and speaking. Thus far we have set down the conjugations of verbes
actives regular and irregular, it remains that we should briefly handle the
passives. But that we may the better confer the French with the Spanish, we
will first put down the example of the said verb yr, in French.

Indicative present of Aller which in Spanish is Andar.
Sing.
Ie vay, tu vas, il va.
Plu.
nous allons, vous allez, ils vont.

Preterimperfect.
Sing.
j'alloye, tu alloyes, il alloit.
Plu.
nous allions, vous alliez, ils alloyent.

Preterperfect tense of the first kind.
Sing.
j'allay, tu allais, il alla.
Plu.
nous allames, vous allatez, ils allerent.

Preterperfect of the second.
Sing.
Ie suis all, tues all, il est all.
Plu.
nou sommes alles, vous estes allez, ils sont allez.

Preterpluperfect tense.
Sing.
j'estoye all, tuestois all, il estoit all.
Plu.
nous estions allez, vous estiez allez, ils estoient allez.

Future.
Sing.
j'iray, tu iras, il ira.
Plu.
irons, irez, iront.

Imperative present.
Sing.
va tu, aille il,
Plu.
allons nous, ailez vous, aillent ilz.

Optative present and preterimperfect. Pleut ad dieu que.
Sing.
j'allasse, tu allasses, il allast.
Plu.
nous allissions, vous allissiez, ils allassent.

Preterperfect and pluperfect. Pleut a dieu que.
Sing.
je fusse all, tu fusses all, il fut all.
Plu.
nous fussions all, vous fussiez all, ilz fusseen all.

Future tense. Dieu veuille que.
Singul.
j'aille, tu ailles, il aille.
Plur.
nous aillons, vous aillez, ilz aillent.

The subjunctive is like the indicative, only by adding the sign veu que or
quand, in every number and person.

Infinitive aller, and estre all.

After the same sort must you decline dire: je die, tu dis, il dit, etc. and
such like verbs.

Hitherunto we have handled verbs actives personals, as well regular as
irregular: it remains that we should next entreat briefly of the passives,
and then after of Impersonnals.

Of verbs passives.
THe verbs passives in the French and Spanish tongue observe the same manner and
order, and that is, in steed of passives, they use the participles adding
thereto the verb, Sum, es, fui, but they differ in forming their persons, as
you shall see by example.

The Spaniard forms the participle passive of the infinitive mood, by taking
awayr, and adding do, as amar, amado: comprar, comprado: atar, atado: dormir,
dormido: and this is done in the first and third conjugation, but in the second
you must first change the last e, into y, before you add do, as of leer,
leydo: tener, tenydo, etc. Therefore if you will know how to use these
participles, you must learn to form them well, and to decline the verb Sum,
es fui.

The Masculine termination of the participles is formed of the infinitive, as
you have seen: the plural is made of the singular only, by adding s, as
callado, callados, tenido, tenidos, etc.

To form the Feminine termination you must turn o into a, as, templado,
templada, etc. and to form the plural you must only add an s thereto, as it
is said before of the masculine termination.

It remains that we should put down one example* for more plainenes, whereby
you may know how to form the rest verbes passives of any conjugation.

The passive voice, Indicative mood and present tense.
Sing.
yo soy amado, tu eres amado, aquel es amado.
Plu.
nosotros somos amados, vosotros soys amaydos, aquellos son amados.

The preterimperfect tense.
Sing.
yo era amado, tu eras amado, aquel era amado
Plu.
eramos amados, erades amados, eran amados.

Preterperfect tense.
Sing.
yo fui amado, tu fuiste amado, aquel fue amado
Plu.
fuimos amados, fuistes amados, fueron amados.

The preterpluperfect.
Sing.
yo avia sido amado tu avias sido amado aq. avia sido amado
Pl.
aviamos sido amados, aviades sido amados, avian sido amados.

Future tense.
Sing.
yo sere amado, tu seras amado, aquel sera amado.
Pl.
nos. seremos amados, vosotr. sereis amados, aquel. seran amados.

Imperative.
Sing.
se tu amado, sea aquel amado,
Pl.
seamos nos. amados, seais vosotr. amados, sean aquel. amados,

Optative present, oxala.
Sing.
yo fuesse amado, tu fuesses amado, aquel fuesse amado
Pl.
fuessemos amados, fuessedes amados, fuessen amados.

The imperfect.
Sing.
yo fuera amado, tu fueras amado, aquel fuera amado
Pl.
fueramos amados, fuerades amados, fueran amados.

Preterperf.
Sing.
yo aya sido amado, tu ayas sido amado aq. aya sido amado
Pl.
ayamos sido amados, ayades sido amados, ayan sido amados.

Preterpluperf.
Sing.
uviese sido amado, uvieses sido amado uviese sido amado.
Pl.
uviessemos sido amad. uviessedes sido amados uviessen sido amados.

Futur.
Sing.
sea amado, seas amado, sea amado.
Pl.
seamos amados, seais amados, seau amados.

Subjunctive. Quando o como.
Sing.
yo sea amado, tu seas amado, aquel sea amado,
Pl.
seamos amados, seais amados, sean amados,

Imperfect.
Sing.
sere, seria, y fuese amado, seras, serias, y fueses amado, sera, seria, y
fuese amado.
Plur.
seremos seriamos, y fuessemos amados, sereis, seriades, y fuesedes amados,
serau, serian, y fuesen, amados.

The preterperfect and preterpluperfect tense of this mood, is the same as it
is in the Optative mood: except that in steed of the signs oxala, and o
plugiese adios, this mood has como, and quando, and osi.

Future.
Sin
yo aure sido amado tu auras sido amado aq. aura sido amado
Pl.
auremos sido amados, aureis sido amados, auran sido amados.

Infinitive.
Sing.
ser amado, aver sido amado, aver deser amado.
Pl.
ser amados, aver sido amados, aver de ser amados.

After the same manner you may form the terminations of the Feminine gender,
only by changing the last o into a, and os into as, as amado, amada, amados,
amadas, hecho, hecha, hechos, hechas, etc. for the better declaration whereof
we will put down one example.

Sing.
yo soy amada, tu eres, amada, aquella es amada,
Pl.
no. somos amadas, vosotros sois amadas, aquellas son amadas.
After this same manner must you form and conjugate in the passive voice all
verbes actives, and neuters that have a passive signification, as yo soy
desterrado, soy vendido, and such other: now we will put down an example of
the passive voice in French.

An example of the conjugation of the verb Passive in the article masculine in
the French tongue.
Indicative mood.
Sing.
je suis aim, tu es aim, il est aim.
Pl.
nous somes aimez, vous estez aimez, ilz sont aimez*

The Preterimperf.
Sing.
j'estoye aim, tu estois aim, il estoit aim.
Pl
nous estions aimez, vous estiez aimez, ils estoint aimez.

The preterperfect of the first kind.
Sing.
je fu aim, tu fus aim, il fut aim.
Plu.
fumes aimez, futez aimez, furent aimez.

The preterperfect of the second kind.
Sing.
j'ay este aim, tuas este aim, il a este aim.
Plu.
nous avons este aimez. vous avez este amez. ils ont este aimez.

The preterpluperfect.
Sing.
IN avoye este aim tu avois este aim, il avoit este aim.
Plu.
avions este aimez, aviez este aimez, avoyent este aimez.

Future.
Sing.
serai aim, seras aim, sera aim.
Plu.
serons aimez, serez aimez, seront aimez.

Imparative present. Que.
Sing.
tu sois aim, il soit aim,
Plu.
soyons aimez, soyez aimez, soyent aimez.

Optative present and preterimperfect tense. Pleut a dieu que.
Sing.
le fusse aim, tu fusses aim, il fust aim.
Plu.
fussions aimez, fussiez aimez, fussent aimez.

The preterperfect and preterpluperfect tense. Ple ut a dieu que.
Sing.
j'eusse este aim, tu eusses este aim il eust este aim,
Plu.
eussions, este aimez, eussiez este aimez, eussent este aimez.

Future. Dieu vuielle que.
Sing.
je soy aim, tu sois aim, il soit aim.
Plu.
soyons aimez, soyez aimez, soyent aimez.

The Subjunctive is altogether like the Indicative, only adding the sign
veuque, or quand, to every person and number, as in the active.

The infinitive.
Estre, aim, avoir estre aim.

An example of the passive conjugation in the article foeminine.
The indicative.
Sing.
je suis aimee, tu es aimee, elle est aimee.
Plu.
nous sommes aimees, vous estez aimees, else sont aimees.


The preterimperfect tense. j' estoye aimee, tu estois aimee, elle estoit
aimee, etc. as in the conjugation masculine, in all tenses, only adding in the
end of every person this letter e, as in steed of aim, and aimez, you shall
say aimee and aimees, etc. After this manner you must conjugate all other verbes
passives, and such as signify simple passives, as neuter passives: as je suis
fait, je suis vendu, je suis batu, etc. in the voice masculine: but in the
feminine je suis faite, je sius vendue, je sius batue, etc.

The Spaniards shall note that in the French tongue, properly there are no
passives, but in steed of them they use the participles passive of the preter
tense, and ioi^e with them Sum, est, fui, so as we noted above in the rules of
the Spanish tongue.

Of verbs impersonals.
THere are in the Spanish tongue certain impersonall verbs that answer to the
latin impersonals, as menester es, necessario es, pertenece, and such like,
and they be conjugated in this manner.

Sing.
de mi se pertenece, de ti se pertenece, de aquel se pertenece.
Pl.
a nos. se pertenece, a vos. se pertenece, a aq. se pertenece.
And thus you must conjugate them through all moods, observing the terminations
of the second conjugation. Others are declined with this verb, Sum, est, fui,
as menester es, menester fue, menester sera, etc. There are few verbs
impersonals of any other sort in the Spanish tongue, although in a demand or
question, all verbs are made impersonals, as Sirven a dios por estatierra? etc.
and so likewise any other verbs. In the French tongue there is great use of
verbs impersonals because they imitate the latins. And so they have
impersonals active and passive, to the passive they add this sign on, to the
active il. An example of both.

Fault il mourir? ne fault il pas esperer en dieu? onrespond. Il fault mourir:
c'est un arrest du grand parliament celeste: etc. mais il fault tous jouravoir
espera^ceau seigneur, etc. An example of the passive. Sert on a l'eternel en ce
pais icy? ou l'honore on quand on vit selon ce mond en toute concupiscense de
chair? etc. On respondera, on serticy au seigneur and on honor l'eternel,
quand on chemine selonsaparole, en toute humilite, etc. Likewise, on fait, on
dit, on dort, on parle, on boit, etc.

These verbs impersonals are conjugated in French in the third person singular
only, as in the Latin. Like as,

Il.
fault, failloit, fallut, a fallu, avoit fallu, faudra.
It has no Imperative.
optativ. pleut a dieu, qu'il
fallut, eust fallu, faille.

The subjunctive is like the Indicative altogether adding veu que, or quand, in
every tense.

Infinitive.
Failloir, avoir fallu.
Examples of the verbs impersonals passives* Indicative.
On.
chante, chatoit, a chaute, avoit chate, chantera.

Imperative,
Qu'on Chante. Optative pleut a dieu qu'on.
chantast, eust chante, chante.

The subjunctive is altogether like the indicative, only adding veu que or
quand, unto every tense and person.

Infinitive.
estre chante, avoir este chante.
All other verbs impersonals passives whatsoever they be are conjugated after
the same sort: which are so many in number as the personals whereof they be
derived.

Here follow^ certain observations about verbs as well in the French as
Spanish.

The first observation.
IN the French tongue, even as a noune substantive has always an article
before it that agrees with it in gender and case; so every verb personal
has his nominative case, or a pronoune demonstrative before it, that agrees
with the verb in number and person. So the French men do not say, aim,
aims, etc. or croy, crois, etc. but j'aime, tu aims, il aim, etc. And they
never utter a verb without a noune or pronoune going before; which is to be
noted the rather because in Spanish it is quite contrary. For although it does
always put the articles to the substantives; yet to the verbs they never join
the pronoune demonstrative. wherein they imitate the elegancie of the Latin
tongue; and they utter their verbs without putting any pronouns before them, as
you may see by experience in reading the Spanish.

The second observation.
STrangers are to note that in the French tongue the first and second
conjugation are regulars and do not fail in any tense. But the third
conjugation oftentimes observes not the rules in the preterperfect tense, as
you may see in these verbs, which being in the order of the third inflexion,
form their preter tense, in is, as je ay mis, comis, requis, etc. Others take
n, betwixt i, and s, as je ay prins, apprins, reprins, etc. Others form their
pretertense in it, as je ay destruit, seduit, cuit, etc. Others taking to them
n, form their preter tense in int, as je ay craint, peint, etc. So that there
is great diversity especially in the preter tense of the third conjugation.

In the Spanish the diversity is not so great, notwithstanding there are some
that change their characteristical or formative letter in the present tense: as
in this verb dire, which makes in the present tense digo, in the
preterimperfect tense, dixe, dix ste, dixo, etc. but there are few such in this
tongue.

The third observation.
IN the French tongue all the verbs actives, and such as signify action, form
their pretertenses by the help of the verb habeo, habes, except the first
pretertense which is formed without it, as we have showed before. But the verbs
passives and such as signify passion, are formed with the verb Sum, es, est:
as I'aydor mi, tuas dormy, etc. The same rules are to be observed in the
Spanish tongue, especially in the preterpluferfect tense, as when we say, quando
ovieremos creydo a las promesas de dios, etc. seremos fieles.

The fourth observation.
YOu must also note in the French tongue that verbes which form their tenses
with this verb, Sum, es, in the plural numbers of their pretertenses, they
alwais form an s, which they do not being formed with the verb Habeo, habes.
Example. Ie suis venu, nous sommes, venus, vous estes venus, ils sont venuz,
etc. Item, I'ay chate, tuas chate, il a chaute, nous avous chate, vous avez
chate, ilz ont chate, etc. and not nous avous chate, etc. the same rule is
observed in the Spanish also. etc.

The fifth observation.
YOu must also note in the French tongue, that there are certain verbs that
have a mixed inflexion, for in the preterperfect tense they are of the third
conjugation, and yet they form their infinitive mood, as if they were of the
second conjugation. As for example, I'ay veu, tenu, detenu, obtenu, etc. which
form their infinitive, voir, tenir, ob^enit, etc. as if they were of the
second conjugation: in the Spanish there are no such verbs.

The sixth observation.
ITem, you must note that some verbs in the French tongue have two preterperfect
tenses: and these be ouuir, offrir, souffrir, couvrir, etc. j'ay ouvry, and
j'ay ouvert, j'ay offri, and j'ay offert, j'ay soufry, and j'ay souffert, j'ay
couvry, and j'ay couvert.

The seventh observation.
ITem we must observe, that some verbs which in the Latin are imperfect, are
perfect in the French and Spanish, as the verb Hayr, in Latin, Odisse, for
the Frenchmen says Ie hay, tu hais, il hait, nous haissons, etc. and so the
Spaniard says, yo aborresco, tu aborreces, aquel aborrece, nosotros
aborrecemos, vosotros aboreceys, aquellos aborrecen. And contrariwise some in
the latin are perfect which in the French and Spanish are imperfait, as,
Soleo, soles, etc. in French. Ie souloye, tu souloyes, il souloit, nous
solions, vous souliez, il souloient. In the Spanish it has but two tenses, the
present tense, and the preterimperfect tense: yo suelo, tu sueles, aquel suele,
nosotros solemos, vosotros soleis, aquellos su^len. The imperfect tense, yo
solia, tu solias, aquel solia, nosotros soliamos, vosotros soliades, aquellos
solian. all the other tenses are supplied by the verb acostu^brar, and in
French by acoustumer, as I'ay coustume, tuas coustuime, etc.

The eight observation.
THere are also some verbs impersonals in Latin, that in French and Spanish are
personals and perfait as for example, this word repentir in these two languages
by adding only to it these pronouns, me te se, nous, vous, ilz, is a personal
and perfait: as Ie me repens, tu te repens, il se repent, nous nous repentons,
vous vous repentez, ilz se repentent, etc. and in Spanish yo me arrepiento, tu
te arrepientes aquel se arrepiente: nosotros nos arrepentimos vosotros vos
arrepentis, aquellos se arrepienten: and so likewise throughout all other
tenses.

The ninth observation.
IN the French such verbs as signify mooving to a place, require after them
these prononus, te, se, etc. with a preposition and an apostrophe, for avoiding
of the unpleasant pro^^ntiation of two vowels, the one after the other, as Ie
men fuy, tu t'en fius, il s'en fuit, etc. Ie m'en vay, tu t'en vas, etc. And
all other verbs are declined after the same sort, when by them we note or
signify a reciprocation with these particles, me, te. se. as Ie m'aime, tu
t'aimes, il s'aime, etc. Ie m'endor, tu t'endors, il s'endort, etc.

THis rule is practiced also in Spanish in the same manner, saving that in
steed of en, they put a, or al, as, yo me huyo, tu te huyes, aquel se huye,
etc. yo me voy, tu te vas, etc. yo me voy al campo; yo me huy al sagrado,
viendo me perseguido, etc. an example of the second: quando yo me siento
culpado, el mejor remedio que para mi hallo, es, no adularme a mi mismo, antes,
reconoscerme peccador delante del sen^or, etc.

The tenth observation.
THere are certain verbs in the French that cannot be expressed in one word,
as also in the Latin tongue. And then they use to express them by some
circumloqu^tion, or composition of diverse words, as for example, I'aime mieux,
tu aims mieux, il aim mieux: nous aimons mieux, vous aims mieux, ils aiment
mieux, etc. Item, Ie me port bien, tu te ports bien, etc. Item, I'ay
acoustume, tu as acoustume etc. In the same sort do we say in Spanish: yo
quiero mas, tu quieres mas, etc. Item, yo me hallo bien dispuesto, tu te halles
bien dispuesto, etc. Item, yo he acostumbrado, etc. In like manner be the same
verbs also declined negatively, as, Ie me port mal, etc. Item, Il ne m'^n
chant, il ne t'en chaut, il ne luy en chaut, etc. and in Spanish, no se me da
nada, no se te da nada, no se le da nada, etc.

Of the Participles.
IN the Spanish tongue there are two sorts of participles, actives and passives.
The actives are formed of the third person singular, of the indicative present
adding thereto this relative el que, as, el que ama: el que pone: el que
duerme. etc. Plur. los que escrive^, etc. the feminine article is la que, in
the singular, and las que in the plural, as la que travaja, etc. las que
travajan, etc. The participles passive are formed of the same person, adding to
the masculine Sing. do, and Plu. dos, and to the feminine Sing. da, and Plu.
das, as comprado, comprados: comprada, compradas: etc. la muger bien ensen^ada
huye las occasiones de ser notada de liviandad, etc.

So in the French tongue also there are two sorts of participles actives
descending from the verbs active, and pssive descending from the verbs passive,
the active have their terminations in ant, and are all of the masculine gender,
but by putting to an e, are made feminine, as aimant, aimante: l'ho^me croyant,
and la femme croyante, etc. The passive participles of the first conjugation
end in e, of the second in i, or u, and those that are of the third conjugation
they follow the termination of the preterperfect tense that they come of: and
they are all of the masculine gender, but by putting to e, are made feminines:
as aim aimee, ouy ouye venu venue, endormi, endormie, etc. Here you must note
that in both these toongs, the participles are declined like nounes, with their
proper articles pertaining to them, and to make the plural of the singular you
must only add an s.

The declension of the participles.
Masc. Sing.
el que lee, deel que lee, al que lee,
Plu.
los que leen, de los que leen, a los que leen,
Femin. Sing.
la que lee, de la que lee, a la que lee.
Plu.
las que leen, de las que leen, a las que leen,

Participle passive.
Masc. Sing.
el leydo, deel leydo, al leydo.
Plu.
los leydos, de los leydos, a los leydos.
Femin. Sing.
la leyda, de la leyda, a la leyda.
Plu.
las leydas, de las leydas, a las leydas.

An example of the participles active in both genders in French.
Masc. Sing.
le lisant, du lisant, au lisant.
Plu.
les lisans, des lisans, aux lisans.
Femin. Sing.
la lisante, de la lisante, a la lisante.
Plu.
les lisantes, des lisantes, aux lisantes.

Example of the participle passive in both genders.
Masc. Sing.
le leu, du leu, au leu.
Plu.
les leus, des leus, aux leus.
Femin. Sing.
la leave, de la leave, a la leave,
Plu.
les leaves, des leaves, aux leaves.

Of the adverbs.
HItherto we have written of those parts of speech that have declenson and
conjugation: it remains now that we speak something of those parts which the
grammarians call Indeclinables: and first of the adverbs, which are diversely
formed in the Spanish tongue: some are made of nounes feminine in a, and do
always or commonly end in mente: as abierta abiertamente: pronta, proutamente,
etc. which manner of forming the French do also observe, with this termination
meant: as belle, bellement: sot sottement: seure, seurement, etc. you must note
that the French men in forming such adverbs oftentimes take away certain
letters vy a figure called syncope, as elegament, prudement, ignorament, etc.
in steed of elegautement, prudentement, ignorantement, etc. of this kind of
adverbs there are great store in both the toongs French and Spanish.

There are other adverbs that are not formed of nouns, but of themselves: and
these are of diverse sorts and significations: of them some are adverbs of
place: as aqui, alli, aca, alla, de alla, etc. some of time: some of number, or
numerall. And to be brief there is as great diversity of adverbs in the
Spanish and French tongue, as in the Latin and Greek

We have showed before how we must use the Aduerbes Comparatiue: Now the
Strangers must note the use of the Negative Aduerbes in the French tongne which
is very hard, because in the Spanish tongue there are none but these: no. and
ni. As for example: no ire jamas a lugar infame: no dire jamas mentira. Item.
ni el avariento, ni el fornicario possedera^ el reyno de los cielos. But the
French uses the Aduerbes Negative with adding these Particles, point, and pas.
And in an absolute Proposition the French men use this Aduerbe ne, with the
said Particles, point and pas; As celuy n* est passage que se fie a un fol.
Item vous n'aimez point ^a paix: etc. Within a Proposition or sentence they use
this Negative, ne, but without a Proposition in bare words, they use, non, and
nany. Example for the first: Ie ne l'ay point fait. Item: je ne l'ay point dit.
Example for the second. If one ask me doy je fire en ma prosperity, they
answer, Non, nany. So that ne serves always in a speech, and is never put
absolutely, and nany, is never used in a proposition or speech, but absolutely
and by it self: this Negative non, is sometimes but (very sildome) used in a
speech or proposition, and most commonly it is joined with these particles
point, and pas. As, non point a nous, non point a vous seigneur, ains a ton
soit nom done gloire et honneur. Item, nous vivons non pas tant du pain, que
de la parole que proceed de la bouche de dieu, etc.

Sometimes instead of point or pas, they say rien, or jamais, as celane vault
rien: l'homme sage ne ditiamais je ne l'usse pas pense etc. vous ne cerches
rien si non de vous enrichir par tromperies, et pource vous ne trouuerez tamais
les vrayes richesses, etc.

To interrogations made with these particles perchance? is it true, is it so?
The French men answer in two sorts: either by affirming as Dieu, est il
unjust, qui ameine ire, and punit nos faults? je n' adviene, etc. Or by
Negation: as, n'est il pas meilleur avoir vnbon amy en place, qu* argent en
cofre* etc. The Aduerbs in the Spanish Constru^tion, are most commonly put
immediately after the Verb; as quien bive christianamente, morira en esperan^a
de gozar eternalmente de la gloria celestial. And so are they likewise in the
French, as we will show in the Rules of the French Syntaxis.

Of the Prepositions.
The Spaniards have the same use of^ prepositions as the Latins have: sometimes
in composition, and sometimes without: as leyendo en la ley divina yremos a
Dios por camino acertado: por la ley, y por el Rey y porla patria es menester
poner la vida. etc.

In composition, as partir, repartir, pensar recompensar, poner disponer: etc.
The French men have the same use of prepositions: As for example, do^ir,
addoucir: ioindre, disioindre: dire, contredire: venir, contrevenir: chasser,
pourchasser: donner, perdonner: etc.

In all these Compositions the Prepositions are separable: but yet in some
other they are inseparable, as in these Compoundes facile, difficile: form,
difforme: semblable, dissemblable: suyvre, ensuyne: etc.

We ought to note diligently the use of this Preposition de in the French
tongue, which always serves the genitive case: but there is a certain
difference in it, for being joined with a Nowne Masculin appellatiue not
appropriated, beginning with a Consonant: it changes e. in u. always, and in
stead of de they say du: but in all other Nownes they say de: As toute verite
proceed de dieu. Et tout mensonge prouient du diable: de Iehan: de George, and
not du Iehan, or du George: Item ^ecy vient de Por, de l'argent, de l'homme,
etc. Not du or, du argent, du homme etc. The cause is, because those words
begin with Vowels.

The same rule does hold in the Preposition en. which being joined to a Nown
Masculin appellatiue not appropriated, beginning with a Consonant, is changed
into the article of the dative case au: but in all other Nownes it is en. As
les anges sont au ciel, and les hommes en terre: les enfans de dieu sont au
monde, mais non pas du monde, etc. They say also, allons en nostre temple, and
not, au nostre temple. As if it were a Nowne appropriated, but they say simply,
allons au temple: In the plural, this proposition is changed two manner of
ways into aux or es, as les vns sont aux fauxbourges de la ville, and les
autres sont es ports: nostre pere qui es escieux, etc.

You must note concerning this Preposition de, that in the Spanish and French
for the most part it works a contrariety in the signification: As Hazer,
deshazer: dezir, desdezir: etc. In French, fair, deffaire: lier, deslier. etc.
Sometimes it signifies not a contrarictie as: tener, detener, mandar,
demandar: etc. And in French, venir, devenir: nier, denier: partir, depaertir:
etc. This Proposition (in) in the Spanish and French does always signify a
contrariety in composition: as iusto, iniusto: pio impio in Spanish: and in
French, lust, unjust, docte, indocte etc. And sometimes in. is turned into
en. as well in Spanish as in French: As for example in French, an^y, ennemy:
and in Spanish: amygo, and enemygo. And this Particle mes, is also of the same
nature and quality in the French: as cognoistre, mescognoistre: croyant,
mescroyant: etc.

The Preposition (de) serves for the Infinitive mood: as de dire: de fair,
d'acheter, etc. Unto the which, the French sometimes adds an S. as for
example, des le commencement iusques a la fin i'ay estuaie en toutes bonnes
letres des mon enfance, etc. The Spaniard says, des de mi niu^ez; des de mi
mocedad: des de el an^o pasado. Sometimes the French men add this Particle
puis: as Absalon estoit fort beau depuis la plant des pieds iusques au sommet
de la test. Sometimes it is put in stead of this Particle du: as vous sorts
horse de propos, in stead of du propos: vous n'avez point de sens, ne de caur,
ne de courage, etc.

Of the Interiections.
The Spaniards use most commonly the same show of affections as other Nations:
but the French Nation especially, uses Interiections very sildome: and
therefore when they hear a Spaniard sigh, it seems to the French men that
such complaints are not used but in extreme afflictions. Contrariwise, the
Italians and Spaniards use very much these admirations and threatenings, and
interiections of gladness and sorrow: the use whereof must be learned by
frequent communication with natural Spaniards and Italians themselves; least
you use them out of the purpose.

Of the Conjunctions.
We call that a Conjunction, which joins and knitteth together diverse parts
of speech: the Spaniards use such Particles almost as the Lattins do: saving
that they have not so many. In the Spanish tongue there is only one
Conjunction Copulative y. which when the word following begins also with a
y. is turned into e. because two yy. should not meet together, as Piedro y.
Antonio. yo y tu, el rey, e infinita multitud de ^en^ores. The Conjunction
disjunctive is o. as Alonso ojuan, etc. The Conjunction rational (that is
signifying a Reason) is. Pues, as vi^to puez oue la fe sin obra no es fe sino
muerta: etc. The French Conjunctions are et, ou, mais, car, donc, as ^est homme
la pense complaire a dieu, and au mond, mais il s'abuse; car null ne peut seruir
a deux maistres: car ou il hai^a l'vn, and aimera l'autre, ou il se ioindra
al'vn, and ne tiendra conte de l'autre: nous ne pouvous do^c seruir a dieu and
au monde. They have also some other Conjunctions; the use whereof may be learned
in reading French Authors; as these be: or, toutefois, neantmoins, iacoit,
ains, aussi, pource, veuque, conbienque, puisque, pourveuque, ni, si, sinon. An
example of ( ni) and ains which are the hardest: la richesse enorgueillit
l'homme, and la pouure^e aucunefois luy cause un desespoir: and pource je ne
desire ni l'vn, ni l'autre, ains seulement med^ocrite, etc.

Of the Construction or Syntaxis of the Spanish and French tongues.
We have hitherto spoken of all the parts of speech, so briefly as we could
possibly: now it remains that we should speak something of the construction
and disposition of the same parts in a speech: for it is very necessary in a
Grammar (of what language soever it be) to know the concordance of Genders, the
regiment of Verbes, and the proportionable disposition of all other parts of
speech: for the preposing or postposing of a word in speaking or writing, is
thing of no small importance. And they that confusedly utter whatsoever is at
the end of their tongue, without diligent observation of the order of words,
in stead of making men understand their conceits, they bring forth naught else
but brabbles. For who sees not that there is great difference between a
sentence well set forth and orderly disposed, and a heap of words pronounced
or written without order. As for example. Saint Paul dit que T^us ceux qui
veulent viure fidelement en Jesus Christ, endureront persecution. Now if you
change the order of these words and say: tous viure persecution qui en ceux
fidelement Jesus Christ, soufriront, veulent. You can make no sense of it.
Notwithstanding that the same words remain: whereby it is manifest, how
necessary a thing it is toward speaking or writing well, to know the
disposition of words, which i^ truth is necessarily required and used in every
language.

Touching* the Spanish tongue (for so much as I have observed) it is not so
superstitious in disposing and ordering of words as the French: but observing
the concordance of genders and Nombers, and regiment of Verbes, according to
the rules of the Lattine tongue, it disposes the Periods in such sort, as the
ear of the hearer may be best pleased: so that the Nominative is sometime
before and sometime after the Verb at the end of the Period. And those parts
of speech which are called indeclinable are so placed, that they make no
Equivocation or Amphi^ologie, that is to say, a diverse sense, that may diversely
be interpreted. But such as will write in Spanish, are especially to note,
that they use parentheses so sildome and rarely as they may possibly: and put
them in such a place of the speech, that they make not the sense going before
and coming after, obscure and hard to be understood.

As touching the French tongue: first you must observe the Concordance of
Genders and Nombers as in the Lattine. Then note that you put no Verb without
his Nominative case, and that for the most part going before the Verb: but
very sildome after. And then afterward, the accusative case must follow the
Verb: and the Aduerbe must be in the last place: as, Ie serviray a l'eternel
mon dieu tresvolontiers, jusques a la mort, etc. Orels jusques a la mort je
serviray a l'eternel mon dieu:

Item tresvolontiers a l'eternel mon dien serviray ie iusques a la mort: Item a
l'eternel mon dieu tresvolontiers iusques a la mort ie serviray. This speech is
thus varied four ways notwithstanding the same words remaining in
Grammatical congruitie: Another example with a Parenthesis. Les sacrifices
doivent estre faitz a dieu auec petite despense (disoit Socrates) pource qu'il
n'a point besoin de nos biens, et qu'il regard plus le coeur decelui qui
sacrifie que les sacrifices mesmes, etc. And this is to be understood in an
absolute speech: for in an interrogation the french uses these pronownes me,
te, se, and puts the nominatine after the verb: as, veux tuavoir vie
eternelle? guarde les commandemens: ^o^nore Dieu, et obey a sa parole, etc.
Item me repentiray ie d'auoir bien fait? etc. Or by a negative in a speech
which denies: as, ne fais point a autruy ce que ne vouldroyes es^re fait a toy
mesme, et.

Phillip de Comines the historian, whose kind of speech and writing is greatly
esteemed of among the Frenchmen, does always put the verb before the
nominative case, thus: and commanda le Roy qu'vn chascun se retirast en son
logis, etc. et vindrent les ambassadeurs de tous costez pour moyener la paix
enter les princes. etc. But whether this manner of speech be the better, or
not, I leave it to the judgment of native Frenchmen.

The French tongue uses very much to begin a speech with a verb impersonall,
which answers to the Spanish ay. As, ay vna manera de ho^bres que son fuera
de toda razon etc. In French thus. ^l ya un certain sort d'hommes qui sont
bien horse de raison. Il en y a moins qu'on ne pense. Item. Ily a trois chosen
qui chassent l'homme horse de la maison, assauoir, la fumee, la goutte qui chait
d'en^aut, and la femme rioteuse. Sometimes they say, simply thus. Il est bon de
converser avec les sages. Item: Il vaut mieux estre roy de ceux qui ont l'or
and l'argent, qu'avoir l'or mesme, etc.

These small aduertisements, together with the rules that I have set down in
the Treatise of the Verbes, may ^er^e for this tune.

FINIS.
The Spanish DICTIONARIE.
A
ABierto open. Abogacia bribery. Abolorio a genealogy or pettigree. Abonado
endowed, begifted, made good. Abrir to open. Abracar to embrace. Absolution
absolucion. Aburar to burn. Abuelo a grandfather. Aca hither. Acabar to
finish, to end. Acaecer to chance, to happen. Achaque a causing, an occasion
or cause. Acertar to hit the mark, to hit on a thing. Aculla there, thither,
that way, thence, De aculla. Accusado accused appeached. Acor a Hanke. Acota^
to whippe, to whip with a rod. Acatar to see, to look, and also to honor and
reverence. Acetre a brazen pale. Acetrero a hauker. Acidente a chance, hap.
Acicaladura a trimming, garnishing, polishing. Acomar to stir up, to provoke,
to irritate. Adelante before. Adorar to worship. Adolecer to be sick,
grieved, or ill at ease. Adeudarse to bring himself in debt. Adelantar to
prefer, to get before. Adentellar to bite. Adulcar to sweeten. Affligido to be
afflicted, vexed. Affloxar to loosen, to slacken. Afuziar to give hope, to
encorage. Ageno strange, alienate, belonging to others. Agua water. Agradable
that which is thankful to a man, pleasing, acceptable. Agradecido thankful.
Agradecimiento thankfulness. Alaban^a praise. Alhaja housholdstuffe.
Alberchigo. Alberchiga. Alguno, some body, some one, some. Algo some thing.
Alli there. Alla that way. Alcar to lift up. Algodon bombast. Algarue a ca^e, a
den. Alimentar to nurish to maintain. Amonestar to admonish. Amenazas
thr^a^^ings. Amig^ a friend. Am^^ to love. Amo, a master to a slaueor a
servant. Amargo bitter. Amassa^or a Baker. Amassar to kneth or to beat small
Angust^ar to grieve, to vex, to trouble. An^dir to add to adioyne. A^o year.
Animal a thing that has life and sense, a living creature* a beast. Animado
animated, with life, living. Animar to animate. Andar to go. Anunciar, to
report, to tell. A^^^ar to make a neaste. A^^llo a ring. Angel an Angel.
Anoche ^ester night. Anoche^^^ to waxen night, to become dark. An^^^o
ancient. Aqui there. Aquell he. Aquell^s they. Aqueste this man. Aquexarse to
make haste, to hie. Arder to burn. Arad^r a ploughman. A^bo^ a tree.
A^repentir to repent. Ar^emet^r to invade, to assault, to set upon. Arribar to
arrive, to come to* Arrodillar to kn^le. Artificio an occupation, a craft,
Assaz enough, su^^iciently. Assossegar to quiet, to a^^wage. Astucia
craftiness, guile, deceit, Astutamente craftily, deceptfully. Atar to tie.
Ata^^^ to drive away* to spy to discover. A^ajo a short or co^pendio^s way.
Auer^gu^r to verify Aver to have. Aumentar to enlarge, to augme^t. Auariento
covetous greedy. Auczez at sometimes. Aximez. Axuar how should stuff. Azeite
oil.
B
BAcin a basen. Ba^o a bathing place, a hotehouse. Barato plentiful, good
cheap. Barragan a young man. Barrena a wimble to bore holes. Beuer to drink.
Bezar to kiss. Bestia a beast. Beuida drink. Bezo a manner, an use, a custom,
Blanco white. Bienaventurado happy, fortunate: Blanquear to whiten. Blandura
m^kenesse fair speech. Boz the voice. Bocezar to yawn, to gape. Bodega a
sellar. Bueno, good. Bodego^ a tavern. Bodigo a cake. B^fetada a buffet. B^lar
to fly. Boluer to turn. Bondad goodness. Bonete a cappe* Borro a blot Bossar
to vomit. Botja a hatte. Botar to thrust out, to expel. Botica a shop.
C
CAbeca a head. Cabello, a hair. Cadauno every one. Cadauez every tune. Caca a
hunting. Cacador a hunter. Cacar to hunt. Cambiar to change. Caminar to
travel. Camino the way. Callar to hold ones peace. Casto chaste. Castidad
chastety. Caro dear. Caridad dearth. Camarro a shepherds scrip. Cansado,
wcarie. Carca, a bush, a thickei, a bramble a wild Eglentine. caquicami a
roof, a beam. Cauallero a knight or gentleman. Cauallo a horse. Calor heat.
Causa cause. Causar, to cause. Cantar, to sing. Camara a chamber. Camueso a
pippin tree. Camuesa, a pippin. Carta paper Cabo the end. Castill^ a castle.
Cargo charge, loding. Cargar to charge, to lode. Cantaro a pot, a judge, a
tankard. capato a shoe Carreta a carte. Carne flesh. Captiuerio, captivity.
Capado one that is gelded, ^^ eunuch. Capill^ a Chapel. Capon a capon. Cara
the face. Carcell a prison. Carnaual Shrouetide. Carnero mutton. Carniceria the
shambles. Carni^ero a butcher. Carpintero a carpinter. Casa a house. Cerca,
n^ere. Cedaco a sieve, a searce. Ceja the space over the nose between the
brows. Cerrojo. Cerra ^ura a lock. Cerca near unto, about, bye. Cerco a
circle, a seege. Cesta a che^^. Cera wax. Cercar to besege to compass about
Cerueza beer. Celozo gealous. Celos gealosie, zeal. Comentar to lay the
foundation. Cometario a churchyard, a place where men be buried. Chapin a
slipper or panto^^e. Charlatan, a prattler, a chatet^. Chamarra, a sheapheards
scrip. Chismear, to gather the tribute of some place. Chismero, a collector, or
gatherer of tribute. Chismeria, collection, or gathering of tribute. Chiste.
Chistar. Chinche a stinking worm breeding in wood, or paper. Cinex. Chimenea a
chimnye. Chico little. Chiquito very little, very small. Chozno. Chueca in latin
Coxendix, vertebra, a knuckell bone. Chupar to suck, to draw. Ciruela a
plumme. Ciruelo a plumme tree. Cielo heaven. Claro clear, bright. Claridad
brightness. Cilla a barn or place to put up corn. Ciudad a cittye. Ciuera
corn. Como like as. Componer to make, to compou^d, to set together. Comprado
bought. Comprar to buy. Comer to eat. Comparar to compare. Comparacion a
comparison. Compania company. Comido meat. Contado counted. Contar to count*
Condemnar to condemn. Condemnacion condemnation. Conseruar to preserve, keep,
and to conserve. Consolar to comfort. Consolation comfort, consolation.
Conoscer to know. Confessar to confess. Confession confession. Consejo
counsel. Consentir to consent, assent, to agree to. Contradezir to gainsay.
Contrito contrit, that which humbles it self. Corregir to correct. Correr to
run. Coracon heart. Coser to sow. Corromper to corrupt, to ma^re. Cortar to
cut, Cortadura a cut a cutting. Corona a crown. Cordero lamme. Cornudo
horned. Creer to believe. Criar to creat, to bring up. Criado brought up, a
servant* also created. Crianca bringing up, manners. Crines, cabellos hear.
Crudo raw. Crimen a heinous crime, an o^^e^s^ Cruel cruel. Cruz a cross.
Cuchillo a knife. cumo juice, moisture. cun^o. Cumplir to accomplish. Cuerpo
body. Cuenta accounts, reckoning.
D
DAtill a palm tree. Dar to give. Dad me give me. Dancar to dance, to leap or
skip. Dan^ar to hinder, harm, hurt. Dan^o ^os^e, harm, hurt. Dan^oso
hurtful. De, of. Deaca from hence. Desebriegar to become sober. De alla from
thence. Demandar to ask. Defiender to defend. Defuera without. Degollar to
behead, to cut off ones neck, to cut ones throat, to murder. Den^ar to daine.
Derecha mano the right hand. Despedir to dismiss, to send away Destruction
destruction. Destruir to destroy. Desterrar to bannish^. Desatinar to reele, to
stagger, to waver, to wag. Destorcer, to vnwreath. Desdezir to unsay, to deny
that which he said. Deshaze^ to undo. Des^os wishes, Des^ar to desire, to
wish. Descubrir to uncover. Desechar, to forsake, to put away. Dexar to leave.
Deshonesto dishonest. Deuda debt. Desense^ar vnteach. Desden^ar to disdain.
Desdicha unhappiness, misfortune, infelicity. Descoser to vnsowe. Desconcierto
disorder, confusion. Desatar to untie. Dicho said, spoken. Diestra the right
hand. Digestion digestion. Digno worthy. Dinero money. Dios God, Disputar to
dispute. Discipulos disciples, sthollers. Disponer to dispose. Diuino divine.
Diuinar to conjecture. Diuulgar to publish. Distancia distance, difference.
Distinguir to distinguish. Donzella a damsel, a young gentlewoman. Doctor a
Doctor, a teacher. Dormir to sleep. Dorado gilded. Donoso pleasant, merry.
Doblar to double. Doblado double. Dote dowry. Duro hard. Duda doubt. Durar to
last, to continue.
E
EMbiar to send. En^^rramiento a shutting in, a penning in. Ensen^ar to teach.
Ensen^amiento teaching. Ensen^ador teacher. Enuierno winter. Enuerano summer.
Encomiendas commendations. Ensuziar to foul, to make durty. Enzina an oak
tree, Enxugar to dry. Enxambre a swarm of bees. Errar to ^r, to go out of the
way* Escama the scale of a fish. Escondido hidden. Escudrin^ar to search, to
seek out. Escuchar to harken. Escoier to choose or pick out* Escriuir to
write. Escalentar to war^^. Espiritu spirit. Esperanca hope. Espinilla the
shanke or shin bone of the leg. Estos these. Estar to be. Ethimologia a true
saying, a true exposition or reason. Euangelizar to preach the Gospel.
Exprimir to express. Estiercol dunge. Estufa a hot house. Estudiar to study.
F
FAltar to want, to lack. Fatiga weariness of the body or the troublesomnesse
of the mind. Fe faith. Feo ^lfauoured. Feame^te ilfauouredly. Fieles they that
be faithful. Fiebre an ague. Fiesta an holy day. Fornicario, a fornicator.
Fortalecimiento fortification, munition. Fragua, a hanuiedld. Fruto, fruit.
Frio, cold. Frito, fried. Fuero, without. Fu rca, force, strength. Fundamento,
foundation.
G
GAllo a cock. Gallina a hen. Gastar to spend. Ganar to win, to gain.
Ganado a flock of sheep, also gotten, gained. Ganir to prattle, to chat.
Garcas ojos squint eyes. Garfio a hook or crooked nail. Gentileza
gentleness. Gemido, a wa^^ing, a lamenting, a sigh, a sobbe. General,
general. Gesto, beha^iour, demeanure. Gente, people. Gengibre, ginger.
Gigante^, giantes. Girifalte, a hawk. Gloton, a glutton. Glorifiear, to
glorify. Glosar, to expound* to make a comentary* Golpe, a blow. Gonces,
Gouernar, to govern. Gozar, to enjoy. Gozo, gladness, joy. Gota, the gout.
Gomito, vomit, vomiting. Gracia, grace. Gracioso, gracious. Grado, a degree.
Guardar, to keep. Guastar, to mar. Guia, a guide. Guiar, to guide. Guiado,
guided. Guisa, manner, guise. ^usto, taste. Gustar, to taste. Gusano, a worm.
Guerra, war. Guarida, a refuge, a place of safety.
H
HAblar, to speak. Hambre, hunger. Haron, Aaron. Hazer, to do* Hazienda,
substance, goods. Hecho, done. Hender, to cleave, to choppe. Heredero, an
heir. Hermoso, fair. Hermano, brother. Herrerero, a smith. Herrar, to ^ette
on irons. Herido, hurt, wounded, thrust. Higuera, a fig tree. Higo, a fig.
Hijo son. Hilar, to spinne. Hilo, thread. Hinchado, swelled, puffed up, big.
Hombre, a man. Hormiga* a pissemyer. Humillar, to humble. Humilde, humble.
Huyr, to run away, to fly.
I
IAmas, never. Iarro, an Ewer. Iardin, a gardeine. Impio, ungodly, incredulous.
Indigno, unworthy. Induzir, to periwade, exhort, to induce. Infinito,
infinite. Igualdad, equality. Infame, infamous. Instrumento, instrument.
Iornal, a days work. Iubon, a do^blet. Iugar, to play. Iuramento, an oath*
Iurar, to swear. Iusto, just. Iustamente, justly.
L
LAdron, a theef^, Leer, to read. Lengua, a tongue. Leche, milk. Lexia, lie
made of ashes. Lexo, far off, far from. Ley, a law. Liberal, liberal.
Librar, to deliver out of bondage Libertar, to set at freedom. Llamar, to
call. Llaue, a key. Llegar, to approach, to draw near, to come unto, to arrive:
Lleuantar, to rise. Lleno, full. Libreria, a library, a shop of books Limpiar,
to make clean. Libro, a book. Lorar, to weep, wail, cry, Llouer, to rain.
Lodo, dirt. Lobrego, wretched, miserable, sorr^wfull. Lobo, a wolf. Loco, a
fool. Loar, to praise. Lugar, place. Luchar, to wrestle. Luego, by and by,
straight way, incontinently. Luego que, as soon as. Lumbral, a threshold.
Lumbre, light. Lutado, k^^ered over with dirt. Luz, light, brightness. Luzir,
to ^aelight, to shine, to glister* Lluvia, rain.
M
MAca, mallet, a hammer. Maestro, school master. Maldad, mischief,
noughtinesse. Malo, naught. Mancha, a stain. Mancano, an apple tree. Mancana,
an apple. Manjar, meat. Man^a, manner, deceit, subtilty, or wile. Man^ana, a
morning, also to morrow. Mandamiento, commandment. Manifestar, to make
manifest. Merrauilla, marvel. Marescido. Mas, more. Massa, a mass, a ^umpe.
Mascar, to chaw, to eat. Mastin, a mastiefe dog. Matar, to kill, slaie, or
murder. Matricula, a catalogue of proper names. Menesteres, it is wanting,
lacking needful. Medida, measure. Menor, less. Mejor, better. Mentira, a lie.
Membrillo, a Quince, and also a Quince tree. Mengua, want, poverty, indigence
lack. Mendigar, to beg. Mercado, the market place, also cheap, a market.
Mesa, a table. Mexiza, the iawe. Mio, mine. Misericordia, pity. Mismo, self.
Misericordioso, pitiful. Miesse, harvest. Mirar, to look, to see, to behold.
Milagro, a thing seldom seen, strange, monstrous. Miedo, fear. Morel, a
mulberie tree, called Morus. Morar, to dwell. Moreno, brown, tawnie, swartish.
Morir, to die. Mosca, a fly. Mortuorio, a Funeral belonging to the burial.
Mosquear, to drive away flies. Mostrar, to show. Muger, a woman. Mundo, the
world. Muncho, much, great, greatly. Muerte, death. Mulo, a Mule. Multitud, a
multitude. Mun^eco, a babie, a puppet, a thing that children play with. Mudar,
to change, to alter. Mudanca, a change, an alteration.
N
NAcer, to be borne, to proceed, to rise, to grow, etc. Nadar, to swim Nalga,
the buttocks. Naranja, an Orange. Naranjo, an Orange tree. Nariz, nose. Naue, a
ship. Nauio, the same. Nauegar, to sail. Nauidad, Christmasse tide.
Necessidad, necessity. Necessario, necessary. Negotio, busi^es. Negro,
black. Neuar, to snow. Negligente, negligent. Negror, blacknes. Necedad,
ignorance, unskillfulness, foolishnes. Neblina, a cloud. Ni, neither, nor. Nido,
a neast. Nin^o, a child. Nebla, a cloud. Ninguno, no body. Nieto, nephew.
Nin^ez, childhood. No, no, not. Nogal, a nut tree. Noche, night. Nombrar, to
name. Nombre, a name. Nosotros, we. Nombre proprio, a proper name. Notazilla, a
little note. Nouela, a fable or tale. Nouedad, newness. Nueuas, news,
tidings. Nuez, a nut. Nuez moscada, a nutmeg. Nubloso, cloudie. Nudoso, full of
knots.
O
OBra, a work. Obedecer, to obey. Obispo, a Bishop. Oblada, a cake, an
offering. Obligar, too bind. Obligado, bound. Obrar, to work. Oficial, an
Officer, also an art or occupation. Ofrecer to offer. Ofrenda, a sacrifice.
Oir, to hear. Ojo, an eye. Oliua, an Olive. Oler, to smell. Olla, a pot. Olor,
a smell. Olmo, an Elm tree. Olvidar, to forget. Omiziano, a manslayer. Ora, an
hour. Orador, an Orator. Orar, to pray. Orden, order. Origin, an offspring,
beginning. Oreja, an ear. Orella, the hem or skirt of a coat or garment.
Orin, rust. Ostinado, obstinate. Osadia, boldness, audacitie. Osar, to be bold.
Otero, a high hill, or watch tower. Otorgar, to grant, to allow, to
privilege. Otro, another. Otra y ostra vez, again and again. Otio, leisure.
Oueja, a sheep. Ouillo, a bottom or clew of thread. Oxala, would to God, God
grant. Oxear, to drive away.
P
PAdecer, to suffer. Padre, father. Pagar, to pay. Palma, palm: also the
palm of the hand. Palabra, a word. Palo, a stick. Pan^o, cloth. Pan, bread.
Parra, a vine. Partir, to part, to divide. Passear, to walk. Patria, Country.
Paz, peace. Pared, a wall. Parir, to be delivered, to be in childbed.
Pariente, kinsman. Parida, a woman lately brought tobed. Pararse, to rest, to
stay, to stand still. Partera, a midwife. Paxaro, a bird. Pastel, a pie.
Peccado, sin. Peot, worse. Pena, punishment. Pequeno, little. Piece, fish.
Pequen^ito, very little. Perdiz, a partridge. Pedaro, a piece. Permitir to
suffer. Peal, a socke. Perdonar, to pardon. Pegar, to paste together. Peral, a
pear tree. Peynar, to come. Pera, a pear. Pain, a comb. Perder, to leese.
Pelear, to fight. Pertenese, it appertains. Peligro, danger. Perfecto,
perfect. Pedo, a hair. Persona, a person. Pensar, to think. Peon, a footman:
also a light horse man, also a iourneyman, a mercenarie workman. Pereza,
lasines, sluggishnes: also to be sorry. Pesar, to weigh, to be heavy. Piadoso,
pitiful, merciful. Pichel, Pic, a foot. Piensar, to think. Pimienta,
pepper. Piedra, a stone. Pintar, to paint. Plazer, pleasure, delight. Pleyto, a
suit in law. Platero, a goldsmiths an ingrauer, a caruer. Plegar, tofold.
Plomo, Lead. Pluma, a feather, a pen to write Pobre, pour. Poder, to be able.
Poco, a little. Poner, to put. Poluo, dust, sand. Por, for. Pourque? wherefore.
Polla, a chicken. Por mi, for me. Por ti, for thee. Porque, because. Posar, to
rest. Porfiar, to affirm, to stand upon a thing obstinatly, to persevere.
Posse^r. to possess. Pozo, a well. Postigo, a back door. Prima, cosine,
kinsman. Principal, principal, chief. Presto, quickly, soon. Prestar, to
borrow or lend. Preceptos, precepts. Predicar, to preach. Preguntar, to ask.
Prometer, to promise. Prouecho, profit. Produzir, to produce, to bri^gforth
Prontamente, readily, promptly. Propriamente, properly. Promessas, promises.
Prouar, to prove, to try. Proueer, to provide. Pua, an iron pike, an iron
prick, y^ point of a weapon, a spear head. Publicar, to publish. Pueblo,
people. Puento, a bridge. Puerta, a gate, a door. Puerco, a hog. Pulga, a
flea, Purgar, to make clean.
Q
QVal, what kind of thing. Quando, when. Quanto, how much. Quantos, how many.
Quebrar, to break. Quebrantar, to break or violate, Quedar, to remain, to
stay. Quemar, to burn. Querer, to will. Queso, cheese, Querella, a complainte.
Quexura, have, or making of have. Quitar, toake away, to seperat, Quexa, a
complaint.
R
RAez, easy. Rayo, the rayon or beam of the sun. Raiz, a root. Rama, a
branch. Razo, rased silk. Razimo, a bunch of grapes. Rauia, madness,
woodnesse. Recebir, to receive. Redemptor, a redemptor. Redemtion, redemtion.
Regir, to govern. Regeneracion, regeneration. Reir, to laugh. Ren^egar, to
deny, to rebel, to revolt. Ren^ir, to chide. Repartir, to distribute, to
divide, to part. Reprimir, to repress. Rescatar, to redeem. Requerir, to
require. Resultar, ^o rebou^d, to leap back. Reuerenciar, to reverence. Rey, a
king. Reyno, a kingdom. Rezio, strong, hard, Rezar, to rehearse. Reziente,
fresh, new. Rezma de papel, a ream of paper. Ria, a haven. Riatillo, a little
river. Ribera, y^ sea shore, coast or banck. Riguroso, rigorous, hard, cruel.
Ricor, rich. Risa, laughter. Rincon, a corner. Rio, a river. Riqueza, riches.
Robar, to rob. Rodar, to turn a thing like a wheel, to swing about.
Romper, to break. Ron^a, scabbednesse, itch. Roxo, read. Ruido, a noise.
Rumiar, to chewe the cudde. Ruim, naught.
S
SAber, to know. Sabio, wise. Sabiduria, wisdom. Sabiamente, wittely.
Sacramento, the Sacrament. Sacrar, to take forth. Saco, a sack, a bag.
Sacudir, to beat down. Sae^, an arrowe. Sagrario, a sanctuary. Saltar, to
leap. Saltear, to assail, or set upon, to rob or spoil. Salud, health,
the good state of once condition, or life. Sanctidad, holiness. Sancto, holy.
Sana, anger. Sanidad, health of the body. Sano, healthful, whole, sound, not
^icke. Sathanas, satan, the devil. Satisfaction, satisfaction. Sauana, a
sheet. Sazon, season, time. Sangre, blood. Salir, to go out, to issue* Sed*
thirst. Seda, silk. Seg^ir, to follow. Semejante, like. Segun, according.
Sen^or, Lord, sir. Sentir, to perceive, to feel, to discern. Ser, to be.
Seruir, to serve. Seuero, severe, cruel, hard, grave. Seueramente, cruelly,
severely, hardly. Sen^al, a sign or token. Ser^idor, a servant, a minister.
Sesos, the brains. Silla, a stool, a settell. S^empre, always. Simiente,
seed. Sitio, the situation. So, under. Soberuio, proud. Sobornar, to suborne,
to instruct one how to deceive, or how to be a false witness. Soldado, a
soldier. Solaz, comfort, solace. Soliuiar, to ease, to defend, to succor, to
lighten, to lessen. Sobrar, to remain over. Soler, to be accustomed, to use.
Sollocar, to ye^, to sob often. Son^ar, to dream. Soltura, a losing, untying,
undoing. Suelo, the ground. Subir, to go up. Suerte, chance, hap. Sufrir,
to suffer, Sujuzgar, to subdew. Sumar, to cast a sum. Suzo, upon* Suzio,
foul, durty. Sudar, to sweat. Suegra, the wives or husbands mother, a mother
in law. Suen^o, a dream. Sustentar, to maintain, to keep, to uphold, to bear
up. Sugoso, full of juice, moiste. Suyo, his.
T
TAbla, a table, or board, Tachar, to show one his vice, to rebuke, to blame,
to find fault with. Tajar, to cut, to cleave. Tan, so. Tan frio, so cold.
Tanto, so much. Tantoque, whilst. Tardo, late. Temer, to fear. Templo, a
church, a temple. Tener, to hold. Terciopelo, velvet three pile. Temprano,
betimes early. Templado, temperate, modest, sober. Tenazas, a pair of tongs,
a pair of pincers, or nippers. Texer, to weaue. Texillo, the weauers shuttle.
Tiembra, a trembling, a quaking. Tierra, earth, country. Tinta, ink. Tibiez^,
between hot and cold: also slownesse, carelesnes, and negligence. Tirar, to
draw, to hook, to pull. Tintero, an inkehorne. Tocar, to touch. Topar, to
meet with one, to go right against, or upon one. Todo, all. Tomar, to take.
Toro, a bull. Torcer, to wreath, to wreast, to wring, to turn round. Tornar, to
turn back. Tra^o a linen or woollen cloth. Trabaiar, to work. Tratar, to
entreat, to handle, to use. Traer, to bring, to carry. Trauar, to knit, to
tie, Tregua, truce, peace for a time. Trespaser, to trespass, to offend.
Trigo, corn. Trouar, to find, to invent. Tronar, to thunder. Truhan, a
parasite, a belly feast. Tu, thou, you. Tuerto, crooked. Tutar, to keep. Tuyo,
thine. Turbar, to trouble, to disturb.
V
VAnidad, vanity. Vara, a yard, a measure. Varon, a man. Vando, a faction.
Vazio, empty. Vencer, to overcome. Vender, to sell. Verdad, truth. Verde,
green. Verdaderamente, truly, verily. Vestidos, apparel, clothes* Vez, time,
course, turn. Vezino, a neighbor. Vinagre, vinager. Vihuela, the violl.
Vianda, meat. Vida, life. Vidro, a glass. Viejo, old. Virgen, a virgin, a
maid. Vista, the sight. Vientre, the belly. Viento, the wind. Vileza,
vildnes, of small price. Vino, wine. Virey, viceroy. Vilescer, to waske, vile,
base. Vosotros, ye. Voto, a vow. Votar, to give voices, to elect or choose by
voices. Vn^a, the nail of ones finger. Union, unity. Vnguento, ointment.
Vsar, to use. Verfano, a pupil or orphan. Vrina, urine, piss.
X
XAbon soap. Xaquima, a halter, a rope, a collar. Xara, the herb whereof
Labdanum is made, which is a kind of gu^ much used in pomanders Xergon, a
matresse. Xenable, or Mostaca, lineseede, whereof mustard is made, mustard.
Xeruilla, a spout, also a pumpe. Ximia, an Ape. Xiringa, a kind of iron pipe
or flute.
Y
YA, already. Yaque, now, that. Yegua, a mare. Yerro, an error. Yerua, an
herb. Yerno, the daughters husband. Yo, I. Yugo, a yoke.
Z
ZArco, it is commonly taken for one whose eyes are bluish and graie: also one
that turns his eyes, so that all the white is seen. Zorra, or Rapaz, a Fox.
Zorzal, a thrush, a black bird.
FINIS.

