THE VNGIRDING OF THE Scottish Armor: OR, AN ANSWER TO THE Informations for
Defensive Arms against the Kings Majesty, which were drawn up at Edinburgh,
by the common help and industry of the three Tables of the rigid Covenanters
of the Nobility, Barons, Ministry, and Burgesses, and ordained to be read out
of Pulpit by each Minister, and pressed upon the people, to draw them to take
up arms, to resist the Lords Anointed, throughout the whole Kingdom of
SCOTLAND.

By John Corbet, Minister of Bonyl, one of the Collegiate Churches of the
Provostrie of Dunbartan.

Prove. 24.21. My Son fear God and the King, and meddle not with those that are
given to change. For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the
ruin of them both?

Mat. 26.52. Put up thy sword into his place, for he that takes the sword,
shall perish with the sword.

DVBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers, 1639.

Perlegi hunc librum, cui Titulus est, [The ungirding of the Scottish Armour]
in quo nihil reperio quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur.

ED. PARRY, Reverendissimi in Christo Patris Archiepiscopi Dublin. Sacellanus.
Maii sexto, 1639.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS, Lord Viscount VVENTVVORTH, Baron of Wentworth
Woodhouse, Lord Newmarsh and Oversley, Lord President of the Council
established in the North part of England, Lord Lieutenant of Yorkshire, One of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council in England, and Lord Deputy
General of Jreland.
Right Honorable,
SInce the Flood of our Scottish Disorders and Vproares have overflowed the
banks of divine and humane Authority, I have been with Jeremie, Ier. 9.1.
crying out in the bitterness of my soul, O that my head were waters, and my
eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night, for the miseries
of my Country people: Whereof a fiery-zealous Faction, have from day to day
waxed so insolent; that of equity they may challenge as their own, that
description which Jeremie affords in the next words, Ier. 9.2.
verse. 2. They proceed from evil to evil, and are an assembly of treacherous
men. For His Majesty's Clemency has been to them, Prove. 16.15. Prove. 19 12.
as a cloud of the latter rain; and as the dew on the grass; which should
have produced many returns of thankfulness. But behold, he has watered evil
ground which brings forth briars and thorns the more abundantly. Mich. 7.4 3.
The best of them is as a briar; the most upright is as a thorn hedge: they do
evil with both hands earnestly; hunting every man his brother with a net. They
are gone in the way of Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam, and
stand in the gainsaying of Core Amongst many passages to prove this, these
their informations of war are a most evident demonstration, which caused me
continue Jeremies Elegy and sorrowful Song: Oh that I had in the wilderness
a lodging of a wayfaring man, that I might leave my people, and go from them.
In the mean time, having purchased a copy of these informations, which with
their Covenant now at last, with force and violence was to be thrust and
pressed upon me, I returned this my Answer, whereof I was to make use with my
Brethren at our next meeting (which was the seventh day after I had seen the
copy) that they might see that as hitherto I could find no reason to Covenant
w th them, so now much less, when it ends in open Rebellion. But being
advertised of the cruel plot, and snares laid for me, I was forced to fly
from the virulent and violent fury of the Covenant, as from a Bear robbed of
her whelps, and to seek friends to virtue among strangers: leaving my wife
great with child, melting in sorrow; with four young children, to take a
proof of their humanity. When I came to this kingdom of Ireland, I was so
ashamed that such treacherous doctrine should have been brought forth by my
Contrymen, to the great scandal of the Gospel, and deep wounding of our
protestant Religion, and rejoicing of the adversaries, that I was purposing to
smother these their informations: But ere I was maturely thus resolved, I found
the matter already spread abroad, and with my eyes have seen other copies.
This did cut my resolution in the blade, so that I suffered these informations
with my answer to them, to enjoy the light. And that for diverse reasons. 1.
Because some men (not knowing the Mystery of the Covenant, nor that old saying
of Luther, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum) have thought it impossible,
that such rebellious doctrine could be hatched by the Covenanters, and that it
seems to be an invention of others, to make them the more odious. This I
refute, by publishing the same. Secondly, that this doctrine, whereunto I, one
of the least of the Tribe of Levi there, have answered, may not be imputed to
that Church and Nation, but to some factious spirits there, who have this hour
and power of darkness: For since the most part of them were compelled to
subscribe their covenant, shall any man think that they will allow this
doctrine of Rebellion? I know the contrary, and dare presume to affirm, that
the best of that Kingdom for worth and number, especially of the Ministry,
shall assent to that truth which I here maintain, though now they be carried
away with this inundation; and the lay-ruling-Bishops their Governors keep them
under. Yea, my charity is so enlarged, that I trust, that the chief Contrivers
of these informations shall acknowledge their error: for they have been
transported with passions, whilst they were upon this work, by their great
swelling words, fully stuffed with calumnies; whereof I hope they will repent
in their cold blood, when they forbear to be as the raging waves of the sea,
foming out their own shame. Jude 13. Esa. 32.2.
Then the heart of the rash shall understand knowledge. So that I hope the
number shall be few, as the grape-gleanings after the vintage, who defend this
mad doctrine: Acts 28.19.
And I, with Paul, shall have nothing to accuse my Nation of. But if any, after
ripe deliberation, shall adhere to this rebellious doctrine, and when they
should cry, Nulla salus bello, pacem te petimus omnes,shall change it into Tota
salus bello, facem te petimus omnes,I shall be so far from contradicting
those who have called them all mad men, that I shall take up Paul's wish, I
would to God that they were both altogether, Acts 26.29.
and almost even as Paul, his bonds not being excepted; which bonds I wish not
as a punishment, but as a remedy for their brainsick malady: having withal
their Campsticks taken from them, Pro. 26.18.
as being most dangerous in the hands of mad men, especially for themselves.
And as for these Cynick and Lucinian railers, rather than preachers; such as
that wiseman who made sport in the Pulpit of Edinburgh, by riding Balaams ass:
and that other madcap who wounded the beast, these are wise enough for their
new calling, let them be gone to them. Let the one learn better to play the
butcher with beasts, whose Physic for man is naught: and let the other be an
Asse-breaker, and if he did formerly thus preach, I am sure an Ass has done
more service to Christ than ever he has done: an Ass carried Christ to
lerusalem, but with his Asinine pratlings he has brought none to Christ. And
therefore I would not that any should brand our Church with such spots,
fruitless trees, wandering stars, and clouds without water: Let them bear
their own shame. It cannot be dennyed, but our Church is now in a great
Eclipse, and the mouth of our common adversary is open, and they triumphing
over us, cry, Medice te ipsum cura: But, Mic. 7.8.
Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, though I have fallen, I shall arise;
though I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. I hope to see our
Church flourishing and shining in her former beauty, maintaining again the
Orthodoxe Doctrine toward Monarchy, 1 Pet. 2.15.
and putting to silence the ignorance of foolish men. And therefore, my third
reason in publishing this Treatise is, that all our Orthodoxe Divines may have
these informations, as so many Theses, brought to their hands, who are more
able to stop the mouth of the Gainsayers.

Now, Right Honorable seeing I am a stranger in this Kingdom, and this my
mean labor stands in need of one (in these evil days) who is powerful
both for Place, and Learning, for its Patron: I have therefore presumed to lay
it at your Lordships feet, begging your honorable Patronage, in whom both
great Authority and Learning, Wisdom and Justice are met; whom this Church and
Nation has found a most gracious Patron. Acts 24.10.
Whom I know to have been of many years a governor unto this nation; Acts
26.3.
and to be expert in all customs and questions of this nature, which
concerns the civil Magistrate, and especially the Monarchical Government of
great King CHARLES. And therefore, though the Author and the workmanship be but
mean and rude, yet the matter which I defend, deservedly craveth such a high
Patronage for its defense, as is your Lordship; who is as faithful David,
among all the Kings servants, and honorable in his house; 1. Sam. 22 14. Job.
29.14.
who has put on Righteousness as a clothing, and judgment as a robe and
diadem; whom, when thy ear hears, it blesses; and when thy eye sees, it
gives witness, as to one ready to deliver the poor that cries, and the
fatherless, and him that has none to help, and to break the jaws of the
unrighteous, and to pluck the spoil out of his teeth. And this is no small
addition to his Majesty's happiness, Psalm. 101.6.
to have one who walks in a perfect way to serve him, which was David's
resolution. As Solomon speaks of the virtuous woman, Prove. 31 11.
The heart of her husband does safely trust in her, so that he shall have no
need of spoil: So may I say of his Majesty's trust in your Lordship,
especially in these evil days, which brings to my remembrance the words of
Nabal. 1. Sam. 25.10.
There be many servants now adays, that break away every man from his Master.
To put confidence in such, is to trust to a broken tooth, and to a foot out of
joint.

May it please therefore your Lordship favorably to accept these mean
labors, which for the Glory of God, Victory of truth, honor of our King, and
good will toward my distracted Contrymen, I have brought to light; Humbly
beseeching for the shelter of your L. protection, to this Treatise and its
Author, who shall begin and remain to be

Your Lordships most humble Servant, JOHN CORBET.

THE VNGIRDING OF THE Scottish Armor.
THE Elephant travelleth not so long from her conception to her birth, as these
chief covenanters have been traveling in their mutual bond of defense
against authority, under the Cloak of a Covenant with God, to bring forth this
huge, and monstrous birth of informations for resisting the Lords Anointed; who
after unparallelled examples of Clemency, is constrained by force of Arms to
re-establish his Ancient Authority in SCOTLAND, which is now laid in the dust,
and trampled under foot. At this last meeting at Edinburgh, of the Nobility,
Barons, and learned of the rigid covenanting Mininsterie, for this effect, I
looked for some great matter, for some weighty, and powerful arguments and
reasons to press the people to Arms, but behold, they have brought forth
naught but a lie, as says the Royal Prophet David, Psalm. 7.14. not so much as
a shadow of any sound reason, to any reasonable man, Parturiunt montes,
nascetur ridiculus ^^us.

And I protest that I am now beyond all Admiration, when I consider how so many
men can be carried away with so small appearance of reason from the due
subjection to the supreme Governor under God, and not be moved when most
sound reasons are brought on the contrary, but rather furiously, with the zeal
of Iehu, persecute those who upon sound reasons withstand them in great
sobriety. This is a great prejudice, and its most manifest that their
affections obnubilates their reasons, as sinoake, that they cannot see. For our
ministers of the strict and rigid sort have taken only pains in moving the
affections, and not in instructing the mind with sound reasons; hereunto like
the false teachers, who (as witnesses Tertullian) prius suadent quam docent:
Hence it is that in this Pamphlet of theirs, before they allege any reasons of
their resisting authority, they propound six points, for the gaining of the
affections of the people, and then come to some naughty reasons to persuade
war. I know that the times are evil, I have already suffered much thereof,
so that Amos counsel, chap 5.13. might seem seasonable, The prudent shall
keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time, Esa. 59.15.
Yea, so evil a time, that he who departs from evil, makes himself a prey;
as Isaias says.

But when I see hostile arms raised against our dread Soveraigue, the Lords
Anointed, the breath of our Nostrils; I cannot hold my peace any longer, but as
the dumb son of King Croesus suddenly spoke when he saw the sword upon the
King his father, crying, O man kill not the King. So when I see the same to be
drawn against my father, my King, and Head, I cannot hold my peace, and I cry
rather, O Country men, save your selves from such high rebellion. Save your
souls, save your bodies and estates: be afraid to under-take that War which
is forbidden by God, adventure not a poor soul upon such an hazard, in
resisting superior powers, which is to resist the Ordinance of God, and will
you strive with the Almighty? I have considered your reasons, drawn up at your
tables for Arms, and I find no reason that any soul may probably lean to.
Upon the first sight of them, my duty to God, my King, and Country, suffered me
not to sleep till I had returned this short answer, which I wish might come to
your hands without suppression, till time and leisure be granted more fully to
answer this point. As your arms (you say) are for defense, so is my Pen; let
the learned turn their Pen against mine, if they find no satisfaction, and
let the sword be against the armies of the Aliens: for my Pen here is not
offensive, but defensive, let us first fight with our Pens, and if yours be
conquerours, then go to swords. I shall keep this Method, to set down word
by word all your instructions without missing a syllable, and then return an
answer, not so much as it deserves, but as I think expedient to answer.

Covenanters instructions.
The times require that the points following be pressed upon the people, both
by the Preachers in public, and understanding and well-affected Professors in
private conferences.
1. BEcause our chief adversaries, who are enemies to the Gospel of Christ,
to the salvation of the peoples souls and to the peace of this Church and
Kingdom, have from the beginning advanced their ungodly and Antichristian
course, by lies and persecution, by craft and cruelty, which have been their
most subtle and strongest arguments. And now when by excommunication they are
given over to Satan who has been a lier and murderer from the beginning, have
put away all conscience, countenance, and natural affections to their Country,
the people would be dealt withal that their fraudulent lies and crafty
devices be not believed, nor their force and threatened violence be feared by
the people of God, remembering their Hellish Maxim: Flectere si nequeo superos,
Acheront a movebo.

Anticovenanter.
Though much might be said against this most unchristian and uncharitable
divellish saying, which I might justly retort, especially in persuading the
people to swear to serve the King, which service you now cause stand in
resisting; Yet with Michael the Archangell, disputing with the Devil about the
body of Moses, I will bring no railing accusation, Jude 9.
but I say, The Lord rebuke thee.

Covenanter.
2. That Unity be earnestly recommended, as that which strengthens the cause,
and which being fast holden with verity, will make us invincible: and on the
contrary, that Division is by all means to be avoided, as that which from the
beginning has been principally intended, and many ways sought for by our
enemies, and which once having place, will bring us to a certain ruin, and
make us of all people the most contemptible and miserable; exposing our selves
and our posterity, to the wrath of God, for our perfidious dealing in his
Covenant, to the merciless cruelty of our enemies, to be a hissing and
reproach to all Nations about us, and to be a grief to all godly, who have
been continually in their prayers and praises to God for us all this time.

Anticovenanter.
1. You have great cause to urge unity, for if even Satan's kingdom be
divided, it cannot stand. 2. Let unity with the head be urged, and not of the
members against the head; to recommend unity, and not with the head, is in
effect, to urge separation and division, to scatter in Israel, and divide in
Jacob; which thing you here do unhappily presage, male ominatis parcite
verbis. 3. No division has been intended, but the right union has been
sought for, which is between the head and the rest of the body, the King and
his subjects, which you now have so much withstood, seeking only union of the
members without the head, which is to make one monster of many heads, as is
seen amongst us this day.

Est bydr a multorum capitum; variabile vulgus,
Seditione potens.
And certainly, there is such Antipathie in this your consederation, that you
cannot be well united; you are like unto Nebuchadnezars image, not all of one
metal, gold, silver, brass, iron and clay, of which simples, none can
compound a perfect body: you of the young Nobility, who will be the golden
head, you of the Gentry, who will be the breast of silver, you Burgesses, who
will be the brazen thighs, you silly Ministers, who are placed in the foot by
the order of your Covenant, to be iron, mixed with the Commons, the clay; whose
dwelling is of the clay, and habitation of the dust, how can you have any
durable union? If you march forward, your foot of clay must fail you, and you
must fall and break your golden heads, like Dagon before the Arc, and nothing
be left, but a stump of antipathizing metal,

Covenanter.
3. That it be frequently remembered, how the finger and power of God by many
and admirable evidences has been manifest in this great work of reformation,
and how the Lord either by blowing upon all the devises of our enemies; or by
turning them back upon themselves, has turned all their wisdom into
foolishness, that we may have confidence for time to come, believing, and
saying with the Prophet, Jsa. 26. Lord, thou will ordain peace for us.

Anticovenanter.
-- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putet.

It Is ever esteemed foolishness to argue of the goodness of any enterprise
from the success thereof. Diagoras the Atheist was confirmed in his opinion
that there was no God, because he came with a fair gale of wind through the
Sea without shipwreck.

Polycrates the Tyrant of Samos was renouned above all that ever I read in
profane History, for his prosperity and good success in all his business,
and when by his friends he was desired to seek adversity in some thing,
because they thought it ominous, never to taste of troubles; he threw a most
precious ring into the river, the loss whereof grieved him much, but the next
morning his Cook found the ring in the belly of a fish, which confirmed the
Tyrant in his opinion of perpetual prosperity, but yet in the end he was taken
by Orontes, and hanged. Men ought not to bless themselves in any evil way,
and say in their hearts we shall never be moved. Read the League of France,
and you shall see how they prosper'd in all their affairs. The Lacqueies of the
Duke of Guize had more credit with the people then his Majesty's principal
Servants: so is it now with you, your cup is not yet full, behold the end. The
Kings Clemency has made you insolent, if he at the beginning had shown
himself like a blazing Star, you had all evanished as smoke, but his Majesty
being a follower of God his Master has thought by clemency and indulgence to
gain you, and now sees that Justice must succeed to clemency, to bring you to
subjection; neither shall you escape by iniquity, and the further ye proceed in
an evil way, the nearer is your ruin.

Covenanter.
4. That the people be not troubled when they hear of wars, nor afraid of
shadows, nor be deceived with promises, nor moved with remonstrances were they
never so specious, but they themselves denounce War against their own
sins, as their greatest enemies, and submit themselves obediently to follow
their Leaders, whom God at this time has largely furnished with counsel, and
courage, for the good of his Kirk, and Kingdom.

Anticovenanter.
The people needs not to be troubled with wars, Romans 13.3.
if they be loyal Subjects, for his Majesty is not a terror to good works,
but to the evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is
good, and thou shall have the praise of the same. For he is the Minister of God
to thee for good: but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid: for he
bears not the sword in vain: for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil.

2. It Is needless to persuade them not to be afraid of shadows, for shadows
fly away. But what mean you by shadows? the Kings power? his army? Well, it
may be that these shadows become bodies. Zebul persuaded Gaal who conspired
against Abimelech, that Abimelech's army was but the shadow of the mountains,
and not men. Judge. 9.36.
But when Gall saw them come down by the middle of the land, and another
company come along by the plain in Meonenim: he found that a shadow to be
feared, when Zebul said, where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou saydst, Who is
Abimelech, that we should serve him? Is not this the people that thou have
despised? Go out, I pray now, and fight with him. Howbeit you regard not this
shadow, yet let all these in his Dominions that fear God, esteem His
Majesty's power under God to be, especially in these evil times, a hiding
place from the wind, a covert from the tempest, Esa. 32.2.
a shadow of a great rock in a weary Land.

3. Whereas you desire men not to be deceived with promises, etc. You would do
well to make this clear. Will the King promise fair, and then fail? Will you
like railing Rabshakeh dissuade Israel to trust Hezekias? and say, 2 King.
18.29.
Let not the King deceive you, hearken not unto him: GOD give you better
minds. I dare be bold to promise in His Majesty's name these words of the
Prophet Esaias. Say to the righteous, Esa. 3.10.
that it shall be well with him: for they shall eat the fruit of their
doings. Woe unto the wicked, it shall be evil with him, for the reward of his
hands shall be given unto him.

4. It Is well advised to urge the people to make war with sin, God further
this work; but I pary you, urge them to denounce war against the reigning
sin amongst you, against rebellion, and resisting of superior Powers. Let
the Leaders of Gods people lean them in the paths of righteousness; bring not
strange fire to Gods Altar; warm not your pulpits with the strange doctrine of
unrighteousness; that you may at the day of account, say, Lord, I have done as
thou have commanded, and if we have been deceived, thou have deceived us: and
be not blind leaders of the blind, till you both fall in the ditch.

Covenanter.
5. That is be remembered, what has been our manifold defections, in
discipline, Sacraments, worship and doctrine, through the want of lawful
National assemblies, and the usurpation of the Prelates these many years by
past; and that a greater mercy could not be shown to this Land, than a free
and full Naetionall assembly; such as is that which was indicted by His
Majesty, and holden at Glasgow, ridding this Kirk of the Prelates, the
Authors, and Executioners of all our woes. That they may be earnest with God
in their Prayers, that as he has been pleased to set up our reformation
again with a stretched out hand, he may be graciously pleased to uphold his
own work; and make the Kings Majesty a nursing Father to the Kirk in this Land.

Anticovenanter.
Let these things be remembered in Gods Name. Tell them, that the defections of
Discipline is great, in that the ancient Apostolik Government is by a lawles
Covenant abjured, and by violence removed; and another of a baser coin put in
it is place. Tell them of the profanation of the Sacraments: and of their
superstitious opinion, who make some gesture essential to the Lords Supper,
and others idolatrous. Let them be told too, that the Lord is wronged in his
worship, by those who condemn set prayers in his Service. Tell them likewise,
that the Doctrine is corrupted, especially concerning the authority of the
Supreme Magistrate. But call not ye the Prelates, the authors and executioners
of your woes, who are become so great enemies to them: you ought also to be
afraid to father your disorders upon God, as a work of reformation, thereby
speciously making him the author and fautor of all your misdemeanors.

After a contemptus species est, dicere falsum;
Vtque fidem facias, divine numine abuti.
And finally, it is a most odiously spoken by you, to pray that the King His
Majesty may be a nursing father to his Church; for in your sense, you seem to
make him a stepfather, an enemy, yea, a Tyrant to the Church, as you declare
your selves in the stating of the question, and answering to the 13. Romans for
except he be a Tyrant, you declare it is unlawful to resist him: and if mercy,
clemency, and all Royal virtues, which are in him, be Tyranny, then His
Majesty is the greatest Tyrant that ever was.

Covenanter.
6 That the Ministers and Professors acquaint themselves with the acts of
Assembly, especially that against Episcopacie, with the protestation and
answers to the Declaration made by the Commissioner, and the Declinator of the
Assembly by the Bishops: That from these, they may be able promptly to answer
the objections of the Adversaries. That the last supplication be read in
public, that the Commons may see how falsely we are traduced, and how
reasonable our desire is.

Anticovenanter.
It were more sit that you should study to prudencie, and to keep these
things close, and to desire that these things should not be told in Gath, not
published in Askelon, especially, that monstrous Act concerning Episcopacie;
lest by publishing these your follies in print, you make your selves,
Opprobrium Coeli, ludibriumque soli. And get your Assembly branded with that of
the Council of Trent. Non fuit liberum Concilium, Sibrand de Council. Excep. 8.
sed combinatio conjuratorum.

Covenanter.
7 The stating of the Controversy at this time between the King and his
Subjects must be cleared to the people thus: that all men may know how unjustly
we are invaded, and how just and necessary our defense shall be. The question
is not, whether we ought honor to the King, for we a knowledge him to be Gods
Deputy and Vicegerent: or whether we ought to obey the King, for God has
given him Power and Authority to Command: or whether we ought to given unto
Caesar, that which is Caesar's, for that we desire to do most cheerfully: or
whether we ought to fear the King, for he is set over us to do Justice.
Neither is the question, whether Honor should be given to evil Superiors,
for as our Adversaries, by moving of such questions at this time under pretext
of duty, do wrong and dishonor to the Kings gracious Majesty; so we
profess in the general, that the wickedness of man cannot avoid Gods
Ordinance: and therefore although we had froward and wicked Superiors, yet
obedience and honor is to be given unto them, as being set up by God, as it
were, in his wrath, Hos. 13.11. Neither is the question, whether we ought
absolute obedience to an evil Magistrate, for our adversaries (whatsoever be
their judgment and practice) do not affirm that malo in malo, or ad malum
est obediendum, but that Kings are to be obeyed so far as their Commandments
are not contrary to Gods, and if God command one thing, and they the contrary;
in this case, it is better to obey God, than man. Neither is the question about
the invasion of the King, or any of his Kingdoms, which is the despitefull and
divellish calumny of the disnatured enemies of this Kirk and Kingdom. But the
question is merely and simply about our own defense. And in this also we
would put difference between the King resident in this Kingdom, and by
opening his ears to both parties rightly informed; and the King far from us
in another Kingdom, hearing the parties, and misinformed by our adversaries:
Between the King, as King proceeding Royally according to the laws of the
Kingdom against rebels, and the King coming down from his Throne, at the
feet whereof, the humble supplication of his subjects, yet lies ananswered,
furiously to invade his loyal and well-meaning people. Between a King, who is
a stranger to religion, and tied no further but according to his own pleasure
to the professors of Religion within his Dominion; and our King professing with
us the same Religion, and obliged by his fathers deed and his own oath, to
defend us his own Subjects, our lives, religion, liberties and laws. Again,
difference would be put betwixt some private persons, taking arms for
resistance; and inferior Magistrates, Counselors, Judges, Nobles and Peers
of the Land, Parliament Men and Barons, Burgesses, and the whole body of the
Kingdom, except some few Courtiers, Statesmen, papists, or popishly affected.
Between subjects rising or standing out against law and reason, that they may
be free from the yoke of obedience, and a people holding fast their
allegiance to their Sovereign, and in all humility supplicating for Religion
and Justice. Between a people laboring by Arms to introduce innovations in
religion, contrary to Gods Word; and a people seeking nothing so much as
against all novations, to have the same Religion ratified, which has been
professed since the reformation, and has not only been sworn to solemnly
long since, by the Kings Majesty and the whole Kingdom, both of old and of
late; but also commanded by the Kings Majesty to be sworn by his Counselors,
and all people, as it was professed at first Between a people pleading for
their own fancies, follies and inventions, and a people suspending their
judgment and practice about things controverted, till they should be
determined in a National assembly, the only proper and competent
jurisdiction; and after determination, receiving and standing for the Acts of
the Assembly. The question then is, whether in this case, matters thus
standing betwixt the King and this kingdom, defensive war be lawful? or,
whether the people ought to defend themselves against extreme violence and
oppression, bringing utter ruin and desolation upon the Kirk and Kingdom,
upon themselves and their posterity? That it is lawful for us to take up
Arms for our defense against such unjust violence, it is manifest by these
reasons following.

Anticovenanter.
I Many Tautologies are here used in stating the Controversy, and you remove
that which is the question, and makes that the question, which I am persuaded,
you know to be not the question. 2. You multiply words to affect the ignorant,
the question is not say you whether we ought to honor, obey or fear the King,
or whether we ought to give Caesar that which is Caesar's. Know you not that the
last question comprehends all these? is not honor, fear, and obedience,
Caesar's due? 3. You are very charitable, that you say, whatever be out
judgment and practice, yet we affirm in word, that absolute obedience in
evil is not to be given to wicked men. 4. You make many differences about
defensive arms to no effect. The first difference, between the King resident
in the Kingdom, hearing impartially the complaint of both parties, etc. I pray
you tell me, if the King were here resident, and did impartially hear you, and
gave sentence against you, would you not then resist? Would you not even then
be judges in your own cause, and take up defensive arms? Whether the King be
at home with you, or abroad, he shall still be one partial and unequal judge,
so long as he goes not with you. Your second difference is of the like stuff,
Between the King proceeding by laws, and the King coming furiously against
his Subjects. His Majesty was still well pleased, and so remains, to proceed
according to the Laws: but you will not stand to his judgment, but must be
judges in your own cause: and now if his Majesty, after so long contempt of
him, and his Laws, be forced to draw the sword of Justice, you cry out, he
comes furiously against you. Your third difference is of the same nature,
Between a King who is a stranger to religion, and a King who is of the same
with us. What make you the difference herein! Will you not resist a stranger to
religion, if he invade you by arms? The stranger to religion, by the Law of
God, and his calling, is bound to defend the Religion within his Dominions,
as well as our King; only this, our King is more obliged by his general
calling of Christianity, and by his own fact and deed: and blessed be God, he
will ever do it. Your fourth difference is of no purpose also. Between a
private man, and the whole body of a Kingdom for the most part, etc. Tell me
then, do you grant, that one private man ought not to defend himself against
the Supreme Magistrate by arms? albeit, it be true that he may not, and you
do here deny it; yet you must be forced to acknowledge the lawfulnes of it:
for afterward, your reason shall make it good, that you maintain the
lawfulness of a private man's taking up of arms, against the Lords anointed.

You do no small in jurie to our Nation; to affirm that the whole body of
the Kingdom, except a few, etc. 1. For it is notorious, that the whole body of
the Kingdom, for the most part, did never dream of such a thing, as to take
up arms against the Lords anointed, but were most deceitfully parswaded, that
their covenant did not carry them to such rebellion; but only to serve God, and
their King. And now many of them are exclaiming, that they are deceived, and
must be perjured, if they take arms against their King. And how many are
groaning under this, and would gladly be freed? and yet dare not for your
terrors and affrightments. 2. They are many who have subscribed the Kings
Covenant, who will be loath to be in that Categorie with you: For I hope they
know, that, beside the sin of Rebellion, they will also incur Perjurie, if
they run with you in your evil way. For they are obliged by their bond, to
take up defensive arms in defense of the King, Religion and Laws; and that
only when by Authority they are commanded so to do. But your covenant obliges
you to take up arms against his Majesty, even though he forbid you; if by
common consent you think it should be done.

Your fifth difference is of the same nature too. Between a people holding
fast their alleagiance, etc. If you be such as you call your selves, his
Majesty has no quarrel against you, but herein yet you must be judges in
your own cause, and the King must stand to your sentence. Saul was righteous
in his own conceit, and did obey the Commandment of God, but the bleeting of
the sheep, and the lowing of the oxen belied him. Your daily practices bear
witness, whether you be such men as you call your selves.

3 You say that ye have suspended your judgment and practice about things
controverted, till they be determined by a lawful assembly. Answer 1. You did
not suspend your judgment and practice, but by your covenant have abjured these
things controverted, as heads of popery; as the learned Doctors of Aberdeen
most clearly have showen, which ye were never hitherto able to answer: and if
this be to suspend your judgment, you are worse than the wife of Bodwell, who
first spoke, and then advised; you have first sworn to the one part of the
controversy, and then take it to consultation. 2. If we will grant you that ye
have only suspended your judgments and practice, etc. consider how absurd you
are herein: first, ye with an implicit faith swear to believe and practice
what shall be determined in a lawful assembly, though ye know not, whether it
shall approve or condemn those things. 2 You fall headlong in another point
of Popery in making the general assembly an infallible Judge, at whose
determination ye swear to stand, in judgment and practice: for if ye did
acknowledge that the assembly might err, it had been great folly in you to
swear to stand to the determination of one, who is not of infallible
judgment. 3. I demand of you who are the strict Non-conformists. What if the
assembly had determined contrary to your expectation, and declare that those
things controverted were not heads of Popery, would ye have condescended to
them? and if the assembly had not been made up of conjured persous, but of
free Ministers, it had been so concluded.

Your last two differences may be joined in one, you profess your selves to be
zealous in religion, and that the Kings Majesty is urging the swearing to the
true religion of his Subjects, etc. Who then is to hurt our religion? who is
coming by arms to destroy it? if his Majesty be for you, who is against you?
You have the King a Pattern and Patron of Piety, and why did you protest
against the covenant, because he commanded it? But all this tends to no other
sense then to brand so worthy a King with perjurie and dissimulation.

You have therefore most wickedly stared the question, especially since his
Majesty by many published Proclamations has often assured you, that he is so
far from thinking of any innovation of religion, that he is resolved constantly
to maintain the same, as it is established by law in this Kingdom of
Scotland, and has been so ready to give all full satisfaction, that he has
in a manner granted all that was petitioned for of his Majesty: read his
Majesty's Proclamation and Declaration, dated the 27. of Febr. where ye shall
find the state of the question rightly set down, and clearly see, that he is
so far from intending the ruin and subversion of this his Kingdom, that he
takes God, and the world to witness, that he is at last forced to take arms,
and that for his own right, and our good, to reclaim us from our daring and
increasing insolences, and for the re-establishing of his royal authority
amongst us again. And therefore the question is now, Whether he be our King or
not? Yea, the question must be now, not, Whether you may take defensive arms
against the King. But, Whether or no the Kings Majesty may take defensive
arms against a disloyal and rebellious people: for do not you invade his
loyal subjects, besieging his cities by armies of men, because they remain
obedient and loyal to their King: have not you by force and fraud taken his
Castles, led captive his captains, and other subjects, and laid hold upon all
whom ye know loyal subjects, to ward them, and compel them to run your
crooked course? you spare not the Lords own Day, in time of Gods service, in
the house dedicated to his worship, to take his Majesty's servants and keep
them in ward, and dispone upon the Kings forts and castles, as you think good;
putting in and putting out whom you please: drinking and carouzing in his
Castles, quasi jam parta victoria. I, you have triumphed, leading the Kings
Crown captive, with Tuck of Drum, in great solemnity through the street of
your City of Confusion: and afterward have not only appointed your office-men
of war for resisting of authority, but also (as I am credibly informed) have
erected a new government of 26. Governors of Nobles, Barons, and Burgesses
yearly changeable, for the government of the Kingdom.

As for his Supremacy then, no wonder that it be gone, for in your last
pretended general assembly, you are not far from that which Optatus says of
the Donatists, Ille solito furore accensus, dicit, Quid imperatoricum ecclesia?
he being kindled with his wonted fury, Contra Parm. lib. 3.
says, What has the Emperor to do with the Church? In your protestations
you give him no more a-doe, but to be present among you, that as an inferior
officer he may attend you, and see that no tumult or outward disorders be among
you, who are the supreme Judges in causes Ecclesiastical. You will admit of no
appellation from you to the King, but have deprived them that thus appealed
whilst even the Jews in an Ecclesiastical matter, admitted Paul's lawful
appeal to a Pagan Emperor: Acts 25.11.
and whereas general assemblies should ever carry libertatem judicandi, non
necessitatem credendi, as Augustine says; and the acts thereof are only
Canons, August. contra Faust.
Directions, and Rules, without any power to be laws, till they be confirmed,
(...), and allowed by the Supreme Magistrate, Qui servit Christo, Leges ferendo
pro Christo, who serve Christ, making Laws for Christ, as Augustine says, yet
you make them to be laws of coactive power, by virtue whereof, ye depose and
excommunicate whom you please, summon before your Committees, whom and when you
please; and because they did not appear before your Committee, though
forbidden by his Majesty's Proclamation, they have suspended them from their
Ministerial function. Thus Attributing to their Assembly not only Directive,
but also Coactive power, not only without, but also against supreme Authority.
It remains then that ye conclude with Emanuell Sa in his Aphorism,
Clericirebellio in regem, non est crimen laesae Majestatis, The rebellion of
Churchmen against the King is no treason, quia non sunt subditi regis, because
they are not subject to the King in Church matters. And that ye rob him of his
Supremacy in matters civil, it will be clear in the dispute following: And
therefore, notwithstanding of all your specious words that ye intend no change
of Government, scelera reclamant, and your protestations are contrariae factis.

But if you will persuade the people on the contrary, that his Majesty intends
the ruin of Church and policy, you must not think it enough to say it so
boldly, but to make it good, or else how can ye escape the wrath of God? Who
dare thus affirm of your King in Word, and Writ, in Pulpit, and els-where;
against whom you ought not to think evil in your bedchamber. And how can you
escape the wrath of a King, Prove. 16.14. and 20.2.
which is as the Messenger of death, and as the roaring of a Lion? who so
provokes him to anger, sins against his own Soul.

But though it were so, that his Majesty, who is the most religious King in
Christendom, were an enemy to religion, and were by arms seeking that which
you affirm he does, can you show any reason, why ye ought not to be subject
unto him? Obedience is not to be given, but subjection must never be denied. I
come then to your reasons.

Covenanter.
1. Argument.
The first is taken from the unreasonablenesse and absurdity of such Court
Parasites, as for their own base ends maintain the absolute Sovereignty, and
unlimited authority of Princes, to the great hurt both of Prince and people, by
loosing all the bonds of civil societies, while the Prince, against the
strongest bands of oaths and laws, may do what he please, to the ruin of
Religion, the Kirk and Kingdom, the Laws and liberties of some, or of all the
Subjects, and the people shall do nothing, but either fly, which is impossible,
or suffer themselves to be massacred and out off.

Anticovenanter.
You begin with unreasonablenesse and absurdities, and so may you end: for all
is absurd, all is unreasonable which you say. If any would have proponed this
question before this uprore came amongst us, in Ahasuerus words, Who is he? and
where is he that durst presume in his heart to say so? Ester 7.5.
Surely we would never have dreamed, that such a Cockatrice could be bred in
the breast of a Protestant: which doctrine is abominable even to many of the
Jesuits. I say of these arguments as Augustine did of the Donatists, In lucem
traxisse, est vicisse, To bring them to the light, is to overcome them. One
Cherilus a Poet wrote a book of Poesy, whereof all the verses were faulty,
except seven; for the which he received seven pieces of Gold; and for every
evil verse, which were many, he received one stripe. If your arguments were
thus tried and examined, for every argument ye would receive a stripe; and as
the fault exceeds, so should the punishment: but I wish you may not receive
according to your demerits. If your reasons were set down in Syllogismes their
weakness would appear; but we must answer as ye set them down: first I deny
that the Kings power is absolute and unlimited in respect of God, who has set
such Marches to him that he ought not to transgress: but in respect of men,
the Kings power must be absolute and unlimited, so that their subjects may not
resist them, but be subject unto them, according to the Scripture. Romans 13.1
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers: and he that resists
resists the ordinance of God. And that of Solomon, Eccles. 8. Where the word
of a King is, there is power: and who may say unto him, What do thou? To
this purpose, Ambrose in Enaraction. in Psalm. 51. says on these words,
Tibisoli peccavi. Vtique rex erat, null is ipse legibus tenebatur, quia liberi
sunt reges a vinculis delictorum, neque enim ullis ad poenam vocantur legibus,
tuti impery potestate -- sed quamvis tutus, devotione tamen and fide erat Deo
subditus, and legi ejus subjectum se esse cognoscens, peccatum suum negare non
poterat, That is, David said, That he had sinned against God, because he was a
King, and not bound to any law, because Kings are free from the bonds of Crime,
etc. So says Arnobius, Cassiodorus, Beda, Glossa ordinar: Didimus, Cyrillus,
Nicaetas in aurea catena: besides all sound modern Protestant Divines. So says
Chrysostom also in Psalm. 118. Octon. 17. Rex etsi leges in potestate habet ut
impune delinquat, Deo tamen subditus est. Albeit the King have the Law so in
his power, that he may sin without controlement, yet he is subject to God: and
sufficit illi in poenam quod Deum expectet ultorem. I hope they will not call
these Authors Court Parasites.

Again, if their power were not absolute, there would be some other power above
them, which is absurd, that the supreme power under God, can have any supreme
power above it, but only God. Super Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus, qui
fecit Imperatorem, says Optatus lib. 3. contra Parmeman. And therefore, in
Synodo Regiaticana under Lothorinus the Emperor, cap. 16. It Is said,
Imperatores summi ac principes minime nunc judicantur, sed in futuro judicio a
Deo. I conclude this point than with that grave saying of Yvo Carnotensis
Episcopus, Epist. 171. Si reges aliquando potestate sibi concessa abutantur,
non sunt a nobis graviter exasperandi, sed ubi sacerdotum admonitionibus non
acquieverunt, divino sunt judicio reservandi, ubi tanto districtius sunt
puniendi, quanto minus fuerint divinis admonitionibus obnoxy. What then is the
Unreasonableness of this absolute authority in respect of men? Great hurt, say
you, both to Prince and people.

Ans. 1. It Is no question but great hurt may fall out both to Prince and
people, while the Prince presuming upon his authority, abuses the same, and
makes himself liable to the wrath of God. But much more hurt would follow upon
the other hand, if the Princes power were subject to the inferior subjects;
that would breed great confusion, and turn all upside down, to make the Supreme
under his Inferiors: everse hoc ordine, publicae tanquilitatis nervum incidi,
totamque humanae societatis compagem laxari, ac disturbarinecesse est, says
Tilen. When ever the subjects pleased they would be raising commotions and
seditions, Corah, Dathan and Abiram would say, Numb. 16.3.
You take too much upon you, Moses. Absalom would strive to steal the hearts of
the people away from the King. The University of Paris (though Papists) in
Censura lata. die 4. Iuny 1610. is of this same judgment, calling it
Seditiosum, impium, ac haereticum, quocunque quaeito color a quocunque
subdito, vassallo, aut extraneo, sacris Regum ac Principum personis vim habere:
A seditious, wicked and heretical thing, that violence should be offered to
the sacred persons of Kings and Princes, upon whatsoever pretexts or color, by
whosoever, vassal, or forrainner. They say further, that it is a seditious
doctrine, Regni optimates and proceres ad foedissimam desertionem, populum ad
generalem defectionem atque seditionem, specioso quidem, sed fucato Religionis
Catholicae retinendae atque conservanda praetextu, hortans, excitans,
impellans. A doctrine exhorting, stirring up, and thrusting forward the great
men and Nobles of the Land to a most filthy desertion, the people to a general
defection and sedition, under a glorious indeed (but yet fained) pretext, of
retaining and conserving the Catholic religion. And therefore, I conclude with
M. Geor. Froger in dicta Censura. Ne subjecti domino nostre regi, abripi se
sinant affrice pestilentis istius dectrina vento. Let not the Subjects of our
Sovereign Lord the King, suffer themselves to be violently carried away with
the Afric wind of this pestilent doctrine. And finally, if there were such
power in the people above the Prince, the supreme Majesty would be rather in
the people, than in the Prince.

But you say, if we resist not, Church and state will go to ruin. An 1. There
is no danger to Church or Kingdom from his Majesty, who is only to put away
disonders, and to restore the Church to her liberty. 2. Though there were such
dangers threatened, yet unlawful means (such as is the resisting superior
powers) for good ends, ought not to be used, suffering is commanded and
commended unto us in Scripture, resisting is forbidden. By resisting, Tyrants
are more enraged, by patient suffering, they are mitigated; resisting brings
ruin to a Church, suffering causes it to flourish; the blood of the Saints is
the seed of the Church: and it is observed by the learned, that so long as the
Churches in the primitive times used sua arma, their own weapons, prayers and
tears against the persecuters, they flourished: but when they took aliena
arma, strange armor, then they came to ruin; as it is this day under the
dominion of the Turks and Infidels. It Is well said, that Peccata pepuli sunt
vires tyrannorum, The sins of the people are the strength of tyrants: and
therefore, when by patience, by tears, and supplications we seek God, God
pardons our sins, and our sins being remooved, the strength of Tyrants is
abated: and God can put a hook in their mouth, and draw them back from
persecuting his Church. But when we resist, we augment our sins, and usurp
Gods place, to whom only it belongs to take order with wicked Kings, since they
have none above them, but God.

Covenanter.
2. From that line and order of subordination, Argument.
wherein the Magistrate is placed under God the great Superior, and the
Subjects are placed under God the Great, and under the Magistrate, the less
Superior. When the Magistrate commands contrary to God, and goes out of his
order and line, especially so far as to invade by arms, if they obey not; the
subjects keeping of their own line and order, and defending themselves, is not
disobedience to the Magistrate, but obedience to God, who in this point, so
long as the Magistrate runs this course, becomes their immediate Superior.
And as under the Magistrate they ought to defend themselves from all violence
without: so in this abuse of God and his ordinance, from all violence within;
otherwise, they sin against God and their own souls. One inferior officer
ought to keep his own station in the army, even when the Captain goes out of
his line and order, and takes part with the enemy; and in this case, is bound
no less than before under his Coronell or General, to fight for himself, and
for the safety of the whole army, against his own Captain. It were against
sense and reason to say, that he must give his neck to the sword of the
Captain, without regard of his General, the whole army, and his own life.

Anticovenanter.
This Argument is not so specious, as false; no man doubts, but when the
Magistrate goes out of his order, and by Arms commands, what God forbids;
that, in that case, man is not tied to obedience. But to take up arms to
resist, is the point in question, which you call obedience to God, and not
disobedience to the Magistrate; but you beg the question, and cannot prove it,
except from that, that God forbids to resist superior Powers. 2. You deny the
King, in this case to be your Superior, so long as he commands contrary to
Gods Commandment; and God only becomes your immediate Superior: before this
time, I never heard so much seditious and treasonable doctrine. Did ever a
Jesuit say so much? This justifies their doctrine, for they hold, that, though
Kings were never so wicked Tyrants, yet till the Pope declare them incapable of
Authority, they remain their lawful Superiors: and if the false ground of
this doctrine were true, to wit, that the Pope is above Kings, their doctrine
even so far were good. But that inferiors should by their own usurped
authority and insolency disclaim their Superiors, making God their only
immediate Superior is a most brutish doctrine, not worthy to be answered with
words. As God sometimes sets up Kings to be nursing fathers to the Church, (as
long may it be, we have one) so sometime he will raise wicked men to be a
scourge to his Church: to both these, we ought obedience in all things lawful;
and subjection, when obedience is not lawful, and never disclaim their
authority. So the Christians under Julian the Apostate fought his battles, and
obeyed him, when he commanded things lawful: but when he commanded things
unlawful they did not obey, and yet never resisted (though powerful to resist)
but were ever in subjection to their temporal Lord, for their eternal Lords
sake. So says Augustine in Psalm. 124. Quando volebat ut idola colerent, ut
thurificarent, praeponebant illi Deum: quando autem dicebat, producite aciem,
ite contra illam gentem, statim obtemperabant, distinguebant Dominum aeternum a
Domino temporali, tamen subditi erant propter Dominum aeternum, etiam Domino
temporali. That which you cannot prove by reason, you would prove by a
similitude of a Captain and his Soldiers, but you know that 1. Theologia
symbolica non est argumentativa. 2. The comparison is not alike, but halteth
downright: for the authority of the Captain is limited and bounded by his
Prince or General, that he must not transgress in the least point of his
Commission; otherwise the soldiers are no more bound to follow him, then they
know his Commission from their common Prince. As for example, the King of
France sends his armies to fight against the Spaniards: Now, if the Captain of
this army make defection from the King, and go to the Spanish army, then they
become as Spaniards, enemies to their own King; now here sense it self leads
the army to fight against their Captain, who are turned enemies; for they
certainly know, that it was the Kings will to fight against the Spaniards, and
all that would take their part in that battle, and therefore they have their
Kings warrant to fight against their captains, who now ipso facto cease to
be their captain, and become enemies. But if the King did give these his
Captains absolute and unlimited power over the armies, commanding the soldiers
not to resist them by arms, whither they did right or wrong; whither they
should turn to the enemy or not; in this case indeed as the soldiers ought not
to turn away after them to the enemy against their Sovereign, so they ought
not to fight against them; but fly home to their Prince, whose will they know.
Thus stands the case between God and the King his Deputy, God has given him
such authority, that all under him must be subject unto him without resistance;
and though he should do many things contrary to Gods Word, yet ipso facto he
cease not to be King, and we must not obey him in evil, but yet be subject
unto him for Conscience sake.

The Covenanters seeing the weakness of this their argument and the strength
of reason against it from the Apostles Direction, Romans 13.1. they strive (but
unhappily) to answer that objection, thus.

Covenanter.
It Is objected Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers.
Answer. Tyranny and unjust violence is not the ordinance of God, and he that
resists it, resists not the ordinance of God: they are rulers contrary to
good works, not to evil, they are not the Ministers of God for good, neither
in this can we be subject unto them for conscience sake. The whole course of
the Apostles argument runs against the resistance of lawful power,
commanding things good and lawful; We must either acknowledge Tyranny to be
the ordinance of God, and for our good, or else exclude it from the Apostles
argument, admitting the resistance thereof to be lawful, at least by the shield
for defense, if not by the sword for invasion.

Anticovenanter.
In this you declare either much weakness, or else much malice; and I may say
both. No man will affirm that Tyranny and violence are Gods ordinance, but
those to whom God has given lawful authority, may abuse it tyrannically; and
they remain the Ministers of God for thy good, in tuum bonum (says Augustine)
licet sibi in malum: for all things work together for the best to them that
love God. For the Lord will raise up Kings sometimes (as Isaiah says) to be
The rod of his anger and staff of his indignation, Isai. 10 5.
to afflict an hypocritical people, to take the spoil and the prey, and to
tread them down like the mire in the streets: Howbeit he means not so,
neither does his heart think so, says the Lord, but it is in his heart to
destroy nations, not a few. And when tyrants think thus to do evil to us,
yet it turns to our good to humble us under Gods hand, and cause us repent.
This is all the fruit, to take away our iniquity, says the Lord: Isai. 27 9.
and thus, Tyranni sunt ministri Dei tibi in bonum, licet sibi in malum: and to
resist them is to fight with God, and pull the rod out of his hand. Your
inference then is most childish, that either we must admit tyranny to be Gods
ordinance, or else we may resist it. For you see that he who has a lawful
power from God, may abuse it tyrannically, and we must not resist Gods
ordinance, lawful authority; because such and such men exercise it
tyrannically. Our superiors power is not Gods ordinance, because he is a good
man that has it, as David was: neither is the authority, not Gods ordinance,
because he is an evil man that has it, as Saul was: but the authority is Gods
ordinance, because he who has it, is the lawful superior. He that was
Emperor, when Paul writ this Epistle, was Nero, a tyrant. Nero (says learned
Moulin) was a monster in nature, the shame of humane kind, and the first
Emperor that began to persecute the Church, nevertheless the Apostle, Romans
13. speaking of that power which then was in being, says, that it was ordained
by God, and that whosever resisted the same, resisted the ordinance of God,
etc. So says Aug. De civit Dei lib. 5. cap. 21. Where he declares that the
authority of wicked Emperors was from Gods ordinance, as well as of good
Emperors, Qui Mario, Caio, Caesari, qui Augusto ipse and Neroni; qui
Vespasianis, vel patri vel filio suavissimis imperatoribus, ipse and Domitiano
crudelissimo: and ne per singulos ire necesse sit, qui Constantino Christiano,
ipse and apostatae Iuliano. Did not Paul acknowledge the authority of Nero,
when he did appeal to him, and that lawfully, I stand at Caesar's judgment
seat, where I ought to be judged: Act. 25.10. And Christ himself acknowledged
the Authority of Pilate over him to be from above. Neither was it lawful for
Christ's Disciples to resist, and by arms to defend their Master against such
matchless cruelty and tyranny.

And here by the way, I gather one argument against your course, which I pray
you answer. It was not lawful for Christ's Disciples to defend Christ by arms
against the tyranny of those who invaded him, and crucified him. Therefore, its
not lawful for us to take desensive arms against tyrants. Ye will answer,
Christ suffered them not to resist, because it was his will to suffer. This is
true indeed, he was most willing to suffer, but yet the reason wherefore he
hinders Peter to defend him, is, because it was not lawful for him to defend
by arms, therefore he says, Put up thy sword into his place, for he that
takes the sword shall perish with the sword. He that draws the sword, must do
it by the authority of him that has power.

Consider also the 13. Chap. of the Revelation, in the 7 ver. It Is said, that
the beast with the seven heads and ten horns had power given him over all
kinreds, tongues, and nations, to make war with the Saints. What shall the
Saints do then under their persecuters? May they not take up arms? Nor, for
in the next words, the Spirit of God sets down the manner of the Saints defense
(...): First, tells what must not be done, and then what they must do; first,
they must not resist, and take their persecuters either captive, or kill them,
because they have not that power; therefore says the Text, He that leads in
captivity, shall go into captivity; he that kills with the sword, shall be
killed with the sword, then he shows that they must suffer. Here is the
patience and faith of the Saints, says the Text. Patience is requisite to
endure tribulation, and faith, to continue constant to the end. I pray you
consider this my Brethren of the Ministry, and be not the kindlers of this
unlawful war against not a Tyrant, but the most religious Prince in the world.
An evil man seeks only rebellion; Prove. 17.11.
therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent unto him, says Solomon, Remember
Bernards saying, Epist 134. Non est meum hortar, ad pugnam. Est tamen (securus
dic) advocati ecclesiae arcere ab ecclesiae infestatione Schismaticorum rabiem,
est Caesaris propriam vindicare coronam ab usurpatore Siculo.

Finally, You make it questionable, whether you may invade Tyrants or not, at
least by the shield of defense, if not by the sword; for invasion, say you, not
determining what may be done: and therefore, you show too much choler to call
it a divellish and dispitefull calumny of disnatured enemies, if they make the
question about invasion of his Majesty's Kingdoms. Your irresolution in this
question, at least, if not, is resolved by your practice who are the invaders,
and our Gracious King must be the defender. The author of the Dialogue of white
divelt, goes clearly to work, affirming, if Kings hinder the bringing in of
their Discipline, they are Tyrants, and being Tyrants, they may be deposed by
their Subjects: and do not you maintain that the Kings authority and true
Religion are so firmly joined together, that if he fall from his Religion he
falls also from his authority; and so is no more your King when you judge him
contrary to Religion by common consent; neither are you more bound to him, then
he defends the true Religion, that is, which you think the true Religion.

Covenanter.
From the end of magistracy, 3. Argument.
the Lord has ordained Magistrates to be his ministers for the good of his
people; whence have proceeded these principles of Policy, Princes are
principally for the people and their defense, and not the people principally
for them; the safety and good of the people is the supreme Law, magistracy is
the inferior and subordinate law, the people make the Magistrate, but the
Magistrate makes not the people; the people may be without the Magistrate, for
the world was governed in another way, till that Cain building a City, made
the godly first take this order for their defense, the Magistrate cannot be
without the people; the body of the Magistrate is mortal, the body of the
people immortal: and therefore, it were a direct overturning of all the
foundation of policy and government to prefer subjection to the Prince, to
the preservation of the Commonwealth, or to expose the public, wherein every
men's person, family and private estate is contained, to be a prey to the fury
of the Prince, rather than by all our power to defend and preserve the
Commonwealth.

Anticovenanter.
There is nothing here but most odious and contemptible words against the
Authority of our supreme Magistrate, preserring the people by many degrees
above the Prince. I say with Bernard, De consider. lib 3. cap. 4.
Situr ques Deus conjunxit, non sunt separandi, sione^ qu^s subju^^it
comparandit moustrum (...) si (...) submovens digitam facis peudere de capite.
You do not so, you separate the King and Subjects whom God has conjoined, and
you compare the people who are subjoyned to the Prince, far above the Prince.
But I come to examine the particulars. You say well, that God has (...)
Princes for the good of his people, but what gather ye hence, that therefore the
people may take up arms? that is a strange consequent: Certainly, if the
Prince fail in the doing what God commands, God his Master will take order
with him; and not the people, whom you here make the Kings Master. The
Scripture tells us, Romans 13.4.
That he is the Minister of God for thy good, but with your leave, he must be
your Commander, and not one of your creatures, your Minister.

2 You say Princes are principally for the people, and not the people for the
Prince. Ans. You should say, for [people] subjects, if you do not disdain to
be called Subjects. Now the King and Subjects are relative, and they are for
other; the one to Command and govern, the other to be subject and led. Now
what is all this for resisting of authority?

3 You say, The good of the people is the supreme Law, etc. This is the second
time that you have ignorantly abused that saying, Salus populi suprema lex
esto, Go to the learned Doctors of Aberdeen, and learn out of their Duplies
the meaning of it. It belongs to the Magistrate, who is the only Law giver.
The case may fall out, that for the good of his Subjects, he must not stand
upon the ordinary Law, but let that stand for a Law, which in such exigence
shall see me to him fittest for the safety of the people: But you odiously
apply it to the people, who are destitute of authority, and can make no law.
Let the people see what is most conducible for their own safety, though it
should be with the loss of the supreme Magistrate; let him perish rather then
his Subjects: as who would say, rather then let the members of the body suffer
such hazard, out off the Head.

4 Ye say the people makes the Magistrate, etc. You declare now what people you
are (for ye will not call your selves Subjects) even great enemies to Monarchs.
Is your doctrine so Jesuiticall and rebellious, to think that the Kings
authority is of humane institution by positive laws, and not from God? if you
say so, Treply with Bernard, Si sie sontis, dissentis ab co qui dicit, non est
potestas nisi a Deo. We have maintained this doctrine too long against the
adversary, to pass from it now upon your naked word without probation. It Is
the Lord that places Kings in their throne, says Job. Job 36.7. Prove. 8.15.
By me Kings reign, says the Wisdom of God. Non tribuamus dands regni atque
imperij potestatem, nisi Deo vero. August. These cannot properly be called
Kings, who have their power from the people, because public Government is
only proper to God, who gives it to whom he pleases. And seeing it is
contrary to reason, that any can have supreme power over himself; it follows
that the people wanting a King cannot have the supreme power over it self; and
therefore cannot bestow it upon any man to be their King, for none can give
that to another which they have not themselves.

5. Ye say the people may be without the Magistrate. Answer. So have you made
us this year and more; in stead of a King. we have had the Ephori of Sparta,
and the Roman Tribunes overruling us, strange Lords rule over us to the great
contempt of our own King. Dominis parere superbis, cogimur. 2. The world was
not without a King till Cain's time: for Adam was King, his Empire was
paternall, and therefore Monarchical; for albeit, at first he did not actually
exercise political Government before the people did multiply; yet ex vijuris
naturae, by the force of the law of nature, it was due to the first progenitor
Adam, to be governor of his posterity, and thus habitually, he was King from
his first creation: and therefore that assertion of the Monarchomachists is not
always true, the King is not without a people, as the people are without a
King. I see, you think you may be well without our King, what remains then,
but with the Bishops, let Kings go too, and lay a ground for Anabaptisme.

6. You say the body of the Magistrate is mortal. I pray you what kind of
people are you? Qui genus, unde demo? Are you only the offspring of God? I
read in Scripture that God says to Kings, Psalm. 82.6, 7.
I have said ye are gods, but to which of you is this name given? and if you
will assume that to you, take the rest of the Text with you, - but ye shall die
like men. It Is an old saying, Rex nunquam maritur, The King never dies. But
one generation goes, and another comes; Let it content you that tho King and
you are of one metal.

Now in the end, having thus many ways preferred your selves to the King, you
make this monstrous conclusion. It Is adirect over-turning of all foundation of
Policy, to prefer subjection to the Prince, to the preservation of the
commonwealth. Answ. Here you separate that which God has joined together, and
make these two opposite, which ever must go hand in hand together: for
Subjection to the Prince, is the only way to preserve the Commonwealth: where
Subjection is not, Gods ordinance is contemned, the foundation of policy
over-turned, and the Commonwealth exposed to ruin, as is clear in the answer
to your first Argument.

Covenanter.
From the Covenant betwixt God and the people, 4. Argument.
for the people and the Magistrate are jointly bound in Covenant with God, for
observing and preserving the Commandments of the first and second tables, as
may be seen in the books of Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles: As the fault of
the people will not excuse the Magistrates negligence, so the fault of the King
will not excuse the people, if they resist not his violence, pressing them
against the Covenant of God, this argument is strongly pressed by sound and
religious politicians.

Anticovenanter.
You should declare, how King and people are both jointly bound: Will you have
King and Subject of equal power, about the observation and preservation of the
Tables? You are bound to keep the Commandments of God, as well as your King;
but the King is bound to do more, to wit, to be careful, that all his Subjects
keep them, and to punish transgressors. I have read the whole Scripture of
God, but I could never find this power given to Subjects. It Is enough for them
to keep the Tables themselves, but they have no authority to command others,
much less does it belong to them to resist the Magistrate. If the King press
the people to the breach of the Law, they must not obey; since God, his
Superior, commands the contrary; but yet they must not resist, since God, both
their Superiors, forbids. You poorly beg here the question, affirming, that
the people will sin if they resist not, but you will never prove it. You say,
it is strongly pressed by sound politicians, but you press it most weakly and
unfoundly, not nominating one sound Politician for you. For no Wiseman will
confound the Princes authority with the people, and turn a Monarchy into a
Democracie.

Covenanter.
From the subordination of Powers appointed by God. 5. Argument.
The same law and order that appoints to obey the supreme Magistrate, rather
than his Deputy, appoints us also to obey God, rather than man: and the same
law and order that leads us to defend the supreme Magistrate against the
invasion of his Deputy, commands us also to defend Gods right, and to
preserve the peoples peace against the unjust invasion of the supreme
Magistrate: who can be thought no less subordinate to God, then his Vicegerent
is to him.

Anticovenanter.
This Argument is builded upon sand, you dream, that whatsoever means may be
used for preservation of the Prince against his Deputies, the same may be used
for the preservation of Gods right, and the peoples peace. But you err, not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. Both by Gods Law, and man's law,
Subjects are bound to defend their Prince. But Gods Law commands not to defend
his right by arms: the weapons of our warfare are spiritual, and not carnal.
Patience, Faith, with other graces, are our Armor, we must be subject for
conscience sake, and not take Gods place to repress our Superiors. If any
inferior judge wrong me, I must not resist him, but appeal to his Superior,
and from him again, to his Superior, even to the King the Supreme; and if he
will be unjust, and wrong me, I must not resist, but commit my cause to God, to
whom vengeance belongs. It is a point of Atheism, and distrusting of Gods
providence, to think that God will not help against Tyrants; and therefore men
will be their own judges, and revenge themselves. But the Lord has said.
Psalm. 12.5.
For the oppression of the poor, and the sighing of the needy, now I will
arise, and set him in safety, etc. Then take Salomons counsel, Prove. 20.22 Say
not thou, I will recompense evil: but wait on the Lord, and he will save thee.
Suffer me then to attest you, my dear Contrymen. What think you to do, O
ye Covenanters, for God and the King? You undertake arms, not for God, who
desires nothing but peace: You publish Rebellion, He commands Obedience. You
trouble the rest and quiet of a King, he wills us to endure hardness, though
at the hand of a Pagan. You do it for God, whose name ye call upon, and deny
his Power. You do it for God, who detesteth your actions, and knows your
thoughts. And you do it for that God, who will confound all those who breed
confusion among his people. You undertake war for Religion, against the
Defender of Religion: You raise armies for Religion, and nothing hinders it
so much as wars: You fight for holiness, and your weapons destroy the
Church, authorize blasphemy, plant Atheism, impiety, and despising of
Devotion in all places. You march under pretense of Religion, and you spoil
the Clergy of Tithes, Stipend, burden the Kings Subjects with impositions,
ransack the Kings houses. Pardon me, I pray you, to tell you, that this
fortress which you build, will be your overthrow; this fire you kindle, will
burn you; these weapons ye forge, will be tempered in your own intrails; and
that thereby you will neither leave of your selves, nor your Covenant ought,
but a shameful memory.

Covenanter.
If a private man be bound by the Law of nature to defend himself cum
moderamine inculpatae turelae, 6. Argument.
against the Prince or Judge, as a private man invading him by violence, and
not pursuing him judicially, and by order of law, and may repel violence with
violence. If a chaste Matron may defend her own body, that it be not defiled
by the Adulterer, were his place never so great. If children may resist the
violent invasion of their parents against themselves, their mother, or others
of the family, notwithstanding the strict obligation between parents and
children. If servants may hold the hands of their masters, seeking to kill them
in their rage. If the Mariners and passengers may save themselves by resisting
him who sits at the helm, and would drive the Ship against a rock, or by
hindering the Prince himself, not only by supplication of mouth, but by
strength of hand, to mis govern the ship to their certain Shipwreck, much
more may the body defend it self against all invavasion whatsoever.

Anticovenanter.
You are put to poor shifts, when for arguments you bring crooked comparisons,
yet good enough for ignorants. As for your first supposition, the question is
not, whether a private man may defend himself against his Superior with
inculpata tutela: But whether or not, defense by arms be culpata or inculpata
tutela? His Majesty denies you not lawful defense by Law, but your taking up
of arms to resist his Authority is damnable.

2. Tell me, when does a Prince become a private man? as the Popes
infallibility is left in his Chair, so you make the Kings authority to reside
in his Throne: When Saul was in the wilderness persecuting David with great
violence, was he then a private man? you will have it so; But I trust David
better then you all, who would not defend himself by arms, but fled from him,
as from the Lords Anointed: who can touch the Lords Anointed, and be innocent?
It is altogether against the Law of Nature, that private men should take arms
against their Superiors, seeing it is against the Law of nature, that a private
man should be judge in his own cause, as Luther learnedly disputes in the 5.
book of Sleidens Commentaries.

Your second supposition is as idle. It becomes a chaste woman to defend her
Chastity, even against the King, but how I pray you by taking up of arms? not
at all, but by not yielding her self into his arms: and though he being
stronger than she, force her; yet she has defended her chastity, and only the
King is the adulterer. Thus in ( Augustints judgment) Lucretia, that chaste
Matron, lost not her Chastity, albeit Tarquinius the Emperor by force lay with
her, only she drew no sword to resist his violence; but here was her lamentable
fault, that the fact, sore against her will, being done, she took arms against
her self, and killed her self.

Your third supposition is no better, for there is no Law that authorizeth
Children to resist their Parents by arms. 2. Rules of prudency cannot be set
down for every circumstance; therefore in such cases, prudency will find out
lawful means either to pacify, or at least to escape by flight, the parents
fury. 3. If the case were so that either the Parent must kill the child, or the
child kill the Father, I think it becomes the child, who has his being of
the Father, rather to suffer, than to destroy the fountain, whence he sprang.
4. Parents have not so great power over their children, as Kings over their
Subjects, Kings have power of life and death, which Parents have not. And your
fourth comparison is yet more weak: for the masters power over the servants, is
less than Parents over their children.

Your last supposition is true in part, the Mariners and Passengers may resist
the Pilot, for Pilots are not Kings over the rest in the ship: you do too
basely esteem of Authority. But what if the King will drive the ship on the
rock himself? Answer 1. By doing of this the King is no more seeking the ruin
of the Mariners and Passengers, then his own aestruction, and in this case
they are bound to save their King from death, in such submissive and humble
manner as it becomes, and not by arms, with swords, muskets, pikes and
Cannons, which are most offensive weapons. 2. If the King would be thus
desperate, it cannot be but he is gone mad, and quite out of his wits, and so
interpretative, they have a warrant to hinder him to undo all, which he will
allow when he comes to himself again. Well, all this may be done without
taking of arms.

But then say ye, may not the Church defend it self from suffering shipwreck
against a Tyrant, who is seeking that? Answer. It cannot be so done, the
comparison is much unlike. You speak as if the one case were as obuious to the
sense as the other. They must be apparent rocks, not supposed only. Both sense
and reason tell that if the Prince be not hindered by the Mariners, he and all
must perish. But the Church of Christ, which is builded on a Rock, against the
which all Tyrants violence, no, nor the gates of hell cannot prevail, is a
gainer by suffering, and every drop of their blood begets new believers: and so
resisting, being an unlawful means, may bring ruin to the Church, but
suffering not so. If the Jews in the days of Ahasverus had been of this new
Scottish humor, when an utter extirpation was intended by Haman both of
themselves and their Religion, they would have taken arms; but their prayers
and tears were their defense in their greatest extremity. This was the
constant practice of the Primitive Church also, even when they were most able
to defend themselves against their persecutors: to this purpose Chrysostom.
exposition on Psalm. 147. says well, that God compasses his Church with the
cross, to suffer; not with walls for defense Ecclesiam (inquit) munist validius
quam Jerusalem non vectibus and portis, se ^eruce circumseptam, and
renunciatione propria voluntatis, cum dixis, Porta inferorum non pravalebant
adversm (...). In principio itaque ^eges and Imperatores, and populi, and
civitates, and damonum phalanges, and ipsa diaboli Tyrannis, and alia
innumerabilia invaserunt Ecclesiaem; illa tamen omnia fracta and dissoluia
sunt, and interierunt, ipsa tamen crevit, and in'tantam provect a est
altitudinem, ut ipsos etiam coelos superaverit. For God has guarded his Church
more strongly then Jerusalem, not being environed with gates and bars, but
with the cross, and the denial of her self, when he said The gates of hell
shall not prevail against her. Therefore in the beginning, Kings and Emperors,
people and cities, troops of Devils, yea and the very Tyranny of Satan, invaded
the Church: yet all these things were undone and dissolved and perished; but
the Church increased, in so much that she reached unto the heavens, and all
this was by suffering; for as the Arc of Noah, the more the floods increased
the nearer it was to Heaven, so the more the Church is tossed with the waves of
affliction, the nearer it goes to Heaven.

Covenanter.
7. From Examples in Scripture, 1. Sam. 14 45. and 2. Chr, 7. Argument
26.17.2. Kings 11.1. Sam. 23. Where Davia bath six hundereth men for his
defense against the King himself, and would have kept Keilah against him,
neither himself nor the Priest doubting of the lawfullnes thereof, only
suspecting the treachery of the Keilites. Examples of the reformed Kirks in
Germany, the Low Countries, Sweden, and the Examples of our own Reformers.

Anticovenanter.
It Is a token that you put small confidence in Scripture: because you have not
begun with it; but left it in the end. For certainly there is nothing here to
prove your tenet. All your testimonies are out of the Old Testament, but not
one out of the New Testament. What if I would grant it lawful under the Law,
and that your testimonies are good for your purpose? but can ye show it lawful
under the Gospel, where suffering is only commanded? Mat. 10.23.
When they persecute you in one city, fly to another: not go take the cities
and castles of your periecuting Superiors, and defend your selves. But as
there is no help for you from the New Testament, so you shall have none from
the Old Testament, as shall be clear in answering your testimonies. In your
first testimony, the people hindered Saul to kill Jonathan: but how did they
it? Not by arms, but by entreary with sound reasons. Shall Jonathan die, say
they, who has wrought this great salvation in Israel? God forbid. But you will
say, they opposed themselves in contradictory terms, saying, as the Lord
lives, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, etc. Ans. In
the original it is not so, but by way of interrogation, as the most famous
Interpreters Tremellius and Iunius do translate it. Vt vivit Iehova, an cadere
debet ullus e capillis capitis ejus? as the LORD lives should there fall any
hair of his head to the ground? The people adjure Saul, and appeal his
Conscience before the living God (say these learned Interpreters) ut posthabita
juramenti ratione, juris habeat rationem: as if they had said, is it reason
that he should receive the least hurt from the people, who following the Lord
has wrought so great Salvation to the people? Then they defended Jonathan not
by arms, but by sound reason; which kind of defense is most willingly granted
by his Majesty to all that now cry for arms.

Your next testimony is no more worth. The people of Israel were put to no
small strait, when there was no Smith in Israel, but were forced to go down to
the Philistines, to sharpen their shares, their axes, and mattocks. This is
also your case, you must here go to the enemies, and from the Papists borrow
weapons to defend your cause, in the examples of Vzziah and Athaliah: Whereby
they maintain the Supremacy of Pope over Kings, and you now use them to
maintain the Power of the people over Kings. But let us consider them. The
first is of Vzziah the King, who contrary to Gods Commandment, went into the
Temple of the Lord to burn incense upon the Altar. And Azariah the Priest went
in after him, and withstood him, etc. Answ. 1. By this example, you must either
maintain, that the Subjects are above the Prinee, giving them the Popes
usurped authority; or if not, you must help to answer this your selves, and so
loose the knot which your selves have knit. The Papists say, 2 Chronicles. 26.
That the High-Preist thrust the King out of the Temple, when he usurped the
Priests office, ergo, the Pope is above Kings; the reason of the inference is,
because no Inferior has power to lay hands on a Superior, and by coactive
power. to compel them to do their duty, or repel them. Now you say the same,
The High Priest thrust the King out of the Temple, therefore it is lawful for
the people to resist Kings. Bellar. de Pont. Romans lib. 15. cap. 6.
What reason can you give of this inference, except you acknowledge the peoples
superiority above the Prince; and certainly, in your comparing the King and
his Subjects, you seem to hold it so. 2. The Priest thrust out the King not by
taking arms, but with rebuke and admonition, as the Text is clear, It
pertains not to thee Vzziah to burn incense, and bad him depart out of the
Sanctuary. This became the Priest to do. But what did the King? He was
indignabundus, he was wroth, disdained their rebuke, and took the Censer in his
hand to burn incense. What followed upon this? The Priests admonitions being
contemned, then the Lord took order with him, to whom it only belonged. While
the King was wroth with the Priest (says the Text) the leprosy rose up in his
forehead, before the Priests: then no man needed to bid him depart, for the
Text says, He himself hasted to go out, because the Lord had smitten him. It
was not then violence from the priests, but the punishment from God, that
thrust him out. But you will say, the Text says also, that the Priest thrust
him out, so it does, but it was by admonition and rebuke; for the Text says,
The Priests looked on him, and behold he was leprous, and they thrust him out
from thence, yea, he himself hasted to go out He knew not that he was so,
till the priests seeing it, told him, and without-doubt, rebuked him sharply;
telling him of the judgment of God upon him. Thus does Josephus testify. Lib.
1. de Antiquit. Iud, cap. 11. Whom Cajetan follows. Visa lepra, sacerdotes
regem ad festine egred endum monent. The leprosy being seen, the Priests
admonish him to make haste to go out. So does Chrysostam, and gives the reason
of it, saying; The office of a Priest is only to reprove, and freely to
admonish, not to move arms, nor to use bucklers, nor to shake a lance,
neither to bend a bow, and shoot forth darts. All then that can be drawn from
this example is, 1. That when Kings break the Commandments of God by any
scandalous fact, it is the Preachers duty to rebuke him. 2. That when Princes
will not regard the admonitions of Gods Servants, they must be left to God, who
sometimes will visibly punish them. I retort then your Argument, Azariah did
not by arms defend Gods right, as you call it, ergo, you ought not to take up
arms, though you had an Vzziah to deal with.

Your next example is of Iehojada, who commanded Athaliah to be slain. 2 King.
11.
The very bare reading of the History answers you sufficiently. Athaliah was an
usurper of the Crown, which by right belonged to Ioash, which was hid six
years from her cruelty. After Iehojada the High Priest, Ioash's Uncle and
Tutor with the Captains and Hundreds, with the Levites and chief Fathers of
Israel, had brought forth Ioash, and put on him the Crown, and declared him
King; then by authority of Ioash the King thus seated in his throne, Iehojada
caused slay that bloody usurper of the Kingdom Athaliah. So this was done by
the authority of the King. Now nothing can be gathered from this, but if any
Subjects for certain years have taken upon them Royal authority, if the
righteous King do recover his own authority, he may command the usurpers to be
slain. This point shall not be denied you.

Your last example from Scripture is also against you, concerning the men of
Keilah. If you will without prejudice judiciously consider the place, you shall
see that if you will prove the lawfulness of your defense, it must be from
David's flying from Saul. I have often seen both in the Fathers, and modern
Writers, David's example produced for to show the unlawfulness of resisting
Princes, but never till now, for the lawfulness of resistance. Consider first
then in general, that as Saul was ever invading David, so he was ever flying
from him. 2. That where David did hide himself, he found ofttimes treacherous
men to discover him, promising to deliver him unto Saul. So the Ziphits ran to
Saul, saying, Does not David hide himself with us in strong holds in the
wood, in the hill of Hachilah? Now therefore, come down, and our part shall
be to deliver him into the Kings hand. And thus being often betrayed, he was
forced to forsake the Kingdom altogether, to go to the King of Gath. Now for
the men of Keilah, they were much obliged to David for delivering them from the
Philistims; and therefore, the place being indebted to him, and also far from
Saul, he desired to remain there so long as he might, as having no certain
dwelling place elsewhere. Saul hearing that he was there, said, God has
delivered him into mine hand: for he is shut in by entering into a town that
has gates and bars. By all appearance, it was some of Keilah that brought
Saul this news, showing him what advantage, he now might have of David, being
in such a close town. As for David, being wise as the Angel of God, when he
heard of his discovery to Saul, he foresaw that if the men of Keilah would be
unthankful, they might keep him within the town to the King, and not suffer
him to fly away. Therefore he enquires of God, first, if Saul would come there
to seek him, for he had no purpose to go from Keilah, if Saul were not to
come; for, poor man, he had no place to go to. Secondly, hearing that Saul
would not fail to come down, he began to suspect the men of Keilah of
deceit, that they would shut the gates, and keep him in, till the King should
take him, having such advantage of the gates and bars, that he could not
fly, as his usual custom was. Therefore he demands of God the second time,
Will the men of Keilah deliver me, 1 Samuel 23, 12.
and my men into the hand of Saul? that which is here translated (deliver,) in
the original is, shut up. Will the men of Keilah shut me up? as is also
exponed in the Margent of the Bible in that place. So the meaning is not as you
most seditously expound it, Will the men of Keilah not defend me, but deliver
me to Saul, who am resolved to keep this walled City against him? But this is
the meaning, Will the men of Keilab not let me go away, but shut me up, close
the gates, that I cannot eseape by flying? This lets us see, that David had a
purpose to fly from Saul, which makes him so careful to try, whether the men
of Keilah would hinder him by shutting their gates, that finding them
deceitful, he mightflee in time. And therefore it is without warrant, you say,
that David with his six hundred men purposed to defend themselves in the city
against the King. If he had purposed to keep the town, he would have been
well pleased, how close soever the gates had been shut: and would rather have
enquired, Lord, will the men of Keilah open the gates, and let in the King,
then will they shut the gates upon me?

2 Though your exposition were true, that David purposed to keep the town
against the King, the question yet remains, Whether he ought to have done so,
or not? a facto, ad jus non valet consequentia.

3 It proves not your conclusion. David was but one man, who took an army of
six hundred men, to defend himself against the King, as you dream. Therefore,
when the King persecuteth a private man, he may gather an army and resist the
King: which I hope you will not, at least, cannot sustain: and yet you must
sustain this, or else pass from your Argument.

Finally, if any of you were in the case that David was in, to be the Anointed
of God, and appointed by God to succeed Saul, it fears me you would take more
upon you then David did, for ye have done more already: and some of you are not
ashamed to call the Nobility, Ephori, and that they put on the Crown with the
King in his Coronation, turning all to a finistrous and seditious sense.

As for your examples from reformed Churches, since we live not by Examples,
but by Laws, I will not stand upon them as not knowing the Laws and
Government of foreign Kingdoms. If they have Laws for their resistance, you
produce these examples most impertinently. 2. From facts to prove the
Lawfulness of resisting is ridiculous. 3. None of these by resisting, gained
so much as by suffering; as experience too late does show.

Covenanter.
From Testimonies not only of Popish Writers, 8. Argument.
but of the Divines of the reformed Churches, even such as will be strong
pleaders for Monarchy: Neither is Calvin against us, but for us; From the
testimonies of most judicious Lawyers and learned men, who have written
contra-Monarchomachos.

Anticovenanter.
I grant Jesuits (yet not all) are for your tenet, for herein you agree,
contrary to the Doctrine of al sound Divines, ancient and modern. You name not
any Protestant Divine, but Calvin, who is flat against you; for this purpose, I
refer you to learn it out of the Duplie of the most learned Doctors of
Aberdeen. You nominate no judicious Lawyers. I know your Advocate Master
Iohnstone is for you, but the question is too Deep for his shallow brain.

Covenanter.
From the mutual contract between the King and the people, as may be seen in
the Acts of Parliament, 9. Argument.
and Order of Coronation.

Anticovenanter.
Answ. 1. To this, I give a Real and Royal answer from the most gracious and
most learned King James of Blessed memory, in his Book entitled, Ius Liber a
Monarchiae, pa. 193. Nego ego tempore Coronationis inter regem and subditos
pactum ini^i, etc. I deny says he, that in the time of the Coronation, there
is any such covenant between the King and his Subjects. But this is manifest,
that at that time, or at the beginning of his reign, sponte sua, of his own
accord, the King promises to discharge honestly and faithfully that charge,
which God has committed and entrusted him with. 2 Though it were granted that
there were such a mutual contract, yet his Majesty demonstrates most clearly,
that it cannot help this cause. If the King, says he, shall not keep his
part of the Covenant, who shall be judge between these parties? there is none
who has but attained to a small taste of the civil Law, who knows not, that
the contract cannot be esteemed violated by the one party: nor the other
absolved of his part of the contract, before that it be made manifest by the
cognition and Trial of the ordinary judge, which of the parties has departed
from the Contract. For this is the caution of every civil and municipiall Law;
otherwise what could hinder but that every man, in his own cause may be both
Judge and party, then the which, there can be nothing thought more absurd.
Now in that contract between the King and his Subjects, without all
controversy only God is Judge, to whom alone the King is bound to give acount
of his administration; because in that oath at the Kings inauguration, both the
judgment and vengeance of his perfidious dealing is given only to God.
Therefore since God alone is the judge between the parties, and since the try
all and vengeance only does belong to him, it must necessarily follow, that
God must first pronouce the sentence against the King, before the people can be
thought free of their part of the Covenant, of obedience and subjection. And so
there is no man so blind, but he may see how unjustly you make your self judge
in your own cause, and usurp the place of God. 3. From this your mutual
contract, you must show that his Majesty, not only obliges himself to
perform his Kingly office, but also gives power to the people (when they
judge that he fails in his part) to resist him by force of arms: or else, you
are idle to allege such contract. And if you will produce this. I have no
more to say, but that the King has denuded himself of Royal authority, and
devolved it into the peoples hands, he only in name, and the people in effect,
being King and supreme judge in their own cause: and so the King must stand,
Vt magna nominis umbra. But you would do well, to produce such a contract out
of the Vtopia of your own brain.

Covenanter.
From Acts of Parliament ratifying the three Estates Authority, 10. Argument
and from our own ecclesiastical and civil History.

Anticovenanter.
1 There can be no Acts of Parliament, but those the King sets down with
advice of his Estates. 2 And can you show any Act of Parliament for the
lawfulnes of resisting Princes, or can you show that there is any Act of
Parliament, giving authority to the Estates, to resist His Majesty to execute
Justice? 4 Do you attribute any authority to these, which ye call the three
Estates, without the King? You must know, that the King is the only Lawgiver,
the Parliament is but his extraordinary Council, and the Estates thereof are
his extraordinary Counselors, by whose advice he enacts Laws. Consider
also, there was no Law in the Kingdom of Scotland before the Kings of it; for,
before Fergusius his days, we were but like Salusticus Aborigenes. Genus
hominum agreste, liberum atque solutum, sine legibus, sine imperio. But when
the first King did conquer this Land, he and his Successors gave Laws,
divided the whole Land which was their own; and distinguished the orders of
men, and did establish a political government. This is clear by our
Chronicles, and Ex archivis regijs, in quibus antiquum and primaevum jus
asservatur, satis constat, Regem esse Dominum omnium bonorum directum, omnes
subditos esse ejus vassallos, qui latifundia sua, ipsi do^ino referant accepta,
sui nempe obsequij and servitij praemia. 4 If you attribute such incompatible
power to these Estates, Why did not you by virtue thereof conclude this war?
You ought first to hold a Parliament, and then conclude war. But pardon me,
you have done so, Your three Tables is for Your three Estates, which has
ordained this war. 5. Which are these three Estates now? Episcopacie is
thrust from you, and overruling Elders are in their place, who are busy
Bishops in another man's Diocese, and have been too busy in my parish; And
shall they supply their place in Parilament? As for your Ecclesiastical and
civil History, if that be Knox, and Buchanans regni jus, expressly condemned
by Act of Parliament, you may be ashamed to name them, and ought to have
covered their nakedness if you had respected them, You have published in print
to the great disgrace of Knooe, that he called kneeling at the Communion, An
Invention of the Devil, and will you here make him a Doctor of Treason?

Covenanter.
From our Covenant lately sworn and subscribed, 1. Argument.
binding us to defend the Kings Majesty's person, in defense of the true
Religion, and to defend the true Religion against all persons whatsoever.

Anticovenanter
This is indeed Ilias malorum, your Covenant binds you to it, and to much more,
even to whatsoever shall seem good to the most part of you by common consent,
were it never so heinous. For that clause of your Covenant, wherein you are
obliged to whatsoever shall seem meet by common consent, is a great Ocean, a
blanke, to be filled up with what you please, it seems good to you already
for the keeping of the first Table, to break the second, in working the works
of unrighteousness. As to withold from Ministers their Stipend, as
conducible for your ends, to threaten them with big words, to lay violent hands
on them in the discharge of their calling in pulpit (...) which I have
suffered; and which is more, to contemn and disobey Supreme, Authority; yea,
to take up arms against it: and if you by common consent, shall think meet
to remove that block of authority out of your way, you are obliged to it by
your Covenant: for certainly, this is very conducible to your ends. For if
your Calder wood be true, Kings are enemies to Religion, in his Altar
Damascenum, he affirms, that Natura insitum est omnibus regibus odium in
Christum. And so King James of Blessed memory is called by him Infestissimus
ecclesiae hostis, And your Master-man Cartwright lays down a ground for this
overthrow of Kings, (as you may read in the speech delivered at the Visitation
of Down and Conuer, by the right reverend and most learned Bishop of Down:)
for he holds that the Commonwealth is in the Church, and not the Church in
the Commonwealth: and therefore, as a wiseman will not frame his house to his
hangings, but his hangings to his house; so the Church is not to be fitted to
the Commonwealth, but the Commonwealth to the Church. This gear goes right,
for then, as there is a paritie in the Church (for so you will have it) there
must be also a parity in the State, and so, let Kings and Bishops go together.
Thus King James knew full well the mystery of your Religion, whilst he made
these convertible. no King, no Bishop, no Bishop, no King. And in your third
argument, you tell that the people makes the Magistrate, and you may be without
him, and by all appearance, you have (that I may use your own words) rid your
selves of him too, as an author and executioner of your woes; and have set up a
new sort of Government of 26. Governors, yearly changeable, for managing the
affairs of the Kingdom: consisting of Nobles, Barrons and Burgesses, which
government will trouble all our Politicians to give it a name, for it is neither
a Monarchy, nor Aristocracie, not Democracie, nor Oligarchie, etc. And you
will offend, if we call it, Anarchie. When there was no King in Israel, every
man did what seemed good in his fight.

Covenanter.
It Is objected; that although upon the former reasons it cannot be denied, but
it must be lawful for subjects to defend themselves by arms, against the
unjust invasion or oppression of the Magistrate; yet the matters presently
debated betwixt the King and his people, are neither fundamental in Religion,
nor of that importance, that we should enter into a bloody war, which
brings with it so many certain evils, and whereof the event is uncertain.
We answer 1. No matter of Religion has so great weight in the minds of
worldly men, that they will hazard their worldly Estates for any thing of that
kind. Gallio cares for none of these things. Festus says, that the Jews had
certain questions against Paul of their own superstition, and of one Jesus
which was dead, whom Paul affirms to be alive; if we receive him; the Romans
will come and destroy our place, and our City, has been a prevailing Maxim
in policy. 2 The greatest questions of Religion carry sometimes a small show,
witness the words (...) and (...) and (...) Electinomen, and Electi
participium, which are small in appearance, but great in substance. 3 There is
a great mistaking about fundamental points of Religion, for if we call that
fundamental, the knowledge whereof is necessary for salvation, a point may be
fundamental and necessary to be known at one time, or in one Kirk, which at
another time, or in another Kirk, is not thus necessary: for although the
foundation it self be necessary for the edification of every soul, yet of
things fundamental, and necessary to salvation, we must judge according to
the different degrees, and, measure of Revelation. There is also a mistaking
about the smallest matters of Religion, for obstinacy in resisting the light,
and following darkness rather than the known light in the smallest matters,
brings certain condemnation. It was audaciously enacted by the Council of
Constance. Non obstante Christi institutione. The Kirk of Scotland, having from
the certain knowledge of the Unlawfulness of Episcopal government (were it
of never so little moment) abjured it, diverse times, and spued it out, we must
not return to our vomit. 4. Though the question were about the name of the
Bishop to be retained in our Church, as the crafty without any warrant give it
out; yet were it most impertinent: for the question must be taken either of the
naked name, which no man is so silly to imagine, since we acknowledge it to be
common to all the Ministers of the Gospel: or the question is about the place
and office signified by the name, which is to be a Pastor of Pastors without a
particular flock, to have the authority of Ordination and jurisdiction, to be
a Lord of Session, Parliament, Council Conuention and Exchequer, which either
the Bishop must be, or else, as they say themselves, they cannot serve the
Kings turn. He is willingly blinded, who sees not how material this is: for
besides the sin in the office it self, it brings with it the ruin of all
religion, by denuding the city of her Walls, and the Vineyard of her hedge. It
is either ignorance or deception to speak of Caveats: for if the Office be of
Divine institution, Why should it be limited more then another office, or
further then the Word of God does require? It ought to be rejected as a
presumptuous usurpation upon the Kingdom of Christ, in appointing chief
Office-bearers in his house without warrant from him, and an intolerable
derogation to his full and perfect Wisdom, as if he had not accomplished his
House with Offices and Office-bearers, but left them to the determination of
the Wisdom of men, which not only in the Mystery of Godliness, but in the
matters of Ecclesiastical Government, is enmity against the Wisdom of God.
We have already had experience of Caveats, and now to hazard shipwreck the
second time, by making such Pirates again to be Pilots, were desperate
madness. 5. But the Proclamation tells us, there are other matters of
difference then Episcopacie. And lastly, the question is now, whether we shall
have a free national Kirk, or any other Religion hereafter, but such as is
commanded by arms, the only mid and Argument now used for that which is
intended? and whether we shall any longer enjoy our Civil Liberty? for if base
slaves be advanced to Honor they will labor to please the corrupt humors of
those who advance them; these creatures must serve their maker. Time was when
the Pope was master, and then they served him. This time past, they have been
agents for Popery, and as they have given lamentable experience, that they too
well know the way to Rome; so may we look no less, then that being
re-advanced they shall carry both Prince and people home again to their old
master, except we stand fast by our Liberty, we can look for nothing but
miserable and perpetual slavery.

Anticovenanter.
These Objections are forged in your own brain, that you may the more easily
answer them. There is no matter now debated of small importance: it is neither
Episcopacy, nor the Service-Booke, but of the Monarchy, and Supreme Authority
of his Majesty; So that upon your part there is no shadow of reason to take up
arms, but to yield all due obedience as it becomes; and so far as it
concerns his Majesty, there is a necessity of arms, for the recoverie of his
authority: And he is not only worldly minded, but treasonably minded to take
up arms against Authority under color of Religion, 2. You say, the greatest
matters of Religion carry sometimes a small show. What is this to the purpose?
I know no great question in Religion, but for the matter it self, it must
carry still a great show, and no small; you bring grammatical and nominall
similitudes of words, but for real differences, they are very great. So
Authoritas Regis, and authoritas gregis carry great similitude in words, but
the real difference is as great as between Monarchy and Democracie. But you
make all the question to be concerning Episcopacie, certainly herein the
question is neither small in show nor substance: for the question is, 1.
Whether Episcopal Government be Antichristian, and your new Presbyteriall
government that which Christ has ordained in his Church, 2. Whether we within
the Church of Scotland are bound now to believe under the pain of damnation,
your tenet concerning the government of the Church: and you hold that it is a
point necessary to Salvation, now in our Church after such degrees of light and
Revelation, to believe your sayings. 1. But that is a miserable light of yours,
that non can see but your selves, your light is like ignis fatuus, which (as
the learned say) flies from those that follow it, and follows those that fly
from it. When we came to your Commissioners at Glasgow, Master Retherfort, and
Master Cant to ask resolution of our doubts, your light fled from us, your
answer was, Ye must deny reason and learning, and help Christ a lift. But
while you were in Pulpit, you made the people to believe that you could solve
all doubts, as having commission from Christ so to do, let your light shine
that we may see. Are all other Churches yet fitting in darkness, not knowing
rightly what is the Church Government, and you only a shining Goshen in the
midst of Egypt? 2 If the knowledge of the unlawfulness of Episcopacy, and the
lawfulness of your Presbyteriall Government be a point now so necessary, what
is the cause that God never revealed, how his Church should be governed all the
time bypast? for you must have this by a revelation; and yet it must not be a
divine revelation, because it is contrary to Gods Word, The Prophet that has a
dream, Ier. 23.28,
let him tell a dream, and he that has my word, let him speak my word
faithfully. Has not the Church of Christ, that has this 15. or 16. hundred
years been governed by Diocesian Bishops, beenlawfully governed? I am sure if
God had ordained your Government, he would not suffer his Church from the
beginning to this time to have been blindly led. But for this point I remit you
to the learned Writers for Episcopacie. As for your malicious aspersions upon
that Apostolic Government, because you speak at random without reason, I
leave you in your choler, to cry out against them, as enemies to al Religion;
Pirates, and misguiding Pilots.

And may it not content you what you have done? you have done worse than the
Pagan mariners did with Jonah, to cast these your Pilots over board into the
Sea, (and how shall you govern the Ship in this storm!) you have done worse
than the Soldiers would have done with the Apostle Paul, Acts 27.42.
who would kill him; for you have had such relation with Satan in this work,
that you have given them as a sacrifice to Satan, as Satan would have given all
the Kingdoms of the world unto Christ: Luke 16.28.
but if you have really delivered them unto him, and he has received them,
there is a deep gulf wherein they are, that you need not fear their return to
your Ship: Acts 27.31.
nevertheless I say unto you with Paul, That except these abide in the ship,
you cannot be saved. And you should study to know, what that is, to deliver
over to Satan, 1. Cor. 5.5.

But you say, You have spued them out of the Church, and cannot receive them.
Ans. 1. The Sea has not been calm, but a great storm has wrought that
excess of loathing in your stomach. 2. The Church spued out all Popish
errors, and amongst the rest, the Popish Hierarchy, and all Popish Bishops,
that hung upon the Pope, their Head; but they did not condemn the lawful and
laudable calling of Episcopacy, which is more ancient than the Pope, as ancient
as the Apostles. 3. If the Church has spued out this lawful calling (as I
hope you will not make it good) she has been in a great distemper, and you
should have covered that fault, as Sem and Japhet did their fathers nakedness,
rather than Cham-like, to declare the same unto the world; it is our Scottish
proverb, They are scant of news that tells, their Father was hanged.

Further, you say, The question is now whether we shall have a free national
Kirk, etc. Answ. 1. Are you beginning now to state the question, when you have
ended your dispute? 2. With such a question, How long will you wrong his
Majesty, who is so far from taking arms against the Religion we now have, to
establish any other, that he will still defend our true Religion?

You speak of base Slaves, and cannot suffer that his Majesty should advance
them. But you speak too basely, and whence are you with your Nobility, you
master Ministers with a Pope in your heart? you despair of your advancement
with Aerius, and cannot endure others. Such as he who said, Make me a Lord
above my Lady, and offered to lead a blind Bishop, that after his death he
might be preferred to his place. The heels once murmured, because they had not
the place of the head; The Ass would climb upon a Velvet Cushion to fawn
upon his master, like a Spaniel. I pray you, whosoever you be, who envy the
advancement of learned men, or any others, to consider, that the Kings subjects
are as Counters in the Kings hand, whereof he makes one a 100. another a 1000.
a third 10000. according to his pleasure. And must he be countable to your
humor? Or must you be his directer? You say, you must stand fast to your
liberty to withstand the re-advancement of Bishops. Take Peter's counsel, Use
not your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, 1 Pe. 2.16, 17.
but as the Servants of God. Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God.
Honor the King.

You began your reasons with absurdity and unreasonablenesse, and you conclude
with these last words, That you can look for nothing but for miserable and
perpetual slavery. So they deserve that hold such absurdities.

Pondus adest verbis, and vocem futa sequentur. And you must perish in the
gainesaying of Core, Jude 11. Romans 13.2.
and receive to your selves condemnation, except ye repent, which I pray God to
grant you. And as heretofore, You have fasted for strife and debate, and to
smite with the fist of wickedness: So now I exhort you in the name of God to
fast and pray, that God would lighten your eyes in this Controversy, and turn
your rebellion, into an humble submission to God and your King.

To my Brethren of the Presbyterio of DVNBARTAN.
Reverend Brethren,
I Have received your Summons, the Tenor whereof is thus: I James Thome Officer
in that part constitute, summon you M. John Corbet, Minister of Bonyl, to
compeer before the Presbytery of Dunbartan the 16, day of April instant, to
hear and see your self further censured for your former absence from the
Presbytery, and further contumacie and contempt to the Presbytery, and other
points both of unsoundnesse of opinions, and disobedience to the ordinance of
the general assembly, as is evident by your manifest adhering to, and avowing
of your declinator of the same, in your last presumptuous and sedicious letter,
sent to the moderator and remanent Brethren of the said Presbytery, written
and subscribed with your hand of the date the 1. of April, with cortification,
if you continue in your contumacie, and compeer not, you shall be simpliciter
deposed, from the function of the Ministry, at a person altogether unworthy
of the sanit.

But I pray you Brethren, have me excused, that I cannot compeer, since I have
received your summons out of due time, and there is no passage between Scotland
and Ireland, because of the great storms from your coasts, which are so great,
Psalm. 55.6, 8.
that I wished the wings of a dove to stie away, and be at rest; and by Gods
good help, I have hastened my escape from the windy storm and tempest, Psalm.
57.1.
and come to Ireland, where in the shadow of the Lords wings, I shall make my
refuge, until these calamittes be over-past, Esa. 33.17, 20.
and may see the King in his beauty, and Jerusalem a quiet habitation: For
this is the day of the Lords vengeance, Esaias 34.8.
and the year of recompenses for the controversies of Zion. In the mean time,
if this my Treatise can find passage by any means, and come to your hands, it
will either justify me, or augment my fault; the one, if you be not
prejudicated; but the other, if you be yet in your passions My Epistle which I
desired you to put on record ad futuram rei memoriam, as being able to make
good what I have said, does contain these opinions following, which you most
unsoundly call unsound, and my letter presumtuous and seditious. My 1. unsound
opinion is, that I call taking up of arms against the Lords Anointed, a doctrine
of unrighteousness. My 2. unsound opinion is threefold, that J said, I take God
to witness, that I cannot subscribe your covenant, except I would 1. sin
against God, 2. contemn Authority, 3. and abjure my Christian Liberty. For the
1. I cannot but sin against God, if I keep not the oath of God, and obey the
commandment of my King, Eccles. 8.1.
against whose Authority and Commandment this covenant is subscribed. 2 There
must be contempt of Authority (and this is too mild a word, let me call it by
it is own name, Rebellion) if I subscribe your covenant, for these 5 Reasons. 1
because all covenants are expressly discharged by Act of Parliament, without his
Majesty's privy consent be obtained thereto. 2 because this covenant is
expressly forbid by his Majesty's Proclamations. 3 because this your covenant
contains many unlawful things, amongst which, is that unlawful Band against
the Lords Anointed. 4 Though your covenant were good and lawful, yet, except
you prove that it is absolutely necessary to be subscribed, how dare any
subscribe it, being forbidden by authority without high contempt? 5. Since I
have subscribed the Kings Covenant, I cannot subscribe yours without perjurie,
as is clear in this treatise. And since you hindered your flocks to subscribe
the Kings Covenant, saying, they would be perjured, if they did it; how can I
subscribe both without perjurie? The third point, That by subscribing, I must
abjure my Christian liberty, wherein I shall stand fast. I pray you, since
your covenant does abjure things indifferent (such as the Articles of Perth
are. etc.) as heads of Popery, Do I not thus far abjure my Christian liberty,
if I subscrib? My last unsound opinion is of your assembly. I was content and
shall still remain, to pass from my protestation against your assembly, these
3 grounds being proved. 1. That by acknowledging the authority of it, I be not
obliged to believe the lawfulnes of it is acts, for it calls evil, good; and
good, evil. 2. That it be proved by the laws of the kingdom, that when the
King discharges the assembly to sit, it ought to refuse, and sit still. 3.
That it be made good, that when controversy is between the King and the
assembly, the assembly must be judge. In my presumptuous and seditious letter,
I called these grounds absurd, and altogether derogatory to Royal authority,
renting the Kings supremacy.

And I appeal the conscience of every one of you, whether these my opinions be
unsound, and I for them judged unworthy of the Ministry; which if you do, your
presbytery is the seat of violence, Amos 6.3.
to the which I will not come near, where when judgment should run down as
water, and righteousness as a mighty stream, Amos 5.24.
you turn judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness, Amos 6.12.
into Hemlock. Howbeit all reformed Churches in Europe are condemning your
course, yet you say you are wise, Ier. 8.8.
and the Law of God is with you; yet certainly, except ye amend and change your
opinions and ways, Ier. 7.28.
truth is perished and cut off from your mouths. Ier. 23.14, 5.
This is the cause, that from you the Prophets of Jerusalem, wickedness has
gone over all the land, and the hand of evil doers is strengthened, that none
does return from his wickedness, Isa. 33.15.
but go on with a revolting and rebellious heart: it is good to walk
righteously, and speak uprightly, which is a hard thing to do with you, when
men must be overruled with ignorant lay-Bishops, to whose humor all must
preach, who remember not that, one day in proper persons we must give account
to God, how we have taught our people to serve God and the King; against whom
too many of you incessantly stir up the people, as against a Nero. I exhort you
my brethren, that when you are Evening and Morning in private with God in your
prayers, to remember and consider whether your course be good or evil, which
you continue in; and if your conscience accuse you, I pray God ye may be as
earnest to ungird that armor, as you have been in putting it on: And may shake
off Pusill animity, having your faces strong against their faces, Ezekiel, 3.9.
who are seditious; and your foreheads strong against their foreheads; not
fearing them nor being dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious
house. Thus at last becoming valiant for the truth. Ier. 9.3.


FINIS.

