THE Copies of certain discourses, which were extorted from diverse, as their
friends desired them, or their adversaries drive them to purge themselves of
the most grievous crimes of schism, sedition, rebellion, faction, and such
like, most unjustly laid against them for not subscribing to the late
authority at the first sending thereof into England: In which discourses are
also many things discovered concerning the proceedings in this matter abroad.

Dicit piger Leo est in via.

Proverb. 26. The slothful excuse themselves, saying. There is a Lion in the
way.

Imprinted at Roane, by the heirs of Ia. Walker. 1601.

The Preface to the Reader.
THe differences and disagreements are such, which in these few years last
past have bred, and daily grow to more and more perfection in that kind, to so
great a disgust of all sincere Catholics, not only here in England but also
in the principal, if not in all the parts of Christendom, whither the worthy
fame of their memorable acts for the restoring of their native Country unto the
Catholic faith has come, that it is high time to give them some taste of
these matters, who are so disgusted, by laying before them the true cause, and
grounds of this lamentable dissension, and to discover how colourably the
common enemy of God, and his Church, has proceeded to the disturbance first
of Gods Priests, then to the mutual dislike of Catholics among themselves,
and of such Priests as against whom by wrong informations they are violently
led, and let not to use both tongue and pen in most ungrateful manner.

Some, being asked by others what might be the cause of so great a strife among
the Priests, have simply answered that the cause is, for that the Priests
being but secular men will not humble themselves, or be directed or governed by
the Jesuits, who are religious; but what truth soever is in this cause, of all
other it must not be given, for such a subjection, even in the ears of those
who desire it, sounds so absurdly, that they endeavor rather to have it, then
to hear of it, and both M. Blackwell in his Letters to the Cardi. Caietan
dated the 10. of January 1596. and F. Parsons in his Letters against M. Doctor
Bish: and M. Ch: dated the 9. of October 1599. labor to put this conceit out
of men's minds, how evidently soever the practice in Wisbitch to make Fa. Weston
the Jesuit superior over the secular Priests (who then were in durance for
the Catholic faith: pursued both by the known, and covert Jesuits, and all
other their favorites does prove it, as also a Libell given abroad by the
Author thereof himself, to admonish others to beware of such Priests (and by
no means to have any dealing with them in spiritual matters, even to the
disturbing of them out of their places of residence) as unfit guides for
souls, who had not a dependence of the Jesuits. And not long since another of
their favorites let not to say, that those Priests who are not under the
Jesuits government are no better then the Ministers; Many more proofs may be
made hereof out of the speeches of many other their favorites, who give
counsel to all that are afflicted in these turmoyles to submit themselves to
the Jesuits.

Other some, (who perceive well, that, if this should be maintained to be the
true cause of so scandalous a schism in Gods church, it would redound to the
eternal disgrace, and infamy of such, as, by whom they having conceived some
foolish hope of preferment, they had rather that they should indeed bear the
sway, and have the government of the Clergy (although it were underhand) then
be said either to seek it, or to have it) give out that the cause of this
division among the Priests is, for that some Priests moved either with
ambition, or desire of contradiction, will not subject themselves unto their
lawful superior appointed by his holiness, and confirmed in authority over
them by his Breue sent into England for that purpose: and these have from time
to time both written, and maintained in most injurious manner (to possess the
more perfectly such as are too ready to think no calumniation too grievous
even against those who have best deserved of them) that these Priests are
schismatickes, seditious, rebellious, etc. even to the dividing for this cause
of parents and their children, men and their wives, brothers and sisters, and
whole households, while the one retaining that reverend respect of their long
known, and tried ghostly fathers, for learning, wisdom, and virtue, is
assailed by the other with these most wicked suggestions, and false
calumniations, and forced either to live a discontented life, or to break
friendship; and (against their own consciences) make semblance at the least
that they conceive hardly of such as they very well persuade themselves will not
commit so great offense against God, and his Church, in whose defense they have
spent many years, and remain still resolute to shead their dearest blood.

That therefore no error be hereafter in any man, who will not too much affect
ignorance in such things as concern not only his particular good but the
Common cause of God, and his Church (which whiles the Clergy lives at some
variance in an evil affected Country, cannot doubtless but be very greatly
prejudiced thereby) it is thought expedient, yea necessary, that the cause of
this dissentio^ be with truth, and sincerity declared, and made known to the
world, that our actions and the reasons thereof being weighed with equal
balances, truth may take place, the offerers of the wrong may be discovered,
the unjustly afflicted may be relieved, and that ease (at the least by these
means) may be procured, which would not come of so long sufferance.

The strife, and dissension at this day too great, and scandalous in England,
is maintained by the Archpriest, the Jesuits, and their adherents, against
those Priests who did forbear to subject themselves unto the Archpriest
constituted in authority over all the Seminary Priests in England and Scotland
by a Cardinal, who was Protector of the English College at Rome, and
afterward honored with the title of Protector of England, for the which
forbearing to subject themselves at the first making known of this authority,
the Priests were accused of schism, sedition, faction, rebellion, etc. All
which calumniations were forgiven by the Priests so grievously iniuried, and a
peace made to the great comfort of all Catholics, when his holiness Breue
was presented unto them, but this peace was soon after broken by the means of
the Jesuits, who revived the same calumniations against the Priests, and by
the Archpriest, who did not only auerre the assertions of the Jesuits, but
published also that he had received a resolution from the mother City (to use
his terms) which avowed that the refusers of the authority (noting by this
phrase the Priests who did forbear for a time upon causes seeming just to them
to accept thereof) were Schismatickes. So that the cause of this division now
in England, is not for any resistance in the Priests against the superiority,
as many forward and evil taught people persuade themselves, and cry out
against the priests, that they are disobedient. But the cause of this division
is, for that the Priests will not acknowledge that in the time of their
forbearance to subscribe to the authority (which was no longer then until
they saw the Breue) they were factious, seditious, rebellious, Schismatickes,
enormiously disobedient, in continual mortal sin, practicing their function
in irregularitie, and pretending to absolve from sin without faculties, or
jurisdiction meet thereunto, worse then South-sayers and Idolaters, etc. If
therefore sufficient reasons may be given why the Priests did forbear to
subject themselves before they saw any Letters from his holiness concerning
this authority, it will both appear how greatly they have been iniuried both
by the Archpriest, Jesuits, and their evil nurtured children, and how
necessary this course of publishing in this sort, is for the purging of the
other Priests from those slanderous speeches; and here by the way do we ask
of those pious Catholics, (for so they must be termed howsoever they deserve
it,) when they charge, and persuade themselves that they choke the Priests
with disobedience, what it is, that they mean by this disobedience, if they
mean thereby that the Priests do not acknowledge M. Black. for their
Archpriest and superior, they may if it so please them correct this their
understanding, and from henceforth either believe that every man does
acknowledge him, or else name who does not, and let him in particular be called
in question for it: for this general prattle that they are disobedient is so
unsavory a shift, unless they could descend to particulars, that a man with
little honesty would quickly perceive how it does taint his breath:

If by disobedience in the Priests they do mean the not yielding or conforming
their understanding to the Archpriest his understanding, they exact this
obedience to the Archpriest either because that he is learned, or because that
he is a superior, but neither of these respects convince any such matter, as
that the refusing to be so conformable should bring with it schism, sedition,
faction, rebellion, etc. Not the first, which is in regard of his learning. For
although that many in England for modesty sake only make no comparisons with
him for his learning, yet without offense we may say that there are many beyond
the seas far his betters, and much more learned, who have decided this
question for us against him, so that the conceit only of being an Archpriest,
or in authority, is left for them to justify these most iniurions
calumniations against us. If then they exact this obedience in Priests to the
Archpriest, in respect that he is a superior, and because that he is a
superior they imagine that every man who will not think as he thinks, and
do what he commands is a Schismaticke, a rebel, factious, seditious, etc.
These who are so ignorant must be taught, and such as are contented at this
time to make show of so gross ignorance, must be put in mind that authority
is not an infallible rule of truth in all who have authority, and consequently
that no man is bound in all things to believe or execute what every man in
authority over him shall put upon him. In how many things not only Arch
priests but their superiors also the Archdeacons, and other of higher degree
have done amiss, and swarued from the truth? and who upon earth is warranted
from erring but one, and not he in all things? how absurdly then should this
point be urged that the Priests are Schismatickes, rebellious, etc. for not
conforming themselves in their understanding to an Archpriest? And if the
simpler sort of Catholics cannot understand this reason sufficiently grounded
upon too many examples recorded in all Ecclesiastical Histories, we would
demand of them, when they are commanded to do that by such as are in
authority upon their allegiance, which in conscience they cannot do, whether
they be rebellious, factious, seditious, etc. in not obeying this
commandment? or by what reason they may in not obeying resolve their
consciences, that they are not rebellious, etc?

Doubtless either they must confess that they are rebellious, etc. in not
obeying the commaundment of those who are in authority, or else that it is not
a sufficient proof of rebellion that men do not in all things as others in
authority command them, and to run for refuge to cases, and particulars, is
to fly touch for (having before spoken of this particular case which is in
question among us) we press now only this point, that authority is not so
infallible a rule of truth in all to whom it is most it stly derived, as those
must be condemned as factious, rebellious, sediticus, schismatickes, etc. who
will not conferme their understandings to their conceits, who are in authority
because they are in authority.

These points, and those which hereafter will be touched, we do not set down
as men that would make sheep judges of their pastors, but as men desirous
that their brethren, and children, would not be so violently carried as they
are, both against duty, and charity, but suspend their judgments in these
matters, and so bear themselves toward all, as they may hereafter make a good
answer for their behavior toward them, who have after so dear a rate sought
to save their souls, and now request that their long sufferance be no
prejudice unto them, nor warrant to loosse tongues to enlarge themselves with
contumelious speeches against them whose cause the discourses following will
both convince all, who are desirous not to be misled in a matter of so great
consequence, that it is just, and that they have also just cause to publish the
same for the better instruction of such as with whom they may not be suffered
or admitted to confer about it, yet without touch of any more then the matter
it self, and occasions ministered do most necessarily require.

Yours in all true hearty affection.

Certain Considerations, to satisfy such as either are, or may be, by any
sinister informations or ill conceits incensed against us, or alienated from
us, because we have not yielded our selves to the designments and wills of
others, in subscribing to this late authority.
FIrst we desire all good Catholics to consider indifferently, what we be,
that defer our subscription to this authority; that we be Priests, and
therefore in reason should know, to what we were bound in this case. Again,
that our present vocation, which is to labor eue^ unto death in saving of
souls, and therefore not like to be altogether careless in matter of so great
weight as this authority is pretended: of our own good, being so careful of
the good of others.

Further, that for many years we have bestowed our selves in this harvest, and
therefore in all likelihood, should somewhat know what things were most
convenient for our selves and Country. Then that many of us being in durance,
have for many years endured, and as we hope without reprehension, the bitter
storms of restraint and persecution, and therefore in justice should deserve at
the least, an easy and indifferent censure, of such as either cannot, or do
not, hear us answer for our selves. And that also some of our brethren as
forward in dislike and disclaiming from such proceedings as we be (if not more
forward) have ended their peregrination and troubles, with most glorious
martyrdom, giving a great testimony thereby of their sincere intentions in
such matters they took in hand, and leaving behind them also, a good motive
unto you, to censure and judge no less of the intentions of others, whose
cases are the same with theirs, that they deal sincerely and according to
conscience. And because you cannot perhaps enter into a just judgment of these
matters, not seeing into the depth, drift, and circumstances thereof, we
desire no more at your hands, but that you will as yet suspend your judgments
of us, and not uncharitably condemn us, until you see the conclusion and
period of this business, which will manifest the truth of all our actions.

Secondly, we desire you to consider our present estate in this business how
we stand, that we have and do vow all obedience unto Gods Church, and do
acknowledge and embrace all authority lawfully proceeding from the Sea
Apostolic, and are most ready to show all obedience thereunto, when we
shall see and know by just and ordinary Canonical notice, what it is that the
authority of that See exacteth at our hands, which no Christian Catholic can
deny to be sufficient, and as much as can in right and reason be desired at our
hands. And if we believe not every Letter, Messenger, or report, only
delivered us by such who are parties in this cause, and master actors in
erecting of this unpleasing and obtruded authority, do not blame us; for we
have reason not to believe them in all things, much less in matters of such
weight and so dangerous, whom by experience we have found difficient in many
things, and whom we know to intend further matters hereby, then are seen or
imagined of many. And yet in this, stand we but upon our own right, in not
yielding: because we expect but ordinary authentical proof of so
extraordinary jurisdiction, never denied in matters of far less moment and
weight then this.

Thirdly, consider what reason we have to yield unto this authority, not only
gotten by wrong and falce information and instance of the adverse part only
against our wills, without our knowledge; contrary to all equity and justice;
but also established in such sort by them, that the superior must needs
remain a punie, and inferior to them, and by that mean be an instrument to
execute what they shall think good or fit to be done; so that our superior
being subject unto them, consequently all we must be their apprentizies, and
stand at their command, which is to pervert all true order in Gods Church. For
oftentimes, and by the late general Council of Trident, it is decreed, that
the secular Clergy shall have power over the Religious, as to visit them,
reform and correct them, etc. as the Bishop does, but seldom or never has
the Religious Clergy any jurisdiction over the secular Clergy, to visit,
command, correct, or reform any Bishop in his See, or Pastor in his parish,
etc. For why? they have vowed obedience, and therefore should not seek for
command. And that these men have sought for superiority over us their poor
brethren, it is most evident by their several enterprises to that end made
amongst the prisoners of Wisbiche: and that now also they seek the same
again, and more generally by this new authority of the Archpriest, is no
less evident the^ the former, to them that will see any thing; else, why
should they so earnestly busy themselves in a thing no whit at all concerning
them, and much unpleasing to others, as to provide and place a Superior over
us, who pertain not to their charge, and that against our wills, and without
our knowledge or consent thereunto, not so much as demanding our opinions
thereof before hand. And when they have done that, by favors, persuasions,
and increasing of faculties, intyce and allure men to ratify by subscription,
what they cunningly have wrought vnderha^d; and to such as refuse to subscribe,
to threaten Excommunication, suspension, taking away of faculties, and denounce
them schismatikes, irregular, etc: and by Letters disgrace them in places where
they come, and give warning of them as of schismatikes, and Excommunicate
persons. And more, to show their intentions in this matter, what interest they
seek and challenge in this authority, though indeed nothing concerning them,
because a distinct society and body from us; one of them in a Letter he
wrote unto F. Garnet.
one that would not subscribe, confesses and acknowledges, that whatsoever is
opposite to the Reverend Archpriest, must of force, be consequently, opposite
and against them, which thing must of necessity import an extraordinary tie
between the authority of the Archpriest and them: either of the
subordination of them unto the Archpriest, which they disclaim from and deny,
or contrariwise of the Archpriest to them, else how must it of necessity
follow, that he which is opposite unto the Arch-priests authority, must of
force be opposite to them, as though a man might not resist the Superior of an
order, but he must needs thereby oppose himself against the whole body of an
other order? Furthermore, if their interest were not great in this authority,
why should they be so unwilling to procure, or suffer to be procured, some Bull
or Breue, for the confirmation thereof, that it might be an absolute and
independent authority? but that hanging at the will and order of the Lord
Cardinal Protector only, they bearing a great sway with him as we know they
do, may keep the Archpriest in awe, that he shall dare to do nothing that
may displease them, for fear they should inform against him to the Cardinal,
and so thrust him out of office: which they could not do, were his authority
confirmed once by any Apostolical writ: and this only is the cause they
love not to hear of Bull or Brieue in this authority, if otherwise they can
choose; for by this means the Archpriest standing in awe of them, we must
stand also at the reuersion of their courtesies in any matter of question or
controversy that may arise amongst us.

Fourthly consider, that by yielding unto this present authority erected and
directed by them, we shall be drawn within the compass and peril of all
plottes and actions whatsoever, in matters of state practiced by them, or any
of them, or hereafter shall be practiced at any time by them, and so not we
only, but also such with whom we shall converse, and those which shall
concur with us in this action, shall be brought into more danger of the
extremity and rigor of the laws, then otherwise we should, in that the
authority is already thought by the Counsel to be of purpose erected for the
better effecting of such designements; and so shall we, being brought within
the compass of other men's actions, be hanged for kingdoms and matters of
state, and the glory of our cause thereby diminished, if not clean
extinguished, to satisfy other men's pleasures and serve their turns. Besides
all this, by the opinions of diverse men of judgment in the laws of our Country,
this our case may and will be drawn within the compass of an old law
enacted, as well by our Catholic Bishops and Prelates, as by the Prince, above
300. years ago, vz. the law of Praemunire; because it is an external
jurisdiction brought into this realm, against the will and notice of the
Prince and Country, which made the late reverend Bishop of Lincoln, Doctor
Watson, to refuse all external jurisdiction offered him over his fellow
prisoners, although once he had lawful Episcopal jurisdiction within the
Realm, and was unlawfully deprived thereof.

Fitfthly consider we beseech you, for the satisfying of your consciences in
this most unjust and slanderous report made against us of schism, that there
can be no schism, where there is a resigned will of obedience. We protest and
vow all obedience due unto Gods Church, and all her lawful authority, and
therefore can be made no schismatikes possibly. If they urge against us that we
obey not this authority: let them show us that it is a lawful act of the
Church and we obey. If they tell us of Letters from the Cardinal, we answer
them, that no man is bound to believe the Cardinal himself without Bull or
Breue, in matters of so large consequence concerning the Church. What reason
then is there that his graces bare Letters, the contents whereof drew on so
general and extreme persecution upon our necks, should be allowed of by us, as
a sufficient proof of the delegation? If they say that the Cardinal is a
person of singular credit, and not to be distrusted, we answer them, that we
impeach not his credit, standing only upon our own right and justice for our
full satisfaction from his holiness, of his absolute will and pleasure herein,
whose least command shall ever bind us, though with hazard or loss of our
lives. To think that his holiness accounts us so base and abject a Clergy,
or so unworthy members of Gods church, that we deserve not his ordinary notice
in matters of so great moment, which is but a common process in matters of
far less weight proceeding from that See, were both in it self ridiculous,
and injurious also to his holiness. We could also urge, that his hol. as yet
has had no informatio^ at all from us, (our messengers being prevented of
audience, and clapped in close prison by Father Persons procurement) but only
from them, who are but one and the adverse part in this controversy, which you
know is against all right and equity; and in which case, being but a matter of
fact, his Holy. for want of due and sufficient information, may proceed with
error, to the prejudice of the innocent part, although unwillingly, and by him
not intended: in which case Appellations always are permitted for further
information in matters thus in question. Consider now sincerely dear
Catholics, these reasons propounded, and enter not too too rashly into
condemnation of us your spiritual Pastors, who have already in part, and are
still ready, to spend our blood for your sakes: but have patience with us a
little, until you see the end of these matters, and the judgments of his
Holiness herein, which we hope you shall shortly see, and perhaps in the
end, you shall find that we, whom by sinister informations and suggestions,
you are now ready altogether to condemn, have been, and are your greatest
friends in withstanding such proceedings, as happily may concern your selves as
near, if not more near, then us, although you perceive not, nor see so much.
And in the mean season, as we labor for your good, so pray you for us, and
the common good.

Farewell, from them that thirst your good.

Other reasons to the same purpose by another, under the form of a Letter.
Sir, your private occasions which you recommend to my care, I have so
tendered, that every thing is as forward as any diligence of mine can set it,
and in my last have explaned to the full, the course I took, which I trust is
comfortable to the directions you sent me, and will I hope have the success
that both you and I desire. The progress of the matter you shall understand as
occasion serves. In the end of your Letter, you make mention of a division
lately grown amongst us, who should be examples of love and union, and laments
the bitter fruits sprung thereof, as pernicious to many a Christian soul.
Whereof diverse friends of mine by name are charged to be some cause, for that
they were not ready at first to yield to the late authority of Master
Blackwell, nor as yet can be brought to acknowledge the same. Truly Sir, for
that you are my friend, and I thoroughly acquainted with the origin and
process of the difference, I thought it my part, for your better information,
and discharge of my blameless friends, briefly to set down what is done in
this matter, and upon what ground, and then to leave the censure of it to your
prudent consideration.

To build sure, I lay this foundation; that it is neither piety nor true
obedience, at the first sight to admit any authority but such as is orderly
procured, and lawfully promulgated, in such sort that subjects may remain
morally sure, that it proceeds from the true fountain of superiority truly
informed, which of it self is so manifest that it needs no proof; for the
contrary were to open the way to all forgeries and intrusions: and in fine, the
overthrow of all Canonical proceedings. Here hence follows; that which true
prudence and virtue do dictate: that when any new and extraordinary authority
is published, they whom it concerns; before that by acceptance they approve
it, should of duty look and examine whether it be accompanied with the
conditions above mentioned, and so admit or reject it, as discretion and
conscience shall require. To the purpose, in both these conditions of lawful
authority, this we speak of is feared to hault, and not without great
presumption. And for that to handle both at large would exceed the limits of a
Letter; and a defect in either, does sufficiently warrant their proceedings, I
will leave the first, (for that must needs touch particular persons and their
actions: which without further occasion and very just, I am loath to do) and
show briefly how the manner of promulgation is in no way sufficient, but rather
full of suspicion, and gives just occasion of distrust.

And first the credit of this promulgation, does wholly hang upon their
credits, who takes authority upon them, who for that they are parties in this
action, may justly be suspected as partial in their own cause, which cannot
choose but leave the matter doubtful in any indifferent mind: or such at least
as no man is in conscience bound to believe. Again, put case they were
lawfulll promulgators, yet they bring nothing sufficient to ordain such
authority or jurisdiction: to erect such an authority, cannot be less then
an express commaundent of his Holiness: and given for this particular
purpose. And the same also authentically notified of al which the adverse part
shows nothing, for neither do they challenge any such express decree from
his Holiness: but only order given to the Cardinal Protector, to take up our
controversies and iarres here, which is nothing to build such an extraordinary
superiority upon: or if they did, we are not to give full credit to the
Cardinal his bare word, in a matter of so great weight: seeing that in such
business he has heretofore been found overmuch affected to the one part, who
have their finger and hand in these affairs, and for this reason has been
excepted against as unfit to judge in such causes, that so near concern those
parties as these things do, therefore these men demand but right, if they
require an authentical instrument from his holiness to specify his will
herein, and in the mean while determine nothing, but rest ready to embrace
whatsoever his holiness shall appoint.

Furthermore, there are now 8. or 9. months past, since first the authority
was diuulged, and sithence the lawfulnes thereof, for the reasons above
mentioned and diverse others was doubted of, as not proceeding from his holiness:
yet the maintainers notwithstanding the hot, eager, and earnest course that
they take in defense of it, would never obtain the least ticket, or testimony
under his holiness hand, or directly from him, in confirmation of it: nor yet
to notefie that ever any such matter was appointed by him; knowing that such a
note would have ended the whole controversy. And this makes men in their
minds to question with themselves in this sort: do not these men by ordinary
course, monthly or oftener receive Letters from Rome? has not Cardinal
Caietan weekly, yea daily access to his holiness as other Cardinals have?
do they want favor with him who is wholly theirs; or his forwardnes to
further that himself has either begun or followed; and for the credit
whereof, he has granted what Letters themselves would request, and as
effectual as themselves could draw them? or would his holiness refuse to
testify that he is the appointer of this authority if it had proceeded from
him? No, no, there is cunning some where, which when matters are discovered
will quickly appear. And this is confirmed with another presumption of no
less moment then the former. For when these friends of mine by uniform
consent of many of their own brethren, wise and learned, and the auncientest,
had resolved peaceably and quietly to send over to know the Popes pleasure in
this matter, they sent to the contrary part, to entreat the^ to have so much
patience as to expect what answer these messengers did receive from his
holiness: and if matters proved to be so as they said they were, then without
further resistance, every body was ready to join with them, and to resist
whosoever should resist them: and so the whole matter might have been very
briefly and quietly ended between themselves in love and charity, without
scandal or hurt to any.

But this so reasonable a request could not be heard, but as if they had feared
some present danger now after sending, they posted about more earnestly then
ever before, send abroad papers, threaten excommunications, promise favors,
abuse the laity with infamous reports of their brethren, sending into all
quarters of the country to beg hands and subscriptions: and where any for
what just cause soever did refuse, their means open or secret were devised to
supplant and disgrace them, and accusations forged to withdraw their lay
friends, and consequently their maintenance from them. Which must needs
constrain the wronged to defend and clear themselves even with the same
lay-friends; and so the matter grew to a contention, and became publicly
known among the Laity, that women and children do tattle and descant every
where, and pass their censure thereof. And what follows of this, every body
may see, and it is too lamentable to speak or write, what hurt our cause has
sustained hereby.

But what good I pray you did these men pretend by so hurtful a course? Was
the Pope so desirous of thanks that it must be procured with such broils? I
cannot think it. Certes it makes men justly to mistrust, that there is a
further matter intended then in show they pretend: and that these hands and
subscriptions by such means and so carefully procured to be sent over in such
haste, must serve to salve and heal somewhat that is not sound there: happily
to draw the Pope to consent to that which perchance he never heard or allowed
of, and so hereby constrain men to put too their hands, saying it is his
holiness will they should do so, and there persuade the Pope to allow of it,
for that it is the Priests voluntary request and suit here. By which means no
doubt but that they may easily procure the Popes confirmation; who is and has
been ready to refer the choosing of the superior to the Priests of England,
as Father Persons himself can witness: which was the cause that at the
beginning when such a matter was proposed to his holiness: he would not
proceed in it without they agreed and consented also, as there is great reason
for him. For whose advise, consent, and allowance, are required to the choosing
of a superior, if not theirs that are to obey and live under the said
superior, when he is chosen? do not the fellows in every house in Oxenford
(and according to the statutes and foundation) choose and elect their head and
Rector? Do not likewise all the religious companies choose their superior? Nay
do not the Did. 63. cap. 12. and Did. 61. cap. 13.
Canons of holy Churh decree that Priests should have the election of their
Bishop? and this late authority is for the amplenesse, in punishing more then
Bishoplike. Yea the Canons allow further, that the Clergy may, and should (if
they find themselves wronged by having a Bishop put on them against their
consent and liking) resist and withstand the intrusion or injury; And not only
Popes have decreed that their Clergy should choose their Bishops, but
Emperors have constituted the same: as appears by the ordinary gloss upon
63. Distinction, cap. 34. All which, makes our friends refusal much more
justifiable.

And last of all, M. Blackwell himself reported, that he had authority to
excommunicate and command to the Court of Rome; which now belike, upon better
scanning of his authority, he goes from. Again showing his instruction,
said, that they were made at Rome, and by the Contents being convinced that
they were made in England, could not deny it; which sure cannot choose but make
men more doubtful of what he affirms in his own affairs. Now good Sir,
these reasons well weighed, cannot but leave any indifferent mind doubtful
whether this proceed from supreme authority or not; which doubt, cannot more
quietly, clearly, and orderly be resolved, then by sending men of conscience
and judgment, to know his holiness will, if he have not decreed and appointed
it, to let him understand the abuse, and take order for the reforming of it. If
he have, then to signify wherein perchance he might be misinformed, that
thereby he may the better redress what is amiss; or if after due information,
his wisdom shall think the course taken, to be for the benefit of our cause
and country, then they carry a mind prostrate both How then could their delay
be schism, they being alike ready to obey.
for themselves, and in the name of the rest that joined with them in this
action, to accept and obey whatsoever the Apostolical sea shall herein decree.
This course I know not what reason any man may have to condemn, as either
rash, or uncharitable, much less why these men should be termed for their just
proceeding, factious, seditious, schismatic, or the like. Hereby also you
may perceive, where the root and true cause of the scandalous reports which
daily come to your ears does remain; notwithstanding the liberty of speech,
clamours, and unjust exclamations of some who would have it to be elsewhere. I
pray God that these men do build upon God almighty, and not upon their own
wits and devises. Here I say nothing of the just exceptions that many make
against the manner of procuring this authority, which are neither few, nor
yet of small moment, but these will be delivered in an other place by them that
shall inform his holiness: and if occasion shall require, and we be pressed
thereunto, you shall understand them in an other Letter. In the mean while,
take and peruse this with indifferency, and judge as reason and conscience
shall dictate.

Fareyewell.
Master Champneyes Letter of the same argument, to a Reverend friend of his.
VEry Reverend Sir, As from my very cradle I acknowledge my self many ways
beholding unto you, for your manifold courtesies, both toward me and other of
my dearest friends; so have I had always a special desire, to yield such
correspondence in my demeanor, as I might neither give you, nor any other of
my friends, just occasion to withdraw from me their friendly affection.
Nevertheless I gather by some speeches that passed not long since, between
you and a friend of yours and mine, that you have conceived a worse opinion of
me, then wittingly I have deserved, or willingly would deserve. The sinister
reports of some, whose endeavors are different from their profession, having
caused in you, not only a surmise, but as it seems, a strong and firm
opinion, that I am disobedient to the Sea Apostolic, and enemy to the Fathers
of the society, and a contemner of the late authority of our Archpriest.
These be the crimes wherewith I suppose, both my self and diverse others are
taxed, (or truer) most injuriously slaundered. Being therefore very unwilling
to permit you to remain in that opinion grounded upon mere fictions and
falsities, I determined to make mine Apology with you, and to yield you reason
for all my proceedings in these matters: which being weighed in the equal
balance of your indifferent judgment, I nothing doubt but it will yield you
full satisfaction, and give you some light to see how you have hitherto been
abused by false informers. I know it to be a difficult thing so to take away
and remove, out of a mature mind, a conceit, which has long without
contradiction possessed it, so to take it away I say, as there remain no
scruple nor doubt thereof. Yet when I do consider on the one side, your grave
and sincere judgment, void (as I verily think) of all partiality: and on the
other side, the clearenesse and manifest truth of the matter I am to speak of;
I cannot almost doubt but so to satisfy these objected crimes, as that you
will easily see, both my self and others, to have suffered mighty wrong by
the raisers thereof.

Let me therefore good sir, crave only this of you, that you will not measure
that which I shall say, according to the prejudicial opinion which you have
already framed of my person; for so shall you easily prejudice the equity of
my Plea: but let your judgment proceed of the thing it self, without respect
either to my person or any other, and so being void of affection, shall it be
more free from error. If I say any thing that may lean upon human creditte
as matters of narration or fact, I desire to be believed no further, then I
can manifestly prove. If I utter matters of opinion or judgment, as arguments,
or reasons for any fact, I desire no more, then that they be measured according
to the weight and truth they do contain. This is so indifferent a demand,
that if I should doubt the granting thereof, I should in mine opinion, offer
you no small wrong. I will therefore Sir, deteine you no longer with
unprofitable circuits of words, but I will come to the matter: and whatsoever
I shall say in mine own behalf in this affair, you may understand it of
others that be of the same opinion with me therein.

The former accusations, to weete, that I am disobedient to the sea
Apostolic, an adversary to the Fathers, and an impugner of our Arch-priests
authority, are all grounded upon one and the selfsame foundation; which I
think, I shall easily show to be both frivolous and false, and consequently
overthrow whatsoever is built thereupon: howsoever some men do labor to
fortify the same, not by the probability of any reason, or equal debating
the matter, but by confidence, or rather impudent infaming of such as labor to
defend the truth.

All these accusations therefore are forged upon this one principle, because
forsoothe I did not acknowledge M. Blackwells authority upon the receipt only
of Cardinal Caietaines Letters: wherein he affirmed that the Pope had given
unto him, authority to appoint a government over the Seminary Priests in
England. For this cause I am said to resist the Popes authority: and because
the Jesuits were the procurers of this delegation, therefore am I counted their
adversary, because I did not accept of the thing and means to establish it,
which they thought good of: And lastly, because I did not acknowledge M.
Blackwell for my Ecclesiastical superior, upon the forementioned testimony,
I am said to be an impugner of his authority.

Lo Sir, here is the whole ground of all the former accusations, neither do I
think they lay any thing else to my charge: If they do, when I may know it,
I will either satisfy their objections, or acknowledge my fault and error. In
the mean while, I would to God that they who do accuse me of these or
whatsoever crimes, would stand to the arbitrament of any indifferent Judge:
such a Judge I mean as has interest neither in them, nor in me: that his
sentence might be void of all partiality; most willingly would I bind my
self to the judgment of such a one, and if I were convicted, I would make
such satisfaction, as the same Judge should prescribe. But I know it is not the
guise of mine adversaries to admit any such trial; for unless they may be
accusers, informers, and Judges too, they will stand to no arbitrament.
Wherefore to omit this indifferent demand, because I am in despair to obtain
the grant thereof, I will by showing mine own innocence, make plain what
open injury and apparent wrong is offered me.

The first accusation whereupon the other do depend, and therefore that
answered, the other must needs also be satisfied, has so small proof or
probability in it, as I cannot but wonder how any man of indifferent
judgment, understanding the state of the matter, should be induced to conform
his opinion thereunto. For to disobey, is to resist, contemn, or impugn the
known command of a superior. To be a schismatique, is wilfully to divide
himself from the unity of the head as head; or from the members of the body,
as subordinate to the head of gods Church. These propositions are of themselves
evident: but if any doubt of them, let him look. S. Thomas touching the first.
22. q. 104. ar. 1. and q. 105. per to^tum. Touching the second, 22. q. 39. ar.
1. and Caietane, ibidem. These principles being admitted, I marvel that any
scholar, though but meanly learned, should persuade himself, that I did
either disobey the Popes holiness, or incur any schismatic rebellion, by
not admitting M. Blackwells authority, upon the only testimony of Cardinal
Caietanes Letters. But I perceive there is no paradox so improbable, that will
not find some approuers. I say therefore, that his holiness will, was not
sufficiently notified by those Letters, to make the refusal of the ordinances
contained therein, either disobedience or schism, which I prove by manifold
examples. Put the case therefore, that some one of our Nobility here in
England, should address his Letters into Ireland, or some place of England
furthest distant from the Princes abode, in which Letters he should signify,
that he had received authority from her Majesty, to ordain and establish in
that Country, what government he thinks best, and together, specifieth such a
government, as was never heard of in that Country, or any other, and this
without any other testimony or proof of his authority, besides his own Letters.

This case being thus put most like unto ours (saving only that some
circumstances are omitted for breuities sake, that make more for our advantage)
I would demand of these that accuse me and my brethren of schism, what these
subjects ought to do in this case. If they say that they ought to obey the
Noble man's writ, and to admit such a Magistrate as he does appoint them, how
discommodious soever it seems to their Common wealth, and how disagreeing
soever it be from the form of government of their known Prince: they will
bind them to so many and imminent inco^ueniences, that in truth I think they
will not avouch such an improbability. For first this would be to enforce them
to incur evident danger of rebellion toward their known Prince, by
admitting an usurper: for it may be, notwithstanding his own word, that he
has no such authority: yea though the Prince should truly give unto him that
authority, yet the subjects having no other notice of it but only his own
Letters and testimony, they should be so far from rebelling against their
Prince by deferring to admit his ordinances, till they had more perfect
intelligence of their Princes will; that they should be accounted both prudent
and loyal for so doing: and for the contrary, they should worthily be
condemned of foolish leuitie, if not of open conspiracy.

For if they should be called to account, and be demanded by whose
authority or commandment they changed their government, will any man think
it should be a sufficient warrant, to say by such a Lords Letters, specifying
no other testimony of his authority, but his own? I cannot think that any
would believe that answer sufficient to excuse them, at least from suspicion
of disloyalty, seeing in this case, they should be no more excuseable, though
he had true authority, then if he had none at all.

An other inconvenience which these subjects should infallibly run into is,
that hereby they should open the way to every ambitious or seditious person to
challenge the same privilege, to have his own testimony admitted, whenever
he should say, he has authority from the Prince, to ordain what he list.
Which who sees not what a heap of inconveniences it brings with it; and
these not following chance or accident; but out of the very nature of the thing
it self, supposing the corruption of human frailty, which no man can take
away: which mischiefs also do necessarily follow upon the admission of such a
pretended authority for the time only, until better certainty may be
procured, either for the establishing or rejecting of the same.

But if they say, that these subjects ought to reject this obtruded and
uncertain authority, as a thing void of all lawful and customary proceeding
in such affairs, and not without great probability of fraud and evident
suspicion of surreption, they shall speak more co^formably to reason, common
sense, and practice, both in civil and ecclesiastical government. But if they
will avoid both these extremes (whereof the latter without all comparison is
more secure, and doubtless of it self most lawful) and say that these
subjects ought at least not absolutely to deny the admitting of his authority,
but to delaie till more perfect notice be given. If, I say, they affirm this,
we will yield it unto them; yea, and that the said subjects, which is much
more, are bound of their own cost and labors, to seek the further knowledge
of their Princes will: and then I demand of them what of all this, I and my
brethren have offended, whereby we should deserve the note of schismatiques,
rebels, seditious persons, or the like Epithetons, which they most prodigally
bestow upon us. But if they can neither prove nor yet show any disparitie in
the case, which of it self seems to be too too clear, I cannot tell how
they will avoid the foul note of slaunderers and detractours, who have by
word and writing, in England, Flaunders, Italy; and where else they come,
accused us of schism, rebellion, sedition, and the like.

Two disparities, peradventure, they will allege in the case: First, that I
put the case in civil government, whereas it ought to be in Ecclesiastical.
The second, that I put the case in one that is not known to have any ordinary
authority in these affairs, whereas it is contrary in our case, the Cardinal
being Protector of our Nation. But both these are very seely shifts, not
worthy of any answer. For first the inconveniences that do follow in the case
before proposed, do follow by so much more evidently in Ecclesiastical
government, by how much more large the precincts of the Popes jurisdiction
are, and further from the place of his abode, the^ the government of any one
temporal Prince, and by how much less sensible ordinarily, and more spiritual
Ecclesiastical punishment is, then is the temporal, for such usurpers. The
second is as frivolous; for albeit Cardinal Caietaine was our Protector, and
also Chamberlain of the Church of Rome, yet is it evident, that by neither of
these offices, he had any ordinary Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over our
Clergy, especially to erect any new government: and therefore if he had any
authority in this matter, it must needs be deligate and extraordinary: and
consequently, was as well to notify unto us the same, by some sufficient
testimony besides his own word, as the Chancellor of England is to show
his warrant, if he intend to take upon him the office of the high Martial, or
any other not perteining to the Chauncellourship.

But they will further object, that to deny or doubt of that which the Cardinal
affirms, is to call his credit into question, whose authority ought to be
sufficient testimony for whatsoever he says: this is their maine objection,
and as it were their Achilles, whereby they would prove us all scismatiques.
But first this argument concludes not. For suppose that we did offend in not
admitting nor believing his testimony for the instituting of this new
authority, yet it follows not that we should therefore be schismatiques, but
at the most, that we sinned against human credit, which cannot be schism, as
by it self is very evident. But that we neither offend in this manner, it
shall appear by the two last answers to this objection; and that we committed
not any act of disobedience, by denying to obey the Cardinals ordinances, it
is very clear: for it is a far different thing for any one to deny
obedience to him whom he knows or believes to be his superior, and to deny
it to him whom he probably thinks is not his superior, especially if he do
it therefore only, because he thinks him not to be his superior; of which
two, only the first is properly disobedience: the second is neither
disobedience nor any other sin, if it proceed of an opinion as probable, or
more probable then the contrary, much less when it proceeds of certain
truth as in our case.

Secondly I say, that they must also answer this objection, if they admit the
case put before: for if we were bound to obey Cardinal Caietaines ordinances
upon his own Letters only, then should the subjects before mentioned, be
bound to do the same in that case, and so should follow all the inconveniences
mentioned.

Thirdly I say, that it is not any offense to deny that unto any one, that is
not due unto him; but it cannot be due unto any man though in never so great
honor, to have his own testimony admitted for the acknowledging of that
authority which he has not of himself but from an other, for otherwise every
one in honor might challenge the same, and so bring confusion in all
governments.

Fourthly I say, that the authority whereby an act of public office is
practiced in any Commonwealth, either civil or Ecclesiastical, requires a
formal or iuridicall proof, to make it authentical. Which kind of proof or
testimony, is not required in any other human action; for we see that the
testimony of an ordinary person may be sufficient for the Judge, with help
of other strong conjectures, to pronounce a party guilty or vnguiltie: and
yet the Judge himself must show other warrant for his authority then his
own word, or else his sentence cannot bind, through default of the
uncertainty of his jurisdiction, though he be otherwise of never so great
honor: neither is this any disparagement to his credit, the nature and state
of the thing requiring it. The like is in all other actions of public
authority, as it is manifest by all experience. For albeit, to convince a man
of treason or fellonie, is a greater matter in it self, then it is for one to
prove that he has the authority of a Judge, or of any other public
officer, yet the testimony of private persons, though otherwise of small
estimation, serves for that, and the Princes seal only suffices for the
other. Which is not to be imputed to the credit of the parties testifying, but
to the condition of the thing testified; for which cause it is very absurd, to
say that the testimony of any man though of never so great honor, is
sufficient in his own cause to make proof of the authority he claims,
without concurrance of any other testimony; for it is but his own word,
albeit his word would be abundantly sufficient for the proof of any other
human matter, as one witness. For seeing that no man of himself, I mean of
his own person, has any jurisdiction over an other: if any man challenge it,
he must either show how he has it, or else the other is not bound to believe
him. As for example, Peter is no more bound to believe, that John is his
superior, then John is to believe, that Peter is his; unless the one can show
it by some sufficient proof besides his own testimony, for in that they are
not much different, although they differ in wealth or honor: which things
authority, does not consequently follow. And to conclude this point, I say,
if the Cardinal had given his word or Letters in testimony of any truth, not
involuing the use of authority, his testimony would have been admitted
without all exception; whereby it appears evidently, that it was not want of
due credit that hindered the admitting of his testimony in our business, but
because the nature of the thing it self required other proof: neither can our
adversaries be ignorant of this, but that they are disposed to contend without
matter: for those that will not deny the Sun to be up at noone day, cannot
deny or doubt of this.

And thus reverend Sir, you see, that containing our speech within the compass
that the very state and condition of the thing requires, how far affection
has led them beyond all sense and reason, that have condemned their
brethren of horrible schism, where there is not so much, as any little show or
probability thereof; though we do consider the matter in all rigor,
abstracting from all circumstances, which being very many and evident for our
advantage, make the thing more plain and clear. As first, that this
authority did bear evident suspicion (I might say evident proof) of manifest
surreption. Secondly, it was procured contrary to the Canons Did. 63. s^
plebibus.
of holy Church, which prescribe that Priests should have the election of their
Archpriest. Thirdly, it is against the very light of natural reason, that a
man who is of a distinct government or body, should be the chief: yea, the
only elector and appoynter of the head and governor of an other body without
the consent thereof. As for a Benedictine Monk, to elect or appoint (for
example) the head and general of the Fathers of the society, and to thrust
him upon them against their wills and consents. Who ever heard of such an
absurdity? Which in our case is by so much more apparent, by how many more bad
circumstances concur. Fourthly, the thing it self carries evident
remonstrance of an intolerable burden without any commodity at all, and not
without manifest suspicion of a plain plot or stratageme, to confound and take
away all Ecclesiastical Hierarchy and ancient approved government in our
Church.

These reasons, whereunto I might add many more, if they be not so apparent to
you, being thus wrapped up as it were in a bundle, I shall if you give me
occasion unfold them, and make them as clear as the noonday. Which if they
be but indifferently pondered, will not only clear us from all schism and
sin, but also convince our accusers of manifest badde dealing: who without
all show of reason or just cause, began the quarrel, to the open scandal of
the world; and yet do labor tooth and nail to cast the slander and ignomie
thereof upon such as were only defendants, and endeavored to deliver
themselves from manifest injury.

Notwithstanding these reasons, and many more which we had, not only to
defer, but also utterly to reject this disorderly procured government: you
shall now hear how peaceably and orderly we proceeded in the matter; and
contrariwise, how turbulently, and without all show of equity, our
adversaries dealt with us. Which because it requires only a narration of
these things that have actually passed between us; I shall not need to
allege any reason by way of argument to convince that which I shall say, but
only if any thing be denied, to call the world for a witness of the truth.
Nevertheless I do not intend to rippe up the matter from the beginning, for so
I should weary you with too long a speech: but omitting the manner of proceeding
used in the first procuring of this late ordained government, which was very
exorbitant, and altogether dissonant to reason, and the accustomed practice of
Gods Church in such affairs. I will begin with the first receiving of
Cardinal Caietaines Letters, whereby we had first notice of this authority,
and so chiefly relate some chief occurrents that have actually happened among
us since that time, whereby you shall easily see, whether we have offered or
suffered wrong.

Upon the first receipt therefore of the Protectors Letters, after due
consideration of the tenor thereof, because they contained an ordinance
unheard of before in the Church of God, and that without any authority from
his holiness, contrary to the continual custom and practice of that See.
Whereupon grew many doubts whether that proceeded from his holiness command
or no; but that which most of all moved, was because there appeared no
probability that it proceeded from him truly informed of the state and
condition of our Country and Clergy; neither the thing it self, nor the
manner of procuring it, yielding any probability of such information: whereupon
we thought it altogether repugnant to Ecclesiastical discipline and
government, to admit any such ordinances entangled with so many doubts. For
which cause, we determined before we did admit this institution, to procure
more certain knowledge and notice of his holiness his will and pleasure in
this matter, with most firm and constant resolution and purpose, to admit
whatsoever we should certainly know to be his will, the state of our Country
first understood. For this cause we sent to Rome two reverend Priests,
earnestly requesting M. Blackwell and the Fathers, the procurers of this
authority, to be quiet in the mean while until the return of our
messengers, or some other sufficient certitude came from Rome, that he was
constituted our superior: without full notice whereof, it was not possible to
take away all doubts and scruples, which would be the occasions of great
contentions and strifes. But they utterly refused to admit the offer, saying,
that it was disobedience and rebellion to the Sea Apostolic, to seek any
further certificate of the matter. Because (as the thing it self bears For
this case ^^e Bullam ^^aenae Excom. ^0. and 11. and Nauar. ^^idem.
evident show) they suspected their own inordinate proceedings, and thought
that if his holiness should be truly informed, he would reuerse this order,
and so frustrate all their devised plot. For which cause they proclaimed us
here in England Schismatickes at the least, and prevented with their Letters,
the coming of the two Priests to Rome: where at their arrival, they were
taken by father Parsons the Architect of all these troubles, spoiled of their
Letters and writings, cast into close prison, separate one from the other, and
all to hinder their access to his holiness. And after a whole winters
imprisonment, they were sent from Rome, separate likewise, and confined into
two several places, France and Loraine, without any allowance for their
maintenance, where they should remain in banishment, to the end they might not
returning into England, report how religiously Father Parsons had entertained
them. Who could have showed more unequal dealing in any proceeding? At last,
Father Parsons having stopped all other informations from the Popes holiness
but his own, procured his holiness Breue for the confirmation of this
authority; which being received, every one admitted M. Blackwell for his
superior, and obeyed. Who then is so void of reason, yea of commo^sence, as to
say that we are Schismatikes, rebels, or disobedient to the Sea Apostolic?
who least we should do any thing against the ordinances thereof, made all
possible means to know the will and disposition of his holiness, with full
purpose and protestation after due knowledge; to admit, embrace, obey, and
observe it, yea and defacto, did embrace it? And who would not rather condemn
them of worse then bad dealing, who left no means untried to hinder us from
the due knowledge of his will? Who unless they intended to cross the
accustomed proceedings of Gods Church approved by all antiquity, and
established by all holy authority of the Pastors and governors of the same,
would never have condemned us of schism and rebellion against Gods Church, for
appealing to the Sea Apostolic, and seeking to know the will of the Pastors
thereof in a matter of such moment, and so evidently belonging to his authority
to determine. But this improbable and senseless Paradoxe, they have raised to
cloak their manifold injuries and wrongs practiced against us their innocent
brethren, which if ever it be laid open to the view of the world, as
peradventure it may be, I think they will not pass without great admiration.

Good Sir, here I might make an end, and think this sufficient to discover
the falsitie of such grounds, as have been and are still with some, the
foundations of such slanderous reports and opinions of detestable schism
unjustly raised, and unconscionably maintained against me and others of my
brethren: and that it might also suffice for our defense against such untrue
and unchristian detractions, yet seeing I have begun, I will go a little
further in declaring our innocence in this matter.

Our Arch-priests authority being now of every one admitted upon the receipt of
his holiness Breue, and thereby all argument or show of schism,
disobedience, or rebellion, quite taken away (howsoever before matter was
fained to uphold so incredible a fable) every one of us for peace and concords
sake, ready to remit the injuries done unto us by public slander of schism,
published to the world in written pamphlets: and our Archpriest writing his
Letters, willing, and by his authority commanding, that no more speech should
be made of matters past, but that every one should compose himself to peace
and unity with his brethren; the Fathers (who are not subject to his
authority, albeit they were the procurers thereof, for they love to impose
great burdens upon other men's shoulders, which they themselves will not touch
with one finger) perceiving belike, that by this peaceable composition, there
was like to ensue a continual agreement amongst the secular Priests, which
they feared would be the baine of all their designements, they quickly devised
a way to break this unity. For it is a principle with those that seek
dominion, to keep division always among such as they intend to bring under
their regiment. To this purpose they renewed, as it should seem, the slander
of schism, in more intolerable manner then before: for now they said, that we
were not only schismatikes, but that whosoever should dogmatizando, say the
contrary, should incur the censures of holy church. And M. Blackwell
himself, notwithstanding his former prohibition (by their suggestion, as it is
more then probable) writ, that they had received a resolution from the mother
City, that we were schismatikes, and that in his opinion, we were not to be
admitted to the Sacraments, without satisfaction done for the same. Will any
man now say, that these men desire and seek the peace and tranquillity of our
afflicted Chuch? Can any one be so shameless as to avowe it? No, no. When
therefore we perceived our late composed peace, contrary to all expectation to
be thus quickly broken, and that our good names began to bleed afresh, the old
gauls being not yet firmly cured: we requested of our Archpriest that we
might have a parley or conference upon the matters in controversy, with these
conditions.

First, that M. Garnet, M. Lister, and whom, and how many soever of the
society they should think good to choose unto them, to be reasoners,
debators, or disputers, on the one side, and of the other, three such Priests
of our company, as we should nominate.

Secondly, that the grounds, reasons, arguments, answers, and reioynders, on
both sides, after full discussion and agreement, should be set down in writing.

Thirdly, that the Vmperes or Arbitrators, to hear or determine of the weight,
truth, and coherence of all that should be said or alleged by either side,
should be 2. or 3. of the seniour Assistants, and M. Doleman, and that it
should be in the choice of our Archpriest, to admit such of the Laity to be
hearers of the dispute, as to his wisdom for the quality of the conference,
should seem meet.

Fourthly, that each of the Arbitrators, should faithfully promise in the word
of a Priest, to proceed to the giving of sentence upon the proof or disproofe
of either side, according to the dictamen of their conscience, and inward
persuasion, without delay, color, mittigation, or partiality.

Fifthly, that if the said Arbitrators, should judge that our case was schism,
and our selves schismatikes, then we most humbly should ask pardon on our
knees of our Archpriest and the society, for hitherto defending the contrary
against the verity of their affirmances. If of the other side, they should
censure or deem that we were no schismatikes; then the society, especially
the penner and the approuers of the Pamphlet of schism, should acknowledge
their error, reuerse the tract, and make us some ratable satisfaction to the
heap of injuries and infamies sustained.

Sixthly, that it should be lawful without offense or prohibition, for either
side after sentence given and fulfilling of the premises, to seek, if it
should so please, a resolution in the difference, from the Universities beyond
the seas, upon show and evidence of the said dispute, grounds, reasons,
proofs, and arguments subscribed, with the hands of the Vmperes and disputants
of both sides, to the end it might manifestly appear to be the same, and no
place left to the other side to suspect any indirect dealing, either by adding,
changing, or subtracting ought, too or from the original; and that none of the
foresaid Arbitrators or disputants, refuse or defer to put too his name,
being requested thereunto.

Could you, good sir, devise more equal conditions then these? Or if these men
did not intend to maintain continual brawles and strifes, would they not have
admitted them? there being no more indifferent means to end all controversies.
Notwithstanding, this so reasonable and indifferent an offer; they termed it a
tumultuous or rebellious demand, and commanded that none under pain of
suspension, should either by word or writing, defend himself from being a
schismaticke, whereby we were debarred from defending our own good name unjustly
taken away.

Finding therefore our selves in these miseries, that we must either loose our
good names, or by aduenturing to defend them, incur some high displeasure, we
set down the state of the controversy, and sent it to the Doctors of the
famous University of Paris, requesting their opinion and censure thereupon.
For although we knew our selves altogether clear from all contagion of
schism, yet because we would not be our own Judges, least peradventure we
might be suspected of partiality in our own cause, we sent to have their
opinions, who are free from suspicion of all partiality. The Doctors returned
us answer as follows.

Anno Domini, Millesimo sexcentessimo, die 3. Maij, propositum fuit facultati
Theologiae Parisiensi, quod literis cuiusdam Illmi: Cardinalis, quidam superior
Ecclesiasticus in regno quodam constitutus est, cum titulo and dignitate
Archipresbyteri, vt haberet authoritate^ and iurisdictionem super omnes alios
Presbyteros in eodem regno commorantes. Cardinalis etiam in illis suis literis
declarauit, se id fecisse iuxta voluntatem and beneplacitum summi Pontificis.

Multi autem ex illis Presbiteris recusarunt subsignare authoritati eiusdem
Archipresbyteri priusquam ipse obtinuisset Literas Apostolicas confirmationis
suae tenorem continentes, tum quia nouum omnino erat, and in Ecclesia Catholica
hactenus inauditum, illud genus regiminis, vt Archipresbyter vniuerso regno
preesset, and talem iurisdictionem haberet in singulos eius regni sacerdotes,
tum etiam quia ex quibusdam verbis illarum literarum Illmi: Cardinalis, visi
sunt sibi videre, talem Archipresbyterum and authoritate^ eius, ex falsa
informatione, a summo Pontifice fuisse concessam: tum denique quia in electione
illius Archipresbyteri, and consiliariorum eius, magnam aduerterunt extitisse
personarum acceptionem. Propter quas and alias non nullas rations, Sacerdotes
illi miserunt ad summum Pontificem nuncios, qui has suas difficultates ei
apperirent, vnaque significarent se paratissimos esse in toto hoc negotio,
alijsque omnibus, suae sanctitati semper obedire.

Archipresbyter vero, and qui ab eius part stant, alios sacerdotes schismatis
accusant, quod literis Cardinalis, quas etiam ex summi Pontificis voluntate
exaratas dicit, parere detrectauerint.

Question igitur est, an illi Sacerdotes sint schismatici? Et si non sint, an
grauiter saltem peccauerint?

Viri principes facultatis Theologiae Parisiensis, selecti a tota facultate,
congregati in domo maioris Apparitoris sui, anno and die suprascripto, re
mature considerata; ita censuerunt.

Primo, illos Sacerdotes quidistuleru^t obedire ob dictas causas; non esse
schismaticos.

Secundo censuerunt illos, eo facto in se spectato, non peccasse prorsus.

De mandato dominorum Decani, and Magistrorum nostrorum, deputatorum and
selectorum sacratissime facultatis Theologiae Parisiensis. DELACOVRT.

The English.
In the year of our Lord, 1600. upon the third day of May, it was proposed to
the faculty of the Divines of the University of Paris, that by the Letters of
a most Illustrious Cardinal, an Ecclesiastical Superior was constituted in a
certain Kingdom, with the title and dignity of an Archpriest, to have
authority and jurisdiction over all other Priests residing in that Kingdom.
This Cardinal did also declare in those his Letters, that he did it according
to the will and good liking of the Pope. Notwithstanding many of these Priests
refused to subscribe to the authority of the said Archpriest, before he had
obtained Letters from the Sea Apostolic containing the tenor of his
confirmation, as well because that kind of government was altogether new in
Gods Church, and hitherto never heard of, that an Archpriest should have
charge of a whole kingdom, and such jurisdiction over every Priest in that
Realm: then also for that it seemed to them by certain words of the Cardinals
Letters, that the Archpriest and his authority was granted by false
information; then lastly because they noted great partiality in the choice of
the Archpriest and of his counselors. Upon which and some other reasons,
these Priests sent Messengers to the Pope, for laying open unto him these their
difficulties, and therewithal to signify their greatest readiness, as in
this matter, so evermore in all other, to obey his holiness.

The Archpriest and those who are of his side, accuse the other Priests of
schism, in that they deferred to obey the Cardinals Letters, which moreover
he said were written according to his holiness mind and pleasure.

The question then is, whether these Priests be Schismatickes, and if not,
whether they did commit at the least some grievous sin? The head and chief
men of the faculty of divinity in Paris, chosen out of the whole company,
assembled together in the house of the Senior Beedle, in the year and day
above written, after full and maturest consideration had of the matter, gave
this censure.

First, that those Priests who upon the above named causes deferred to obey,
were no schismatickes.

Secondly, that they committed no sin at all in that fact in it self
considered.

By commandment of our Deane and Masters, deputed and selected by the whole
faculty of Divinity in Paris. DELACOVRT.

This we showed to our Archpriest, who, that he might leave no way unattempted
to injury us, prohibited all Priests under pain of suspension from the Altar,
and loss of all their faculties, and Laie-men, under pain of being
interdicted ipsefacto, to defend directly, or indirectly, the censure and
opinion of the Doctors of Paris, whether it were given by true information or
otherwise: which was not only an intolerable injury unto us, prohibiting
against the law of nature from defending our good names, but also an absurd
indignity against so famous an University. I do not know how any man could
have used more unequal dealing. If our matter had been sufficiently heard, and
we condemned of a competent Judge, these proceedings might have some show of
Justice: but to proceed in this sort with innocent men, for moderately
defending their good names unjustly taken from them, they being altogether
unheard in the matter whereof they are accused: I think the like was never heard
of amongst Christians, and much less among Priests and Religious men.

By these and the like violent dealings, both in these matters and others,
whereof, beside my self, diverse have tasted abundantly; they have given too too
pregnant proofs of their further designements, if so that they can effect
their purpose. For if notwithstanding the manifold troubles of these times,
they have attempted and put in practice such violent couries, trusting to their
own power, and not to any equille: what will they not attempt, or what may we
not expect, if future times and other opportunities be answerable to their
desires? Which desires, if they be to Gods greater glory, and more to the good
of his Church, with my whole heart I wish they may take effect, and that they
may consummate what they have begun. But verily their proceedings have
hitherto been far different, not only from theirs who have planted and
watered the vineyard of Gods Church from the beginning, but also from theirs to
whom before all other men, we ought most to attribute that hope we have of the
recovery of our poor Country to the Catholic faith; namely Cardinal Allane,
of most holy and happy memory, whose life if it had pleased God to have lent
us till this day, we should have had, if not in some sort, a flourishing
Church, yet a Church at least without such enormous dissension, strife, and
debate; a Church full of true simplicity, religious zeal, and fraternall
charity; for such a one (God concurring to his holy endeavors) he planted,
and until his dying day, kept and conserved. Notwithstanding those who do now
so grievously perturbe our peace, did attempt the same even in his days, but
their endeavors being prevented by his prudence, took small effect so long as
he lived. But alas, since his too timely death and departure, what misery has
found us, and what trouble has fallen upon us? God pardon the causers thereof,
and grant us perfect peace and brotherly charity: Vt omnes cognoscant quod
discipuli Christi simus. That all men may know us to be the disciples of Christ.

Thus good Sir, have I laid down unto you the whole grounds of the crimes,
whereof both my self and diverse others of our brethren are accused. I rereferre
the matter to your judgment, to discern whether we be guilty of them or no.
If you doubt of the truth of my relation, I desire none other trial then the
testimony of mine accusers; who if they deny any one word that I have uttered
by way of narration, I can easily procure such proof thereof, as they shall
not deny, unless they will deny themselves. If my deductions, arguments, or
suppositions, used in yielding reason for our not admitting M. Blackwells
authority upon the only receipt of Cardinal Caietaines Letters, and that for
so doing, we incurred no note either of schism, or disobedience to his
holiness; if they I say need any proof, I will undertake to make them most
evident.

Wherefore according to these grounds, I humbly beseech you to pass your
opinion, and yield your judgment of our cause. And if the grounds prove true,
your judgment conformable thereunto, may remain firm: but if they prove
otherwise, your judgment notwithstanding shall not be faulty; for he that
judges according to his evidence, is not culpable of any error. This good
Sir, I request, because I desire to know your opinion of our cause, which if
you give according to these grounds, I shall easily understand whether you will
condemn or clear me and my brethren of the crimes objected; for I am sure I
have not erred in declaring the state of the matter.

If this which I have said be not sufficient for your full satisfaction; I hope
it will suffice at least to suspend your judgment of us, until further trial
be had of our cause; which being had in any indifferent manner, and if we being
convicted, do not acknowledge our fault, and make competent satisfaction, then
do not spare to account of us as Heathens and Publicans. But our adversaries
purpose not to put the matter to any indifferent trial, or to end it by any
equal means, but to decide it by strong hand, might, and violence; by
perpetual oppressing us with infamous slanders of schism, faction, and the
like; thereby to deprive, if it can be, our brethren abroad, of all convenient
entertainment, and to debar us in prison of necessary relief, to the end
that necessity may compel us to yield to their desires: the inequality of
which proceedings, I beseech you with indiffere^cy to consider. Sometime it is
seen, that a party wilfully bent to contend, is justly compelled to admit an
equal compremise, and to stand to the arbitrament of an indifferent Judge: but
it was never seen where justice and conscience ruled; and much less amongst
such as ought to be the rule of other men's consciences, that the party willing
to stand to any indifferent trial, should be compelled by violence, to agree
unto the desire of his adversary, how just or unjust soever it be, and that
without any further sentence, but only because his adversary must have his
will.

Good Sir, we are here in this place, diverse in great want, in so much, that
besides our debts to the keeper, we have not to defend us from the injury of
the winter weather: whereof that you may have some special taste, I do you to
understand, that since Trinity Term, we have received no more from London,
from whence the chiefest part of our relief comes, then will suffice for
three weeks charges with him that can husband his matters best. And this
shall be sufficient to insinuate unto you our wants, hoping that as opportunity
serves, you will concur to the relieuing thereof; confidently hoping withal,
that God for whose cause we suffer, not only of the common adversary, but also
of those who ought to be our friends, will give us patience whatsoever crosses
befall us, to bear them to the end. For mine own part, they may by their
violent proceedings, make me yield my breath and life, which by Gods grace, I
shall if need require, willingly sacrifice for the defense of justice, equity,
and mine own innocence: but my consent to these unjust dealings, by Gods
assistance, they shall never extort out of me.

If any one to whom you shall think good to impart this (as I am not against
the imparting it to any, so that you keep the original your self) shall
undertake to improve me of any untruth: I will either satisfy his objections
even to your own judgment, or else I will acknowledge mine error.

Take this, good Sir, for a taste of our internal and domestical troubles,
wherewith I imagine you are not much acquainted, and therefore are you worse
affected to our cause: and as you shall give me hereafter occasion, you shall
understand more; for this is but a small thing in respect of that which this
matter affords. But I fear I have been too tedious in this so disgustfull a
discourse; but let, I pray you, the hard terms my good name is brought into,
plead my pardon for my tediousness, and the equity of my Plea, procure me
your favor, and so in all humble sort I take my leave.

Yours ever in all true Christian affection, Anthony Champney.
SIr, if you do not consider diligently the heinous Post scriptu^.
enormitie of schism imposed upon me, you will peradventure condemn me of too
much preciseness, if not of contention, for laboring to defend my self from
the note thereof; and will think that I ought rather to suffer some small
infamy, then by opposing my self so earnestly, to repel the same, to procure
a further breach between mine accusers and my self, to both our harms, and to
the offense of others. But if you consider first, to admit the infamy of this
slander, (though it were of it self but small) were in some sort to give
occasion to mine accusers, to heap upon my head greater wrongs hereafter, (for
he that will offer wrong in one thing, will do the like in an other if occasion
serve) you shall find it to be neither wisdom nor piety, to give place to
such beginnings. Secondly, the condition of mine estate requiring a most entire
fame, I should both wrong my self, and slander my function, if I should admit
any blemish or blotte therein, which I may by mine own endeavor wipe away: and
therefore to purchase peace at such a price, I hold it not lawful: for Non est
faciendum malum vt eremat bonum. Evil is not to be done that good may ensue.
And as S. Augustine says: Qui famam suam negligit, crudelis est. He that
neglects his good name is cruel. But if thirdly you consider the intrinsical
enormitie of this crime, you will easily excuse mine endeavor in clearing my
self thereof, from all note of contention. For amongst all other sins against
our neighbor, schism is the greatest: and the pennalties which the Church
has always inflicted on such as have been guilty thereof, prove the same; to
weet, excommunication and separation from all use of Sacraments, as appears
by diverse ancient Canons, and also in Bulla caenae: which being granted,
necessarily follows heinous sacrilege, committed by the ministratio^ of
Sacraments, and the frustrating of all confessions made to all such as they do
term schismatikes. For my fuller acquittance of which schism, in one word I
say, that if I be a schismaticke, Clemens the eight is a schismaticke; for his
will is my will, both in this and all other things pertaining to Ecclesiastical
government, and for mine obedience and subjection to him in the same, as
hitherto by Gods grace I have not, so God assisting me hereafter, I will not
refuse to yield my life, if at any time it be exacted.

Peradventure Sir you will marvel, how I dare attempt to say thus much in mine
own and my bretherens defense, our Archpriest having under pain of
suspension, commanded the contrary. But you may understand, that this
commandment cannot be of force (and therefore not to be respected) for diverse
causes. And chiefly, for that the law of nature grants absolute freedom to
every one to defend himself and his goods either of fame or fortune, and to
labor by lawful means, to recover them being unjustly taken from him. For
which cause it is an intolerable error, annullating any iuridicall sentence
to forbid a man to defend himself. Siluester verb. Excom. 2. number. 1. and 16.
Our Arch-priests prohibitory censures therefore in this case, are even by the
law of nature made void. And if he say that we have suffered no wrong by the
loss of our good names, but that we have justly deserved the infamy of
schism, it will not serve his turn, for he being in this case, a party subject
to trial, and therefore no Judge to discern whether we have suffered wrong or
no, his sentence or opinion herein can be of no more force, then his ought to
be, who having taken away an other man's goods, says that he has not wronged
him, and therefore forbids him to prosecute the case against him, under pain
of a greater displeasure: for this is just our case. I might say much more in
this matter, but I have bin too long already, and I hope this will suffice for
this point: and so once again I take my leave.



THE COPY OF A LETTER written by F. Rob. Parsons the Jesuit, 9. October. 1599.
to M. D. Bish: and M. Chapter two banished and configned Priests, the one in
France, the other in Lorraine, by the suggestions of F. Parsons, for presuming
to go to Rome in the affairs of the Catholic Church.
Paris. To my very loving friend M. W. Bish, Priest: give these.
Bish, it being now diverse months since you departed from hence, and no one
Letter appearing yet from you: or from your friend M. Chapter it made us marvel,
considering your promises at your departures; and some began to suspect (that
which I fear me will prove too true) that you were fallen into that temptation
which each man did easily foresee here before you went hence; and I many times
foretold you also, to wit, that you having received evil success here in your
journey by your own defaults, and going among men that would and must of
courtesy bemone the same (for who will to your faces seem to like of it, or
say you have deserved it) you would be in danger thereby to change your good
minds that here you showed, of acknowledging your own errors: and for excuse
thereof, would lay the fault where it is not, and so make posteriora peiora
prioribus.

Paris (to wit, the 11. of June) I perceive you were slidden much forward,
seeing you say, you cannot but tell me of the great dislike which ordinarily
all sorts of men have of your imprisonment and hard usage here in Rome. And
moreover, you say that every one cries out against it, although you use all
the modifications which in truth and equity you may. And the^ further, you
wish me to prevent in time the odious name of a rigorous and stern governor,
and not by colorable words, but by effectual deeds; and that it is a corosiue
unto you, that those goodly gifts (so you write) which God has bestowed upon
me, should by the alienations of our Country-mens affections from me, be made
less able to do our Country that good which all desire.

written hither diverse ways, and by diverse persons of credit, of other men's
speeches (upon your reports and complaints by all likelihood) touching your
superiors also; for by this same Post, and with your Letter came another, of
our friend M. D. C. which you do also mention, and he says that your friends
(though he commend your own moderation) do cry out and complain of singular
injustice done unto you: and that you could not be heard iuridice, nor have
your Proctors, or proceed in your process as Jews and Turks and common
malefactors are permitted.

Flaunders, by the Ordinary of this week, that passing of late by those parts
where M. Chapter resideth (though he talked not with himself) yet he reports
that others cry out in like manner, being stirred up as he says (for I will
relate his own words) by the grievous complaints of M. Chapter who threateneth to
set down in Print the whole story of your usage here; to make it known
thereby, as he writes, both in England and elsewhere, how Priests be received
by his holiness, that come from Catholics to disclose their griefs unto
him; and that he does not bear himself as a common Father, but as partial
for Jesuits, prevented by them, to the ruin of poor Priests; and that in
Turkey they should have bin used no worse: and that he and you, seeing how
matters passed, determined never unto this day, to open unto his holiness, nor
unto the Protector, the true causes of your sending, nor what errand you had,
which should have been delivered to his holiness only. Moreover he says,
they lament bitterly the poor estate of Catholics, who at home are
persecuted, and abroad cannot be heard when they send to open their griefs to
him that ought to give ear to all as a common Father, and that the College at
Rome is brought into a Spanish and Italian government, F. Parsons bearing
himself not as a Countryman, but Italianated; that men will labor in
England that none do send over their sons to be brought up in it, for that
it is not fit for English natures; that it will never be well in England until
Jesuits be recalled: Saltem tempore persecutionis, etc.



go open for them to read, and after to send or deliver unto you: and I pray
you also, that M. Chapter may have a sight or copy of the same, when you have
vewed it; together with some good temperate counsel from you: and he is
thought to have more need of it by his hot nature known, and by the reports
that come daily from his parts of like speeches to these before specified:
which if once they come to the ears of them whom most they concern, they may
chance to be called by them to further examination, which I would gladly were
prevented if it may be.

Rome, upon the 11. of December, 1598. (if I mistake not) after friendly offer
to entertain you in this College for the days of Hospitality accustomed
(though the cause of your coming to Rome, was known to be far other then
the rule appoints for such as are so to be entertained) I told you at large
how all matters stood, and how his holiness then in Ferrara, having been
informed by his Nuntios in France and Flaunders of your coming, was much
offended therewith, and meant to put you in prison if you had commen to
Ferrara, as appeared by a Letter of F. Bellarmino, now Cardinal, which I had
sent presently to Flaunders to meet you there, if you had passed that way from
France, as it was thought you would: and by that Letter appears also that I
had not informed against you, seeing that his holiness willed the Father to
write to Rome, to know my opinion of you, as by the original Letter yet here
extant is manifest; and the cause of his holiness offense against you was,
that having bin vexed for more then three years together immediately before,
with such a sedition of Englishmen here in Rome and in Flaunders, as had
utterly wearied him and this whole Court, and had scandalized all Christendom,
and highly discredited our English Nation and Catholic cause; and having
after all ways of examination and trials, both by visitations, commissions,
memorials, and the like, found no other ground of all these stirs, clamours,
and tempests, but only envy, emulation, and dissolute humors, of loose
behavior in some, and no one point proved, nor able to be proved of the
manifold slanders which were exhibited in these tumults, against most innocent
men of the Society, who had been the best friends of the troublesome: his
holiness resolved to make an end at last, and so did in this College, by
punishing the principal; and how much the finger of Almighty God assisted him
in this action, the blessed fruits that have ensued since, of peace, union,
modesty, spirit, learning, and devotion in these youths, have evidently
declared: whereby they have regained again a great part of that estimation and
good opinion, which the former had lost by their contrary vices.

appoint a subordination among Priests themselves; which Jesuits especially
among other Catholics their friends, have demanded for many years together,
thereby to deliver themselves from all show of that calumniation used to be
laid against them, that they would govern the Priests against their wills; and
hereof proceed the long deliberation of his holiness: together with the
Cardinals, not only Protectors, but also of the Inquisition, whether it were
best to appoint at the beginning, a Bishop or Archpriest: which deliberation
endured above a year together; and in the mean space his holiness took
information also sufficient, about the person most fit for the office, and that
from Priests of England, though not perhaps from you, as it was not
necessary; and in the end, resolved upon the dignity and man that you know.
Which being admitted and appointed most willingly by all the body, both of
Priests and other Catholics in England, and abroad also, you only, and very
few others joined with you (as here was proved by your account) opposed your
selves, and not expecting to bring any matter of substance against his
government that was appointed for your superior, you subtracted your selves
from his obedience, and gave occasion for others to do the like: and
consequently, to cause a most perilous schism and sedition amongst
Catholicques in our Country; which his holiness foreseeing, meant to
restrain you at your coming: but yet to hear and examine all that you
brought, as afterward he did, and you do greatly wrong him, if you report the
contrary.

Haddock, M. Martin Array, and Priests of your own coat that lay here, and
are your ancients, both in your own order, and their trauells in England; and
the very same we made you to see to be the judgments of the grauest of our
Nation, in Flaunders, and other places, and especially in England: from whence
I assure my self I showed you first and last near two hundredth names of
Priests writing and subscribing against you: and you afterward upon your
oaths could not name a dozen to be for you, as yet appears in the Register.

Caietane Protector, and by Cardinal Burghese Vice-Protector, to desist from
your enterprise of contradiction, without foundation at all (as after appeared,
and then was suspected) his holiness after seventeen days of your persisting
or thereabout, willed you to be retired to some place of custody, in respect
of your offense, and there your allegations to be examined, whether they were
worth the handling or no; which coming to my knowledge, I entreated rather
that your retirement might be with secrecy in this College, then with more
infamy in any other place, though I easily foresawe what thanks I was like
to have for my labor; but I did it for him by whom I cannot leese, as I did
also the rest; to wit, in giving you of the best chambers in the house, in
cherishing you gratis, in visiting you often, and making each of you good new
gowns for the winter; in giving you a Father to be your Notarie gratis, and
procuring your Judge to come to the College and lie here to examine you: with
commodity, which otherwise would have cost you much money, and many painful
iournies about the streets, and other incommodities, which now you little
consider.

three months or more; you had time and commodity to say or write what you
would, yea you were willed upon your oaths to say what you could, and all that
you said is written, and you did swear you had no more to say of moment in all
matters handled, as appears by the Records: and all that you said was
considered of maturelie, as well by your Judge that was a Lawier, as also by the
two Cardinals, the one a Divine, the other a Lawier; who to the end they
might be sure to hear all, and satisfy both you and themselves, did come in
person one day to the College to examine you, and to hear read in your
presence, all that you had said and deposed, or could say: and after this, yet
stayed they diverse weeks to inform his holiness, before they gave sentence
in your cause.

Chapter own hand, to exhibit to his holiness, of your most secret business, are
here to be seen; and the Judge, Cardinals, and perhaps his holy. also, have
had the view of them, and have found them of no more weight then the rest; and
how then is it said that you kept your chief message to your selves and
disclosed it not? what message could this be? or from whom? for of the Jesuits
and of the Archipresbyter you said your fill, and were willed upon your oaths
to say more, if you had any to say, in that or in any other points. And as
for those priests that sent you, they were very few as appeared; and I showed
you well near twenty times as many names of the same order against you: who
testify also for all Catholics which deal with them, to be of the same
opinion, and to have misliked your journey and cause, and detested the schism
that thereof insued.

unjust calumniation. And so much of our Superiors.

Shawe a Priest, who having fallen fowly in England, and railed afterward
egregiously against the Society (as he had done also here in Rome first
before his going into England, and commonly these matters go together) yet
coming hither of late, and being in great misery, both spiritually and
temporally, and in danger to despair, and to lie God knows how long in the
Inquisition, I have comforted and assisted him in this College, as if he had
been mine own brother, and this for many days together, procuring him also a
good and favorable dispatch, and afterward to be placed in a good Church
under religious men in Naples, where he lives with great contentment to
himself, and edification hitherto of others.

Factus sum insipiens, sed vos me coegistis: to show my self to be neither
stern, nor rigorous, nor colorable, I am forced to speak of that I would
not. It may be you do mislike in me my firm standing against the troublesome
of this house first, and against you, and your companion afterward, that came
in defense of the former troubles: if it be so, you and I do differ in
judgments, for I do think that vigor and fortitude to be so necessary and
commendable, which is required to stand in confractione, as the scripture
terms it, against unquiet striving spirits, as without it, no good in any
government can be expected; and albeit in some it cause alienations of
affections, as you signify, yet in others it works the contrary; and that
which most imports, it vpholdeth truth, virtue, and Gods cause. And I would
ask you now again (as sometimes here in presence I did) in what case do you
think our common cause of England had been at this day if no man had
resisted the designements of the troublesome in this place, or if your
endeauours after them had taken place?

Haddock, and M. Martin Array had talked with him also, and informed him as
they thought of the very truth of matters, he told an honorable man of Rome,
and a great friend of mine, that four English Priests having talked with
him, they had taken from him all list to believe any Englishmen, or matters
more, they told him so different tales, and yet all of them would seem to be
men of zeal: well then, if you had bin let alone by his holiness to deal
with all the Cardinals, and great men of Rome in like sort, would you not have
brought our common cause in a pretty plight trow you, and your selves also?

Blackwell, the first, man of all your order that ever was yet in authority,
and of those parts and merittes that all English men know; yea in the very
matter of his faith, for that an heriticall proposition was laid to his charge.
Secondly were to be discredited such English Priests as stood with him, who are
the principal of your coat; and with them, all Jesuits, but chiefly those
that are known to have labored most in the common cause, and by whose
intercession Catholic Princes have been most moved to assist hitherto the
same: and what would have followed of this? Further, the Protector himself
must have bin changed, if all designments in your papers had taken place; the
Seminaries must have been taken from the government of Jesuits, and the whole
society called out of England: and albeit you proposed not in words al these
points together when you came, and how matters stood: yet were they mentioned
as is to be seen in your papers from your partners in England; and you see
that now they begin to be given abroad again, in places where you or M. Chapter
are or have been, and uttered coffeehouse.



Rome, whether it be Spanish or Italian, I know not; but sure I am, it tends
all to union, peace, love, virtue, and learning; and that do the scholars
find by the effects, having received more comfort, quiet, true mirth, and
gain of learning, in one moneh sithence the reformation, then in some years
before; and as for youths to come unto it, let no man have care: for would to
God we had so much maintenance, as we could have choice of scholars to enjoy
it; and no wise Catholic is there in England or elsewhere, that hearing of
this change and reformation, will refuse to send his children hither (if he
love them, and may be in hope to have them placed) for the words or writings of
any such to the contrary, as M. Chapter threatens, who shall bemonethe lack of
liberty. And if M. Chapter or any other should attempt to put any thing in print
of matters passed here (as our friend writes is threatened, but I cannot
believe that any such intent can be) the matter would easily be answered, for
that here remain authentical registers, of all that passed by public
authority.



Flaunders, and thence to your parts again, that you should confess here to
have been moved only by ambition, to take your last action in hand, I will
deliver you most willingly from any thing that I have written, or willed
others to write; for as you say, I did ever attribute your attempt, rather to
error and lack of consideration, then to ambition; wherein you may see I was
not rigorous; but yet seeing your matter passed by diverse men's hands and
knowledge, I cannot let them to think, speak, or write, what they judge best;
yet do I suppose verily, that none would say or write that you confessed so
much here, tho I have heard diverse speak and suspect so much, upon the sight
of your papers; for that seeing in diverse papers and scrolles of your fellows,
which you brought open with you, you were proposed for Bishops, and in a long
discourse of a friend of yours sent out of England after your departure, you
two by name were appointed to be Archbishops and Primates; and that besides
this, a principal man of your side, writing to you certain notes about your
message, uses the phrase of your LL. with his own hand yet here to be seen;
it was much to be suspected what motion moved you.

Chapter do bear your selves well and prudentlie, and do stay and not stir up
such as do seem to favor or bemone your cause, which though you term by the
phrase, of all sorts of people, in your Letter, yet must you not deceive your
selves, for that finally all those sorts must be reduced to a very small
number, in respect of others that do condemn your action.

Rome you proved how the grauest sort of people, both strangers and others,
judged of your cause, after they had heard and examined the same; I showed you
also the Letters and subscriptions of many of the chiefest and most principal
of our Nation, in Flaunders and England; and since that time I have received
many more, and many complaining of the overmuch lenity used in ending of the
cause; how then do all sorts of men cry out of the rigor or injustice used
toward you? but in truth it is a very uncertain thing to depend upon the
speeches of men; diverse speak fair, and will bemone a man to his face, when
their hearts are far otherwise; and some being discontent or in passion
themselves upon other grounds, are glad to take such occasions as this of
yours is, to disburthen their stomachs of their own griefs; others evil
informed at the beginning upon pity do bemone you; which afterward upon
knowledge of the truth will change their minds, and cry crucifige.

by Gods assistance to follow it my self, wishing no worse to you and yours
then to my own soul, as he is witness who is master of us both: to whose
holy protection I do most affectually commend you: and my self to your holy
prayers and sacrifices. From Rome, this 9. of October. 1599.

Yours ever most ready to serve you: Robert Parsons.
This Letter of F. Parsons, did the Archpriest send abroad by his Agent, with
an Iniunction to those to whom it was carried, that they must believe all that
was contained therein, assuring them that it was most true, notwithstanding he
had made a severe Edict not long before against all such as should diuuldge
any thing set out for the space of two years before, wherein the credit of
any Ecclesiastical person of the English Nation, should particularly and by
name be touched. How many faults were in this action of the Archpriest, it is
not for me to discypher: but it is very manifest, that in this Letter of F.
Parsons, the credit of two English Priests by name, are very much wounded, and
as it should seem by the censure following, the Letter deserves little
commendation for truth therein contained.



A censure upon the Letter which F. Parsons writ the 9. of October. 1599. to M.
D. Bish. and M. Chapter two banished and confined Priests, the one in France, the
other in Lorraine, by the suggestions of F. Parsons, for presuming to go to
Rome, in the affairs of the Church. Given by M. I. B.
Parsons follows a suspisition conceived against M. Bish. and M. Chapter because
they did not write unto him, and yet confesses in the second Paragraffe, that
the same week he had received a stale Letter from M. Bish. so that he might
have left out of the first Paragraffe this manifest ungrounded suspicion, and
also this absurd untruth, soon after controlled even by himself, that no
letter appeared as yet from M. Bish. And M. Chapter being confined to a place,
where neither any ordinary Post was for Rome, or usually passed (as F. Parsons
well knew) he might with more credit have pretended some other cause of so
unjust a suspicion, as that the two Priests had forsaken their good minds,
fallen into known and acknowledged errors, and broken promises made at their
departure. If Letters might miscarry in so long a way as was between Rome and
them, what ground was, the not receiving of Letters from them of those
conceits? If they will say that they must needs receive all Letters which come
to Rome directed to them, and so soon as they do come to them, daily practice
will convince the contrary, howsoever he shuffleth off this contradiction,
that as yet no Letter appeared from M. Bish. (as F. Parsons affirms in the
first Paragraffe) and that he had that week received a stale Letter from him
(as he confesses in the second Paragraffe) but it appears both in this
former part of F. Parsons Letter, and also in all which follows in the same,
that F. Parsons thought it a great sin for himself, not to deserve blame.
What errors were acknowledged at Rome, I know not, but it is very likely that
they would have been specified upon so good an occasion as was offered to F.
Parsons by M. Bish. and is by F. Parsons touched in the 21. Paragraffe: and if
they should have acknowledged themselves to have erred in want of
consideration, doubtless I should (as now it falls out) believe as much,
because they did willingly ouerslip an opportunity of having a fit mean
(maugre their adversaries) to have been heard before they should have bin
committed to prison: which infamy as F. Parsons confesses, they were in the
10. Paragraffe.

Parsons boldly without blushing says, that he received a stale Letter from
M. Bish: from whom in the first Paragraffe he says, as yet no Letter appeared,
and both by that Letter, which was received, and by that none at all as yet
appeared, it is gathered that M. Bish. was fallen again into a pit, out of
which as yet he never came, since his first fall into it. Those commendations
of himself, which F. Parsons took no great disgust to repeat, (meaning that
these Letters should pass far and near, as appears in the 6. Paragraffe)
were used by M. Bish. perchance to try if by fitting so well F. Parsons
humor, he might draw him to that which as it should seem by M. Bishops reply,
was not in him. What M. Doctor Cic. did write of others complaints I know not;
but so far as without offense I may, I think that it was a most lamentable
case, that two Priests coming as it became Priests, toward Rome, to deal
with his holiness about such things as belonged to the Church, and were said
to be done by his order, not confirmed by any Letters from the Sea Apostolic,
or any other sufficient witness, should be judged to be laid in prison with
infamy (as is before showed out of F. Parsons Letters) after many years spent
by the same two Priests in their Country, many dangers of loss of liberty,
and life ouerpassed in defense of the Catholic Church, and particularly of
the dignity of the Sea Apostolic, and a glorious confession of the one in
prison, and banishment of the same.

To omit the rest of their entertainment at Rome, I cannot but marvel that
there should be so grievous a sentence of banishment, and confinement given
against them, who offered at their arraignement before the two Cardinals (the
sentence deserves that term) to answer to what was objected, and they who
put up the Libell (that is a bill of complaints and accusation) against them
(when they perceived how ready they were to make their answer) requested on
their knees of the Judges, that the Libell might not be delivered unto them,
but rather that all things should be peaceably ended; to which the Judges
inclined, and thereupon delivered not the Libel to the two Priests, who had
demanded it, to make their answer unto it.

All things at that time passed in such sort, as they should have bin presently
set at liberty, had not there bin a deliberation to stay the^ for two or three
days (as was then pretended by their adversaries) in regard that M. Bish.
behaved himself with more confidence and boldness in this cause, then was to
some of their likings. Which I note the more at large, in regard of an ungodly
Letter pe^ned by F. Parsons, or at the least by his instructions, as it is most
plain by some of the particulars; at the handling whereof, M. Martin Array was
not present, although it goes masked under M. Martin Array his name to his
friend, bearing date the 20. of February, 1599. Wherein he undertakes as a
Proctor in the Arch-priests case against these two Priests, to relate the
story of that which passed upon the seventeenth of the same month, at their
trial: and among many most shameless untruths, affirms, that the two
Priests (whom in scorn he calls Ambassadors) were able to say little to that
which he and M. Doctor Haddock had libelled against them; and were willing to
say less, but only excused their own intentions, and asked pardon, if they
had given scandal by their manner of proceeding, more then ever they meant.
Whereas the only pretense that was made, why they were not at the same time
set at liberty, was more courage then was well liked of in pleading for
themselves, and confident demanding for the Libell to answer unto it. Before
or after which time, they never were brought before the Judges, and yet a
sentence of banishment, and confinement, without any provision made for them,
was given against them: and what conjectures was made of this by such as heard
thereof, I know not; neither has F. Parsons as it should seem by these his
Letters, any further knowledge what M. Bish. and M. Chapter report, but a hearesay
from a hearesay, a slender ground to publish in such sort as he does against
the^, although not in print, yet with so many Copies, as they are common
enough, and are carried about to such as are thought will not bestow the
pains to write out Father Parsons follies, or the cost otherwise to have them:
and thus much for the 3. and 4. Paragraffe.

Parsons professes how that he would pretermit these and other points without
any answer at al, for so much as they touch himself, and the society,
because his and their deeds do speak of themselves, against all calumniation
of words. To what purpose this is here brought I know not, unless for company
he would draw his whole society into obloquie: without danger of which, his
deeds will not be justified by them, unless they use to speak better for
themselves, then he speaks in these Letters of his, notwithstanding all the
gloses, which he makes to cast off all the blame of the hard measure which was
meated to the two Priests, and the shuffling of the same from himself, upon
the Pope, in the 7. 8. and 10. Paragraffe, although in this 5. Paragraffe he
would most holilie persuade, that, had not these things touched his holiness,
especially by false and injurious reports, against all truth and equity, he
could and would have dispensed with whatsoever touched himself. And that he
might clear his holiness especially, and the two Cardinals Protectors, in
the 6. Paragraffe he conuenteth

F. Parsons neither made any friendly offer to entertain the two Priests in
the College for the days of hospitallitie accustomed, as he affirms in the
7. Rome, that they might lawfully demand such entertainment. And after four
or five days, that they had wroong themselves in, he found a means to thrust
them out again, before the accustomed days of hospitallitie were ended,
charging them, that they did by murmuring against the Pope, give evil
edification, which for lack of better proof, F. Owen a Jesuit, and F.
Parsons instrument in that business, would demonstrate unto them, because that
one of them being demanded whether that they had seen such a man in England,
answered, that he had seen him, but not talked with him, yet understood that
he was hardly dealt withal, because such as were accustomed to entertain
Priests at their first coming, were persuaded by some, that they should not
give him any entertainment, and that his nearest of kin were told, that in
conscience they could not receive him. If F. Parsons charity and his fellows
toward the two Priests, or the third of whom they spoke, had been answerable
to their profession, this would never have been so judged of by them, and so
vehemently maintained to have been a murmr against the Pope, unless for the
Popes farther honor, they will as unadvisedly lay this to his charge, that it
was his will the Priest should be thus used, as in this same 7. Paragraffe F.
Parsons (forgetting that his motive to write this Letter, was to deliver the
Pope from false and injurious reports) boldly affirms, that his holiness
having been informed by his Nuntios in France and Flaunders, of the coming of
the two Priests, was so much offended therewith, that he meant to put them in
prison. What truth there is in this report I cannot say, or what falsehood; sure
I am, that it sounds like a very injurious report against the Pope, if he
had such a meaning; and much more, if he had it not, as in reason we should
think he had not; for who can in reason think, that his holiness only upon
news of the coming of two Priests to him with so great adventure, and danger
of life, about matters of the Church, would determine to put them in prison
before he heard them what they had to say, or saw them? But to avoid his
holiness of blame, we will supply in this place for F. Parsons, that if the
Nuntios did signify any such matter unto his holiness, as most likely they
did not, they did send such informations against the two Priests, as the
Pope might purpose to cast them in prison so soon as they came to Ferrara, and
then let us demand where these Informers had their instructions and of whom?
of themselves they could not, being far asunder each from other, and both out
of England, whence the two Priests came. If of any other, who were they? or
were they such parties (although religious of the society, who only can be
imagined to have correspondence with them, although it be unlikely, especially
with him in France) that upon their bare accusations the Nuntios would write to
such purpose to his holiness, as he should determine upon this relation of
the Nuntios, to imprison the^ so soon as they should come to Ferrara, without
knowing, or having any further proof of the accusations made against them by
their adversaries? Yet is not this report more injurious against the Pope, whom
he undertakes in the 5. Paragraffe to deliver from al false, and injurious
reports, against all truth and equity, then his proof is insufficient which
here he makes in defense of himself; for which in the 5. Paragraffe he seemed
that he would wholly rely upon his known deeds, not upon his writing, his
proof is, that F. Bellarmino now Cardinal was willed by his Holy. to write to
Rome, to know F. Parsons opinion of the two Priests, therefore F. Parsons had
not informed against them. Did F. Parsons imagine that men's wits were so short,
that, when they saw this Letter of his, they would forget that F. Bellarmino
his Letter, was an answer to a Letter, which F. Parsons writ to him concerning
these two Priests; the effect whereof alghough we do not know, yet we may
probably conjecture what it was by F. Bellarmino his Letter, which was to
inform F. Parsons that the two Priests were not as yet come, and that when
they did come, there should be such order taken for them, as he should not
need to come from Rome to Ferrara. What order this was F. Parsons himself
confesses, and cyteth F. Bellarmino his Letter, forsooth they must first be
laid in prison, and then if there could be any cause found why, this infamous
injury should be justified. Does the Popes commandment to F. Bellarmino to
write to F. Parsons to know his opinion of the two Priests, prove, that F.
Parsons had not sent information against them? Or if it be true, that the Pope
did give this commandment to F. Bellarmino, does it convince that what
persuasions F. Bellarmino used to the Pope, or some other (if he would not be
seen in it) did not proceed from F. Parsons, who, had he not benestaied by
this Letter of F. Bellarmino, would have come to Ferrara himself, as it should
seem by the same Letter? If the informations given to the Pope against these
two Priests, by reason whereof they were to be imprisoned (for no man but F.
Parsons as I think, would say, that without any informations against them, his
holiness upon a bare hearesay that they were coming to him to deal in matters
of the Church, would resolve to put them in prison) must of necessity be
given as coming from F. Parsons. How is it true, that his holiness resolved
to put them in prison, before he had F. Parsons opinion of them? If the same
informations were not of necessity to be given as coming from F. Parsons,
what proof is this that F. Parsons had not informed against them that his
holiness willed the Father to write to Rome, to know his opinion of them? But
these things seem to proceed from the same vain, from which that which
follows does proceed: where F. Parsons to make the matter more odious, does
labor to confound the business about which the two Priests went to Rome with
that, which was at Rome between the Jesuits, and the English Students: and to
that effect, in the 8. 13. and 15. Paragraffes makes the stirs which were in
England, an appendix of those, which were at Rome.

Parsons can say, that the Jesuits especially had demanded for many years,
that there should be a subordination among the Priests, to deliver themselves
from all show of that calumniation used to be laid against them, that they
would govern the Priests against their wills; when as by credible report, F.
Parsons (without whom no English Jesuit durst do any thing) labored mightily
against it, until he saw that the secular Priests went seriously about it: and
it is so evident, that no man may without overmuch impudency deny it; that
all the strife, which was openly in England between the Jesuits, and the
Priests, began upon occasion of a government, which the Jesuits sought, and
would have had over the Priests, who were in durance at Wisbitch against many
their wills; and for the better effecting of that, to which most inordinately
they aspired, they did not only endeavor to disgrace them, as men that were
desirous of liberty, but were the occasion also that many Catholics did send
them no relief.

The second untruth in this 8. Paragraffe is, that the man or authority was
admitted, and appointed most willingly by all the body, both of Priests, and
other Catholics in England, and abroad also. For F. Parsons confessed
himself at Rome to the Priests, (who were sent thither) that he himself
appointed the man, least some such other should have bin chosen by the
general, and free suffrages of the Priests, as would not run along with the
Jesuits: and as for the authority, I think I may boldly say, that neither
Priest, nor Clarke in England, ever dreamed of the authority of an
Archpriest; whose office is clean out of use now in England, except the
complaining part thereof; neither can it be said that ever it was willingly
approved by the Priests: who for the most part, had their co^sents wroong from
them by the Jesuits, and the Archpriest himself; and if there were no other
proof of the priests not free approouing thereof (as they are many) the
quality of his authority, as it was first granted (at what time the Priests
were sent to Rome) will show it manifestly, or justly condemn those, who
approved it of great haste, for without any authority to do them the least
good, or repair the least harm he might do to them, he had a bare office of a
lawless executioner, of which the Priests in England stood in no need.

The 3. untruth in this Paragraffe is, that it was proved at Rome by the
account of the two Priests, that very few opposed themselves, for they brought
with the^ sufficient testimony, that many opposed themselves: that is, were
very much discontented with it, and thought what would come of it, although the
two Priests who went to Rome, had parsonally talked but with few, and therefore
could not justify upon their oaths for many.

The fourth untruth in this Paragraffe is, that they brought no matter of
substance against his government: whereas F. Parsons could not but know very
well, that the strife being between the Jesuits, and the Priests, he who
should be at the Jesuits devotion, could be no fit governor over the Priests,
and when F. Parsons writ these Letters of his, he could not be ignorant both
that the Archpriest had instructions to be in some sort ordered by them, and
he professed it openly, that no secular Priest must be of his counsel in this
his government of secular Priests, who should dislike any thing in the
Jesuits; which was deposed, and in particular justified at Rome: beside this,
if F. Parsons say true in the 17. Paragraffe, the Archpriest was touched in
the very matter of his faith; for that an heretical proposition was laid to
his charge, as appeared by their papers, and depositions yet extant. Lastly, if
it should be proved that the Archpriest consulted about the suspending of
some, with certain Jesuits only and some women, this government of the
secular Priests would prove little commendable.

The 5. untruth is, that they caused a most perilous schism, and sedition
among Catholics, by this their substracting themselves from this obedience.
Is it to cause a schism, not to obey him, whom under their oaths (if it be
true which F. Parsons says in the 17. Paragraffe) they touched in the very
matter of his faith? but whether this were so or no, I am not here to
discourse. Could they be accused of schism, which formerly includes a
voluntary, actual, or vertuall division from the head, with like contempt of
the head; who sent directly to the head to understand whether that did come
from the head, which was pretended to come from him, and challenged without any
his Letters, or any testimony sufficient to bind them? or were the English
Priests, who have so well deserved of Gods Church, to be so severely censured
for doing that which is lawful in all places; that is, to oppose against any
preferred, especially without their knowledge and consent, by their
adversaries, before that he be confirmed in his authority? promising in the
mean time as they did, to discharge themselves as became them, and to obey in
what they might know themselves bound.

The 6. untruth is, that the Pope foresawe all that which F. Parsons rehearses
in this 8. Paragraffe; which being false, might upon wrong information be
believed, but not be foreseen.

The 7. untruth is, that the Pope did hear all that the two Priests brought;
of whom did his holiness hear it? they were never suffered to be heard by his
holiness, as F. Parsons himself confesses in the 13. Paragraffe.

Parsons shows how he dealt with the two Priests to return again with their
credites, by ending forsooth all matters at the discretion of the General of
the Jesuits, and the Protector (who was allied to him) both unequal Arbiters
in a difficulty raised by the Jesuits against the Priests; yet, as it should
appear, they were not so backward to deal with the Protector concerning the
new authority sent into England by him only (for any thing that they knew,
or could sufficiently learn) for so soon as they understood of his arrival
at Rome, and could come to him, which was upon the 21. of December, they brake
the matter unto him, requesting him that he would listen to the just petitions
of many well deserving of the Catholic Church, which if he should do, they
would not trouble his holiness with this matter; and he willed them to bring
in writing what they had to say, promising them, that he would consider
thereon; to which the two Priests accorded, and departed, intending to return
so soon as the holy days would license them to follow their business, and
they might have free access to the Cardinal: but upon the 29. day, which was
wont to be in great reuefence among all English Catholics, that is to say,
upon the feast of S. Thomas of Canterbury, they were apprehended with infamy;
as Father Parsons confesses in the 10. Paragraffe (and sooner perchance should
have been, had not Tiber by a strange inundation kept their adversaries
asunder) deprived of all their writings, perfect and imperfect, and never after
suffered to deal together concerning their business which they had in hand,
until the 3. or 4. day after that F. Parsons had procured (God knows out of
what Office) an Apostolical brief, in conformation of the Archpriest his
authority; yet all this must be cloaked with the love of union, and respect
with due obedience to the superiors ordination, and under this color he, M.
D. Haddocke, and M. Martin Array, must oppose themselves against the two
Priests, and F. Parsons must also tell them, that these their adversaries were
their ancients, both in their order, and in their travels in England. He might
have put down this also for him self, for he was their ancient likewise in
both; but if all the time which they three spent in England were put together,
it would hardly make out the time which he that traveled least in England of
these two, had spent, for all three ran away, and not all of them in so good
sort, as some wished they had, being so hasty to be gone.

Concerning the last clause of the 9. Paragraffe, I know not how many names of
Priests F. Parsons showed them, or whether he showed them any or no, but I do
verily think he might have showed the names of many more, then he could
justify their consents unto it, their names being known here in England to
have been wroong from them by the Jesuits, and the Archpriest in his own
behalf, neither was it to be expected of the two Priests to name under their
oaths any great company, not having specially spoken with many, yet they
brought testimony, that many disliked it, of which perchance some in
particular, who had given them their names, had for fear afterward subscribed
in the behalf of the Archpriest of which kind the more names were showed, the
less was the number of those who Fa. Parsons in the 8. Paragraffe says, gave
their free consent.

Parsons begins to disgorge his choler against the two Priests for their
obstinacy, because forsooth they would not desist from their purpose, and
follow his humor. Secondly, he joins an untruth, if the Protector and they
did agree in such order, as is set down in the 9. paragraffe, or the Cardinal
Burghese promised them all the furtherance he could give them in their
matters, as I am credibly informed he did. Thirdly, it is not likely that the
two Cardinals (not knowing what was to be said) would upon a bare suspicion
charge them with an enterprise of contradictio^ without any foundation at all,
unless F. Parsons will say, that they had such a foresight, as he attributes
to the Pope in the 8. paragraffe; or that he had plotted such a Commonwealth,
as wherein could be no error, or the least cause of exception either against
the authority, or Officers, for how else (before men were heard) could there
be such a judgment in such as were esteemed wise men, and thought fit to be
pillars of Gods Church? What foundation there was for them to build upon, I
will leave to a more Clearklike discourse, and for a few complements sake,
briefly note some points of many, which I have seen, to show how lightly F.
Parsons lays his foundation upon he knew not what, for the justifying of
himself in that action, and what was done by his means.

Black. an Archpriest, and gave him his authority, that the motive hereof,
was a most false, wicked, and ignominious suggestion made to the Pope against
the Seminary Priests, and the Catholics, and therefore the thing thereupon
granted merely void.



England (and Scotland where was a Catholic Archbishop) nor showing any
authority, by which he could make an Archpriest over all the English Priests
residing in England (and Scotland) had little reason to look that the
appointment of this authority by him, should be taken without moving any
question.



stricti Iuris.

Parsons was the principal, and M. F. Jones stand the instrument, who being in
a secular Priests habit, deluded the Pope, and pleaded as sent by the Priests
in England, or with their consent; of which afterward being challenged for his
audacious attempt, he confessed before many Priests, he did but presume.

to punish them extremely, as by taking away their faculties, and suspending
them from the Altar; by which offices they live, and not by any benifices,
which remain to Priests in other Countries after such proceedings, and in the
hardest dealing they have somewhat allowed them for their maintenance; and now
least that some being thus debarred from use of their function, should in
respect of their preaching receive some charity from Catholics, they are
forbidden by the Archpriest to preach.





his choice of such as might serve him in place rather of Promooters, or
Informers, what was done in far parts, then in place of Counselors, and were
sildome or never made privy to his actions.







Col. and M. Chapter

his authority was, or he did not. If he did not, what should the Priests do
in that case? If he did, the Priests had the greater reason to suspect evil
dealing, by his affirming at the first, that he had such and such authority,
and not long after denied it, and small (God wot) is the satisfaction which is
given for this, that forsoothe he might say, that he had such authority,
because he could write to those who had it.

Black. being subdeligated by the Cardinal, as it appears by the Cardinals
Letters, to make a peace where there was no war; if there had been any need,
should have sought such means only, as were necessary therefore, and not have
challenged of the Priests an obedience in all things, which never any Prelate
presumed to do: neither did he when he was told of his large demand, amend
the matter so well, as some do ween, in limiting his former speeches to
obedience in all things, which might tend to peace: for as it is said before,
such a delegatiue authority, as was given unto him by the Cardinals Letters,
will allow him no more, then what is necessary to effect that for which he is
deligated.

Parsons says in the 17. Paragraffe, that M. Black. was touched in the very
matter of his faith, and offers to prove it by certain depositions yet
extant at Rome, that an heretical proposition was laid to his charge, I doubt
their foundation for their going to Rome will hardly be shaken.

Rome, did testify that his holiness would not constitute any authority
without the assent of the Priests in England; and the Priests were well
assured, that they had not sent any as then to deal with his holiness in
their names, but what was done, was rather done by the open, and covert
Jesuits, and afterward salued by M. F. James Stand; that he supposed the
Priests would consent to that, which he would do without their knowledge.



Rome in this matter be an honest man, for he told the two Priests who were
sent to Rome severally in their persons from the Popes own mouth, that his
holiness did not appoint it, and gave this reason from his holiness, because
he would not adventure to have his authority contemned in England by the
Priests.

which men are not only not bound to admit a far less Prelacie over them,
the^ this, but are sharply to be punished if they do admit it, and subject
themselves unto it, as it appears in that extrauagant of Pope Boniface the 8.
Iniunctae nobis de electione. And thus much for the challendge of their
enterprise to be of contradiction without any foundation at all.

Let us now return to F. Parsons, who (forgetting himself what he had
promised in the 5. Paragraffe, that was, not to let any thing which touched the
Pope, to tun with false and injurious reports, against all truth and equity,
although content to pretermit what concerned himself) plaieth the Proctor
altogether for himself, to the little honor of the Popes holiness. For in
this paragraffe it is set down, that after 17. days of the two Priests
persisting in their obstinacy (which was no other then is showed in the 9.
paragraffe) his holiness willed them to be retired to some place of custody
in respect of their offense, and their allegations to be there examined,
whether they were worth the ha^dling or no. Which coming to F. Parson his
knowledge, he entreated that their retirement might rather be with secrecy in
the English College, then with more infamy in any other place. So that F.
Parsons here lays to the Popes charge, that he caused the two Priests first
to be imprisoned for their offense, and afterward to have it tried, whether
they had committed any offense; for if it had so fallen out, that their
allegations had been worth the handling, what offense had they committed in
coming to Rome to deal with his holiness about them? But the Pope foresawe
perchance (as F. Parsons says) in the 8. paragraffe, that they were not worth
the handling. Then was this no cause of their imprisonment, which F. Parsons
alleged. But perchance it was no certain foresight, such as F. Parsons notes
in the 8. paragraffe; but only a suspicion as he affirms in the 10.
paragraffe. Then was this no just cause to use two Priests with infamy, who had
many years adventured their lives in defense of the Popes honor, and dignity
of the Sea Apostolic. But afterward perchance it so fell out, that their
allegations were found not to be worth the handling. Let us suppose that
which was not, that they were permitted to deal together or with other, and
could bring nothing worth the handling. What then? shall we to save the Pope
from false and injurious reports (as F. Parsons pretends) say, that the Pope
was ignorant of this saying, he who loves danger shall perish in it; and
like sychophants affirm, that his holiness may do what he will before he see
or know any cause why he should do it, and really defame them against whom he
has nothing, but an imagination, that it might be they deserved it? had they
been imprisoned upon color of somewhat to be laid against them, somewhat in
this kind might have bin justified; but coming as plaintiffes, supplicants, or
appellants, they were to be heard, or at least to be suffered to deal together
in their business; and for F. Parsons to pretend that two Priests coming to
his Holiness (as in duty they were bound to do in any difficulties of the
Church) were cast with infamy into prison, before they were heard what they had
to say, and that they should have been cast in prison with more infamy (had
not F. Parsons entreated for them) is not to pretermit that which concerns
himself, and to stop injurious reports against the Pope (as he prete^deth in
the 5. paragraffe) but to heap false and injurious reports against the Pope,
and to fall into most absurd praise of himself. And if F. Parsons did tell
them, what benifites he bestowed upon them, when they were with him, I dare
presume that they would not be so ungrateful as not to give him thanks for
them, although perchance not so greatly from their hearts, as if he had let
them alone. Before they departed out of England, or were known who they were
that should go, the speech was rife in some men's mouths, that they should be
cast in prison when they came to Rome; so that F. Parsons wit was not so highly
to be commended, in that he could foresee, what thanks he was like to have.
First for their imprisonment in the College. Secondly, for giving them the
best Chambers in the house with such conditions. Thirdly, cherishing them
gratis (that is, at the charge of the College). Fourthly, visiting them often
(especially at the first, for he must needs be the Commissioner to examine
them). Fifthly, making them good new gowns for the winter, (no doubt better
then they had any, who had none at all) and with as much speed as after long
seeking for cloth for the purpose they could be made, and they were not
ordinary good gowns for the winter, for as they were not too hot for the
summer, so they were not too heavy for the winter: and as I make no question,
but that he deserved thanks for his good will in this, so I doubt not, but
that they gave him thanks for them. Sixthly, giving them a Father to be a
Notary gratis (for naught) who at the Commissary his appointment (that was F.
Parsons) might write what he would have written, and blotte out what he would
have blotted, if it did not fadge to his mind. Seventhly, procuring the Judge
to come to the College, etc. Which, if F. Parsons did examine them himself,
possibly was very sildome, and that only for a fashion. If F. Parsons 1. were
apprehended by the means and assistants of his adversaries, 2. carried to their
own house, 3. locked up, and kept sure enough from speaking with any body but
at their discretion, 4. examined by them, and his examination also taken as it
should please the^. A good new chamber, a good new summer gown for the winter,
a gratis cherishing, the saving of him from spending his money and taking many
iournies about the streets, could not (as I suppose) so dull these his
adversaries wits, but that they might easily foresee, how many more thanks they
were like to have for their labor, after that they had once made a friendly
parting. Perchance F. Parsons expected such an after applause as some Priests
did make in England for their superior, who had authority to chastise them
only, and at his pleasure, in most grievous sort.



First they were kept from Pen, and Ink, from the 29. of December, until the
17. of February following, although they had often requested it. Secondly,
they might have said what they would at any time, as well as at their
examination, for their tongus were at liberty enough, had time and place been
convenient for it; which F. Parsons was often told, when he took upon him to
be a stickler in the matter, and would know what they could say; and if that
they were willed upon their oaths to speak and answer to such questions as
might be asked, it does not therefore follow, that they did say all that they
could, either because they were perchance released of their oath (taken by the
Commissary appointed by his holiness) upon some consideration, for example,
that they did accept of F. Parsons to be their examiner, who thrust himself
into that office, and was suspected that he would abuse it, as in truth he did;
or else because they perceived that all was not written which they said, nor
that which was so written, so faithfully written, as they delivered it, a
Jesuit being the examiner (who was a party) and giving them an other Jesuit
to be the Notarie, as F. Parsons confesses in the 10. Paragraffe; which being
all the company which were present, might and did deal, as pleased them; not
only with the two Priests, whose Iaylors they were, but with their
examinations also, which they took. 3. They might also swear that they had no
more to say of moment in all matters handled; not because they could say no
more, but because they saw that they might hurt themselves (being at their
adversaries devotions) but were not likely to do any good in the cause which
they had to handle. 4. They might swear they had nothing to say, because
neither of them had any commission, or was sent to deal in any thing
severally, but jointly, and each with others help, which they could not do
(being kept close prisoners, and so as one might not come to the other). If
the Judge of whom F. Parsons speaks (who was no other then the Fiscall or
Commissarie before mentioned) and the two Cardinals came to the College one
day to examine them, (as F. Parsons here says) to the end, that they might be
sure of all, and satisfy both themselves and the two Priests, they might have
done well to have examined them, which they did not, but only heard first some
part of M. Bish. his examination; who presently after without any question
asked him (more then whether he would add any thing to his examination) was
shut up as before. Then M. Chapter was called for, and some part of his examination
read, after which being licensed to speak, he used some words to the so great
liking of the two Cardinals, that had it not been for company-sake, he had
been set at liberty the same day (as both M. Bish. and he were told by the
Jesuits afterward) for as they pretended, the Cardinals did not take well M.
Bish. his answer, that he had nothing to say, when he was licensed after his
examination was read, and therefore commanded him to close prison, and M. Chapter
also for company; and they thought that they did not M. Chapter any injury by
making him a close prisoner again, because M. Bish. his silence displeased
the^ once, and his earnestness at an other time. After that F. Parsons and F.
Titch. a couple of Jesuits, the one the Examiner, the other the Notarie, and
were all the company that was present at this arraignment with the two
Cardinals, except M. Acrysio (who came thither as if he had before supplied
the place of an Examiner) had read what they thought good, and M. Chapter dismissed
for a time into an outer-chamber, where the Cardinals Retinew was, and some
Jesuits was. F. Parsons called at the door to F. Owin a Jesuit (who during
this time was vice-iaylor in F. Parsons place) to bring forth M. Bish. and M.
Chapter together, and the Proctors for the Archpriest. F. Owin fetched M. Bish. to
M. Chapter who had not met for the space of seven weeks (in which time they had
been kept close prisoners) and after they had embraced each other, they went in
together before the Cardinals, with M. Doctor Haddocke, and M. Martin Array.
The two Proctors who (after notice given unto the Cardinals by F. Parsons what
they were, as though the Cardinals had known neither the men, nor the office
they then had) at their Qu. (as it should seem) delivered up in a dumb show,
a Libell or Bill of complaints and accusations, against M. Bish. and M. Chapter
without any words (whatsoever M. Martin Array says, or F. Parsons under M.
Martins name in his Letters, dated the 20. of February, 1599.) stuffed too
shamefully with untruths. Among which, rehearsal is made of many speeches,
which are said to have been uttered by M. Martin and his fellow Proctor before
they exhibited their libel, as (to use their own words) being bidde^ to speak
as Proctors, whereas in truth neither of the^ spoke any one word good or bad,
either of themselves, or as bidde^ by any other. The libel being read by F.
Titch. the Jesuit, M. Bish. was very earnest to have the Proctors put to their
oaths, that no falsehood was contained in the Libell, to which the Cardinal
Caietan made answer that they were not to swear, but to prove what should be
denied; then was the whole Libell denied, and a copy thereof demanded, that
answer might be made unto it; but when the Proctors saw the resolution of the
two Priests, they humbly desired with knee on ground, that no copy should be
delivered, but that all things should be shut up in peace; to which the
Cardinal Caietan made answer, that it was peace, which the two Priests sought
for, and presently the two Proctors having readily what, and against whom to
object, wrangled a little with the two Priests, and particularly M. Martin
Array urged against M. Chapter that, and no other thing, namely that they intended
to have the Protector changed, which in the aforesaid Letter of the 20. of
February, he (or F. Parsons rather under his name) affirms, that because the
Cardinal was present and satte as Judge, they would not urge for very shame
of their English ingratitude. After this little wrangling conference the
Proctors were dismissed, and the two Cardinals calling M. Bish. and M. Chapter
nearer unto them, declared that they found no cause against them, only this
they thought in their conscience, that these two Priests had unadvisedly taken
this journey, because thereby they had scandalized many in England; to which
the Priests made this answer, that if they had given any scandal they were
sorry, and ready to give satisfaction, which M. Martin in the aforesaid
Letters does confirm, but that he puts it in a wrong place, for he puts
it, as if it had been said by the Ambassadors (as he terms them) after they
had heard his, and his fellows falsely vaunted of objections before they gave
up the Libell, and the Libell it self, which was read against the^, against
which, says M. Martin, or F. Parsons under his name, (among other his most
shameless untruths) they were able to say little, and willing to say less,
but asked pardon if they had given scandal, etc. If these men could have
persuaded themselves that neither M. D. Bish. nor M. Chapter should ever have seen
these Letters, or have come to control these shameless untruths, and wicked
detractious speeches, where they were so boldly spread abroad, yet had they
remembered there had been a God, they would have had some fear, if no reverence
unto him, but these be those of brass, who put themselves forth as a wall for
the house of the Lord (of a fly) and would be accounted constant, and pious,
yea and friendly (as F. Parsons urges in the 18. paragraffe) toward these two
Priests. Within less then a week after this arraignment, Master Chapter was
brought to M. D. Bish. his Chamber, where after they had embraced each other,
they were carried each between a couple of Jesuits among all the students, as
a beginning of their liberty, (no other cause being pretended of M. D. Bish.
his longer imprisonment, then that he had to the Cardinals coffeehouse used
silence, when he was licensed to speak if he would after his examination was
read, and used more courage (when he had heard the Libell read) then was
thought convenient by them; and no other cause was given of M. Chapter his longer
imprisonment, but that he should be punished for 3. or 4. days for company,
after which they should be both set at liberty and permitted to deal in their
business (for which they went to Rome.) So that F. Parsons might have devised
some other conceit for the auouching of the long stay before the sentence was
given (which came before it was looked for, and yet it was 9. weeks in coming)
then that the two Cardinals should stay diverse weeks to inform his
holiness, before they gave sentence in their cause. For first they gave
sentence when they were present, in so much as both the two Priests, and the
students also in the College upon the Jesuits their own reports expected,
that they should be very shortly set at liberty. Secondly, it is unlikely
that the two Cardinals should diverse weeks be debarred the Popes presence, or
denied audience, or have any great doubts in such a case, as when they heard
what was to be said against the two Priests, they judged, that they found no
other cause in them then is aforesaid. And if the Cardinals had been so little
gracious in the Popes sight, as in diverse weeks they could not have audience,
this matter being of no more importance then the Judges (the one a Divine, the
other a Lawier), after conference upon the examinations read before them, and
the offer made by the two Priests to answer to what was libelled against them,
declared it to be, a more mild restraint then close imprisonment for other 7.
weeks would have been no evil edification to such, as expected that no more
rigor the^ needs must, should have been used at Rome, against a couple of
Priests, who had many years adventured their lives for the honor of the
Church of Rome, and dignity of the Sea Apostolic.

Parsons having in the 11. paragraffe showed to what end the Cardinals did
come to the College, but not what was there done, nor what sentence was either
then, or afterward given by them, expostulateth how with any color it might be
said, that the two Priests had wrong, etc. Could he forget that they were
imprisoned with infamy before it was known whether they brought any thing
worth the handling or no, which himself confessed in the 10. paragraffe? Did
not he as a most vigilent Iaylor, keep the keys himself, that they should not
come together, or use any means to deal in the business, in which they were
jointly employed? Can he be ignorant that when the two Proctors libelled
against them, they were so far from being unwilling to answer the Libell, as
their exceeding forwardness in this was pretended a sufficient cause to keep
the one in close prison, at the least for a few days, and the other because
he was his fellow in this action? Was his memory so short, as he could not
remember how that the Cardinal Caietan in his hearing (at their arraignment)
cleared them from all things, except only, that they had offended some by this
their journey; for satisfaction whereof, they were willed to write into
England, which they performed to his present great liking, although afterward
he wrangled with them about the same Letters? Can F. Parsons say, that ever
they were brought to any answer afterward, although many things were
attempted, and objected privately by himself against them, and he willed by
them to take what course he would, when he pretended matters against them from
England, whether the Cardinal Caietan had sent the 10. of November before from
Rome (in the Popes name as he pretended, who was then at Ferrara) for
informations of their lives and behauiours, who did not accept they knew not of
what authority, and how lawfully it was sent, and set over them, more then
what he witnessed himself, a testimony not binding any to give credit in so
weighty a matter, and to the preiudise of so many, as sufficient proof will
be made? Or could F. Parsons pretending to be a religious man, and of the
society of Jesus (that is, of a society instituted in the honor of the name
of Jesus) make so slight a matter of a sentence of banishment, and of the
confinement of a couple of Catholic Priests, who had a long time labored
with peril of life, in defense of the Catholic Church, and one of them
suffered imprisonment for the same, without any provision made for them, or
suffering them to be in one Region together, which had been one point of
humanity for mutual comfort in this extremity, unless perchance he will
say that he is devoted only to the name of Jesus, and not to trouble himself
to immitate any thing in the person? If F. Parsons had not sent word into
England, that the Priests should continue under this sentence for three years,
which was more then the two Priests themselves knew, or was contained in any
sentence that ever they heard, he might have excused himself in part, and not
have been thought the sole plotter of this dealing: and if others hearing of
these proceedings (and many more which for brevity are here omitted) have
said, that the two Priests had wrong, and had less Justice in Rome then is
permitted to Turks and Jews, they cannot let them to think, speak, or write
what they judge best.

Many things does F. Parsons heap together in this 12. Paragraffe; as first,
that the Cardinals were ashamed to find the two Priests to have come so long
a journey with so little to say. Secondly, that they brought not so much as any
one Letter of credence from any Community, or private person in such form, as
might give credit. Thirdly, that even the secret memorialls of their most
secret business were seen, and found to have bin of no more weight then the
rest. Fourthly, that they should keep their chief message to themselves.
Fifthly, that they said their fill of the Archpriest, and Jesuits, and were
willed upon their oaths to say more. Sixthly, that the Priests were few who
sent them, and that F. Parsons had showed them wel-neare 20. times as many of
the same order against them.

To the first it is well known, they had many things to deal in of more
importance then are as yet granted, as the procuring of ordinary Pastors in
Gods Church, or at the leastwise, authority for the administration of the
Sacrament of confirmation (most necessary in time of persecution, or
altogether vain, and as a superfluous ceremony in Gods Church) 2. The
procuring some means for the holy oils, which used to come very late to their
hands. 3. For the acquietting of such stirs as were then begun, and were
likely (as the event proves) to grow daily to the undoing of our Country,
and such like. And if F. Parsons had thought what would have followed in the
17. Paragraffe, he would (as I think, unless he were exceedingly shameless)
have had more regard what words he had used in this 12. Paragraffe; for if that
be true, which he there relates to have been deposed at Rome, the Cardinal
and he had more reason to be ashamed of that which was brought against the
Archpriest, a creature of their own, then that the two Priests had little to
say.

But if F. Parsons should be demanded where this shame came upon the two
Cardinals, or how they came to have that conceit, that the two Priests had
come so long a journey with little to say; would he trow you without blushing
make an answer? The first time that the two Priests saw the Cardinal
Burghese, and at his importunate request, imparted to him some part of their
business, they found him so favorable unto them, that according to their
humble suit, he promised that he would procure them audience, before they
should be judged, and further them what he could. The first time likewise that
they saw the Cardinal Caietan, although he used them in very rough terms,
he willed them to bring in writing unto him, what they had to say, and told
them, that he would thereon consider. And at these meetings could neither of
the Cardinals be ashamed of that, which the Priests had to say, for neither of
them knew but in general terms some part of their business, and appointed
thereupon a farther conference. The second time that these two Priests saw
these two Cardinals, was at their arraignment, where the Cardinals might
perchance be ashamed of the insolency of their adversaries, but could not be
ashamed that the two Priests had little to say; for when they were both
together, and might have dealt in their business (although with this shameful
disadvantage, that they had all their writings taken from them seven weeks
before, and all that while kept close prisoners, that they might not speak
either each with other, or any body else (as they did both desire) to ask some
counsel being thus betrayed) they dealt as far forth as was convenient for
them to deal, that is to say, for so much as they were at that time urged to
deal in, which was upon occasion of a Libell put up against them by M. Doctor
Haddocke, and M. Martin Array, a couple of Proctors for the Archpriest: for
when this Libell was read, they offered to make their answer unto it, and for
that end they demanded a copy thereof, which at Doctor Haddocks earnest
request, (who Proctorlike before had put it up against them) was not given unto
them; so that at this time the Cardinals had more cause to be ashamed of the
two Proctors then of the two Priests, who were arraigned, and by all likelihood
were so, for they dismissed the two Proctors, and afterward acquiting the two
Priests from all matters except one, that was, that by their going to Rome many
Priests and Laymen in England were scandalized, they dismissed them also in
very friendly manner, and no case was alleged of their farther imprisonment,
but an ouer-great forwardnes in the one against the Libell, which is an
argument that the two Priests had somewhat to say, which the Cardinals not
being ouer-forward to hear (as it should seem by their not delivering the
Libell to the two Priests when they called for it) could not in reason be said
to be ashamed that the Priests had little to say. The third time, that these two
Priests did see the Cardinals, was when they went (as they were set at
liberty) first the one, then the other to take their leaves, and so to depart
to the place of their confinement, at which time also the Cardinals might
perchance make some reflection, but not upon a thing worthy of shame in the
two Priests, who during the time that they might deal, always offered
themselves, and performed as much as lay in them, and when they could not
deal therein (being joined so as the one without the other had not to attempt
any thing) they patiently suffered first close imprisonment for 14. weeks with
the appurtenances, afterward a months easier imprisonment, and lastly, a
sending severally one after another into banishment, yea and to be confined
each to one Country, and thereby to be banished not only out of England their
native Country, but also out of all Countries in the world but one, upon a
supposall that they had maintained controversies in one: and thus I leave this
point to any indifferent man to judge, what cause the Cardinals had to be
ashamed, (if they were ashamed, as F. Parsons here notes) and whether F.
Parsons (who was present at the arraingment, and saw the forwardness of the
two Priests to make their answer to what was objected against them) were he
as he would be thought, could without shame insert this clause in his Letter to
the two Priests, who were then arraigned. And howsoever he might forget any
other matter, must needs remember, that they demanded the Libell to make their
answer to it, because the courage of the one in this very action was pretended
by the Jesuits, to have bin the cause why they were not the same night set at
liberty, because forsooth this was an argument to the Cardinals that he was of
a stirring spirit, and therefore they would for 2. or 3. days longer keep
them both in prison.

To the second, they brought many Letters, from many, as F. Parsons and the
Proctors in their moodes will confess, although not from any settled community
under any head, for from this the Priests refrained until they had sent unto
his holiness, which whilst they were effecting by common suffradge (as became
Priests) a head was most fraudulently by the Jesuits procured to curb them,
and cross them in their courses, which they had intended. And if F. Parsons
had remembered, that not long after in the 21. paragraffe he tells them, that
they brought certain notes about their message from a principal man of their
side of his own hand writing, yet there to be seen, whatsoever he had
written here of a community, he would not have said that they brought no
letters of credence from any private person; but F. Parsons would perchance
give men to understand, that the petitions of Priests subscribed with their
own hands, were not of so great credence as a brazen face of a Jesuit (who
before his holiness pretended that he was a secular Priest, and sent by them in
their business) being seconded with as false a friend to the Priests as F.
Parsons himself a Jesuit in his own likeness.

To the third, if there were secret memorialls of most secret business, how
was all said by the two Priests that they could say? How can these memorialls
be termed by F. Parsons to be secret, if nothing were concealed which was
contained in them? and for their weight, if F. Parsons say true in the 17.
paragraffe, they had no need to be of greater weight then the rest, for F.
Parsons there confesses that the Archpriest was touched, yea in the very
matter of his faith, for that an heretical proposition was laid to his
charge, as appears by their papers, and depositions yet extant, which would
hardly be excused, if such a thing should be proved against one, who to give
him what F. Parsons gives him (no doubt great commendations) is a man of those
parts, and merits, that all English men do know, or at the least might imagine
so long as he did not show himself.

To the fourth, I know not what was their chief message, nor where they had
any convenient time or place to utter it, or any other, being clapped up close
prisoners before they came to do any thing, and never after suffered to be
together at liberty in Rome.

To the fifth, a reason is given before, why it was no wisdom for them to say
their fill, either of the one, or the other, being in custody of the one, who
was the more careful of his charge in respect of the other. Yet if F. Parsons
be not over forgetful, he may call to mind that about a month after their
arraignment, upon some occasion of speech between M. Chapter and him, M. Chapter told
him of some matters, which F. Parsons pretended he had not heard before, and
seemed to be astonished at them, whereby at the least this may be gathered, that
F. Parsons very rashly affirms that they had said their fill at any time.

To the sixth, (to omit what means and threats the Jesuits, and the
Archpriest did use himself to be accepted for their superior) they could not
expect to carry many Priests hands in testimony of their minds, (who foresawe
what would come of this authority procured by the Jesuits for their better
oppressing of the Priests) least their stay should be threatened down upon
his holiness (by such as would let slip no opportunity) to be a general
acceptance thereof. The authority being sent into England (as the Priests were
informed) to be first liked, before it should be confirmed upon them.

Parsons would know first how it could be said upon a little part or faction (as
he terms it) that Catholics are intollerably afflicted, being persecuted
at home, and cannot be heard abroad. Secondly, he asks who are those
Catholics. Thirdly, he boldly demands, what audience is denied to them; as
who would say, no audience was denied to them. Fourthly, he would insinuate
that the Priests, who hold with the Jesuits and Archpriest, are more
persecuted, and hated by the Council of England, then the other Priests.
Fifthly, he excuses the Pope for not giving audience to the two Priests.

To the first, it is answered, first that a little part of Catholics may be
called Catholics; secondly, that all Catholics are intollerably afflicted
at home, and cannot be heard abroad, while they make suit as they are bound to
do for such things, as are most necessary for Christians living in
persecution, and are wanting, in England and cannot be obtained, as the
Sacrament of confirmation, of which F. Parsons could not be ignorant, when he
writ these Letters, nor long before having viewed, and reviewed the petitions
of the Priests, which those two carried with them to Rome. Also the union of
all Priests together; which (as it should seem by that which has followed Fa.
Parsons courses) was but slubbered over for a small time by him, and his
fellows, or adherents who quickly after both by writing, and tongue detraction
began to refresh the former wound.

To his second demand if he should be satisfied, and the Catholics named,
the satisfaction would be as foolishly given, as the question was asked: he
might with much less danger to Catholics say, who they were not; for I do
suppose, that either there are none so careless of their own good, or their
friends, but they desired what is before mentioned should have been demanded,
and is not granted, or at the least none so shameless, as they would discover
so great a carelessness in themselves of matters of so great weight.

To the third, this answer may be made, that doubtless he took a vizard
when he writ it: what audience says F. Parsons is there denied them? were they
not with infamy cast into prison before it was known, whether they brought
any thing worth the handling, as is showed out of the 10. Paragraffe? And does
not F. Parsons in this same 13. Paragraffe confess, that they were not heard
by his holiness, to whom they went for audience? how could he within so few
lines forget himself?

To the fourth it may be truly answered, that among the Priests who have been
put to death the least part (if any at all) have been for the Jesuits, or
Archpriest. And if any difference has been made in their persecutions, it
has been in showing extraordinary favor to the Jesuits, and their adherents,
as will be proved by their usage of F. Heywood, M. Martin Array, and such
like. But if it could be proved, that the Jesuits, the Archpriest, and such
other Priests as are known to be guided by them were more persecuted, yea and
hated by the Council of England, then the other Priests, who are not guided by
the Jesuits, perchance this reason might be given thereof, that the Council
have found by the Jesuits Letters, which they have often intercepted, as also
by some books of theirs, that they came not so much into England to set
forward Religion, as they would be thought to do, and as the other Priests only
attend unto, but to further a state faction, and to deal therein more then
becomes religious men to do.

It is a world to see how he busieth himself in this kind, if the Priests
embrace his plottes for the foreign invasion or civil wars in our own
Country, they are subject to most grievous death due to traitors; if they do
not, the favor which they may find at their better informed adversaries
hands, must be their perpetual ignominy. Yet does F. Parsons incline rather
to include all the Priests within the statutes of high treason, and to this end
this ground is laid. All that do not like his proceedings or his treatises of
matters of state, do meddle more in matters of state, then he or any other: and
that this is no consequence made of any his words, or writings, but his very
ground, his Letters written or dictated to M. Martin Array, of the 18. of
January does evidently prove, where he follows his own conceit, in
deducting one proposition from an other until a primo ad vltimum he makes
this argument. The two Priests were to make a Petition, that all books should
be forbidden, which did without need or profit exasperate the state of England,
Ergo they meddled in matters of state more, and offended now the present state,
then by any other way that is yet known; and that no man have hereof any
doubt, I have set down the postscript, word for word as it is in the aforesaid
Letter concerning this point.

I had almost omitted one particular, which shall not be evil for you to know,
and that is that among other points of Commission delivered in writing to these
two Ambassadors, one principal was noted in all their latter Letters, that no
books should be admitted that offended the present state of England in
matters of state, or exasperate the adversaries; whereupon they being examined
what books or book they meant in particular, said it was the book of
succession. And being demanded farther whether any particular persecution had
been moved hitherunto by that book, or any man put to death for having it in
this three or four years since it was written, they said that they knew of
none. Then was it asked them why there was more grudging then, and complaint
against this book that had moved no persecution, then against D. Sanders
Monarchia, and book de Schismate, and D. Bristowes Motives, for which diverse
in particular have been put to death; as also against D. Allen late Cardinal,
his book Contra iustitiam Britanicam, D. Stapleton his Dydimus, M. Reynolds
against Whitakers, and such others, who are much more earnest against the
present state, then this other book of succession, which speaks so mildely
and indifferently as he can justly offend no part. And how our spiritual
masters being not able to answer, discovered themselves, and their fellows
under pretense of spirit, and religion, to be Scotists in faction, without any
respect of religion at all there, but being to set up a known heretic, and
thereby also to meddle more in matters of state, and to offend now the present
state, the^ by any other way that is yet known. So as in this they have
neither reason, religion, nor state with them, but only aemulation, folly, and
faction, etc. Thus much verbatim out of the aforesaid Letter of the 18. of
January. 1599.

Wit whither will thou? Are not these fellows desirous of this kind of sport,
who rather then they will fail of their designs, stick not to accuse innocent
men of meddling in matters of state, and setting up a King in England, the very
talk whereof is a thing most hateful, and dangerous there, and to bring them
into no less danger, and hatred in Rome, they amplify the matter with this
Epitheton; a known heretic. And upon what ground say they this? forsooth
because their spiritual masters (as they scoffingly term the two Priests)
being asked why the book of succession was more disliked then any other named
unto them, were not able to answer. Ergo, conclude these fellows, they
discovered themselves and their fellows to be Scotists in faction. How
follows this upon the antecedent? how would these simple Statists have
sported themselves, if any their discourses or trains could have taken the
least hold upon either of the two Priests? how much more to purpose might this
conclusion be deduced out of this postscript, that F. Parsons does but cogge
with the King of Scotland in his flattering Letters to some of his Nobility,
or that there is little constancy in him and his followers toward any, longer
then they think it may make for their advantage without any due regard to
conscience, right, truth, reason, or religion in their dealings? having chopped
and changed the Crown of England 8. or 9. several times, to several
persons, as it pleased him and his to play with it, and as little boys sport
themselves with King by your leave, now the great ones every hand-while do
cry, A new King, a new, such an one, as (if F. Parsons his word be of any
credit) he shall think to be the most likely to carry it from the rest, which
might be thought to have been spoken in jest, had not some of his fellows
practiced the same in France, who while the king who now is, was in danger of
being debarred that kingdom, were most earnest against him, and stood most
stoutly for other who were likely to have it, but when they saw him brought
into Paris, they were the first religious that went to congratulate him,
although not long after there were such proofs against them, that one was
publicly executed for treason against his Ma. person, and the rest banished
those parts of France. And here also it appears how greatly they wanted
matter against the two Priests, that to prove them to meddle more in matters
of state, and to offend now the present state, then by any other way that was
then known, they are driven to so miserable a refuge, as to say that one
principal point of Commission delivered in writing to the two Ambassadors (as
they term them) was, that no books should be admitted that offended the
present state of England in matters of state, or exasperate the adversaries,
Ergo they meddled in matters of state; but to omit their not ouerwise illations,
there is no truth in their relation. For when they were asked by F. Parsons
what books were meant in particular, they said that they meant all such, as
their petition did include, and being entreated by F. Parsons in particular to
say whether the book of succession were not meant for one, answer was made
that it was one, which did much offend, and to the reply which was foolishly
made, why that book should offend more then other, which are named in this
postscript; they answered to F. Parsons, that they named this no more the^ any
other, as appeared by their petition, although just exception might be taken
more against this, then any other, because it did convince that thing to be
true, which our adversaries always objected against Priests, that was, that
they dealt in state matters, and that the Council being so well assured
thereof, and able to give so good a satisfaction for their proceedings, might
afflict Catholics more then ever they did, although they did not descend to
this particular cause thereof, or proof against them, the Spaniards having
often attempted by wars to invade our Country, to which this book does
entitle them. In this I am somewhat longer then I intended, because I would
note what liberty F. Parsons, and his followers do use in their pens, who
being to this effect answered to those questions in the postscript, scornfully,
and contrary to their own knowledge affirm, that their spiritual masters (so
terming the 2. Priests) were not able to make any answer to their profound
questions, and conclude most absurdly thereupon, that the two Priests
discovered themselves to deal more in matters of state, and offend the present
state, then by any other way that was yet known.

If some Jesuits exhorting their hearers to abstain from sin, or more
particularly from all sinful dissimulation, and falsehood, as a thing hateful
to God, hurtful to their souls, and a mortal enemy to all humane
fellowship, should be asked whether they meant such a sin, or such a
dissimulation in particular, and after answer made, that they meant that and
all the like, should be urged why that more then the like, and were not able to
give a reason thereof; how would it follow that these spiritual masters were
hipocrites, which is to use dissimulatio^ in the highest degree? or to be the
notablest dissembling companions that ever were known? Could the Jesuits trow
you admit this consequence as true, although they should know in their
conscience that the consequent were most true? Thus and no otherwise play
these pious, and constant champions against the two Priests, and as the spirit
moves them, sometime the Ambassadors, sometime their spiritual masters
being to make petition that no books should be admitted that offended the
present state in matters of state, or exasperate the adversaries, and not able
to answer why this book should be more blamed then any other (as they say,
although most falsely and impertinently to their petition) prove Statists
(Scotists in faction as they term them) and ready to set up a known
Heretic, and to meddle more in matters of state, then ever any was known to
do. Would any Scotist or Sotist have made such a reason? it would best fit a
Sottist that neither cared what Scotus said, or Sotus, but run upon omne
vtile honestum, that which may make for our purpose, be it what it will be,
that is piety, that is constancy, that is state, and religion also. And thus
much for the 4. point, touched in the 13. Paragraffe.

To the fifth it may be answered, that the message of the two Priests being
about other matters then the Jesuits quarrels at Rome with the Students, F.
Parsons might have made some better excuse for the Pope his honor, which he
undertook in the fifth Paragraffe to defend; and also have somewhat remembered,
how boldly he had in this same Paragraffe demanded what audience was denied
the^. But over shoes over boots.

Rome to the Inquisitio^, which you shall seldom hear by any Jesuit, when he
has forsaken the Catholic faith; of which if a man might without offense
make a conjecture, he might think, that the Jesuits their fall (without some
special miracle) is incurable, as many examples may be given of some in
England, some in Geneua, some in other places, and they grow to be the most
notorious companions that live; but for the Priests who are much talked of, if
any of them do fail here in England, for the most part, they have had always
remorse of conscience after the first heat, and so have lived until they could
find some opportunity to rise again; and some of them having failed perchance
in respect of coffeehouse upon the hard dealing of the Jesuits, or their
adherents (who under one pretense or other do use to try whether the Priests
be confirmed in grace) have spent their speeches against them, happily not
without cause, which is no proof for the Jesuits goodness more, then it were
an argument for the goodness of the devil, that many yea wicked people rail
against him; but for that man in particular, I think F. Parsons cannot charge
him, that ever he did any harm to any Jesuit, but to the secular Priests he
did very much, which could not stand with any good liking unto them, and if
hereupon a Parenthesis should be made as impertinently as F. Parsons makes his
(that falling from God and dislike of the secular Priests, or railing against
them, commonly go together) the Jesuits and their adherents would think that
they were greatly iniuried, who for a show only, and for the better effecting
of that, which they intend, seem to bear good will to such secular Priests,
as will be guided by them, and by now and then showing themselves friendly in
some small matters to some, practice more boldly against the same parties, or
other their fellows.

Rome in defense of the former troubles that were there. But it should seem by
F. Parsons in this, and in the 13. Paragraffe, that he would feign possess
people with this wrong information; and for his question, which here he asks,
in what case our common cause of England had been, if the endeavors of the two
Priests had taken place, I may boldly make this answer, that doubtless it
could not have bin in a worse case then now it is.

Rome a great friend of F. Parsons any such thing as he here relates? and what
harm could the common cause have taken among wise men, if the two Priests had
been let alone by his holiness to deal with all the Cardinals, and great men
of Rome, being but a couple of Priests, and more easily borne down, when it
should have been evident, that they had nothing to say, as F. Parsons would
have all men believe? Was the Commissarie of the Inquisition and all the
Cardinals, and great men of Rome so sottish in F. Parsons conceit, as they
would have embraced so slender a cause, as he would show this to be?

Blackwell, which if it be true, how is it said in the 8. Paragraffe, that the
Pope foresaw that they did not expect any matter of substance against his
government. Of what substance against a man's government in an heretical country
such a deposition is, any Catholic will easily see, and ought to reflect the
more upon it, if it were in matters directly concerning his government. And how
in the 10. Paragraffe can F. Parsons say that they had made a co^tradictio^
without any foundation at all, which the Cardinals should at first suspect,
and after find it to be true, and also be ashamed that the two Priests came so
long a journey with so little to say, as he affirms in the 12. Paragraffe?
Secondly, F. Parsons affirms also, that the two Priests would have
discredited such English Priests, as stood with the Archpriest, and were the
principal of their coat, but in what it is not said, perchance it is meant, in
that these two and other in not accepting of an authority, pretended to come
from the Pope without the Popes Letters, or other sufficient testimony, might
argue the other of an ouergreat forwardness, in that they did without more
examining of the matter, yield unto it; but how the Jesuits are drawn hereby
in discredit, I conceive not, unless perchance this authority being procured
by the Jesuits, it might be thought a disgrace unto the^, that (being
adversaries to the secular Priests) they might not be trusted to choose a
superior for them, who should be an Arbiter betwixt them; which constuction I
am induced to make, both upon the manner of F. Parsons bringing in the Jesuits
with those Priests, whom he says the two that went to Rome took the way to
discredit, and also upon that which follows in this same 17. paragraffe. For
I do not think, that F. Parsons will attribute that which follows to any,
but to himself, who (if himself be of any credit) made choice of the
Archpriest as one, that would run with the Jesuits which were at variance
with the secular Priests. Those other things which F. Parsons in this 17.
paragraffe says should have been proposed, would not have been proposed
without some ground. For the first, the Protector was known to be allied to
the contrary part, and said to be ruled altogether against those, whose
Protector he pretended to be. For the second, the Seminaries were in perpetual
garboyles, and as nurseries of strife and debate between the Jesuits, and the
secular Priests. For the third, the Jesuits who were in England, aspired daily
to that, which became them not. Which first was attempted by them at Wisbitch
most manifestly, and afterward was gotten after a more secret manner, while one
in the likeness of a secular Priest bears the name of a governor over the
rest, and the Jesuits rule him, and them also.

Rome, for the two Priests were not suffered to speak together about any thing,
but Fa. Parsons (examining by how many means peace might be kept in England)
was answered among other, that were named, that this might be one, not that one
should be opposite against the other, as F. Parsons would make the world
believe, but that the strife in England being between the secular Priests,
and the Jesuits, and the Archpriest guided by the Jesuits, it was fit that
there should be a secular Priest who was not governed by the Jesuits in the
like authority with the Archpriest, and that such laws might be made, that
neither part would be ouer-hastie to offend other; at which disputation, Fa.
Parsons ouershot himself fowly. First in arguing that it was never seen that
there should be in any one country two superiors, and the one of the^ not
subordinate to the other; for himself had procured the same in England by this
new government, as appears by that the Archpriest is not, or must not be
said to be subordinate to the superior of the Jesuits, nor this to him, but
this instance at his request was not urged. Then upon an other instance given
him of the Bishops of Canterbury and York, he went about to prove a
subordination between these Archbishops, out of a foolish hardiness of the
Bishop of York to take the upper place of the Bishop of Canterbury at a
Co^uocation in the time of Henry the second: and the good Fa. would not in a
long time understand, that that strife proved no more that there was, or is a
subordination between these Archbishops, then the strife between the two
Ambassadors of France, and Spain, for the higher place (when they meet) does
prove, that one of these Kings is subordinate to the other. But to conclude
this paragraffe, if all things were so well ended in England, and all so
happily united, as F. Parsons here confesses, why were not M. B. and M. C.
sent home, but kept still in banishment, and relegation without any provision
made for them to live? What constancy was in this I know not, in show there
was but little piety, especially, if through their means this unity was
wrought, as I have been credibly informed it was upon the sight of their
Letters, and the Breue which was sent into England with their testimony to it.

Parsons rehearses in the 19. paragraffe, to draw men to send their children
thither, I know not. But if it be true, which I have heard some Priests speak,
that they have been exhorted at Rome by Fa. Parsons to thrust themselves into
state practices, and encouraged thereto, because by being Priests they were
already condemned for traitors, and could suffer no greater indignities, or
more cruel death for that, then for this; and that also be true which likewise
I have heard other say, how he practiced with the Students in Spain to set to
their hands to such like matters for the Infant, I do not see how any wise
Catholic in England or elsewhere, should be ouer-hastie to send his children,
either to the one place, or the other. Neither do I know what M. Chapter
threatened: F. Parsons in modesty, and honesty, might have used better terms,
then that he should bemone the lack of liberty; for little reason God-wot he
had (if it had been in his power) so to use M. Chapter having no proof (as it
should seem) of any thing concerning these matters; but a hearsay from a
hearsay, as he discovers in the 4. Paragraffe: and if M. C. shall put those
matters in print, which have passed at Rome, as it should appear both by that
which is here set down, and that which M. D. Bish. in his answer to these
Letters of F. Parsons does touch, I doubt it will be little for F. Parsons
credit, howsoever he vaunteth that the matter would be easily answered, upon
pretense of authentical registers of all that passed by public authority,
having himself confessed in the tenth Paragraffe, that matters were done
privately in the English College, and the Notary of the cause, no other then a
Jesuit of his own appointing: and as I have been credibly informed, himself
the Examiner (except what now and then the Commissary did for a fashion) and of
what credit these Registers may be, or how he may thrust in and out for his
purpose as sometime he does, I refer me to any honest man to judge, this
strife being principally between the Jesuits, and the secular Priests.

Rome, for by this Letter of F. Parsons it is evident, that great sin may be
committed in relating a matter; but if it be true, which is said in the same
Paragraffe, that al things were well ended, I do not see how they could be
accused either of breach of oath, or incurring the censures, having once
procured that peace, and unity, to which they were bound. And in the 22.
Paragraffe it is again repeated, that all was ende^d, and consequently the two
Priests were discharged of their bonds, and might very well have been sent home
again, had not there been an intention in some, that the peace should not long
endure, which these two had procured.

Parsons shows himself most willing to deliver the two Priests from any
thing which he had written against them, or willed others to write. I will not
here repeat that which is sufficiently before showed, how willingly in this
Letter he has himself written, whatsoever he willed others to write. He
acknowledges that he did ever attribute their attempt rather to error, and
lack of consideration, then to ambition, although in the first Paragraffe he
seems to excuse their attempt also, and attributes the evil success
thereof to their own defaults, as if they had handled some good matter not in
good sort, as once a most reverend and grave Prelate seriously told them that
some others had done in a matter between them and the Jesuits. If they should
not acknowledge error, and lack of consideration in this their attempt, they
might justly be blamed, althought perchance that error, and lack of
consideration, grew upon too good an opinion conceived of some in Rome, and was
confirmed by others lately come from thence, and thereupon they made not such
provision for their own safety, and their so free dealing in their affairs,
as they might have made, little suspecting, that coming so far to speak with
his Holiness in matters of the Church, which required conference not only
each with other, but with others also, they should not be suffered to speak
one with the other, or any man else to ask counsel therein, until after some
two or three days after the Breue was gotten, at what time they were licensed
to come together, and were in scorn bidden to deal in their matters for which
they were sent to Rome. But although F. Parsons did ever as he says, attribute
this their attempt, rather to error, and lack of consideration, then to
ambition, yet least that birds of one feather should fly too far asunder,
he gives here some reasons, why men might think that ambition did make the
two Priests to take this action in hand, to give me^ to understand of his ready
mind to hold up his fellow F. Bald. in this untruth, of which although M. Bish.
in his answer to this Letter of F. Parsons does sufficiently discourse, yet it
will not be amiss to say somewhat here concerning F. Parsons proofs. For the
first proof I have spoken with such as gathered the petitions, which the
Priests did make, and they do assure me, that M. C. was not proposed by any to
be made a Bishop. M. B. was, but if M. C. did carry those writings and kept
those secret from M. B. wherein he was named, what proof is this against M.
B.? To the second proof, I may answer as once I heard an answer made for F.
Parsons, when it was reported here in England, that all the boys at S. Omers
had conspired to make him a Cardinal, and had written such effectual Letters
to the Pope for it, that (as it was here reported) both he, and the general
of the Jesuits, yea and all the friends that they could make in the Court of
Rome, were little enough to keep him from being a Cardinal, which F. Parsons
could not help; for who can hinder Letters to be written by such as are many
hundred miles distant from them? But I marvel who should write this Letter, or
whether F. Parsons did ever show it to these 2. Priests, so as they might see
it and read it? To the third proof, M. B. says, he could never obtain so much
favor of F. Parsons, as to see those notes, and as I am informed, M. Chapter says
the same, although he were most importunate with them (especially upon their
often promises) eue^ until the last hour of his restraint or abode at Rome,
yea and chale^ged it, that it was forged. I have heard this conjecture made,
how it was forged. M. C. being at the first to go alone to Rome about the
affairs of England, had certain instructions sent unto him from D. Ba. who
always used to call M. C. by a name of which the first letter was L. by which
he was called when they studied together at Rome, and accordingly sent
certain instructions to ^. L. which M. C. (sometime called M. L.) carried with
him to Rome, when he went in company with M. B. Now what little need of wit
there was where there wanted honesty, I refer me to them who could to the
one L. join an other L. and either blot or scrape away as much as needed of
the first stroke of the ^. in ^. and so leave it ^ L L. which perchance in
that writing of M. D. Ba. they might do with some facility, because as all
men know, who ever received any Letters from him, he writes that word Mr. in
this sort ^. as easily and with little help, it may be made to stand for ^: and
as it should seem, when it was done, it did so please F. Parsons, that he told
it often, and by often telling it, thought at last himself that it was true;
and was not ashamed to write it, and send it round about the Christian world
against the two Priests; to whom notwithstanding his often promise upon their
constant denial thereof, he was ashamed to show it when they earnestly
demanded to see it; might not F. Parsons have said somewhat else of himself
when in the 15. Paragraffe he said he was become a fool? And was it not great
need that either there or somewhere else he should commend himself in this
action of his, concerning his dealing with the two Priests?

Parsons tells the two Priests that now all is ended, and this and all the
rest will easily die and be forgotten, as already he trusts all is forgotten
on all hands. Was the affliction so small, that even while it was, it was not
felt? or if it were still felt, and could not but be so thought of by men of
best understanding (being a banishment out of their native Country, and all
other Countries in the world but one, without any provision made for them) with
what face does F. Parsons tell them, that all is ended, and that he trusts
all is already forgotten on all hands? Could this, or any of the rest die, and
be forgotten, so long as the two priests lived, and were not forgotten, but
kept still in banishment for this, and the rest? If all this had been ended in
all others, and been forgotten by them, yet could it not possibly be forgotten
by the two Priests, who even to this day suffer persecution for it, and with
such extremity, as the one being driven by necessity to return into his
Country for necessary relief to sustain life (notwithstanding he gave
notice of the cause of his return to the Archpriest, and how for more safety
he had made an appeal from the sentence, which not having inflicted any
censure, nor being to inflict any but upon such, and such condition was in the
general opinion of the learned so suspended by an appeal made before the
event of the condition, as after the event of the same condition, it could take
no force against the appellant) he was upon this notice given to the
Archpriest presently denounced (although untruly) to be suspended, and without
any other cause given, the Archpriest at the same time abrogated, anullated,
and took away all his faculties, when, or by whomsoever they were granted,
which doubtless, was beyond his Commission, which was, to direct, admonish,
and punish as occasion of offense in breach of his peace should be offered, not
whom, and when, and for what he listed; much less for an entrance into the
Country, which if it had been without leave, or not justifiable otherwise, it
did belong to others, and not to him to punish, and much less if it were true,
which F. Parsons says in this 21. Paragraffe, that now all was ended, and that
he trusted all was forgotten on all hands. But to return to our 22.
Paragraffe, what was that which was ended? If the cause between the Archpriest
and all the Priests were ended, how were the two Priests still kept in
banishment? but we must here learn a new trick, how to have all things ended
and forgotten. Those who are iniuried must say nothing: good counsel. So may
the Potent oppress whom they may by might, or fraud, and all is well, yea and
all is forgotten, if those who are oppressed bear themselves well, and
prudently, and do stay, and not stir up such as do seem to favor or bemone
their case. But perchance these reports which came to F. Parsons ears from
Flaunders, and France, may be said to have been the hinderance that all was
not well on the two Priests sides (for as it should seem in the sixth
Paragraffe, they were not come to the ears of them, whom they are said most to
concern) but then before these reports came to the ears either of the one, or
of the other, how was all well, and all forgotten, and yet the two Priests kept
still in banishment? there are Leters under Fa. Parsons hand to be seen, to
testify that all was well, and under F. Warfords hand likewise, and others
doubtless enough to the same purpose, before these things were objected
against them, or this devise wrought for the farther persecuting the two
Priests, and delaying them still in banishment, and confinement, without any
provision made for them to live, why were they not then dismissed? Perchance F.
Parsons did at that time divine, that the two Priests might give some cause,
that notwithstanding all was well ended, and as he trusted on all hands
forgotten, yet their particular cause might be exempted from that all, and not
only not be forgotten, but prosecuted still unto the uttermost that the
straungest mood could devise. Upon this therefore his divination, and great
foresight, notwithstanding that peremptorily, or positiuely he said in the 18.
Paragraffe, that all was well ended, and iterateth the same in this 22.
Paragraffe, and trusts that already all is forgotten on all hands, yet he
sauceth it with a condition, that is, if M. B. and M. C. do bear themselves
well, and prudently, and do stay, and not stir up such as do seem to favor,
or bemone their case. Now all good Catholics in England do heartily grieve at
the present stirs in England. M. B. and M. Chapter were far enough off; who
has begun them? All those who did seem to favor, or bemoane the case of M.
Bish. and M. Chapter had made an atonement with their adversaries, and forgiven
all those slanders, and detractious proceedings which were practiced against
them: and neither of themselves, or stirred up by M. Bish. and M. Chapter have they
revived all that which F. Parsons here confesses to have been dead,
forgotten, or ended. Did not rather F. Rob. Ion. a Jesuit (no great favorer
or bemoaner of M. Bish. and M. Chapter their case) broach this division again, and
renew the soar (which was, if not clean healed, yet forgotten, and the
offenders forgiven) by publishing that the Priests (who did forbear to admit
M. Black. for their superior, until they saw the Breue in his confirmation)
were Schismatikes, and that all those, who should not hold the same, were under
the censures of the Church? Did not M. Black. soon after, both approve the
same paradox of F. Ion. the Jesuit, and furthermore publish a resolution sent
(as he said) from Rome, either by Father Wasord or F. Titch. (both Jesuits)
which avowed the same, with many Edicts, and prohibitions, under pain of
incurring the censures, that the Priests should not defend them selves from
this most absurd, and injurious calumniatio^? Was it so necessary that there
should be tumults in England (which must be said still, no doubt, to be
between the secular Priests, and the Catholics) that the Jesuits must still
give the onset, although for to avoid blame in the opinion of such as will
blind themselves, their enterprises have been so prosecuted by covert Jesuits
(who were not known but as secular Priests) and by the Archpriest, as they
are generally taken for quarrels among the secular Priests? Can F. Parsons say,
and not think to be laughed at, that these stirs are reviued by default of
M. Bish. and M. Chapter their not prudent bearing themselves, or that the Jesuits,
and the Archpriest were stirred up by them, as men who would seem to favor,
or bemone their cause? But had peace long continued in England, which was
feared that it would, (had it bin in their power who were so maruellously
injured) some judged that they should miss somewhat at which they aimed, and
therefore they set all things worse then they were before. We hope we shall now
shortly at the least see to what end they did it.

Priests cause, they themselves must answer how they found such as with whom
they talked; yet if it be true, which F. Parsons relates in the 16.
Paragraffe, it is very likely, that they told some tale, which carried some
weight with it, or else both the Commissarie of the Inquisition had little
reason to use such words as F. Parsons there says he did, and F. Parsons less
cause to fear least their dealing with all the Cardinals, and great men in
Rome, would (to use his own term) bring the common cause in a pretty plight.
He vaunteth here, but falsely and injuriously against the principal of our
Nation, either in Flaunders or England, who should complain of the overmuch
lenity used in ending of the cause, and that none but upon passion or
misinformation did bemone the^. The judgment of the two Cardinals Caietan, and
Burghese, I saw in their letters of the 21. of April, 1599. to the Rector or
vicerector of the english College, and that was, that it was not expedient
that the two Priests should by and by return unto those parts, where they had
maintained controversies with other of their order. Wherefore they commanded
the two Priests, that for a time they should not presume to go without
license, into the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. I have been
credibly informed that neither of them were ever in Scotland or Ireland, and
therefore could not maintain any controversies there in parsonall presence,
but if they did maintain any, it was by Letters, which they might do
(notwithstanding this prouiso) from other parts also, neither can I learn that
ever they maintained any such in England, but if they had, in my simple
judgment, it was no good reason why therefore they should be debarred Scotland
and Ireland; and although this were the judgment which was specified by the
aforesaid Letters, yet there was an other judgment also, that they should not
be both in one Regio^, as it should seem; for although in the Cardinal
Burghese his Letters of the 15. of September, 1600. to M. C. it is insinuated,
that they might choose their place of banishment and confinement, (which is a
confession) that because they had controversies in some one place, not
certainly set down where, (if we look into the aforesaid mentioned Letters
of the 21. of April, 1599.) or because by their return into England, some
controversies might have grown there (as appears by Cardinal Burghese his
Letters of the 15. of September, 1600.) they must be banished out of all places
in the world but one, where they must live in relegation God knows how long
(for neither is there any certain time set down for this) yet in the answer
unto it, written by M. C. the 4. of Noumber following, I read that he was not
suffered to be in France, as he had made his choice; and if this was not cause
sufficient for honest men truly informed of the ending of their cause to
bemoane them sincerely, and from the heart, yet with this circumstance at the
least it might be, that no provision being made for them to sustain life, they
were banished out of all such places, where they might have means to live,
upon a supposed cause never proved against them, or a bare suspicion of what
might hereafter be, unless to go to Rome to prevent great controversies, be
said to be to maintain cotrouersies, or to give a suspicion that they would
make controversies, when as that thing by which probably they might assure
themselves that controversies would grow, came from Rome, and was no where to
be remedied but at Rome. And it will appear by those authentical Registers in
Rome, (if any be kept) that they sought with all submission to his holiness,
to know his will in a cause not made known by any Letters before from him, or
by any sufficient testimony otherwise that it was his order.

Parsons would seem to give good counsel, although in all that goes before
he shows how little he cares to follow any, but rather aduentureth to say or
do, what comes into his mind, and seeks afterward to persuade such as
against whom he works to have patience, and say nothing but be peaceable, not
to find fault, or blame any his proceedings, least that tumults arise thereon,
as who did resolve rather to go through with whatsoever he attempteth, then to
recall, or reclaim himself at any time, when he has done amiss; for proof
whereof, he caused this Letter (as it appears in the 6. Paragraffe) to be
communicated to others, beside those to whom it was written, who should also
publish it further without any shame (as it is to be feared) of the follies, or
conscience for the untruths contained therein, and with as much brevity as
the matter would suffer declared in this Censure.

DOCTOR BISHOPS AN swear to Fa. Parsons Letter, of the 9. of October. 1599.
YOur Letters ( Father) of the 9. of October. came late unto my hands, being by
you sent about (as it were in circuit) open; to be read and coppied out by
diverse others before they should come unto me. Meet it was surely, that so
odd a story might not run the ordinary course of vulgar Letters: but
against the property of missiues, and contrary also to common ciuility, be
communicated first to others, and last to him, unto whom they principally
belong. Yet truly when I heard of others, the purport and contents of them, I
had no great delight to look upon them, but let them lie by me more then a
month, ere I read them once over, so unwilling have I always been, and yet
am, to give my mind to such troublesome business, which is like to draw me
from a desired repose, into the lists of an unpleasing dispute: and that with
those who pretend to be (as in equity they should be) my very good friends. I
had also long before often heard of many slanderous rumors raised of me
unjustly, and seen some flying Letters stuffed full of misconstruction of my
actions: yet I remained silent, not without the offense of diverse honest and
wise personages, for that I spared to write in defense of my own innocence,
and to purge and clear my self from injurious calumny. But I knowing my poor
credit to be a matter of small moment: and fearing least to treat of such a
pitiful subject, might be some hinderance unto the Catholic cause: did
prefer the common good before my private interest; our blessed Lords honor
before mine own reputation; leaving unto his omnipotent divine disposition,
the success and event of the whole matter. And so putting up patiently those
injuries, passed over the time in silence quietly, until that now ( Father)
you have by addressing such Letters unto me, rowsed me (as it were) out of my
quiet Lodge, and do press me, either to acknowledge for true, that which I
take in many points to swerve much from the truth, or to declare and show
what I know concerning those matters. Wherefore being very sure that the
honor of God his cause cannot be stained by a true defense of my self his
poor servant from dishonor, and that it needs not (as the Prophet says)
our lying, but is rather by truth and equity vpholden and maintained. I will
set down the verity of that affair (as before almighty God my just Judge)
most sincerely, and withal, so temperately, as that no upright and in
different Reader shall have reason to be offended with me. Yet to speak (after
my manner) plainly, I cannot ( Father) but mistrust, least you will not take it
well, for you have already showed your self to have been moved with my
former Letters, which only had friendly requests and admonitions: how much the
more are these likely to trouble you, which carry in them also, free, yet
friendly reprehensions; which unto a high and hot stomach are of much harder
digestion? But to mittigate the matter, consider I pray you, how unwillingly,
and as it were enforced by your self, I come at length to set pen to paper:
and what liberties by God and all good men are allowed unto all sorts of
persons, speaking in their own defense: and then remembering how you have taken
in accusing of us a rethoricall license, you cannot in equity and reason, but
approve and like in us defendants, a modest, Christian liberty of speech. And
so desiring you to prepare your self unto some small patience, I come now to
the answer of your Letters.

In the beginning whereof you write, that no one Letter appeared as then from
me to you, accusing my long silence, and within ten lines after, you say, that
that week you received a Letter from me of an old date, to the which you
answer. What Riddle I pray you may this be? No Letter appeared from me to you
when you began to write: and yet that week you had received a Letter from me,
what? was the Letter you received invisible, that it appeared not in his
likeness when you received it? Yet it appears by your particular reply unto
the parts thereof, that you had thoroughly seen and perused it. To say that
after you began your Letter you were a week ere you came unto the tenth line
of it, and that mine came in the mean season, were ridiculous. What then
remains, but that in the first period of your Letter, there is either some
egregious equivocation, or evident untruth, which fell out (by God his
providence as I take it) very fitly, to forewarne your Readers what credit
they may give unto much of that which follows. For, if in the very first
lines they find such apparent vanity, voluntarily uttered without any just
cause; let them judge what conclusion and dubling is like to be devised, when
it will serve for an advantage. Correspondent unto this oversight is that bad
construction which you make of my former letters; but that it sauoureth a little
more of an uncharitable mind. In them I gave you to understand, that they by
whom I passed (not all sorts of people as you report) misliked much of your
rigorous dealing: and therefore desired you for the love of our general cause
to use more mildness. You hereof infer that I am fallen into temptation, and
much changed from that I was. In this your collectio^ I find two faults, the
one, in that you insinuate that then I spoke placentia, but that now I writ
acerba: There indeed I often refrained franckly to speak what I thought,
because it was like to do you small good, and more then like to do me much
harm, yet I many times to your self, and to those who would tell you all,
grievously complained of your severe and rigorous kind of carriage toward your
countrymen of all sorts, much unseeming (as me thought) your private person,
more dissonant from your holy profession, and very ill suting, both with the
times we live in, and the parties you have to deal withal.

The other fault more foul in my opinion, is that of a friendly admonition
you gather a falling out: and because I went about to persuade you, to be more
mild, kind, and courteous, toward your own countrymen, who otherwise endure
sorrow enough: you judge me fallen from your friendship into a dangerous
temptation, and to have incurred many (I know not what) grievous sins and
censures, but I am not greatly dismayed at these your big words and terrifying
consequents; when as I find them to be (as this is) erroneous in the light of
nature, and condemned even by the Heathen Philosophers, who like well, approve,
and commend as very dutiful among dear friends, not only exhortations which
I then used for the love I bare you, but also reprehensions, which I now come
after withal, being thereunto by you compelled. I am sorry to see you who have
so long lived among so many good religious Fathers, so far from that pitch of
humility, and mortificatio^, which makes a man to contemn himself and the
honors of this world, and to desire to be evil thought and spoken of: that you
may not abide to hear tell of any fault of yours, but by and by, you fall out
with your friend, for that he in fair terms entreats you, to look unto
such an evil humor, as partly by natural inclination, partly by long custom
of harkening unto flatterers, you may be subject unto. And albeit in another
passage of yours, you would seem not to mislike them, who advertise you of
that they think amiss: yet this your evil taking of such aduertisements when
they come, does evidently prove the contrary: and this fault is taken to be
too common in some of your Society; and I my self once before, found the like
demeanor in one of your principal Agents in England: These Letters were the
cause why h^ lost an Assistantship, by M. Black.^ own repor^
whom I friendly certified of some odd dealings which were reported of the
Society, assuring him that I believed them not, but desired to hear from him
the verity of those affairs, for my further satisfaction. I was so far off
from receiving a good answer (due at least in courtesy for that I desired it)
that my Letters were read openly and showed unto others, and sinister
construction made of them, to procure me evil will and discredit. What kind
of religion, civility, or humanity may be in such manner of dealing, I can
hardly perceive, and list not here to discuss, hoping that when you shall see
other men scanne, examine, and confute your Letters, as you were wont to do
theirs; you will be hereafter more mannerly and mild interpreters, least you
otherwise hap to meet with the same measure that you meat to others. Well, let
us go on.

You pretend, that you expected to receive from me loving Letters and much good
service. A great presumption surely of my no small mortification, if you speak
unfeignedly. For it were no vulgar virtue for manifold and manifest slanders,
calumniarions, imprisonment, and exile, which I received there among you: to
return and render commendations, congratulations, all sorts of sweetness and
courtesies; which nevertheless, you would have the world ween that you
attended at my hands. But to speak without glosing, your own guilty
conscience, told you even before our departure as you signify, that you were
not like to receive from me (whom you know to be plain and round:) any other
then ordinary courtesy; such as the love of God and law of charity binds
me unto: the which for those good parts it has pleased God to endowe you with,
I will always afforde you in a high degree, and more too, when I shall
perceive that you esteem more of it, and to go about not in empty words, but
by sound deeds better to deserve it.

But not to wander up and down after all the particularities of such a long
tedious Letter: I will reduce my whole answer unto two points. The former
shall show what reasons moved my brethren to send unto Rome, and us to go
thither at their request. In the latter shall be declared how we were used
there; in the one or the other I will answer to whatsoever in your Letter
touching me, and hope by both to give full satisfaction unto all honest, equal,
and upright consciences, of that which they have heard objected against me,
concerning that negotiation.

The most holy and blessed course, of the peaceable reduction of our Country
unto the ancient Catholic faith in Apostolic manner, being before somewhat
hindered by a dispute about government in Wisbitch: and afterward much more
troubled by emulation, growing between some English of the Society, and
certain other Priests: who took themselves much impeached in their credit by
them: it did not a little grieve me (who had employed a great part of my best
years in that our good Lords harvest: and had nothing on earth in so singular
recommendation, as to see that heavenly work prosper) to consider what
impediment and let of it was like to follow, if those sparks of dissension
were not speedily quenched. Wherefore, with many others of the auncientest
sort, and of better mark, merit and affection toward our Country, I
traveled about a sovereign medicine, for the present malady (as it seemed
unto us) and a notable preservative against any other that might ensue
afterward; which was to unite and knit our selves together, in some loving,
sweet, and easy association and brotherhood, that so by mutual intelligence,
counsel and aid, we might either prudently prevent, or speedily meet with all
inconveniences that might happen to arise among us: being now many in number,
and every one left unto his own government and discretion. This matter of
union was communicated unto all, and every man almost requested to join in
it: a draught of rules were drawn, which were few, easy, reasonable, and
much profitable: which were also showed unto whosoever would see them, that if
they misliked any thing therein, it might be amended, and so made agreeable
unto all honest desires. What could in reason be more demanded? Yet, because
this proceeded not, as it is thought from the Society, nor had any dependence
upon them; although at first they seemed to approve it much, as that which was
in itself, honest, just, and necessary: yet afterward seeing it likely to go
forward, and to grow into such a body as theirs is, they openly opposed
themselves against it, and stirred up their fellows to contradict and cross
it, as much as they could: and in the mean season coined a new form of
government or subordination (as they call it) never heard of in the Church of
God since the the beginning of the world, until our days; and by Cardinal
Caietanes authority, caused the same to be cast upon us, at unawares; our
co^sents or likings never demanded, until it was (as they said) established.
This cunning and audacious enterprise with the prepostorous unadvised
proceeding in it: moved far greater coffeehouse among us then was before,
and was the principal cause of sending unto Rome, (the sovereign Court of
Ecclesiastical controversy) that from whence the fountain of our grief did
seem to spring, from thence in like manner we might derive and draw the
streams of consolation. That we had many weighty, urgent, and lawful motives
to sue unto that Court, a wise, upright, and well practiced man in
Ecclesiastical affairs, shall (I doubt not) willingly grant me after he
has well weighed and pondered these reasons following; which are taken of the
order it self, of the obtaining, sending, publishing, and executing of it.

First, touching this subordination, it being no such as our savior Christ
Jesus delivered to his Apostles, or that has been seen practiced in any part
of Christendom these 1600. years: no marvel though simple witted men, who
desire not to straie from the holy steps of our forefathers, were at the first
not a little amazed at it, and could not be so very easily induced to approve
it. This also, besides the novelty of it, being much more odious and
intolerable (as it was then proposed) then any other government that our
predecessors had ever lived under. For having full and absolute power to punish
rigorously, and that (as it were) at pleasure and discretion: it had no
faculty joined with it, or ability to benefit or do any good at all: no not
so much, as upon amendment of the party punished, to restore unto him again
that he had taken away from him before. If now he have more ample authority,
he may thank our complaints, which were no small cause of it. And hereunto his
Injunctions (whereof more in an other place) that Priests should not meet
together privily in our country; that they should not secretly send unto
their friends over the sea: whereas openly they can do no such thing, as all
the world knows; and tell us (I pray you) when and where ever you heard of
such an Ecclesiastical government in any Christian country before: that
sacred Priests, the free children of God his family so greatly privileged by
all good Christian Princes, should be (I know not by whom) in such a servile
sort yoaked?

Again, this punishing authority cannot be well practiced in England during
this heat of persecution, and therefore seemed to be frustrate and given in
vain: for by the Canon law (which is the common rule of spiritual causes) as
by all other laws; no punishment ought by sentence of Judge to be inflicted
upon the offender (not confessing the action) before he be by order of law
convicted. Confession of the fault is sildome in that Court or never to be
expected: wherefore lawful defense is to be granted unto any person accused
before he be condemned. But no process according unto order of law can be
framed and followed, so long as we have hot persecutors, laying wait every
where to apprehend us. For to omit all other difficulties (which in practice
will be found to be very many) where can a safe place be found to assemble
the parties, their witnesses and Proctors together; and there to hold as it
were an Assize, for the determination of their controversies, which to be
necessary, Lancelot a man singularly seen in both laws and author of the
institutes of the Canon law sets down (which he takes out of the Canon
law, Extra de appell. cap: ex part tua: see also the gloss there: which both
require a secure place, both for the parties, Proctors, and witnesses, or else
holds them for excused if they appear not) Institu. L. 3. Tit. s. Locus in
these words, Tunc enim ius dicenti impune non paretur si locus citatione
designatus pestilens sit aut alias pro citato male tutus. Then may a man freely
not obey him that ministers justice, when the place in the citation assigned
is infected with the plague, or otherwise not safe for the party cited. Now
every Catholic knows, that there is no place in our Country, free from
danger for Priests to assemble together: such diligent watch and ward being
laid in every shire to apprehend them. And who will be so simple, as to allow
them a hall in his house for their pleadings, whereby he (that cannot start)
does cast himself into a hundredth perils, of loosing not only all his goods
and liberty, but his life also and inheritance? A place of assurance then
cannot in these times be appointed for the appearance: he therefore is
warranted by law not to appear, although he be cyted by his lawful
magistrate. And so no action can be commenced, much less determined by this
authority of the Archpriest: and consequently, such penal power is to small
purpose in our Country. This subordination then being extrauagant without
example of antiquity, hateful, as having power to punish, but not to
pleasure; and scarcely possible to be now practiced in our Country, had we not
great reason to certify his holiness of the inconveniences of it, and in
humble sort to sue unto him for remedy and redress, before he put to his
hand unto the confirmation of it?

And this you must needs much more easily grant, if you consider how this
subordination was procured and gotten: for it seems to have been by false
information, which alone is sufficient to overthrow the whole authority. My
proof shall be pregnant, taken out of the very letters Patents of the
Archpriest, where are these words, Rations pro illa subordinatione ab ipsis
Sacerdotibus Anglis redditae S. mo D. N. probatae fuerunt. The reasons by the
English Priests themselves exhibited for that subordination unto his holiness
were well liked. Mark I pray you how this subordination was obtained at the
suite and persuasion of the Priests in England. Now I appeal unto the
consciences of my loving brethren the Priests then in England, whether ever
they had heard of any such stratagem or strange subordination before they
felt it (as it were) clapped on their shoulder, sure I am for the most part of
them, howsoever they were M. James ^tand: who had given his name to be a
^esuite (and was the man who by Fa. Parsons sub^rnation im^loyed himself in
this action) confessed before diverse priests ^t his return, that he had ^n
interpre^atiue consent of the Priests in England.
drawn afterward to accept of it by flattery, fraud, or threats, that they
never dreamed of it, before they saw it, so far off were they from devising
and tentering persuasions unto his holiness, for the admitting of it. I will
not deny, but that some one Priest, who had been in England, being then idle in
Rome, might by evil counsel and subornation take upon him to be sent of the
whole body, and so contrary unto conscience and good order, speak in their
names, that never sent him. But what was granted upon such untrue suggestion,
every man knows to be of no force and validity; and that we in England had
just cause to certify his holiness, by trusty messengers, how we were
greatly abused, by the^ who used our names, to obtain that exorbita^t devise,
which we neither desired nor liked, but rather, that it would please his
holiness, to establish among us, that sound Ecclesiastical Hierarchy which was
instituted by the wisdom of God, and had bin ever sithence in time of
persecution, as well as in peace, observed in all Christian Nations: that he
would (I mean) give us Bishops the successors of the Apostles, and only
ordinary Pastors of God his Church, who might confirm, consecrate oils, and
bring many other of God his blessings among us. But not to digress from my
purpose.

The third cause why this subordination did mislike us, was for that it came
not authentically from his holiness, by Bull, Breue, or any other lawful
instrument, but was framed by you Father (as it is thought) liked by Cardinal
Caietane, (a great patron of your plots) and by virtue of his Letters
authorized and sent in amongst us. If his L. had been so provident as he was
aduenterous, he should have certified us before, how he came by any such
sovereign commandment over our Country: for that was utterly unknown unto
the most of us. We had heard that he was Protector of our College, and of our
Nation in the City of Rome: but it little follows thereof, that he might
erect a spiritual Monarchy in England. For there be in Rome many other
Protectors of Nations, but yet no one besides him, that takes upon him any
such authority. But to purge himself from this stain of usurpation, he
writes that his holiness willed him to take order amongst us for peace and
unity. Let us do him the honor to believe him on his word (although some
report that he has little deserved it at our hands:) was there no other
means to be found for appeasing of all parties, then to cast upon us without
our priuities and consents, contrary to the Canons of the Church, a platform
of government, never before seen or heard of in the Church of God? Would not a
man marvel where his Lordships judgment was, when he approved without any one
president such novelties? Surely, their wits seem to have been gone on
wooll-gathering, that invented this, as a way of peace and union; it being most
like, what for the strangeness of it, as also for the disorderly obtaining
and sending of it, to engender much more debate amongst us then was before.
For, according to the general voice of the wisest Commonweal men: there is no
higher way to dissension and garboiles, then to bring in (as it were perforce)
a new and strange order of government. But not to omit any thing for his
Lordships excuse, he writes in the same his Letters, that his holiness liked
well of the reasons exhibited unto him for that subordination: so in the same
sentence he says, that we english priests presented many gentle persuasions
unto his holiness, for the admitting of it, but in this his Lordship seems to
have bin deceived: why then might he not so be in the other? But admit that his
holiness liked of the reasons, and that there was no surreption: no more
follows, but that his holiness would have the Cardinal prove how the priests
in England would like of that subbordination, and according as he should hear
of their acception, he would after either approve or disprooue it. This (at
the most) to have been his holiness mind, I heard of a principal Officer of
his at Rome. Also, other honest and virtuous Priests, affirm on their
credits, and are ready to bind it with their oaths; that they heard you
Father, yea and the Pope his Holiness himself say, that he would not
establish and set any certain superiority amongst us in England; before he
had heard from us of our good wills and likings, which was fatherlike,
lovingly, and wisely spoken; conformable unto the ancient Canons: see did.
61. can. nullus inuitis detur Eps. Let no Bishop be given to men against there
wills: the reason he sets down in the law: did. 63. can. si forte: ne
ciuitas (inuita) Episcopum non optatum aut contemnat aut oderit. Least having a
Bishop given them against their wills, they do either contemn or hate him,
whom they desired not. If such liking and consent be required by the Law for
ordinary Magistrates: how much more for extraordinary and such as they never
heard of before; and that especially at the first reducing of them to
subjection, who before were free from that yoke: when after the gloss upon
the word Rogarunt: did. 21. can. In nouo. non nisi volentibus dabitur Prelatus
etiam a Papa. A Prelate is not to be given but to the willing, no not by the
Pope: much less of a Cardinal. Here we took these words of the Canon first
cited did. 61. to have place. Sit facultas Clericis renitendi si se viderint
pregrauari, and quos sibi ingeri ex transuer so agnouerint non timeant
refutare. This passage falls so fit to our purpose, that it seems to have
been made for the like case. We were about a sweet brotherlike association,
every man made privy to it, every ones advise and counsel required and
desired: in the mean season to cross our good meaning and designement for
unity and concord, a stately superiority is intended upon us, whether we will
or will not. Who can now condemn us for taking the benefit of this law,
which gives us as it were commission to resist such intrusion, and bids us
boldly to reject and refute him that was so ouerthwartly thrust upon us;
especially by appeal and recourse unto both our superiors, for the composing
and quietting of all parties? And truly to declare my opinion, who of many have
thought very well of M. Blackwell, and even then wished him greater preferment:
he surely, if he had harkened unto his own natural disposition and accustomed
modesty, and had not been by some hasty hot-spurres pricked forward, would
not upon so slender a foundation as a Cardinals Letter, have taken upon him so
strange a vocation, against the consents of so many his brethren: some his
ancients, some his equals, many not much his inferiors, in standing,
learning, good affection, and merit toward our Country: a man of his gravity
and piety, that had no doubt many times pithily declaimed against ambition and
desires of honors, should at least (as me seems) ere he had undertaken that
dignity, have granted so many grave learned men, leave and respite, to
inform themselves thoroughly of the whole matter, before they did bind
themselves to that subjection.

But to proceed forward in my proofs, the publication and execution of this
subordination much more yet increased our dislikes, and ministered new occasions
to appeal from it. The publishing of it, by the Archpriest his own Letters,
seemed indecent. Where were your wisdoms? Could not a Letter at least have
been devised from the Cardinal (who was ready to assign all that Father
Parsons presented unto him) to the Priests, aduertising them of this his good
pleasure, or some other mannerly invention have been framed; but that the good
man himself must needs be made his own Trumpeter and Crier: and be forced to
offer that violence to his modesty, as to blow abroad and divulgate his late
achieved promotion, and to beg of his fellows, or command them (take of
the two whether you think more civil) to like well of his preferment, and
thereunto in all haste, to set to their hands: they must not in any case,
stay to examine his authority, what it was, whence or how it came, but
forthwith put their necks in the collar, be subject and obey him. This
uncomely and untimely haste to bind our selves, I know not unto what
subjection, seemed very raw, and of hard digestion: and nothing suitable with
the gravity and weight of the matter, which required much more mature
deliberation.

Moreover, when by word of mouth he broached the same his authority unto
certain Priests, he to amend the matter withal, added thereunto somewhat of
his own: and being forthwith taken tardie, he did presently confess that he
indeed put thereto somewhat: as honest Priests on their oaths will testify.
This gave a great presumption that the matter was contrived by their friends,
and that they might add or diminish at their pleasure. Which is more probable,
if we call to mind and mark what instructions he gave forth at the first as
received from the Cardinal. Among others, were these, that Priests should not
meet secretly together, that they should not send any privy messages over the
seas; that they should take in good part whatsoever was either written or
spoken against them, and such like which are not in the roll of his
instructions sent him from the Cardinal, as every body may see; and I can by
producing a true copy of them, when need shall be, evidently demonstrate: and
besides are so void of reason, so odious and intolerable in our Country,
especially at this time, when Priests cannot meet together or do any thing,
but in secret: that a babe might plainly feel them, never to have proceeded
from his holiness, or from any noble, free or compassionate heart, but to
savor of (I know not what) base mind too too much addicted to terror,
cruelty, and servitude. I will (that I be not ouerlong) omit diverse other
pregnant and forcible reasons which we had of sending unto Rome; this only I
may not leave behind, which of it self were a sufficient cause to sue and
speak for redress in season: vz. that in the whole drift of this
subordination, extreme partiality was apparently showed, which as the world
knows, was no good means to appease all parties and to end their debates;
the only cause pretended of this lately erected authority, and namely to
accord the Priests and Jesuits, as the Letters Pattents specify. Now that
controversies be well decided, and all honest parties agreed, it was meet
(perdie) to choose upright and indifferent Judges and Arbiters, who should
without favor, fear, love, or hatred, weigh every man's cause uprightly, in
the balance of equity, and without respect of persons, give sentence
according to justice. This is a principal in judgment so clear, by the light
of nature, that it is granted of very Pagans: yet in our cause very badly
observed: for both the Archpriest and his counselors, (unto whom the
determination of our causes are to be referred) were all chosen by the one
party, with a special prouiso, that no one be admitted unto that number, who
did not greatly favor the same party: how contrary soever they were unto the
other party, it imported not: yea perhaps the more earnestly bent against
them, the rather elected. Had not trow you, the other poor party just cause
to refuse such Vmpeeres and Judges that were so alienated from them, and such
favorites of the adverse party: and to prevent the unjust sentences that were
like to follow of this partiality, to fly in time for refuge unto their
lawful superior? And if in all petty judgments, every private man is
allowed by law an exception against a partial Judge, how much more is the
same to be granted unto many ancient, grave worthy men, in a general cause
of a Country.

Two proper points of policy I observe in this election, the one in choosing
the Officers so plyant to their pleasures, that they may be the more ready to
run byaz when it will serve their turns. And yet because men are mutable, to
hold them in awe, their authorities might be taken from them, what time soever
the Cardinal thought good, as in the points it is to be seen: but let this
go, because I touched it before; the other piece of policy yet more fine, is,
that the Archpriest himself who is appointed to give justice unto both
parties, has power only over the one party; and none at all over the other:
so that the one he may by censures and severe punishment, constrain to stand
to his definitive sentence: but the other needs not to care for him any further
then that he may use him, to plague his adversary. Vt sibi caveat loco. These
hardy champions, hold it not sufficient to have the favor of the Court for
them: but for fear of after claps, will have also their persons exempted from
the principal magistrate, and reserve themselves only, to their own Fathers
judgment, which must be sought for also, far enough off from Rome, and that
in form of supplication, if I mistake not much the Arch-priests instructions.

Here seems to be the place to answer to that sentence of yours ( Father),
where you tell us in good sadness, that many years you demanded with your
friends for this subordination. I believe you surely, considering that neither
you would have yours comprehended in it, and yet you would have the appointing
of all the Officers, and ordering almost of all matters belonging to it. But
say you it was thereby to deliver the Society from that calumniation, used to
be laid against them, that they would govern the Priests against theirs wills:
and you had some reason so to say, if you had suffered the Priests to have
chosen their governors according to their own wills and desires: but you
putting in, and choosing such commanders, as at your beck, should be ready
to do whatsoever you will, do manifestly prove that saying to be no
calumniation, but a plain demonstration of your incroaching, upon the
governments of priests, much further then your profession or vocation does
require. For by the ordinary course of the Church, religious men are to be
governed by some of the lay Clergy, and not the Clergy by them.

Well to draw toward the end of my former part, this subordination being both
strange in the Church of God, hateful of itself, and not to be exercised in
our country in these times, it being also procured (as it seems) by false
suggestion, authorized by him, that was not known to have any such authority,
and finally by partial election of the governors, tending unto the oppression
of many notable personages, who had excellently well deserved of our country
by their long and fruitful trauells: yet remains evident and most manifest,
that we had sundry, just, lawful and great causes in humble sort to sue unto
our superiors for a mitigation or alteration of it, and for establishing of
some better and more fit for our country. Whereof appears first, how vain
that vaunt of yours is, where you say, that we came and brought nothing with
us, and that you were ashamed to see that we had taken so long a journey and
had so little to say, when besides the causes before mentioned, we had many
other points also of importance in our message. As to desire and sue for
Bishops, or at least, that the faculty to confirm and to consecrate oils
(whereof our country stands in very great need) might be given unto some of
our ancient Priests, with diverse such like, which were not unknown unto you,
wherefore I marvel with what conscience you can say, that we brought no
matter of substance, or worth our travel. Secondly, out of the premises
follows, that the love of God his cause, the zeal and earnest desire of some
good order for peace and unity, moved me (at the earnest request and
solicitations of many godly and grave Priests) to forgo the company of my
dear friends, to contemn mine own ease and commodity, and to put my self
unto the pain, danger, and part also of the cost of such a long perilous
journey: and not ambition, as many of your dependants, have with evil
conscience bruted abroad in diverse coasts, and one of the society an especial
correspondent of yours, did not blush to write, that we in Rome had confessed,
that nothing but ambition incited us to this journey, of which I certified you
in my former Letters, and you writ that you cannot believe, that any body would
give out any such impudent reports, but I assure you that I have seen it
written, and can have their Letters produced, when time shall serve to confront
the shameless spreaders of such slanderous rumors. And albeit you clear me
of that crime most willingly (as you write) yet as men that speak hollowly,
and not from the heart, you give forth some suspicions out of other men's
speeches, and lay down in their names, your reasons for confirmation of them.
The first is, that in the papers we brought with us, there were voices for our
promotion: I answer, that with those papers I was not much acquainted, as one
that neither gathered them, nor carried them; and full well I know and
protest, that by accord among our selves, it was determined before I resolved
to take that journey, that they which were sent should not accept of any
preferment willingly, although it were offered them, least they should give
their evil willers occasion to carpe at them, rather to seek their own
particular, then their general good. Their second reason is, for that in a
foolish Letter de preside^tijs incerto autore, a request is made, that we
should be made not Bishops only, but Archbishops (forsoothe) and such a
ragmans roll, there is in it, of which is the first dignity after the Bishop,
which is the second, and so (as far as I remember) unto above twenty, that
any fool almost, may see that Letter to have bin contrived to work our
disgrace; and so as a fiction not worth the answering. Their last reason was,
for that in an other Letter of I know not whose (the phrase is) of your L L:
for your Lordships: but this Letter would never be showed (although it were
most instantly desired) because they said it to be from a very friend of ours,
a general answer unto these Letters is; that it is easy, for those that list
to devise what Letters will best serve for their turns, and then make great
matter out of them. But howsoever it were, yea admit that all were true, as
they say: yet nothing else can be proved out of them, then that many wished
and desired our preferment: whereof whosoever would gather, that we were
ambitious and desirous of honor: I will boldly say that his wits begin to
fail him, if they ever were good. For the humblest men in the world, and those
that were farthest off from ambition, were ever thought most meet, and were
most desired to take the charge and dignity of the best seats. God make me as
free from all vain desire of worldly promotion, as were S. Barnard, S.
Francis, S. Thomas of Aquine, and such like most learned and virtuous, and
withal most meek and humble personages: who nevertheless, were greatly
desired, even of the greatest, to take upon them great and high dignities. In a
word, it was no ambition in us that others wished and desired our preferment.
And as I before said, their wits wear apace, and are near the wane, that of so
vain and light surmises, judged us ambitious, and their consciences fowly
cankered and corrupted, who of so weak and slender presumptions, went about by
writing or speaking to impair our credits, and to hurt our good names.

Here I would finish this part, but that I take it very expedient and almost
necessary, to touch by the way (until a fit confutation come, which will be
shortly, if the Author supposed will avouch it: as one of the best of the
society thinks he will not) Fa. Mayor.
to touch I say in a word or two, a saucy, rude, and unlearned discourse,
entitled Contra factiosos in Ecclesia, Listers Treatise.
because the drift of it is, to prove that we were so far off from having
good cause to send to Rome about that matter, that we were all Schismatickes,
who did not at the first sight of the Cardinals Letters, receive the
Archpriest without any more adoo, and to have committed many other enormious
crimes. I am sorry to see such a base piece of work, and so childishly handled,
to proceed from one, who, if he did not despise others (that might have
sometimes been his good masters) as Dwarffes in divinity, ( Homu^ciones enim
vocat) and take himself to be some huge Giant were to be esteemed to have much
better skill in school divinity, the^ he at his first coming to light
amongst us has made show of. And truly, I had rather think it to proceed
from some other not so honest a man, and a meaner scholar, it is so void of
learning, so full of arrogant and approbrious terms, and has so many pergoes
and properoes, odd interrogations and preposterous exclamations. All which are
nothing usual among schoolmen. Well, whosoever it be, besides divisions, the
penalties that ensue of schism, and much other impertinent stuff, it has but
one bare ground of that badde assertion, which seems also to hang upon
gimballes (as they speak in my Country): for it stands upon a proportion or
similitude, this it is in form. That is schism in the Ecclesiastical state,
which is rebellion in a civil Commonweal; but in a civil state, it is
rebellion, not to receive a temporal magistrate, chosen by the King, and
recommended by his Letters, therefore it was schism, not to receive a
spiritual magistrate, elected by the Pope, and by his Letters sent unto us.
This is his argument, in substance, and framed in as good order as it can be:
but it concludes not, nor proves any thing at all: for to speak plainly,
all the propositions and parts of it be faulty, the Mayor, or first
proposition taken of a similitude is very feeble, for Argumentum a simili (as
the learned hold) Magis valet ad ornandu^ orationem quam ad aliquid probandum,
it serves more properly to trim up and flourish out a matter that is well
proved, then to be the maine ground of a proof. So that it was no small
oversight in a man of judgment, to lay so foul a foundation of his whole
discourse. The Minor or second proposition of that argument is apparently
false: for in what Country I pray you, or by what law is it rebellion not to
receive a magistrate appointed unto us by the King? It may be disobedience, if
they have not great reason to refuse him: it may be also contempt, if it be
not done in dutiful sort, acknowledging their bounden duty unto their
sovereign, and making their recourse unto no other but unto himself for
redress and remedy; but to teach it to be rebellion, where there are no arms
borne against the Prince, nor no obstinate denial of his princely power; is to
bring a new doctrine into the world, contrary to both the signification of the
word rebellion, and unto the common acception and use of it among the learned.
Now the conclusion collected of a feeble Mayor, and false Minor, must needs be
nothing worth: and so notwithstanding that argument, it is no schism not to
have received a magistrate nominated and chosen by the Popes holiness Letters;
other arguments he brings none, but a certain general kind of Maxim. Qui
vos spernit me spernit, which was spoken unto the Apostles, and may serve for
such like, to prove no schism, but a contempt: when without good reason, and
after an undutiful manner, we obstinately contemn our superiors. In the
allegation also of that one Canon Nulli fas est Did. 19, whereunto this
trifler often refers us. There are 3. foul faults. First it is evil applied
unto a Cardinals Letter, being in the law set down for confirmation of the
Popes decretall Epistles, which as the learned know, are of far greater
authority, then his own ordinary Letters: and do without all comparison so
far surpass a Cardinals Missiue, that to apply to the one, that which is
proper to the other, is little less then to doat. Secondly that decree is
only against Prelates that disobey the Popes commandment, which to extend to
all sorts of persons, is a foul fault in penal laws, which pass not their
case. Thirdly the decree plainly shows, that in Prelates it is only
disobedience and presumption, not to obey the Popes decree, and not schism:
for these be the words; Damnatus sua inobedientia and presumptione. If then in
these his principal forces, he has showed himself so weak, judge I pray you
what worthy stuff the rest is like to be. But because I hear my brethren
endure the contumely and approbrious name of Schismatikes, albeit that they
upon the first sight of his holiness confirmation of the Arch-priests
election, submitted themselves unto him: I will by the proper passion and
inseparable quality of schism, prove that our action to have been nothing
schismatic. All schism (as it is properly taken) is joined with such a
rebellion against the Church and chief Pastor of it, that it makes his
subject obstinately to contemn his commandment, and to refuse to stand unto
his judgment and determination.

These are the words of the Angelical Doctor, and most sure pillar of school
Divinity, S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 39. ar. 2. Pertinaciter eius preceptum contemnere,
and recusare eius iudicium subire. Mark the words. It is no schism where
there is not contempt of the superiors commandment, and that obstinate and
wilful: which is not when a man upon probable reason, does not presently do
that which his superior commands, hoping that when his superior hears his
reasons, he will not be displeased with him. This man (as every man sees)
despises not his superior, although he may by error or ignorance perhaps
offend him, and yet not only contempt of the superiors commandment is
required to make schism, but also an obstinate resolution that he will not
(for examining his reasons, and final dicision of the controversy) stand unto
his superiors judgment. Vt cu^ recusat eius iudiciu^ subire. And that you may
know that this is not only S. Thomas opinion, who alone might suffice, as
being the Prince of schoolmen: I will join with him that most reverend,
holy, and learned Bishop of Florence, S. Antoninus the ringleader of casuists,
who in his Sum. P. 3. Tit. 22. c. 5. 11. witnesses the same in these words.
Schismatici sunt omnes resistentes Papae non quocunque modo, sed per spontaneam
intentionem, and manifestam rebellionem and eius iudicialis sententiae
recusationem non recognoscendo ipsum vt caput Ecclesiae. All they are
Schismatickes, not in what sort soever, but such as resist the Pope upon
wilful intention, and by manifest rebellion, and by refusal of his judicial
sentence, in not recognizing him to be head of the Church. Of the same opinion
is Siluester Verb. Schisma.. 1. to omit all late writers: we therefore that
delaide to receive our Archpriest, upon many probable reasons, the which I have
before rehearsed, and referred our selves unto his holiness judgment, and
sent speedily to give him to understand of our difficulties, with humble
submission unto his final conclusion: cannot possibly be proved
Schismatickes, or to have come any thing near that obstinate contempt, and
utter refusal of his holiness sentence, which is always accompanied with
Schism, and can never be separated from it.

This argument necessarily delivers us from the note of Schism, although our
Archpriest had been chosen by his holiness, and by the Pope himself
recommended unto us: but when he was only nominated by subdelegation from a
Cardinal, who never made publickely known in England what authority he had
over us, it had been great simplicity, (that I say not great folly) to have
admitted of him, without further inquisition, considering all the
circumstances, of the procuring, sending, and execution of it, as I have at
large already discoursed. Wherefore to conclude this former part, it was
neither rebellion or schism, as where was not any obstinate contempt of his
holiness, or refusal of his final sentence: or any disobedience, not to have
admitted of our Archpriest before he had the Pope his holiness Letters in
confirmation of his authority, no man being bound to receive him before; both
according to the practice of the Church in all countries, and conformably to
the grounds of the Law recorded by that singular Canonist Lancelot. Lib. 11.
Tit. 9. de confirmatione. Petet qui confirmatus est ab Apostolica sede literas
confirmationis suae tenorem continentes, illisque ostendet ad quos ea res
pertinet, alioqui nulli eum absque dictaru^ literarum ostensione recipere
tenebuntur, without showing of Letters from the Sea Apostolic containing the
tenor of his confirmation, no man is bound to receive him. To say that a
Cardinals Letters are such, would deserve little less then the Inquisition, if
a man were in place where, and the censures also that fall upon the falsifiers
of the Apostolical Letters: so that I say it was not so much as any
disobedience unto our superiors, much less did we incur thereby any of
those censures noted by this Libeller; but contrariwise, the acts of all the
Cardinal virtues were to be seen in this our fact. First of fortitude, in
resisting them that went about wrongfully to oppress us, and take our
privileges of electing our governors, granted by the ancient Canons: then
of justice, both in suing for our right of choosing, as also in aduertising of
his holiness of the subreption and other inconveniences of that subordination.
Of temperance, that in such a mild sort we sought for a moderation of it, by
the way of entreaty and supplication, and consequently some part of prudence
must needs have been observed in the due exercise of the other virtues: yet as
I am none of the wisest, so I willingly confess now as I did then, with you
Father (not any errors as you write) but that there was lack of due
consideration in my fact, as in some other circumstances, so especially that
passing through France, where I might easily have procured the Kings Letters,
and thereby have been preserved from all sudden seasing, and secret shutting
us up; and so have been able to come unto equal trial of our cause: I upon
other reasons omitted so to do. This my negligence grew in part, of the
ouerweening, I had of their modesty, charity and religion, with or against
whom I had to deal: whom I found (much contrary unto my expectation) sharply
bent unto war and hostility, and utterly resolute to take advise of no man;
but omnibus vijs and modis, as they say, determined whatsoever came of it, to
do their own wills. God grant them therefore good wills and ways; and so to
knit up this part, all that I have said concerning the Archpriest and the
subordination, is not to discourage any of my brethren from it, being now
confirmed by his holiness; and for that it is better to raunge our selves
under whatsoever order, then to loose our times about contentions: but (as I
showed before) it is to purge and clear us from sundry false accusations,
being thereunto as it were by others enforced, and to show what reason we had
to do that which we did.

Now I come to the latter part, wherein I promised to declare how we were used
there: the which I will do as briefly as I may, because the matter is
lamentable and scarce worth the hearing, and should for me have been buried in
oblivion: had not you ( Father) by misreport thereof urged me unto the true
narration of it. If in the relation of it, I differ somewhat from you, you must
bear with me, for that you dissent much (by your leave be it spoken) from the
verity of that matter, it may be, you remember not so well, what then was
done, as we which felt it; Pium est hoc credere, it is good so to think,
although it be more like, that you being ashamed to hear what was reported of
it, thought it good policy to color and disguise the matter as much as you
could, and much more then you should, to save your credit, with those at least,
which take all your words for Oracles; and by the first setting of it forth
under your name, to forestall (as it were) and draw unto you other simple
souls that are too credulous. Wherefore I am to request all indifferent
readers, who has seen yours, not to suffer themselves to be carried away with
a smoothe tale cunningly told them, but they will keep one ear for us; and
then (laying all affection and partiality aside) having heard both parties,
judge uprightly as before Almighty God, the sovereign and most just Judge. To
come then to the matter, I will first set down how all things passed plainly,
and afterward examine most briefly the justice of it, and some points of your
narration.

We coming to Rome, about the time you write (for where you tell truth I will
agree with you) not willing to acquaint that Courtanie further with the
imperfections of our Country then must needs, and desiring rather in fair and
friendly sort, to compose matters, then to contend with our brethren, we went
the same day unto the College, to open unto you our good meaning and purpose,
requesting you to join with us, about the contriuing of some such loving,
reasonable and indifferent order, as all honest parties might be contented, and
so drawn unto one sweet and sure band of peace and concord. The same our
intention, we declared shortly after unto both the Cardinals, Protectors.
Caietan who was ere we came thither greatly incensed against us: (God pardon
his soul) and Burghesio, whom we found more calm, and desirous that all our
disputes might be well and quietly ended: you ( Father) also seemed at the
first not unwilling to hearken unto that our proposition for peace: hoping then
(belike) to win us to whatsoever order you should devise and frame: but
finding in few days conference that we were resolute not to condescend to any
thing, that was not equal, and good generally for one as well as for another:
you sent us word (much before our days of hospitality were accomplished) to
depart the College presently, and to provide for our selves where we could:
which we did, keeping from you the knowledge of our lodging; because then we be
began to misdoubt some foul play, calling to mind, how rudely you had handled
the Scholars and Priests also before; and seeing that in the city we were
then feared even of your friends as a shrewd bustling Bear. It fell out evil
for us, that his holiness, as then was not there, who returned out of his
journey from Ferrara but three days before Christmas, so that for the press
of great personages, who went to welcome him home, and the festiual days
following, we could have no fit audience, till after Christmas: you in the mean
season not sparing that high solemnity of our Saviors birth, contrived our
apprehension, and having by the indiscretion of one of our friends learned out
our lodging, came upon S. Thomas our Patrons day (to make your celebration of
those feasts) to visit us as a good friend, and to advertise us, that you had
heard that it was his holiness pleasure, that we should be restrained, but for
the love you bare us, you were come before in haste (for you came puffing and
blowing up the stairs): what? to advertise us belike to look to our selves,
and to be gone betime least we should be taken; nothing so: but much more like
to give us a Judas kiss. For you had the Comissarie with his ministers at your
tail, and came (for ought I can guess) to lead them to the place, and to
appoint them out the persons whom they should take, and lead warily, not unto
the prison, for there we were like to meet with ordinary Officers, equal to
all but unto the College, that there being shut up from all help, we mightlie
wholly at their devotions. I know ( Father) that you came thither pretending
to entreat for us, that we were not sent unto prison: but that was but for a
color, for that you might have done as well absent as present. The Comissary
being wholly yours, set on, lead, and lodged by you: in the College we were
locked up apart in two little close Chambers, much more like the worst then the
best in the house, with poor scholars fare, and in smoaky colored gowns,
such as the servants wear, far otherwise ( Father) then you brag of: for
the most part kept without fire, being very cold, and for twenty days, not
suffered to go out, not so much as to hear Mass upon New-yeares day, or the
Epiphany. Examined we were, by one Signior Acarisius, a trusty friend of yours
Father Parsons, an humble servant of Cardinal Caietane our potent adversary.
The examinations were, what is your name, how old, where remained you in
England, how and which way came you over, what money brought you over with you,
etc. and much such like impertinent stuff to fill up the papers, that when we
came to the matter it self they might be brief: taking barely what we came
about, without the reasons and persuasions of it: yea obiecting against it, and
perverting it what they could.

And because Signior Acarisius seemed not sometimes sharp enough; Fa. Parsons
himself would be an examiner also: when I heard that Cardinal Caietane should
be our Judge, I excepted against him, as being one principal party: but I
could not be heard; I called also for a Proctor to assist us with his counsel:
it was denied. NO remedy, for there was no body to be spoken withal, but Fa.
Parsons and whom he appointed: we had not so much liberty, as one of us to
confer with another; all our instructions were taken from us also, and
neither pen or paper, or any book allowed us, wherewith we might help our
selves in that our common cause, until the day of our hearing came, which was a
little before Shrouetide in an afternoon, where the Cardinal Caietane and
Burghesio being present, our examinations were read each man's apart, which
spent most of the time; after a long bill exhibited against us, with some
Letters also in the end of it: and so the time was spent unprofitably, little
examining and waighing the substantial points we came about: we were after
that kept two months close, attending their LL. sentence, which some ten days
after Easter was delivered unto us: to this effect especially, that we should
go whither they sent us, and not return into England without express
license. Propter controuersias quas cu^ sui ordinis hominibus exercuerunt, for
maintaining of controversies with me of their own order. This is I assure you
on the word of a Priest, the very truth of the story.

Now touching the equity of it, let any prudent man, never so little void of
passion, judge what justice it was, first to have all our instructions and
proofs taken away from us: after to separate us that we should not one help
another; then to keep from us all learned counsel; lastly to make our
professed adversaries our Lawiers, the relaters of our cause, and finally our
Judges. I would gladly see for the excuse of the matter (but I should marvel
if any man were able to show) a president of such a form of justice, or
judgment. Indeed I must needs confess that the Cardinal Burghesio always
seemed desirous to have heard the matter better sifted and discussed; but being
punye and the other so exceedingly bent against us, he could do nothing for
us. Now concerning the general point of our restraint, I could never get them
to tell me, some reasonable cause, why we Chatholique Priests, that had so long
labored with the peril of our lives, for the Catholic cause, and then suing
in humble and dutiful sort unto the Court; should be cast in prison, before we
were convicted, or lawfully accused of any crime. I demanded of the Confessor,
that sometimes visited me, he could tell none, although he lacked not skill in
cases of conscience, but referred me unto the Comissarie. I asked him, he
would give me no other answer, then that it was his holiness pleasure: you (
Father) go about to show the reason why his Holiness would have it so: but
with such a circuit and confusion, that it is hard to pick out what you would
say, that it was, because we opposed our selves, and not tarrying to bring any
matter of substance against his government, etc. What matter we had against
that government, has been before declared, and the reason why we stayed no
longer, was that we might come to show our griefs before his holiness had
confirmed him. For it is to be understood, that between the election of such a
high Officer and confirmation, there is a certain pawse made, to hear whether
any thing will be objected against the party, or concerning that point of
office; that in season convenient remedy be provided, and the person elected
if he do intermeddle in his charge, before he be confirmed, is presently to be
deprived of all that interest which was given him by the election; which if our
Archpriest had looked into, he would not have been so hasty, as to have
dealt in that charge, before he had received his Letters of confirmation; but
you say at last, that his holiness cast us in prison, because we subtracted
our selves from the obedience of the Archpriest, and gave other men occasion
to do the like.

I deny now as I did unto you then, that I subtracted my self from his
obedience, either therefore set down, wherein by word or deed, I with drew my
self from his obedience, or else let the world take you for an egregious
calumniatur. For I was with the Archpriest before I went, and told him of my
journey, and gave him the cause of it in writing under my hand, taking also a
copy of it under his hand; and he never commanded me not to go, neither in
any other point did I transgress any of his precepts. What an irreligious and
damnable slander then was that invented of purpose, to have us taken and shut
up before we were heard: that they might have the delivery of our message, and
be our Interpreters and Proctors, and so make us say what they listed, and our
matter to be such as they would have it. But say you. Did you not come to Rome
against him? There was no disobedience in our going to Rome to sue unto our
superior, for it was conformable unto the Canons and practice of the
Catholic Church, and was not, nor could not have been forbidden by him: See,
Nauer. cap. 23. Number. 37. The subordination indeed did not like me, for the
causes above mentioned: yet I carried my self so warily, that I did nothing
against it, but sought orderly unto my superiors, in time and place to have it
amended, which is very lawful; yea if he had been an Archbishop, and must
needs have bin granted by law, if we had had our Courts of law as in other
Countries they have: if any were scandalized at this our orderly repair unto
our ordinary superiors, let the wise judge whether it were Scandalum datum or
acceptum. I should now according to the order I proposed, examine and confute,
sundry false calumniations, which you let fall by the way; as that we deposed
we had nothing else to say, and that we could not name a dozen Priests for us,
and as your followers amplifying, such flying tales reported, we had not half
a dozen that gave us their suffrages, when we had twenty nine in writing with
us, some of them speaking also for others, and yet neither sought for many, nor
staide about that matter, but contenting our selves with some of the most
auncientest, most learned and of best reputation in our Country: trusted to
the weight of reason, which we had on our side, and to the equity of the
magistrates, before whom we went to present our selves. Again, how ridiculous
was it to expect of them that are to be so narrowly searched when they pass
out of the Country, that they bring their testimonies with them in great
sheets of paper, as though the virtue of witnesses lay in the bigness of the
paper, and that we should have brought some Princes Letters patents with a
broad Seal at them; whereas the magistrates are our enemies. These and many
such like I will leap over, that I may at length come to an end; and if my
Letter seem long, let the blame be imputed unto yours, which, in answer to
half a dozen lines, grew into two sheets of paper and a half: if it be
thought too sharp, let it be well waighed, whether men first hardly used in
fact, and afterward by words and Letters much damnified in their credits,
have not just cause to write roundly: and if you like not to be so freely
reprehended, be not so lavish of your pen, for unless my foresight fail me,
you are like hereafter to be no more spared of many then you spare others.
Wherefore to draw unto a conclusion, apply to your self some part of the good
counsel you gave me in the latter end of yours, have patience with whatsoever
falls out, and persuade your self that he which offends many, is sure to
be offended by many: wherefore holding your self within the bounds of your
religion, meddle with other men's matters as little as you may; and if for the
common good of our country you please to be doing, take rather the way of
mildness which wins men's hearts, then of rigor which lightly offends
all. Follow the noble, prudent, and admirable steps of that rare ornament of
our country, and singular light of the Catholic Church, Cardinal Allen, who
carried himself so courteously toward all men, so charitably and withal so
wisely, that he was able to have done with us Priests what he would most
easily; and did hold the Lay Gentlemen in such a reverend and loving awe, that
albeit some of them were very prone to contentions and quarrels, yet his
authority and counsel so brideled and reigned all exorbitant humors, that in
his time, to his perpetual praise, no great flames of dissension burst out,
especially amongst us Priests, when you taking the contrary course of severity,
have made an open breach amongst us already, and God knows what may fall out
hereafter, if you look not unto it in time, which because you are wise, I
hope you will do, and so shall you purchase unto your self much more good will
and quietness in this life, and better assurance (if I be not far deceived)
of everlasting repose, and joy in the life to come, the which with all my heart
I wish you; and so humbly commending my self unto you,

I take my leave the 10. of April. Anno. 1600. Yours in his prayers, William
Bishop.

A LETTER OF Mr. MV. TO Father Parsons.
WEll, well, Fa. Parsons, I pray God send you a more sincere and quiet spirit.
I find that true daily more and more, which often I have heard good Cardinal
Allein, Father Holt, and others of your own coat, report of you, that you
were a man of too violent and hard a nature. It were high time that you should
permit your self and us, to carry our gray hairs in peace to our graves. The
trouble and scandal you have wrought in our Church these late years by your
polliticke courses, do quite cancel all your former desert. Was our peace and
union made at the coming of his holiness Breue, and the most injurious calumny
of schism and enormious disobedience to the Sea Apostolic, raised and
continued most presumptuously against us and our ghostly children by your
society here, to the grievous scandal of our whole Nation: was it, I say,
put up by us, and for love of peace and union forgiven; that presently after we
had received the authority, and submitted our selves to it, you, and yours
might more safely and liberally renew the infamy against us, and by the
Arch-priestes authority (assured to you in whatsoever you listed to attempt
against any) at your pleasures persecute and oppress us? You have in the
highest degree, dishonored and injured Peter's Chair, whiles by your cunning
you so enormiouslie abused our brethren (as good doubtless as your self)
appealing and coming in all humble and dutiful manner to the Apostolic See;
defaming them, and auerting his Ho. mind from them, as from vile and badde
persons, by your untrue reports before they came; and procuring (a most impious
and horrible thing to be recounted for perpetual, yet hateful memory, of your
fact) them to be imprisoned as notorious malefactors, before they had been
heard, stopping up all means of access to his holiness, and your self playing
their Iaylour, a fit office doubtless for so well disposed a religious person,
and finally procuring their hard banishment, to no less dishonor to the Sea
Apostolic, (abused by your information) then to your own perpetual
ignominy. And whiles you have done all this by abuse of the supreme
authority, through your unconscionable and untrue informations: you give all
our Nation here cause enough, never to admire or hereafter to exclaim against
the iniquity of adversaries, who may truly justify themselves in their hard
proceedings against us, by these unconscionable courses of yours. A lamentable
case, that now by the polliticke shifts of one person of religious profession,
orderly appealing to S. Peter's Chair, must be thought a trespass, and
punished as a grievous crime. Our statute of Praemunire may well be repealed
now: Father Parsons a Jesuit, has laid a plot sufficient enough to hinder
appellation or access to the Sea of Rome. Is it possible this iniquity of
yours should be kept secret from the world? Is it possible his holiness and
the gracious Cardinals you have so notably abused, should never be brought to
know the innocence of us whom you have thus wronged and persecuted in our
brethren, and never can cease to afflict? Will they never, think you, find
out your deceit, and by just discussion of our cause, relieve our miseries, and
repay you your deserts? The clamours of innocent men, will in time no doubt,
ascend up to heaven, and we cannot but hope that our Lord Jesus (whose work we
have in hand, and whose glory we seek with innumerable vexations for his
sake) will once stir up and direct his Vicar, to judge and discern our
cause, and to deliver us from your most violent and wrongful oppressions. In
the end it will be found we were no Schismatickes, nor in the least point that
may be devised by an unconscionable head, disobedient to his holiness, or any
superior he has or shall appoint over us. I am persuaded surely, that God
will have you and your adherents known ere it be long. For defame us before
we come; imprison us at our arrival; keep us close from being seen or
heard; yet shall you not go so away with your iniquity; we are resolved
verily, that with our good names, you shall bereue us also of our lives, before
we sit down with this undeserved calumny. Either will we be proved no
Schismatickes, or found no living men. We have labored what we could, that
the controversy might be taken up, and have a quiet end among our selves
before it were carried further. This would not be granted by you and yours,
but for our good endeavors, they take from us our faculties (I might have said
you take) whereby we live; we wish rather you had at once taken from us our
lives, but we take it to be Gods providence, that enforced to come to buckle
with you once again before S. Peter's Chair, we may clear our selves, and
discypher what your self, M. Haddock, and others of you are: for better, or
less evil it is, you suffer as you have deserved, then either the Sea
Apostolic be abused and deluded by you, or our afflicted Church be thus
exceedingly disturbed by men that are fled from the work and camp of Gods
soldiers, and some of you, of no great edifying conversation whiles they were
among us. Most glad we would be (God is our witness) if we might on all sides
be at peace and sincere friendship one with an other: but if you will not
permit this, Gods will be done: we must defend our good names, and our
childrens, as dear unto us as our lives; in which the most of us I hope, find
no such sweetness (how pleasantly soever you and yours live) among these
innumerable adversities, as we can desire or delight to keep them, with the
infamies you have most uncharitably and unjustly laid upon us. We impute no
fault nor blame to his holiness, or his Cardinals, in believing your false
informations against us, till we come to speak for our selves: for who, not
knowing your conditions, but he may easily be enduced to believe what you say?
your age and gray hayres, requiring a true tongue, and your religious
profession requiring also, a sincere, charitable, and quiet disposition, and
not a turbulent, reuengefull, and crafty carriage in word or deed? Jesus send
us all his grace, and deliver me and all good men from your mischief. London
13. of November. 1600.

Yours as you are to our Church, I. M.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page. Line. 2. 1. not, hear not hear 3. 16. falce false 6. 7. Lincoln,
Doctor Lincoln Doctor 15. 9. instruction instructions 23. 23. pretendad
pretended 33. 11. Cods Gods 43. 1. timely untimely 54. 24. regained repaired
59. 19. praises phrases 65. 24. your LL. LL. 69. 5. to them thither 24. prison:
which prison with 70. 24. of for 73. 5. holiness, especially holiness especially
74. 9. receive relieve 77. 4. parsons. How parsons, how 82. 11. Conformation
confirmation 86. 14. part, only part only, 87. 23. sildome seldom 89. 12.
persons prisons 93. 11. fildome seldom 96. 1. was 19. Array. The Array the 26.
words (whatsoever words: whatsoever 29. 1599.) stuffed 1599, stuffed 148. 12.
tentering tendering 156. 14. of from of, from 157. 19. yet it 160. Marg. Fa.
Mayor. Fa. Maio. 163. 24. approbrious opprobrious 172 17. me men 174 14
calumniatur calumniator


