THE WONDERFVLL Battle of STARELINGS: Fought at the City of Cork in Ireland,
the 12. and 14. of October last past. 1621.

As it has been credibly informed by diverse Noblemen, and others of the said
Kingdom, etc.



LONDON, Printed for N. B. 1622.

TO THE READER.
Gentle Reader:
TO report strange and admirable accidents, is subject both to danger and
disgrace: to danger, in that they may be held as prodigious, or ominous: to
disgrace, in that they may be reputed fabulous. There can be no danger in
reporting, so that there be no prognosticating, which by all means I do
forbear: only I will say with the Royal Prophet, Admirabilis Deus in omnibus
operibus suis, God is wonderful in all his works. And with Saint Augustine,
That as it was not impossible for Almighty God in his first creation to make
what variety of creatures he pleased, so it is not impossible for his divine
Majesty to alter and change the ordinary course and disposition of the
creatures which he has made. Which may appear in this Narration following,
the like never heard or ever seen, by testimony of any recorder history in any
Country heretofore. I need not to fear disgrace in reporting so strange an
Accident to be reputed fabulous, being able to free my self from any suspicion
of such an imputation by certificate of Letters, from Right Honorable persons
in Ireland where the accident fell out, to Right Honorable persons at Court,
and diverse in London at this present: as also by the testimony of Right
Honorable and Worshipful persons, and others of good reputation now in
London, who were eyewitnesses, beholding the same, during the time it
continued. Notwithstanding so ample proof of what I write, yet I do confess,
that so many poetical fictions have of late passed the print, that they have
some cause to suspect almost every extraordinary report that is printed: but
now that abuse done to the Commonwealth is utterly taken away: for no
Currantos, no reports of History, with the like, may now pass the print,
without strict examination, and sufficient approbation, as in experience and
trial will be found hereafter. These strange news out of Ireland had been
printed before this time, but that it has been stayed till the truth were
fully certified and examined.

THE VVONDERFVLL Battle of Starelings, fought at the City of Cork in
Ireland, the 12. and 14. of October, 1621.
As it has been credibly informed by diverse Noblemen, and others, of the said
Kingdom, etc.
CORK is a City in the west of Ireland in the Province of Munster, for
situation, and all commodities which Sea or land may afford, not inferior to
any City in that Country. About the seventh of October last, Anno 1621. there
gathered together by degrees, an unusual multitude of birds called Stares, in
some Countries known by the name of Starlings: these birds are for the
quantity of their bodies strong, for their quality bold and ventrous, amongst
themselves very loving, as may appear by their flights keeping together all
times of the year, excepting the breeding time. It is, and has been an old
proverb, that Birds of a feather hold and keep together, which has ever been
a common custom in these as much as in any other kind whatsoever: but now the
old proverb is changed, and their custom is altered clean contrary. For at
this time, as these birds are in taste bitter, so they met to fight together
the most bitterest and sharpest battle amongst themselves, the like, for the
manner of their fight, and for the time the battle did continue, never heard
or seen at any time in any Country of the world.

We read in the Histories of our own Country, that in the twelfth year of
King Richard the second, That the Gnats mustered together at Shine, now called
Richmond, in great abundance, with so great a multitude, that the air was
obscured and darkened by them. They fought so violent a battle among
themselves, that by estimation two parts of them were slain, and fell to the
ground: the number of those which were killed, was so great, that they were
taken up with shouels, and swept together with besomes, that bushels were
filled with them, the third part having gotten the victory, flew away and
vanished, no man knew whither.

Now to come to the fight of our birds, the Stares or Starlings, they mustered
together at this aboue-named City of Cork some four of five days, before
they fought their battles, every day more and more increasing their armies with
greater supplies, some came as from the East, others from the West, and so
accordingly they placed themselves, and as it were encamped themselves eastward
and westward about the city, during which time their noise and tunes were
strange on both sides to the great admiration of the citizens and the
inhabitants near adjoining, who had never seen for multitude, or ever heard
for loud tunes which they uttered, the like before. Whereupon they more
curiously observing the couses and passages they used, noted that from those on
the East, and from those on the Wess, sundry flights, some twenty or thirty in
a company, would pass from the one side to the other, as it should seem
employed in embassages, for they would fly and houer in the air over the
adverse party with strange tunes and noise, and so return back again to that
side from which as it seemed they were sent.

And further it was observed, that during the time they assembled, the Stares
of the east sought their meare eastward, as the Stares of the west did the like
westward, no one flying in the circuits of the other. These courses and
customs continued with them until the xij. of October, which day being
Saturday, about nine of the clock in the morning, being a very fair and
Sunshine day, upon a strange sound and noise made as well on the one side as
on the other, they forthwith at one instant took wing, and so mounting up into
the skies, encountered one another, with such a terrible shocke, as the sound
amazed the whole city and all the beholders. Upon this sudden and fierce
encounter, there fell down into the city, and into the Rivers, multitudes of
Starelings or Stares, some with wings broken, some with legs and necks broken,
some with eyes picked out, some their bills thrust into the breasts and sides of
their adversaries, in so strange a manner, that it were incredible except it
were confirmed by letters of credit, and by eyewitnesses, with that assurance
which is without all exception.

Upon the first encounter they withdrew themselves backward east and west, and
with like eagerness and fury encountered several times, upon all which these
Stares fell down in like strange and admitable manner, as upon the first
encounter. They continued this admirable and most violent battle till a little
before night, at which time they seemed to vanish, so that all Sunday the xiij.
of October none appeared about the City.

Upon this Sunday diverse passengers came out of Suffolk, who sailing betwixt
Grauesend and Wolwigge, they heard a loud and strange noise and sound in the
air, whereupon casting their eyes upward, they saw infinite multitudes of
Stares fighting in all violent manner together, with a Crow or Raven flying
betwixt them, for the flight being so high, they could not perfectly discern,
whether it was Crow or Raven: these birds had also several encounters, making
great sound and noise, and ever as they divided and retired themselves, the
Crow or raven was seen in the midst. But what slaughter was made they could
not observe because the evening was somewhat dark and the battle was fought
over woods more remote off, but for more assured proof of this fight the
Sunday before named, there are at this time in London diverse persons of worth
and very honest reputation, whom the Printer of this Pamphlet can produce to
justify what they faw, as cause shall require, upon their oaths.

Now to return to the last battle fought at Cork by these Stares. Upon
Monday the xiiij. of October, they made their return again, and at the same
time, the day being as fair a Sunshine day as it was the Saturday before,
they mounted into the air and encountered each other with like violent assaults
as formerly they had done, and fell into the city upon the houses, and into the
River, wounded and slaughtered in like manner as before is reported: but at
this last battle there was a Kite, a Raven and a Crow all three found dead in
the streets, rent, torn and mangled.

IN this precedent narration one report will cause most admiration, and that is
the Stares or Starelings forbearing and absenting themselves from Cork upon
Sunday being the xiii. of October, should that same day be seen to fight
near or not far off from Wolwige, whether the same Stares, it may be held
in respect of the distance of the place by sea and land improbable: but this
improbability is soon answered, for as the fight at Cork may seem strange
and improbable, yet being most assured that such a battle was fought, it may be
as probable in the wonderful works of Almighty God, that notwithstanding the
distance of place, these may be the same Stares. Howsoever, I will dispute these
matters no further, sithence in the works of Almighty God, being contrary to
the ordinary works of his creation, all the reason which can be all adged for
them, is the omnipotent power of the Almighty Creator. As when contrary to
ordinary course of Nature in the battle fought by Duke Joshua, the Sun stayed
his course the space of a day. So when at the prayer of Ezechias the Sun
retired his course x. degrees: what other reason can be yielded but the
omnipotent power of Almighty God. So that albeit we should not be curious to
search out reasons for the wonderful works of Almighty God, yerit does import
all Christians not to be careless, but that they must know and consider there
is no wonderful or miraculous work, but it does prognosticate either Gods
mercy to draw us to repentance, or his justice to punish our sins and
wickedness, if we do not make haste to repent in due time, when his mercy is
offered, or his justice threatened.

FJNJS.

