ESSAYS.

By Sir WILLIAM CORNE-WALEYS the younger, Knight.



Printed for Edmund Mattes, at the sign of the Hand and Plowgh in
Fleet Street. 1600.

The Heads.
OF Resolution. 2. Of Advise. 3. Of Patience. 4. Of Suspicion. 5. Of Love. 6.
Of Friendship and Factions. 7. Of Aemulation. 8. Of Praise, and Glory. 9. Of
Entertainment. 10. Of Ambition. 11. Of Discourse. 12. Of Ce^suring. 13. Of
Jests and Iesters. 14. Of Youth. 15. Of the observation and use of things. 16.
Of Oblivion. 17. Of Discontentments. 18. Of Sleep. 19. Of Life, and the
fashions of life. 20. Of Imitation. 21. Of Behavior. 22. Of Alehouses 23. Of
Affectation. 24. Of Fantasticknesse. 25. Of Fame.
FINIS.
To the Right virtuous, and most Honorable Ladies, the Lady Sara Hastings, the
Lady Theodosia Dudley, the Lady Mary Wingfield, and the Lady Mary Dy-er.
RIght Noble Ladies.
Although I know that worthy Knight, the Author of these Essays, hates
nothing more then coming in public, yet many Copies of them being bestowed,
by often transcription (as it many times happens) they might have been by a
mercenary hand fowly corrupted and altered in sense, and both in his absence
and mine, delivered to some Printer, who to make present gain, would have
published them unpolished, and deformed without any correction: to prevent
which, having in my hands a perfect Copy, and being inwardly private with his
priuatest conceits, I thought it better to divulge them, then to adventure that
hazard. To cover this presumption, I have made your Ladyships partners in the
patronage, because I am sure howsoever he shall dislike the publishing, yet it
shall please him that your Ladyships names are honored in the forefront of his
writings. I know also, that if himself could have been persuaded to make them
thus vulgar, out of his own choice, to your Ladyships they had been directed,
of whose virtues I have heard his own tongue utter such worthy praises, that I
doubt not but his Heart (which always agrees with his tongue) and all his
other powers, are, and shall ever be consecrated to your Ladyships service.

The work of it self being virtuous, it cannot but be gracious to your
Ladyships: for in this backward Age (too much declining from Virtue,) who are
more fit to protect and defend her then your Ladyships, who are so nearly
allied to Virtue, that she has chosen you for her Temple, therein inshrined
her self, and in you only desires to be adored. Your Ladyships are nearly
conjoined in blood, three of you being Sisters by nature, the fourth by Love:
but that conjunction is nothing so noble (although very noble) as that sweet
combination of your spirits, which are all so devoted to Good, that though
there be a Quaternity of your persons, yet those persons are so guided by those
Angel-like spirits, that they make up a delightful harmony, a Soule-rauishing
Music, and a most pleasing and perfect Simpathy of Affections.

If then your Ladyships shall patronize these Essays, what venomous tongues
shall dare to infect them? If you like, who will dislike them? what you allow,
nothing but Envy, Detraction, and Ignorance will disallow, whose infectious
^reaths shall be so purified by the ^recious Balm of your Virtues, that all
shall suddenly dissolve into the sweet Air of Applause. They are now
(Honorable Ladies) your own, being freely given to your Ladyships by the true
hearted Affection of their Author, and by the hands of

Your Ladyships most humbly devoted Henry Olney.

Essay. I. OF RESOlution.
THe World is a book* the words and actions of men Commentaries upon that
volume: The former like manuscriptes private: the latter common; like things
printed. None rightly understand this Author, most go contrary. Some few
according to probalitie: but the worst of all is, the unsettled opinion, whose
continual alteration makes him unprofitable to himself, and to others. So
much have I hated this giddy vnco^stantnesse, as I have bin content to take
knowledge of duttie Resolutions, and to prefer them before the other; yea to
pity and admire them both together, and to end the viewing that object with
allowing the virtue of the Jewel, if it had been well set. Truly I need no other
example then mine own life, which en^^red continual troubles, while youth and
folly governed my bark in the sea of chaunges. I still contradicted my self,
attempted nothing, but a languishing weariness possessed me before the end:
but it was no matter, so unworthy were those thoughts and attemptes, as they
were worthy of an untimely death, and to be interred in the mire of
Irresolution. In the end I found my self: and my soul undertook to guide me
into a more wholesome air: I dare not say she has kept promise really, but it
was my own fault, yet in part she has: Her motions, my own memory and books
have done something: these last I am much bound too, especially to Seneca and
Plato, who have gotten this power over me, (though they seldom make me do well,
yet) they oftentimes make me think well: they so wholely possess me, as I
then resolve to meditate on nothing under Socrates Apology. Me thinks I am
strong, and able to encounter my affection, but hardly have my thoughts made an
end of this galla^t discourse, but in comes a wife, or a friend, at whose sight
my Armor of defense is broken, and I could weep with them, or be content to
laugh at their triuiall sports. After which I come again to see my promise
broken, that challenge in cold blood makes me desperate, that were i^ not for
the comfort of my youth, which gently gives me time, I should surely punish my
inco^stancie with great rygour.

Thus it is with me yet, and I am afraid of worse, by comparing what power
these gentle Disturbances have over me: I am afraid griefs and calamities
would overthrow me: nay, I will not be afraid (since it is truth) to confess,
that I am more troubled to think Disasters should trouble me, then of
themselves: yet I am sometimes persuaded not to mistrust my self, since I have
already tasted some store of crosses, but they are nothing, no not
preparatiues to that I may feel. Not leaving these thoughts thus, I begin to
search into the inuentory of my things esteemed, and I find no^ that I have
cause to love any thing so preciously: I have a wife, and a very good one, I
love her according to her deserts, but should she fall into any thing except
dishonestie (which her virtue I know will defend her from) I would not weep if
I could choose, nor do any thing more the^ stand the surer upon my guard to
resist fortune: for wealth, and her Appendices, I know them not, nor did I long
for them ever, but to keep me from baseness, and to exercise Charity. For
my Parents I owe the^ voluntarily that, which the laws of God, and of Nature,
exact of all men, I do it without Hypocrisy, or fear: yet should they loose
their wealth, or their lives, I would neither tear my hair, nor melt into
womanish exclamations. No I know the reuolutions of the world, they are not
strange to me: Omnia te^pus edax depascitur, omnia capit,
Nil sinit esse di^s.
I think nothing would more troble me, the^ that they should loose their
reputation, I love that well, and it would grieve me sure to be prevented of
that patrimony. For other friends (thanks be to God) I have but few, I would
I could affirm the same of my acquaintance. The cause, few have corrupted
me; and out of my own choice, there are few that I hold worthy of that
nearness. Some I have who^ I hold so virtuous, that they would be sorry to see
me lament for any of their trialls. Thus I have been content to hold you in
mine own example the longer, as taking the opportunity of recording these
honest thoughts, whose will I hope I shall the better follow, since I have set
my hand to their choice: and I see no reason but I should be as careful of not
breaking with them, as common men are of a bond, the penalty is as much, the
law to punish, and recover lies open, the court of Conscience with whom it is
always Term time. To speak now of the contrary, it has much moved me to see
the strange alterations of men upon slight occasions, at the receipt of a
letter, yea, before the reading* at a message, at news: I have been so
charitable as to be sorry for them, for these intolerable bendings of theirs.
There are others (but it is no matter, for they are commonly hawking, or
dogging fellows) that hoping the return of some messenger employed about these
worthy occasions, have suffered great extremity between hope and fear in
that time: at sight of the messenger, behold the very height of Disquietnesse,
and wherefore? alas for a Dog, or a Hawke: believe me* a pitiful disease,
which in my opinion ought to be prayed for as earnestly, as one that is upon
the point of taking his leave of his body. When Seneca writ the definition of
Hope, Spes nomen est boni Incerti, I am sure he meant not that good this way.
Banish these gross perturbations all noble spirits, they are dangerous, and
the enemies of Resolution. I do not poetically deifie Resolve, neither do I set
up a mark impossible to hit: no, it is in the power of a low stature to wade
here without drowning: I speak of no impossibility, perhaps at the first
some little difficulty: there belonges so to the basest trades, and shall thy
estimation be so tender hearted, as to refuse it for so mean a price: beware
of such covetousness, for it is worse then to love money. Our misfortunes in
general, me thinks should not be so near a kin to us, they are no part of
us, we may stand without them. God has given us Bodies, Souls separate from
others, and has tied neither lands nor treasures unto them, they are no part
of their buildings, we are worse then women, if we cannot see without these
Habiliments and tricks: without question, it is a true sign of a maimed Soul,
and a deformed Body, to seek luker from these outward things. It is more base
then to be out of countenance at a feast, if not graced by the Host. I am my
self still, though the world were turned with the wrong side outward.

If I loose ground in virtue, I will repent, not wash Handkercheifes in my
tears. Man knows not himself until he has tasted of both fortunes. Every
milke-sop can endure to swim in hot bathes; any man shows gloriously in pomp,
and no marvel, for he feeds Flatterers, and they him: but to endure the
tempests of winter, to be able with his strength to endure the most violent
tides, and still to swim aloft, he is the man. You shall find no man that
dares go wet-shod, but will protest in his Ambition, how much he loves Honor,
what exploits, what famous Acts he would do, if he had been borne mighty: do
you hear my friend? you are out of the way, if you think any other estate but
your own capable of true Honor: the poorer, the better: the stronger your
enemy, the more worthy your conquest: vanquish your own sick wishes, and
desires, and the Chariot of triumph belongs more truly to you, then to Caesar.
I write thus, I think thus, and I hope to do thus: but that blessed time is
not yet come. Now to particularities.

In the outward habit, and in some actions, I am not so precise, I like not to
be bound to one, it becomes not secular men, it tastes of affectation and
Hypocrisy: It is naught, it comes too near singularity, and a desire to be
noted: for those things I would conform my self: I am not of their minds
that tax Alexanders putting on the habit of the Persians. It was a politic
intent, he joined the^ to him, by that yielding. For some actions, if they be
not wholely vicious, humanity and good nature shall make me sociable. I will
hawk with a faulkoner, hunt with hunters, talk of Husbandry with the
servants of Thrift: be amorous with the Italian, and drink with the Dutch
man, Non ad Ebrietatem, sed ad voluptatem: The fruit: you shall thereby win
their loves, and you may with that interest make them honest: A course
neglected, but wel-becomming a wise honest man. Your determination being not to
put on their imperfections, but to make them perfect: So does the Grafter join
good fruit to a Crabbe stock: and thus humility alters not the good, but
makes that which is ill good.

Some may wonder I have not yet touched Death the chief. If thou think so,
thou art a coward, for in my opinion all affections are more strong: and though
to some it is the chief instrument of Fear, I think not so, thou mistakest
it, it is past fear, for thou art sure of it. Thou art unreasonable, if thou will buy a thing and not pay for it: thou boughtest life, and payest for it
with death. The lapidary is not sorry when he has gotten the rind, or bark of
a Jewel from what is precious. Thy body is no otherwise, thou art never
precious before thy separation: thou shinest not, thou have no virtue in thee,
thou art not sound until the cover of thy perfection be withdrawn.

In truth at this time, though my face would hinder me from being thought of
Age, and so by course my lease might be long, yet I am not afraid to be put
out of my Farm: It is a dyrtie thing I dwell in, full of mistie gross aires,
and yet barren; I have been so vaineglorious sometimes as to say so, when I
have been answered by more years, that I would change that mind, when I grew
older. I have searched into that speech, supposing there had bin some concealed
mystery in it, but I could find none: then I thought they imagined my boldness,
the effect of ignorance: if it be so, I shall love knowledge the worse while I
live. To cure this disease in a woman, I would apply no other medicine but
example: It is every bodies case, the fortune of Princes, as well as Beggars, it
is the fashion. To conclude, the first causer said it should be so: and if thou
art not an Heathen, thou will not mistrust his love. His wisdom ordained it,
who is the fountain of understanding: Come then, Allons Alegrement. I have
loved a creature that has been the very picture of Ignorance, for following
the example of Socrates taking his poison. And Cicero whom I could never love,
because he was a coward, won me at his death, with thrusting his neck out of
the coach, to meet the sword of the executioner.

Essay. 2. Of Advise.
IF we could persuade the first Taste to respite the Operation, or the
Operation to leave some part of the sweetness to the first taste, our lives
should be long, happy, and safe, for we should begin to live, when we begin to
breathe, whereas we begin not to live, before we are ready to die: still
defective, If having strength, wanting judgment; If wise, Decrepit; Fate,
Desteny, and Fortune, are the Goddesses of Sloth, Negligence, and Pleasure.
These warrant our deafness, and promise a sanctuary to privilege us from
Infamy, beggary, and misery, but alas they cannot: wisdom and virtue
preuailes, and before them these names of shelter are but the surnames to our
folly. Our actions are in our own hands, and it were pity else, for virtue
and vice should be confounded, were our deeds necessited. The world were no
world, if they could not be cut asu^der by a distinction: there were no pains,
no hier, there were no virtue, no glory, all were one and this one were a
Chaos. But there are differences, There are good, and they are to be praised,
bad, the example for them yet indifferent, to eschew badnesse by their
punishment, youth ready for impression, Age wherein may be read the journey of
youth: Times christened by our use Ages past, to light us the way: others to
come, the Judges of our deserts. If the end of life be to be good, if the
safest purchase of goodness be counsel, if counsel without scarres be
most profitable, why eschew we the blessing of Advise? let us alter this
tradition, let us not be so tender; let us make our beauties, our strengths,
our abilities complete, with making the proportion of the mind answerable to
the beauty of the body, with giving Strength direction, Ability judgment.
Wars, and States, and Counsels choose men practiced in wars, in states,
and in counsels. We are to ask counsel for the passage of our circuit of
them that have passed it, of Age, and Books: we ask to know, we cannot know
except we believe, we must ask if we will know, we must believe, or else
our asking is vain. We give, and rightly give pre-eminence to Age; we have
found out a word to beautify the wrinckles, and hoarinesse thereof, we call it
venerable: why? merely in respect of the Appearance? no, but in respect of the
annexion; because wisdom commonly accompanies such a presence: for should we
see it in any other thing, it would be despised and called riueld, and ill
favored.

Let them in Gods name then show us their inward excellencies, and as our eyes
believe them to be old, let our minds believe them to be wise: I see nothing
more decay the fairest branches of our Commonwealth, then this neglect; either
we will not endure Advise, or not believe it until our own perils, and
ouerthrows make us see it, to our shame.

We are inquisitiue of Trauailers concerning strange Countries; our ears
stand wide open for news; and sometimes we swallow matters improbable: but
when we are Advised for our own sakes, persuaded by Virtue, told the passages
of the world truly, and have all this sealed up with the assurance of a
fathers, or a friends love, whom we have no cause to suspect, as speaking
either for Ostentation, or Flattery, yet we believe not. Let us supple our
affections with reverence, and regard of their words: let us prepare our selves
to receive this inheritance, which feeds the mind, though it does not durtily
pamper our bodies, it fortifieth all, and costs nothing, with safety it gives
you that which another perhaps purchased with danger, in an hour his
collection of years. It would doubly bless you with youth, and judgment,
which seldom happen in our Age, because our Age is so obstinate as not to be
capable of Advise.

Let us ask, and follow: The life of Industries first fruit is somewhat
sweatie, and painful, but then pleasant, and ever pleasant. A memory stored
with the performance of gallant actions is only rich, it is a sweet
meditation, that may be often read over without tediousness. The most leaden
spirit that ever was, at the hearing a Relation of an unusual excellency,
though he be more beholding to his ears, then his head, yet feels Emulation
tickle him, and wishes his brand were set upon those riches. Wish and spare
not, but let not Laziness make thy wishes vain.

First let us proclaim war against delicious niceness, and either turn our
affections to a good use, or turn them out of doors, Semen Laboris, Honoris
Seges. It was pity Pirrhus had no more to give, he knew so well to whom to
give, naming him his Heir whose sword was sharpest, the height of whose spirit
should carry him to the conversation of actions stuffed with magnanimity, and
judgment. Yea, here is the life, whether he win, or loose, he is happy.
Hanniball being demanded who were the worthiest Captains that ever were, names
Alexander, himself, and some others: Scipio demands where he would have
stood, if he had conquered, he answers, first: It was well answered, and he
meant well, his attempt shined too gloriously to be dusked by misfortune.

I would allow a man to keep the house no longer then till he be able to
fly, until his mind and body are able to carry themselves without falling,
not until he be past reeling, and staggering, for that ability we never
have: but in this time let books, and Advise rectify, and prepare us fit for
the entertaining of all fortunes; victories, and overthrows: calamity, and
happiness. Let us rob and suck from our Parents experience, and judgment:
let us be acquainted with the successes, and sequences of the world, tracke
their observations, be acquainted with the minds of times past, and let their
bodies go: If we love what they did, we have the best part of them, for the
work is commonly better the^ the manual Instruments effecting it, for they are
the servants of Direction, the thing performed the issue both of mind and
hand. Fie upon these engrossing senses of ours, that make all fare the worse
for the satisfaction of one, and yet limit their objects, and carry level but
certain distances. The mind, the mind is the Magazin of contentment, It is
the mind that can distill the whole world, all Ages, all acts, all humane
knowledges within the little, little compass of a brain, and yet with the
force of that little treasure command, dispose, ce^sure, and determine States,
Actions, kingdoms, wars, overthrows, and all the Acts, and Actours busied
upon our humane Theater. To this mind, to this cesterne of preciousnesse, let
us attribute al, and not suffer the weight of our affections to disorder this
goodly frame, this clock of Time and Reason: O quam contemptares est Homo,
nisi supra humana se erexerit.

These licourous Humors, and Affections, are the out-offices of our mansion,
and the respect ought to be given to the Director whose high erected scituatio^
witnesses his prerogative: from the Rays of this sun proceed all blessings,
Advise is the medium transporting them, our brains like a sense able to
perform good offices if employed. Let us receive, and utter, be capable, and
return increase of this fruit. What a precious sight is it to see a temperate
young man, how he shines, Glory, and admiration attends all his actions: It is
good in age, because the contrary were abominable, but it is common, and their
night being almost come, they cannot but look gravely, and live temperately,
as well to preserve them from pain, as to eschew shame, and reproach. I thank
not Alexander for conquering the world, but for performing it before thirty
year old. Augustus commands admiration of me for nothing so much as his
beginning enterprises of high moment very young, and yet with that youth
reducing the whole world under his subjection. I often hear old men wish
themselves young, which though I allow not, as being wishes of impossibility,
yet hoping their intent is to trace their course moderately, and to unite the
blessings of youth, and judgment, I think it tolerable: but we that are yet
young, need not wish youth, for we possess it, but judgment that may make us
worthy to possess it: then begin with Hearing, next with following Advise and
Counsel: let us begin with our selves, and marshall, and dispose our own
course; let us determine it, and leave nothing to uncertainties, but drawing
out our intents regularly, follow that delineated, and wayed manner: Here lives
Happiness, for here lives wisdom: this music of two strings is the most
delightful harmony, for the world affords not a more admirable excellency then
youth, and judgment included in one substance: both parts show their richest
Treasure, the Soul judgment, the Body youth: let us then infranchize Advise,
and persuade our ears to become good commonwealths men, to respect the
general profit: Counsel, and Advise, are the parents of Government: what can
I reckon the^ more worthy, more safe, more excellent in institution, then
Counsel, and Advise?

Essay. 3. Of Patience.
ABout nothing do I suffer greater conflict in my self, then about enduring
wrongs: for other duties (though perhaps I seldom perform them) yet I am
resolved they should be done: and it is not the fault of my meditation, but of
my negligent flesh: but here is set up Reputation as the Garland appointed,
and he that reuengeth not, is not capable of this glory.

Here has cruelty borrowed the apparel of wanton vanity, and makes foolish
youth her Agent. I know what Divinity, what Philosophy persuades: I know
these wrong-doers to be wretched creatures, rather in truth to be pitied,
then maliced, and yet for all this I dare not yield: the cause, there is too
much safety in following this Advise, the body by this preuents an adventure,
therefore that respect makes me obstinate. I know again this idle breath
should not divert me from Virtue, but having no present occasion wherein I may
exercise valor, and manifest my worth, I dare not take day in any thing so
nearly concerning me. But all this time I find not my self angry, but in
truth somewhat subject to vainglory, which is a worse disease, because less
violent, and therefore of more continuance. I have not yet any outward witness
of my valor, but this is my determination, not to refuse the first good
quarrel, and to perform it as well as I can, after which I will serve Virtue,
bear, and forbear: and this I will do in humility to please the world, and
to show them I scorn not altogether their customs. Now arises another
question, (behold how subtle Vice is, she steals often to the bed of Virtue,
and puts in a changeling, and makes Credulity believe because Virtue is a
mother, therefore this is her child:) upon the receipt of a wrong, and an honest
determination to forgive, I am whispered in the ear, that this lenity is
injustice, that I nourish sin with not cutting it up when I see it grow,
that though I effect revenge, and revenge could do no more, yet it is not
revenge, it is justice: pitiful abuse, Anger is the ^other of Injustice, and
yet Iu^tice must lackey on her Errandes, ^ight battles, and give her the
victory: I cannot reconcile these together, but even in the behalf ^f Truth,
and mercy, I will combat against a received tradition. I think nothing but
murder should be ^unished: for these petty matters of theft, and such
trespasses, they ^re the effect of need, or wantonness, venial faults; Age
common^y reclaimeth the one, and the other is punished by the setter Po^ertie:
for any thing less offensive, a cool reproof, no cholle^icke revenge.

I have seen some fall out upon wrong understanding, presently ^ce has
chafed, sworn, stricken, played the Bedlam, and in the end i^ has been proved
no offense: Was not his case lamentable? Yes, he is bound more stricktly to
Restitution then the son of an Usurer. It is an excellent temperate Virtue
this Patience, and punishes more with no^ punishing then the hastiest
Executioner. Though Enemy would be loath to be hurt, yet i^ hurts them to
meet with a cold adversary; the revenge not performed, they live in fear, the
terror of which is without bloody hands, and yet most terrible. If it were
possible to play Fury to the life, and yet not have her effects inwardly, I
would be content upon some great occasion not to hurt* but to scarre the
injurious, but it is dangerous, and that jesting often will discover the
intent, and it is to be feared will weaken the brain, as ill as drunkenness.
The greatest use that I see old soldiers make of this conuersing with danger,
is an ability to suffer, and in truth it is one of the best collections of
Experience. Patience is the mother of Opportunity, she prostituteth her self
to them that nourish this her child carefully, when before Anger she goes
invisible, and hinders them from what they most thirst after. When in my
reading I meet with a fellow that has deserved much of his Country, and has
been paid with ungratefulness, and yet endures without alteration, I honor him,
and in my estimation, I prefer him before the mightiest Conquerors, or most
powerful Princes: o he is wise, he knows the passages of the world well, he
served his country for his countries sake, and I think they have rewarded him
against their wills better then they could with their wills: for in his other
deserts he was but a sharer with others* the tractablenes of his people might
keep them in peace, the valor of his soldiers make him a Conqueror: but in
this he fights singly, he gouernes alone, he overthrows millions of
affections, to reward which, no Triumph, no Palm, no Statue, no Edict is
sufficient: what then? Memory, and Eternity.

Essay. 4. Of Suspicion.
FRom the uttermost bounds of knowledge and ignorance, are derived all our
contentments, and discontentments: from the survey of knowledge, proceed all
delightful objects, and in the obscure darkness of ignorance, lives Doubt and
Suspect, over-valuing causes of Opposition. Incestuous Ignorance begets Fear,
and then ingenders upon his own daughter Suspicion: this is the original of
this monster, which so distracts his possessour, as in the clearest day he
goes without light, and makes his imagination build blocks and thresholdes,
in the plainest and most beaten way: yet let Wisdom manage this blind
Humor, and it sees: such is the touch of understanding, as it gives things
new natures, and makes clogges wings to raise him to his pitch. From hence may
be demonstrated what an excellent counselor a self observation is, since no
words, no works, no passion, no Patience comes from us, that turn not back
their heads to look upon this Author, and are either ornaments or disgraces to
our life: they all resemble the Father, and cast back upon us the true
reflection of our selves. Midas fable has great interest in m^ respecting the
morrall, what he touched was Gold: what Covetousness touches, it conuerts to
that use: we are all Bees, or Spiders, converting things indifferent to a
particular quality: thus Suspicion which in women, and ignorant persons,
looks like the mother Fear, and is most deformed, with wisdom is so
ordered, as it becomes Forecast, and Providence: thus is the making things
good, or ill, equally in our choice, as the being good, or ill. Even as the
pestilencies of corrupt humors are fed by ill diet, and slowly go on in their
infectious natures, and increase so easily, a^ they show not their extremity
suddenly: so is the order of our life disordered by giving way to the qualities
of our affections: and as we loose ground in the right managing of our selves,
the other gets: giving liberty we loose liberty, and by degrees throwing of
the prescribed course of Virtue, we fall into the incertainties of passions,
and appetites, and with converting Desire into base uses, we purchase fear,
and suspect, and lives, living to no other end, but to hunt out cares, and
griefs.

Vita quid est Hominum, nisi
spes incerta, metusque?
Haec inter dubij viuimus, and morimur.
Me thinks there is great indifferency, who receives Joy immoderately,
should be touched with the contrary equally, otherwise he buys without
payment: who suspects ought to be, and is suspected. If we like not this, let
us deliver men ware more precious, and we shall not be offered such base
stuff in exchange. It is the traffic of Humors that disorders our
conversation, and a seeking a present itching contentment, brings repentance on
the one side, and derisio^ on the other. Thus are our lives either weeping or
laughing: and every one by turns either feels his own pain, and laments, or
seeing better a far off then near hand, laughes at his own imperfections in
another. Who sees a Lover, and loves not? forcing his imagination to draw a
portrature of perfection, and then Pigmalion-like inamoured of his own
workmanship, and laughes not? Who sees this creature feed upon the Suspicion
of a Riuals entertaining his mistress, his ears not having ability to
perform their office, and therefore teaching his eyes a new occupation,
measuring the wind that proceeds from her mouth, and spelling words by the
observation of her lips, and pitties not? when in another vice this pitying
laughter may deserve these marks of reproach, and have his Judges part taken
from him, and condemned by his own sentence.

Te respice, quid, quoties, obijcias casiquam. Amendme^t is more excellent the^
reproof: for things purchase value with the quicknes of their loose, and thus
Amendment which is immediately good: Reproof receives the nature of all things
performed for another sake, they being laborious and painful: besides
Suspicion cannot detract from acted Advise which is example. What this humor
does vndirected, it undoes: what directed sul of preservation. Suspicion will
accuse a friend, and fearing enemies, make an enemy: Wisdom knows Trust
ought here to be applied, and makes Suspision jealous of loosing him, not
loosing him by Suspicion: Certainly though it tastes of the grossenes of the
parents, yet it is refined, being a knowledge forced out of ignorance, and not
like the mother distracted, but avoiding danger: more subtle, for fear
understands nothing that looks not terribly, and frowns not: Suspicion out
of smiles, and courtesies, can pick dangers, and Distrust venom out of sugar:
but thus if not governed she will go too far, and starve her self with
suspecting all things dangerous: but Wisdom applies it self to the place,
and time, and out of them frames the allowance, or disallowance of Suspicion.
One thing makes me think it not so naturally ours, seeing it seldom lights
upon things not precious in estimation, as among poor men jealousy of their
wives: but no where so conversant and powerful, as among Princes, unto whom to
say rightly, it rightly belongs: for how soever they are, they have enemies: If
good, envious: If evil, some that lay hold upon that occasion: Yea, even their
friends are doubtful, not being easily to be discerned whether lovers of
them, or of their fortunes. Here it shows it self in diverse forms, It made
the cruel Tiberius look virtuously, Occultus ac subdolus fingendis virtutibus
donec Germanicus, ac Drusus superfuerint. It made Galba Idle, when living under
the tyranny of Nero, Nemo rationem otij sui reddere cogeretur.

Claudius had it in that extremity that it turned into fear, and baseness,
Quasdam Insidias temere delatas adeo expauit, vt deponere imperium cogeretur.
It is seldom wanton, or pitiful, the next turn among them is into blood,
and death, and not without reason: Upon this state dependes the common good;
the preservation of which, restes much in Suspicion: for before the majesty of
a Prince none will come not adorned with an outside looking honesty.

Of the best deserts there ought to be the greatest care, Niuno piu facilmente
inganna gli altri, ^he chi e solito, and ha fama di may non gli ingannare: So
is there no way left him to unmask dissembled faces but Suspicion; which
though it sometimes err, yet more often it is a true Calendar of the seasons,
of the tempests, and dangers.

Among these States, Suspicion and Dissimulation are to be allowed, as being
the Handmaydes of Policy, they ought to be conversant among them, not to
offend, but to defend: not in respect they are men, but in regard they are
princes, whose lives travel among dangers, and therefore ought warily to keep
this case of Pistols continually ready charged, and bent? but downwards they
are not to be allowed, not dissimulation at all, for in a private Fortune it is
a fearful baseness, and a cowardly shift: neither will Suspicion then serve
to look upon our own lives, to observe whether we go backward or forward in
Virtue: for we have neither poisons, nor any other kind of treasons among us:
our enemies are more open, and touch us slightly, and yet so plainly, as
without the spectacles of Suspicion we may see them. Thus are things different
in name and nature, according to the possessor: and as Princes and private men
differ in the outward magnificence, so in their inward minds. To a low
fortune belongs simply the use of Virtue, In the other she must be often
changed, not into vice, but not to look always like Virtue: their Operation
must meet, but their preparing must differ; the one having to deal but with
himself, may go on directly; but the other conversant with multitudes, must
sometime go about, and seek out by-ways, which action in him may be
virtuous, though in the other it would be termed dishonest.

Essay. 5. Of Love.
IT is a pretty soft thing this same Love, an excellent company keeper, full of
gentleness, and affability, makes men fine, and to go cleanly, teaches them
quallities, handsome protestations, and if the ground be not too barren, it
brings forth Rimes, and Songs full of passion, enough to procure crossed
arms, and the Hat pulled down: yea, it is a very fine thing, the badge of
eighteen, and upward, not to be disallowed; better spend time so then at Dice.
I am content to call this Love, though I hold Love too worthy a Cement to join
earth to earth, the one part must be celestial, or else it is not Love.

I hope I shall not offend Divinity, if I say the conjunction of man and wife,
is not Love; It is an allowance of Gods, and so good: and the name of it, I
think, two honest Affections united into one.

If this be so, what becomes of all the rest, which are counterfaites, and yet
beg under ^he passe-port of Love? Love thy neighbor as thy self, that which
comes nearest to Love is this, man with man agreeing in sex: I cannot think
it is so between man and woman, for it gives opportunity to lust, which the
pureness of Love will not endure.

Among all Affections that of Socrates was the best, who sought ^o better the
minds of his familiars, and loved a good ^it, and inclinations to good, and
sought to confirm them in that.

I laugh, and wonder, at the strange occasions that men take ^ow a days to
say they love:

If they meet with a fellow ^r a Feast, or in a Pot, If their Delights
be any thing ^ Kin, or their Faces any thing alike; If their Countries be
one, or their lands near adjoining; If they be both rich, or both poor, or
indeed if their newfangled inventions can find out any occasion, they are
sworn brothers, they will live, and dye together but they scarce sleep in this
mind, the one comes to make use of the other, and that spoils all; he entered
this league not to impair, but to profit himself. I can compare prosperity
to nothing so rightly, as to the promising plenteous fields of the Egiptians,
which were devoured by the numberless troops of Flies: You cannot have the
one without the other: Flatterers devour the Inheritance of Fortune, who while
she has no need of them, look like Bees that will not be unprofitable, but be
once driven, let Poverty be your Arithmetician, you shall then see they
brought nothing to your stock, but fed upon it, and then you shall easily
discern them to be Drones. There is no Love upon the earth, God loves us
undeservedly, and some good men love and fear him: It is Love from this last
because God is a party, or else it might be affection, not possibly Love. Love
is divine, and eternal; Affection like our flesh, momentary, and mortal. If I
could be sure of them, I would say I loved too, and make men say they are my
friends: but it is an uncertain trade this loving, and stands upon such a
company of circumstances, as I like it not. I make no difference between
common lovers, and common whores, they both flatter, and make the name of Love
their Bawdes to serve their particular pleasures. For my choice of friends,
virtue shall be the groundwork, and so I may build surely. Let his fortunes be
what they will, I care not, yet if I might choose, I would have him poor, for
so I might easiest show my affection to him, and profit my self by him with
least cost: for I hold observation much more precious then wealth, and I will
rather give him my purse then my Time.

Essay. 6. Of Friendship and Factions.
SInce the necessity of our infirmities has added this curse among the rest,
that it cannot enjoy a peaceful amity, it is necessary that we provide our
selves of an Antidote against this poison: since our love will not, or cannot be
universal, let us make it happy in the particularitie, and love well what is
well worthy to be beloved. Under this name of Friendship, which name commonly
to our understandings, is the messenger of Peace, is included much danger: for
to leave a friend, testifies either inconstancy, or treachery: and to be
constant is not without peril: In the choice rests some appearance of safety.
In this choice there ought to be much vigilancie, for until the marriage of
love, has coupled paires, wise natures are timorous in dilating themselves:
and after that celebration, it is irreligious to divorce a friend though guilty
of many deformities. Yet must we not entertain the humor of neutrallitie, for
La neutralit a non assicura da nimici,
e questa non conserua gli Amici.


No, from the utmost happiness of man to his basest contentment, it is not
tolerable, neither Religion, nor nature, allows it: we must then choose, we
are compelled to choose: but here is diversity, the choice of a great man
differs from a private man; the choice of a friend, from that of a faction. It
is for a mean fortune to think of such as are able to better his mind, for a
greater, of such whose strengths are able to uphold his fortune. In friendship
I will regard Virtue, In factions power: under this old sentence, Simile simili
gaudet, there was once much certainty, but now policy can put on all shapes,
so that the Wolf and the Lamb are hardly to be distinguished, either by their
habit, words, or actions. It is less difficult for persons in indifferent
estates to make their choice, then for great men, yet only safe to poverty,
for there he must be in love with himself, or nothing. Well as I am, let him
pace by me often, and (as Hunters do) let me see how he behaues himself, hot
and cold: let me see his motions in anger, hear his opinion of all things,
try him with me, and against me, whether he loves what I love, what he holds
indifferently, what vehemently: If he fits you, observe then whether he comes
faster to you, then you to him; If he be very forward beware; for either he
is a common friend, and so no friend, or else he means to betray you: they
are surest that are won with labor, and certainest that are purchased with
difficulty: for an open prostitute man, or woman, is loathsome, and flexible.
Your friends estate is to be reckoned among your cares, for if he be too low,
he will have occasion to use you too often, and his bareness promises little
help: If the virtues of his poverty be worthy to be known be his
acquaintance, not friend, so does your liberality come voluntarily from you,
and not exacted, and less serves in chari^ie the^ when it is commanded by
friendship. That part of Friendship which commands secrets I would not have
delivered too soon, this is the precioussest thing you can give him, for
thereby you make your self his prisoner, until his Advise, or assistance
requires it, he should not have them, for it may be his honesty would keep
them, but his tongue cannot: feate or corruption does much with men, especially
when the discovery endaungers not his own body. Our respect here must be much,
for our thoughts in other cases may for our safety lawfully be mingled with
the poison of suspicion, but in friendship, nothing but friendship, and
opennesse. It is dangerous if we enjoy a friend much our superiou^ to do him
Offices not easily requited, such impossibilities make him desperate, and
desirous to cancel that Obligation with some Action, that you shall not
afterward be able to complain of his Ingratitude. To these I would perform
duties, rather giving assurance of fidelity, the^ of themselves Assurance. For
Princes, or great fortunes I think it much more unsafe, since they cannot
easily determine, whether they love them, or their fortunes, whether this
league be entered for a mutual safeguard, or for the ones particular, and it is
the more dangerous, since the name of a common good authoriseth this breach.

Among these; if there be equalness, the more benefits the one part pulls
from another, the mo^^ safety the receiver is in, for they will be careful of
him, because part of themselves is in him, and not deny to do for fear of
loosing what is done.

Sertorius the Roman, saved his life with being indebted to his Captains: and
many States at this day, hold other their friends not for love, but for fear
of loss, i^ being an Hostage of most security. Alliance among these does
much, for the mingeling they^ blood with others of power, makes them strong,
when theirs cannot be shead alone, but others are in the like danger of loss.
Thus much for the head: but heads can plot, not execute, and therefore they
must have meaner fortune^ tied to them. Generally beware of imparting too much
to these, for though you were before a lord, you become now a servant,
specially if the secrets were of such importance as may promise a more liberal
entertainment among your enemies. They are many Instruments that come under the
use of Greatness: If himself be wise, he needs not entertain many wise;
and those few where they may do good far off: for wit is a searcher, and
ransackes every corner, somewhat too much, for it is good, going inuisibly
sometime. 'The nearest I would have naturally simple, honest men Appendices
farther off that attribute so much to my knowledge, as to perform not to
examine my commandments: some for their Alliance, others for valor, a few
for discretion: some ambitious, for that is quallitie that great matters may be
wrought out of: lastly some honest, some dishonest: Poisons are as necessary as
wholesome Simples, if they be in a hand able to prepare them.

Since Diuinations among men are uncertain, if Factions be so equally peised,
as it is hard to determine which side will be victorious, to remain wooed by
both parts before won by any, is wisdom.

Shall it be objected to me, that the respect of right ought carry me? I
think so too, if my power might give Right the upper hand; but I do wrong to
sink with Right, for so Right loses a Champion: and headlong to run into
mischief is not zeal, but desperation.

Here must be observed how you stand to both factions, whether allied, or
more beholding to one then the other, for if tied by any of these respects to
the weakest, the strongest will be jealous, and then of force you must be a
cold enemy, for you must not think to be entertained as a friend. Beware of
entering into any, where there may be hope of reconciliation, for that is
commonly wrought by the deaths of the meaner parties: So was it between
Tigranes, and Mithridates, they were both holden innocent, and their servants
to make the^ innocent found guilty. The like in the time of the Triumuiri,
where the seal of their concord was the delivering the several vpholders of
their Factions one to another. To conclude, speaking of this, every way
appears danger: but since necessity inforceth, let circumspectio^ arm
necessity: the friends of a private fortune are less dangerous: in greater
there is more gain, and so more loss: He that stands without stands naked,
and subject to every storm, who vnder-propped, so long safe, but no sooner
loosened, but ruined. Too much suspicion begets treachery; an obstinate
belief, is dangerous folly. Clarissima sententia, Confidere paucis: the next
following is too strict, yet a sentence: Sed clarior est altera, Confidere
nulli.

Essay. 7. Of Aemulation.
I Do not think there are any acquainted with envy, but some old withered
foolish creatures, who we say haunt our Beer-fattes, and our Cattle, such as
we call witches, but with Aemulation the refined issue of Envy, every one is
acquainted: yea the most noble spirits are most familiar with it, and they do
well.

I love not Socrates, nor Caesar, nor none of these ancient glorious ones so
well (in plainness I speak it) but I could be content their good Sayings, or
good Actions were mine. I would have them willingly with the appurtenances, and
with the pains, and cost they were purchased with: but since I cannot have
them so, I will take pattern by their example: I will live temperately, and
love valor to atchieue the like Ornaments. Do you not think Aemulation does
handsomely here? yes, yes, without question she is the very spirit of
whatsoever rastes well. When we begin to live, we are naturally given to
follow what we know, and so we live vanquished by pleasure, until Advise or
Discourse tells us the way of Virtue, and commends it; and at that time we
only apprehend the commendations, and would feign procure the like: thus is
Aemulation the bait of Virtue, for looking into the sweetness of the reward,
we undertake the labor. Behold the power of Virtue, even they that dwell not
with her, but speak of her, it makes their speech graceful. I remember the
time when I my self was thus caught: I heard the report of the virtuous, and
presently I emulated the Discoursers good delivery, and began to get his Tale
by heart: but upon the repetition I began to think, if speaking well were so
gracious, how excellent would it be to do well? thus the aemulation of good
words, begot the aemulation of good deeds; which one day may come to the
ripening and to the effecting of worthy matters. Come then, put away your
rustie tradition, all you that think not thus: banish not Aemulation, except
you determine to have all your young men unthrifts of their time, for thus youth
must be entered: marry for age, Time has brought them nearer their graves, and
therefore let them a Gods name, love Virtue for her own sake: let them define
Virtue, and her reward inuisibly: but those that are now in the quickest of her
sensibilitie, must see her in a body sensible, or they will not know her.
Parents thus wrap your Aduises, for I never believed any advise of mine, until
the application of their speech came to persons known, and so quickened me up
with an honest Aemulation.

Essay. 8. Of Praise and Glory.
TO the thing so full of perfection as nothing can be added Glory must be
attributed, for it is a title only due to the extreme point of all
perfection, to things acknowledging an original Praise: Glory goes upward, and
is the Attribute to God; Praise the reward of men reckons downward, chalenging
nothing respecting his worthiness, but that there are worse, and so much
goodness is allowed him, as to overcome ill in comparison: we must give Glory
then, not usurp it, but Praise i^ allowed us, and we may safely love it for
Virtues sake, to whom it is so nearly joined; as to contemn it, shows a mind
either stupefied, or shameless.

We that are left beggars by our first Fathers unthriftiness, have only a
possibility to recover left us: wherefore Virtue comes hardly to us with
difficulty and pains; neither will our poverty permit us to be content with
reuersions, and to possess the reward of our travails after our decease: and
therefore God has given us upon deserts, the liuelihood of praise, and after
death, the recovery of our first rich inheritance: so that Virtue has praise
here, and Aeternitie hereafter. This praise must be derived from Virtue, for
we must love deserts as well as rewards, or else our minds are mercenary.

The respect must only be to Virtue, which obtained, the rest are obtained;
without which, to snatch at praise is vainglory, at heaven, presumption.
Accidents cannot stand without a substance, neither have these separated any
Essence, but are rather names then things: Virtue must beget them, for without
her they are not. Let us see Virtue the^, and afterward Praise: what comes
within the circuit of our thoughts or deeds may be adorned with Virtue: to
think well constantly is virtuous, and virtue gives it praise: for deeds are
begotten by thoughts, and good deeds without good thoughts are not. In things
indifferent a gracious Ornament only is obtained: Thus are our Habits, and
part of our Behavior, which depend upon occasion, and are either graceful, or
disgraceful, according to time, and place.

Courtesy, liberality, gentleness, and such like are outward virtues, and
termed the parts of a winning behavior: good they are, not to be missed, but
yet not the end of the desire of Virtue. But showing our chiefest treasure, we
must bring forth Temperance, Fortitude, and Patience: so ample is the scope of
these perfections, as what else in morality may be named, comes within the
compass of their Dominion.

Temperance is the hardest lesson, so contrary it is to our Appetites, so
seldom vanquished: but this difficulty is rewarded with the most resplendent
shining of all: for Fortitude carries safety with it, and present
commendations: Patience often proceeds not from the rebutting choler, but from
a coldness of constitution: but to possess Temperance, there is no
Temperature helps, for none are so weak, as to want ability to maintain
Desires, and Affections: none so defining Fortitude, as the pleasing their
sensual appetites, shall be called cowardice: It is a concealed victory,
therefore not so near a neighbor to commendation: no nothing can challenge
part of his conquestes, for all Tempers, all strengthes, all bodies have
affections, therefore to this belongs the title of supereminency. Fabritius
poverty as he used it, was fuller of Greatness, and Splendour, then Riches, or
any purchase of Riches: the Giuers liberality was nothing so magnificent as
the refusers temperance.

A follower of Alexanders, denies the wading through a deep carowse, for fear
of needing Aesculapius: So is it with all intemperancy, which is most needy,
when most full. We love liberty, and yet love Intempera^cy, which is a slave
ever hungry, and asking assistance. Diogenes at a Fair full of those things
which Curio^itie, and Householders call necessaries, proclaims his abundance
such, as not to have need of any of those things: the riches of his mind was
so full, as it could take no addition of contentment from those outward gawdie
trash: how rich was this fellow in a Tub, over the most worldly rich, that with
riches, are haunted with humorous, and licorous appetites? Fortitudes circuit
is more limited, her strength being destinated to be conversant with dangers;
how like this Virtue looks to Temperance, since Fear is naturally the
Companion of Danger, but Fortitude abstaines, and in this Abstinence resembles
Temperance: what armor can promise mortallitie more safety then this, which
beating back Fear, loses nothing with oversight? and if it must be death, Un
bell morir tuttala vita honora. I know not how I shall entertain this closing
point of our Actions, because all things not past are among us uncertain, but
I hope well of my self, so much I loath an effeminate bewailing, which has
taken away all pity from me to see men so foolishly compassionate of
themselves. Socrates says Fear would feign seem wise, taking knowledge of
what she never knew. Me thinks for anguishes, and pains, Marius should
strengthen the back of our resistance, when upon some disease of his legs,
without frowning or crying, or being bound to any thing but wisdom, he
suffered the Surgion to search, and cut, and mangle, and cauterize the veins
of his leg: he would have served the other leg so, but that he thought the
disease not worth the curing: Thus expressed he his pain, and yet seemed not
touched with pain: It was a pretty trial, and he that upon the like, cannot
persuade Magnanimity to resist weeping, let him obscure himself, and make
account to do nothing but prevent pain, and resist infirmities with Physic.
When Fortitude feels oppression, and an impossibility of being victorious, to
eschew rashness, desperation, and fury, he turns to Patience, which defends
him from being overcome though vanquished. No Fort can compare with the
strength of this, which suffering makes affliction angry, rather then himself
to be moved. Nothing here is comparable to the unmoved disposition wrought by
Reason. The earth stands necessited because it cannot go, things vnse^sible
because insensible, but to have the feeling of calamities, to be shaken with
the winds and te^pests of Chance, and mortality, and yet not to be loosened,
nor in danger of falling, is the most bewtiful, the most happy, and the most
renowned happiness of man, so full of perfection, as drawing liking to that
extreme pitch, as it ends with Admiration. Who enioyes this Virtue really (for
there are counterfaits resembling it) has the precioussest Jewel of the
world: the virtue of stones expelling poison, skins, bewitchings, and
thunderclaps, herbs, spelles, and Incantations, are not comparable, they are
poor in virtues, and perhaps estimation in spite of them gives the^
qualities: and though they have them, it is commonly but one: but Patience
resists poisons, bewitchings, thunderbolts, spelles, Incantations, and all
calamities whereto our life is subject. Tradition says some things will
foretoke^ a mishap, and break before the event: but Patience in the midst of
Calamities breaks not, no nor crackes.

The attribute of these outward Jewels of estimation, if we receive good by
them, must go to them: but all these blessings light upon our selves: we have
not only the happiness of safety, but the sweetness of not receiving it from
another. Lastly, no casualtie can deprive us of it, for we loose our selves if
it: nor can we be vanquished with missing it, since he parts from himself that
wants it. Al these blessings are the trapers of the furniture of Patience,
which no power, no strength, no authority can make recreant. Then Praise bring
the Garland of Victory, the Chariot of Triumph to adorn this Conqueror, and
Fame out of the mouth of Envy hale commendations, and praises: who denies the
attendance of his tongue upon this Trophee, let him be cursed with being not
capable of Virtue.

Thus Patience, thus Fortitude, thus Temperance, if Temperance, if Fortitude,
if Patience be united, one is not enough, nor two, the consorting Harmony is
not full enough: besides wanting one, the contrary not wanting, duskes all with
counteruailing vices: but to be complete, is to have all, from which though we
sometimes slide, let not that discourage us, but up again, and happily with
being overcome, we may learn to overcome, which yields the contentment of
being victorious: Victory brings forth Praise, and Praise ends with Eternity;
Eternity to our name, and to our souls. Praise is the breath of Fame, which
if overcome by Time, Eternity reuengeth, and overcomes Time, and in despite
of his worme-eaten consumption lives in our best part, our diuinest in that, a
life full of joy, and knowing no end of joy, carried to the height of bliss,
by the wings of Eternity, and Contentment, whose incomprehensible happiness
none can imagine, that are not happy in the enjoying eternal Contentment.

Essay. 9. Of Entertainment.
THere are but two causes that pull on Ghests, Love, and Business: I must in
good nature make much of the former, and the latter, necessity inforceth me to
entertain: but I like not to dwell upon these. A short time may satisfy
visitation, and business not hindered by complement cannot last long.

Me thinks I should have done now: It is tedious to meet with a fellow that
will stay to day, and tomorrow, and the next day, on purpose to say he loves.
If he fear my memory, that he thus reiterateth Love, let him give me some
token of remembrance: this tarrying persuades me rather the contrary, he is my
enemy that thus eats up my meat, and Time, without any cause that persuades
his stay. Truly the name of a good fellow is so dear a title, that I had
rather traffic with courser stuff, and be called parsimonious, yea miserable
if they will; It smartes not half so ill as the phrase, Every Bodies friend
but his own. I know some whom modesty restrains from telling Impudency
their faults: Alas good Virtue, that thou art grown a coward, and dare not
discover thy self. Well, I have a medicine for these people, I will not be
consumed living by these worms: what is your pleasure? this is my answer,
farewell. These words have an excellent virtue in them, they deliver you to
Solitariness, the mother of Contemplation, they keep your house sweet, and
at dinner if you like a dish, it is your own fault if you have it not cold.
When my occasions grow so desperately mad, as in despite of me they will hale
me abroad into throngs, and great assemblies, he that entertains me, I will
him, speak to all, reserve a strange familiarity for the best, and my good
word, and courtesy generally. I have known some affecting Courtesy
overthrow their labors, with not having choice of Complements, but
confounding a Gentleman, and a Peasant, with the likeness of salutation, and
farewell: they were too blame to set up shop so ill furnished. As men differ,
so must their vsages, and respects, not to all, I am the servant of your
servant servant. In truth I am naturally kind, and pitiful, and would gladly
give every man a testimony, that I neither hate, nor contemn them. I will
speak, and pity, and lament with all, and to some give my time without a
fee, but not destroy my self for their sakes: they are no Gods, I need not
sacrifice my self, there is cruelty in this courtesy, I must not do thus:
marry any kindness that shortens not in the spe^ding, that makes not the purse
empty, and the houshold-booke rich in Items, I am ready to be their Host, and
to entertain all: but to keep open house until I shall be compelled to shut
up my doors, must be pardoned me. I have a purse, and a life, and all that I
am for some few; but they are indeed but a few: Non omnibus Dormio.

Essay. 10. Of Ambition.
WE are all in darkness, the Sun, and our eyes help us not: for we see by
them, trees, and woods, mountains, and me^, but the light of reason is
clowded: so does our discerning but beget Opinion, and when we have said we
think thus, our knowledge is at the farthest. My steps are the steps of
mortallity, and I do stumble and stagger for company, and crawle rather then
go; yet I desire to get further, and to discover the land of light. To this
end I read and write, and by them would feign catch an understanding more the^
I brought with me, before decrepitenesse and death catch me.

Cicero exacteth an extraordinary knowledge from his son, because of his
hearing, and conuersing with Cratippus. Me thinks more should be expected from
me, who have had, and carried about with me, the excellent Philosophy of a
soul. I am now come from conuersing with Princes, great spirits, and high
fliers, History has possessed me last, a knowledge meetest for us, since most
of the rest are supernatural, and not of so ready use: our thoughts here
run level, and may overtake, for they are earth, and we are earth; the rest
have too much law; It is a great start to be as far as heaven before us.
What we call licorousnesse in children, greediness in Clownes, misery in
covetous persons, the same is ambition in a higher fortune: the head of this
humor is one, but in the disposing takes several passages. To aspire is
Ambition, which is hope attempting, here hope is abused which is given to man
not to clime with, but to keep him from fal^ing. It hurts not for all this, if
we would allay the vigor, and prepare it, as we do Quick si^uer, which killing,
cures. I would give men leave to look upwards to make themselves apt, and
nimbl^ to leap: let them a Gods name love learning, the experience of youth:
let them observe, and be expert in the knowledges of men, and their actions;
let them be just, temperate, and virtuous, all thi^ time it is not ^ll ^t
makes them more industrious, the^ perhap^ Virtue could so speedily: but to
look upwards, and sink into the earth, to have a high mind, and then to
bestow intolerable worship upon a great man, merely because he is great, I
like not. I do not think but Virtue apparelled in a true magnanimity, must
speed as well as a seeming good in insinuating baseness: and I would rather
choose to rise by loving distressed Virtue, then by adorning pomp; it is much
more cleanly, though more dangerous. Men mistrust themselves when they trust
more to pleasing, and soothing, then to their own inward graces. If I be
honest, valiant, and able to manage great matters, do I not abuse them to fly
for preferment so flattery, base servitude, and admiration of their actions,
who are worthy to be disdained? It is worthiness to pluck Honor from
dangers, and hazards, to adventure famishing in a siege, to be the first at a
breach, to lay hold at the grappeling of ships, until the loss of both
hands, and then to hold by the Teethe: this is the way to Honor directly; for
which if there be not recompense, upon their heads let it lie: Comfort cannot
be wanting to these men of valor, that they have restored to their Country,
the blood, their Country once gave them. Are not these virtues better then to
woo preferment as if she were a wench, to send presents, to praise all,
because we like some; to dance among the creatures of servitude, three hours
before our God does rise, and then to think well of a nod for recompense? I
do not think it pride in my nature to abhor these, but a good safe care to
keep her self from bemiring: for we must not counterfayt, If we worship
Baal, we are no Christians: and he that declines to their adoration is not
honorable.

I like well of Augustus his choice of Senators: Let him try me thus a Gods
name, and reject me if he list: I will subscribe to his wised^me, but never be
bound to be the register of his Glory, nor to make off^rings to him, to pay, to
pray, and to serve. Let them that will guild over their fetters with the name
of Policy, call him a good Politician that can thus temporize, I think he is
a slave born, meeter to fear then love, let him be whipped, not cherished.
Thus I think seriously, though I write it in my talking style, It may be it is
the better, for commonly he is not st^^cken again, that laughes when he
strikes.

Essay. 11. Of Discourse.
IT is a pitiful thing at great assemblies, to see how the rich, and gay will
ingrosse the talk, and how basely they use that commodity, not a word able to
profit a Hackney-man: they send away Time worse appareiled then their
Horse-keepers, poor and naked of what is precious, but laden with straw and
dirt, good only for Thatchers and Dawbers. At this time I suffer much,
specially if I would choose rather to fill my ears the^ my belly, I wish for
Fiddler, to confound them, or any noise saving their own: I would at this time
loose my memory, for she is covetous, and takes all, and with this she will
pollute all, make all taste of Barbarism.

In this time my eye wandering to find a handsome cause of Interruption,
meets with a fellow in black, back again they come with their Intelligence
and tell me they have found a Scholar. I go to this Vessel, and thirsting
after some good licour, hastily pierce it, when there issues medicines, or
Lawe-tearmes: alas, it is either a Surgeon, or an Attorney, my expectation has
broken her neck. Well these are places to grow fat in, not wise. Let us
travail some-whither else, to the University: Their discourse is good, but
too finicall, you undo them if you suffer them not to go Methodically to
work. Nego maiorem, aut minorem, probo, Ipse dixit, etc. I like not this,
except his adversary be a Fencer too, there is no understanding one another: It
is a general fault among the best professions: For Mercenary, and Mechanicke,
it skilles not, It becomes them well to discover themselves by their speech,
but a Gentleman should talk like a Gentleman; which is, like a wise man: his
knowledge ought to be general, it becomes him not to talk of one thing too
much, or to be wayed down with any particular profession. Herein I admire
Plato his Description of Socrates, who though a Soldier, and a Scholar, yet
he discoursed still like Wisdom, which commands over all. One knowledge, is
but one part of the house, a bay-windowe, or a gable-ende: who builds his house
so maimed? much less himself, no be complete. If thy Ghests be weary of thy
Parlor, carry the^ into thy Gallery: Be thus, but yet if thou meetest with a
fellow, that would feign show thee he is a Mathematica^, or a Nauigator, be
content to talk with him of Circles, and Quadrangles, of the Poles, and
Nauigating Stars.

There is an other Creature that weyes every word, and will be sure to turn the
verb behind, affects elegancy, and to be thought learned: this fellow is
formal, he robbes himself of his commendations, with this premeditated
course: me^ look for much, where they discern such a preparation: besides,
me thinks he dresses Truth and Wisdom too gawdily. It is the Country
fashion to sugar over what is naturally sweet: he profits not his Auditory.

I knew a Country Church furnished with a Clock, whose hammer was stricken by
an Image like a man, upon the wheels stood a Catte, which when the Image
struck, made such haste away, as the Parishioners when they should have wept
for their sins, and were moved thereunto by the Preacher, laughed at the
Cattes nimblenes: so is it with this man's hearers, they catch at some pretty
sounding words, and let the matter slip without any attention. Let Ape-keepers
and Players, catch the ears of their Auditory and Spectators with fair
bumbaste words, and set speeches: It shall be my course when I must discourse
(but I had rather hear) not to loose my self in my tale, to speak words that
may be understood, and to my power to mean wisely, rather then to speak
eloquently.

Essay. 12. Of Censuring.
THere belongs a duty to every action, they are our preciousest Issue, being
ours alone divinely descended, the children of our souls, we must name them,
our Censure is the Gossip, the names good, or badde. There was a time of no
distinction, for all were good, and then Praise was superfluous, for they had
motions, and instigations more excellent: but now we are so ill, that they
deserve thanks that are good, and must be cherished: for vice has persuaded
Custom, that to call naught naught, is uncivil, and dangerous. Things in
suspense come only under Supposition, and Judgment will not turn her self
into Opinion with meddling with uncertainties. What Is past is in the power of
our Censure, and it were pity it should be prohibited, since experience
doubles our natural discretions, and discourse adds to experience, being the
Censure thrown up and down in our brains, until the wisest with the strength
of Reason, determines it. We are not without scandalizing, and reproaching
veins, but they are occasioned either through envy or malice, too foul, and
misshapen mothers, to bear so fair a child as reformation: yet I have heard
some wise men hold that venom of enemies not unprofitable, that discouers our
imperfections: what an unhappy and monstrous world is this of ours, where the
best Offices are performed by our worst acquaintance? For friends either we
choose them il, or corrupt them, or there is no choice, I fear the last, yet I
think it possible, if we be good to make the^ good: but our conversation is to
delight, not to better, we have co^merce, and traffic with our goods, not our
minds: Herein let me register my particular happiness, who have parents more
careful of my mind, then of my body, whose advise, or example, if I will
follow, I cannot stray.

But in this paper I was determined to speak more generally; for
particularities are offensive: Which tender affection of ours, though I
abhor, yet I mean not to hazard my self with Innovation. I will adventure
my opinion, but not my self for my opinion. Whether it be solitariness, or my
conuersing with books, or that my youth has not been worthy of grave
acquaintance, I know not, but the greatest number (me thinks) are out of the
way: their project, the end they determine at is low, and base. Since Time has
distild our bloods, and separated us from the crowde, I hold nobility bound not
to commit any action tasting of a degenerate humor. Our souls though they can
here take no essential addition, yet in titles they do: for our virtues sure
we were first preferred, which is the desert of our soul, our souls then are
gentlemen, and we should apparel them* but we attribute all to our bodies, we
feed them well, and cloth them richly, so that we have Gentlemen's bodies, and
slavish minde^; nay even our bodies, strip them o^ clothes, and worship, suit
our mind^, being gross, and thick ribd, apt for nothing but a chair with a
back, and a pair of slippers. Ease, and formalitie, are the highest we reach
at, and like seeming Fencers, we are meeter for a flourish, then defense. It is
the comfort of sorrow, to search the cause of our mishaps: for this what shall
we say, that Ambition is a fault, and Quie^nesse a blessing? No, but that our
educations are rude, and we are blinded with Ignorance. I dissuade every worthy
spirit from the inticements of Ambition, and Quietness I hold blessed; but I
hold not Idleness to be quietness, but that that peace is good, which
authoriseth the exercising goodness. Beside the bond we are obliged in to our
Country, even for our own satisfaction (me thinks) we should be more
industrious. I durst venture my life, there is no pleasure so sweet to age,
blind, and decrepit, and by time robbed of all Health, and Contentment, as the
meditation of good deeds: It is a rich inheritance which the father has, and
the children have, and the whole household is graced with. If we be asked how
we have lived, how are we pierced, how cowardly our sloth serves us, leaving
us without all defense? Place two men in equal fortunes, the one the servant
of Virtue, and of his Country, the other of Idleness, and pleasure, fools
may determine him happiest that eats most meat, and keeps most men, but after
their deaths, the eyes most bleared with vice, cannot but acknowledge what a
huge distance Fame makes between their memories.

I have known the extremity of this Idle life, and of the other I have had
some little taste, and even that taste I so much prefer, as I reckon not my
life from the time of my birth, but from this day, how much they differ, what a
tranquillity there is in the one, what wretchedness in the other, how
pleasing a sight is the inward aspect to the one, how horrible and fearful to
the other, that by mine own experience I can affirm, I was afraid to think
of my self, and never durst ask account of my own life: their discourse and
familiarity how unlike, this life able to better the Auditory, to set forth
Virtue in her fairest colors, the others motions like the penny-motions able
to stir, and stare, and down again. We patch and lengthe^ our hopes with
such frail and slender stuff, imputing our misfortunes to our Desteny, and to
the Tune, like Tiberius, asking a Guard of the Roman Senators, saying his love
had purchased the hate of the Commonwealth, when it was his unmeasurable
cruelty. Neither in public, nor in private lives, need we be in this
adventure, it is no bodies fault but our own: for Fortune has no power of
Wisdom, but of Sensuality, and of lives that swim and nauigate without the
Lodestone of Discretion, and Judgment. I am brought in this Theme, to write
with more then an ordinary vehemence, so certainly do I know man's happiness
to rest in the ma^naging his own time: Every man may be blessed, and rich in
perfection, if his own dissoluteness, and unthriftiness, incurres not the
contrary. I wish we were all thus careful, and if I can, I will begin, which I
should the better perform, if a general consent of amendment were in every
bodies mind. Let us one help another with laying open our diseases to one
another: If our titles in our lands be never so little cracked, or seame-rent,
we sweat with our black boxes, we are diligent in searching to recover them,
but our minds are seam rent, cracked, and bawdie, but we ask no help, nor
endeavor to do any thing but to conceal them. For every headache our vrines
knock at the Physicians door, and we are inquisiue about the state of our
bodies, but our conscience may exclaim, and cry out to us, how sick, and
famished our souls state is, and we will not hear her. Times past were not
more careful, but employed their care more worthily: I will be bound in the
Roman Commonwealth, in the time of one man's Consulship more excellent deeds
were performed, then there is now throughout the world in many years. Who can
match me, Sceuola burning his hand without motion? Where is there a Rutilius
that will prize his Commonwealth so dearly, as to run into the Jaws of torment,
and death? No, we draw not euenly, but are carried away with particular
Humors.

Laws and inforcements, must keep us from the extremity of ill; what slavish
mettalls are we made of in the mean time, that choose to fear punishment,
rather then to love Virtue? I blame nothing for this but Custom: It is in her
power if she will, to make shame smart as ill as whipping.

Laws keep but the dregs of a Commonwealth in obedience, and them only from
being too ill, but vpwardes it prouokes them not, nor any thing but Custom,
and the estimation of Virtue.

All this time I have built but the bridge I mean to travail upon, and not
that anointed with a finicall Exordium. I travail where I list, and when I
list, and will not bind my self to more then I list. Let my feet be bound
to come into the hal before the great chamber, my head shall see which I list
first.

I hate the dullness of my own feet, and my horses, when I travel, and
cherish the nimblenesse of my thoughts which can fly over the world in an
afternoon.

I am determined to speak of books next, to whom if you would not say I were
too bookish, I should give the first place of all things here. The best wit
of man that ever was, not assisted by such helps as may make my comparison
blasphemy, never brought so much into the world, as by their assistance he has
had. When I hear a natural man speak in his best, I can say but witty, My
comendations are at the farthest; but the tongue steeped in the true
understanding incident to learning, has Wisdom for his reward. Experience
does much, but it is too full of scars and wounds, and is brought with gray
hairs, and danger: when the other has no less that has travailed but in his
study. In a word propounde any course saving eating, and sleeping, and wanting
this, you are maimed: even in the life of blows, and wars, where strength
seems to bear more sway then understanding, yet Armor, Discipline,
Marshalling, Advantage of number, and situation of the place, ends with the
well tuned Harmony of an Oration, whose force has often been as much as all
the rest, and with the sweetness, added vigor to the harshnesse of Valor.
Of Books, for both Philosophies, I only esteem Plato, who does so cunningly
weaue them together, as (me thinks) he says he is content to give you
knowledge, on condition you should be honest. In the person of his Socrates,
he sets down one of the most absolute forms of life, that is possible to
be imagined. I doubt whether he were so well as his picture, yet Plato tells it
so with the circumstances, as I am afraid sometimes by doubting, to do him
wrong: If he wanted not very much he is worthy of admiration, if very much, of
applause, being the only man that ever I heard of, most innocent of
entertaining a forced grace for some second cause.

Of History if you will have me show you the best first, I must begin, and end
with Tacitus, so grave a style, so Judicial a Censure, and so piercing an eye
into the designs of Princes, and States, never met in one man: he is so
worthy, that I wish he were as rare, for I hold no eye meet to wade in him,
that is not at the helm of a State.

For profitable Recreation, that Noble French Knight, the Lord de Montaigne is
most excellent, whom though I have not been so much beholding to the French as
to see in his Original, yet diverse of his pieces I have seen translated: they
that understand both languages say very well done, and I am able to say (if you
will take the word of Ignorance) translated into a style, admitting as few
Idle words as our language will endure: It is well fitted in this new garment,
and Montaigne speaks now good English: It is done by a fellow less beholding
to nature for his fortune then wit, yet lesser for his face then fortune; the
truth is, he looks more like a good-fellowe, then a wiseman, and yet he is
wise, beyond either his fortune, or education: but his Author speaks nobly,
honestly, and wisely, with little method, but with much judgment: Learned he
was, and often shows it, but with such a happiness, as his own following is
not disgraced by his own reading: He speaks freely, and yet wisely, Censures,
and determines many things Iudicially, and yet forces you not to attention
with a hem, and a spitting Exordium: In a word he has made Morrall Philosophy
speak courageously, and in steed of her gown, given her an Armor; he has
put Pedanticall Schollerisme out of countenance, and made manifest, that
learning mingled with Nobility, shines most clearly.

I have done with Books, and now I will sit in judgment upon all those that my
memory can readily produce, and it is no presumption, L'euento spesso e giudice
non Imperito delie cose: Seeing the beginning, and ending, the circumstances
fall easily into every head, especially considering my opinion of these things
is no part of my faith, neither do I hold them so obstinately that I will not
do Reason reason, and yield if I see cause. I think Courage in the time of
Alexander the great, was a great Gamster, Pol^cy at that time was not his
crafts-maister; some understanding they had in marshalling an Army, In
aduauntaging themselves by the ground, but in more hidden points they were not
then exercised: thus I think his Conquestes the less miraculous: but yet from
so young years, from so little experience, the height of his attempt was
honorable, and his proceedinges admirable: to keep so warlike a people in so
good a temper, argued a great strength of understanding, yet do I bless no
action of his more then the fair usage or his female prisoners, considering
their beauty apt to provoke, his ^emper being fiery, not to endure
provocation, one of these resistances shines beautifully, and as Cicero says
of Caesar's clemency, is an action purchasing glory without sharers: His
foundation was answerable to so high an enterprise, sharing out his particular
revenues among his followers, which won their love: for mean fortunes love
wealth, high Fortunes Glory.

Among these, Perdiccas spoke to my liking, who being offered an ample
Patrimony, asked his master what he would leave to himself, Alexander said
Hope, he desired to rest there too: excellently well played on both sides: he
was a rare young man, whom Fortune followed, and with whom Death played good
Fortune, for I think if he had lived, he would have lost by the world, and
grown downward: so excellent was his youth, as I am afraid his Age would not
have bin answerable, and then his Cornet would have fallen out disgracefully,
therefore he did well to die.

If the Senate of Rome had seen Caesar weep that he was not up as soon as
Alexander, I think they would have cu^b'd him shorter, but he offended worse
in that iourny, when he protested among his Companions, that the first place in
a little Village, was in his estimation more worthy then the second in Rome: I
like not this opennesse, it was not suitable to Caesar, he played his Game well,
but there was no cast like the reconciling of Cassus, and Pompey, it won him
the wager: Even this one Action deserves a volume, for there is much in it,
but I will think the rest, and give it only a scratche with my pen: his
Government generally was like Caesar, only there rests two things that I am
determined to touch: the one his erecting again the Statues of Sylla, and
Pompey thrown down by their misfortunes, it was too late for their memories
to hurt him, yet this eleme^cy to his enemies, made his friends not doubt to
speed well under him, and those indifferent to find him a good Lord: this was
well done. The other as ill, that having brought a government free to a
particular, and forestalled all Dominion, not to be content with the thing, but
to thirst after the name of a Monarch, it was unseasonably done, and in my
opinion the hastener of his death. This puts me in mind of the contrary course
used by the house of the Medici, who did pull the staff of liberty so easily
out of the peoples hands, that they had it before they were mistrusted: so by
degrees did the son get farther then the Father, and the Grandchilde farther
then the Grandfather, as if their souls before their communicating with their
bodies had set in counsel about it.

Augustus the heir of Caesar's labors, was borne fit (in my opinion) to settle
a new erected Empire Militem Donis. Populum annona, cunctos dulce^ine Otij
pellexit: he took the right course, for there is in the multitude a strength
more then they know of, and in this new world, severity might have brought
them to tricks of Restinesse, able to have endangered their Rider, but he
loosened them, and gave them laws, and restrained the excess of the mighty,
things acceptable to the people, and with these good Innouations, he turned
their eyes from looking into times past, or practicing to recover liberty. But
of all the Princes that ever my eyes have met with in my reading, or my ears
have heard of by others, the only Politian was Tiberius: his beginning was not
ill, but full of wisdom, and somewhat virtuous, yet somewhat the better (as
it is thought) for fear to be excelled by Germanicus, whose power in
soldiers, wisdom to manage great matters, and love to possess himself of
great matters, was such, as Tiberius lived jealous as long as Germanicu^ lived
at all: there was no less honest policy in Germanicus, who saw Tiberius, yet
was not able to shun him: After a great Conquest of the Germans, marks of
Triumph being set up, Tiberius was mentioned in the Insculpture, and the
Conqueror left out, for he knew well the covetousness of Tyranny.

Tiberius course with Germanicus was full of safety, I cannot say honesty:
first to remove him from the government of France, where he was strong in the
love, and multitude of his soldiers, was under the cloak of rewarding his
virtues with Triumph: afterward an Insurrection in the East parts was
acceptable unto him, to suppress which, he sent Germanicus, where he might be
nearer danger, remote from Love, and conuersaunt with Chance: to effect
which, he sent thither Piso, by base flattery to win the Soldiers, and by
opposing himself to Germanicus, to keep foreign Princes from uniting
themselves to him.

Germanicus died there (as it is thought) poisoned, which the people desirous
to revenge, he suffered to keep himself out of suspicion, and yet with such
hope to Piso, as kept him from discovering the secret. His speech (even in
light matters) was obscure, and subject to a subtle construction.

In the government of foreign Provinces, he made choice rather of a slow
delicate people, then of spirits of more excellency: as Suetonius says he did
of Vitellius, In inferiorem Germaniam missus est, contemptu magis quam gratia
electus. In the end this course made him grow doubtful: for such people being
vncaple of those places, indaungered the Empire; and such as were worthy, he
thought dangerous to his particular person: to avoid which, he chose Governors
of ability, which exercised their wits in their places with the bodies of
their Lieutenantes, and themselves he kept near him in person. I make no
Apology for his virtues (for he was vnmeasurably vicious) but his policy never
failed him but in his affection to Seianus, who surely had gone beyond him, had
he not been hindered by the peoples hatred, and the number of his successors,
rather then by himself. In the end, let me end with Death, which last part
gives either luster, or blemish to our memories: nothing here can stand,
therefore let us make it in our powers to go out handsomely. Fear (me
thinks) is destinated to more uncertain events, and therefore should not
disturb our conclusion, saying truly, I should forbid it in all things, but
Divinity, for it hinders our intentions, and a seeming, makes us do things
unbeseeming.

Quippe etenim quam multa
tibi iam fingere possunt
Somnia quae vitae rations
vertere possunt,
Fortunasque tuas omnes
turbare timore?
Tacitus makes one of the Sempronij not wholely to degenerate from his house
only for dying well, Constantia mortis haud Indigna Sempronio nomine. I know
not any thing so certainly in our power that carries with it more majesty,
and begets a more eternal, and continual Honor: nor any thing that we may
provide for so certainly, and not be deceived. Let us a Gods name Hoc agere,
when we live, live, and when we are about death, tend our business.

Though we have many examples notable in this kind among the Graecians, and
that it was so conversant with the Romans, as nothing was more in fashion: yet
I will name only two of several Sexes, it may be they may engender among us, and
beget Resolution: I like them the better because unexpected, therefore their
manner of entertaining it not affected, it was Julius Caesar, and Olimpia the
mother of Alexander, they dyed comely, and had even then when they were out of
danger of Reproof, a care not to commit any ill beseeming Action.

There is a last taste of things, that gives them the name of sweet, or sour:
from this we have drawn a Metaphor, that nothing goes with full applause,
that holds not his perfection to to the end. Of life, and his appurtenances
Death is the last relish, which if it taste fearfully, and look troubled,
draws the Censure to determine it licour full of the lees of Humors, rather
then of clearness, and purity.

Essay. 13. Of Iestes, and Iesters.
I Think Iestes, and scabbes are much alike, both the abundance of
superfluous humors, and this breaking out more wholesome then pleasant* It
defends the wit and the body from sickness.

If the most natural ability be thus deformed, what becomes of the affectors
of this vain, who enforce it in themselves? Surely if they determine not to
beg with it, and so to move commiseration put it on, and nourish it as Beggars
do broken shinnes, I know not their use. It is only tolerable in them whose
natures must of force have that ve^t, which use it as some bodies do breaking
of wind. But for them that will choose to loose a friend rather then a Jest,
and desire to be admired in laughter, and are out of countenance if their
Iestes take not, they be in my opinion strange creatures.

There is another sort worse then these, that never utter any thing of their
own, but get Iestes by heart, and rob books, and men of pretty tales, and
yet hope for this to have a room above the Salt. I am tired with these
fellows, my ears suffer at this time, more then at Parris Garden.

I would have a Jest never served above once, when it is cold the vigor, the
strength of it is gone. I refuse to wear buffe for the lasting, and shall I be
content to apparel my brain in durance? by no means. Of things of this
kind, I would not desire to be doubly furnished, for by that time one be
worn, it is out of fashion.

There is a kind of harmless witty mirth, at sometimes not ill becoming,
but the excess is abominable; especially to set the wit on the
tenter-hookes for so base a purpose. He that happens on this mediocritie has
no evil chance, but to take pains, and to earne a Jest with labor, he is
in worse case then a Ballad-singer.

Essay. 14. Of Youth.
Me thinks this same Youth is a very sickness, a malady full of
distemperatures like an Ague, it wishes for what would hurt it, is
daungerously sick, and yet will take no physic. It is a strange thing that
the beginning of life should be death thus full of incurable diseases.

I have long labored in this infirmity, ever since I was borne, I am not yet
cured: they say there is nothing good for it but time, which I cannot yet get,
and therefore am still sick, though not so ill as I was: for I borrowed a
little of Experience, which has done me only this good to know I am not well,
which has made me sensible: since I came to which my Occupation has been to
observe my self, and others. And if it be not the effect of a cruel nature,
it would make a man laugh to see the diversity of their fittes, generally all
mad, but differing in the manner of their furies. Their brains are all so
hot, that they have no use of them, they are all numme, only their senses
are lest them, in whose pleasure they live. Some give all to their sight, and
love to look upon nothing that looks not fair, and yet they look in the
Glass to find themselves, when a more beastly sight they cannot find in the
world. Thus do they attribute all to their senses, though they differ in
allowing the pre-eminence.

It is with them as with the Indians for their Gods, some worship the Sun,
some the Moon, Beasts, Fishes, and Fowls, or whatsoever else it pleases
their fancies to prefer. Sometimes they grow inconstant, and vary their
delights.

There is most hope of these, for I hold, that Inconstancy the working of
their soul, who loathing this language of earth which she understands not,
shows them betimes the end of their delights to be grief.

I have noted when these sencepleasers have come from any of their sportes,
what a naked discou^se has followed: how well Iumball gave it in such a dry
path, he has a Nose cries one, like a Beagle, and yet a very deep mouth: if
very deep, deeper then his head, for that is too too shallow: In this kind
pass they all their time, and some worse: and yet these are the best sort of
youth, there is great hope of these: me thinks there should be so of their
Dogs too, for they receive all from them.

In the other sort more riotous, I can commend nothing but their resolution,
surely they meditate much on Death, and think not to live till to morrow, for
they take care only for to day.

Thus much I know of Youth, I would I could tell you the disposition of Age
too, for I am weary of this life.

Essay. 15. Of the observation, and use of things.
I Come now from discoursing with an Husbandman, an excellent stiff slave,
without observation, respect, or civility, but not without a great deal of
wit, if it were refined, and separated from the dirt that hangs about it. I
have sold him an hour of my time, and have ware for it, good sound principles,
in truth becoming a better fortune: This time has not been lost, for his
experience, his learning of Tradition, and his natural wit has informed me
of many things, I have picked out of him good Philosophy, and Astronomy, and
other observations of Time, and of the world: all which though he imployes
about dirt, and allotteth to that end, hinder not me from making a more worthy
use of them.

There is not that thing upon the Earth, that well examined, yeeldes not
something worthy of knowledge: that divine Artisan that made them, never
fashioned any thing unprofitably, nor ever set forth any of his workmanship
without some inward virtue. I do first prescribe them that desire to prove
excellent in distilling these simples, to lay in good store of the fuel of
learning: whatsoever he has of his own natural wit is not sufficient, it
makes not the fire hot enough: for there is a great deal of tough vile
stuff to be drawn out, before what is pure can be gotten: but then (I tell
Ignorance a miracle now) he shall not see, nor touch that thing, that will not
add to his wisdom: for things are a kin to one another, they come all out
of one Fountain, and the knowing one, bringes you acquainted with an other,
and so to others. All kind of books are profitable, except printed Bawdery;
they abuse youth: but Pamphlets, and lying Stories, and News, and two penny
Poets I would know them, but beware of being familiar with them: my custom
is to read these, and presently to make use of the^, for they lie in my privy,
and when I come thither, and have occasion to employ it, I read them, half a
side at once is my ordinary, which when I have read, I use in that kind, that
waste paper is most subject too, but to a cleanlier profit: I see in them the
difference of wits, and dispositions, the alterations of Arguments pleasing the
world, and the change of styles: this I have in despite of him, be he never so
ignorant: and if he has any thing good among such store of ill, why that is
mine too. I have not been ashamed to adventure mine ears with a
ballad-singer, and they have come home laden to my liking, doubly satisfied,
with profit, and with recreatio^. The profit, to see earthlings satisfied with
such course stuff, to hear vice rebuked, and to see the power of Virtue that
pierces the head of such a base Historian, and vile Auditory.

The recreation to see how thoroughly the standers by are affected, what
strange gestures come from them, what strained stuff from their Poet, what
shift they make to stand to hear, what extremities he is driven to for Rhyme,
how they adventure their purses, he his wits, how well both their pains are
recompensed, they with a silthy noise, he with a base reward. There is not any
thing retained in my memory from the first that profits me not: sometimes I
renew my nurses stories, and being now strong, and able to digest them, I
find the^ not without nourishment. My after life (though I lament the
bestowing it, because I should have put things more precious in first, yet it)
is not without profit. I was bound then to Arthur of Britain, and things of
that price, for my knowledge was not able to traffic with any thing more
rich, Stowes Cronicle was the highest, yet I have found good use of them, they
have added to my experience. My exercises, and recreatio^^, or rather (as I
the^ used them) occupations, I find worth somewhat. I would not loose my
knowledge of Hawks, and running Horses for any thing, they are not without
use, I meet often with people that understand no other language, and then they
make me sociable, and not unpleasing to the company. If out of these dregs
there be good juice to be got, what is there out of more noble observations?
truly an incredible knowledge: he that can make use of them, may leave reading,
and profit no less by these. If out of these blotters of paper many things may
be extracted not unworthy of note, what may we expect from Homer, Virgil, and
such Poets? If in Arthur of Britain, Huon of Bordeaux, and such supposed
chivalry, a man may better himself, shall he not become excellent with
conuersing with Tacitus, Plutarch, Salust, and fellows of that rank? Here
stay thy self, and read with attention: Me thinks Plutarches lives should make
every man good that reads them, he may take his choice of such a number of
courses, and fit his nature with his temperature: Some only the servants of
Virtue, others using her for their own sakes: some swayed with their fortunes,
others immovable. Cicero shows thee how to speak well, and to take a care
of thy self. Scipis only looks to the flourishing of his Country.
Themistocles burning with Ambition, sleeps not until he has gotten a life
answerable to his nature. Alcibiades an excellent pattern of wisdom to him
that will temporize. Alexanander prophesies of himself with weeping at his
fathers Conquests, a testimony that Virtue will show it self before it has
power to perform any thing. It is older then the body is, ready long before
it. Pyrrhus represents to us the uncertainty of the world, not holding any
of his Conquests sure: It may be an advise to some spirits to make them prefer
a poor certainty, before these wavering fortunes, to which purpose one says,
Beatior fuit Fabritius animo, quam Pirrhus regno, It is true, the inward Riches
are only our own, but to dedicate a life only to their use, is to enjoy an
invisible commodity, to bury wealth. Demetrius was a Commixture of virtues,
and vices, and (me thinks) his end declares his vices only to be naturally
his, for his change of fortune made him give over Virtue; he was content to
forget her, on the condition not to remember his fortunes, he betrayed Virtue,
and died a drunken dicer. Salust is excellent in his description of men, If
thou likest a severe honest gravity, look upon Cato, this fellow sure was
naturally good; but somewhat too well contented to be thought so: If I were
not a Christian, I should like well of his death, especially of the manner of
it: It is nothing to die, but that night to study earnestly, I do infinitely
allow: since I may not admire him, I will pity his death, and withal, the
feeling the points of the two swords, that was not suitable, I am afraid he was
afraid of pain, I am sorry for this, the rest was very good, his other
calmness shall make me pardon this motion.

From Cateline may be taken many observations, but they are like the man
dangerous: then but this. All qualities without the direction of virtue profit
not, but overthrow their possessours.

From Tacitus concise style, there are many I^wels to be gotten, he begins
(...) the common Judgment that follows a cruel luxurious government. All
that I can say of Nero, is, I blame him not for being afraid of Death, it was
not he, it was the remembrance of an i^l life, and riches* the betrayers of
men to cowardice. Galba teaches Princes, there is danger in trusting servants
too far: he witnesses the indiscretio^ of the people wishing for Nero
again, because he was young, and handsome, and fair, whereas Galba was riueld,
and old; their ears are their Judges. I have been content to taste Histories,
and their observations, that I might tell them that yet know it not, that there
is yet something else to be noted besides the Series of the History. As out of
these, so from our living Relatio^s, from men, and from their actions, of all
which, I ^^cretion will make as much use, as an observing stomach does of
meats agreeing, or disagreeing with his disgestion.

Essay. 16. Of Opinion.
IT befalls me now, to speak of the straungest thing of the world, and yet
it is nothing, and for all that, scareth the most mighty; It is a monster,
half Truth, and half Falsehood: It receives all forms, sometimes taking
resemblances most pleasing, other times most terrible: It cleaues most to great
Fortunes, and yet lives upon the breath of the vulgar; It is desired, and
shunned; served, and scorned: Sometimes it makes her servants Industrious,
sometimes treacherous. It is often a cause of things looking like good, and
fair, more often of wickedness, and sin: In a word it seems to do much,
and does nothing; And all her followers looking like spirit, and Resolution,
are the very essence of baseness, and cowardice: they are worse then blind me^
that have a dog for their guide, for they dare do nothing of themselves,
unless they first ask counsel of Opinion: She is much made love too by base
Ambition, by Thirsters after promotion: Some attempt to win her with little
ruffes, short hair, and a grave habit, decent looks, few words, and
sobriety: These would feign have her say they are grave, wise, sober,
temperate men, worthy of promotion, meet to be part of the tacklings of a
Commonwealth.

There is an other sort court her with fine speeches, would be thought wise,
and learned, but these never utter their ware but in great assemblies, where
they may hope certainly of witness. It sometimes makes cowardice to adventure
upon danger, but they will seldom make trial of themselves alone, they like
not night-seruices, nor secret* Stratagems: A pitched field is too little, and
the eye of the General must attend them, or else they like it not.

It is wisdom* with them to loose no labor, and prodigality to conceal
virtue, it is worse then to wear cloth of gold inwardly, and fustian
outwardly, they allow of no secret expense, it is unthriftiness: They often
go like Virtue, speak like Virtue, do like Virtue, but that is where Virtue
is in fashion, for as it alters, they alter, they love not her, but Opinion.

Opinion the mother of Hypocrisy, who coins counterfeit money under the stamp
of Virtue, which nothing can disprooue but the touchstone of both Fortunes:
surely these people ought to be pitied, for they take more pains the^ the
virtuous; for these last utter their ware as Occasion gives them leave, and
when it is done, it is done* the other are feign to get company together, to make
friends, and all the time of their performing any thing, their mind is
dictracted: they desire to do it well, and are earnest about that, and as
earnestly are their eyes and ears busied at out their allowance, which if they
have not, they are thrown lower in their imaginations, then the Center of the
Earth: their pains are thrice more, their reward much less; the allowance of
the people, the applause of uncertain Ignorance, which if they do not as much
to morrow, is lost: but the virtuous have an inward satisfaction, and a sure
expectation of an eternal reward. If at any time the attempts of these
Sectaries of Opinion be espied, and that the cause of their seeming good be
known, they are then the very pictures of wretchedness, more base then a
Spittle-house, they lament, and howl, and chide Fortune bitterly: thus is it
with them in their apprehensio^; of misfortune, they are more subject to take
infection then the best complexions, their imaginations multiply griefs, they
add more terror then it is possible they should suffer: An ill Dream to them
is worse then the sword of an Executioner to Resolution: In a word, they know
nothing; neither do they think of any truly, but the excess of delights, or
griefs worries them worse then a bear bound to endure ten dogs. He that
loathes this life, let him not believe any thing rashly, let him love Virtue,
let him aspire to Cato his description, of whom Salust says, Esse quam videri
bonus malebat. Let him neither be subject to vainglory, nor flatterers, nor
respect co^mendatio^s, nor reproves, farther then they go with Truth: If
otherwise, let him defend his ears from their noise, and let them pass
without attention, for they are but as fawning dogs. This course will defend
him from being bewitched with words, and beget Judgment, the cause of all well
performed Actions.

Essay. 17. Of Discontentments.
SHall we rob our selves of Contentment because our bodies are mortal? or
shall we esteem it the best assistance of our friend to weep? I shall doubt
of the che choice of my Counsailour, if his Proemium be bewailing, and his
instructions tears. Our griefs originalls are two, both arise from the body,
the one the issue of Pleasure, the other of Griefs: the first is the most
honest, the ^ast most foolish. When our body has rebelled, and becomes the
slave of lust, it is well done of the soul to lament his obstinate folly, but
to simpathize with the bodies griefs, and aches, and pains, to spend
exclamatio^s upon a thing necessited, it is most ridiculous.

We have many fair examples before us, rather to be followed, then admired;
for I think it not impossible to put on this Habit of Resolution. It is an
armor (me thinks) of excellent proof, to meditate of the Eternity of our
worthiest part, and to think this compact of the Elements must suffer a
dissolution. Whatsoever God does by a Medium, must know an end, what
immediately belongs to Eternity. Here does Philosophy according to Plato,
give the Soul again her wings, and helps her to blow the Coal of her
first light, and makes her to distinguish between Earth, and her own Essence:
and when any of these Tooth-aches of the body come, she teaches that they are
to be entertained, not as strangers, but as Familiars that we have long
expected. Who has been acquainted with this Philosophical life, cannot but
end with Plato in his Axiochus, Tantum abest vt timeam mortem, vt nunc etiam
teneor Amore. Reso^ued of this, me thinks Things short of this should lay no
hold of us; but alas we are so used to this bewayling, as if we have no cause
for what we feel, we will for what we see, for the loss of money, and things
of that kind: and if these be not ready, we will weep at a Tale, or at a
Puppet play. It skilles not, If the body only were at this expense, but our
souls will accompany them, and be so foolishly kind, as to lament for that
they never knew. Writing of this, Contemplation desires me to protest her the
only Curer of these Diseases: and she is so indeed: There is no way to make
this separation but by her: she shows her servants those Terrors unmasked,
which are found to be no other then like Chimeraes, begotten between Fear,
and Darkness, which vanish with the Light, and are expelled by the eye-light
of Knowledge.

Do thou lament for what is to come? Why? because it is not come? No,
because it is grievous, and will thou double thy griefs with pulling them on
before they come? Are they come? why it is too late to weep: If thou will do
any thing, please thy body with getting Cure: If it be incurable, Lamentations
are vain: There rests nothing then, but to imitate cunning Porters, get
somewhat to save thy shoulders, and learn to carry it with the greatest ease.
I never yet saw grief of so deep a Dye, that Time has not changed: were it
not better to be ones own Physician? and though we have lost Friends,
Reputation, and Riches, the household stuff of esteem in the world, yet if we
hold Patience we are not poor: And among the wise, the estimatimation will
rather increase then decrease with these trials. Come then, let us maintain
this Fort resolutely, there is no safety but here, Nullus locus est, quo non
possit Fortuna prosequi, yes, here she cannot: this place is divine, and
immortal, and she commands over nothing that is not sensible: for the other,
Vitij affectus proprius est displicere sibi: Behold this woorkeman who has
made us so contrary to vice, as we never taste her, but she rises in our
stomachs, and checkes our Intemperancy.

Here are the best motions that the Soul has of the Body, she erreth not
from her Divinity to be thus charitable for her self, and her Companion: there
is no Divinity so easy to be comprehended by our senses, neither is there any
that carries more terror with it. When our enticing Fantasy has dressed a
Delight pleasingly, and presents it to the r^st, they all like it, and it is
speedily bought: afterward our Conscience shows us our choice, when behold it
is most ougly, and deformed: our Senses we cry out, have deceived us, but that
will not serve: our once kissing it, makes it follow us perpetually. Here has
she cause to weep, and to pity our torments, enforcing us to remorse, and an
after care with impression of her lamentations.

Essay. 18. Of Sleep.
MY custom is about this time of day to sleep, to avoid which now, I choose
to write: so, if this be a drowsy style, and sleepily done, yet if it be not
worse then sleep, I go not backward, for it serves in sleeps room. This
Sleep is to me in the nature that Dung is to Ground, it makes the soil of my
Apprehension more solid, and tough, it makes it not so light, and pleasant, and
I am glad of it, for I find my self too much subject to a verbal quickness:
thus I think it good for me that am of a dry barraine mould; but for others
it may hap to make them too waterish: the cause of this is common as the
effect, yet as some bodies are more subject to it then others, so meats of one
kind provoke it more then another. This makes me often play the Epicure,
making my stomach a coward, to fight with Partridge, Phesant, and such foul,
whose Airye parts are more fine, and poison not the Brain with thick vapors.
These foure-footed Beafts are dull and gross, and so is what proceeds from
them. Well, for my part I will put away this sleepy Humor, for it is an
extreme spender. When I come at the end of a week to reckon how I have
bestowed it, in that seven Days I find nothing, but Item in sleep, Item in
sleep: And in the end Summa totalis, seven nights, seven Afternoones, beside
half hours, and quarters, at unaccustomed times: there is no proportion in
this, especially to bestow so much on winking. I cannot blame Alexander though
he misliked it, and held that, and Lust, the Arguments of Mortality: If he had
used eight of clock-houres, the Persian Empire might yet have stood. Not so
much but good Husbands hate it; And Pedantes have made it a main supporter of
their instructions. I would liken it to Death, but that it is more terrible,
for it is Idleness; yet thus it is Death, for it killes Eternity. Fame never
yet knew a perpetual Bedpresser. Is it not a pitiful thing to see a fellow
bestow half his Patrimony in hobby-horses? then pity all them, who having but
a little time, dedicate half that to sleep. But this is the effect of our
Bodies, who in despite of our souls Divinity, will follow their natural
Inclinations, to lie along, and be senseless like their Earthly Original.

Essay. 19. Of Life, and the fashions of Life.
THere have been great Contentions about my Mind, and my Body, about this
Argument of Life; they are both very obstinate in their Desires: I cannot blame
them, for which so ever preuailes, depriues the other of the greatest
Authority. My Soul extolles Contemplation, and persuades me that way; my Body
understands not that language, but is all for Action. He tells me it is
improper, being of the world, not to live so, and that I am borne to my
Country, to whom embracing this contemplative life I am unprofitable: the
other wants not reasons forcible, and celestial. It has been my continual
labor to work a reconciliation between them, for I could not perfect any
course by reason of this Division. Earth and Heaven cannot be made one,
therefore impossible to join them together: only thus much I have done, they
are content I shall take my choice. All this time I was not Masterlesse, nor
idle, I put the common phrase out of fashion: he that says of me only, He
lives well, speaks too sparingly of me: for I live to better my mind, and to
cure my body of his Innate diseases. I must choose the Active course, my birth
commands me to that: I am set above many other in the Herralds books, not to
sit ^ighest at a Table, nor to be worshipped with caps and knees, but to have a
care of my country. The aduancer of my House first did certainly see some
worth in my predecessors meet to govern, or at least wise to be an example
to lower degrees, to that end they were erected higher then ordinary, that
every eye might behold them: If their blood were refined by the Prince on that
condition, if I pay it not after them, I am worthy to forfeite it. I will then
religiously observe the doing my Country service; If she employ me not, I
sin not though I betake my self to the secret betterer of minds,
Contemplation: Howsoever, I must begin here; for as Nur^^es Lectures instruct
little Children by several objects, to know sensible things, and by that
little give them the knowledge of a Boy: Being past that Age, and come to the
new life of a man, Philosophy must then be his Nurse: and as his first
institution taught him words, and to distinguish of things by words this
teaches him the meaning of those, and to distinguish things by Reason: he
received first single objects by the intelligence of the senses: In that time
he learned to speak, the Schoolmaster taught him to put together, and to
enlarge his building, he made him capable of universalities, and the highest
knowledges.

No^ Radij solis, neque lucida tela D^ei,
Discutiunt animos.
It is so, he gouernes by guess that is not a Philosopher, he is a dangerous
statesman: for when vncontrowled Affections meet with a high fortune, they
beget Tyranny and Oppression. I have not then altogether lost my time, I have
been adorning my house within: It is my Desire not to have it lie slouenly, I
make it ready for Ghests, that is for Employment; if they come not, it is no
matter, it shall be the better for my self to live in. I care not though some
nice Brainestaxe me of Immodestie, for protesting my self thus desirous to do
my Country service: my Soul can witness for me, it is no particular Love:
thanks be to God, I know not much of want, neither desire I Riches: I am borne
to sufficient. It is true, I thirst after Honor, and would be glad to leave my
House some testimony I have not been unprofitable that way, which may be
purchased in an honest quiet life, as well as in the other. I am afraid of
nothing, but that in this contemplative life I should be thought idle, and in
eschewing company, to be of Domitians ^ect, a Fly-catcher. We Gentlemen are
very subject to this, therefore it is not Jealousy but Providence in me to
suspect: we are indeed generally slothful, our contention is not which is the
most honorable life, but which affordes most pleasure. So does the patrimony of
our Ancestors (which rightly understood, will give us advantage over men)
destroy us. I cannot blame a Beggar, though he think more of his Dinner, then
of the definition of Fortitude, or the purchase of Glory: he is violently haled
to the upholding of his body: nor is it an ill commendation for a Ploughman, to
be said to be a provident man for the world, and to have a care to keep his
family from staruing: but to him that already has enough to defend him from
baseness, and mi^ery, shall he only eat, and drink, and make an even
reckoning at the years end? Fie, it is baser then baseness: No, let him
purchase Honor to his house. Me thinks Fathers should give their Sons this
Counsel, and it is odds but they do: If not, sure they think it, and would
have them find it out. I am afraid our much Eating, and little Exercise, is the
cause of this our low flying, and heaviness: our many Crudities send up dull
heavy vapors, that makes us like better of a bed, then of a saddle. I would
we were Ambitious: I wish for us, as for a slouenly Boy of mine own, whom I
persuaded to pride, thereby to escape the contrary; if I could have obtained, I
would have thought to have shaue^ off his pride in a small time, and left him
only cleanliness. I know Ambition to be a fault, but they that will not
vnder-go Actions for Virtues sake, will for Ambitions. I would propound Fame,
Greatness, Honor, Estimation: for wading to find these, we may happly meet
with Honesty, Temperance, Fortitude, and Patience: so must ill stomachs have
wholesome things covered over: let them be sweet on Gods name, so that the
pleasantness take not away the good operation.

The next division after this choice, is to advise and execute: my knowledge of
these is by reading, not by experience, yet did I once touch at the baye of
Arms, but so short was my stay, that I trust more to my reading then to my
Experience. Plutarches Lives are abundantly stored with men of both kinds. I
allow well of the Consul Cicero; his wit and fear prevented a dangerous
conspiracy: but yet I am much more ravished with the lives of Alexander,
Caesar, and fellows of that kind, Me thinks it becomes a Counselor well to
act his Advice, it agreeeth with reason, for he understands well what should be
done when it comes from himself. There is a brave satisfaction in a mind that
conuerseth with Danger; he does rightly serve his Country, whose Body
executes what his wisdom plotteth. Sometimes when I have read the life of
Cicero, I think him a good Orator, he deserved his fee: but Caesar is so much
beholding to me, that I put him on, and all the time I am reading of him, his
happiness is mine, his danger is mine: when I am out of my dream with
coming to, Et tu Brute, I should be very sorry this imagination could last no
longer, but that not being my self, I may without Ostentation commend him, O
Caesar worthy of an eternal memory, and of never ending praises. Reading these
lives I am inflamed, my thoughts soar high, and I am sorry I cannot carry my
Body to that pitch. When I hear of any famous Action of our time, I suffer
with Themistocles, it takes away my sleep, not with Envy, but with an honest
Emulation. I desire to rob no man of his Glory, but to participate with
Experience: well it pleases not my Destiny, I hope it will do, that is my
Comfort: In the mean time I will see Battles in Imagination, and read them,
since I may not be in them.

Essay. 20. Of Imitation.
THe first times had a great advantage of us; all came from them we must now
say, because they got the start, spoke before us, and lived before us. In
truth I think they were more industrious; for out of their natural wits, and
observations, they founded Arts, and Sciences, in which they were much more
profound then latter times, though we are assisted by their travails, and know
whither we should go, and how to go by their methodicall courses. We must lay
the fault to Covetousness, and Pleasure, with whose inticements we are diuerted,
so that we choose now rather to be rich men, then wise me^: In these trades
they have not outrun us, our times may safely brag with them, that we have
hunted out more fashions to please the senses, and to get riches: the age after
us, that shall see both, must be our Judges, who, I am afraid, will determine
the times of old, times begetting Philosophers and wi^e me^, ours an Age of
Cooks and Taylours. I wonder not that Virtue is so out of regard: for we
imitate nothing but what we see. Plato his Socrates, and Xenophon his Cyrus,
are things to be talked of, not to be worn. I should be sorry for our
times, (but that it is out of fashion to be sorrowful for others) to see how
willingly we put on all habits saving Virtues: Our hair shall go off, or on,
as occasion serves, we will pull our brows, and endure any pain to imitate
the fashion, but not intertaine the least Virtue, though she offer her self,
and would be ours with less pains and expense. All this time we are free from
imitation, yea from following the good, but in the apish kind we are exact:
for a new Congye, or protestation we swallow presently, and the fashions of our
Apparel run among us like a Plague. I observe a people that will tell you
where they were last, by their behavior, and table-talke, as well as upon the
inwardest acquaintance: If he has but seen Ca^llis, he cries out of the
English Beer, and that with a shrug, and shaking of the head, as if he knew
more the^ he durst utter. A year in Italy makes him forget his English, and
speak it broken, and ^^ping: they run away with all villainous customs, and
think it fine to talk of Ciulia and Lucretia the famous Curtizans. Me thinks
these fellows are like Suc^^-balles, that carry away part of the Dirt they are
rolled upon. These are base Imitations begotten between the senses, and the
fantasy, bastards unknown to the inward true discerning soul.

There are another kind that will hold their necks awry with Alexander, these
are not wanton but subtle Apes, which seek to creep into Princes, and great
men, with putting on their Habits, they are the da^geroussest flatterers. Come,
I will make an end with these fantastickes, they go against my stomach, they
are worse then Onions, I can commend them for nothing: sometimes perhaps the
stuff they wear is good, and the stockings, and the hat, and the rest, all
saving the man: they are like Hatters blocks, that wear what is worthier then
themselves. But now to a worthier subject, I will not reject Imitation, yet I
will hardly imitate any man living, especially in things apparently his, as his
Behavior, and accustomed Phrases: In virtue it is very lawful, for that is
neither his, nor mine; it carries no mark of any owner, but of the real
possessour of Eternity, whom if we could imitate in the least perfection, we
were blessed.

There are a great sort past, as worthy as any living, among whom I will
choose some one, by whom I would be most governed, yet not in all things, for I
would not license my self to put on his imperfections: I have too many of mine
own that were borne with me, I have no need of his: but when he speaks well,
and virtuously, I would think he speaks to me, and do my endeavor to execute
his Advice: the Actions performed by him I hold like the Vaulters Instructions
done first to show me how to perform them with greatest facility.

We are beholding to times past, they have showed us the ends of all Courses,
we may know Virtues and Vices, as lively by their Example, as Lycurgus taught
it the Lacedaemonians in the persons of their Ephori, and the Hel^^s their
slaves. If I find my strength able to follow one of these, and to get honest
Virtues by Heart, I will take out a new lesson, and buy some perfections of
others, wherein he was wanting. Thus is Imitation innobled, and well becomes
the worthyest: so shall he enjoy abundance, when he has his own store
multiplied with gathering from the stored with Virtue.

Essay. 21. Of Behavior.
PHilosophies strictest Inquisition of the Soul, does not more lively
express her then Behavior: for hers are Notions dark, and obscure, too heavy
for every head to carry away, but this gives our senses a sight of that
Divinity, and is the very picture of the inward mind. Here may be read the
differences of men, and a short observation shall tell thee as much as a long
conference: It can be no other then a shadow of the soul, such a sweetness it
carries with it, so much comeliness, so much contentment. The Bodies respect is
overthrown by this evidence, let his Beauties be never so excellent, if not
assi^ted by Behavior, they turn all to Disgraces, and his whiteness does
nothing but make his spots more visible. Contrarily, I have seen deformed
Bodies, and ill favored Countenances, highly in men's estimations, and dearly
beloved, being accompanied with a handsome, and discreet government. This
cannot be performed exactly, if the Souls power, and Discourse be not
regarded, which makes me think the bodies thus happy, substances of Crystal
transparent. When I meet with a dull fellow that has no other testimony of
his being awake, but that his eyes are open, I determine him a fellow dro^ned
in ^legme, and puddle: for any thing I know he has no soul, for there
appears nothing but a durty piece of flesh. At me cum legcris etiam formosa
videbor Says the Poet: this is to be complete when the eye shall be
satisfied, and the soul not displeased. There is hardly another thing so
absolute, as to be able to give them both intertainement together. Of
Particularities (me thinks) Courtesy chalengeth the chief place, and would
be dispatched first: truly among all other virtues, except it be Liberality, I
know none rewarded by men but this, and if for nothing else, me thinks it
should be esteemed for the present payment: It pays a great sort, and is never
the poorer, satisfies every man, and lessens not the stock: It is the true
Character of a good natured Discretion, and so powerful, as the shadow of it
has raised many men to great fortunes: but that is the abuse. I would Virtue
would put away Patience, and become chollerick, and revenge: she never had more
cause, being made a Bawd to herself.

Every man musters himself in the band of Virtue, when there is any pay to be
taken, but at the day of battle (except it be some fellow out of a hole) she
has not a follower. I mislike not a common Affability, so it reserve the state
of the party, for otherwise it is not humility, it is baseness. I owe unto
every man a Salutation, and likewise my Cap, but not familiarity, except I be
sure his worthiness deserves it I betray my self. There is a certain majesty
in Behavior well-becomming, without pride, or Affectation, for they spoil
all, the least dram of them makes all taste of Indiscretion: no, this is the
natural Guard of Virtue, the fortification to resist baseness, and to keep
out saucy incrochers. We must not be careless of these outward matters, but
seek to make them complete, yet there is an inward thing which unless it be
added to this, makes all this to be nothing. A Schoolmasters had in his place
of Exercise a Glass, wherein he caused his Scholars to behold themselves; If
they were fair, and handsome, he would tell them what pity it was, such
goodly bodies should be possessed with defective minds: If foul, and
ill-fauoured, that they might make their bodies fair with dressing their
minds handsomely; this was somewhat too good for a Pedant: my Application; If
his behavior be good, the adorning his mind doubles that Excellency: if ill,
it will make it good, when your mind performs what your body promises not.
It is without exception, when the Actions of the body are lighted by the gift^
of the mind. I allow not too lavish a discourse; it is as if one meant to sell
himself: he that will still talk, aduentureth himself too much; It is not
valor but foole-hardinesse, he depraues himself of observation. It were good
in this to imitate cunning shopkeepers, who show their ware in a half light.
Upon occasion I would speak, but niggardly, and rather starve then surfeit my
Auditory. Avoid Affectation, and love Virtue, and for outward gestures if
those naturally yours be not deformed, change them not, for they sit you best.
The gifts of the mind are not so easily obtained, these you must purchase with
pain, and difficulty; and great reason, for it were pity such preciousnesse
might be had for the taking.

Essay. 22. Of Alehouses.
I Write this in an Alehouse, into which I am driven by night, which would not
give me leave to find out an honester harbor. I am without any Company but
Ink and Paper, and them I use in stead of talking to my self: my Host has
already given me his knowledge, but I am little bettered, I am now trying
whether my self be his better in discretion. The first note here is to see how
honestly every place speaks, and how ill every man lives: not a Post, nor a
painted cloth in the house, but cries out, Fear God, and yet the Parson of the
Town scarce keeps this Instruction. It is a strange thing how men belly
themselves: every one speaks well, and means n^ughtily. They cry out if man
with man break his word, and yet no Body keeps promise with Virtue. But why
should these Inferiors be blamed, since the noblest professions are become
base? Their Instructions rest in the Example of higher fortunes, and they are
blind, and lead men into sensuality. Me thinks a drunken Cobbler, and a mere
hawking Gentleman rank equally, both end their pursuites with pleasing their
senses, this the eye, the other the Taste. What differs scraping misery from a
false Cheatour? the directour of both is Covetousness, and the end Gain.
Lastly courting of a Mistress, and buying of a Whore are somewhat like, the
end of both is Luxury. Perhaps the one speaks more finely, but they both mean
plainly. I have been thus seeking differences, and to distinguish of places, I
am feign to fly to the sign of an Alehouse, and to the stately coming in of
greater houses. For Men, Titles and Clothes, not their lives, and Actions help
me: so were they all naked, and banished from the Heralds books, they are
without any evidence of pre-eminence, and their souls cannot defend them from
Community.

Essay. 23. Of Affectation.
AFfectation begets Extremities: Man is allowed only the middle way, he
strayeth when he affects, his Error is punished with Deformity, whatsoever he
performs thus, becoming disgraceful and uncomely. There is not any in this
kind to be pardoned, even the open affecting of virtue turns into Hypocrisy,
and makes him seem rather as if he played Virtue then possessed it. The
ordering of the body, if it be subject to this A pish Imitation is wholly
disordered: for his inward Directour is disobeyed, and forced contrary to it
excellent nature to become base, and to borrow. The excellent Artisan that made
all, gave all his Children portions of qualities befitting them, as Heat to
Fire, Moisture to Water, Trees to be plentiful Mothers, and Herbs to have an
healing ability: should these fall to affecting, and to like others Qualities
better then their own, what a confusion would it beget? how much wrong to the
workman? Thus is it with us: Every Soul casts a color upon the Body suitable
to it own nature, not like our common colors which will endure a second Dye,
but which at first is naturally in grain.

Every one in truth is fitted by nature, whose fashion if he likes not, but will
choose rather to wear other men's cast clothes; it is pity the Admiration he
affects should not be turned into laughter. I have seen some seely creatures
that have had the extremity of this disease in words, but what has been the
end? alas they have deliuerd Prisoners that have turned Traitors, and instantly
betrayed them to Derision.

For my part I think generally it ought to be shunned, and if ever I were
subject to any Affectation, it was not at all to affect, in which I have been
so precise, that I have been afraid to wear fashions, until they have been
ayred by a general use.

Let no man think this mislike bars my allowance of enriching my self by
the example of the Virtuous: no, the best may want, if he be only stored by
his own meditation. Books, and men are both good Instructours, those we must
read and observe: but when that is done, to make our reading, and observation
no longer theirs* but our own. I have noted a People content inwardly to be so
humble as to wear cast Apparel, but for the outward satisfaction they would
alter, and trim them to defend the^ from being known, and so fit them to their
bodies, though before they were too wide: Thus must they do that desire to be
adorned with knowledge, and judgment, and virtue. Whatsoever I read, I
understand it not, if my Disgestion makes it not naturally mine: Thus it
becomes men, and makes the constitution of the mind strong* and fair, and
worthy of allowance, if not of Admiration.

Essay. 24. Of Fantasticknesse.
FAntast^cknesse, is the Habilime^t of youth, Wisdoms minority, Experiences
Introduction, the Child of Inconstancy, the Mother of Attire, of Behavior, of
Speech spoken against the Hair, Customs Enemy, It is Green Thoughts in
Green years, or at the farthest, green Thoughts in a sear Substance, this
is Fantasticknesse: Wit (as long as wit) exercises her self lightly, and is
the Glass wherein the Body looks to set his Attire in fashion: being weak at
this time she plays with the Body as Children do with Babies, puts on and
off, dresses, and vndresses, lays it to sleep, and takes it up again all at
an instant, must be doing, though to no end doing: yet for all this I think it
a color of the Soul, for so is wit, and wit is Fantastic, but indeed not so
strong as to be laid in Viniger, and not alter, for it alters with hours,
almost with minutes: Notwithstanding wisdom may come, and with her comes
Resolution, and Constantnesse. For Experience comes by Knowledge, Knowledge
from Change, Change from Fantasticknesse, trying many things with allowance
of some, and yet cleaving but Inconstantlye to that allowaunce. It is least
dangerous in the Attire, for that may be worn and put off, more in the
behavior, for Time reconciles it to Custom: most in the Conditions, for those
spots will never out.

For Clothes, he that shunnes singularity, (for from singularity comes either
Disdain, or Envy) let his Attire be conformable to Custom, and change with
Company.

I have once cleared Alexander for his Persian Attire, I think Fantasticknesse
lent wisdom Policy at that time. The Graecians were too strict in this, not
permitting a Grecian to differ in the least thing that might be, from a
Grecian: whereupon an Ambassador of theirs, sent to the Persians, was called
to a straight account, because he kept Cowes for their Milk, and learned to
lie soft. In many things (as in this) Custom is a thing Indifferent, and
things indifferent receiving their life from light Grounds; Every country has
some peculiar to it self, by which when we are there, we ought to be ruled.
Demetrius fantasticknesse was not so safe, when he made his Mantle, or Cloak,
full of Stars with the Sun, and the Moon, rich, and so full of state, that
none of his successors durst adventure on the like, being infinitely misliked
by his Soldiers. But Anthony never sped better, then when his Attire differed
not from the common Soldiers, which might be thought fantasticknesse, for not
going according to his degree.

Time in it self is always one, but Occasion runs Division upon Time, her
note is not always one, which ought to be noted by them which are not
negligent of their Time.

A King of the Parthians (of whom Tacitus makes mention) being deposed, comes
after in the sight of his People, poor, and forlorn, and thereby moved
pity. But Pompey with a fortun^ no less unfortunate, came for succor to the
Egiptians, and thereby lost his head.

Thus different are the dispositions of men; thus contrary fall out courses,
though for a great space together they run all one way. I have seen fellows
kiss their hand so continually, that their hand in the end has come to make
no difference between a Lady, and her Dairy-maide: (...) your service, has
been so co^uersant, as one asking, what is a Clock? first came a kiss on the
hand, next, At your service, and lastly the hour: do you not think Nature had
done this fellow a good turn, to have made him without hands, or tongue? for
so his head might have lived (...) condemned.

There are some that never see great assembly without as certain a bringing
home of a new grace, as Clownes of Ginger-bread from a Fair, making their lims
Rogues without an abiding place: In the end Fantasticknesse lies with custom,
and gets her with Child of a Thumb under the Girdle, or crossed Arms, or one
hand before, and another behind. Bar some fellow from chewing a stick, and
he is as utterly unfurnished as a House without stuff; In what case would this
fellow be in a Champion country, where wood must not be so wantonly bestowed?
being without his feaking stick, he is without himself: A dangerous Companion,
he will gna^e him that stands next him, if he find him not Timber. But if this
Fantasticknesse fall once to grow inwardly, the cooling it with Time, the
ministering counsel, the letting blood with Adversity will not serve, but in
spite of wisdom, and gray hairs, it will dance at three score years old,
and wear Green, and play with a Feather, and then it is monstrous, and
ridiculous without Hope, or Pity.

I can remember no sight more offensive to me then a variable old man, that can
speak of nothing but the fashions of his Time, the wench then in price, how
many hacks he has had in his Buckler in a Fleete-streete fray, or the friskes
of the Italian Tumblers.

I begin now to suspect the time in the which he lived, that it was barren of
all things worthy of note, hoping in Charity, that if there had been better,
he would have made better choice, and not have made his memory worse then a
Brokers Shop, full only of the cast skins of Times past. Whether he need
it, or no, I would not have Age without a staff in his hand: I like not a long
Graye beard, and a sword, me thinks he should trust more to his wisdom then
to his hands. In a word, after twice shauing, at the third, Fantasticknesse is
to be abandoned, for it is Time to put the wit to Schole, and to leave playing
with these vndisgested Apes of the Fancy, to trust to Virtue, not to a French
Doublet: If we do thus, it is no harm to have been once otherwise, for so we
know what it is to be otherwise, and may help those that are yet out of the
way. Thus has my Fancy thought on this Child of Fancy, which the has
uttered, as some an Oration long since gotten by Heart: this she has known
her self, and who believes not, i^ he be not past feeling, Time will make him
know by himself.

Essay. 25. Of Fame.
AS Conceits come into my Head I utter them, for what is naturally mine,
carries: with it rather a heavy Substance, then any rich Quality: I have daily
to do with more happy brains, whom I hold worthyer of a place in my memory.

I thought last of Fame, and my Thoughts have ridde^ (as I think) over her
whole circuit; what I have seen in my travail, I will trust this piece of
paper with, and so rid my brain of that carriage. Humors, and Affections our
manu-mised slaves, have a great hand over us, they place and displace at their
pleasures; Reason carries but the name of Authority, this makes such strange
Occupations in the world, such sweatings, and striuings, in the Discovery of
things never found before. I hold Covetousness a vice bad enough in
Conscience, for the best they can say for themselves, is but that they imitate
the Ant, a seely creature, made by Nature without candlelight, imperfect,
among those whom the Philosophers call Insecta Animalia: yet they are able to
yield a reason for their scraping, they will say they may want. The servants of
Pleasure, and the worshippers of their senses, though they live only to power
it in, and put it out, and in the end are every way unprofitable, except they
were among the Canibals, who love a well-fed morsel of Man's flesh: yet in the
end they are able to say, This is an excellent cup of wine, and these very fat
and good Foul. Nay that Camelion-like occupation that blows the coal, and
feeds upon smoke mingled with a little hope, is in much better case then this
humor I speak of, for though he cannot take away that leprosity, and
Imperfectnesse that keeps base Mettalles from being the best: yet commonly his
Distillations, and Abstractions, make him a perfect Emperick, and so it leaves
him; not without an Occupation, though it drops somewhat short of his purpose.

But Fames Affectation is the most unreasonable thing that ever was; when one
has wrought all his life, he knows not where to look for his hire: Every man
denies to pay upon compulsion, and says he may bestow it where he will: Nay,
they that take most pains, are kept longest without it. Has not a Cobblers
trade ods of this? he numbers the patches, and modesty restrains him not from
asking a penny for every patch, and honesty binds thrift to pay it.

This invisible thing has a number-lesse company of Disciples: All that love
not money, for the most part woo Fame, and some this way too: many Dung-^^il
Bi^des have maintained in^^^^te labors, assisted only with the fame of making
their sons Gentlemen.

As diverse are their fashions, I have seen so^e go about to catch Fame in a
caper, and a well graced Galliard, I remember Suetonius mention of Nero, he
took not so much pains for any thing as to be thought a good Singer, and who
affoorded him not Glory, and Admiration in that kind, he would hardly afford
him life. I condemn not his wanton expenses, and inhumane cruelties more then
this, that having the power of disposing the most famous, and ample Empire of
the world, a stock able to maintain Fame richely, yet to f^ye to so base an
Eunuchs quality for Fame.

Where Humors may be covered under the having no Beard, I mislike it not so
much, Fame serves to enter the Eyas knowledge of man, who cannot catch Virtue
at the first flight: but to converse with Experience, and then to cozen our
selves of the familiarity of Virtue with accompanying Fame, is abominable.

As my youth has been spotted generally with entertaining my Affections too
nearly, so by this the number has been increased, and I may safely say, it
has been the last extraordinary illness that I have had to do with. My
occupation has been vehemently bookish; I have been counseled by Plato and
Seneca for Philosophy. Writing is the draught of reading, and by this I have
disburthened my head, and taken account of my pro^^iting.

If it had gone no further, it had been well, but I have been content to
dilate my self too much: It has been my Fortune ever yet, to like one year
worse then another, and this fault among my worldly faults lies heauiest upon
me, and is yet the last.

Vt iam seruares been corpus adultera men's est. Since I have kept my body from
madness, my mind has doted, I think it is with overmuch joy, that it has
gotten employment.

Among my readings Philosophy has made me honest for two hours after, and I
think I could have held out if I had found any drawing that way, but every man
is so busy in the quest of Fame, that they neglect the desert: they ask which
way she went, but not how she went.

History has added to my natural desire of loving fame: I was there set a
fire with conuersing with brave spirits: I like deeds well, but they were not
within my reach, and so I sought to buy what my stock would reach to: though
I cannot clime so well as Caesar, yet I should think my self happy, if I
could but get up to his Style: But he was a Roman borne, and borne under a
climate of more wit: we are so cold, and so dull, that we think of nothing
beyond the compass of our inheritance, just like the Swissers we will lose no
ground; leave us in dirt, and find us in dirt.

The Graecians and the Romans were Monarchs of the world, not by sitting
still, and keeping themselves warm, but Industry, and Adventure were the wings
that made them fly high. We will adventure upon nothing except it be on a
surfit, and six pence at Tables.

I wonder why we estimate our selves so preciously, or keep our limbs so
carefully, except we have indented with our churchyardes, not to coozen them of
any part or parcel of the said Trunck. Since we are so stupefied, it is well
we lived not in their times, for we had surely gone to the mill: our bodies
should have been branded with the marks of a slave, as well as our minds are
with the deformity of ignorant Laziness.

But these are no suitors at the court of Fame? Yes, as earnestly as Deserts:
they can find Titles as fast as Herraldes devise Arms: If for nothing else,
put him in for providence, and for leaving as much to his son as his father
left him.

Honor is to be bought cheaper then with blood: It is possible to have Titles
not Honor thus, for Honor is universal, and runs thorough all mouths, and
inforceth Envy, and Vice, to do him Justice, and to give him his due.

But where is Caesar, Cato, Epaminondas, Alexander, Eumenes, and the rest?
Dead: and with them Desartes; their names are inwrapped in Virtue, ours of this
sick Time in Fame: they searched for Substance, we for Shadows, they should
be our Cognisances, for we are walking Ghostes.

I could write more in this kind, Vehemence sharpens my Invention, but I have
disclaimed it. I will from henceforth follow Virtue silently in my study, and
abandon this Impostour Fame, as a Cheater, and Play Master of counterfeit Coin.

FINIS.
A SECOND part of Essays.

Written by Sir William Cornwallis the younger, Knight.



LONDON Printed for Edmond Matts, dwelling at the sign of the Hand and Plough
in Fleet Street. 1601.

TO THE LADY Hastings, Dudley, and the rest.
Honorable friends:
I Number it amongst your many favors, the protecting mine Idleness, for I
cannot confess them labors: he gest right (that said, I would be glad to
do any thing that might be acceptable to you, but not iudiciouslie) to think
these a fit present, for they are too light for your grauities, and too mean,
for they are but papers: I had as lieue leave gratefulnes to words spoken, as
to written words, and these are no more, when I give, or serve, or perform
any of these offices to you, I would be glad, they should be armed with some
other desartes, besides the Widows mite, or the tale of the King of Persia
and the poor bodies gift of water: I am poor enough, but like not to come so
near begging, as to confess it, nor to confess it in this common apparel
of Epistles, it has been worn by so many as it may be infected, and then it
were ill for you, and it will be ill for me, for I should borrowe it, and a
poor estate, and a poor mind, and poor every thing, would make me fit for
nothing but a Spittle-house. No more worthy Ladies, I will not bind you to the
penance of reading further, I doubt not you will receive all, having taken
some, and doubt not you, but I will be ever the true obeyer of your
commandments.

W. C.

To the Reader.
I Present thee Reader with no excellencies, to do thee no harm is my
Commendations, which if thou cou^st unprofitable, believe, it is against my
will thou know it, for might I have prevented the coming to thy knowledge,
thou should never have known me thus: but since a part of me was out,
though I trust not to their strength, yet their strength shall be stronger by
the rest, to live together and dye together, becoming their neerenesse, they
shall then go together, and be all against my will in the power of your
disposing.

W. C.

The Essays contained in this Book.
OF Affection. Of Keeping State, Of Complements. Of Estimation, and Reputation.
Of Popularitie. Of Humility. Of Fear. Of Silence and Secrecy. Of Human
Contentmentes. Of Trappes for Fame. Of Knowledge. Of Judgment. Of Natures
Policy. Of Conceit. Of Counsel. Of Sorrow. Of Solitariness and Company. Of
Vanity. Of Vainglory. Of Essays and Books. Of the Instruments of a
Statesman. Of Words. Of Justice. Of Flattery, Dissimulation, and Lying.
Essay. 26. Of Affection.
THose actions that receive not their commandments from a deliberated
discourse, the issue of reason, receive it from a sympathising with things, the
issue of affection, whose effects though not unnatural, yet very unreasonable,
for so much is given to beasts to maintain like with, but to man is given
reason to purchase virtue with, which by the other can no way be compassed, no
more then the taste, taste virtue, the smell, smell virtue; for affection
brings all things to trial by the senses, reason carries them to the
inquisition of the soul, who regardes not their colors, nor those sensual
qualities, but makes them confess how much they have of Temperance, how much
of Fortitude, and of those inward qualities of the mind. Doubtless then,
this power of affection carries no farther grace then the preservation of
life, which regarded no farther then right is a care of the last place, for
speaking of this life, me thinks there is no other thing presented to our
view, then some handsome Table or Picture that looks pertly for a time, but
will not last, and should receive of us in exchange a contentment of the
present state, and a determination to use it to the best purpose whiles we have
it, and when we are to part, a pacient farewell without disturbance or fear.

Omnia mers poscit, lex est, non poena perire. We are taken out of the
universal matter of Nature, and made man, highly already preferred,
considering our first state; but this viewed with immortality, is baser in
comparison, then the first, to the second. This life is but a Prentishood, the
freedom immortality, and me thinks it fittes well in respect of the ones
shortness, and the others eternity, life being but like a Prentises holyday,
but more near when we think of our knowledges which are here impotent and
defective, but are there complete and full, all things appearing there
unmasked, and the borrowed colors and vain apparitions of Affection being
withdrawn, those vnlimmtied and rich lights of the mind, behold every thing
in the right proportion, all the deformities and misdemeanors of the world are
the children of affection, which binds up our sight in darkness, and leads
us blindfolded: from hence Opinion, which is the destinated censure of
Affection, as Judgment is the Souls, from hence proceeds the irresolution of
our thoughts and our wauerings, and changings from one thing to another; for
Affection, likes his present satisfaction, and judges that best, which if in
Opinion bettered, he changes his sentence, and so not able to penetrate into
the depth of things, is every day ready for a new impression. All that I have
heard, all that I have read, all that by any means has come to my knowledge
performed well, has been where Reason has made Affection his servant:
contrariwise, destructions, dishonours, dangers, have been enforced by the
tyranny of Pride, Disdain, Hate, Self-love, or some other of those
Affections unrestrained: so can I fetch Calamity from none other original but
this; not happiness but from the deprivation of this frailty. Even that
honest harmless Affection, which possesses Parents toward their children, me
thinks whiles they are yet but lumpes of flesh, and things without all merit,
should not be so ardent and vehement, pity and commiseration fits them better
then Love, of which they are no way worthy; for howsoever we abuse love with
casting it away upon trifles, yet it is the pretiousnesse of Love, appointed
only to attend deserts, and to join no pieces together that are not of this
kind; but it is well that Nature has cast the extremity of this disease upon
mothers, it becomes them not so ill to be fond as men, besides these little
ones being their charges, Affection makes them more careful, and so it is for
those first years never the worse for the child, whatsoever it is for the
mother. Justice being for example, and no more destroying a commonwealth then
the husbandman the trees with executing the water boughs, which he does as
well in respect of their unprofitableness, as also to show malefactors in a
glass their own state while they behold the guilty vnder-going the
severity of the law, but yet the creatures bound to profit others with their
own destruction, should be picked out monsters whose natures might be seen
incorrigible, and those of whom mercy may conjecture amendment, to be spared:
thus in the ambiguitie of things which doubt will not have resolved, mercy may
have a hand. Thus commiseration and a charitable eye to the distrested, all
which though they leave more to affection then to the strictness of justice,
yet must we so far tolerate them, for so God looks upon us, and so should we
upon our brethren, being all borne lame, which fault of ours if it were
punished with death, none should live; yet I go not with Montangnia, who in his
Essay of Cruelty, bribes wit to take part with commiseration so extremely and
so womanish as not to endure the death of Birds and Beasts; alas this
gentleness of nature is a plain weakness, we may safely see the deaths of
these, yea of men without motion, it belongs to us to look into the cause of
their deaths, not into the manner only, but fetching it from the desert we
shall see plainly, it is not the Judge nor the executionner that committes
this abhorred spectacle, but themselves, themselves do execution upon
themselves; Might there be that unspeakable blessing given to the imprisoned
soul, that she might here view things in sincere truth, how would vice and
sin fly light, when unmasked light might discover their deformities, how
profoundly should we be able to censure things, how would we scorn laws and
compulsion, when the most ragged-vnderstanding should fly far above them.

Lastly, all the enemies of wealth and poverty should be banished, for we
should not know want, and so should want them, and the laborious life of Study
should end, whose travels aim at no other end, but an ability to know every
thing in his propper kind; this is not, because Affection is, who daily
ouercomes reason, not by strength but flattery, and sometimes makes the weapons
of Reason, treacherously turn head upon Reason, with corrupting his taste, and
making him fortify pleasure with arguments. I would be glad to look upon my
brother with the same eye that I behold a stranger, and may the strangers
worth excel his, I would prefer him. He is deceived, that thinks virtue
respects blood and aliaunces: she is not so bodily, having commerce with us
whiles we have bodies, not because we having bodies, should love our bodies:
but because we should with the ordering and subiecting them, win her. It is
Affection that has skill of colors, and has set up the estimation of White
and Red. I verily believe Virtue was never Paynter nor Armorist, all those
choyses and allowances that come from tall, and fat or slender and well
bodied, are all Affections choice, the mind sees the mind, and gives the body
leave to look how it will, for she loves the abilities and graces of the mind,
whose never fading beauties, makes their imbracements blessed. Here is the
choice of all things made sure; thus friends are to be entertained, whose
perfection may be better discoursed of, then it is possible to find it
actually, the reason because Affection bears so great sway, our causes of
combination being commonly more beholding to Affection then Reason, which makes
us so often complain of the unstableness of friends and friendships
inco^stancie. No other are those leauges which look into the fortune rather
then virtue of friends, that cunningly make Love the broker to supply their
wants; how can these hold, since the hold of their hold blind Dame Fortune
is brittle and flitting. But amongst all I find no body has so just cause to
complain of this as Justice, which being the very soul and life of government
is often time compelled to help the lightest scoale with her finger, whiles
Partialities burden makes the other heavy. I can pity the distress of no
virtue so much as this, since no virtue carries with her a greater majesty,
and in that majesty knowledge, the life of life, the joy of man, and his
surest evidence of participating with the divine nature. Surely were it not for
the orderly working of this virtue, we should make the world in a worse state
the^ the Chaos, where was a confusion, but it was innocent though deformed: but
now it would be turned into a guilty deformity, the picture of which though not
fully, are those sick states that are continually letting blood; where the
sweet wisdom of laws, are turned into those doubtful arbitrators blows, and
where Justice executes not with her sword, but fights for her right, but I
have destinated a whole Essay to Justice, wherefore I will speak no more of her
now.

Of all our delicacies or imperfectitiues of any kind, there is no Author but
Affection, whose inticements brings on equally both excess and obstinacy,
witness the many idle lines of Lovers, who have made many foul Papers, for
the sakes of their fair Mistress, whose luxurious conceits they have made
love answer for, and called them love.

Talis amor teneat, nec sit mihi cura mederi. I wish them no Physic, but my
self the sight, for I like no play like to a passionate Lover, yet have I
heard it has killed some; but I will neither believe it, nor yet be thus in
Love. In a word, all these rabble of disturbers, that prouoakes passion and
procures the full possession of men, of what kind soever, are the children of
Affection, or if not her children, her self, for Proteus like, occasion
alters her shape, and she sometime looks like Anger, sometimes like Love,
other times like some other of those blind choosers, whose effects though so
different as called by different names; yet all are Affections, with whom I
will have as little to do as I can, and when I do use her, it shall be no more,
then so much as shall make my body content to go of my souls errant.

Essay. 27. Of Keeping State.
I Mislike nothing more then the purchases that some intend, with prostrating
and deiecting themselves, to get the highest price on earth with this base
commodity, is baser then Vespasians gain of Urine; Virtue goes more right
up, more gallantly, none of her limbs are so crooked and halting, she
commaundes Industry of her servants, not this lazy falling at men's feet, and
voluntarye professing servitude, when greatness declines to this, either it
means not well, or is not able to mean well, for Contempt the most cruel
enemy to Greatness, is by this means begotten, (Virtues and Vices
procreating not like visible creatures, but contraries beget contraries, and
those furthest off, bring in those furthest off on the other side, though other
defects may incur dangers of no less moment,) as Cruelty, Extortion,
Rebellion, yet contempt comes from no other place, the^ a careless ignorance of
our states, or from Pride, the not valuing and over valuing, giving life to
this curse, worse then death. Government the blessing of the world, by the
experience and inconvenience of times past, brought into an exact form from
the comparison of strength and wisdom, has made a distinction of states,
giving one pre-eminence over an other, thus come Kings, Lords, Gentlemen,
Yeomen; which difference were it only in name, without the duties belonging to
each of them, words should go without meaning, and meaning separated from
words, speech should loose her name, man his society, and all should bellowe
and roar like beasts.

We have then from our Ancestors differences, which tradition is not so
tyrannical as not to satisfy us with any other reason but custom, for she
tells us, that Obedience makes way for Wisdom, which otherwise whatsoever
it could do, should do nothing, for the clamor and noise of community, every
man would speak, every man's speech likes him self best, Selfe-conceite makes
Opinion obstinate; many determinations, no resolutions; clamours, not counsels;
confusion, not government; for gouernements supporters are Command and
Obedience, the foundation and chief causes upholding states, our eye gives
every thing a color; the things most precious are counted more precious, if
they be fair as well as good: from hence we have enforced the Merchandise of
the mind to be good, for somewhat else besides mere goodness; all virtues
have agreed to this, Temperance has Health for her coulor; Fortitude, Sa^^tie;
Patience, Tranquillity; thus Wisdom now understood by Nobility; Majesty and
State, with ordinance of the divine wisdom, whether it be the knowledge of our
weakness, which cannot behold pure truth by it self, or our other
weakness, which has need of inticements for our understanding, to persuade
us to virtue, or else the temporal rewards destinated to these divine graces,
whether for all, or part, certain it is, it is so, these excellent and
supreme things, having inferior graces to be their attendants. It is not then
in the power of the most witty envious repining nature, to spurn at the
differences amongst men, it is a lawful constitution upholding laws, the life
of life, it makes up the sweetest sounding harmony whose speaking in several
keys by discord, gives every one a part, every one is fitted and altogether
knits diversity in concord. Particularly to speak of the upholding and
destroying the state of authority, those that are content to let fall their
countenances and to open themselves to the intertaining all with one respect
are natures forced beyond their natures, being meeter to serve then govern,
or such, whose actions going awry, fearfully to eschew punishment, seek
shelter in the abuse of courtesy, of the first, they understand not themselves,
or rather understand themselves, but not their places, the other, neither the
natures of them nor their places, or else worse, are led by affection, of whom
there is no more to be said, but being not fit it is meet to send them to
mending, if not capable of that, to be made into some other form. This other
has been accessory to the overthrowing many states, nay hardly there is any
destroyed, but this has been an assistant to it, being a cherishing poison,
that makes inferior conditions resty, and rebellious; the Roman state
offere^h many examples of their kind where their chiefetaines unable to
purchase respect by the true way, attempted the love of the soldiers by giving
them liberty, saluting them by familiarity; thus the most exact millitary
discipline that ever was, was lost and ruined and they that had wont to smell
of sweat, the testimony of labor, now smelt of oil the witness of an
vnmanlike effeminate niceness. It ended not hear for the armies wont to look
upon their generals with admiration and reverence brought to a deeper insight
through their prostitute fashion, began to compare his power and theirs, to
examine the causes of evidence, which being wisdom an evidence past their
knowledge, in their knowledge nothing being of force, but force finding him
inferior to their multitude, it brought contempt, so came (says Tacitus) the
secrets of the Senate to be known to the soldiers, so came they to know their
own strength, though not to know how to use it, an unhappy knowledge, so came
the armies to make Emperors, so came the world to be governed by money, for by
that corruption the Legions erected Emperors, so came the Masters of the
world to be held in the slavish tenure of paying a fine for their admittance,
and to hold their states of men, that were wont to acknowledge no body but the
Gods: such a baseness and declination is this in vice, and indirect aspiring,
that to attain but the names of Lords, they are content in truth to be
slaves, to be the miserablest slaves, being only commanders insatiable and
unlimited, for there is such a mystery in Nature, as natures passing beyond
their allotted limits, work nothing but confusion, and not even their own
intendements can they bring to perfection. Never was there any country
possessed of the Empire, that managed it more gallantly then the Romans whose
care of keeping their state in majesty did no less preserve them then their
greatest conquests, for those do but enlarge these settled and confirm
dominion, for little avails power without order, and this is the mother of
order. I do not think but that there might have been men found, in the time
of Oracles, no less sound and more certain in counsel then the Oracles, who
preserved themselves with a double construction, but their venerable account
brought men to attend their answers so preiudicially, as they were taken not
searched into; and men with men, doubtless sometimes servants, happen of sound
counsel, but their baseness takes away belief, their fortunes esteem, so
fruitless are the endeavors of great men, when they put on the carriages of
servile conditions, for with the same neglect are they used, that hold not
their parsons with the gravity of their states in veneration. Cassandraes
prophetical counsel, surely would not have gone so regardlesse, had she not
been a woman, the parson as well as the advice is reckned of by the advised,
they must go together, though we marvel at strange things, yet wisdom will
not follow them, and even they esteem that all women have, is derived from
their modesties, and shame fast obscuring them selves for put them in their
contrary habit accompanied with man's accustomed boldness, and there
follows a loathing and detestation. Thus has custom destinated in each sex,
and every calling, certain rules and orders of life, which broken, are
abolished, as greatness attired in a servile form, or a serulle in
greatness, is an innovation no less dangerous particularity, then innouations
more general to the body of a state, that once overcome the loving, the worse
is no less dangerous then the once forsaking the best, for custom is a metal
that stands which way so ever it is bent and is not to be rebent without the
danger of breaking, witness Galba; whose words to the soldiers.

I actauit se legere, non e^^ere militem consuesce. A speech good and well
befitting the mouth of an Emperor, yet received a contrary censure, because
not fitting the time: thus dangerous is reformation, thus pernicious to follow
a time wherein the devotion of subjects to their prince by the negligence of
their progenitors is debased and made contemptible. Now to eschew this evil,
and to possess the true esteem incident to honor, the ground-woorke and
foundation must be from their lives, for two causes. The first, it is
impossible to possess this procurer of awe and veneration being inwardly
visions, for vice is base and makes the behavior base and fearful, which is
contrary to the chief lim of this purpose, which is magnannimity and clear
conscience, the mother of resolution, the other that every body will shun his
direction, that is not all to direct himself, his commandments shall not get
passage through the hearts of men, but be spurned at, and despised. There is
nothing that has need of more respect, then the first acquiring respect, it
is with much more ease preserved then obtaynd, for it preserues it self, but
with great difficulty is attained, for coming from no other original but
virtue and authority, (both which are strangers to the beginning of men's times)
they must be had first; and then this, for men's love and reverence are gaind
not for the beauty of the persons but for the abilities likely to profit, for
whatsoever we pretend they are rare that ground their loves upon the general
weldoing, we do but talk of loving our countries best, for we love our
selves first, it is to be wished it were otherwise, but it is to be feared it
is so; the reason is, we undertake much more willingly to conquer kingdoms
then our selves, and therefore as nature made us, she may have us again, for
we are without any other alteration then is incident to obstinate ignorant,
for the other instruments vphoulding a due reverence and respect, I remember
some, but fearing they would be caught at, without the condition of retayning
virtue first, I hold it best not to adventure them, we are lazy and proud, for
he that thirsts for honor with out desert, is lazy and proud, and desert I
cannot call those crossings and gain copings of virtue, it is a counterfaite
fashion to face our foreparts with the rich stuff of worth, and inwardly to be
a peeced stuff of diverse colors of diverse rags; to conclude he is perfect in
his best liuehood that is perfect in himself; he understands an evidence more
profitable then the evidence of his land, to which a confirmed bahauiour is the
profit of his knowledge, the preservation of which, is the preservation of his
honesty, the use of which is as effectual as his wisdom, for separated he
may be heard, but not believed; it is not Pride, but Virtue then, to exact and
maintain the reverence fit for his calling, which who does not, is either
vicious, or unprofitable, or both.

Essay. 28. Of Complements.
WE misuse all our actions, we spur-gall and tire them, look upon them when
they are begotten, and we abhor them, for they are full of deformities, and
behold us with wrye mouths, as if they mocked their fathers, our Tailors gave
us but a little belly to our doublets, and we never left until we made our
selves crops bigger then women with child, Hand-kercheffes and Towels, and
half Tablecloathes thrust in, they not so rich in linen, but as abundant in
folly, hay and Straw, as if there had been no grace but in a gorbelly and the
brauest proportion, the largest Girdell* thus madly ran our pleasures, our
profits, our desires, our endeavors, never thinking any thing sufficiently
followed, until it turn again and looks either full of horror or derision;
we of these latter times, full of a nice curiosity, mislike all the
performances of our forefathers, we say they were honest plain men, but they
wanted the capring wits of this ripe age; we are not yet so impudent as to say
they were fools, but we affirm they were fools, for all they did is undone,
and their whole courses altered. They had wont to give their hands and their
hearts together, but we think it a finer grace to look a squint, our hand
looking one way and our heart another, they gave entertainment to your friends,
to strangers, we, accomplement, and ciuilizd, or ciuited (for our actions
smells like a profound Courtier) kiss the hand as if we meant to take say of
it, embrace curiously, and spend even at his entrance a whole volume of words,
which when it meets with a fellow unprovided of that windy commodity, he is
driven to take all without exchange, and so is thought either clownish or
shallow, or else he is bound to the penance of a million of I thank you with
all my heart Sir, I am glad to see you well, tell me how you do Sir, but if they
be both cunning, what a deal of Synamon and Ginger is sacrificed to
dissimulation, O how blessed do I take mine eyes for presenting me with this
sight, O Signiour, the star that gouerns my life in contentment, give me
leave to interre my self in your arms, not so Sir, it is to unworthy an
enclosure to contain such preciousnes, but pleases it you to honor me so much
as to make me the bridge of your passing home, happy shall I be to have had the
impression of your footesteps, this and a cup of drink makes the time as fit
for a departure as can be, by this time they are both drunk dry and they have
no more to say but by way of repetition, which the ear lotheth as much, as the
pallat meat already chewed, only certain shot are left to bring themselves
of, as unhappy occasions. Why do you spur me to depart out of this paradise?
no Sir pardon me, It is I that have cause to complain of injurious time, who
wanting you, do wish the want of my self, for my self without my second self
is alike loathsome; no more sweet friend, let us not think to much of the
misfortune of separation, but let me leave you here. O Sir pardon me, mine
eyes would take it unkindly at my legs hands, my heart at both their hands,
if they should not do their uttermost toward your fruition; no farther then
this gate, I protest, a little further I beseech you, be not so injurious to
the lengthning of my joys, not a foot, much do I fear you have already
hazarded your health with this long journey. Give me leave therefore, for the
quiet of mine own mind, to salute you by a messenger in the morning, to know
how you digested your great travel; my messenger shall intercept your kind
intention, and so more then my self farewell: farewell to you both flattery
and folly, or both. I am weary of playing this part any longer, and almost
tired with this short thinking of these vain touches of the tongue, like to
have made love to a servant that interrupted me; Fie of this abuse of speech,
fie of this purblinde choice; for my part, I had rather bind my tongue
apprentise to an Oyster-wife, then to this language, for I hate nothing more
then the accomplishing of things purposelesse, and so is this, if it be not
worse: for he is possessed with one of these two devils that speaks thus within
him, either Dissimulation, or the propper title of a well-spoaken man, which
two are the badges either of a fool or a villain.

I like well that every thing should do according to their kind: I have heard
of division in singing, and of the divisions that neat Scholars use to tie up
the breeches of an Argument or Oration with, but when we are to send truth or
seriousness of an arrant, to send such a mincing imbroydered Ambassador, is
not fit: wherefore are these imploide, but for their swiftness? because they
can get sooner to our friend, then our actions, of whom they are the
forerunners to relate their coming, which when they shall do, one after an
other, a multitude of messengers before the true expected ghest shall come, who
can blame the scorning, and not trusting such lying posts, me thinks the
tongue reading in the heart what he pronounces, should read truly, and not
abuse both with a corrupt translation; but this is the most poisonous quality
in accomplements: the pretiest are those that mean neither well nor ill, but
as I said, to be a well spoken man, that like an unthrifts money that burns in
his purse, so these, their words in their minds, that can no more keep their
words, then the flix his excrements, but when it comes, he cannot carrye it to
the appointed place, but lets it go upon the next he meets; if he meets
none, he lays it in his breeches. Who would be troubled with such a disease as
this, basting every one without al choice or respect, not I, for I prefer the
freedom of my mind, before any thing of the world, and amongst the things of
the world, then this, there is none more slavish and base, comes it either from
the best or the worse of these two twins Flattery or Folly.

Essay. 29. Of Estimation and Reputation.
THe most dear and most precious commodities of man, are these, they are
himself, his life, those which all noble and honest spirits have the care of,
they live, carefully cherishing it, and die, embracing it. Even wife, and
children compared with this, are counted respects of a second sort, and we
provide for this, and then for them, which excellent color that makes men
decernable from one another, though opinion or affection, partially
distributeth, and sometime counterfets, it is no matter, life's enabled with
thoughts of magnanimity must not desist for this, this worth is not blemished
by this halting defective imitation, but rather increases; for imitation how
short soever it comes of the origiuall, yet bears the meaning of allowance. It
is a sweet thing full of the pleasure incident to the things of our own
acquiring, for it is no inheritance, nor is it bound to follow the followers of
Fortune, but purely is theirs, whose thoughts have guided their actions to do
things of note and worth; it belongs not to sloth nor idleness, be he never so
noble, if a Sluggard, she will not serve him, she binds her self to no body
that does not well who embraces virtue, she comes after and kisseth him,
baseness and sensuality, she gives in pray to her opposite the most abhorred
thing of nature, oblivion, and is her self associated with none that determine
not bravely as well as honestly, being indeed the last and most refined
disgestion of a fiery and high flying nature. This is Estimation that carries
level throughout the world, where eyes by distance are unprofitable,
greatness dismembered from fear, which being inhabitants of different regions
unregarded, thither, and beyond goes Estimation, being a coin current, and
received in all countries, with all dispositions, even enmity and malice it
self cannot resist acknowledging her; besides the ample territory which it
yields in commanding respect every where, being like the Sun dispersing his
Rays over the world, making the dwarffish feeble co^stitution of man,
whatsoever the eyes says, figured by the mind, a most godly and most strong
portraiture of Excellency; more then all this, it gives the letters of
credence that makes us believed in the commerce of men, without this we labor
altogether unprofitably, suspect killing all our intents, before they come to
the age of actions, surely they are natures of a dastardly kind, that do not
vehemently thirst after this most splendent brightness, they are rustie
bodies, that do not continually handle themselves until they shine thus, for
leaving that worst part that declines to ostentation, and bragarisme, (though
praise and commendations, and so estimation may be loved, and yet live long
enough without these extremities, for Virtue is not so tyrannical as to
propound labors without recompense: it may be loved for a thousand other
respects; even as love it self can sometimes go without lust, for the pursuit
of actions for the sake of vainglory, is no nearer a kin to the true grounded
estimation, then lust is to love. Estimation being the blossom of the tree of
Virtue, which promises the husbandman payment of a more tasting commodity,
being the forerunner of Virtues best payment, we must not contemn, but
cherish, the blossoms perishing, the fruit perishes; praises are not then to
be contemned, for they are the blossoms of virtue flourishing, they must be
loved and desired, for from them one day comes the fruit of the Tree of Life.

But now to the indiscreet greediness of many, who desire to be rich in this,
as robbers by stealing, who leave industry and thrift (the true means) on the
right hand, and impatiently dispoile others, to satisfy their appetite: the
way by virtue is called large, the goodness of the minds inclination tedious,
they apply outward medicines, things of resemblance, matter of form, but for
truth and not the resemblance but the thing it self, they never travail about
it. These base mercenarie imitations take their original from three plots:
from the pretense of descent, from the infections that parasites give the world
in their behalfes, from a behavior big and swollen full of promises, eager of
performances, and traffiquing with occasion of a slight and safe price, I can
warrant no man from the infection incident to high fortunes, for I taste in
every man lively prouocations, to teach their thoughts flattery, and to lay
matter of worth to their own charge, my readings iumpe. Alexander, when he was
so full and so mighty, as to be called Conqueror of the world, was then so
needy as feign to borrow Jupiter Hammon for his father, to be the bawd of his
own conceptio^; for it was he only that brought Jupiter and Olympia together,
such is the blind indiscreet capacity of man, as when he may draw estimation
from him self, then not for modesties sake, but a mad ambition, he gives it to
others, making his case weak, with bringing in weaker assistance, rather
choosing to be a glimmering reflection, then a true and real light. But the
pretense here was the purchase of a more ample regard amongst men, whose states
commonly being full of dark ignorance, is muth more ravished with thoughts of
superstition, then things apparent, for they can guess so near themselves as
to determine things of their own pitch, base and triuiall, which brings them
to a retchlesse respect of what they are conversant with, and to lend
admiration only to things rare, finding what they know unworthy, they are much
more delighted with what they know not. I find not for all this any increase
of estimation fetched from these divine titles, for men of judgment whose
abilities reach farther the^ the present fortune of princes behold a weakness in
these unreasonable affectatio^s, they see a bowing and wavering in those minds,
unable to manage succes, over the more inferior subject, it lays mo^e fast
hold but unprofitably for means of a more direct ascent shall perform this
office, doubt shall hold them as fast by the heel as the name of Jupiters
mistaking workmanship, for doubt breeds a fear of so good a temper, as being
neither inclining to desperation, nor hate, it begets obedience, with other
nations it preuailes not at all, for being out of the reach of awe and fear,
their sights are more clear, and their inquisition more certain. Amongst all
those states that drew estimation from this superstitious belief of their
participating with the highest powers, Numa Pompilius played it best with his
nymph, he was a prince that bred and nourished devotion in his countrymen, who
before bred up in wars (a life apt to corrupt) knew better how to be soldiers
then good subjects, he changed their lives, to strengthen with innonation the
opinion of the counsel of a more then humane understanding was necessary;
more modestly though I cannot say more discreetely did the Romans of the ages
before use this Deifying power, they gave it their Emperors dead, but with such
partiallitie as they spared none that left a successor of his own appointment,
so much differ the nature of these from their progenitors, so much does it
alter nature to be brought up and nourished in seruilitie, but could they, or
durst they have given it only to well deserving princes, their princes
unlimited by others respects, would have been the better for this, since it is
as natural in men to purchase hope as assurance. The Egiptians have a law that
at the funeral of any man, all that could accuse or excuse the dead, came in,
where if his defects surpassed his merits, he was denied the rights of their
interring, it did much good, though they were not in hope of winning any more,
then a mortal reputation, the fear of losing that was much feared and so
shunned, an excellent law, no laws being so excellent as those that seem
cruel and are not, and being slight, produce the weightiest and best effects.
The ages since these, grown more Philosophically wise, to whom it is apparent
the immediate act of generation is a mortal thing, and no way answerable to
the divine nature, the multiplicitie of the many Gods being abolished, not so
easy a matter to have the conversation of a God, these being known fables not
daring to ground their designs upon impossibilities, to which judgment will
never consent, from things of likehood they give their pretenced grace, instead
of the counsel of the Gods, the manner of adoring God, insteade of their
descent from them, from families of long standings, these are the maskes and
disguises of al those impatie^t eager disposito^, that are not content with
there own states, to which at the first approach by the quick and light
apprehensions of the multitude, perhaps estimation may be given, but it wears
off, and is too lightly wouen to endure. It has not been omitted by many
thirsters after estimation, to make mercenarie breathes fill the ears of men
with their commendations, in indirect course, be they even as worthy as they
will, for a true thing out of the gutter of a false throat can hardly escape
corrupting: surely so great an enemy is virtue to hypocrisy as she grows and
increases most where she is most obscured, to give whose effects leave to
speak, not to speak of her effects, is the best proceeding for attending her
leisure, she will discover her self in a more fair and full growth, then now
coming into the world like abortiue issue half stopped and deformed. The
estimation fetched from a big and bo^bast behauior decernes not the confuting,
for the best of behavior, more then that the shadow of the sun is better
then a candle, indures comparison with nothing, for it is but the shadow of the
mind, but the companion of this a hunting out employment, flight, and safe,
though it be as ridiculous, yet looks more gravely; how well does it praise
some men to be sent of a message by a greater man, though of no more worth
then would fit the performance of a foot boy, these mistake estimation, and
intertayne baseness in her stead, like a suter that presents the obtaining
the mistress, and marries her kitchen maid. This theft and hope of crossing
Estimation by the nearest way, seldom escapes discovering, if it does, and
that they do by an insinuating diligence get some degrees higher, their own
course is their own destruction, for those dejected dispositions can do
nothing well but flatter, and feeding them with hope, they will live, and living
they are of good use, there natures run mad with exaltation, they are nothing
so well made to bear good fortune as bad, in which state it seems that
nature has conspired with fortune, they shall live and dye in.

Reputation the garland of meaner price for meaner champions, is not yet so low
as not worth the stouping for, though with titles and worship and words we
distinguish states, yet to all men of all fortunes, the grounds of virtue are
one, with whom estimation and reputation is al one, but we whose narrow rooms
are not able to traffic with virtue by the wholesale but by retayle must take
in things by handfulls; there is nothing easier then to confound our natures,
to eschew weariness we count our miles, we number things and are afraid of
infinity, thus speak our arts being erected with grounde-workes, divisions,
rules etc. Thus Arithmetike by 1. and 2. and 3. as the stayres mounteth up to
millions, we see not, hear not, touch not, smell not, together, but singly
comes our knowledge; thus is virtue content to suffer her self to be
anatomized by words, and by words,, to pull one part from another, thus comes
fortitude, temperancie, justice, to be destinated to several functions, and to
be known by several names, thus comes estimation and reputation to a
destinction, thus by words is man's understanding set a work, and kept from
running mad. Though our English courtesy calls the Tennant goodman, and the
Landlord master, yet I hope goodness belongs no less fully to the Lord
then Tennant, but that their actions pretend a general good, and these
vnimployed obscure fortunes, but a particular, we must give a pre-eminence,
which our minds can not do without our senses, our ears must have their
indifferent soundes, the best is therefore known by the name of estimation to
determine honestly, to practice those determinations, to resist fear, and
vanquish covetousness, is the direct way to reputation, which who honestly
endeavors to follow, shall have his endeavors rewarded with this title. These
are not impositions of such import as those belonging to estimation, but yet
respecting the diversity of natures as difficult, for every one is fitted with
desires and appetites of corruption equally dangerous, the husbandman has his
defects, the mechanicke his, the merchant his, all theirs whose resista^ce is
no less troublesome though less worth then princes pretenses to crowns, to
sow sedition amongst their neighbors, to remove by the shortest cut men
mislikt, so coming so full of variety, so universal, is the power,
instruments and policy of vice. To determine honestly, which is the allowing,
and retaining thoughts of such provocation, the resisting thoughts contrary, is
the first and most effectual means, surely there is nothing so ordinary as
those thoughts: yet served thus, they will be less violent* and less in
number, it makes the assaulters weak, the assaulted strong, their resistance
is reasons office, who with the truth of discourse skirmisheth, and at last
overthrows these rebels and out-lawes, the mustering the good, the trying
them, the teaching them their duties, makes them invincible. Quaecunque
salutaria sunt, saepe agitari deben^; saepe versari: vt non tantum nota sint
nobis, sed etiam ^arata. The often using these thoughts, ends with the practice
to a thing often read, the memory will lead as well as the eyes, we cannot
think well often, but we shall do well sometimes, and then virtue is gotten by
heart, which before was but counsel. Toll errores, superuacua praecepta sunt,
Good thoughts a^e precepts, good actions abolish errors* which thoughts though
we must light our actions at, yet must we not live only to increase that fire,
and not at all to use it, but practice first with our thoughts and then in good
time begin a best with our actions. Fear the ill humor upon which oppression
works, must be abandoned by him that gives the badge of honest reputation, for
without a hacksters humor (for I call not him fearful that will not adventure
the loss of his life, for the loss of the wall) even according to the laws
of virtue, he can not be honest that is haunted with the could desease of
cowardice, you shall see my reasons, let vice but run with an edge tool, he
will disclaim honesty, he will never assist the oppressed, for he loves not
the weaker part, he will never instruct the erroneous, for a frowning reply
quails him, he will never proffit any by his example, for he is still of the
same religion the greatest number are of, and they are vicious, thus can he not
earne reputation, that is troubled with this falling sickness, perhaps put him
in a Castle by cannon proof well guarded and well victualled, then turn him
to a parley (always provided there be no Gunnes without) he shall then say
they do not well, and that honesty is a thing more excellent then power, but
if these words deserve reputation, every body having their right, it must be
parted between the guard walls, and the victualles, and to him must remain
the everlasting shame of an unprofitable fellow, that doing nothing takes
more pain, then the most industrious valor. Covetousness, that makes men
resemble beasts, whose bellyes never so hard stuffed, will yet tear a pray,
though they cannot eat it, assaults not so vigorously as the spirit of fear,
this frowns not but smiles, this takes not men by the throat, but by the
hand; it infuseth gently the venom of corruption, which perpetual hunger
though it be not more deformed, yet is it much more dangerous then fear, for
besides the same effects, (though by a contrary course) this presupposed
invincible Castle is woone, for a covetous commander, can never be safe
guardian.

I have told the direct way to Reputation, the color that the substanciall
body of Virtue caryeth, the seemliest and most blessed title of this world,
for all others stand either upon the pleasure of men, or fortune, both which
are too inconstant Lords to be Tenants to, but this is a man's own which he
challenges, nor houldeth upon no second state, but the same power that gives
Princes Sovereignty, gives honest men reputation. Estimation the destinated
luster of greatness has more to do, he has the enemies of reputation to
resist, as he is a man, and estimations as being a great man, nay he may play
the private man's part well, and yet fail of his title, it is not enough for
him to think well, to do well, to be no coward, not to be covetous, all these
particularly come not so hie as the mark, for his thoughts must carry a more
ample nature, his thoughts must tend to the universal profit, his actions so,
he must not be content with his own valor, but teach others the rules of
fortitude, he must not only resist covetousness, but punish the covetous: The
nobleness of these actions speak for themselves, they are bound of a rich
voyage, from which may they return into the baye without shipwreck, they have
done so well as not to be mended, they have no more to do but to die, and leave
their example to successors, whose lives if they attain to an exact imitation
with them selves, lift up the memory of the estimation of their forerunners,
so eternal and everlasting a thing is virtue, adorning great personages: so
true, and just, and liberal a rewarder is virtue to well deseruers of all
kinds.

Essay. 30. Of Popularitie.
SO is the state of man environed with weakness, so irresolute are his
actions, as from success he draws danger, from occasion changes: thus may I
say viewing the occurrentes incident to this humor. Surely at the first
founded with the consent of commiseration and good name, but the effects
following too fast, we rob virtue of her operation and reward, seperating
her and our selves, and attributing all to our own merits, as if there were a
power in us able to do well, that proceeded not from the motions of Virtue.
Certainly before the gain incident to this attempt, when accompanied only
with honest prouocations, and a sincere mind, it is well intended and without
corruption, they put on the state of the oppressed, and pittye, they feel the
wrongs, that others feel, and redress them; but the strength of virtue
enforcing allowance, applause, and following, drawn beyond the compass of our
selves, impacient of virtues long last payment, we snatch at the opinion of the
world, and loose her, for she must be loved alone, then these pretenses change
their end, and what we meant once should purchase virtue, we lay out for vice,
who now manageth an usurped authority, and does some things seeming good, to
do ill after with the more safety, and under the covert of Humility,
Liberallitie, and Commiseration, means to inthrone Pride, the engrossing all
things, and cruelty; thus fails the foundation of a goodly building, meant to
the good inclination of the lovers of their country, but they are put out, and
ambition dwells there. It is no wonder then though this common affability has
ill success, for it has an ill intent. It is no wonder though it be the most
cunning seducer, for it is covered with the robe of virtue, nor deserves it
marvel, though it conjure hearts to be the means of their own overthrow,
since there is no bait swallowed with so much have, as that of gain and
particular contentment; thus is there destinated to this Art much cunning,
much danger, much applause. That the state of man is on every side environed
with danger needs no proof; read but thy self reader, and without me thou
shall find, vice has fitted thy state with thoughts apt to deceive and
entice, all estates have them, prosperity as many as adversity, ask vain
glory else, which as much out-runnes the mark as miseries repining comes short
or despair, all which being vnrestrayned by reason, carry man from his
destinated mediocritie, and so leaves him to the pleasure of irresolution and
vncertainenesse; but nothing so subject is adversity to this staggering as the
other, it is prosperity and success that brings forth this monster, who
following the actions of men more amply then they have expected, has wholly
corrupted them, making their attempts that were fair at the time of
conception, when they have been actions foul and ill favored: thus have many
pretending to be reformers of state, through the favor of their pretense grown
mighty, been deformers of a state: so hard it is for man to think well
altogether, especially when his demeanure carries a popular form, bearing the
title of the oppressds refuge, and patron of the vulgar, whose wording favor
and showting allowance, has such an operation with man's frailty* as carried
from the true regard and knowledge of his duty, he seems like a feather
governed by the breath of men. That there is danger, who sees not? since he is
a loft by the pleasure of others, a dangerous estate, for with danger they
stand that stand not upon themselves his foundation is the many headed
multitude, a foundation both in respect of their number and nature uncertain,
and consequently dangerous, for who knows not the diverse forms of men's
imaginations, as different almost as their faces, which shows them easily
separated, and their forces being strong, no longer then whiles together
incorporated, being so subject to be severed, nay they going against nature, if
holding a continued union, what can issue from this confidence, but danger?
their natures, but by the pleasure of nature and their education is left
ignorant, which impotencie leaves a wavering disposition easily seduced, and as
easily reformed, apt to believe a fair tale, and as apt to believe weak
reasons, strong: spent in contradiction, this makes them inconstant, for their
discourse not used to retain things, makes them like any thing, because they
are destitute of the use of comparison. It is in every man's nature to allow the
state of others the vpperhand of his own, even rich men sometimes wish
themselves poor, but with much more vehemency the poor themselves rich; thus
are the vulgar often caught, poor creatures, they will be enamored of gay
clothes and rich abiliments, yea even of the persons of men, which they shall
never have the least use of, who then obtaining grace from the subjects of
fortune and time, who like inconstant builders are still erecting and pulling
down, and can think it meet to adventure his state, his fame, his life, his
soul, upon such wavering opinions. These are uncertain, how can the erection
upon these stand? the one and the other must of necessity fall, for so go al
things originally descended from our affections vncommixt with reason. But
determine their favor fetched from more reasonable grounds, from the doing
them good and easing their yoke of subjection, this shall be found as unstable,
for have they no need, or is there need beyond the power of remedy they are
lost, for their love comes from necessity, always loving them that they have
need of, but never loving the needers of them. In the mean time the prince
from whose careful circumspection nothing of this kind can be concealed,
finding a subject engrossing subjects, what can it breed but suspicion, what
ought to be the issue of that suspicion but death? it being as just and as
natural for them to remove fear, as others pain: but were his course bent
but to win, not to abuse their loves, that immoderatly sought, is an offense,
for all the possessions of subjects must be limited, his honor, offices,
revenues, power, and so the love of the people, the generality and gross
body of which is destinated only to the Prince. Needs must they have cunning
that deal with this ticklish commodity of the vulgars favor, they must carry
an even hand of them, neither to let them be empty, nor full gorged, they must
neither too often, nor too seldom see him, neither must he be too strange, nor
too affable, for opinion is much more nice and curious to please, then
judgment, more quick, more light, being soon off, and soon on, of a ready,
though not of a wise dispatche. They are won with what they feel, and
delighted with what they hear; are the chief tools of this trade,
Liberality and Rhethoricke, these must serve one another turn, amplifying,
gifts, and the actions performed for their commodities, with Eloquence; other
times leaving the persuasion to the benefit, when benefits want, drawing the
picture of Liberality in good words; their minds are like queasie stomachs,
that will surfeit as well by the use of one meat often time, as by excess; their
satisfaction resting as much in the variety, as in the proffit. But no more of
this, it is not requisite to follow this point any further, I have often times
seen them that meant to destroy vice, sow it* then no more but this, the
cunning of Popularitie, is like that of Iuglers, the cunningest of which can
cast mists before men's eyes, but here is their nearest resemblance, Iuglers
tricks go most inuisibly by Candle light; men popular, with those heads that
come no nearer the strength of understanding, then candle light the light of
the sun: the payment of these are praise and applause, a reward fuller of
noise then profit, of which they are as prodigal to their sportes as
favorites, with no less vehemency, with no less number of circumstances, so
me thinks it is doubtful which they affect most, for their behavior without
all herauldry gives no mark of destruction. Much harm does the possessors of
these shouts and clamours receive by them, for the knowledge of their actions,
which from the account of others comes most impartially, helps their
proceedings, for all they do by a corrupt interpretation is called
commendable; make him an Archer, if he shootes not near, he shootes for all
that a fair shoot, so corrupt is our estimation of things not looking into
the inside, but upon their success and fortune: who can then that determines,
determine popularitie commodious, since waying the discommodities, the dangers,
the pains incident to it, and then behoulding the profit, we shall find no
profit, the deduction has consumed the sum, this body of breath is too
mutual to rest on; if not mutable, dangerous, if not dangerous, dishonest, who
then will spend his time in pursuit of a thing so diseased, as to be mutable,
dangerous, and dishonest? But the extremities of the other side must with no
less care be shunned, there belonges to every man that desires safety to make
the things appertayning to him, correspondent with his fortune, otherwise like
a bark ouersayled, he runs him self under water, and sinckes.

Essay. 31. Of Humility.
WE have much labor and houlde in the obtaining Virtue, when we have fought
well al day, we loose it at night, vice dogs us, and never assailes but upon
advantage; she comes creeping, and by degrees gets into our bosoms, we cannot
shut her out, for our gates will not be bard, our senses keep open houses, they
are busy faculties, that love not idleness, though they lead to idleness:
be blind, and the power of the eyes will run into the touch, and then make
that itche for both, take away four and leave the fifth, and that fifth will
trouble us as ill as all, take away all, we are senceles; so having senses, we
are subject to vice, having none without feeling. The reason of Virtues
difficulty, is her inuisiblenesse, it must be touched or tasted, or heard that
they make much of; and so much of virtue is common, we can call her by her
name, and tell of her excellency but to translate her out of words, into
deeds and actions is few men's cases, and no marvel for the persuasion of
virtue being in a language that man understands not without the senses
interpretation, by their interpretation is corrupted, this makes them think
those good deeds l^st that have not the eyes of men for witness; the most
detestable vices are those that desire to look like virtues, and these come
from the corrupt perverting the souls motions, those merely of the body
though they be ill enough, yet are they not so ill, for they are natural. Thus
hardly do we earne all virtues, humility excepted, which me thinks is so
near a kin to us, so like us, so fit for us, as she needs no long wooing, we
have no other refuge but this, it is she only of all other graces that most
truly belongs to us, and of whom we may have the greatest part, for the rest
send but their shadows amongst us, she comes her self: they are all of an
higher nature and more stately, but this virtue is humility, that teaches the
knowledge of knowledge selfe-knowledge, that destroys Fortune, for she is
delighted with nothing but excess of passion, but this has but one
countenance, that confou^deth pride and counterfeiting, for she shows her
inside, and thinks of mending her imperfections, not of glorying in any,
surely, there is no doubt but the quest of the others is an honorable
imploime^t, but the pursuit of this exceedes all in proffit, for without this
the rest are not, all of the^ being dispoiled of their excellent natures, by an
ouerweening opinion, but this true vndersta^der of our states, so sweetly
co^mixeth her defects with those thoughts of liking, as taking away
presumption, the abuse of our endeavors, and leaving just so much knowledge as
desends wearines and lothing, we happen of that true way, that directs the
graces of the mind to heaven without danger. But because though we dare not
say we mislike; yet we like that best, that is good both for soul and body,
and that the body will, like children cry, if it have not part with her
fellow: that it is here a beauty, a help, a preservation, is worth the
proouing, we differ much in natures, and our likings like not all one thing,
yet was there never nature that likt the taste of pride in another, the sport
of it is not pride likes pride, but will spit at one another, and make even
their own imperfection, bear witness against the same imperfection in
another; thus plain it is, howsoever we hide it, and hiding cherish it in our
selves, that by our opinion of others, the opinion of all others nearest a kin
to judgment, we hold pride a vile and loathsome companion. The creatures that
give us earthly immortality, whose chosen evidence is beauty, if that not
beautified with modesty, humilities other name, it is no less loathed then
deformity, it gives a sweetness both to the beauty of behavior, and the
bodies beauty, and turns the beholders thoughts into admiration, that unless
thus accompanied, would end with envy, and a repining against natures
partiality. The assistance of this virtue, is as much as her contraries
dangers, never was there pride, though encompassed with the strongest guarde,
safe; For it is a vice contrary to all natures, there is no other but may have
aid, aided by the hopes of gain, or satisfying some humor; but Pride
deuouting all things to uphold her self, destroys both love and hope, and is
left destitute of all manner of defense, it killes succors, and multiplieth
enemies, the contrary, purchasing friends, infeebling enemies, therefore
without question, a virtue of great help and profit. But her best virtue is
Preservation, for beauty is but a color, and not reckened amongst the
substantial, help may be helped, and yet have need again, but Preservation
loses no friend, and humility is the author, for sailing by this compass,
we know wheresoever we are, what we are, it is impossible for any place or any
state to alter us all fortunes are one, things that may stick upon the body,
but never upon the mind, thus is she the cause of Preservation, for to
preserve is not to loose, she loses not therefore, she preserves, making the
mind constant and free. To tell how fit it is for man, it were fit first to
relate the wretchedness of his state, an argument long and doleful, but that
it were a relation that would ask a long time, since it is of his misery,
shortly auerreth mine opinion, for those debased states unable to stand upon
themselves, have no other refuge but humility, a testimony of an obeying mind,
and yet far enough from a dejected baseness.

Essay. 32. Of Fear.
WE hear from our nurses and old women, tales of Hobgoblins and deluding
spirits, that abuse travelers, and carry them out of their way, we hear this
when we are children, and laugh at it when we are men, but that we laugh at it
when we are men, makes us not men: for I see few men, we delight not perhaps in
Iigges, but in as ridiculous things we live: nor this disprooues not their
relations, for we are misvsed by these spirits both night and day, some go
but a a little out of the way, most go contrary, yea succourlesse, for the
Moonelight of sense is hardly their companion, but the clouds of error wholly
incompasseth them, and in their trauells, pride catches some, luxury some,
hate others, covetousness deludeth another, ambition others, and my text
millions, whose cases are desperate; For day helps them not, but then instead
of thinking of these impostors, they see them and follow them, and love them:
of none of these have we so just cause to complain, as of Fear, for most of
the others are the diseases of our choice, rather then natures, but this
imperfect opinion catches hold in our very conceptions, and when we have not
wit enough to be cousined with the other crimes, we have then apprehentions
of fear and nothing is more conversant with us, then dismayednesse and terror.
Licurgus ordained the Laconian women the exercise of their limbs, wrasteling,
running, and managing weights, and throwing them, it did well doubtless for
the preparing their issue strong and sturdy, but had he given mothers the
education of bettering their minds, he had done much better; matters of
execution are the servants of direction, weakness is not so great a fault as
ignorance, and ill strength with a strong mind more invincible, then a strong
body and feeble mind, but to my use, we leave our women ignorant, and so leave
them fearful, which makes us so weak hearted, the man's part is soon done, he
has much more from his mother, which being thus full of pusillanimitie, must
needs sustain and make his issue fearful, it will impair a ma^s courage to
converse with a cowarde but a twelue-moneth, to live with them, and be
nourished with such faint blood, cannot choose but make them like safety best,
and prize a whole skin above honor. I do not think women are much more faulty
in Natures abilities then men, but they fail in education, they are kept
ignorant, and so fearful; Instead of these L^curgian courses, I would have
them learned and experienced, let them know as much as we know, and then
doublesse they would be as fearelesse as we are, I am much against that Roman
law, that prohibiteth commanders wives going to the wars with their
husbands, all objections set apart, their commonwealth would have gained by it,
for doubtless a wenche that has been in many countries, seen many
battles, and is full of experience, is excellent to breed on, and if the
Nurse were there to, it were well, for from her teat they suck somewhat of her
constitution, in which I doubt whether there be not some fault, for we take the
wives of our grooms and tenants, to feed these little ones, and mingle gross
and heavy blood, with their gentile and spirited natures. This is that I
think, now to that I see: there is no vice that we blame so much to blame as
this, no vice so putrifieth man's best part as this, for though voluptuousness
and other frailties, will abuse the office of wit, and procure warrants for
their purposes, yet in none does wit strengthen opinion with such strong
arguments, as she does fear, she will here transform bushes into men,
bul-rushes into Spears, any thing into any thing, being still desirous of
matter and occasion to do her self hurt: man had need beware of these
imbecillities, for their neighborhood to his reason makes them obstinate; hence
comes it, that no creature is so good and so bad as man, for all other
creatures are bound by nature, but the universal circuit of man's mind, has
leave to run, into the extreme and furthest part of things, which since it
has, well may we profit by it, as well as receive loss, who has the history,
but of his own time, and so much of years, as may make him hold the
relations of the world shall find the worst of calamity to be a thing so
ordinary and so incident to the life of man, as not at all to fear their
approach but embrace them as the appendixes and connections of life. I was and
again not to be, must give beings to others, that time shall ruin me and my
memory skilleth not, before I was, I was, in the same case, and when I am so
again, I shall not be sorry for it, fame and oblivion and such things are coin
of our stamping, and only curra^t with our pouerties; those opposites to fear,
as to be the favorites of Fortune, to be rich, to be noble, to be any of these
outward things, are but apparitions, things without all hold or continuance,
time must do his office, populate and depopulate nations, give and take
Empires and so downward, from the plough to the spear, and from the spear to
the plough. -- Fuimus Troes, fuit Ilium and ingens, Gloria Teucroum -- How many
thousands of states are gone and vanquished, and hardly so much as that they
were, is left, how many millions of examples have we of things finished, as
full of terror and terriblenesse as fear can possibly imagine? certaynely the
pain of things rest not in the execution, but in the conceived opinion, for it
is too short to be grievous, we make no account of the cramp, because it stays
not, yet for the time questionless it assaulteth the body more sharply then
the Ague, death is but a crampe, therefore knowledge an Ague, looking into the
state of fear, I find she lives by two means, by ignorance and by knowledge,
by ignorance as the fear of children, by knowledge when malice compelles
knowledge to go against her knowledge, the first we are borne with, and many
mittigate with industry, the second virtue expelles. Of the first I have
already spoken something, of which I say again the industrious search of
letters vncaceth al these terrible apparitions that seem terrible to the
vulgar.

-- Vvlgi qu^ vox vt venit ad aur^s,
Obst-puere animi^ ge^^dusque per ima cucurrit,
Ossa trimor. --
Upon the first buckling of Caesar with the Heluetians, a cowardly commander
of his, lost him a fair attempt, through the false persuasion of fear, that
the enemy had possessed a hill, that was possessed with his own forces, but
himself never sped better, then when he drew his valor to the aduenturing his
own person, exercising his hands as well as his head. The examples of the
ancient honest Philosophers as well as their speeches are full of contempt of
fear, they seemd to make wars continually with this opinion, and we are most
of them as it is said of Zeno rebutters of that Sympathizing delicacie with
heat, and cold and sickness and the rest of the vulgar misleaders.

Hunc non aeris hyems domuit non frigidus imber,
Non sol^s radii non vis teterri^ a morbi:
Non quicquid vulgo pretiosum inuictus at vnus
Instabat gra^^bus studiis noctesque diesque.
Few men in health and prosperity can promise themselves this constancy, but
to do a man's good will is well, to perform which the meditation of fortunes
foulest play is good, imagine the woorst of misery and go to fence to these
old Phisophers to learn the warding blow, me thinks the certain belief of
the pricelesse, value of things in the world, should do much with a man,
these things of reckening with the world are only good in opinion, estimation
gives them grace and value, they have nothing in themselves, but men gives them
what they are, from whom, if he will respect his own poverty most, and take
them away again, he shall leave them beggarly and naked, and then see they
are things neither good nor ill, but indifferently made good or ill by our use.

Huc tandem concede, haec Ara tuebitur omnes. There is no good to be done upon
these things but by contempt and scorn, and withal knowing the things
contrary to fear, are no more rich nor solid in contentment, then these are
procurers, dangerous and painful, we have no truth that our reaches can
stick upon, that we have, we have by faith and belief our reason cannot
graspe it, being too little and too short, there is a mortal understanding
destinated to our use, and in the use of things is our cunning, and in this
running the best lesson is, not to be apprehensiue of the storms of the world,
he that cries for his losses, must necessarily laugh at his gains, do now not
rebuke days and women for this quality, and shall men cry them mercy, and
say they mistook my sorrow and calamity? Those things that are necessitated,
there is an end of the^, they must be done, those things that may be resisted, and
resisted gallantly, encounter danger and you shall soon know his pleasure,
either he will make an end of you, or become a quiet fellow shortly, run away
and he is more then at your heels, for he is in your self.

As Li^sius in his Constantia handsomely shows, the cure of the minds malady
is not by the physic of travail, for all griefs must be cured like the
wound that was incurable, but by the means of the wounding weapon, by it
self, loking into the cause of the grief, and finding sorrow a fellow, that
keeps an unprofitable stir, I hope you will hold your peace. Me thinks
Virgil makes Aeneas speak too like a nurse or a waiting maid, when commanded
the repetition of his fortune, he says; -- quil^ alt^ f^nd^
Mirmidonum, Delopumue, aut duri mil^^ Vlysis temp^ret a lachrymes? --
and after. Se^ si tontus amor casus cognoscere nostros,
Et breuiter Troia suprem^m ^^d^re laborem.
Quanquam animu^ meminisso horret luctuq^^ resugit,
Incip^^m --


Well if Aeneas were of this mind, it was not Dame Venus, but Dame Fear, that
wished him to fly from Troy and it was not a clowd but cowardice that
encompassed him. There is a great deal of weakness and too much moisture in
these heads, that cannot stir their memories* but straight it will rain. Saint
Augustine remembers in his confession, the expense of tears that he was at,
when he read Didoes end, verily it became his condition well, for tears are
only due when we fall short in our reckenings with God, then tears and
repentance is behouefull, but in any other case, it is unnecessary, nay more
it is indecent. I have not yet spoken of those far fetched fears that are
drawn not from any apparencie of danger, that is either felt or seen, but
from dreams, incountring with Hares, and the Salt spilling, other that go by
the signs, or by Prognostications, prophecies, and auguries; times past were
much governed by these. It is said Augustus was very inquisitiue about his
own dreams and his friends; it was great pity, for he was otherwise a very
wise Prince, but he had a great fortune, and a mortal body, which are still at
variance, and blind-foldes the true discerning in which time, fear creepes in
and ouer-valuing life, draws preservation from wrong places. For these
auguries and fetching things from the intrayles of beasts, it was not amiss
then, (...) no state can be vpholden without religion, no people are well
governed or succesfull in their attempts, without the annexion of divine hopes
to their earthly strength: but now when that is done by the true means, when
men may fetch hope from a clear possibility, these things are to be
discarded, and to trust to the soundness of religion. For the signs, I
remember a speech of Cassius to a South-sayer, that wished him not to fight
with the Parthians until the Moon had passed Scorpio, he answered, he
feared not Scorpio but the Archers; These things are least of all to be
feared, they beg fear that pick them out of these occasions, he that will
interpret mischaunces out of these things, may take his leave of
tranquillity, for some of them happen every day, which being enforced to
these ill presages, makes the vulgar so full of sighs, exclamations, and
uncertainties; Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus.

There are no mischances, there is no fortune, there is no misery in our
human lives, except we look into the feebleness of our merits, and our
Creators bounty, in other things we are deceived by imagination, the
circumstances of things are more then themselves: Exovitur clamorque virum,
clangorque tubarum.

It may be so, is it any more then death? tush cruelty can do no more, and for
that, put but away opinion, and it is soon gone. In the mean time, see the
behavior of the suppressed Troyans weaklings, and the children of Fortitude,
and think who carried themselves to the grave most graciously.

Apparent Priami, and vet^rum penetralia regum,
Armitosq^e vident stantes in limine prim^,
At domus viterior gem tu, miseroque tumultu
Miscetur, pe^tasque ca^e psangoribus ^der
Fa^^ers u^n^^t: ferit aurea sidera clamor.
Tum pa^ida tectis matres ingentibus errant,
Amplexoeque tenent postos atque oscula figunt.
Now who would add to the fury of an insulting enemy, prayers and petitions?
no let it be death, let it be pain, there is yet left us to conquer the
victours patience, there let us end; for those terrors that are exhaled by a
guilty conscience, they are more incurable then any other, in spite of vice,
our knowledge miscarried, will return and complain of her abuse, and the
impression of her fault bring fear, and fear presents thoughts of terror,
thus Nero beheld his murdered mother; thus tyrants are no where safe, though
in the midst of their strengths. This made Dionisius make an Image that singed
off his sons hair, not daring to trust a Barbar; this made Alexander
Pheraeus use to have his wife searched for fear of murdering him, guiltiness
cannot be without fear, neither will Justice long delay their execution*
which in themselves they find, and so fear every thing is a hangman. Many of
the Roman Emperors at the hearing of the thunder would creep under their
beds and seek shelter of the most unable things to defend the^, poor
people, it was not the thunder but their consciences put them in mind, like
sea sick persons that complain of the sea when it is their troubled stomachs
that diseaseth them, but this argument fitteth a more divine hand, to them I
leave the examination of this honest remembrancer conscice, and end with the
example of Numa Pompilius and Aurelius, who need no gardes, for they were
honest men, they feared not, for they were virtuous and virtue cannot fear,
such is the power of that excellent and true guide of humanity.

Essay. 33. Of Silence and Secrecy.
IT is pitye this quality must borrow words to express it worth, but it is no
more unfortunate then all things which to become known, must borrow sound and
air, for though we can think, yet think we not that enough without sending
our thoughts abroad to the censures of men. I confess speech is to the mind,
as convenient havens to towns, by whose currents they grow rich and mighty,
but it does as these places of traffic do, bring in not only commodities
profitable and wholesome, but luxuries, corruption, and delicacie, I cannot
well tell then which I should prefer of speech and silence, since the one
does to much the other to little, speech inritching and corrupting, silence
being poor but honest, but these are extremities which never prosper, until
brought into the mean, whose mediocritie keeps each end from falling,
withholding and paizing each side with the holdfast of the midst. I am not
against speech, but babbling, which consumes time, and profits no body, it is
one of the blessings of nature, speech; but to ride still upon the top of it,
is too vehement; they are at great pains with feeding hungry ^ares, and to
speak truly, are the very bellows to kindle laughter, it carries not only
this fault, for with all, it is unsafe, words discovering the mind, and
negligently giving all eyes the sight of the heart. There is a wise Philosopher
that calls words the shadows of deeds, Sermo operis vmbra, this is his best,
which is so slender as the true affectors of things, will give their thoughts
bodies and translate them more substancially. There is a more noblenes in
deeds, in which may be read the worthiness and unworthiness of men truly,
whiles words greatest gains, does but promise things, performing nothing. I
find no men affecting actions more thoroughly then these people of fair
words, which makes me fear these ingrossers of speech, are constituted of
too much wind and air, and want that solidity which is meet in the
generation of this dear issue of ours, our actions, which never fail to
resemble us more nearly, then the children of our body. Phocio^ was preferred
before Demosthenes, because he spoke not much, but filled his speech with stuff,
and was sparing of Rhetoric* and full of reason. If he tells me their nature a
right, I join with his choice; it is with these for bettering the hearers, as
it is between a few dishes well dressed and a great feast, the sparing speaker
gives you that which is wholesome and ouerburdens not your memory with
superfluity; the wording Orator is like our English feasts, where the stomach
must win way to the second course, with bearing the burden of the first, and
when he comes to it, has lost the bettering himself by it, through the
heaviness of his first receipt: when I hear one of these common speakers
laying up his stomach, I let his words pass without any more attention then I
bestow upon a clock, when I care not for the hour, but he that solicits my
ears but seldom, I receive his pleasure with pleasure, and willingly grant
him a room in my memory.

It was well advised by Cleanthes to one that entreated him to instruct his
son, he said, be silent, for besides the advantage that he has of a
talker, of having all he knows without paying him any thing for it, receiving
it scot-free, it is also more becoming and instructing, for his behavior is
not carried out of the way with following his words, and out of that silent
behavior there is more wisdom to be learned then from a multitude of words,
and more with intertaining this silence, for he receives from her, her wise and
safe daughter Secrecy. Were I sure all men thought just with me, secrecy were
not necessary, but since the speaker and expositor utter and receive with
different minds, and that speech cannot carry her self to mean just as I
would have her, I must defend her aequiuocall impotencie, with bestowing her
only where she may be well used; it seems the late professors of secrecy,
which were not yet so secret but to confess that if their nearest attire were
privy to their determinations, they would burn it, received this Item from
Metellus, by which I will show you the example of a double exposition,
Montagnia likes not the protesting this, nor I to say, so, for I would not have
vttred so much, but for the thing, it is a safe and an honest principle, for I
will not conclude, their concealing things proceeds from the faultines, but
since ill has gotten that power, to convert things well meant, into their own
vilde natures, it is best to keep them from it; the integrity of the world
is past, it is too late now to profess opennesse be it never so honest, for so
neete may many of our actions come to dangerous intents, as they are best, when
only in our breasts, for In du bium trahitur relligiosa fides. Secrecy is of
two kinds, of our friends, and of our own; that of our friends, religion
commands us to keep; that of our own, discreation: for the first, did he not
open me by the power of friendship, I would not willingly neither give it nor
receive it, for he that means honestly, I think deserves as much thanks for
being content to hear, as the other confidence in telling, for we are bound
once more then we were, by his disclosing, and perhaps drawn, that we cannot
eschew the doing a fault, for if his secret be pernicious, I must betray him,
or my self sin, then he must go, and so I forfet a friend, and break a
principle of friendship. I would here upon such a desire, demand if he sought
it for counsels sake, if so I would hear him, if otherwise deny him hearing,
for howsoever he means, if he relieth upon mine advise, he shall mean, as I
would have him. Many States used to punish the laying open of secrets, with the
loss of their babbling instruments, which was a very just law and a sure, for
no example preuailes with a borne tatler, but the loss of his picklock; I
wonder that the Barbarians generally do not with those slaves they imploye
near them, deprive them of their tongues, as they do of their stones, for
fear of the abusing of their wives and concubines, me thinks they should be as
jealous of their secrets, as they are of their lusts. The Turks they have
certain Mutes to perform their executions, which since they are in for worse
matter, may be put in amongst the rest for venial; But to speak as I think,
I hold the people subject to this flux of words very dangerous, for by such,
Scilla found where the possession of Athens might easilest be attempted, by
Flauius that had this disease. The city of Rome had the plague of a tyrant
continued, I never knew tatling a safegarde, but the geese that preserved the
Capitol, which the Romans rewarded with great care, popular states being
never ungrateful to geese, these are all to be shunned, for their
couuersations are more unsafe then the fellowship of the most malicious, words
being more pernicious then blows, for no Fencer can ward them. Of our own
secrets the discovery bewrayes a great feebleness and impotencie, it
resembles a cloud, that by the sun is possessed of hot exhalations, but
is so weak as not to keep them, desire draws up thoughts of assistance, but
when the desirer has them, ouer-burthened with their strength, they burst out
and dissolve him; thus all his attempts ouerwaying the mind, are brought to
nothing, which weakness of man's were ill, were not man so ill as to have ill
affected thoughts, but having such it is well, for thus most conspiracies
against Princes are prevented: for an honest man, it is a great blessing, for a
dishonest the contrary, an excellent punishment. So must I conclude of
secrecy, which if you will call craft or policy, I must answer you with
these two verses; Tutus vhique manes, f^ calliditate valebis.
Non est simplicit as dign^ sauore magis.


Essay. 34. Of Human Contenment.
BEhold the godds of the world, the soul of action, the motion of the
inhabitants of the earth, the point, the conclusion where unto all thoughts are
reflected, this is the master of al trades, Arts, sciences, and professions,
for this, the husbandman finds a sweetness in labor, the Artizan in
following his trade, the Artist in the inquisition of knowledge, soldiers in
pursuing danger, politicians in the working of the mind, in plotting and
fetching in strange conclusions to uphold practices; this is the garland, that
makes enery one love victory, this is the reconciling object of the discenting
constitution and courses of me^, for they al agree, that contentment is the
place where they desire to end their iourneyes. But that the world should have
still the right use, and not be desolated with man's neglect of inquiring and
uttering her secrets, this contentment is fashioned like our loves, what I call
fair, another thinks ill favored, another out of deformities pickes beauties;
thus contentment, which according to the minds of men is drawn out of a
numberless number of courses, which mystery of natures does make all agree.
That contentment is to be sought, and to disseuer them in the manner of their
search, joined with the other of making all forms lovely in some eyes,
vphouldes the world, for by this last, the world is peopled; by the first her
people made industrious, and the great volume of the world in no corner left
unnoted, but stirs and flourisherh as the chief and master piece of Nature.
Thus do we propound a cause and reason of our life, and make every day beget us
occasion, either of following or learning to follow our quest, when we do not
go forward our selves, we behold others, which like a map lays out the
course of our travail, but when according to the excellency or grosenesse of
our choice, the determined contentme^t approaches, we fly from, not the
inioying, but the opinion we had, another contentment is set up; that obtained
another, so does our human lives run after contentment, but never overtake
her, we cannot, for contentment is divine, our bodies earthly, our minds we
feel ouertakes her, for the propounded contentment pleases her, she imbraceth
it, and is already in possession, but when it comes, so short does it fall of
her expectation, as she erects another, a plain argument of her divinity,
and a true sign, that real contentment is not of this world, nor to be
grasped within our earthly arms.

Essay. 35. Of Trappes for Fame.
I Had not need to teach the world new opinions, for I hold all I know, more
by tradition, then reason, I have a brain like a French force, that does it
best first, my incountring an argument is most vigorous at the prime
opposition. I after fall and wax lazy, and in truth shallowe, I do nothing
well, but speak much worse then I write, and perhaps worse (in something) then
I can do, which I must confess the fault of my brain, for I neither lispe,
stutt, nor speak in the throat, nature has made the cariadge of my words
large, and swift enough, but I want merchandise and stuff, the Italian
civility would well fit me, where the overthrow of an Appositor is counted
discourtesie, and they call him in disgrace, Vince guerra. The reason of this
exordium, is the view of the works of Nature, and our variety upon them, few
men receive any thing with the like use, but occasions or things represe^ted,
begets in one, fear, in another, fury, in a third, fears harbinger
amazement, in a fourth desperation, some of these differ much, yet shall one
occasion beget all these at one instant, which makes me think our discourse
finds out more uses of things, then our senses qualities, yet am I not of
Empericus mind, who holds the quallities of things to be more in number then
our senses, and that we reckon our knowledge to see all, as Alexander conquered
the world, because in his time there was no more known. I am not of his
opinion, for all things being made for man, and his senses being fit for both
life and knowledge, his servants sure which are all things sensible, have no
more tricks then he knows of. But thus new am I in opinion, that the
receptacle of our senses intelligence, with joining, quartering, and mixing
things, imploye them far from their accustomed properties, which my subject
here will plainly exemplify. Man being the most substanciall and most canning
piece, accompanied with a head that masters and is Lord of all things; How has
he fallen this second time, more vainly deceived, and more miserably punished
then in the first? He fell then with a bait pleasing to one sense, and when he
fell, fell upon a good substanciall body, where there was good footing, and
hope to, of rising, but here he is fallen into smoke where he may be choked,
but cannot live nor walk, he is fallen into fame; to entertain which I know
no sense destinated, upon a thing not to be handled, not to be ridde^, not to
be seen; children would not have doted thus; not to be eaten, gluttons would
not have so miscarried, not to be touched, an amorist would not have been in
love with it, not to be heard by himself, a light headed musition would have
shunned it, not to be seen, a Faulconer would not have lured it; yet all these
that are able to make so good an election of their delights, sacrifice to fame,
and flattery is their priest. There is certainly but one end, whereto the
intendments of man are destinated, which prosecuted rightly, is eternal
happiness, this is not fame, for she dies often in her birthe, commonly
overcome by time, and sometime men famous have had their memories dispatched,
either by oblivion or detraction, before death has made an end of their lives;
all these working where the bodies grows covetous, and would have the gains
alone, are vicious, he must not determine any thing particulerly, for he is
none other then a hired servant, and his wages is life, the proffit must be
given to the soul, whose predominant power, is also compelled to use the body,
for the souls performances without the body are not understood, contemplation
being a good unprofitable naked life. Both working together, and both agreeing
in their purpose questionless, they would determine upon some more lasting
reward then fame. They would lay for virtue, for eternity, for the fruition
of a never dying happiness, but this Essay must speak like it self, not what
should be, but what is, the^ to the baits for fame: The actions of these
differ not, from the prouocations of virtue, for as much as appears outwardly,
for they profess valor, temperance, liberality, and the rest of the lims of
honor and honesty, but in the mind that works these motions, is the
disagreeme^t, the one being spurred by virtue, the other importuned by the
tickling of applause. This same those ancient Philosophers that so much
enueighed against fame, well knowing the tyranny of such thoughts, which where
they get entrance, overthrow all that rest in the place more modestly humored.
Infinite are the baits that are laid to catch this, nothing far surmounting
the number which curious Fishers have found out, and yet in one thing they well
agree, for they fit the couerer of their deceit to the time; Fishers having
flies for the spring, the fall, and the winter, fame catchers, countenance,
seemings, and aspects, for a state good, or bad, or indifferent, both their
baits go down the stream, both purchase not by force but deceit, both look
pleasing, but swallowed, are dangerous, and to conclude, both labor for their
bodies not their minds. To speak of those petty fishers, that nip their
bodies, and cast them into more mowldes, then their mothers bellyes, that never
read any thing but how their ruffes stand in a glass, or of those that grow
old in the obtaining the name of a good Fencer, dauncer, vaulter or wrastler,
were to no purpose. These are but trifles, and indeed, though not virtuous yet
plain dealers, for a ietting behavior, or an action with their hands, or the
curiosity of their clothes discouers them; no I will speak of those that
Painte so in oil, as the examination of a sharp rain will hardly discover
them, of those that carry the world about by the nose, of those that keep
their minds more hid in, then women their limbs, how many of these masked
creatures have mine eyes beheld, laden with the honors of the world, and set in
the highest top of estimation, who, were the world inquisitiue any further then
the outward sight, they should have found, not virtuous, but betrayers of
virtue, Rogues with counterfeit pasports, and coyners of false money, inwardly
though they be idle, yet they bait their hook with a profession, of which
they continually talk and act their parts, like Nero his Philosophers, whose
wisdom lay in their vnkembde hair, and rugged beards, and ill clothing, and
counterfeite gravity. Nec de^rant, qui voce vultuque suo tristi inter
oblectamenta regia, spectare cuperent. Thus contrary are they to the time, when
their singularity may puachase admiration without danger. The valiantest of
these will be soldiers, but unwillingly feel either danger or hardness. But
no profession nourishes them worse then this, for at sometimes this gallant
active life will bring him upon trial in spighte of his heart, when these
gilded spirits will be known for the couerers of rotten bodies; this life of
arms has almost discovered the whole world of famemongers, for it is a
received axiom Honor once acquired, is not to be ventured. Montania in his
observations upon Caesar deals somewhat to indifferently with his taxers, for
this alleging a proverb, that the old soldiers of Italy use to mock their
young adventurers with, calling them Bijognio^i^de Honor, in which mock they
discover their own actions (let the world think of them what they will:) to
be counterfaite stuff. True it is, a quarrel must not be undertaken by a
private man without just cause, but having a just cause, how ridiculous it is
to deny resistance, because already tried, as if because they having been
valiant once or twice, licenceth cowardice for ever after. A general must
join to this respect the occasion, if his force be more necessary at any
time, then his direction, it is necessary that he uses the fittest instrument
for the time, but to hold the gains of this virtue, as gamesters do their
gettings at play, which because they have (...) much, will adventure no more,
is an impotent shift of a painted mind, we are not so near the riches of the
mind, as we can be full, neither is virtue so inconstant, as to let the
outward senses obscure her worth, the soul that begins with virtue, whether
she winnes or looses, is still virtuous, and her disciples rest not, because
they have filled the mouths of men with praises, but because occasion offers
them not combats of this kind, for so formed is the mind of virtue, that
hazardes look not terriblie upon her, coming into battles and skyrmidges, as
into the School of her exercise. Surely, there are few human actions but
may be bettered, and if not bettered, yet at least ways equalled, and so the
number being increased, they are better, the oftener they are performed,
winning i^ comparison the less, but so dangerous are our natures, as they
surfeit both with good and bad, actions bearing grace, so ouerpeizing the bodies
baseness, as he knows not how to use his victories. I have seen few that
have been happy in these atchiuements, but some trick of pride, disdain, or
ouer-valewing himself, has made him a looser by his rich commodity. When I
read Liuie, I found times past were even with us in this imperfection, for
Publius Horatius murder of his sister, because she kindly did her kind in
bewailing the death of her slain spouse, was the vomit of the undigested honor
that he had one. But I think the Romans were not sorry for it, for such
states know better how to revenge then reward. Success and fortune, are like
hot Wines that immeasurably taken, help not digestion, but set the strain on
fire, for such meditations are as burthe^some to the brain, as weight to the
shoulders. I confess there is a great satisfaction in the executing of these
high attempts, and I hold them not hurtful, but restoratiues to the mind, if
managed by the skill of reason, and thought of by a knowledge, able to limit
the desert. I would choose a young man that loves fame, much sooner then a
heavy spirited fellow whose sluggish earthly thoughts cannot mount so hie. A
young man of this fiery condition, a little allayed, will make a wise man and
a virtuous man, but in age it is a disease incurable. I do owe very great
respect to those metalled yongsters, that think of honor and of high
practices, even that condemned fellow of the world, that sought Fame in the
ashes of the Temple of Ephesus, I think he would have equaled Caesar, if he
had had education answerable to his spirit. Honor has but two wings wherewith
she mounts above the vulgar, daring, and applying, and this fellow had one of
them, he durst, but wanting the other, the poor creature fell, and ruined
himself. The next are fellows that (fearing blows) honor peace, and cry out
with Tullie, Cedant arma togae, concedat laurea linguae: These shoot at Fame,
under gravity and justice, ending all their actions with the commendations of
peace, excusing the bastardy of their natures with the Grammar rule, Dulce
bellum inexpertis, and houlding wisdoms best quality, to consist in keeping
the body warm and whole. I would have little to do with this people
willingly, were they not a member of mine argument, which since they are, I
must say of them, their greatest hurt is unprofitableness, they shoot but
low and not far, less fame will serve them, then Alexander would have asked
for his little finger, in a word, they are good foyles to add to the luster of
a Jewel, or like cyfers that make figures precious. There are more witty
cowards of a higher reach and more profit, that like Tully will smell danger
far off, the vain affectation of these fellows, is a pattern of their
general natures, which is full of a blown pride, and a dastardly shining,
what wise honest man durst have been so bold as this fellow, to cry out
himself? Ego meis maioribus virtute Proeluxi; but they are valiant in things
that valor fears, they dare not encounter an enemy, nor behold danger, but
they dare do things more terrible, disgrace their auncesters, and commend
themselves. This is not they but the false ground they build upon, which is
ever shrinking and showing his burden, it is impossible that the motions of a
mind led only by fame, should be otherwise, then a trembling unsettled thing,
that is virtue only, that repells fear, and fear only that makes life
troublesome, without Virtue, Justice is not; without Justice, no tranquillity,
Iustus a perturbatione remotissimus, in iustus perturbatione plenus est. Well
may these fellows follow and go with company, but lead, or go alone they
cannot, fear and the affection of fame are inseparable and though they set a
gallant countenance outward, yet inwardly they look for assistance as well as
praises. These false Laizers that cou^terfaite the fair essentall hue of
virtue, untried, may seem the same, but they are too cheaply obtained to hold
al wethers, they buy not nor boil not those never stayning colors that dies
in grain, but cousin the world with trash, that can go no farther then
imitation, they are to themselves uncertain, to their friends hollow and weak,
inconstant they must be, for they fetch all their determinations from the
continuances of other men's and upon them build either by scornful looks, or
the basest basest deiecction: often times have I seen these supposed grauities
so pinched up in formalitie, as without question they have endured more pain
for same, then a fellow infamous in the stocks, it is odds but they act their
parts first by themselves, and after get them by heart, they spitte all one
way, and upon no occasion will alter the tune of their hem^es, and coughes,
their bodies and their heads go always together, they must not turn the one
without the other, never laugh, let the occasion be never so just, their eyes
must never make a turn, but gallop right forward, in a word, they are locked up
in formality, and barred is the chest, where they enclosed with the eyes of
men. Were there a more substancialnesse of fame then there is, this were a
dear earning of it, to deny the course of nature in these indifferent things,
nay it is more, for it makes nature a superfluous Artizan, for we need no
limbs to play this part, no not a soul, for my picture can do this, better
then I, Vbi turpis e medicina sanari pig^t. This medicine tastes ill, the cure
is earnd to dearly to swallow this potion for amendment, I had rather be
diseased with some ill iestures, then put on these French bodies of formalitie.
I am rather of Epicurus mind, who would lay in just so much provision of fame,
as would defend him from contempt, Gloriae curam habiturum, quoad contemptut
non habeatur, to be licorous of more is plain gluttony, leave the rest to the
world to do, what they will withal, for we have more need of other
commodities, we are too much behind hand with nature to be importunate for
earnings, he is an ill commander of an hold that spends all his treasure
in painting, and making gaye what should be laid out in munition and
fortifying his foretresse; pleasures, false desires, fears, perturbations,
errors do yet live and leave our enemies, besiedging and ingirting us round,
and have we leisure to paint and trick up and set up tokens of triumph before
the victory. Non vita nostra aut stultitia, aut gloriae vanitate opus babet,
sed solum tranquilla et secura a vita; this is not purchased by flattery but by
continual correcting and amending of our wandering ill shapen thoughts and
actions. Those that bait fame with misery, and with immoderate longing after
riches and the basest earthly compositions of all others, thirst whiles it
goes no further, is good for it is the heigh way to temperance; besides I
think it a great sin to consume wastfully the inheritance of our ancestors,
the Grecians had a law, that denied them there fathers sepulcher that consumed
their patrimonies wastfully, and great reason I think; for we cannot behold
a more lamentable sight, then to see a house that has long stood in honor and
reputation ruined and desolated by prodigality, It maintaynes abundance,
which freeth us from many vain thoughts, that love that most, which they have
not, they that have not much, must love frugality or else they will have less,
they that have much, by frugality keep it from wasting, they that are left
rich it is irreligious not to leave theirs rich; but of these Epicurus speaks
in one of his Epistles to more purpose. Frugalitatem magnum existimamus bonu^,
non vt semper vtamur modicis, verum vt nisi multa habeamus, vtamur pancis,
verissime credentes illos magnificentia frui suauissime, qui illa nimium
indigent. But he that will draw worthiness from wealth how does he rob
heaven, and dispoyle us of the graces of the mind? questionless the robbing
of a Church is not so sacrelegious, need causes the ones theft, but this
theft comes from to much abundance, he leaves us the most miserable and
needy creatures of the world, for we have need of more then beasts, yet none
catch fame sooner then these, more reverence is thrown upon them then upon
the most reverend subject of virtue, but it skills not, wisdom sees their
poverty and pitties those, that the world admires: quis illos igitur putet
beatos, quos miseri tribuu^t honores? The opinions of some to be seldom seen,
to appear in the eyes of men far from the fashion of other, to suffer any
thing, for a fair out side, are the courses that many take, but all these
courses are too strict and unsafe, they promise much more then they are able to
perform, and suffer their habits to compel them and lead them a painful
and wearisome journey. Our determinations appear better formed when performed,
then promised, they have then a fair birth and a pleasant, which they have
not, that prepare the eyes of men to wonder before any thing comes, the
effect of a promise, is but the payment of a debt. The suddenness and
unexpected view of a thing, makes it admirable and beautiful, which made that
ancient Philosopher Pittacus, forbid the talking of what he will do. Quod
facere instituis, noli praedicare, nam sifacere nequi veris, rideberis. Now he
that in his attire or customs affects a singularity and an odnesse, proclaims
it with many tongues, for every gesture, every motion, and every thing about
him is a tongue. The last means is by the way of letters, which though the
instrument of all the excellentest actions of man, being the most near and
dear servants of virtues, being her chief factor, her other self, her
medicine curing the infirmities of man, expelling the leprosy and dross of
nature, yet not able to defend her self from the being abused by counterfeit
servants (under her band march many) that never were enrolled nor interteined,
but they are easily found, bearing their pasports upon their toungs, and in
their very behavior, may be easily seen how they labor for applause. But for
the true devoted servants of letters, they are questionless, the happiest and
worthiest of all, receiving from the pure springs of knowledge, a water so
quickening and clearing the sight, that nothing is impenitrable, be it armed,
either with distance, darkness, or with never so many intricate passages: how
much do we owe to times past, that left knowledge so discovered and open, as
we with much ease in respect of theirs inioye a rich patrimony thereof?
surely we owe a reverence to their names, and should never mention them,
without acknowledgment of their excellencies, which though they feel not, yet
does it nourish industry in the hearers, and explane us not robbers but
debtors of the dead. I happened very lately amongst my books to meet with
Diogenes Laertius, where I was much delighted, even more then ever I was with
any book, for I do behold their words and writings with nothing so good a
stomach as I do their lives, and to know what they did; I found hardly a page,
but I wished my memory, to gather some griftes in them, not a line but so full
of precious liquor, as the words were too short wasted for the matter, he is
in great estimation with me, and shall be one of my nearest companions, and by
Plutarche his leave, have the upper hand, for I find few of his captains
Philosophers, but amongst Laertius Philosophers, many captains, and
instructions for commonwealth causes, not inferior to Plutarche. But in the
mean time the sight of this abundance brought me to feel more senciblie our
dearth, such is the barrenness of our time, as the world in an age hardlye
brings forth a famous man, which whether it be the fault of our idleness, or
that our industries are killed by sensuality, or tenderness or gluttony, I
find it is so, the cause were to much curiosity for me to hunt for. But fame
may rightly hang over their memoryes, and rightly, since they all embraced the
sweet effects of virtue without caring for the estimation of men though all
the greatest Princes of the world continuallye made love to them and offered
them abundance; See the confession of Antigonus to Zeno Citicus. In fortune
and glory (I think) I exceed thee, but in the liberal studies and perfect
felicities, which thou possessest, I believe, I am by thee far excelled, and
toward the end of his Epistle, this periode, for he that teaches and
instructs the king of Macedon in virtue, certaynely instructs also both him
and his subjects to fortitude and honesty. How would our glory hunters have
accepted of such an embassage from a Prince, certaynely it would have burst
them, or at the least ways have distilled them into an Epistle most flaunting
and adulating, but he far otherwise, coming no nearer commendation, then to
encourage him on in the continuance of his good determinations, and sending a
scholar of his to him, himself through age, being unfit for travail. Thus
happy were many of them to deny the reputation of the world for virtues sake,
living lives so temperate as instructions came doubly from them, for they that
could not attain virtue through the difficult paths of Philosophy, might
read it and understand it in their lives and examples, yet this, abhorring the
vulgar licentious way, leads men's eyes to suspicion, whether the intent be
fames or virtues; let it, me thinks I here them say it shall not turn us,
for virtue were not precious, if not accompanied with danger and detraction. I
think they would have said thus, and so charitable am I as the actions of them
drawing more near the affectation of fame, I interpret otherwise; even that
excellent head of our time, the elder Scaliger, though he wrote many things
tending to his own glory, and did himself turn the inside of himself
outward, yet I think he wrote it to spur on sluggish spirits to the race
of virtue, rather then for his own glory or memory. And even for Montania
and my self (who in these matters of excuse I may safely join with me,)
though we do sometimes mention our selves, yet are we not to be suspected of
intrapping fame, we allow men in their lives to build their tombs, and we
allow charity to set the first letters of their name upon the gowns and
coats they give in alms, shall it not be lawful then for us to build our
tombs in our papers? and to wear our names in our labors? yes surely, it
cannot be denied us they are our children, which if they resemble us, it is not
a thing monsterous, but pleasing and natural.

Essay. 36. Of Knowledge.
I Praise and reverence the power of these words, Fiat lux, I honor the
seperatio^, that made the Chaos a world, I reverence that divine situation of
the Elements, that dissenting, consent in their adjoining qualities, but of
all, the creature that was made for all, Let us make man; O diuinest breath,
whose infusion made him breathe. Man has the superiority of all, and is the
worthiest of all, for he consists of a soul by the fathers side, divinely
descended, and capable of a divine inheritance, and of a body, the most perfect
and full of mysteries, that it is possible for earth to put on, whether can
knowledge bend her force, more excellently then, then man to look upon man:
this knowledge is profitable, for it is for himself this knowledge is
beautiful, others, this omitted, is curiosity, others, without this is
ignorance, for it hunts for light without light, in himself he must begin and
end, for in himself is the light of reason, that disouereth all things else.
He consists of a soul and a body, by reason of which souls accompaning with
the body, she knows nothing not encompassed with a material form, from these
two are disce^ded two children, Reason and Affection; Reason is the souls, and
is the mother of Knowledge, Affection the bodies, whose perfection is life,
which perfection she maintains, the conduits yielding increase to these two
cesterns are the senses, of which, ^ight and hearing are the servants of the
soul, taste, touch, and smell, the bodies, when these attend their destinated
fu^ctions, the commonwealth of man flourishes when the soul is obeyed, and
the body obeys, when their servants sent of Embassages, tend their commanded
negotiations, but then ruined, when the sights merchandise, becomes pedlers
stuff, and the ears bell metal, dross and lead, when the taste becomes
unchaste and is licourousnes, the smell so curious, as to think nothing sweet
but Musk, and the touch will presume to be a cou^sellour and to advise. They
differ not from the frame of a state, which is in frame so long as knowledge
ioines with obedience and the liuetenant of God upon earth, nature is obeyed,
but when humors usurp reasons name, and shadows are believed substanciall,
then Ixion embraces a cloud for Juno, so vanishes pleasure, and after comes
the torture of the time breaking wheel, there is plesures reward.

Hinc enim libido versat
auidis corda venenis:
Hinc flagellat ir a mentem
fluctus turbida tollens.
Divine knowledge, from whom preceedeth all blessings none of these mistakings
and riotts belong to thee, but peace and wisdom, for thou managest all things
iudicially, that neither chance can overthrow nor rob thee of thy conquests.
The world is like a sphere spectiue piece, knowledge the circkle, showing the
proportion in this piece truly, nothing but knowledge can perform this
office, for she sees them with the eyes of meditation with the souls sight,
here are they unmasked, here the universal matter of things is known, to be
one, changing but forms, like players that must be understood other men,
because they appear in others beards and cloakes, here can be no mistaking,
knowledge disdaines the rattles and gibby horses of the world, knowledge fears
not but what is to be feared, loves not but what is worthy for to be beloved,
knows all things, and to all things renders his due, and with tranquillity
lives, and without admiration sees, and without sorrow feels, all the shapes
and apparitions of the world. These see man if he sees himself, being a
^^mpendium of the world, and having in himself what is in every other thing,
the thing only excepted that is above all things, he has a being with stones,
he has life with trees, he has sense with beasts, he has understanding with
Angels, which understanding is the crown whereby his principality over
stones, trees, and beasts is known. What should man then look upon but
himself, since in himself is all, and more then all other creatures or
substances have, to behold which the true glass is natural Philosophy, in
which he must dress, morrall, and adorn his life, for morrall Philosophy is
the grace of ilfe, weaue this together and it will prove a stuff outlasting
time, natural Philosophy showing us what we have, morrall, how to use rightly
what we have. Reason has two quallities, knowledge, and direction, whose
divine and most powerful faculties we lost in our first fathers fall, what was
once a flame is now but a spark which by these two doctrines is again made a
flame, knowledge by natural Philosophy, by morrall direction, without these,
ignorance casts darkness over us, but having this direction and knowledge
making a commixture of their virtues, knowledge teaches direction how to
command, direction gives knowledge majesty and power. These order the senses
and makes their effects come to the determined period, teaching those belonging
to the school, to gather wisdom for the soul, which two destinated
servants though they present the mind sometime with allurments, yet the
execution of all vice belongs to the other three the assistants of the body.
What arises from these senses are affections, what affection thinks but
opinion, affection like the parents medleth with single objects, the mind
graspeth universalities the minds imploiment is about things firm, the
affections momentary and sading. Who sees not then, to be led by our
affections, is vaiue and beastiall, who seeing this will neglect the mind,
whose ample territory stretches eue^ to the heavens.

Men's cernit et men's audit, caeca caetera, et sur da sunt. I account our senses
and their affections, like Physic drugges, which are one way poison, another
way preservatives, when they work only in the body they preserve the body,
but if ouercharged with excess the fumes smother the soul, and makes her
aguish, distasting what she ought to taste, furring her mouth with
super^^uities, and making her not know true pleasure and vanity by the taste.
What blessings or cursses can I think of in the world, but are derived from
these two heads, these were the two ways that Hercules was led unto: these are
the two ways that leads to knowledge and ignorance, these are the two ways
that part light and darkness, in a word, these are the two ways that make
man's life either happy or unfortunate.

Quisquis profunda mente vestigat verum
Cupit que nullis ille deuijs falli,
In sereuolua^ intimi lucem visus,
Longosque in orbem cogat inflectens motus
Animuque doceat, quicquid extra molitur,
Suis retrusum possidere thesauris.
Thus have I anatomized the parts of life, of which if Physic be so careful
as to anatomize bodies for bodily diseases, in these where mind and body are
to be both inquired into, care cannot be called curiosity. To meddle with
effects without the causes, is to tell him that is sick, he is sick, not to
remedy his sickness. I will now speak more feelingly, and speak of events
and actions, which in the pettigree of knowledge, is knowledges last descent.
Contemplation thinks well, action ought to do well: of contemplation, it is
too insensible to dilate, so contrary to custom and nature, as it would be
hard like Poetry, the touch of the fancy. But action is every bodies case, he
that can but wipe his nose is his acquaintance, of which I will speak my
opinion, concluding all in the managing these three, Prosperity, Adversity,
and Danger. If I should exempt knowledge from all things, but the happiness of
understanding, it were well, but it is not taken thus by the world, no, sildome
it meets with the worlds diffinition, whose maine is riches, and either pomp
or pleasure, luxury or power; of these; what one is there whose gain has not
been knowledge, that the weight of them has not pressed down, and been like
a Millstone tied about the neeke of a swimmer? Is it wealth, and is it given
thee think thou only to nourish thy sensuality? fool that thou art, which
have thirsted after thy destruction, how much would poverty have become thee
better, since wealth proves but an instrument of thy destruction. I account
wealth and want the touch-stones of dispositions, even in their uttermost
extremities, they agree in this, wealth melting substances, not thoroughly
substanciall, and want undoing their powers with his chillness and storms of
immoderate cold and heat, man is impatient, so of prosperity and want, which
are not so unlike, as not to fit a resemblance. There is virtue in wealth, as
there is in any manual instrument handsome and pro^itable, if in a skillful
hand, that fearful Simile of the sacred books, that says; It shall be as
possible for a ritche man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, as a Cammell to
pass through the eye of a Needle, is meant as I hold not by any propriated
course incident to wealth, but incident to the disposers of wealth, because
commonly disposing it to their own ruins, for charity is a commandment, to
whose performance, wealth, is a visible testimony. It is the use that carries
the curse, the thing is innocent, it is a newter, for can we separate it from
vain glory and prodigallitie, it is a step to eternal felicity and
hapipinesse. To come to this iourneyes end, we must pass by two dangers, not
bestowing too much upon our selves, not bestowing, where it may bring forth
pride, rather then defend want. I never saw it yet, though I should be happy
to see it, a man curbing his own disease of excess, to bestow it upon others
needy, we are content to starve our selves, to want handsomnesse, to deprive
our selves even of the necessaries of the world, to feed the unsatisfied
appetite of covetousness, in the which we suffer so much, as not to think of
our own using this store during our life, we need do no more, to do
virtuously, alter but the person, and love not another better then thy self,
and thou art in the way of heaven, put in thine own name for thy sons or
heirs, and thou have purchased a divine inheritance, I, for them, giving from
them thou augmentest their state, purchasing a blessing upon their house and
life. I know not the thoughts of wealth, for I was never wealthy, but as I am,
I never see excess, that my memory laments not the want of penury. How
unequally, nay how foolishly manage we our states, that neglect heaven and
buy damnation with surfets and excesses. A particular faith serves a seculer
fortune, in these holy mysteries, my knowledge aspires no higher then the
salvation of one soul, in morallitie common to all men, I may speak as well
as any man, because it is mine as well as an others. So strong is my
proposition, as I need not the valor of divinity, morrall reasons will show
how excellently Liberallitie becomes Plenty, and Plenty without Knowledge is
not Liberallitie, but a chest that unnecessarily makes much of his store
without use, or else prodigallitie, which in confuming is no less vicious, then
covetousness is in sparing: what have we that the use makes not precious,
dominion, palaces, riches, what else, if not used, lies without any more
contentment then the things take in themselves, which have none other but a
senseless being, me thinks contentment can be bestowed upon nothing more
rich, then to see creatures by nature neglected, by thy good nature maintained,
wherein thou surpassest common nature, for she gave them a life, but thou
give more, a contentment of life, for she gave them life, which ending there
would have proved misery and unhappiness, but thou give him life and from
his life remouest those torments, which are worse and death. How beautiful do
these actions look upon us, so truly are these belonging to the soul as li^e
two lutes meeting in pitch and nearnes, the striking of the one makes the other
sound, so these thoughts st^ooken by the memory, makes the soul rebound a
sound of joy, and contentment. Solon to Craesus telling him the frailty and
unstableness of wealth sinkes so deep in my thoughts as I wonder it has not
been advise to all such fortunes, those plenties left him in his greatest
need; but then Solons counsel showed him, how like flatterers these outward
glitterings are, he then cried out of Solon, and understood his wisdom, which
before he could not see through his magnificence and power, which lay between
him and wisdom. Who would not then buy liberallity with temperance, and sparing
from himself that which is to much, to give his brother that has too little?
body and soul are preserved and glorified in this, for the body never sends
the stomach to tell us, we have eaten too much, but the soul feels it too,
when the stomach rises against the meat, the conscience does against
intemperaunce, and as one feels the meat, the other does the sin of the
surffetting it is not the destiny of every man to be rich, but every man is
destinated to be a man, and if thou remembrest from whence thou camst, he came
from the same place, we estimate pictures that can but counterfaite the life,
but this has life, has flesh, and blood, is thy brother, will thou be so
partial to thy sight and so unnatural to him to prefer a sense before thy
self, the bark of a thing before the thing substantial? this looks but like
a man, but this is a man has reason, has speech, and all things else with
thee, but what thou know not how to use.

Omne hominum genus in terris
simili surgit ab orin.
Vnus enim rerum Pater est
vnus cuncta ministrat.
Thus staggereth ignorance in the disposing of wealth, but knowledge makes them
steps to ascend the throne of glory, he wauers not, he plays not fortune,
dispersing blinde-fould, nor sinckes with covetousness, whose nurse is a mind
unsatisfied, that does starve himself, to weaken himself, for his wealth is a
bait to the world, and his misery leaves him destitute of defense.

Nam priuata dolor omni private a periclis,
Ipsa suis pollens opibus.
No, knowledge sees these things to be fading, his strength is in himself, if
he have these, he betters not, impaires himself by them and ends.

Inueni portum, spes et fortuna ualete. I need not say much of prodigallitie,
since it speaks as ill for it self as his uttermost enemy can, only it is
worth the noting, how covetousness prays upon unthriftiness, which shows
the wisdom of the eternal goodness, who has given one sin leave to lashe
another to death. In private fortunes it ends with beggerie, in high with
infamy, in both with repentance.

Habit hoc voluptas omnie,
Stimulis agit fruentes,
Apium que par volantium,
Vbigratia mella fudit
Fugit, and nimis renaci
Ferit icta corda morsu.
I never see prodigallitie but accompanied with troops of vices, and their end
is commonly, a young unthrift an old cheator. I will speak no more of these
private, of princes prodigallity a little, it is necessary princes reward
servants, it is necessary they supply virtues need, but neither, to much, it is
good to keep them in appetite, for performance comes of more roundly, when
the soul and body both hope of reward then when the soul alone, for then the
body waxes lazy and becomes sluggish: Much more dangerous, was Demetrius
taxation upon the Athenians, which being so much as hardly in their powers to
contribute: at the receipt he gave it his concubine to buy soape with this
smarted doubly upon the taxed people, for it stroke them with shame and loss,
which had they had power, they had reue^ged, and did with the power of their
tongs questionles sting him with infamy. Where public actions inforceth the
use of the public purse, princes must show an extraordinary temperancie, and
demonstrate those common contributions are spent for the common profit, upon no
private. I hold adversity nearer a kin to virtue the^ prosperity. I have
heard great men complain, they have no leisure to perform their best
businesses, and this is prosperities and powers fault, so busy are their lives
about their co^mings in and layings out, as their lives and knowledges are not
far different from a marcha^ts cou^ting house, where the bills are, Ite^ for the
body and about the body, but the soul, has nothing, no not her windows
glased, that she might look abroad, but stopped they are with rags and dirt,
so despised and forlorn, does fortu^^ make this creature borne to eternal
light, so ungrateful are we to her that gave us life, not to return her
light. Adversity needs not Phillips boy, to wake him with the clamor of
mortallitie, no, adversity sees clearly, the mists of adulation are not cast
before her sight, she hears with her own ears, with her own eyes she sees,
with her own head she judges, Plenty flatters the senses and the
affections, but she wants this, therefore them, she can tell, that it must be
death, without the custom of the Eastern Monarchs, who were crownde and
modeld their sepulcher in a day, Si vis vacare animo, aut pauper esse o^ortet,
aut pauperi similis, poverty is ready for this, not needing the conflicts of
reason and affection, and so happy she is, as to make wealth counterfeit her,
when she would be let into the house of knowledge, though we be rich, if we
will be wise, we must not let riches cleave to our minds nor ingrosse our
love. Poverty is the way, Res quibus occultas, penitus conuisere possis.

Against this and all other adversities the way to withstand them is knowledge,
love them not and thou shall not be shipwracked with their loss, that thou
shall not love them, knowledge will show thee, that they are unworthy to be
beloved, since there hangs about them uncertainty, in that certain peril of
distraction, they nourish wishings and longings, before whom goes doubt and
grief, after whom comes repentance and shame, in our lightest matters who
has consideration, paizeth the commodities or discommodities attending them,
and casts them away if belonging to discommodities, in our profoundest matters
let us not be more light, but examine them and then doubtless we shall
dertermine Adversity the man of glory. Beware of believing the resister of
these, for they are affections, whose lightness not able to pierce the
profunditie of these things, likes better what they know; what should I say
more of danger, then that knowledge knows her uttermost, and therefore cannot
be dismaide or afraid? that this is true, see children more fearful then
old folks, fools then wisemen, ignorance breeds fear, knowledge
resolution. Re cognita, statem cessat timer: says a Philosopher, Fear then is
gone if Knowledge comes. If it be still dangerous, by knowledge thou know
it is dangerous, and knowledge will teach thee to intertaine it with
resistance or patience, how so ever she gives thee the victory, for patience
is invincible, conquering when resistance is conquered, he is not overcome,
whose discourse and resolution can say with Ulysses: Hoc quoque c^r perfer,
namque hoc grauiora tulist^. As in this, so in all things, knowledge like the
sun kills fear and darkness, and makes the foundation where she is the
sement, not to be shaken nor stirred by the storms of the world. As his sight
is clear, so are his steps right, no apparition nor color distractes him,
neither with joy nor sorrow; that child of the Phancie, appetite, in beasts
it is called appetite, but in man it is termed his will, a word of command,
which authority is given him for knowledges sake, who knows what to will, for
otherwise did he appetite without knowledges counsel, it should be appetite in
men as well as in beasts. What should man will the^, but knowledge, by this will
is made precious, when he goes from this, he goes to beasts, it is appetite,
from whom pull but the paintings of the world, and it is like a tyrants pomp.
Detrahit is qui superbis
Vani tegmina cultus,
I am videbit intus arctas
Dominos far catenas.
How admirable is this virtue, which gouernes here so wisely as no shot nor
tempest of the world can batter her, how lasting is this virtue, so embalming
our actions, as time cannot ruin them: sloth and sensuality are drowned in a
few years, but knowledge and her effects are immortal. In history and other
relations, every head can determine of virtue and vice, let our heads make us
do this for our selves, let us impartially see how often times we have stumbled
for want of this light, if we come to this sight, we shall come to more, for
this examination is the way of light, without this, Homo homini dominus non
est, sed mors and vita, voluptas, and dolor, but with this, with Socrates, Me
quidem Anitus and Melitus occidere possunt, laedere non possunt. Fortune, the
world, or all that is in the world, with this armor is vanquished, for
knowledge says of Fortune, Fortuna vitrea est; quae cum splendet, frangitur,
of the world, Homines perturbantur non rebus, sedijs quas de rebus habent
opinionibus. It is not opinion that is in knowledge, but judgment, who waieth
every thing with the balance of Justice and discretion, what more ca^ be said,
but that she is so precious, as having her, thou want nothing, in a body
thou live, but in a mind thou ioyest, and death does no more to thee, but
make thy already obtained sight more clear, with seperating of mortality
from eternity. The world is sweetened by thy example, and fame makes thy memory
resou^d over the whole world, and thy name lives in spite of time or
detraction.

Essay. 37. Of Judgment.
AMongst the rest of the fruitful children of Knowledge, Judgment, me thinks
is her dearest issue, for they are inseparable, they resemble one another so
nearly, as hardly can a distinction get between them, if between them, it is
only in their place, for knowledge goes before judgment. The perfection or
blessedness of knowledge, is this her child, it is the reward of her
travails, it is the triumph of her victories; she says: -- Et summa sequar
fastigia rerum. And judgment answers her, thou shall determine rightly of
every thing. The most resplendent ornament of man, is Judgment, here is the
perfection of his innate reason; here is the uttermost power of reason ioynde
with knowledge, here is experiences harvest, for the excellent union of reason,
of knowledge and experiences, ends his knitting up with the excellentest
perfection of man, Judgment, what give we, wisdom, what give we, the scarres
and battles of age, but Judgment? what has the most excellent men to prove
their excellency, but the title of Judicial? what is wisdoms other name but
Judgment? for Judgment is wisdom: who able with the wings of reason to mount
his soul into the pitch of this meditation, and is not covetous of his time,
and repines not that nature has made him so weak, as to satisfy her
weakness, he must often be carried from his quest, but who alienates his
mind with the houlding other things more precious, how does he drown
himself in perils and dangers? If the very name inamours thee not, what
would thou have that she yeeldes not? honor, wealth, happiness, dominion?
why all these are in her, what can merit honor, but judgment? wealth thou
desire but for need, but having judgment, thou need not wealth,
happiness is judgments, for she never knew misfortune, having her, thou have
dominion over the world, for Kings command but bodies, but the minds of all
that are not judicial, shall be thy subjects, and lic prostraite before thee,
but these with Judgment are but like the puppets of children, or pictures
liuelesse, for they are broken with the least blast of the world, if not, by
time, but no time overthrows judgment, she meditates of eternity, and has
already put her possessor in possession of eternity; Though she meddles with
the world, as being of the world, yet so safely, as she cleaues not to it, nor
is not astonished to leave it: Good Archimedes, me thinks I see thy calmness
and contentment, in the midst of the ruins and blood of Syracuse, so busy
about knowledge, as not hearing the clamours, and noyses, not laboring for
fear, but for knowledge and judgment, and when he was interrupted by his
murderers, he asked not life of them, but a little time to finish his
intendment; what a tranquillity of mind was here, how gloriously did he
look through danger and death? It is not pomp nor shining roabes that gives
grace to the body, no, it is the mind that is in the body, who houlds the
preciousnesse of judgment, and whose preciousnesse tells him death and
tortures, and the enmity of Fortune, are not blemishes but graces to him. Who
will have to do with the world, must take as well the storms as sun shines
of the world.

Quid tibi formosa, si non nisi casta placeba^? She is unchaste and inconstant,
and in the end of all thy labors thou shall be forgotten and despised, it is
dangerous to be too skillful in the matters of the world, witness the Athenian
Ostrocisme, where to be higher then the rest in virtue, was expulsion, witness
all times, all states, where the noblest have begun with praises, and ended
which disgrace and banishment, come thou to the top of promotion, and dyest
thou there, what is thy gain? the ages after takes no knowledge of thy riches
and magnificence, but of thy virtues, not of thy rewards but deserts, Vbi nunc
fidelis ossa Eabritii manent? he attaind to places hie, his fame was great, yet
his temperance in refusing Pyrrhus gift is his best and most lasting suit, had
not Cato dyed in the defense of his country and common wealth, his fame had
dyed with his body, thus are the actions of the world full of dangers, and
without judgment, of destruction. But come to the managing of a state with
judgment and thou can not be thrown, what though thou see examples of
ingratitude, of dangers, of death, these in judgment thou see rather
terrors then dangers thy end is to do good and these letter resisted,
innobles thy intendement, my country gave me life, it is my duty to give it
her again, but what is life in respect of virtue, alas too mean a purchase. I
have a soul whose perfection rests in resisting the childish opinions of the
body and that soul knows it is ignominious to deny a public good for a
private peril, no virtue comes to us pleasingly, but after, come pleases, it
is vices bait to seem sweet at the first taste, the continuance is the virtue
which shows her the child of eternity, and safenes entertaining pleasure,
demonstrates mortality and dust. It is not danger with judgment, what the
world calls danger, the loss of virtue not of life is unhappiness, then for
our country all our endeavors should bend, not because honor and promotion
goes that way, but because it is one of the lessons of virtue, we must not
look after danger and corruption but after the purity of virtue, had Caesar
died when his conquestes and government of the Gauls, made his Country hold
him a true servant, how much more clear and shining had he left his memory
then it is now with his perpetual dictatorship, what might have been virtue,
is now polluted with ambition, and all those virtues that without this might
have been called, fortitude, temperance, liberallity, and patience are now not
these, but counterfaites of this, he was not, but seemed virtuous, for
unspotted virtue calls none virtuous, that have any other end but her self,
howsoever the grosnesse of our sight used rather to colors, then truth, would
persuade virtue to put one a more mixed body, yet thus is virtue, and thus she
may be brought acquainted with our souls though our vile bodily composition
cannot comprehend her, none can tell but they that have felt the many conflicts
the soul indures with the body, whose impurity not tasting the purities of
virtue, draws the natural well inclined parts of the mind into the
unnatural natural affections of the body. In this Caesar questionless* were
more many graces, had they not been disgraced with converting the sweet
abilities of his soul to the bodies gain. B^^ thus a young experience may
produce many examples where the abou^dance of virtues reward ouerwaying men,
has sunck them, for the eyes and tongue of the worst have this enforced
instinct though they do not well, yet must they praise well doers, and in the
midst of thereill, exalt virtue. I think Caesar meant well to his common
wealth so long as his common wealth was his master, but declined when their
power declined to his will, thus between too much and too little, wauers the
life of man, no reward makes him desperate, too much ambitious, but judgment
swimmes between these, and never touches any of these extremities, she labors
for virtue no^ power, she runs without the stop^ either of fear or
covetousness, I wonder at this infection of greatness that it can so blind
virtue, thinks no further then death, and the reasons to overthrow t^is theft
will show them reasonlesse that affect it: neither in number proportion nor
quality, can one equal thousands, what reason is there then he should be
preferred before them, there is justice against it, one cannot withstand
thousands, there is safety against it, and could he want danger, yet he that
wantes not guiltiness is never without the torments of fear and suspicion. Ne
vitima quidem sortis homi^um conspiratione periculo caruit, as he is a man he
wantes them not, but being an ill man, are they not increased? and fame the
roabe of greatness is it not ouer-throwne by this? Yes who sees not, that the
best private performance answers not a mean public, a great deal of petill
and pains of a private soldier ranckes not in men's mouths with a generals
but coming within shot, the least managed Duello carries not the grace of
the having but been at a skirmishe of small moment, he that does but for
himself, though he do well, yet it is no wonder, it may be mentioned
perhaps in a ballad, never in an history.

Fame is not so light, as to sail with a small gale, it must be a wind of
force that mooues her sails, which never is so forcible as when a good action
is good for all. But Caesar robde the world, brought all the proffits of his
commonwealth to be his only, of which, that it was in-iustice all sees, that
it was dangerous he felt, and for fame the spirit of his actions are
commended, the disposing of them, because not hurtful unto us, not exclaymde
against, but ask Judgment, and surely he will condemn him for killing
virtue which ambition if after death we behold them impartially, who would not
choose to be Camillus the sauer of his country, rather then Caesar, the
destroyer of his country, how warm and cherishing to the soul are actions
like Camillus is, what a sweetness comes from the air of such a meditation,
when the other feels as much cruelty inwardly, as he effects outwardly, and
byes a beautiful out side with the tortures of his heart. That corrupt speech
of Caesar's upon Scilla, Scillam nesciuisse literas, qui Dictaturam deposuerit:
Had Scilla out lived Caesar, how well might he have mocked his greedy body,
when in spite of it greatness, it lay entangled and liuelesse in the Senate?
Scilla saw this, and eschewed it, Caesar marked his judgment, and found to
late there was wisdom in moderating power. But all this saues not greatness,
all are tempted, many yield, few hold out, we use power commonly as meat,
not nourishing ourselves, but surfeiting, to please our taste, we ouerlaye our
stomachs, thus we abuse the preciousnesse of things, that it needs no wonder
though there be a frailty and weakness in what we are, and have, for we pull
it upon them and us, with abusing all, this is the odds and preciousnesse of
greatness over meaner fortunes, that by their greatness they may do more
good, virtue in low states lies buried, in high it stands a lost, poor men
may think well, but rich men both think and do well, here is all,
greatness has no other circuit, no other ought be his end, for power is given
him by the incomprehensible greatness, compared to whom his is lest then
nothing, to no other end, that he has, then to support the weakness of men's
fortunes and understanding head to dispatch it, not that he has a body to
consume is his desert, power is not to do wrong, but to punish do^ers of wrong,
and wealth I should hold a burdensome companion, were not liberality a vent,
for were it not for that, it is good for nothing. But this to the hearers
seems rather truth then possible, those thoughts make virtue impossible, vice
works all her doceits with sweetness and laziness, and these catch almost
all dispositions* for where a good disposition resists the former, vice calls
difficulty impossible, and so laziness killes those, that pleasures let go:
but Virtue says* Caronam, at bletae nisi certant, non accipiunt: think but of
the reward of virtue, and the pain is nothing, if thou dyest in the attempt,
honor attends thee to thy grave, honor attends thee, peace attends thee, fame
attends thee; in a word Virtue attends thee, in whom are all the rest, and
more then all, for virtue marries thee ^o heaven. Thus comes greatness to an
excellent periode, without this it comes to destruction; Judgment chooses the
way of Virtue, Opinion of vice, which dissolueth into infamy and repentance,
greatness without judgment, brings forth tyranie, and all the indirect
ascenders to this top, are like Caligula, of whom Suctonius says: Nec seruum
^ellorem vllum* nec deteriorem domi^um fuisse; but greatness counseled by
judgment, has Pater Patria, within which is Justice, Fortitude, Temperance,
and all that makes a state flourish with peace and plenty.

Essay. 38. Of Natures policy.
THe Glass wherein the mind beholds it self, is Nature, there she sees the
beautiful lineaments of her own proportion, and might not mine opinion seem
to digress too much from the world, I would swear there is no life, no
sweetness, no contentment, that intends not this more then any thing, we know
not how much wrong we do our souls with compelling them to be play-fellowes
to the bodies wantonness; I will adventure it, the worst that opinion can do
to me, is but to oppose her self against me, and I fear it not, then thus,
they are childish or beastly courses, that are taken for bodies sake, only that
excellent and divine faculty excepted, that keeps societies in society, that
make many bodies one body, that reconciles the differing and disagreeing
understandings of man, and knits them up in an unity, the preservation of
whole admirable concord, we call policy. This study becomes the most divine
spirits, as long as they are in bodies, (...) so much subject is the soul to
the body, as in confusions and troubles she is troubled, and therefore
Policy producing peace, and peace giving liberty to the souls workings,
government and policy are the destinated and direct objects of the souls
that are yet in bodies. But does not this compel us, from a more divine and
more aspiring inquisition? it does not, for the rules of policy are no where
so truly written, as in the works of nature, to the works of nature is the
furthest journey, that our soul can carry us, as long as she bears the
burden of a body, then under this tutresse, is the best of ^he best
knowledges to be learned, being the instructor of the most excel^ent natural
courses, either active or contemplative.

This Architectres shows the first ground of policy, the society of things
^greeing in kind, this, she has given ^o beasts that have only sense; nay to
her Elements who have only quallities, so may it seem not by discourse nor
excellent grace, but even by a single infusion the meanest, we naturally
thirst after a participating and communicating with things of our own kind,
there is even in all these three kinds, a singular contentment in this, for
beasts whose only pleasure is feeding and the appetite of generation, has
their stomachs increased by the stomachs of the heard, and has females upon
whom to execute the most forcible commandment of natures and their full
pleasure, each Element by the assistaunce of the same, is more able to resist
things Antipatheticall in nature their only care, and man whose voice carries
interpretation, and whose reason fills that voice with meaning, what can he
desire more earnestly then his communicating reason, and by the other faculties
of his constitution to give his reason the force and strength of many. Were it
not thus, it would be a Chaos, for the separation makes a world, which
separation stands by the agreeing and disagreeing of natures. Yet has she
tied the understanding of all things but man, within the compass of their
own constitution; so seek they no further then a particular preservation, in
which both they are contented, and nature served, how admirable is our mothers
wisdom, she has given no creature reason but man, had she to an other, all
her travails should have served for the food of civil wars, such being the
effect of an equal power bent to the obtaining a great dominion: the next is
her skill in preservation, of which, though the most assured gain is hers, yet
is it so commixt with a particular satisfaction, as uncompelled they willingly
perform her commandments; thus should Lords command that would not have
their service slacked, never to imploye any instrument of their will without
giving them an interest of contentment, yet might it be covertly handled,
otherwise it will make them mercenary, the destroyer of love and obedience, and
the bringer in of restinesse and rebelliion, it is to be safeliest done, either
by teaching them the duty of each state, by making them understand the
worthiness of a life that runs directly in his destinated course, or else
with showing them the effects of their labors, and with them comparing the
unhappiness of the actions of disobedience, but natures know not what they
do, and yet do her pleasure, he that can find instruments of the same temper,
is likely to make good work: All the rare and variable actions and forms of
Nature, are tempered and performed only by her four servants the Elements,
she uses no more. A plain demonstration, not the multitude, but the diligence
and discipline brings things to the wished end; though Caesar could call all
his soldiers by their names, yet I doubt whether he were perfect in all their
natures, it could not be, and yet might be, in the course of Arms it bredde no
danger, but when it came to counsel, I believe he would not think their names
assurance good enough; but to speak of the councels of peace, which give all
exterior actions their shape, it is not meet they be many, but selected out of
many, for the soundest councels proceed not from largeness of the company,
but from largest understandings, for them that use many, as servants, not
counselors, it is not so hurtful, yet have they so many windows for
passingers to take it at, and to discover what they do. Nature constitutes but
four, under which number she has reduced all the things of the world, so
ought a politician that inte^ds the keeping the body of government in good
form, to make every creature of his charge belong to one of the ordained
states of his signiory, by which he shall defend his country from idle
straglers, and suppress one of the means of innovation. Out of these four
constituted bodies, has she made all things, there belonges no more to her
whole frame, whose situation and whose number is another lesson, they are
four, so are the different states of a common wealth in her exactest
constitution. The Prince, Nobility, gentry, plebeians natures, agree and
disagree in qualities, the one in respect of their situation, the other of
generation, things altogether like being, as unprofitable as letters without
a vowell, so ought the degrees above mentioned, for were they altogether
contrary there could be no combination, if altogether a like no generation,
no order, nature of hers has given fire the pre-eminence, whose neighbor air
is, and they agree in heat, water is next the air, and they in moystnes,
water with the earth in coldness, the prince with the Nobility in mortality,
the Nobles with the gentry in their refined blood, the gentry with the
Plebeians in subjection, the fire is the most hye, the most worthy, the air
less worthy but behoofefull, the water to be used not using, the earth an
immense and monstrous body, whose worthiness consists only in his quantity.
Such must be the care of law giuers and founders of societies; as their
incorporate body has both there agreeing and disagreeing qualities, by those
agreeing, to keep them in amity, which is always the effect of an equal
interest, even as Princes by alliance seek to assure themselu^es of one
another, by this disagreeing, to have all the sundry employments of a seat,
fitted with managers meet and skillful. After the creation of these four
fellows their employment, the industry of nature, is well seen in her
children, to whom she has expressly forbidden idleness, to keep which precept
she has made need an ouerseer, and corrector of the disobedient, her elements
are continually busied either in composing bodies, or if single in being
assistant to bodies, if they be not thus they suffer a mutation, the most
abhorred thing to their natures. Trees are continually busied in converting the
sweetest of the next adjoining, earth into bows, branches leaves and fruit,
if they do not they dye, beasts have their food to provide, from which if the
desease of lazines or age diuerts them they starve, man the noblest creature is
not so sharply compelled, but by his gift of reason has his choice, which if
he does abuse, he becomes unprofitable, a course much more terrible then the
rest, of this idleness, comes many mischiefs, as first his unprofitableness,
next his ill example, and often it proves worsse, there being none so dangerous
thoughts as those that are bread in this languishing sloth. Dracoes medicine
for this was death, I doubt whether I should condemn it for too sharp, for
that execution disburdened his Country and was likely to cure the behoulders,
but a more gentle medicine might have served as well: beware of that, there
being nothing more dangerous to a state, then to jest with offenders, if you
confess the debt, pay it them, or you leave them worse then you found them,
well, if it must be cruelty, yet it is a pitiful cruelty, and Dracoes laws
very good for the behoulders whatsoever they were for the vndergoers. From
whence nature fetches the stuff of her workmanship, is only from her self,
she has fetched them from the poverty of nothing, and given them a being, a
means to hold them in their duties, for it binds them both by love and fear,
beholding the benefit, gratefulness compels them to acknowledgment, if
dishonest and ungrateful, they are easiliest suppressed, whose obscure
original receives their light not from themselves, but the assistance of
others, but this example must be allayed, before it comes to the practice of
men, otherwise taken, it will prove poison, somewhat there is in it, not
unprofitable, but it must be carefully prepared, for we are not so early as
before the beginnings of things, we have the pleasure of the use, not of the
making, to attempt which, is not without apparent danger, it is not out of the
way, to raise poor fortunes with rich minds, neither will they be
unprofitable if regarded lightly, but if suffered to amount, they be most
dangerous, for as things naturally cold, through force made hot, burn most
ardently, so is there no ambition so violent as the beggars ambition. There are
examples enough of slave and servants, that have stepped between their masters
and death, as many that have aspired to their maisters' authority, here was
the use and abuse of those inferior instruments.

Nature coun^elles with no body but her self, an instance not fit for man,
because the weakness of his understanding needs the force of assistance, but
that they should be few, and selected, is a wise and the nearest imitation
that we can attain unto, the reasons are two, those councels are likelye to
be kept secret, that are committed to a few, it being an infallible precept to
lay a man's estate (if need requires) upon many, his thoughts and weighty
intents upon few, the other reason, there are but few to be found so honest, as
not to abuse this authority converting their counsels to their particular
benefit.

Dumque suo tentat saliente^ pollice ven^^,
Ca^dida per causam brachia saepe tenes.
To counsel is the best office of a friend, but let him be a friend with whom
we counsel, Omnia cum amico delibera, sed de ipso prius. Since we must use
help, let us be sure he is so, to whom we trust, so the discretion by
nothing receives so great a check, the estate so great a loss, the life so
great a danger as by the choice of a dissembler a fool or a coward for our
friend and counselor. Tiberius in his whole course never proved himself
honest, but never a fool, but in his trusting* Neither is this most powerful
Empress lavish in her rewards, she ha^h created things one above another and
given them degrees of pre-eminence, but she corrupts not natures with a
prodigal heaping promotion, upon promotion, for well knows she that the
enforcing things, beyond the limits of their conceptions and essence, wholly
corrupts them, and makes them as unprofitable as age in a strange country. But
this denies not rewards, the food of a mortal goodness; which it must have,
or else it ^ildome lives, but the temper and the right distribution is the
thing that nature teaches us, for in this abundance does the mind surfeit, as
does the body by abundance of meat. She has made nothing without an use, an
advice, fitting high and low, whose cherishing creatures without use, marks
them at the end with an F. or B. to make which imposition to endure easy, she
has more things to set them about, then one, and fitteth dispositions with
taskes answerable to their dispositions, of this I have spoken before, yet is
it so certain an effectresse of things prosperously, as to remember it again
is not superfluous. Having thus constitution her government, she detests
nothing more then monsters, be they never so excellent in some things which she
hates, either because they are not hers but fortunes, and her wisdom and
nature is to hie and excellent to mother that pedlers brattes, or else they are
rebels that in dispite of her authority and skill will break out into the
world and disgrace her cunning, the same reasons ought to make states no less
abhor the monsters of states, practizers of innovation, which whether it
comes from the humor of fame or from the more dangerous of surprising his
country, is to be with all diligence suppressed, bad, if they be not too bad,
customs being more then remedies producing innouations. For in this troubles
the honest mind stands amazed, the seditions that have long waited for such an
opportunity embrace it, wounding the state in many places, whiles her
governors are either feeble through distraction, or their forces bent another
way, by the commandment of passion.

Often time was the Roman common wealth sick of these diseases, fildom cured
of any if salued of one with such a disauantage, as the curious eye of
sedition, found by that how to molest her more dangerously, even as a-troubled
title of land, often times brings forth more with pleading for the right and
showing the title. So apprehensiue and so percing is the wit of man, that
spurred by his will, there is nothing too difficult that he dares not attempt
and perhaps vanquish, such a fury mooues his will, with such subtlety his
reason, wherefore since the will backs ill causes sometimes, and that the
reason is corrupted, by the violence of the will, there is no safety through
this intricate many turnings, but the thread of virtue, whose light is the
only means to lay open these iuglers and workers by stealth. To follow
natures progressions a little further, by this time having laid the foundation
of her goodly building, it is time to illustrate the effects of her excellence,
to arrive at some good end of her travails; nay what is there, but is the
creature of her hand? An excellent happiness, to equal which, though it were
a groundless ambition for us to aspire to, yet as like it as we come, is a
worthy desire, we are well pleased in the attempting things, but things of this
rank effected, to have preserved our country, to have given her good laws,
to have left her good examples, are such things to behold, possesses us with
so ample and eternal joys, as not the imagination, the nearest neighbor to
mortality, to immortal state, cannot think of more divine joys, then is
here ^elte. I wonder not at Licurgus wilful exile, respecting the occasion, it
was an uncertain and dangerous state, that he left his nephew, compared with
the fruition of those thoughts that accompanied his banishment, his
constitutions and ordinances of the Laconian kingdom, in my account far
ouer-valuing, the possession. Of the rest of natures workmanship, though there
be none but full of precious liquor, and that there is yet more then a mortal
imagination can graspe, with that multitude I am confounded, and dare go no
farther then to shut up what has passed my pen, there rests but of her this
then that I dare venture upon; the first how liberally she deals with the
world in her effect, how sparingly in laying open her causes, well knows she
the disposition of man, who spurneth and dispiseth all those benifits that he
understands the reason of, an excellent lesson for souerainty to learn, whose
knowledge fetched from his government rather then person, nourishes and
vphouldes majesty, they being drawn into more beautiful colors, that the
eye seeing not, the imagination performs for her, then those things that are
the ordinary objects of the eye and familiar to our senses. The vphoulding this
miraculous frame, rests in the hands of love and need, which do preserve
all her creatures, which two, are the maine pillars vphoulding her building, by
love her stock is renewed.

Omnibus incu^iens blandum per pectora amorem.
Efficis, vt cupide gener^ti.
By need things disagreeing in nature, are yet kept from proclayming wars
against one another, this need and love though by the effects they may be
parted by a distinction, yet is all our love needy and none that is not
interested in our particular care, how a state ought to apply this, is evident,
by the whole world, it is determined people cannot live without governors,
there is their need, from his justice and true execution of his place
proceeds their love; thus from love and need, proceeds the preservation of
societies. It is all our states to need, and a mutual supplying each others
wants, that makes us complete and full, being otherwise lame and defective,
this must persuade subjects willingly to contribute to the charge of the
Prince, and not look only upon their own charge, but upon his expenses to
defend them from innouations and troubles, this does nature more plainly teach
in the suns drawing up moisture from the earth, which it does not as needing
them, but to give it again to the earth more warm and more fat then she
received it, in the same nature must we esteem Princes impositions, which
return us them with a great increase, and more rich in substance then they
received them, thus does Nature excellently uphold her world, thus excellently
shall these states stand that proceed so impartially and wisely as to imitate
her, for; Ratio est naturae imiratio.

Essay. 39. Of Conceit. To the Lady Withipoll.
EVer your commandments (honorable Lady) are conceited: for by your
commandment I have inquired of conceit, which I find so like yourselfe, as
to resemble it to your self, were a true and quick description: but it is in
you mixed with judgment, without which it often goes, though it often go with
it. That it go without, it makes it differ from you, for you cannot go without
judgment, but I must speak no more of you, I must then speak of perfections
whose want in the world makes imperfect judgments determined commendations,
and due praises, Poetrye or Flattery. But either conceit is two sundry things,
or conceit is abused; for to tuck, and to be stuffed with apish tricks, to
wear green cut upon Yellow and to be a very meriment to the eyes, I have
heard termed conceit: when they are no other but Tailour-like friskes of the
senses, which they have seen, allowed, without asking eouncell even of the
common sense, the warehouse common to beasts, and to men. But the worthies
Conceit leaves posts between the senses, and the fancy, which speedily
convey inttelligence, and are as speedily answered. It is a fruitful land
sowed, and reaped at an instant; it is a quick workman which sends and
receives whatsoever is presented in a time: It is in a word, a fancy well
disposed, not only to her own faculty, but to the abilities of both
neighbors, the common sense and the memory: Her power is doubly set a work in
words, and in deeds. In these she differs from Judgment, not in success,
but ready payment, for where the success is ill, I call it not conceit, but
rashness. Words uttered, turned upon the vtterer, is conceit, when nimbly
like a weapons Artisan, he makes his enemies arms his enemies destruction.
Thus Cicero to the fellow, who to show that his eloquence was mercenarie,
demanded of him what he should give him: any thing (answered he) but a Tart;
for with a Tart it was thought he poisoned his father: this was a pretty
Brickwall, and bounded the slander into his own bosom. There is no such
stillitorie as a quick brain, which refines and makes use of whatsoever comes
within the Pan of his receipt. Thus to Hortensius, who told him he understood no
ridles, and yet says he, thou have a sphinx in thy house: kuowing that Verres,
whose cause he defended, had a little before given him an Iuory sphinx; his
intelligence was good, and his use good: thus does wit whip oppositions, and
outrun his riuals, and manifest the quicknes of his dexterity. Demosthenes
conceit was nothing resty, when being mocked by a thief called Calchas for his
nightwatching, and studying by Lamp-light; Indeed, said he, I know nothing so
contrary to thee, as to see light in men's houses. This tale^t is commonly given
youth to play withal, and it is a pretty gift to begin with. Nature had done
well, if therewith she had taught us the use, which is (as I think) for defense
only, for offensive, it is to offensive, getting enemies beyond the power of
conceit to defend. Besides who knows whither not borrowed, which if it be,
he becomes disgraceful, and ill becoming. To be without the right use is to
be naked, not to have it without study is as unfruitful as a Hargabush making
a full point between the firing and the report. I like that fellow well who
desired the hangman not to fasten the rope about his neck, protesting the
tickling would move him too unmeasurable laughter, I see not how he could have
scarfed his shame more handsomely: his last refuge then was to mock the
hangman, and the rope, and to despise life as a runnagate servant, we have
another English shot as quick as this* one being showed a fair woman, was
asked what he would do if she were in his bed, he answered, I would play the
watchman of Callis, either serve my self, or hire another in my room. It was
quick and ingenious, pleasant, or serious, or between both, do every way
handsomely. It reprehendeth vice as effectually as a sower chiding, or
downright blows, and yet is wrapped up finely, is gilt, and looks sweet. So
Archelaus to a prattling Barbor, that asked him how he would be trimmed, he
answered, silently: this was for both parts better, then plainly to have bid
him hold his peace. The wantonness of abundance mingles sharp things with
our meats, and when we have no stomach, makes a counterfeit stomach, giving
a sharpness like the humor of appetite: Thus is the abundance of words
made not distasting, with giving the apprehensions of the auditories unexpected
acutenes, and meeting with the thrust of a jest, thrusts it back upon the
iester. In the times of danger, conceit has a much brauer luster, it
manifests a mind not wholely taken up with pain, or with peril. Thus Pompey
advised by his Physician to eat Thrushes, and no man having any but Lucullus,
what (says he) cannot Pompey live without Lucullus Thrushes. A slave being
racked to accuse Neroes wife of dishonesty, stoutly answered, that her part
capable of committing that crime, was much more honest then the mouths of her
enemies: there was an honorable mind in the body of that flaue: and if ever
the Pythagorean Metempsychosis had any color, the soul of this slave did
surely belong to some worthy personage, which held it first excellency in
despite of Fortune and opinion. Now to the quickness of deeds, which seems
to be the Hatte suitable to this Nightcap. This never is without virtue;
Fortitude must be here as well as wit, otherwise fear will turn wit into
fear. From Hanniball may be had more of these patterns, then from any one
within the compass of my memory. As his deluding the Roman army with Oxen
carrying fire-linckes on their heads, whose strangeness in the night
astonished his enemies, and made way for him to escape, being before
encompassed in a straight. It was then a stratagem of great wit, and is now for
all the age worthy of memory. His attempt to make use of the slain Consuls
seal of Arms, was not unworthy though unfruitful. His beginning of his
wars in Italy, to remove them out of his own confines was an Act of a
judicial Senator: but this I think was put in practice upon great
aduisement: these other no sooner thought upon, but done, are excellent armours
against danger. Fear is content to have his throat cut, so he see it not,
and at the approache of his enemy turns his back, because his back has no
eyes to behold danger, he lurkes, and couers his bloodlesse face to keep it
warm: but to meet danger half way, and in the mean time to devise to shun,
nor to run from it, becomes valor and resolution. You know now (Lady) what I
think of Conceit, and I know that you are able to touch it with a sweeter
stroke: may heaviness presses it down with a clacking rather then with a
sounding, yet because I am obedient, let me have the censure not utterly void
of good.

Essay. 40. Of Counsel.
Counsels part, is Cassandraes part.

Vatem voluit frustrae sane me esse Deus;
Qua^do ante clade^, sum numerata Insana,
Calamit ate accepta, nunc sapiens vocor.
The trap of our first parents, was licourishnesse: and all our calamities are
licourishnesse, not enduring wholesomnesse without sweetness. All senses have
taste, and senses make all things distasting, that meet not the Taste with a
present satisfaction and sweetness. Advice fitteth friend to friend:
counsel counsailours to states, the first private, the other public both
unhappy since commonly Prophets with our profit. Chauce chalegeth
vnpremeditated actions; what more tirannous? since it is seldom with safety:
if with safety, the cause hers, not ours. Then must we admit counsel, but
shall we admit her without hearing? shall we hear, and not believe? or
believing, not follow? we had better not have gone thus far, then to have
turned again: but reason inforceth our voyage, then let constancy continue
it: where reason is at the beginning, and resolution in the midst, praise
stands with the crown of victory at the conclusion, counsel then vphouldes
states, and to counsel, and be counseled, fittes a^ statesman. Cottages may
be built without modells, not palaces: the Inhabiters of Cottages need no
long reuoluing their intendmentes* but the other that cannot call back the
stone cast, ought by praemeditation to divine of the resting place. The first
determination of a man meet to be a statesman should be (as I think) not to
sue* nor to intrude himself in to employment: we should say as M. Cato said
for not erecting his statue: Malo, ^^quit, queri cur ^tatus mihi nulla posita
si^, quam cur su. To have the ability is sufficient: to thirst after the other
cannot be without either an itching of fame, or thirst of covetousness, both
turning their inquisito^ into vice but both supporters of his state, if seeking
him. It is true our country seeks only profit, and gives praise to the cause
of her profit, but it is due after the harvest, neither at the sowing, nor
reaping. Virtuous experience can relate, that had is to be returned to our
country, obtained reputation giving that strength to the obtainer not for his
own particular, but that he may have the more force to attempt, and execute
the dissignes of his country. Reputation, wealth, wisdom* strength, must be
employed as Gerion did his many lims, to be at the direction of his mind, so
these blessing to serve, and obey the common wealth, but called. As natural
Philosophy commaundes Moral to search al before they come in her sight, and to
cleanse them of all the spots, and deformities of licentious affections, leaft
their corruption corrupt the purity, and profoundnes of her knowledge: so an
admitted common wealths man must turn all his affections to advance the
state, he may love a friend, cherish his children, with duty honor his
parents, when these appear in his private common wealth: but to assist, or
prefer the^ without the approbatio^ of justice against his country, is
intolerable, what does this particular, but breed a dispense? what is the
death of a state, but this dispersion? If you do it, why not he, and so they?
who measure equally measures to himself, and others equally: as Gods to Pi^^
Vtilissim^^ (...) brenissimus, b^^ar^m (...) l^^umque ^eru^ delectus) eogitare
gold aut riolueris sub also Principe, ade vol^^^ie, Our country must have all*
the other private respected must be weighed down by this general. Na^^ (...)
^eos, sed^ame plus Patriam, says one. I remember not the colors of a Roman
History, but the body of it I hold. It was a son being consul, made his
Father (according to the custom) appear before him to declare, that he had
not been unprofitable to his country, he came accompanied, all the rest
dismounted as soon as they came in the Consuls presence, his Father did not,
he forced him, for which his father blessed, and Rissed him he was a Father
worthy of such a son, and they both worthy of their country. Pericles
meditation becomes a Judicial statesman Aoerce Pericles Am^^^^, Libe^is
Imperas^^ Graecis imperas* Ciuibus Atheniensibus Imperas^^. Suits from friends
should be hard like strangers, if they prejudice the common wealth: Ones gain
may be a general loss, which is unequal, and unjust. Epaminondas answer to
P^lopidas upon such a suit became Epaminondas, Huius modi beneficia Pelopida
Scortis, non Ducibus conuenit vt praestentur. As for this, so for the contrary
of this. Nullus Ciuis est numerandies bostis. Hatred in general is to be
redeemed as the mad-dog of humanity, It looks as ill fauoredly as the rags,
and yet his deeds are more furious, and more dangerous. Innumerable are the
examples of States, and Cities burnt to Ashes, and oblivion by these
particular Chimneyes, by Marius and Sylla, the Romans state lost her
sturrops; by Caesar, and Pompey was cast out of the Saddle. Here factions (the
Plaguesores of a common wealth have their original, which if they kill not,
yet at the best are so ill, as to make all the fu^^our^ gathered about this
infection to feed the infection, and to run out their force at one head. It
was numbered among Scipioes capital crimes his not inuiting his College
Mum^^us to the feast he made at his dedication of the Temple of Hercules: and
rightly, for though our weakness cannot restrain this natural unnatural
affection, yet should it be so limmed, as to spend the whole force privately,
and in public matters to think only of loving, and laboring for our
country.

The danger of letting in one of these affections (though the disturbaunce of
all often happens by this one) is not all, for that opens the gate of others:
affection lets in partiallitie, Partiallity procures hate, Hate murder; the
conscience thus stained feels not other spots, and then disdain, and pride,
and covetousness are accounted venial, and pettytrespasses.

This covetousness made Liturgus Iron money of little value, and of great
bigness, this covetousness brings a popular famine, and private surfeit, this
sponge sucketh dry the commerce of societies, from whence have popular mutinies
received either color or truth, but from the oppression of the mighty? life
is given by the giver of life to none so unequally, as it shall be a pain to
live: neither riches to any, by them to suppress, and make slaves of their
countrymen who sees impartially the life of bleare-eyde misery already
possessed of more then his life is able to manage, sinking life, a ship
ouer-ballasted in the midst of the Ocean, and yet dry and thirsty, and
would not with the Poet over burdened, with a few talente^ cast away his
disquietnesse, and shame? Themistacles Actions makes a brave distinction
between a man innobled by the employment of a great place and a life dedicated
to it self* such a one was with him, when passing by the wind fall of a great
bickering, he espied a dead body richly adorned he passed by, but called to his
companion* Toll haec inquit, non eni^ tu, Themistacles es: He could not stoop
so low, as to gather gold out of blood and dirt: but he stoopes lower that
pluckes it from the living: these carcases had no need, yet Themistacles
refrained for his own sake, because he was Themistacles, but from the living,
it is a double Theft, robbing himself of honor, the other of the means of
life. With covetousness gooth pride, and meltes covetousness, he draws his
unmeasurable store, into a meditation of his store and d^inkesl^^ which
digested; turns all into pride, fully humor which loves admiration and
procures laughter, looks in the glass for beauties, and in the mean time is
collied on the back with scoffs and reproaches. It is no where safe, for it
above decision, it is surprised by secret conspiracies. What danger is there
to which this affection is not subject? If he be a Prince, it mines the love
of his people, and their fear only is left, which spurred by pride, turns
into desperation, and ends with the life of either Prince or subjects. If he
be a Statesman, he draws the power both of Prince and subject upon him, making
the Prince jealous, the subjects cruel. If it be a free state, (it resembled)
tyranny, and is most hateful, P^rsin Cu^itae^e parentium quam Imperantium^
amplior est) he cannot live. Generally for all those things, which looking
pleasinglie upon us may procure pride? let us allaye it with thinking of (...)
errors and our infirmities, which (...) all mortal men fa^^e surpass the
number of his good deeds. If commendations follow us, let us say like Pubon
that killed (...), D^us hoc, m^^^s^ue m^a per perpetruate. These beaten back,
irmite their contraries, and as these ouerwhelme their possessour with dangers
and reproaches: so do these virtues or the contrary crown their intertainer
with safety and praise. Who undertakes to stere in the Bark of government,
must not end with the theoricall part of knowledge, but must continually employ
himself in shunning or repairing the ruins or threatenings of rocks and
tempests, and showldes.

Acco re aliri a'lle port, altri all mura.
Il Re va interno, el tutto vea, e cura.
If outward invasions busy not a Statesman, the diseases of peace will
imploye him: every way must his fight be cast, every way must his thoughts
travail in discoueries, and if there be a time of rest, it must not be of
idleness, for his precepts to his countrymen must prohibit that, and to
incline to actions by himself, thought unlawful, slanders his government
with weakness and follye.

Neque Poeta bonus est, qui prater numeros canit, neque qui, praeter leges
indulges, bonus Magisttalus. So must all his actions be governed, that his
example may be a lining law, and those dead ones speak no more then he
performs.

He must moderate all his actions, and draw even his lightest affairs into a
lawful circular course. (...) non tantum dictorum public, and factoris ab
iis, qui rem publicam gerunt, reposo^^^tur rations, veru^, etiu^ cana little,
cubal^^, ^^pti^e, ludicra, and s^rig Acti^. When happiness and a freedom of
mind is it to be able with the Tribune Drusus, whose house partly lay open to
the sight of his neighbors, when being offered by a workman for five Talents
to have it closed, he offered ten to have it laid open to the view of all
eyes, that the world might see his whole life, and that vice might be driven
from that flattery to think others do as ill, but not known, because
concealed. Thus counsel says to me, and I believe her, thinking (though with
the mist of knowledge unexperienced) that she speaks truly. That I am a man,
I am bound to do something; that a Christian, some thing not ill: so I think
of this, in respect of my purpose, not in my purposes performance. It is called
madness to talk to ones self, and meditation goes with so fainte a press
in my brain, that it is soon wiped out. I write therefore to my self, and my
self proffites by my writing: If a strange eye carries it to a strangers
judgment, and he proffits not by it, I am not sorry nor displeased, for I
meant it only to my self.

Essay. 41. Of Sorrow.
THe most acceptable blessing that ever I had, was a Son, in whose time of
growing meet to see the world, I examined often how to fit my self for his
approache. I durst not but smile, and seem joyful, for fear of a Mid-wifes
censure, with whom Dame Nature being also a Gossip, conspired to make me
joyful: I was indeed; but yet reason taught me, that extremities toss the
life of man in uncertainties, and joy immoderately swallowed, surfets, and the
surfeit turns into sorrow. Thus have I determined of all things here, being
half a ^^rbonia concerning these Terrene business, in my opinion holding
opinion the mother of joy and fortune. What is mortal, is mutable, and our
joys here, often yield their place to sorrow, and sorrow to joy.

Eor^em hic nunc latam ducit quandogue malign^m. Why then do we determine
these pricelesse things, at so inesti^^^^ a rate as to disturb the whole life,
and crase the body for these mutabilities? how far does a farmers policy
exceed all other politikes? what does he with a farm that he holds from
year to year, but make his use of it, and drive it? what does he possessing
one but for a few years but the same? the fee-simple, or many lives; shall
persuade him to build, and to handsome it, and husband it, otherwise he
conuerts it to a present proffit, and prepares to be gone tomorrowe. It is
strange to observe the wisdom of man, how much good he knows, and how basely
he uses it: there is hardly a creature borne that is sensible, but (...) full
of principles able to uphold his life in a good and safe estate, did he not
(...) that naked, and apply them to baser uses, as taking care for cuffes, and
for going wool-ward. Who loves colors (...) buys them, but inquires if they
will hold? and that they will he takes for their best quallity, but himself
never blames, nor priseth himself the less, though he changes and loses
color and quality in every instant. He that never knew Tailours measure, and
caries his body about for a pattern, yet he will not buy until he has fitted
himself, and examined the stuffes continuance yet he will intertaine giddy
affections, buy them, and wear them, though neither fit, nor lasting. Masters
cry out on their servants if they be idle, and call them unprofitable: but
masters are bound in straighter bands to themselves and to their country, and
yet to both they are content to be idle and unprofitable. Thus in all lives,
and in all men, may be found precepts able to advise them, but they wilfully,
or negligently (...) the right application ^^ this we ^^ght to sorrow, but we
abuse sorrow, and ^^ue her for that is nothing worth. Who knows not our naked
beginning voice even of strength and reason to d^^end^ na^^ (...) time contend
us with reason, and shall we ill the strength of that lunl^^^ for mo^^^
^^albo^basorts? what is this bar to be more insensible, then before we had
sense? I am sure man would la^^^as an^^e^^^re, that, his companions of the
earth should excel him in immortality, his richest blessing are they made fit
do accompany his ^^^ns^^ofinesse, and will he yet be sorrowful and angry this
passes the way wardnesse of children. Trees have then spring, and fall, yet
live in both, without the torment of unreasonable joy; or sorrow each
elementary substance suffers a dissolution, and willingly obeyes nature, she
having given them a secret instinct to obey their creator, and even of their
own accord they hasten out to let others in, and are careful to uphold the
workmanship of her miraculous frame. Why then are we crowned with reason, and
are excelled by the reasonlesse creatures? have we the Armor of hope to
defend us from despair, the stillitory of reasonable discourse showing us both
the dregs and Quintessence of all things? and in spite of these assistances,
and odds, shall we be overcome by beasts and trees, and stones?

Cossa, ^c respice mala caeterorum,
Ira fe^ es ru^ leuius.
If there be no remedy let us thus appease our bewaylings, and sorrows, but
rather if I could, I would withstand this effemiuate opinion, with a shield
hammered out of resolution. If it be my only desteny to be poor, and
deformed, can I repeal the decree of the fates with tears? No, no more then
trees in Autumn recall the spring with shedding their leaves: if it be the
work of chance, I will overcome chance with immovable embrasing her enmity.
Sertorius used Fortune bravely in the loss of his eye: others, says he, leave
their marks and crowns of glory at home for loosing, but I have mine still
on, I wear it, it withers not, I cannot loose it: who likes not this better
then bewailings, and tears, he has untuned ears, and bleare eyes. I do not
think but Fortune wished she had rather tried to melt him with smiles, and
dandlings, then to have hardened him with her frowns. Thus may we convert
those things which we call mishaps into blessings, pulling the sting out of
Fortunes tail, and enforcing her to be our servant. If she power wealth, and
honor, let us use them to uphold our honor, and profit our country; but if
she kick, nettle her again with despising her power, making the rain of her
afflictions wash the secret spots of our soul, and outwardly be a soil to
our patience and constancy. Man, if you will end there, excels not other
creatures, but man's preheminencie is granted him for his discretion, which
abused and defaced by the use, his evidence gone, his jurisdiction is gone, and
his definition must be, a creature with two legs made long-wayes. Man knows
he is mortal, and that what he has; is transitory: he is vnha^py that is not
armed against the turnings of the world, with the experience of the turnings of
the world.

Ad cuncta non genuit t^ Agamemnois prospera,
Atreus, dolenau^; and gaudendu^ inuice^tibi,
Es namque mortalis genitus.
If he know this, and will weep, is he not worthy to have another stand by and
laugh at him? whither can knowledge go but hither? where is she profitable but
here? He that reads to speak, ends with the commendations of an old wives
tale: he that reads to apply his reading to his own life, is wise: he
pours oil into the lamp that will give him light, the other (...) it without
supplying it, Anoxagoras made good use of his Philosophy, when his sons
death assaulted him, Scieba^ (...) alem me genuissa f^^u^. To know himself,
and the appurtenances to himself is the use of knowledge, and this knowledge
vnmaskes his eyes, and shows him wonders in himself, he becomes in this like
unto God.

Est nosce teipsum, non quide^ ample ^^ctio,
Sed tanta res solus quam nonuit Jupiter.
To know himself, is to know before hand what may happen to himself, so shall
he in despite of the apparitions of the world, stand immovable: so shall he
not be cosined by expectation: so shall he not be seduced to think her
overthrow his, but catch the Poets description and crown himself with it;
Virtute praedui, and sapientis est viri,
Non in rebus ouris in Diuos fremere.


This life is like a continual battle, and yet in battles men are prepared
better to endure what may happen: the loss of a friend there, is not his life,
but of honor, this is accounted loss, and lamented, not that: He that dies in
a rank strikes not his next neighbor with terror, nor does he think death
calls him, though he be at his elbow, an overthrow they seek to recover by
overthrowing, not lamenting, and bravely they make resistance and resolution
supplye the place of all other affections. Thus I think every morning, I see
no sooner day, but I think that light will discover some assault, and with the
Poet; Mando a cantar la matiulina tromba.

Essay. 42. Of Solitariness and Company.
HOw true a principle of virtue is it, that crossing our appetite is the way of
virtue? Appetite is the child of the senses, and senseless when he uses but
his parents counsel: how true a testimony is this Axiom of our vile
inclinations, when it needs not the exception of good desires, for all our
desires ate naught. Thus has solitariness fallen into knowledge, because
speech and reason love traffic and exercise, the former of which is vnecchoed
without company, the last naked, for reason is made forcible by exercise.
Societies sweeten the bitterness of life, for life without society is Viuere,
non been viuere: the objection of calamities attending it as well as
happiness, is resisted by the whole understanding of man, for what knows he
that is not answered with a contrary? that excellent supernatural blessing of
man, his Creator, his God, has a contrary, the curse, the pitche of his
extreme danger, and peril: lower, what goodness is without temptations? what
happiness not possible to be transformed to her contrary? who then seeks
shelter in a cave, outwardly imbalmeth his malady which cures, Physic says
he, does but leasurely cure, it delays, not ends his wars, for he caries with
him a body, which like childrens fancies will wheresoever find sportes, and
delights. The life of contemplation at once bearing the functions, and
pleasures of the body, makes the body strive for employment, helps not that it
is wholly encompassed, for it makes it the more furious, as when one dissenting
eleme^t imbraceth another, the stricter his kindness, the more violent the
others rage. Thus holiness sequestered, sequestring the bodies exercise, makes
it fly to the meditation of this life, will be glorious, and admirable in the
world. He must think, and those thoughts come through his body, and there are
polluted with vainglory, or hypocrisy, or some other such malady incident to
this retired course. If from the scorn of the world, or the being scorned by
the world, if from the despair of not being greatest, we can feed upon
nothing but extremities, and therefore will be least: if from losses, or a
fear of loosing, we are not eased of the cares and danger of the world* but
rather ingrosse a map of her miseries, and differ from the other life only in
desperation: for we steal the devouring monsters of despair, self-love,
disdain, and scorn, into a corner, and there sacrifice ourselves unto their
insatiate appetites, past danger, for hope here cannot hope of rescue, unknown
diseases being diseases incurable. For secular fortunes this cloystered life
is not tolerable, it resists reason and goodness, which both join in guiding
us to society, and the common good, which has need of the worst of us, even
of those whose hands are their best parts: for execution sets more a work
then direction. There is a last time of life, when decrepitnesse kills
experience, and when age has not only set up his marks of triumph, of
wrinkles, and gray hairs, but plays the Prologue of death, and draws the
Curtain not only before our senses, but even before meditation; It is then
time to give that life leave to think only of death, and to prepare for his
last journey. Thus have many kings wilfully deposed themselves, for which
power, and which performance, I think they were more bound to God, then for
making them kings. But a life in the strength of mind and body, commits
sacrilege to sequester it self from the world, for he for his country is his
mother) In a word he declines to his worst part, for beasts live so, and
leaves the imitation of his diuinest father, whose greatness is goodness, and
whose goodness is excellent, because stretching the arms of his goodness to
the embracing of all man kind. Shall Trees become equal to men? becoming
thus, they become equal: Trees have for their object, themselves, themselves
has solitariness: can the blessing of humane souls look higher and
worthier, and shall they crop themselves lower, and match equally those, over
whom they have superiority? nobility uses mean fortunes for servants, not
companions, if it do, it does basely: what do these then that deprive
themselves of greatness to become bare? our preaciousnes is reason, reasons
servant is speech, which is the messenger of reason, and reasons meditation:
these are the cement of societies, to bear these with solitarines is to
contend with nature for wisdom who has abilities, and uses the^ not, as some
creatures strength, others horns what reckon we them but brutish, and
reasonles? But man has more excellent orname^tes, and the use of them is
society, and company, which he must embrace, it being impious to give an
example of leaving the word desolate. He must, so must he eat, and from eating
come surffers as well as health, from company corruption, as well as purity: the
neighborhood of these poisons to these wholesome things I should lament, were
not reason given us to cut them a sunder, and to choose wisely: I do not in
this choice compel, or wish men to covet thronges or multitudes, to hunt
dry-foote after feasts, and assemblies, such are to be eschewed, their very
smell and noise without their familiarity, being dangerous, and offensive. I
think Senecaes sentence of his never coming among men, but he went home a
worse man then when he came out, leueld at these flocks. But to make his
choice of company, to use speech with the^ able to assure himself, and better
them (for as Faces differ, so temperatures, and from their temperatures comes
variety of reasons) becomes wisdom. Every head begets thoughts indifferent,
even our Mechanic Trades, as well as Arts witness it, for the lights of
these came not from one lamp: our proportions, and casts are to little to
comprehend the universal knowledge of things: therefore one helps another with
the conference of one another: minds traffic like bodies, a Hat for a Ruff,
the Shoemaker with the Tailour. To become wife, conference is the means, to
become temperate, example: we must call out men expert in these, and accompany
them: we are not as the Be, the sweetness of whose nature makes things of
another nature sweet: alas, no: It must be good we receive, and then perhaps
we will make it better, but if ill, we make it worse. To be known much, to be
saluted much, to be in presses much is not the way of wisdom Clamours, and
salutations distract us: our senses receive singly, we hear not two tales at
once, at once we see but one thing, the Brain ioynes, and dilates after. Thus
must we use company for conference, and conference to be enriched by seldom
happens among multitudes. Except in an Army, and a counsel chamber, I would
proportion my number; not above five: in these before recited where there are
most, there are blows where fewest, wisdom I am not much blown, nor stirred
with the vulgar opinion, and yet I find an aptnes in my self, to eschew their
opinion. If I were so great as Alexander, to prohibit every man but Lisippus
to proportion me, it were well then to go so naked, as to be commonly known
and consured: for did none but the skillful determine me, I should be sure
their reprehension were truth, and I would amend, or prosecute accordingly ^
but when he that stoopes worse well tax my leaning forward, and dwarfes deride
them that are not tall, what is better then to avoid coming within their reach,
by priuatenesse? But this leanes to affection, so much priuatnesse is good, as
betters an ability to become public. I should not know the Sun from a petty
star, did he not warm me, and light me, nor finde^ distinction between
worthiness, and baseness, did not worthiness like the Sun direct
baseness, and spread it self to comfort, and give life to the darkness of
ignorance. Our eye gives the Sun circumference but the circle of a head, and
our heads circumference differs not inuch, in their quallities near a kin: for
as the one lighte^s the steps, the other does the actions. The Sun shows us
where to step, the head wherefore: with their littlenes they command the most
immense, and monstrous things, with their littleness assist the mightiest,
and end so excellently as to have a care of the common good: the Sun not
carrying his Lantern for himself but for the world, the head not like a
limme, or a Sense tending only that, but the whole bodies preservation is his
care. How excellent would the Emperor Titus have been, had he been so
blessed as to have known divinity, that in his natural inclination, and
Morrall understanding suffered no^ time to slide away without the memory of
some good deeds, not a day? how rigorously do these days of his, look upon
our days where at the very last day to dispose some things to a good use is
wondered at, but company was my Argument, not whether the use of company, and
all things else should tend. So well have Tailours handled themselves, as we
will draw from them the censure of men, by his clothes we think to make a
conjecture come near truth, if not by them by his companions undoubtedly we
may, for Dulce quidam dulcise adiunxit omeraque amoris.
Acre pe^inde acri accessit, salsum quoque salso.


He dyed not long since, that held it an excellent testimony of wisdom to
keep no unprofitable servant, counting them unprofitable that eat without
bringing in, it paid his opinion ritchly, for he dyed rich, If this prove so
well, and proving well, ought to be constantly maintained, how respective
ought we to be of our companions? the former were but the ministers of of our
bodies, but these converse with our minds, upon whom by the help of custom
they cast either gra^es, or deformities. They must be then able to batter us:
we make choice of our dwelling places by the sweetness of the Air, which if
ill, we suck in diseases: so if our company ill, vices, and imperfections.
Those that we continue with, I would have firm, and good, honest, and of
understanding, for if their water be a standing poole without a spring, they
may be drunk dry* and then they are Idle, and unprofitable. But for others,
let them bring what they will with them, it is no matter, sometime to see ill,
is not without use (for ill is goodness folly:) I know behavior by seeing
clownes mock behavior: I know folly by wisdom, and wisdom by folly, as
small drink, by strong, strong by small. Among these, use the seamans plummet,
sound them, see where their best lies, and follow that argument: it is good for
both parts, for every man loves to talk in his own element and his talking
there yields most profit to the hearer. I would hear speak no more then would
bring on speech, for silence among strangers is safe besides. Observation
loves not to speak, but to hear, and from observation, comes experience, and
wisdom. To the company and time we must lend respect, for high fortunes love
not to be asked questions by inferiors, but to hear: If content, it is where
the interrogatories may pull out threads of their own praises. Age loves it
well, disburthening the memory of times past: O Nestor Neleiade, tu dicito
verum,
A rides vbi mortuus armipotens Agamemnon,
Et Menelaus vbi fuit, Argis anin Achiuis.


Where wisdom holds out with age, and memory has not unthriftily spent her
commings in upon time, the conversation of age is the wisest book: of these I
have never in my life seen any comparable to one, for commonly they are
obstinate and morose, and their discourse is mingled with as much bad, as good;
but contrary is this, having the experience and the wisdom of 80. years and
upward, and yet a body more healthful then many of half his years, so wise,
and so temperate; so able, and so willing to instruct his friends, that I never
am with him, but I come from him stronger in understanding, then when I went,
so does his advise moderate my youth, his knowledge melt my ignorance, ending
shortly, of him I may truly say; Huc omnes pariter venite capti,
Quos fallax ligat improbis Cate^is
Terrenas habitans Libido mentes.
Hie eri^ nobis requies Laborum,
Hic portus placida manens quiet,
Hoc patens vnum miseris Asylum.


To proffit by company must come from our selves: our questions is the fire
which draws out either the quintessence, or the dregs of things. Who with a
Trauailer asks what sport is most used in foreign countries, whether
Hawking, or Hunting, Baloone, or Tennis, pulle but more corruption upon
himself.

-- magisque caecas
In suos condunt animos tenebras.
Who with an Ambassador, talks rather of their women, and their attire, the^
of their natures, force, revenues, merchandise, and such like, what is his
gain but the mark of an idiot? what his knowledge, but Tailour-like, and
light? Alexander in his childhood, entertayning the Persian Ambassadors, may
instruct the ripest years, at that time his questions tended to the inuading,
and conquering the world: for he asked of their havens, their passages, and
distances between place, and place, of the power of their king, of his
conversation with his friends, and his enemies: out of this more certainly,
then for the managing of Bucephalus might his father have prophesied, that the
confines of macedon were to narrow for him. Me thinks this childhood of
Alexanders withstandeth the right of fortune to any of his enterprises: for he
began with wisdom, and was worthy to end with honor. She has to do
rather with people that have success in their actions, without being able to
produce causes deserving it, like starte up gentlemen, gentlemen without a
pedigree: but for his co^quests, his infancy showed, he would deceive them,
beginning to speak, and to speak wisely almost at an instant. The use of
things makes things worth the use, and company by the use is an excellent
instructour, and solitarines moderatly taken, makes us fit for company; our
whole life is a warfare, for all things have co^traries, though in appearance
they often look alike. Goodness, and good uses come to us hardly, for vice
chalengeth us as aunciently hers, and resistes virtue with persuasions, and
pleasures, to whom if thou yeeldest; Iaecebis extincta, et non vlla memori^
Erit tui.


But resisting, and resisting vanquishing, what honor, or reward is there,
that is not ours? If I should speak only of wisdom, were it not well? but
it shall have more, the addition of divine wisdom; of a wisdom able to
gather the best fruits of the world, without being corrupted by the world:
of a wisdom defending the conscience from wounds and spots: of a wisdom
before whom vanity shall vanishe, and the apparitions of Pomp, and
glittering Pride, shall be seen in their right natures ridiculous, and
abominable: of a wisdom that being a River belonging to the Ocean of
wisdom, to that Ocean shall again yield her streams: she shall yield with
joy, not with fear, but a loving fear, and having performed the circle of
nature, shall rest in the Center of eternal perfection.

Essay. 43. Of Vanity.
IT troubles me not to see the light professions of Dauncers and Tumblers cast
their behauiours and bodies into unused forms, nor to hear tooth-drawers, or
Rat-catchers, swear themselves the best in the world in their professions: I
knew this before, upon the sight of his Banner I knew him guilty, and it is
not amiss: when nature made minds conformable to their fortunes, she was
about none of the least, nor worst of her mysteries. But nobility, and
professors of noble actions, how crooked and deformed make they their minds,
with rancking with these bond men of their senses? I know we are the sons of
a fallen father, but mercy has helped us up again, and though we be
originallie sinful, we may be eternally happy: we need not still buy Apples,
we paid too dearly already for that purchase. But as a drunken night makes a
mistie morning; so are our knowledges still taking one thing for another, and
inquiring what will look fair, not what will last. Can we see, and yet do we
not see, that vanity is nothing but like a single guilt, which a shower
transformeth to dirt or rust? making shift^like dauncers, that devise changes
in their daunces, calling them by another name, because the singles or the
doubles differ. Vanity in factions in the very Index of vanity, for all that
she does, is but with her rotten body to put on a new form. I account them
more daungerously ill that are drunk with vanity, then those with wine: for a
morning makes one himself, but the other is hardly ransomed with years, but
is ever staggering, and falling, either in his words, clothes, or actions.
Here am I fallen into a bottomless pit, indeed past either the nature of an
Essay, or my writing, which agree in a short touching of things, rather then in
an histories constancy, I bait rather then dwell in the^; but this anatomized
will make Folio volumes look less then Primmers. Pull man from vanity, and he
is like Birds that are nothing but Feathers. The incomprehensible soul of
Heaven, of whom we are but drops, yet that we came from him, we hold that
preciousnesse, that suddenly our minds can draw the picture of the bodies
passages, and so fruitefully as to run division upon it: then is it possible
to overtake vanity spurred by the mind, since horse and rider run so fast,
so quick, and so far? A little though I will follow it to the descrying these
three, words, clothes, and actions, the depth of which I would be loath to be
able to reach, for I should then be accessory to too much vanity. Some I have,
which being a kin to more, bringes me acquainted with more. I have tasted of
more then I have digested: for at twenty years old, I vomited a great deal
that I drunk at 19. and some new I have, of which this Essay is part.

Of words first: for it is one of the first things we do, they are but the
Lackies of reason of which, to send more then will perform the business is
superfluous, me thinks, an esse videatur at the close of a period, is as nice
as a Tumbler ending his tricks with a caper: and Tullies Venit, imo in senatum
venit, moves me no more against Catiline then the first Venit. Me thinks, this
same rethorick the child of words, is but as a pickled Herring to bring on
drink, for his divisions and repetitions are for nothing but to bring his
memory acquainted with his tongue, and to make three works of one. How shall a
man hope to come to an end of their works, when he cannot with two breathes
sail through a Period, and is sometimes grauelled in a Parenthesis? I wonder
how Cicero got the people of Rome tied so fast to his tongue, for which his
matter, no better then his style, he should not persuade me to look upon
him? I make as great difference between Tacitus, Senecaes style, and his, as
musitions between Trenchmore, and and Lachrymae. Me thinks the brain should
dance a Iigge at the hearing a Tullian sound, and sit in counsel when it
hears the other.

But his matter is substantial, and honest, and though he be betrayed among
Pedauntes, and Boys (which he may thank his Style for) yet he is meeter for
greater persons, and sounder judgments. But eloquence (as we take eloquence)
it is of no use, but among such ears as call a Bag-pipe music, it fittes
them, and among them must be used; but among wisemen, it is to distrust their
understandings, loosing time in repetitions, and Tautologies. The virtue of
things is not in their bigness, but quality, and so of reason which wrapped in
a few words has the best tang. Those which are subject to this prodigality,
they should help themselves, as stutterers, by learning to sing, so these by
making verses, whose number ties up words and gives reason liberty, carrying
reason level to the soul, and giving a report out of the mouth, as
Gunpowder from Ordinance. This disease of words let in by Cicero, was not
long after letten out: for Augustus following almost in the fury of the
shower, was feign to arm himself with writing all he meant to speak,
seriously, even his speeches to his wife, which was painful and dangerous: for
if the women had been led by his example, the world sure at this day had
been inhabited by nothing but papers: yet he durst not do otherwise, least
Plus, minusue loqueretur ex tempore, which cannot choose but happen to a tongue
that runs proud after words. But they are worse that send messengers without
an errand, that speak, and yet gelde their speech of meaning, like a foulded
sheet of paper without any infoulding. Thus I have heard speech cast out of a
mouth worse then ridles, which neither speaker nor hearer could interpret. In
the same file are Prouerb-mongers, whose throats are worn like roade-wayes,
with little said is soon amended: It is no halting before a Criple, and such
like: when I hear one of these I look for his dry nursse, for from her arms
he plucked this language. I have liked my patience as much for inducing these
trialls, as for any of her sufferinges: for what can be more contrary to
tunable ears, then to hear this most excellent instrument abused, and to
hear ignorance clap the air with his breath? his lips opening like a purse
without money, and his tongue like a Fencer before a Pageaunt stirring, not
striking: of whom when all is finished may be said.

N^mo tibi dicit dictis quis denique Finis? The tongue is the key of the mind,
the mind the casket, holding all our riches to discover which ordinarily, is
to make another key besides his own to command your own, which makes yours*
another. To discover bright things so often, as may be called wearing them,
soiles them: but to discover all you have, and that all shall prove nothing, is
the most miserable: so does the mediocritye between too much speech, and
silence fit both wisemen, and fools, for the ones ware is to good, the others
to bad.

Me thinks, this same vanity of clothes has done virtue wrong, for we
discry great men as much by their clothes, as actions, which is very improper:
for we allow not houses by their plaistering, and gayness, but by their
rooms, and conueniency. Has it not also weakened our best force, and made us
call in outward helps? for not of our heads, but of our Tailours we ask
aid, where power languisheth with entertaining these baudes of pleasure,
sedition comes in, for when poverty finds her endless labors end with pouring
her gains into excess, mutiny counsels want against this too much plenty:
Thus to these miserable ones speaks a seditious fellow in the Florentine
state, strip us all naked (says he) and you shall perceive no difference,
cloathe us with their garments, and the^ with ours, and doubtless we shall
look like noblemen, they look like vassalls, for it is only poverty, and
riches that makes the disparity beweene us. It is the luster of greatness, and
yet the most dangerous: dangerous, for it feeds envy, dangerous, for it
makes us unapt for any other estate, to which mortality being over subject
should never be unfit to entertain it. Cleopatrats misery looked much more
deformed, because men's memoryes could join her present state, to the state she
put upon her when she would resemble the Goddess Isis: it is like a face used
to look through a ruff, when put in a falling band looks as if looking
through a halter. But this is a common curse upon greatness, that it can
nothing so well defend it self from misfortune, as misfortune from fortunate:
to become great of little indures much better, then to become little of great.
I cannot think it a lawful excuse, to say, the mind still aims upward: no,
the mind of virtue is still it self, and is it self, let fortunes
Arithmeticke be either adding, or substracting: she can join no more earth to
her then the body, and rather would she be rid of that, then receive more. It
is disputable, whether these robes of greatness should at all be allowed, but
to be in them always, without question is disallowed. There are some that can
see, and not judge, know these, it is necessary for greatness to show them
somewhat which they may understand. Now for the light changes of attire, me
thinks they go like a singing catch, some are beginning when others are
ending, others in the midst when another begins again. Let another be
absent from this mint, and without the discipline of a Tailour but a few
months, and at his next appearance his friends shall not know whether he be
a man, or a Ghoast of times past, or a spirit moving a Westminster Statue. The
money-maisters have not engrossed all vanitye, though they have money, for
these people have a change where to be out of fashion is to be banquerupt,
and as the ones bills are protested, so the others discretion. This is not to
have a head, but a hat buttond up on the side: It is no matter what soul, so a
body in fashion, of which though I do despise it enough, yet I wish it no
other mischief then the Painters Shop, where a picture of seven years
since, looks more like an Anticke Dauncer, than a man. But thus shall I be, if
I speak more of them, for I draw them, and Time draws them out of fashion,
and they if I lay any more hold on them, draw me.

But now the motions of man, by reason of his reason called Actions, what an
Eclipse do they suffer with vanities dark body getting between them, and
the clearenesse of reason? what see we almost performed? How nearly soever
resembling virtue, which more deepelye examined would not prove vanity? even
Divinity is not free, for Hypocrisy killes many actions, which without
hypocrisy would be virtues; but I will leave this office to Divines, whose
sightes can better discover the invisible walkings of professors of
good-dooing ill. In secular professions, I hardly see even the grauest go
without touching vanity, performing as much for oste^tations sake, as for
virtues, the observation of which has made me so incredulous, as I believe
light actions, no more the^ I do words: he that protests he loves his country,
and in some adventure of his pursse and pains, shows it, I am never the more
moved to extol him: but when in a breach he defends his country, when he
calls the forces of his scattered countrymen shattered by Fortune, and so out
of hope, as his action may be called the dying with his Country; I will begin
then to trust him: or if like the keeper of a Forte in the old Florentine
dissentions, who being beseiged, and his Castle fired, threw his own children
into the flame, willing them to take those gifts of Fortune, but for his
honor, he held that in his breast, which no shocke of fortune should
overthrow, nor fire melte, Were there not such men to inriche Histories, how
idle a thing were a History? for who is not moved to follow this honorable
pattern? his children were not more inflamed with the fire, then the virtuous
reader, me thinks, should be with his throwing them in the fire: now may we
swear he loved his country, and honor, and from him may distingush between
the lovers of Fame and Virtue: for Fames servants love commendations, but with
all they love to hear it themselves: the other thinks of virtue not of Life.
It needs no wonder though their valures differ, that employ them for fame,
from those for virtue. Were I the servant of Fame, it should be my case, for
her rewards are fainte and lean: the fire nourishing valor, comes from no
outward thing, but from the sweetness of the meditation of virtue: but Fame
thinks not on that, but looks who sees her, and does worse then lovers, that
draw their vigor from their Mistress eyes.

Virtue has Fame, though virtue works not for fame, which me thinks is an
excellent testimony of the divine goodness, when not only his, and human
laws teach it, but even from the example of our familiars may be read good
and bad. Thus prevailed Benedetto Alberti banished by the Florentines, for
after his death they confessed their error, and fetched home his bones, buying
them with solemn pomp, and honor, whom being alive they had persecuted with
slander and reproache. In matters of policy, vanity bears no less swaye,
when from the force of rules and institutions, they think to maintain states.
Policy conducted by virtue, I think the life of Government, without which a
commonwealth can no more live, then a body without a soul: but policy (as
it is commonly taken and used) is no more certain nor profitable, then a
Farmers drawing all his Council from a Calendar.

It raines, of which Philosophy will say, the suns drawing up of moisture
from the earth is the cause: alas* this is the last cause, but the cause of
causes we understand not. Tracke by Philosophy the most impotent natural
thing, for some discentes you may go with it, but the end is, you must leave
it, attributing it to the intelligences, and to the first cause past the
ability of our meditations strength; for we are yet human, they meerelie
divine.

As this, so this policy is coniecturall, and uncertain, full of peril,
never safe. Of men of this kind, Caesar Borgia is a fit example, in whom
was as much wicked wisdom, as I think ever in any, with which he fared
like a Cockboate in a storm, now alofte, now suncke, and still in his
desseignes, rather increased in his sins, then in his power: at last when he
meant one that should not have assisted his rising, he killed the supporter of
his height.

He that will with natural accidents seek to diminishe the divine hand in
this work, does impiously, and is in the way of Atheism: for it is manifest,
God meant to punish, and to teach in this example, that he did it rather by
his ministers, then immediately, explaining his divine wisdom, which enforced
them to run into their own plots laid for others. Not only does heaven
detest this course, but even among men it is vain: though the strength of a
state may be known, their use lies hidden. Every day does the wit of
industry enlarge it self, and devise uses of things, which without the
spirit of Prophecy, or chance, may be without his rules, and then who sees
him not apt to fall into the worste errors? Thus has Artillery put the
ancient Roman and Grecian Histories out of fashion in many things: thus
has the experience of their times, and the wit of these, changed almost the
whole body of government. Who hears of Lycurgus commonwealth not skilled in
Antiquities, and believes it not rather a thing thought, then done? Doubtless
the wit of man is too excellent a thing to be caught in a snare which he
sees lie before him, he goes not always one way: though laws can fadome
the driftes of vice, yet those of wisdom, this policy cannot, for it is
upward, even to heaven is her flight; the other earthly and visible. But I may
in this offend, like some confutours that have ended their pains with making
their cause worse. This paper is yet in my hands, but in whose it may be; I
know not: and howsoe^^^ I mean, others not meaning well, may make help their
ill. It must be God, that in these and all other things must help us, we are
no other then his instruments: when we undertake to be hands, we sin in
presumption: under his conduct things come to a conclusion. Those that prosper
for a while without his counsel, and direction, they are but the Instruments
of his scourge, and prosper no longer then while they are in their executioners
office, we go blind fold without the Sun, can we then go without his license
that made the Sun? We are to impotent to stand without a supporter, our
actions rest in doubt, and our discourse cannot resolve them, but ever we
shall think La tardita noi toglie L'occasione, la celerita ^e for^e. I account
in this list all that account their country ungrateful, or that repine at her
commandments: she cannot be, for thou art for her use, and if thou be
unprofitable, with justice she may put thee away. We must not think she
can do unjustly, it is Arrogance, and partiality, to compare thy knowledge
with hers: our souls are for heaven, our bodies for our Country, and that
excellent Issue of heaven, is destinated to no work upon the earth, but to
vphould this our common mother.

How may we blush that are overcome by heathens and yet have the odds of
divinity? by them, that knew virtues preciousnesse only in fame, when we know
she is curraunt in the world of worlds? this has come from an opinion that
their ignorance produced valor, but this opinion is as full of sin as
follye. Is valor prohibited because murder; and self murder is prohibited?
the building cannot stand where the foundation is false^ they fail in the
definition of fortitude, which is (as all other single virtues are) but the
color of the substanciall body of virtue, which when cast-vpon another
substance is not virtue, though like virtue. These hold that fortitude has
run her perfectest course when she has passed the gates of death, no:
fortitude indures stronger assaults then death. But were it so: Is he that
comes near death valiant? why then, hang Tropheys over the gallows; the
cause, the cause must in all things tell whose child the effect is. He that
fights with fury is not valiant, but he that lendes justice force. Cato dyed in
as fit a time to make his death look nobly as could be, and at the fittest
course of natural reason, it will seem good reason, not to out live his
countries liberty: but had it not been more compassionately done of him, to
have accompanied his country in misery? had it not been more wisely done to
have repriued hope, and to have watched time, when happily by opportunity he
might have ransomed his country? I account not his valor, no more then he that
winkes at the blow of death, the one hiding his eyes because he would not see
death, the other seeking death because he would not feel misery. Cato is not
held by me a pattern of fortitude, he helped not his country by his death: if
to dare dye you think so excellent, the women among the Romans could do it
as well as he: because it is prohibited, we like it, because contrary to our
selfe-louing minds we admire it, and in that respect, (were it not against
divinity) I should allow of it; for he comes nerest virtue that throws
against the bias of his affections Camillus (whom I once mentioned) was a
pattern of fortitude: so was among the Graecians Pelopidas and his companions,
who plotted, and effected the overthrow of tyranny with the adventure of their
lives, yet killed not themselves because their country was oppressed by a
tirant. Fortitude, (take her in her uttermost bounds) incircleth the
ouercomming Passions the bearing the assaults of the world, she goes even into
the confines of temperaunce, for to curb appetite, me thinks, is fortitude:
but bind her now to her managing peril, and to the serving her common wealth,
to make her herself, there must be in her pretense, reason, profit, and
justice. Reason in the plotting, profit in the obtaining, justice in the use:
for without these, it is a bestiall daring, not fortitude.

Now to my comparison of the valor of those times with this of Christianity:
can his reason be so exact, that knows not from whence his reason comes (for
their wisest did but guess at the immortality of the soul) as his that does
continually co^uerse with his soul? for so ought Christians. Or shall his
profit, that looks no farther then the body, be compared to him that profits
both soul, and body? Bud for justice, what vnderderstanding will prefer humane
laws (whose end is but proffit) to divine justice, whose end is virtue? who
sees not now (that will see) times past had not the way of fortitude? for
their best were but shadows: neither had they that cause, for fortitude at
that time was not known. They durst die, but we know how to use death: they
durst adventure but we know how to profit by aduenturing: then it is Idleness,
that has founded this opinion, for if we will do well, none ever knew better
how, never had any better cause, for we are certain of our reward. Of the
repinings, and vpbraidings of a man rejected by his country, I should speak a
little more: how contrary it is to right, and virtue, for thy body is thy
countries, and thy soul ought to follow virtue: does thy soul consent to thy
bodies rebellious thoughts? both body and soul forsake right, and virtue, for
thy soul maintains wrong, and so loses virtue, thy body does wrong, and so
loses right. In this, both the Grecian, and Roman common wealths brought
forth many more faithull, the repetition of whom, those eyes that have seen
historye, can as redily produce as I, whom I will therefore omit, and save that
labor. Only thus: to vpbraide our country with our good deserts, is to ask
reward at the worlds hands, not at virtues: out all, is not all: we are
bound to do for it: but our best shall be called well, because our uttermost.
Not to profess much, but to use it well is the way of felicity, and then does
our body not hurt our soul, when it is content to employ his force to blow
the fire, while she is extracting the quintessence of things. For the lighter
performaunce of men, how drunkenly, does vanity make every thing that comes
from them, look? one gildes himself with having much, looks big, doubts not
of himself, speaks peremptorily, when asked for his warrant, he throws out
the big-swolne words, of a 1000 pound a year: not from his wit, but reuenew
draws he the strength of his ability, it is seen, and allowed by custom (to
the terror of wisdom) that from that 1000 pound a year are fetched all
virtues, he shall be honest, temperate, wise, valiant; learned, for he has a
thousand pound a year: who sees not here a conspiracy between ignorance,
and adulation to confound knowledge, and virtue? for never was there yet so
unchaste and poor a virtue, as to be corrupted by earth? Did they know rather
how much virtue hates the borrowing the gay clothes of riches, and withal how
feeble, and worthless creatures they are, that painte themselves with these
outward things, certainly they would change their vanitye into desperation.

These have a soul in which restes so many graces as passes the deciphering
of man, yet these not knowing their soul, live, fetching contentment from the
gross poverty of earth: how is he feign to borrowe company? to tune that
company to his ignorance? to warn them from speaking wiselye? for his mother
tongue he understands not, if employed in any grave subject.

In the midst of these, what does he but feed upon himself? for he loves
life, and yet wears out Time, the stuff that life is made of. But wantes he
Company? or does it rain? or are not sportes ready? he gapes, he rumbles, he
cries out of solitarines, he sympathizeth with the rain, and lotheth his life.
Who not guiltye, and at this ^ight does not laugh to go with the weather?
surely had the Romans had any of this kind, they would have cooped them up
among their Birds used for Augurie. There are in man yet many things that
might be made virtues, for his glimmering is a kin to the sight of our first
father before his fall: The breath that was once breathed into him (though
corrupted) yet is not wholye taken away: except vanity still makes us fall,
we may yet rise to divine height: to defend which poison, contemplation and
study are excellent Antidotes: for I think with Plato, that learning is to
the soul but Recordutio: for by learning we may recover part of the
knowledge, which our first father lost, though no more near that perfection,
then our virtue is noare his first goodness.

I have done writing of vanity, I would I could have done with her in all
kind of things ^ but wishes are the shaftes of Vanity. Reader, if thou
think I have been too long, for all that, be not angry, for perhaps thou
art partly the cause.

Essay. 45. Of Vainglory.
Zeal, and Contemplation, have likened the earth to a Theater, human natures
to Actors, whose parts delivered, they deliver their stage to the next,
witnessing by this, the shortness of mortality. Let me lengthen this suite
made for the world, and resemble our knowledges to a common Plaiers; who gets
his part by heart without the knowledge of his heart, speaking not
understanding. Who believes me not, let him behold my subject, whose sight
bleared with folly, never saw, nor ever shall see the light of knowledge. Alas
man's glory is vainglory: what more ougly, and absurd portraiture can the
thoughts and tongue (which are the colors and pensill of man) decipher? for
this flatters poverty, and calls it rich: wrinckles, and deformities,
beautiful, and well formed: ignorance knowledge: Black, white: the names of
all, these good, she attributes to himself, when if drawn to the life, she
is poor, wrinckled, deformed, ignorant, and black. O double unhappiness: not
to be able to help it with knowing it: o unrecoverable disease, that is
without feeling the disease. The best does best, when he accuses his own
unworthiness, like Caesar's soldier, whose valor being such as to be
commended by Caesar, yet asked pardon, and wept for the loss of some one
souldierly habilement: he saw himself truly, and took knowledge of his
fault without partiallity. Even the best part of man receives life from the
affections of man, which like affections do not always see directly but came
often with an vndirected vehemence. Man's valor is first a daring, afterward
experience, and reason refines it, and makes it valor. It is not valor at the
first; for we have no virtue originally pure, and vncorrupt. Reason at the
first is but sense, and sense afterward makes reason: for our knowledge here
is earthly, what above earth, we comprehend by faith, or suppositio^. How then
do we run by error to knowledge? so that our Audit impartially reckned, he
that does best did ill before he did better, and has the History of the life
stuffed with as many imputations as actions well ended, who now deliberating
will either obscurely force commendations from his companions, or more
impudently made will crown himself with, deserts, since reckening with
himself, except pa^ed by flattery he shall find himself indebted to his
country, and to nature? I need not mention the Author of his country, and
nature, since these more feeble and morrall considerations will overthrow him.
Yet nothing is more common, and in fashion with the world, then either to draw
modesty to betray, herself to flattery, or if not understood, to make
themselves music with beeng the trumpet of their own commendations. How have
my ears persecuted my whole body with dispersing the tedious relations of
these creatures? How have I heard some braggarts not soldiers, discoursing
their perils, ingrose the actions of whole armies all to themselves? None have
been mentioned but themselves they were general and soldiers plotter and
executor, it has ended with their wounds, their victories. What could chance
to discreet^ a^^ more oftensiue? not Ribauldry to I ^ Virgin. Thus in all
lives, and in the best most common: thus Statesmen, employment, Lawyers,
Clients, Scholars invincible in arguing, profound in knowledge: how have
mechanicke trades robde these noble professions? they say, judge of me by my
work, so should these say by their actions: True worthiness having heard
these fellows with the large particulars, would end with the Athenian
Architect, I can do what these have said: thus does true Virtue, acting
matters for Chronicles, not recording her own Actions.

Let us think then of vaine-glorye as it deserves, and not of the name but
nature, not with a disallowance in general, but particularly applying it,
disallowe so much of our self as is infected with it. I will begin, whose name
being lately diuulged may be suspected of the sickness: I disauowe it, and
that I am so, I protest by the Genius of Contemplation, was contrary to my
intendiment: but I durst not then suppress it, Nam spreta exolescunt, nor now
say more, for fear my use of modesty, may be thought the abuse: yet thus much
more, to whose hands so ever these come, let them charitablye believe, I desire
more to do my country good, then to be paid for it, for I have my hyre from
another place. I mean well, and speak honestly, and I will be as careful to
live well, for; Dicentis Inducunt mores non dicta.

But to leave this by arrand: necessity may enforce us to speak like
vainglory, but that it is necessity cleares us. Suspicion of a crime
allows us to show our innocence, when wronged by our Ungrateful Country,
it is lawful to go with Themistocles, Quid o beati tumultu^mini? saepe numero
ab risdem beneficia accipientes, et tempestate quadem pressi, sub eorundem
tutelam ta^quam sub arborem fugi is, facta autem serenitate, sub ducitis vos
illosque vellitis. I think he did not this more for his own sake then for
theirs, he made them a glass to behold their inconstant follies in: It was
well done, softness in these cases nourishes vices, and gives the giddie
multitude wings instead of legs to fly to mutinies and dissentions.

When a place of authority gives us authority, and truth allows us to
speak well of ourselves, it is lawful to make the subjects of our
government confident of our virtue like Nestor.

Quippe viris ego cum long melioribus olim.
Versatus sum, quam vos estis: nee tamen illi.
Concilium spreuere meum.
It is common in the whetstone of the soldiers swords, the oration of a
general before a battle to rack their memory, and to make her confess all
the exploites which at any time they have done: It is common to tell them; how
often have you been victorious over these people your enemies? though a simple
Arithmetician might bring them within number.

Plutarche avowes it to be the manner of Cyrus in wars, though in peace there
was no man more modest.

The custom of our Attyres in those times seems to allow it, we wear
glorious colors, and our heads, and Horses feathers, beautifying this bloody
occupation, and giving the eye leave to Judge of a Iollye magnificence, and
courage. I like Ansigonus well, who in a sea battle being advertised that
his adversaries exceeded him in number of Galleys, he asked the reporter,
against how many he reckened him: It was bravely said, and illustrated a bold
spirit, it was no matter though it wanted modesty, she fittes more civil,
and and more silent actions. Thus did Ulysses in courage the fainting spirits
of his companions.

O socii, Iguari certe baud sumus ante malorum.
Porro malum hoc maius non est, quam quod Poliphemus.
Nos inspelunca cepit violenter opaca.
Consilio inde meo tamen, et vertute animoque.
Elapsisumus.
Gonsaluo the brave purchaser of the kingdom of Naples to the crown of Aragon
spoke bravely in a time of danger. Desider aua piu tosto d'hauere ^d pirsente
la sua sepoltura un p^lmo diterreno piu avanti, ehe co'l ritirarsi
indietropoche braccia, allungare la vita cento anni. He did well at that time to
clear himself from the suspicion of fear which commonly attendes danger,
and to his soldiers he gave new life, for their heads being unable to judge,
they are directed by their eyes whom they send to discover the behavior of
their commander, which from thence come, fraught either with hope, or
despair. I think it was neither envy, nor vain glory, that made Agesilaus
examine whether the title of Great, belonged more to the king of Persia, then
to himself, Non ille me mayor est, nisi et (...): He was a Philosopher as well
as a king, acquainted with his own soul as well as with greatness which
dilated to him, that outward greatness differed not from gay clothes which are
worn out by time, and in that time subject to casualty, but virtue he saw to
be the foundation, and the true judge of greatness. At death it is tolerable,
for then the best we can do, is but to be an example to the living; and to
show our best points to the world, and our worste to God wrapped in repentance
is honest, and religious: that done, to show a gladness of our new guest,
like Phocion to a fellow that wept at his death. Heus tu, inquit, quid^dicis?
non amas mori cum Phocione? or like the Milanois conspiratour. Mors acerba,
fama perpetua, stabit vetus memoria facti.

It is a cold thing this same Death, and must have some such warm meditation
to comfort the stomach of the mind, or else it will confound, and distemper
the soul for the bodies sake. But in an high state, and a state of
tranquillity, neither Moral virtue, nor discreet policy allows it: not
virtue, which will tell us, we come short of the hyre of commendations: not
Policy, for it lays us open to Envy, and demostrates a mind ouer-burthened
with his Fortune.

Not our actions performed with wisdom and success, may we challenge at this
time, for their glory vpbraides the state, as if unrecompensed, and ouerdrepes
our countrymen, both adversaries to potent to be despised, both losses beyond
the gain of commendations. God is the giver of victory, the performer of all
well succeeding enterprises, give it to him, to whom given, it produces
safety, and accords with truth: from thence let us share it, attributing
part to the direction of the state, part to the valor of our Soldiers, or
others nearest to the employment: to our self, allaying praise with fortune or
destiny: thus it is safe, and good, and not without Fame, which grows by
being suppressed.

Of Essays, and Books
I Hold neither Plutarches, nor none of these ancient short manner of
writings, nor Montaignes, nor such of this latter time to be rightly termed
Essays, for though they be short, yet they are strong, and able to endure the
sharpest trial: but mine are Essays, who am but newly bound Prentice to the
inquisition of knowledge, and use these papers as a Painters boy a board, that
is trying to bring his hand and his fancy acquainted. It is a manner of
writing well befitting undigested motions, or a head not knowing his strength
like a circumspect runner trying for astarte, or providence that tastes before
she buys: for it is easier to think well then to do well, and no trial to
have handsome dapper conceits run inuisibly in a brain, but to put them
out, and then look upon them: If they prove nothing but words, yet they
break not promise with the world, for they say but an Essay, like a Scriuenour
trying his Pen before he ingrosseth his work, nor to speak plainly, are they
more to blame then many other that promise more, for the most that I have yet
touched, have millions of words to the bringing forth one reason, and when a
reason is gotten, there is such borrowing it one of another, that in a
multitude of Books, still that conceit, or some issued out of that appears so
be labored, and worn, as in the end it is good for nothing but for a
Proverb. When I think of the abilities of man, I promise myself much out of
my reading, but it proves not so, Time goes, and I turn leaves* yet still
find my self in the state of ignorance, wherefore I have thought better of
honesty, then of knowledge, what I may know I will convert to that use, and
what I write, I mean so, for I will choose rather to be an honest man then a
good Logitian. There was never art yet that laid so fast hold on me, that she
might justly call me her servant. I never knew them but superficially, nor
indeed will not though I might, for they swallow their subject, and make him as
Ovid said of him self.

Quicquid c^nabar dicere versus erat. I would earne none of these so dearly,
as to tie up the mind to think only of one thing, her best power by this
means is taken from her, for so her circuit is limited to a distaunce, which
should walk universally. Moreover there grows pride, and a self opinion
out of this, which deuoures wisdom.

Mark but a Grammarian, whose occupation well examined is but a single-soled
trade, for his subject is but words, and yet his construction is of great
matters resting in himself. Socrates was the wisest man of his time, and his
ground for that, was his turning all his acquired knowledge into morality: of
whom one said, he fetched Philosophy from heaven, and placed her in Cities.
Plato laughes at those commonwealthes men, that intend only the enlarging, and
enriching of their countries, and in the mean time they suffer the inioyers
of their labors to be vicious, and dishonest: even so of these thirsters after
knowledge, for has he all that men possibly may have, and then enclose it in
the chest of a dishonest breast, it but corruptes him, and makes the poison of
his viciousnes more forcible.

Non mihires, sed mi rebus submittere conor. I live not to illustrate the
excellency of any art, but to use arts as Bridles, to rear up the
headstrong wilfulness of my natural corruption. Thus I see all things, and
take example as well by a vicious prodigal fellow, as by one upon the
gallows, and desire his part no more that is able, and does nourish excess,
then I do the others, and if I would believe Plato, he holds this state the
better, for the one is now surfeiting, the other taking Physic. I have heard
of the effects of great reading, joined to an understanding able to digest, and
carry it, of high acting spirits, whose ambitions have been fed by Fortune
and power: these make a great noise in the ears of men, and like a swaggerer
seem to drown more humble spirits: but equally examined, the gifts of
morallity are more excellent, and virtuous. When Alexander thirstinge threw
the water offered him upon the ground, and would not add to the thirst of his
companions with his own private affections, he did much more noblye then in
winning all his victories: for those rightly determined take away marvel, and
admiration, for they were for his own sake: but here, compassion, regard of
others, and temperance, plead for an eternal applause; this was morality,
and the inward discourse of an honest mind, this was no bloodshed, nor
blows, but the preservation of his friends: here blood spotted not his name,
but purity so imbellished it, that no eye loving virtue can see this piece
without due praising it. Non of these searchers into the driftes of na^^e can I
think so well, as of a mind observing his affections, moderating or spurring
his will, as it flies, or straiteth from the right way of virtue. Thus do I
think of Seneca, and Aristotle, the first's morality its easily to be
understood, and easily digested to the nourishment of virtue; the others more
high, and to the readers more questionable, whether it will make him curious,
or honest.

Xenophon though his Cyrus be so good, as plainly shows it a life, rather
imagined, then acted, yet he so plainly discovers the way of virtue, as
the easiest understanding ^^nnot go astraye, nor the worste abuse him with
interpretation I hold these much more safe, then those works which stand
upon Allegories, for every head has not fire enough to distill them, nor every
understanding patience enough to find out the good meaning: and many are so
ill, as when they have found out an interpretation meet to nourishe their
sensuality, they stay there, and are the worse for their reading.

Thus offend, most Poets, who landing their writings with fictions, feed the
ignorant and vicious with as much poison as preservative. This one of them
confesses speaking to his Muse.

-- e it is pardo^a
S'intessofregi a'l ver, s'adorno in part,
D'a^^i diletticbe de tuoile caerte.
And he adds this reason.
Sai la corre il mondo, oue piu versi
Disue dolcezze il lusinghier Pernaso,
Et chil vero condito in molli versi,
I pin schiui allectando ha persuaso.
Though rightly he touches the tenderness of human conceits, which
willinglye admit nothing that represents not pleasure, and flatters not
sensuality, yet should it be far from the gravity of a writer, ^o run
with the streams of unbridled affections. He should rank with the
Constitutours of commonwealths: Lawe-makers, and wise Authors, ought to intend
both one thing, they no way differ, but that only these last compel not, but
entreat their Countrymen to be virtuous. But should a Lawe-maker insteade of
punishing malefactors widen his laws, and make them soft upon the complains
of men, no state could stand for the cause of commonwealthes mankind would
destroy themselves, and this world by laws made beautiful, by being without
would become a spectacle of ruin, and desolation. Though in this kind,
Poetry has most offended, yet intending well, it (...) to be rejected. It is
a short, and swe^^e ^ur'd eloquence, it stirs up noble desires, and good
intentions, (...) according to Plato, it performs it off^^, which is Diuinos
hymnos canene, (...) magnariumque gesta (...) recensert. Thus it is not basely
employed, nor were it reason, for it is a divine issue of understandings, and
dresseth the subjects of her peniful of witty delight and is the wings of the
some with which she seems to fly to the heighest part of imagination. Among
Poets S^neta^s Tragedies fit well the hands of a statesman, for upon that
supposed stage are brought many actions, and fitting the stage of life, as when
he says.

Arsprima regni est posse to inuidium pa^^. History would have carried you
through many regions, into many battles and many changes, and you should have
little more for your ^aines* as in the life of Sylla, and many others of all
times. A truly disposed mind must meditate of this even at his entering into
this life, so shall it be no stranger to him, nor drown this well perso^nied
actions with ^^rds, and exclamations. In another place he draws the
excellency of virtue, and that her strength passes all strengthes. Vertutis
est (...)

For so does virtue prepares her subject, that nothing but herself often en^^ of
them with love, and affection, all other things being by her caught to be
transitory, and mortal, even pa^^ of himself, knowing which he neither
fears, nor longs for the time of hi^ dissolution. So is Virgils Aeneiads a
book meet for a Prince, and his nearest instruments: for it being agreed by
the most judicial censures, that in matters of state many things fall out both
beyond expectation and natural reason, which we therefore call the Acts of
Fortune: he says, -- Superanda omnis Fortuna ferendo est.

For Patience keeps the reputation unspotted; though outward forces be
destroyed, this makes the mind invincible, which not only gives gr^ces and
preservation to the best par^^^ of man, but inforceth more commiseration from
the victour, then baseness, in^reatie, and supplications, which AE^^bus the
utter ruin of the Macedo^ glory explained, when P^rseus the last of their
kings being vanquished, prostrated himself at his feet, from which sight he
turned his eyes, and called him the robber of his glory, for his power, and
name, made his victory glorious, which the vileness of his person brought
back to contempt, as if he had overcome a boy, or a woman, the poorness of
whose strength makes tears and supplications readier then resistance. At what
time England remained unpolished and unmanured by the sweetness of letters,
there was sound one Car^cta^us, whose name Tacitus celebrates with as great
praises, as if a Roman, and a conqueror, which last I name as the spur of
commendations, for more faintely do all men, as well as Historyographers
mention the vanquished their Conqueror: for many ac^ions are brought forth by
the haste of occasion, to whom a long discourse is not Midwife, yet done, the
world makes some one access^rie of many plottes, which he never thought of,
and another guilty of imputations, because overcome. But Caractatus betrayed,
and brought in triumph to Rome, was neither dejected with thinking of his
captivity, nor amazed at the Romans splendor, but then taught Claudius how it
became him to use his fortune, and in spite of fortune with the ^agnanimity of
his own mind made the action of those times confess, that C^sar dum suum
decus extollit addidit gloriam victo. How slowly and unwillingly praises are
bestowed upon the vanquished, Tacitus Relates speaking of a king of Sueuia,
Digressus C^stellis Varnius funditur praelio, quan qu^^ rebus aduersis
laudatus, quod et pugnam (...) capescit, et corpore adverse vielnera excipit.
He fought valiantly, and received wounds, but was not valiant because fortune
gave him not the victory. In another Virgill teaches that no noble minds are
fearful, Degeneres Animos Timor arguit --

Who ought better to think of this then a statesman, the height of whose
actions brings him to handle things to an unprepared mind dangerous, and
fearful, to eschew which he binds him in a strong band, he fortels his
honor, which is the most precious jewel of greatness, without which he
becomes as unprofitable as a Be without a sting, for whatsoever he is, be he
never so great, or good, yet, magis fama, quam vi starent res suae, the
reputation of a statesman, the credit of a merchant, and the modesty of a
woman, prevailing more, then their powers, riches, or beauty. In another place,
Men's immota manet. Lachrimae voluntur inanes.

How feeble the succors of the body are, every understanding observing those
creatures that either have no soul, or having, use it not, may easily know:
for the grosenes of the bodies nature prevailing but by strength, when that is
vanquished Lachrimae voluntur Inanes: but a mind made strong by use, and
exercise Immota manet; it looks not upon fortune with a dejected spirit, but
not puffed up with the vain allureme^ts of the body, is then plotting how to
recover, not how to desire pardon: he looks upon his prefent state, not with
tears, but upon it, because upon that groundwork he must build the course of
his freedom as he says afterward. Tunecede malis, sed contra audentior ito
Quamtua te Fortuna sinet --
Howsoever that Scithian fellow esteemed music basely by preferring the
neighing of horses before it, yet no question both music, and letters, and
especially verses, which participate both with music and letters, is a brave
raiser of the spirits: and I think arms disable not themselves with taking
assistance from Poesy, for doubtless it makes valor beautiful, and well
becoming, for taking away part of his fiearcenesse, and adding instead thereof
reason, makes it true fortitude. Of Poets for this purpose some learned, talk
much of Homer, but though they are learned, yet I dare not speak of him,
because as near as I can, I will not build upon others. Of those whom I
understand, Lucan, and Tasso, the one of which is ancient, and the other as
worthy if seasoned by so much time, but I will not chide the world for that,
for the reuerencing of age, and times past moderately is a good fault of a good
nature. But this life of arms which custom has taught to put on a galla^t
iollines in his outward behavior, thereby to show danger and distress, cannot
in their course mourn, or be fearful, giving leave to the mind in these
outward semblances to play the braggart, and lay open what she thinks of her
own resolution, which fashion of a soldier binds him to entertain all
fortunes alike. For the high words and big looks that use has made tolerable
in this life, would add deformity to his yielding tears or complaints, but
especially here.

-- Crescit on aduersis Virtu^ -- There Is the alteration which the frowns of
fortune should breed in him, being rather an Alarm for the summoning of his
spirits, then a terror driving them away, which power, Nature has given to
the Elements by instinct, but a more excellent power has she given to man,
namely reason, with which if he does not more then those more meanly endowed,
it is his fault, not Natures, for in reason and discourse, the abilities of
man, there is more then an Antipaerist aticall virtue.

-- sua quisque pericula nescit
Attonitus maiore metu --
So fear ought every way to be remote from the life of a Soldier, for neither
is it handsome, nor safe, so stupifying his understanding, that neither the
danger, his honor, his country, or his life is in, are either defended or
regarded. But this banished makes not valor but fury, for Justice must be
matched with daring, or else it is not Fortitude; the cause must reconcile the
effect to upright truth, or else; Heu quantum ^aenae miseris, men's conscia
donat?

Were guiltiness removed from punishment, yet to wrest the understanding
against Justice, is full of terror, the conscience being an inseparable
companion, which neither corruption nor fear can make silent. In no course is
it more behoouefull then in the life of a soldier, for arms takes upon it
to correct the disorder of peace; It is the Physician of a state, the Iusticer
of a state, the Divine of a state, for his inforcement is the Physic, the
execution, the counsel administered to those obstinacies intractable, but by
computation. Tasso does also yield many plentiful rules leading to the
preservation of life, and after that of honor. E paer lieto morir, poscia
che'lerudo,
Totila e vinto, o saluo il caroscudo.
Cowards feel not death, but the meditation of death, for that concluder of
mortality is no more cruel to the coward, then to the valiant, the difference
rests only in their opinions, as it is in many other things of this world.
What by some imaginations are called jewels, are by others determined trifles:
as these outward things, so the choosers of these the affections, are according
to their possessor: for a cowards fear, is in a wise man providence; lavish
joy, solid contentment: appetite made choice, wishes intentes, making hope
fruition. Thus certain does wisdoms resolution perform his journey without
halting, tiring, or straying. E par lieto morir. No doubt but to a mind that
can inwardly relate a well-runne course, it cannot but be joy to be taken up,
for with glory he ends, and remaining longer he could not end better, therefore
longer life could have been but superfluous, perhaps dangerous: for many
years well followed have doted before their ends, and so corrupted their work
fairly begun. E saluo il caroscudo. In this shield I hold the preservation of
honor, care of his country, an honest life, for detraction cannot be kept out
without such a triple-leaued shield: but this shield embraced, envy it self
cannot wound, but death appears like a grateful master releasing his servant
from travel.

E tempo e ben che qualche nobil opra,
De la nostra virtude homai si scopra.
So lazy, and fluggish are our natural inclinations, that I wish these verses
the perpetual object of my eyes, and if I should wish all men the same
medicine being sick of the same disease, I should do them no harm. Who thinks
of the infinite capacity of man, of his admirable invention, of his
immortalizing the whole volume of abstract, and most forms: of the
fertilenesse of his brain, where things are continually in conceiving, and
bringing forth new, and they new, I cannot think of any thing which he has
done that might not be excelled, considering his abilities, his works are
mean and slight, and their perfections so imperfect, as they are not worthy to
be called the children of his loins.

E tempo ben -- It is time, so soon as our breathing has set a scotch upon
Time: what can I speak of this time, but as of the light given us to live by,
which who spends idly, or (as ill) luxuriouslic, is worthy to go to bed
darkling, which is, to die without being able to produce any matter worthy of
his life, which vacuitie of virtue at that time will breed more terror to
him, then darkness to children. It is time to do that we came for; for those
employed to be vigilant, to the flourishing of their country: to those private
to be an example to others, and safety* to themselves, in taking the direct way
of right -- che qualche nobil opra. I am not so precise to call no Actions
noble, that carty not with them a rumor, or a glittering: to my meaning
nobility and honesty mean all one, and thus may a painful Artisan be noble,
if he follow his vocation painefully and constantly, he is honest, and so
noble, being a Iimmer of a state, though no maine Organ, and his being in
right temper, so far as his strength goes, a preservative to the whole. To
know this he ought to temper the hotnes of ambition, for it is not the
greatness, but the goodness of an action that makes it worthy, which who so
knows, and yet prosecuteth the violence of that humor, ought to be cut off,
for nothing is more fatal to a state then innovation, neither is there any
thing so fast drawing to innouatio^ as ambitions, it being innouations
minority, like a pumple the childs age of a sore.

De la nostra virtude homai si scopra. Here is the whole power of man taught
the right use, which we have a common speech no less illustrates when we call
the quality of things their virtue, by which we enforce the strength of each
thing to work by the line of virtue: to this center should all the
diametricall parts of man tend, for they are but like the rays of the sun,
which borrow their beauty from the sun: for without virtue all the abilities of
man are in darkness, performing all things doubtfully, and perniciously: si
scopra.

I do not think there can be concealed virtues, for though I hate ostentation,
yet virtue aiming at nothing but the transforming her self into goodness, and
the excellency of goodness resting in her communicating power, virtue is not
come to her perfection, until come to the perfection of goodness Duce sei tu,
non simplice Guerriero,
Publico fora, e non priuato il lullo.
Here does he show the office of a general, whose judgment, not body, ought
to be employed: Nature has taught this to every man, for she has made his
arms to give blows, and defend, his head to teach his arms, and to be sure
we should not use it out of the right kind, she has given it neither
nimblenesse, nor strength, but direction to teach the other parts that use.
More need not be said of this, for common experience makes it every man's. I
will speak now of no more Poets, though there be more of use: only thus much
of the ancient Satyrists, I hold them not meet for every man's reading, for
they chide vice, and show it both together, besides their darkness, and
personal meanings, take up more time, the^ known, they are worth: of other
books though I have already commended Plato, yet speaking of books, I must
again mention him for his commentors sake, who does excellently illustrate
him, which he performs with as little delay, and as few idle speeches, as
the understanding receives knowledge from the sight of things which deliver
themselves truly and simply unto her. I know not whither I should speak of
Philosophical books more, since if the reader be not a Physician, or an
Herbarist, they breed in him curiosity rather then vse^, for I account these
words of Plato, Peritia efficit vt vita nostra per Artem incedat, imperitia
vero vt per fortunam temere circumuagetur, to tend rather to the knowledges
pertine^t to an intended life, then to her universal body: for should a Judge
talk of the observations of an urine, when he is about matters of life and
death, who would not determine his skill unnecessary and ridiculous, since his
Art cures the mind, Physic the body? na^ medici curant corpora, Paenae
Animam. What Books, or art medles, with a doctrine remote from the use of life
is a busy idleness, and a cover of an unprofitable mind, like fiddlers
undertaking the use of an Instrument to keep them from a more laborious trade.
Less Astronomy then will make a Calender, will serve my turn: only so much
is sufficient in a gentleman as seeing the reuolutions of the heavens, he may
see them without disinaidnesse, and use his knowledge to the comfort of his
ignorant charge: As Dion going against Dyonisius the tirant, an Eclipse
happened, which astonished the multitude, but he converted it to the Eclipse of
their enemies height, which fortified, and persuaded the fear, and blindness
of his soldiers: the Eclipse (I think) would have fallen out, though Dion
had bin at home quietly in his chamber, and I doubt not but this friend of
Plato thought so to, but yet the minds not able to judge of truethes, must be
held with the exposition of these caelestiall apparences, and be persuaded that
the heaueus work thus, only to encourage, and harten them on. For that
coupler, and combiner of words Grammar, to be much longer then it is in the
arms of our nurse, is naught. I acount it a pitiful sight to see a fellow at
sixty year old, learning to speak: to know the names of things without the
things is unprofitable, as a power to repeat the alphabet by a fellow
altogether illiterate. I like well to speak, rather then to make signs, and
to be careful of joining the nomminatiue case to the verb, as my servants or
friends may understand what I would, but to be Prentice to Tonus and Sonus for
a life time, is a needless as to make new clothes when one lies a dying, for
words are but clothes, matters substance. Rethorickes Cookery, is the vomit of
a pedant, which to make saleable he imitated the Dyer, whose fat working ill,
he makes a mendes by giving those ill colors new names: so this venting his
infinity of words with calling it eloquence, and fortifying eloquence with
methodicall divisions. Rhetorica suadet, non docet: Is she could persuade what
were worthy to be taught, and bring that worthy with her, it were better: but
the slipery glibnes of the tongue gives such a facility, to speak, as commonly
it runs without reason, and so is as fruiteles as a messenger without an
arrand. I might say of those remaining, that they hold more conclusio^s then
are needful for every man, but I will go no farther the^ this taste. Again of
books, morality has very ill luck now a days, for many have meddled with her
with ill succes: I will name the^for they are vnhapy enough to be destinated to
wast Paper. Those of co^mo^wealthes, came as much short but it is no marvel,
for commonly they are scholars that never knew more of government, then it
pleased Aristotle's Politickes, or some such, rich only in the names of
Oeconomicus, Despoticus, and Politicus, and then to define the three several
gouernementes, but they were to blame, for the Theoricke, and Practick of no
art nor subject differ so much, as that of commonwealthes, and state
business. Seneca of morality is the best, Petrarch de remediis vtriusque
fortunae does well, but he was a sharper Poet, then a Philosopher, there being
a more excellent quickness in his Sonets then Dialogues. There is now left
History, which resembles, counsailours that advise nothing but what they
themselves have done, which study is not without danger, for it is so bound to
truth, that it must relate falsehood, and continue rather in relation then in
advise: of these, the truest reflecting glasses are those that present
particular men's lives. Among those I have seen none are worthy but Plutarch,
and Diogenes Laertius, which two being diligently read, and rightly used,
cannot but recompense the readers pains, for the temperance of these
Philosophers mingled with the valor of Plutarkes Captains cannot choose but
make an exact man. Tacitus already has received his sentence from me, but I
must again say, he is more wise, then safe, but that is not his fault: for the
Painter is not to be blamed though his picture be ill favored if his pattern
were so, nor Tacitus thought ill, because Tiberius was a tirant, Claudius a
fool, Nero vicious. But never was there so wise an author so ill handeled by
commentors, for where as I am sure he meant still wisely, some of them have so
powdered him with morality, that they convert his juice into as little variety,
or good use, as Beware by me good people; or if more gently, like Aesops
talking creatures, that have moralls tied to their tails. The rest have left
him as they found him, without making him confess any thing; so that all of
them have done no more, the^ to try who loves gold so well as to pull it out of
the dirt, for he that fetches his sentences out of their pages, adventures a
bemiring. Comines is a good Historiographer, he knew much of the practick part
of state learning, but I hold Guieciardine a better scholar, and more
sentencious, as when he says, Intuttele attioni human, et nella guerra
massonamente bisogna spesso acco^modare il consiglio alla necessita. For the
marshaling advise more cannot be said, for it teaches an aduiser to take his
mark so sure as he cannot miss: for respects appearing weighty in the time
of the health of a state, must not be redeemed in her sickness, for
preservation is to be preferred before comeliness. There are many books by
me omitted precious enough, if Time will give us leave to digest these: for I
am of Senecaes mind concerning this variety of Books, who compares an
unsettled reader, to a trauailer, that has many Hosts, and few friends. There
are more, but mine is but an Essay, not a Catalogue. I think well of these
Books named, and the better because they teach me how to manage myself:
where any of them grow subtle, or intend heigh matters, I give my memory leave
to loose them. There are none that I scratche with my pen that do not fatherly
counsel me to the way of virtue. I like much better to do well, then to
talk well, choosing to be beloved rather then admired, aspiring to no more
height then the comfort of a good conscience, and doing good to some, harm to
none. If my Essays speak thus, they speak as I would have them, for I think
not of making morality full of imbrodery, cutworkes, but to clothe her in
truth, and plainness: nor if they straye do I seek to amend them for I
profess not method, neither will I chain my self to the head of my chapter.
If there be any yet so ignorant as may profit by them, I am content: if
understandings of a heigher reach despise them, not discontent, for I moderate
things pleasing upon that condition, not to be touchd with things displeasing,
who accou^tes them dark and obscure let them not blame me, for perhaps they
go about to read them in darkensse without a light, and then the fault is not
mine, but the dimnesse of their own understanding: If there be any such, let
them snuff their light, and look where the fault of their failing restes.

Essay. 47. The Instruments of a Statesman.
Nvnc Animis opus Aenea, nunc pectore firmo.
Against no life does the force of vice oppose her self; and make so strong a
preparation, as against the life of a statesman: for in a private course she
prepares her self but upon some few places left unfortified by nature, and
transformes her self into some unconquered affections, but here she assaults
with the weapons of Power, Self-loue, Ambition, Corruption, Revenge, and Fear:
all which though in all states, yet no where so forcible; as where greatness
observes reason with flattery, and happiness determines success fetched out
of his own merits. In his private course, every man may allot himself his
company, his imploime^ts, his success, which hardly can fall out so contrary
to his expectation, that either his own negligence, or necessity shall not
mittigate his passion: but here multitudes of purposes, of imploime^ts, of
company, of occasions, so roll and tumble one: upon another, as like a Swimmer
in the boisterous Ocean, does he never so strongly part one billowe, another
ouerwhelmes him, and his whole life is as troublesome and painful, as a body
sweltred in a crowde: But howsoever troublesome with being a maine pillar of a
state, howsoever dangerous with being outwardly subject to state and envy,
and inwardly perplexed with his natural ill affections made obstinate by
fortune: yet these vanquished, or at least wise honestly resisted, he becomes
of all living men the happiest, and the most innocent of mispe^ding the benefit
of life. It is with man, as with the purest thing in estimation, which whilst
it self, receives respect from the sight and imagination, in recompense of the
pleasures and contentment that the sight and imagination receive from the
object: but if spotted or deformed, all the other beauties turn into
blemishes, and are witnesses of the disgrace, from which fight the senses turn
away, as knowing this intelligence would bevnwelcome to the mind, as the most
abhorred thing of nature.

Man must then keep his mind, (the infused preciousnesse that makes him man)
as cleanliness keeps white, or rather as virginity, virginity: for
estimation is the sharpest enemy, if lost, and separated from our friendship.
To all men belongs virtue, for he cannot deal justly with himself without
virtue, for affection choosing grosely and partially, will statue the mind to
feed the senses, and perhaps some of them to surfeit others. He then that must
distribute rightly to others without virtue, he shall be insensible, because
affection knows only what she feels: to be just then, he must be
virtuous, to be wise he must be virtuous, for wisdom is but truth, and virtue
is truth: to be good he must be virtuous, to be honest he must be virtuous,
for virtue is honesty: in a word to be, he must be virtuous, for her contrary
is but corruption, which killes and deformes, but is not to be seen separated
from her conquest. Virtue is the rock whereupon the expert Architect of life
must build, if he mean to reconcile those heavenly adorners of things,
beauty, and lasting. It is the foundation or stem, that all particular graces
are rooted in, for this pla^t so observed, as but once living in the soil of
man, the labor is over, and the hands that labored at the setting, shall be
now recompensed with the gathering of all the sorts of wholesome fruits. Honesty,
goodness, truth, and wisdom, being all the individual parts of virtue, and
virtue all them. To the obtaining virtue, which we have naturally rather in
possibility, then possession: there is no course, but as Socrates says; Bona
malaque distinguere. In the knowledge and choice of these, rests the uttermost
happiness of man, for Summum bonum est, quod honestum est, and quod magis
admireris, vnum bonum est, quod honestum est ceura falsa, and adulterina bona
sunt. To see how to make this separation, let us take the two bodies including
all the courses of man, which are proffit and pleasure: this first, the seducer
of mankind, what is it but the adulterate issue of the senses? whose opinion,
or persuasion do we use in the receiving these but our senses? whose earthly
capacity is too base a counsailour to direct him, for who^ the earth was made,
neither can they determine of the substa^nciall parts of things, their powers
reaching but to the accidents of substances, as what is white and what sweet,
but how to use them they know not, De bonis, and malis sensus non iudica^;
quid utile sit, quid inutile, ignorant. The pleasures of these things are
touched, and dead at an instant, the estimation of which, has made me repugne
that ordinary speech, and opinion of the worlds. He is a glad man, he has a
son: or his son is come home: or he has an unexpected inheritance
befallen him, truly I will not deny but these occurrentes will breed a tickling
kind of pleasure, but of joy they cannot, for it is a more solid thing, and
arises from an understanding that is able to judge, such contentmentes
eternal, which the circuit of a narrow imagination can by no means grant to
these. Of feasts, assemblies, and delights purchased by the wantonness of to
much store, which are not only named pleasures, and delights, but are even
confessed by the gossips of sensuality to be those blessings that make life
pleasant, and to which they apply life: Who out of the experience of almost the
circuit of the Sun, sees not these pleasures either vomitted out by the body,
or the conscience, and those licorus intertainers plagued with as much thirst,
or unsavory tastes as erst with the famine of desires. Were that true
excellency in them, that opinion has seduced Imagination to believe, who would
think that power that gives us both them, and our selves, would be so hard as
to exempt himself from so material, and excellent a blessing? But I take
myself here in a fault of to much earnestnes, making the clearenes of light
questionable, with bringing in proofs; no question, but joy, and pleasure
differ much, pleasure being so fading, as if not preserved by the me^ory it
would hardly last so long as her picture were a drawing: but joy being the
reward of virtue has all one nature with virtue, which is eternity. Husbandry
defines profit well, for he accountes that profitable that is lasting, but my
profit outliues his, for it is eternal, and excels him once more, for this
profit is both excellent and lasting, where as his things lasting, crave help
of a gross, and thick substa^tialnes. This profit virtue, which we mistake,
when we account a dry morose life, that is so trust up in form, and that it is
void of all contentment; and no, we look upon the least part of virtue when
we look but upon her countenance, and upon the worst to, I may safly say, for
though she shows not her teeth in a laughter, yet I will be bound, her
possessor is more laden with contentment, and her conversation more sweet, and
pleasing, then the merriest lightheaded conceit, or he whose constancy, to
company has purchased the name of a good fellow. To obtain which rich adorner
of life, there are especially two means; A self observation, which (me
thinks) a Garden formed* but not planted* to plant it, example is the
speediest means, for the way of precept is more long, and laborious, then that
of example, observation two ways purchases her perfection, by that of a man's
self, and others: so example two ways, by the good, and the bad, which last
means though the Lacedaemonians did unjustly use with loosing one for another,
as some Alchimistes purchase their Elixer with as much charge as gain,
surffeting their slaves to make their freemen temperate, yet that means
omitted, voluntarily there will be enough found to make this medicine, for the
world will never be so barren, that good men shall not find more ill, then
they can make use of. To him that will profit by the observation of himself,
must be set up a mark, reckening from which, he may know his own profession;
as an eye on the sea reaching to the land by some steeple, or tree of stature,
gesseth of his journey. Propound virtue the end of your course, reckon those
innate affections most praedominant, and dangerous the miles, which you must
overcome before the dispatch of your journey, and from one of these to another
shall you rightlye measure your proceedinges I accept of no other intentes but
the obtaining of virtue: for to intend the raising of the body, and to put the
mind to drudgerie for his sake, is full of peril and folly, as we say in
English, It is to set the Cart before the horse. They are the disease of the
body these thoughts, and no more to be believed or followed, then the thoughts
of a man in a burning fever. There must be a course propounded, for a mind
full of thinks and holes, powers out it self unprofitably, and spends faster
then he gets: his determinations for want of resolution are all monsters, some
headless, some leglesse, some blind, some dease, none with their right shape,
or christendom; for it is not enough for the Painter to have colors, has he
not a solid Idea in his fancy? his colors may show colors, but never agree
so well, as to beget proportion. Every man has not all affections, the journey
were then longer then we should have light to perform it, but commonly they
go in couples, and though they all wish themselves most power, yet their
natures being a kin, they agree better, and divide the spoil: so pride, and
covetousness: pride is content to give covetousness leave to work the
Usurer, and in the mean time she goes to the prodigal, and prepares him fit
to feed the usurer, and when she, has burnt him to Ashes, and durte, then
goes she to usury, and deuides him with covetousness: in the mean time
pride is a lazy effeminate imperfection, covetousness a miserable industrious
vice.

He that is touched with any of these, or others of like natures, let him
strictly examine their gains and their losses, if he finds them
transitory, unsafe outwardly, inwardly torments, full of vexation, and
disquietnesse, what an indiscreet choice does he make of his companions? To
perform this surely, let him observe others, and especially those whose
nearenesse of fashion, and life ^^eme to confess a likeness: here he sees
truly, (if ever he will do justice it is here) how he falls, how he rises, what
is becoming, what disgraceful, to the least spot, moale, or wrinckle, shall
he be able to discern in this Glass, whose reflection deciphers more
clearly, then his own feeling, for there parciallity will corrupt wit, and
make her an advocate of an ill title. Thus much for observation, whose circuit
wholely to incompasse, would make this writing fault of mine unpardonable, for
it is a body of a great bigness, and rich in solid wisdom, but deciphered by
my pen, it would be thought a Ghost, for my stock set on the tainterhookes,
can give it but shape, not substance. It is the most precious licour in the
world the most working, and powerful, all others are not comparable: for
herbs, and mettalls, and mineralls, and the rest of the Chimick rank, are
fetched from some 1.2. or 3. simples, and are good for one, or two things, if
they speak of more they are suspected for impostors: but the licour of
observation is the whole world distilled, which is good for the whole world,
for all things troubling either mind, or body. Omnia rerum omnium si
obseruentur, iudicia sunt, et Argumentum morum ex minimis quoque licet capere.
I know none better at this, then the author of this sentence Seneca, who in his
Epistles (the work, of all he wrought in most estimation with me) makes light
observations continually beget serious discourse: as when he fetches from his
blind fool (who was persuaded he could see) the blindness of all men in the
seeing their imperfections. Me thinks the right understander of example uses
the world like a stage, me^ like comaedians, for though he makes least account
of a stolen marriage, of an ammorous young man, of a father as much in love
with his money, as his son with a wench: of a huffing braggart, and a gouty
Leno; yet even from these he fetches some implementes of his building, but
more from the Tragical matters of Princes, where the, play is more deep, and
more earnest, where men being come to the ripenning, and harvest, give the
beholders a more lively representation of virtue, and vice, then the coldness
of precept, which is rather a muster, then a skirmish. Who will believe me so
well that Aches, and sickness thrive best when resisted? as if Plutarch tells
them, Caesar with a falling sickness was no longer idle then senseless:
instruct sureliest that are both represented, and rewarded in the beholders
sight. I do not think there is so leaden, and counterfeit a spirit living
that would not give his hand for Scaeuolas action, who punished himself (says
an Author) more severely for not killing Prosenna, then Prosenna him for
attempting to kill him. There is this force in precept, but how would a
scholar fly from his master that should go about to persuade him to burn of
his hand? yet performed it looks not madly, but beautifully, and surely, I
think this gallant fellow did it more by the help of his discourse, then his
bodies willingness, for I verily believe his body loved his hand better then
his counerey, and it is not to be blamed for it, it was nearer a kin to him,
and his natural occupation to think none so precious as the parts of
himself. Now let me see Gluttony, Luxury, and wanton Dissoluteness be
content to be thrown out of their Kingdom with Nero, to be despised of the
whole world, to cover his face from the eyes of men, not to dare to live, and
yet affraide to dye, to beg death at the hands of his seruannts, to cry out in
the end, Nec amicu^, nec inimicum habeo* I do not think, but the most hardened
piece of vice, though contented to have gone with him a great while together,
would leave him now, and serve him as flatterers do poverty. But who knows
not, that has not all his understanding moulten by vice, that deserts and
rewards, are appendices one upon another, and as inseparable as heat and
fire. We hear this without example, as we see the pieces of things rent from
the body, without any note, or observation: but if this goes so to, there is
left only the medicine of experience which (as Phisicians say) in states
desperate, either killes, or cures. Questionless from the lives of men there
are great matters to be fetched: It is a living Book, by which Princes and
great men may with least difficulty gather instructions for the managing their
lives, but it is to be done carefully in matters particular, for those
performed long since, v^altered, can hardly fit our time, where not only
states, but even the very constitution of men, and their reaches are changed.
I have been content thus far to talk stoically, a profession I confess,
contrary to my nature, who a^^ easily bent, and wrested: It is a profession
rejected by the world, and reason, for some part of their doctrine strayeth
from Christiantie: but where it may be tolerated a nature able to maintain the
civil wars of his own resistance, and that finds a possibility of being at
last victorious, shall do well to persevere: for there can be no life safe,
which if not wholye the enemy of hope, and fear, yet that borrowes not some
rules from their precepted, Talis est sapiens animus, qualis mundi status super
Lunam, semper illi^ serenus est. Who would not buy this hapines with thinking
of every thing truly as it is? no other way does he obtain it, for be does
but buy things as they are worth, and part with them as he bought them: virtue
being his mark, other things pass like bette^, but the maine is virtue, which
both in the seeking, and obtaining, strengthens her pursuer with such honest,
and understanding thoughts, as from nothing here, can he receive either a
gain, or loss. Here then must be the foundation of a statesman, who must
learn this lesson if he mean to do well, for being a great Gamster in the
world, always in those either gains, or losses, should he think them so, and
be either thrown down; or lifted up upon the success, his life would be
distracted, and be able to do nothing for his country, for laughing, or
chasing. But when truth, and virtue have rooted themselves in him; when his
discerning shall be come to that perfection that he sees the map of nature to
the life as it is: when his discourse shall be come to that strength, that it
sees the inward graces of the mind are so full, and complete, that they can
take no addition from the world: and that again they are so solid, and firm,
as by no time, nor occasion they can be diminished, (for Vertus non potest
Mayor, aut minor fieri) then let him in Gods name yield his country his
strength, and his time,, for then neither victories can puff him up, nor
overthrows deiect him: he lendes himself, and other, not pity but
assistaunce, and weeps not for his own losses felt, no more then for
Hecubaes, seen in a picture, he has met with an excellent workman and his
squared falling (howsoever cast) right, and fumely. Thus is virtue, whom
though I never saw so fastened to any man, as (lending not a little partiality
to truth) I might call him a virtuous man: yet we have diverse that have done
well, and though we had not, yet in our imaginations where things live in their
greatest purity, and flourishing) we can see nothing but man, that is capable of
virtue: for we pay all other things (doing any thing extraordinarily) with the
name of instinct, a word given us to (I think) by the name of instinct: for it
is like a wrastlers saving a fall with a foiling: for we taking upon us to be
wrastlers with the mysteries of nature, save ourselves, with the name of
instinct, a degree of Ignorance more guilty then plain ignorance, for here it
is impudent, and saues it self with a word, not reason. I have yet spoken of
virtue in gross it is now time to speak of her particular workinges, how she
mannageth the several occasions that do befall her: and first to the means
of rising. It is not now the world, where the saving a Roman Citizen shall be
rewarded with a crown of honor, and still bear a token of his desert about
him, and by the help of that imprint his action more deeply in the memories
of m^n: nor is there such an equalness in states that all men's actions are
seen with a like judgment. It were pity it were so now, for Pride would
ruin all in a moment: the humor of preferring our country before any thing
else is spent, the world affordes not a Curtius: we hold most of their vices,
but what supressed their vices, and kept them in awe, we have not. Shame,
honor, and a nobleness in all their customs, wherewith the Grecian and
Roman co^monwealthes wrought their greatest wonders, are now like a morning
mist overcome by the rays of wit. Our time is the noone time of the world,
theirs break of day, or the gray morning as we call it. You shall hardly
find a father now a days, that will care rather how his son is dead, the^
dead, that prizeth his valor dearer then his life, yet in times past, mothers
had that hardines that they hated more that he should be wounded in the
back, then dead. It is not so now, no^ I think it not necessary, for the
spirit of these times joined with their deserts would beget to good a
particular opinion, which would distemper government, whose flourishing,
sta^des upon the motion, of the inferior orbs in their right place, obedience
not examination being their destined functions. It stands now with the justice
of a state, to draw the reward of virtue from his country, it being not so
pertinent that the desert of one be honored, as the examination what the
subject is upon whom this is laid: for may this reward increase his estimation
beyond the power of suppressing, whatsoever he does, that he may do much, is
dangerous: his nature, his power, his birth are circumstances to be wayed with
no less care, then the not suffering his valor, or wisdom to go away empty
fisted. This has made me wonder at the impudent folly of such, as I have
often heard to extol their own deserts, as to call their country,
ungrateful* alas no the power of one man is to feeble ever to make his country
his debtour they are traitors to their country that dare protest this, and
minds too mercenarie to be of worth. Rather we are obliged to our country,
that under the Ensign of her authority we may exercise our virtue* for only in
her behoof, or quarrel, it is lawful for us to spend our time, and adventure
our lives: for in another state he is an hierling, and his endeavors belong to
covetousness, or vaineglory. Two Germane princes, the one of them a servant of
the Roman state the other their enemy, meeting upon an enterueiw, of the
Roman parts being demanded by the other how he lost his eye, answered, in
the quarrel of the Romans* being asked how recompensed, he told of Garlandes
of victory, and other liberties (...) him; the other laughed at the baseness
of his brother that sold his blood for such trifles. Had he lost it in the
(...) of his country, this mouth of reproach had been stopped, it being an
action so just, and so worthy, as far over valueth either an eye or a life. A
virtuous maid needs no persuasion to this, it being the first lesson of
virtue to her disciples, to fly a mercenary gaping after reward, so
indifferent she stands for the applause or honor of the world, receiving
outward testimonies of gratuitye* rather to satissie the giver, and not to
seem a despiser of his favor, then needing gifts, honor, or riches: so for
her imploiment laboring truly where she is set, not appointing the world,
which room is meetelt for her. I confess a strangeness in this position, and
that from some minds I take hereby even the very spirit of their endeavors:
but such minds know how wavering and perplexed they live, so crushed and
battered with giving liberty to hope and fear, as their life is no life but
the harborer of living griefs, or a ship of glass nauigating in the sea of
errors, as the Poet says; O vita, vitae non, ma viue Affo^ne,
Naue di vitro ni mar di cieco errore,
Sotto pioggia di Piaxto, et di dolor,
Che sempre cresce con-vergogna, et danno.


There needs no great examination of this: for even their very behavior gives
purblinde sights knowledge of their continual suffering, which, who can get
virtue to remedy, and to be his champion, against these hateful bereauers of
contentment, he will shortly cry out.

O felice quel di che' l grave giogo,
Sento far lie^e.
I wish to a mind that desires to carry his life every way graciously, not
under the color of recreation, to give any sports leave to possess him too
much. I remember Terence makes a Father commend his son, that all those
things were esteemed of him equally, and not too much, which he rejoiced in,
and he had good cause, for they are things of too light a color to be worn
by gravity, they spend much time, a thing not of the least co^seque^ce, for
either himself, or his country still needs it, it lightens the mind, and
filles it with thoughts of pleasure and gaming: it is the entrance of
corruption, for who resists riches, is often taken by a meaner thing fitting
his pleasure.

If I should tell you, that the fighting game of Quails was Anthonies
overthrow, it would be thought fetched a great way about: but it is truth that
Augustus ouer-comming him in those wagers, gave an entrance to the persuasion
of his flatterers, that his spirit was obscured by Caesar's, and that he
should speed better when more remote: so that he left Rome, and went into
Aegipt, left temperance, and fell to sensuality, which if you will not grant
this the cause of: yet can it not be denied for a motive more attractiue then
the occasion was worthy of. The body must have recreatio^, but it is to have it
in my opinion, but as Physic for necessities sake. But we must go no farther
in this then the avoiding, which without a great power in himself none can do,
it being naturally in men, violently to run from one extreme to another. Let
not this shunning pleasure destroy affability gravity is not bound to frown and
bite his lip: this becomes singularity the destroyer of the love of others:
neither so strictly is the life to be ordered, as shall make men fly your
imitation. Good is to be done in a common wealth, not only by Justice, but by
persuasion: to meet the humors of men sometimes, gains men: and the putting
of authority, and using familiarity, preuailes as much, as the bloodiest
sentence of Justice, whose severity often makes offenders obstinate, which
though it ends with the smart of the accused, yet does it discredit
government as much to have many put to death, as it does a Phisitio^ to have
many patients perrish under his cure. Of flattery the bane of virtue, and the
destinated disease killing greatness, every one can speak, though few avoid,
The good Augustus that managed principallitie as fairly as it was possible
for a man vnasisted by divinity, was taken here, but the safest that might
be, I cannot find that suffered it to lay hold of his wisdom, or
government, but it caught him by the eyes, for he loved well that other eyes
should confess a weakness to his, and not be able to behold them long
Gaudebat si quis sibi acrius contuenti quasi ad sulgorem solis vultum
submistures. The extremity of this seldom comes but from mean estates, whom
if they bar from such altberty of speaking as may give oppertunitie to
adulation, they may prevent this danger: If it come from such as we hold
friends, their life and honestye examined, will tell what they mean. Anthony
whom I late mentioned, was deceived by such as would tell him of his faults,
but so little of them mixed with so many praises, as their reproves seemed but
like sharp fauce to make him devour their commendations more hungerly. But
this was a cunning trick, and those less cunning are hardly avoided, since
they meet so right with the general inclination of man, self-love, as
commonly they speak no more then we think. The last and best remedy that I
know, is that which was given me by the worthiest friend I have, by way of
advise: when commended, examine impartially your own deserts, where if you
find not what is laid to your charge, note that tongue for the instrument of
flattery. I cannot think of a better remedy, only I must say, it is not to be
done without virtue, for all the examinations of vice are partial and corrupt.
For friends there is no safety but in honest me^, for others will betray us, if
not by our selves, yet with himself, for becoming once his friend, wisdom, nor
forecast, nor the discrying danger ought keep us from perishing with him. I
hold it no less unsafe to choose one only for greatness, for we make choice
of them but for our own sakes, which they are apt enough to find, and as apt
to make use of us to their own profit: we may fall with these, but our rising
is in their power: thus the friends of Seianus when Tiberius had discryed him,
paid deerly for their nearenesse. Here a power to descrye into the natures of
men, is of great importance, but it is a power as difficult, few being worthy
of knowledge, that withal have not an ability to obscure their defects:
whereupon one says; Gioue tu aesti par chiari segnali,
On^e l'argento, et l or siseuopre,
Ma nessun Segno in human corpo appare,
Ond' il buon huom' (...) firiconosce.


To find out the secret passages of a man's nature, I devise not to talk so
much with him as with his man: his chamber actions discover more then his
appearance in assemblies. I like nothing better in Montaigne, then his desire
of knowing Brutus private actions, wishing more to know what he did in Tent,
then in battle, for there being himself, not ouerawed by respect and
company, he spreds himself open, and in this corner gives a discerning eye a
more liberal view, then when he stands upon the allowance of the general
sight of men. Of seru^ats now I hold it necessary to speak; an assistance well
used assisting, but to be handled carefully; and to be chosen with as great
regard: for the employing, these shows the^ many things, which were it
possible to bring to effect without their knowledge, were the better. I have
elsewhere mentioned their use: now I will speak of three things concerning
the^. The first, the disposing the^ according to their natures.

Tranoin^ nasce buom, ch'ogni cosa sappia,
Questo e bueno ad un mostier, quello, ad un altro.
Tu saila spada oprar, quello il configlio.
Of this with nothing so excellent an happiness am I able to speak, as does
that Maister-peece of English, which in a light Historye means the most grave
matter, I mean the Arcadia, where the besieged Amphialus teaches the use of
servants and inferiors most exactly there shall you find constitutions fitted
with charges and employments according to their nature, and the disability of
one man for all places. The second care must be, that their imploiments be not
matters of the greatest consequence, reserve these for your selves: for not to
be able to manage matters of weight breeds pride in the employed, and to the
lookers on, derogates from your authority. The last, and not least of
importance is the carriage of your rewards and punishments: this is the thing
that gives lords good servants or bad: I like well to let them see all their
faults, hardly let all be impardonable though not punished with austeritie. In
capital offenses chide not, but let them feel sharply what it is to be
disobedient or rebellious. Talk not with them but upon occasion: let them at
no time have idle talk: be a good Master, not a familiar: and let the^ have
all their due largely, but pa^ed with the hand of severity. For rewards it is
the life of their action, and they must be taught to do well thus, but let them
nor know how much they have done, but extenuate the service as much as safely
you may, and reward them not presently, but rather when it shall look
altogether like your bounty. Of old servants make great account, and give
their bruised bones means to live their after life in rest: I do religiously
hold this, for we owe him much that gives us his youth: and surely there is no
greater inhumanity, then to make use of the fresh time of a man, and turn him
out in the cold, and winter of his age. This I find generally to be the force
of virtue, that all her proceedings fall out most safely: for ingratitude a lim
of her contrary, leaves destitute them that are known so barren: if the earth
should be so to the pains of the husbandman, we should starve: If rivers, so
to their father the ocean, his liberality to the thirsty earth would make her
poor: but nature has made her creatures more loving, and assisting to one
another, therefore is the ungrateful man to be termed a monster. Pity and
humanity, where benefits bind not, must bind: thus come all the under states
of a statesman to challenge his aid, the plenty of understanding, and riches,
wherein he surmounts these, is given him, because he knows how to imploye
them best, they are put in his hands not to keep from them, but to keep them
from excess, that ignorance would fall into, if at his own direction. These
need only Justice, and to be kept from want, which is the charge of high
fortunes: but the^ it must be done merely for their benefit, not to purchase
popularity, which is an humor full of danger, and no profit, a breeder of
vainglory in himself, and suspicion in others. The private communication of
great men with their Prince is the last for outward matters: the last, because
I will speak of no more: for otherways the turnings and occasions of this
life are so infinite, that if every man that has written of the matter, were a
million of Authors, and all so employed, more could not be spoken. Howsoever
his masters familiaritye may promise a liberty of behavior, yet never to
approach him without due reverence: what ever he is, yet being a Prince he is
to be reverenced, and not be practiced against, as a wise Author says, Good
Princes are to be desired, but howsoever they are, to be obeyed. It is the
duty of a faithful servant to tell his master of his faults, I mean of such
servants, as a Prince thinks meet for their wisdom, to be assisters of his
government, but he must watch fit opportunity.

-- Ascolla, ^ taci,
Poi moui a tempo le parole audaci.
Plato holds him a worthy counsailour, that is adorned with these three
qualities, honesty, wisdom, and boldness* that his advice be safe, he must
have honesty; that sound, wisdom; that gracious, boldness. Never is advise to
be ministered in the time of the fruition of what you mean to inueigh against,
but then when the smart of the error joins with you in persuasion. This
fault was Clytus in, when he openly inueighed against drunkenness, in the
midst of Alexanders quaffings, he dyed for it, which though Alexander
lamented in his sobriety; yet could not that revive him again, but is an
example, how circumspectly a servant must deal with his Prince. Now to the
inward mind, by the which as by the fertilenesse, and heat of the soil, the
children of her womb flourish: All vain hopes are to be abandoned, as the
perswaders unto all uncertainty and peril. I am not moved against Nero for
any thing more (excepting his Quiristers occupation) then at his credence given
to a fellow, that told him of great treasures that lay hidden in Africa,
upon hope of which he dissolutely consumed those he possessed. Certainlye these
hopes can never enter but into a vicious breast, which often resistes reason
when she would look into it, with these vain hopes. Ambition also buildes
upon such grounds, and thinks not upon any thing that it would, but it
believes it shall, whose reasons were they laid open, would appear such
feeble impotent things, as the meanest reach would rather laugh at, then
fear. Denique Auarities, et honoru^ caeca Cupido,
Quae mis^ros homines cogunt transcendere fines,
Iuris, et inter dumsocios scelerum, atque ministros.
Noctes aetque Dics niti praest anti labor,
Adsummas emergere opes: haec vulnera vitae,
Non minimam partem mortis forneldine aeluntur.
Besides the rest of the miseries of man that comes from thence, Fear the most
terrible and abhorred thing of Nature has here her original, which with his
inward trembling, and distracted motions, hinders also all proceedings and
intents: for fear makes every thing look like himself, to avoid which, he
heaps mischief upon mischief, blood upon blood.

Vnde homines dum se falso terrore co^cti,
Refugisse volunt long, longeque recesse,
Sanguine civilly rem constant: diuitiasque
Co^duplicant auidi, caede^ caedi accumula^tes.
Thus intermixed, and entangled with all horrors, are those lives, that are
content to entertain the desires of indirect aspiring: these hopes never go
without fears, and they never without ill effects: thus does he outwardlye
heap upon himself the detestation of the world, and his own thoughts make
him detest himself.

Le dubbie spenix, il pianto, e'l van dolor,
I pensier folli, et le delire imprese,
Et le querele in darno a'l vento spese,
M'hanno a me tolio, et posto in lu^go errore.
To avoid this, I know no way but virtue, which so filles, as where she is,
nothing else is sought: take from, or add to her, she is still her self,
like a circle whose bigness or lightness alters not his form, but his space.
Besides, where as the defects of men in times past to uphold their reputations,
were feign to persuade the world falsely of their communication with the Gods,
and to belie their mothers with the adultery of Jupiter, her estimation shall
not need these deceits, for the life of her Possessor will show he is divinely
descended, and her counsels shall be held so sincere, as they shall be
accepted without the subornation of the nymph Egeria,

Esaias. 48. Of Words.
I Like no Relation so well, as what mine eye tells me: for there is in
speech, as in su^ptuous building, many entries, landing places, and Lucomes
commanded more for formalities sake, then for conueniency: so ands, and ifs,
and many sounding words stuff up empty periods with wind. Naturally we carry
matter better then words, in which nature tells us, she uses words but for
an interpretour, because our ignorance understands not her Language, which
puttes us to a great deal of pain, and makes us go a great way about in our
inquisition of knowledge: for there is less dross in the letters of nature,
then in words, the substance of Books: for the apparition of natural obiectes
carries not such a company of circumstaunces: for the ear is more deceived
with soundes, then the eye with colors. That same Euphoniae gratia the
maintainer of prattling, what is it but to feed the auditory, with Dishes
dressed by the painter, not the cook? for they may say they are satisfied,
when examined what they had, it proves a painted shoulder of mutton; sulciae
solue, multum mali sub illis latet. It may prove ill, but if not so, Anatomize
the words of these adorers of words, and they prove nothing, which is the
next degree to ill. Seneca commendes his friend that he hears nothing of him,
Quod plerique ex his quos interrogo, nesciunt quid agas: To my friend, I would
say, that they know not what thou think, because seldom speaking: for my
thoughts are dearer to me then any actions; performing any thing, it is the
giving thoughts bodies, and sending them into the world. There was a knight of
Rome put to death for translating a dream of his into words, had he not
better have suppressed his dangerous imagination, and taught another thought
to have killed this, then to have thrown it out of his breast by the violence
of his tongue? I dare be bound his mother if she were alive at that day, wished
he could never have spoke, for mothers like nothing in their children so well as
life: but his punishment was to seueare, his tongue had been loss enough, for
that had been the capital Traitor. Is not this a dangerous judgment that
betraies the whole life for the trespass of one lim? had it not bin better for
him to have used the tongue for a taster, then a distributour? yes,
questionless. For speech less dangerous then this, is good for nothing but
to pull speech from others: for willingly (were the company fit) most of my
words should be interrogation, but when I were at this charge I would be glad
to meet with those whose expense of matter should equal their number of
words. Truth has fallen upon it so often, and so commonly, that it is a
received precept, not to trust a great talker with your secrets, for they have
such a disease of words, that like fire they will feed upon themselves if
they want sustenaunce: so that you must feed him continually like a Woolfe,
or else he deuours you, and after himself, for he loves nothing so well as
words. If he had performed it without diuulging, I should have liked the
custom of Pallas, the manumized slave of Claudius, who protested Nihil vnquam
se domi nisi nutu, aut manu significasse: It was a good course: for words to
inferiors, and servants, draw on familiarity, and familiarity robbes masters,
and Lords of their dominion, and rule. If we were now, as we were once,
though speech should be superfluous (for all should have been good, and I
think then, all knowledges should have seen truth in a like quantity) yet
it had not been so dangerous: for our vices are the Ocean, our words the
Barks transporting, and trafficking sin with him, and imperfection with
imperfection: so that multitudes, and Assemblies (where talk turns the mind
outward) are as perilous to an honest mind, as to receive education in a
Bordello. Heardly shall a man meet with a tongue in these places speaking
either honestly or temperatly, for either speaking ill, or too well, takes up
all me^, flattery or slander engrossing the whole body of speech: and either
he is a worthy fellow, for I am much beholding to him; or very unworthy,
because I am not beholding to him what an impudency of the world, is this,
where men dare protest the sum of virtues, or vices, rests in men's conforming
them selves to their humors? what is this but the confounding of all
goodness, and benefit of societies with including in themselves the estimation
of all, and allowing nothing that works not for their private satisfaction? me
thinks other creatures wanting this are as happy as a licentious disposition
wanting wealth: for by this means they know but their own infirmities, and
go no farther, then natures infusio^ gives them leave; but men by the help of
speech draw the corruption o^ others into themselves, and ad to their natural
infirmities millions of imperfections. I hear men speak daily, but not a day
in a month find myself bettered by their speech, but contrarily have every
day such a company of rags thrown into my brain, that I wish my self deaf
all the week long but on Sundays: for then devotion, and the Book in a
divines hand, and his being a divine, draw me to work somewhat out of my
hearing, be he never so lame in his function. How often have I seen occasion
offer company a use of their tongue that might have bettered their minds, but
as often almost respected, and enforced understandings able to have mounted
heigher to go with them in the dirt, and made the weather, the season, or some
chance consume the preciousnesse of time, and so broken up with ouerladen
stomachs and empty heads to the shame of reason, and her servant speech?
where the souls of men are more strong, and skillful, there has vainity so
plied them, as many there are of pretty abilities, that trust as much to the
sounding of their words, as some women do to white and red, for the painting
of their faces, and end no petition, without a compelling the company to
applaude it, with turning their eyes to the looks of their auditory.

Was it not this that made Demosthenes put stones in his mouth to amend some
iarring noise of his voice, and to talk to himself in vaultes? What a follye
was this of a wise man? or if not folly, wickedness, for either he meant to
seduce the people with the melody of his tongue, or if not, he thought smooth
speaking of more price then it is: for sure among wiseme^ where speech is to
most purpose, the licour is not refused because in earth or wood, for reason is
reason, as well squeaked as sung. I do not think, but Demosthenes when his
voice was most cracked, spoke as sweetly as Balaames Ass, yet he being given
speech by the giver of all things, and reason by the giver of all reason, his
speech was to purpose; and so no question, might Demosthenes untunable voice
have been without ballasting his mouth. But this is not against speech, but
speakers: for speech may bring home good Merchandise, if in a wise Merchants
bestowing, and is without question a Touchstone, discovering as well wisemen as
fools: marry I think fools speak more then wisemen: to shun which name I
will do my best, and therefore will say no more.

Esaias. 49. Of Justice.
IN all, I in them whom honor and good opinion have left without note, there
is a natural touch of justice, they cannot determine safety to themselves
without it. The plant of a particular preservation set by nature, becomes after
the tree of Justice in the soil of policy: the first regard gives it life,
the last growthe and flourishing; self-love inuiting him to love, reason
making his love general. When the world in his greenest time lay in the arms
of ignorance, thus much was known; they then measured things by the touch, and
sacrifized themselves to experience, they had no presidents before them, whose
diligent observation has given power to these last begotten ages, to prophecy
of events, and to see them long before they feel them. It was then but rough
hewn, it is now polisht, it was not then, because regard took charge but of
one, it is now, because their loves are commixt, and every one ventures in the
bark of the common good: Thus far, of Justice natural parentage. Her other
side is divine, even so far fitting the constitution of men; as he of a soul
and a body, so she of proffit and honesty.

The other that would behold nothing with that care that himself, by this is
taught to regard a more noble proffit, that is honesty, to give every man his
due, being full of the divinity of the heavenly nature. Profit is divided
into the obteyning peace, and plenty. Peace (the nourishing warmthe,) by whose
rays, states stretch out their arms, and enjoy a perpetual Summer) lives
not without the nourishment of Justice, and by Justice lives without the
dropsy of excess; for arms are taken, when equity is resisted, and excess
purged by discipline*

Different are the courses of Justice, between the offenses foreign and
domestique: on these without she must smile, upon those at hoame look
plainly. Standing on the rank of companions, they must be persuaded; for
where strengthes are equal* it is safer to adventure the wi^, then those
forces that once overthrown are not easily repaired.

Plenty is to be wished and sought after, to defend foreign invasions, and
to eschew home discontentments; for the name of power is the best orator to
persuade peace, and plenty takes away the vennom incident to men in need, for
there is noe poison so strong and fatal to a state, as to have many poor.
To the supreme and highest part of justice, there belongs a power to discorne
truth, to be able to penetrate into the secret and covered actions of men,
after to go according to that knowledge free from partiality. The first must
be joined to an honest inclination, or else he has but one eye, and being so
defective, is meeter to obey then govern, he may do well, but it shall be
well by chance: a compass too uncertain for Justice so sail by.

This knowledge has two lims; the knowledge of the laws, the knowledge to
moderate law. For those written opinions of Justice, are often so enfeebled by
time, or construction, as for all their fair precence, they kill instead of
curing. But an ability to behold things ambiguous with the true fight, gives
the time, the persons, and other circumstances, leave to expound themselves;
and reconciles the exposition of the law and question, by boiling them together
in the fire of a wise understanding. Partiality may come from fear, love, or
gain; but since they meet in the disease, and bring forth all one sickness,
it shall be my furthest to say, it confounds all the beauty and happiness of
societies, being the dissoluer of those bands and fastnings, that gave safety
to the passengers of the world, which by this is rent in pieces, and the whole
number of her inhabitants are drowned in the gulf of calamity.

Essay. 50. Of Flattery, Dissimulation, and Lying.
THere is hardly a fellow, though he can minister no further then the
tooth-ake, but will give Antidotes against the plague. I would they could find
outsome drug, or drudges fellow that a man might handle vice without
infection. I desire it, for fear the drawing this picture be not of the nature
of ill eyes, that make sound, ill; and devil wise labor for nothing but to
make all souls level with them. I must confess I am the veriest bungler at
this flattery that ever welded tongue; and not having natures goodwill to set
up, I have shunned to be prentise to it, because I regard nothing (that
exactes not regard) with that feruencie, that I do liberty. But since I am
fallen into an Inckpot, and that these papers I use only to make me clean, I
will speak of flattery as a thing that I have hard spoken of, but was never
acquainted with. The heart is the tongues master, in her travails she used
this instrument for interpreter, by the help of this she traffickes with the
world, and travails through the sundry regions of dispositions. All this time
it is well, but now when the thoughts go east, and tongue west, there is the
disease. This is plainly sprung from a fainte hearted cowardice, that is the
head of this pudle, and from that head come these three, Flattery,
dissimulation, and lying. Plutarch says that the flattered have the disease of
ouerliking or else they could never be surprised; and I think so to, for an
exact, and stricte Judge of himself smells the straight. It is the false
reflection of our one thoughts that abuses us. What need then have they
(that desire not to mend, but paint over their constitutions) to hire any other
workman save their own sweet imaginations certainly they need not, except
they desire witnesses of their folly, and so call in those breath-sellers, and
perfumers. A people certainelye that earnd their favorers dearly, being the
basest, and most groueling minds that it is possible for the honest
imagination to descend to, that suffer gain to transform them into all
shapes, look how you will, if you will, he will look like you; do what you
will, and warrant him that he shall not be called to an account before the
general account, he will do it, shall I make an end of this pcture quickly?
They are creatures that will not spend a drop of love upon any but themselves,
they are creatures that have no other god but pleasure, and have sold their
souls for clothes, and meat, and countinance, not natures children, but dame
Needs and base desires. The subject of this venom, that has eyes, and yet
sees not, is in a worse state, for besides that he is a looser by time, by
whom discreation in spite of his heart is a gainer; (for wisdom is more
precious then youth) he loses the use of himself, for he can not go
without his trumpeter, a counterfeit fame.

He grows dull if he be not hourly new whetted by his flatterrer, out of
countenance if he borrowes not the tongue of men to go a journey of his
praise; in a word, a substance that fetches his merit^ from the shadow of
vain glory; and a lasie work man that calls for his hire, before he has
begun his work. But to make this monster more portable, it is best to cut
him into several pieces.

There is a self flatterrer, a flatterrer of others in hope of gain,
flatterrers by exchange; then, flattery for Princes, for the vulgar, for rich
men. The most subject to self flattery, are scholars before they arfledge;
for there is no such cherisher of the imagination as are letters, this
proceeds from a little wit and no judgment. They are like beggars that a small
sum makes in opinion infinitely rich; but time recouers them from the most part,
for either they are not worthy to bear that little, or else they betray not
their riper years to this enemy of reformation. Sometimes meaner professions
get it, but it is seldom, except they be rich, and the rich commonly keep
servants, which besides their other offices, may now and than scratch their
masters itching minds, and not leave the burden only to himself.

Nil habet in faelix paupertas durims in se
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit.
These give their vices names not odious, and then look upon them for the
essential parts of virtue; th'easiest reasons that can be are by them
received, not looking into the reason, but whether their reason be content to
allow of their courses. The next that are not borne fit for the intertainement
of this ambition of the half blood, work journey work, and give an other the
ware, and trust themselves only to their ^ite; they extol, and commend all,
their shall not be so vilde a weed belonging to Macenas that he gives not
excellent qualities to, and gildes not over as trim as a Brides rosemary.

Si beneructabit, si rectum minxit am^^us.
Si trulla inverso crepiru^ dabit aurea fu^de.
But who would be content to draw such vile forms? had I not made a match with
the world that I would not spare any part of her cracked inhabitants I would
even here begin to repent with ending, but I have promised and will through;
And because I love to suffer as well as execute, I have written; let them take
my papers, and do with them what they will. Sufferances of some kind are
holesomer then revenge. Now the last are like horses that rub one another by
consent, not so able as willing to maintain a flatterer; they admire one
another and dame up their wants with a mutual service; he calls him wise, the
other him valiant, he swears, the other swears, and so overcome with the
opinion of their plot, they pass assemblies, increasing the number of their
follies, not praises. Easily can-not sovereignty distinguish between
humility, and flattery; for subjects that ought to prostrate themselves in the
lowest kind to make their speeches follow full of reverence and respect, have
under this a fit opportunity to cover flattery, but the paying their duties is
not. When one comes more particularly and personally on, is the danger of which
Princes must be so careful, as of procuring an enemy that can strike him and
go invisible. The vulgar that build upon the breathes of one another, and know
no more how to examine, then to love constantly, are like an after game at
Irish, that is won and lost diverse times in an instant, they are
vnmethodicall, hardly to be caught by one form, any in truth will do it. Speak
them fair, and begin, courteous reader, if you speak brethren and companions
of my fortune, if you will say, gentlemen, it may do well, for a pesant
reading it will think you meant him. Amiable looks and fair words will go
far in^^igh, flattery of the coursest kind will serve them, being won
commonly more by luck then cunning. Dissimulation is more tolerable; in some
courses necessary, as if a man be fallen upon a wife that he cannot love, yet
he must use her well, and if he cannot perform the express commandment, yet
at least to come as near as he can. Other times it may come very near
honesty to dissemble a man's intentions, as in cases of revenge, where it gives
a pause, and that pause makes room for consideration, that in the heat of
blood is ever denied audience; and if it never come to that perfection, yet it
makes opportunity of his counsel, who fashions a revenge that he may be a
sauer by. This dissimulation is a very pretty workman, and not so base minded
as flattery, he calls not night, day: nor badde, good: but is a skillful
manager of time and bears himself as cunningly, and as warmly as the sun
when he overcame the wind in master Esops moral. Lying (the refuge of
runnagates) and the ingrossers of vices of the meanest price, are so hardened
by the continual hammering of some beastly humor, as they look not so much as
upon a probability, but beat away repentance, and remorce, with palpable
untruths. There is another kind of people, that build a certain reputation
with being the Chronicle^s of incredible relations, maruailes impossible to
swallow without faith. The vanity of these is impardonable, giving precious
truth, for base leasings. One more there that tell untruths, and yet are
preserved from lying, by the aedequation between their tongue and heart, these
are only hurtful to (...) suffering in themselves (...) the imputation of
rash ignorance. For all my disallowance (...), I am not so nice, that (if I
had anything about me worth the praising) I would not be content to have it
allowed, I to my face allowed. I would be content, even my self I think might
speak it without ostentation, for truth is truth, in spite of customs
heart. But I am not furnished with a strength able to overcome this received
opinion, and for mine own part I like it well, and so do more; for our
weakness is concealed, because the disco^erie of a man's own virtue is called
arrogancy.

FINIS.

