A SHORT DIALOGVE, WHEREIN is proved, that no man can be saved without good
works.

Edit. 2. With some Additions.

Be not deceaved, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
reap; he that sows to the flesh, shall reap corruption, but he that sows
to the spirit, shall reap life everlasting. Galat. 6.7.8. AT OXFORD, Printed
by Joseph Barnes, and are ^o be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the
Crown, by Simon Waterson. 1604.

To the Right Worshipful Sir ROBERT VERNON Knight, all health and prosperity.
Although (Right Worshipful) now long distance of place and time, has
severed us, yet the exceeding great kindness you always bore toward me,
whilst you lived in Oxforde, has wrote so deep an impression in my mind,
that neither disco^tinua^ce of time, nor distance of place, has any thing
abated my wo^ted dutiful affection toward you. Presuming of the like
affection in you toward me, (knowing your kind disposition) I am imboldned
to offer, and dedicate this my little book unto you: the which being conscious
of his own imperfections, craves your patronage, and favor; which if it may
obtain, it fears not to come abroad into the view of men, and if you will
vouchsafe to read and like of it, it sea^es not the censure of others, both
which it hopes the rather to obtain for my sake. It is not long, nor tedious,
and (I hope) it is profitable, and therefore it hopes the better accepta^ce,
the which if it might obtain, you shall make me not repent mine endeavors.
Thus my humble duty remembered I commit you to the tuition of the Almighty.

Yours for ever JEREMY CORDEROY.

To the Christian Reader.
AS to the body of man (Courteous Reader) all kinds of diseases, to all kinds of
ages are not incident, but some diseases are more peculiar to us when we are
children, some proper unto us when we are young me^, some more incident when
we are old: so in the Church of God, al kind of evils break not forth in one
age, but some are more peculiar to some age, the^ unto others; as both
histories of former times, and daily experience do manifest unto us; the
disposition whereof come not by chance, but by the determinate counsel of the
Lord, who in his just judgment disposes of these things, as it shall make for
his glory, and the good of his church. That these things come to pass by the
appointment of God, it is manifest by many places of the Scripture, wherein god
shows that he does send these calamities for the exercise of his church, and
also foretells the time when they shall come; in the ^3. of Deuteronomie,
verse, 3. the Lord says that he will send false Prophets amongst us, to try
us, whether we love him with all our hearts and with all our souls. ^y this means
men's hearts shall be manifested, whether they love God or no; they that belong
unto God, will not give ear unto these false Prophets, but vvil be directed by
the word of God; according to that saying of our Savior, my sheep hear my
voice, and follow me, Ioh. 10.
they will not follow a stranger, but flee from him, for they know not
the voice of a stranger. He foresheweth when such and such evils shall come, as
it appears in diverse places of the Prophets in the old Testament; and in the
new, the revelation of John abounds in predictions of things to come. Now as
God in his goodness and mercy toward us vouchsafes to forewarne us of these
temptations that shall come on us, and when, that therefore we may be the
better armed against such events; so it is our duty, to take notice hereof, and
accordingly to address our selves to withstand such temptations as shall come
on us; but especially to observe what evils are more proper to the time
wherein we our selves live, as most pertine^t unto us; not to speak of matters
of old time, but of latter times, as most concerning us. The Apostles,
inspired by the holy Ghost, have intimated unto us of this age, what
temptations shall assault us, who have divided the time from the incarnation of
Christ, until his second coming to judgment, into two several times; in which,
two several temptations shall assault the church of God: the former of these
two times, they term, the latter days; the ^ther, the last days. ^n the
former, that is the latter days, shall come errors in doctrine: in the last
times shall come corruption of ma^ners: not that the later days shall be free
from corruption of life and ungodly behavior, or the last days shall be free
from error of doctrine: but in the latter days error of doctrine, in the
last days lewdnes of life, as two predominant ill humors shall abound, and
therefore according to the diuersitye of these two times, it is our duty to bend
our selves more against the one then the other. In the time of error, we must
most of al endeavor to confute error; in the times of ungodliness in life, we
must contend against ungodliness in conversation. Now because this time present
wherein we live is the last time, wherein corruption of ma^ners shall most
abou^d, according to the prediction of the Apostle, the which we see with our
eyes to be too true: I have chosen rather to speak of the necessity of good
works to salvation, as most befitting this time, then against error in doctrine
(though I have not altogether omitted to speak some thing against it) seeing
that now most men offend in lewdness of life, more then in error of
doctrine. If any doubt whether this time wherein we live, be the latter or last
times or no, let him but confer the prophecy of these two times, with the
event which has fallen out, and he may easily be resolved. The Apostle Paul
speaking of the latter days, wherein error in doctrine should abou^d says: 1.
Tim. 4.1
now the spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter days some shall depart
from the faith, and shall give heed to spirite^ of error, and doctrines of
devils, which speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned
with an hot yro^. That this latter time began in the Apostles time, and holds
until the revealing of Antichrist, the same Apostle shows in an other place,
where he says, the mystery of iniquity does already work, 2 Thessalonians 2.
Chrysostom. 2. The^. 2. hom 4. Ambros 2. These. 2. Hierom in Dan. 7 and quest ^1
ad Algas. Tertull de resurrec. car. Lactan l 7 Aug. lib 20 cap 19 Zancheus in
2, These 2 Osiander in 2 Thessalonians 2 and epit hist eccl^s. centur 7. lib. 1 and
lequent. Plat. de Bo^if 3. Func Cron. de Phoca and Bon. 3.
only he which now withholds shall let, until he be taken away. He which
hindered Antichrists authority then, was the great power of the Emperor of
Rome, who would hinder the power of the man of sin, until he, that is, the
Emperor should be taken away; as histories, the event, and expositours do
testify unto us; when the power of the Emperor should be Eclipsed, then the
man of sin should exalte himself above all that is called God, or is
worshipped; that he should sit in the temple of God, showing himself that he
is God, which in the Popes of Rome has already been verified, exalting
themselves above God, taking unto themselves the authority of God, making
laws to be observed upon no less danger of eternal damnation; then the laws
of God: dispensing against the plain word of God, abrogating the
commandment of God, to establish their own. This the man of sin has
finished, according as it has been foretold of him. But his pride shall be
abated, and he shall come to an ebb, as the same Apostle foretells; 2 Thessalonians
2.8 Esaias 11.4.
saving that the Lo^d will consume him with the spirit of his mouth, that is,
by the preaching of his gospel. By this means we see the kingdom of Antichrist
now brought to a very low ebb, and his madness made manifest to al men, 2 Thessalonians. 2. ^i. 12.
saving in some few, to whom God has sent strong delusions, that they may be
damned, because they loved not the truth. Antichrist being revealed and made
manifest, now follovveth the last time, this time present wherein we now
live; of which the Apostle Paul speaks. 2. Tim. 3.1. Saying, this know also,
that in the last days shall come perilous times, for men shall be lovers of
their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers,
false accusers, intemperate, fier^e, despisers of the^ that are good,
traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure more then God, having a show
of godliness, but have denied the force of it. The Epist. of Jude consists,
2. Pet.,
almost wholly, of the description of these ill men, of whom also Peter
forewarneth us; the which if you read, you shall have the manners and behavior
of the men of this age presented as lively unto you, as if you should see them
al in a glass at one vi^w. Now (as I have said before) corruption in manners
being the proper disease to this age, in reason we should bend our chiefest
strength against this disease, especially since the reason why the Apostles
foreshevve these things is, Jude 3.
that we should earnestly contend against it, and that in this miserable and
perilous time, we should have compassion on some, pulling them out of the fire,
verse. 22.
in putting a difference, as the Apostle Jude says. He co^pares this time, to
a city set on fire, which when it happens, we catch at that which is
dearest in our sight, and save it from burning. We must put a difference
according to the difference of me^: for, some there are, who sin of
infirmity and weakness, and are, as the Apostle says overtake^ with sin;
Gal. 6 1.
these we ought, to reclaim with the spirit of mildnes and gentleness. Others
there are who are more stubborn and wilful; these we must rebuke more
sharply. A third kind there is, who, 2. Tim. 4.2
so they may enjoy their pleasurs, care neither for God nor man; who say unto
us, depart from us, Job. 21.14.15.
we desire not the knowledge of the Lord; who is the Almighty that we
should serve him, and what profit should we have if we should pray unto
him? Psalm. 50.17. Ier. 2.24.
these kind of men hate to be reformed, these are like those wild Asses used
to the wilderness, that will not be turned, and who so seeks to turn them,
shall but vvearie himself, Mat. 7.6. Exodus 10.29. 2. King. 3.14.
but not prevail: let these pleasantly descend to hell, for who can turn
them; we may not give that which is holy to dogs, nor cast pearls to
swine, if we do they will tread the^ under their feet, and return and al to
rent us. Wherefore if I may be so boulde to advise those, to who^ the care of
souls is committed, I would advise them to follow the steps of our ancient
Fathers, who always bent their studies against that of their time, wherein they
lived, which was most hurtful, and the abuses which then most abou^ded. Since
the time of the Apostles, until within these few years, error in doctrine
most abounded, therefore we see the godly men of that age bent their whole
studies to confute errors but now (God be thanked) this disease being almost
cured, and as great a disease, as the former, affecting the Church of God, in
my opinion, if we devide the word aright and minister a word in due season,
we ought especially to use our endeavor to reclaim men from ungodly behavior,
and not wholly, in these days, spend our studies and labors against error in
doctrine; notwithstanding (gentle Reader) I speak not definitiuely herein, but
my slender opinion; if I speak upon weak grounds, I will not be stubborn,
but am content to yield to men more judicious. Farewell.

Yours in the Lord, JEREMY CORDEROY.

A SHORT DIALOGVE between a Galla^t, a Scholar of Oxforde, and a
Church-Papist; wherein is proved that good works are necessary to salvation.
Ridente^ dicere verum, quid vetat? praesertim in hac iocosa aetate, cum nil
nisi ioci placent.
GAllant. You are well overtake^ sir.


Scholar. You are welcome sir.


Gall. I pray sir how far ride you this way.


Scholl. To Oxford.


Gall. And so do I: if you would ride a little faster, I would be glad of your
company.


Schol. For company sake, I will alter my pace.


Gal. It seems you are a scholar by your attire.


Scho. So I am.


Gal Of what profession.


Scho. I study divinity.


Gall. Then I doubt we shall not pass our way so pleasantly as I hoped I
should.


Scho. Why think you so?


Gall. Because I see few, or none that study it, but are given much to
melancholy, and sadness, scarce fit for any company. I have an old acquaintance
in Oxforde, who before he gave himself to this study, was very pleasant, but
since he has undertaken this study, he is clean altered, scarce the same
man: now no good-fellowship with him, but he is always reading the Bible, or
musing, still silent, unless you urge him to speak.


Scho. That is a good change. For in that he is always reading the Bible, it
is a good sign he is careful to understand the word of God, which is the
means of our salvation: ^ Romans 1. verse 16. 1. Cor 1.8
in that he is continually musing, it is likely that he does ruminate, and
meditate on that he has read, to apply it to his use, and conform his life
according to it, without which ruminating and meditation we make small use of
our reading, but are like unto conduits which receive water, but keep it not.
This was prefigured unto us in the old law of Moses, Lev. 11.2. Deuteronomy. 14.4
where no beast was clean, but such as chewed the cud. Which kind of beasts,
when they have received sufficient food, they sit and recall it again, and
newly run over it, and fitly prepare it for their stomachs, that it may so be
converted into their substance. In like manner, he who will make a right use
of reading of the Scriptures, must after the reading thereof ponder, meditate,
and ruminate on it, and make use thereof for his own edification. Lastly whereas
you say he is very silent, it is most likely, he has a care he offend not in
his tongue. For most commonly, multiloquium est stultiloquium, in much talk
there is sin, seeing we must give an account of every Mat. 12.36 37.
idle word,


Gall. But what need all this ado? I hope, I shall be saved as well as he,
though I pine not my self away in melancholy reading of books, I confess I
have but little skill in divinity, for my humor is not that way, yet I hope I
have enough to be saved; for I know Christ dyed for me, and I believe to be
saved by him only, and not by my works, I stand not on them, Vide Bucanum de
praedestinat. quest. 50.
nor put any confidence in the^.


Scholl Why? think you a bare belief, without a careful endevor to live
according to the will of God will be sufficient for you to salvation?


Gall. O sir, I perceive you are of the old stamp, you trust to be saved by
your good works and holiness. I know that to be Papistical and erroneous, and
therefore I rely wholly on faith in Christ, and not on my works.


Scholl. It is true, I am of the old stamp, of that stamp which the old
Patriarks, Prophets, and all the Elect of God have bin: al which were zealous
of good works, and studious to approve their calling thereby; Heb. 11. Tit. 2.
yet am I far from that blasphemous conceit of the Papists, which you falsely
call old, but truly erroneous, for so it is; and no less erroneous is your
solitary faith without good works. This opinion of bare faith has bin
condemned, for an he resie long si^ce, in the heretic Eunomius, who thought
that a man might be saved if he had faith, how lewdly so ever he lived, as S.
Augustine reports in his 54. heresy ad Quodvultdeum, and S. Augustine wrote
his book de correctione and gratia, Aug. tom. 4 li. octoginta quest c. 76.
against certain that were of this error in his time and the Apostle James
terms this kind of faith, Iam. 2.19.
the faith of Devils, and therefore it cannot save.


Gall. I have heard it I know not how often, that we are freely saved by faith
without good works, and therefore, I confess, I have had the less regard of
them.


Schol. You have mistaken the matter, you have heard often that we are
justified freely by faith without good works, but not saved without good works.


Gal. That is al one.


Sch Nay there is great difference between justification, and salvation: to
justification only faith without works suffices, Romans 3.28 Gal. 2 16. Ps 15.
and 24 Fox de christo gratis iustifi lib. 2 page 380. Mat. 5.20. August. in
Psalm. 30. and despiritu and lit. ca. 9. Romans 8.29 Luke 1.74. Heb. 12 14 Reve
20.6
but to salvation is more required: as first, predestination; then an effectual
vocation by the preaching of the word externally, and an internal operation of
the holy Ghost; Then justification by faith only; afterward a measure of
sanctification, which consists of godliness of life and good works; and then
salvation; so that without sanctification and good works you cannot be saved.


Gall. It is a hard saying, and I hope it is not so, if it be true, I must
confess, Vide Fox^ de Christa gratis iustificante, li. 2 fol 359. and 360.
I have hitherto reposed my only hope of salvation on faith without works, and
I am so deeply settled in this opinion that I shall hardly ever alter my opinion.


Scho. Yet if you have manifest proof hereof in the scripture, you will alter
your opinion and your life.


Gall. My opinion I shall, for I hold the scripture the only rule of truth. But
for my life, I fear I must crave pardon a while, til years grow on me. But I
pray sir (since we are entered into this matter, and we have no other matter to
pass the time) show how you prove this point. Heb. 1^. Exodus 40.32. Mat. ^
Calu. instit. li. 3. cap. 14 sect. 1. and 21 cap. 15 sect 8. and ca. 16 sect.
1. 2. Pet. 1.1^



Sch^ll. This matter is proved not only by the godly conversation of all the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and holy men of God, but also prefigured in the old law
of Moses, and set down in plain terms in many places of the new Testament,
as Except your righteousness exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Now although the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees was far short of theirs, who may
be capable of the kingdom of heaven, yet even they were very careful, not to
kill, not to wrong, not to swear falsely or forswear, not to commit adultery,
in a word, not to break any of the ten commandments in external action;
notwithstanding they were careful and precize herein, yet our Savior plainly
pronounces; That except our righteousness exceed the r ghteousnesse of the
Scribes and Pharisees w^e cannot enter into the kingdom of God.


Gall. If to abstain from killing, swearing, adultery, and the rest which
you have reckoned up, be not sufficient, God help me, and a great many more
besides me; what would you have us to do?


Scho. Our Savior in that place shows, that we ought not only to abstain from
the breach of these commandments in external action, but also abstain from
evil thoughts: as namely we should not lust after a woman; Mat. 5.28.
for he that looks on a woman to lust after her, has already committed
adultery in his heart: This lust the Scribes and Pharisees thought no breach
of the law. Again, he requires (...) we should not swear at all, in our
ordinary talk, but our affirmatio^s should be yea yea, and our negations, nay
nay: The Scribes and Pharisees thought they offended not, in taking the name of
the Lord in vain in ordinary talk, so they swore not falsely. Again the
Scribes and Pharisees thought they might take an eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth; and that they might revenge a wrong to the utmost, so that their
revenge were not greater then the wrong received, but our Savior requires that
we should not resist evil: if any man take away our coat we must give him our
cloak also: if any man strike us on the one cheek, we must turn to him the
other also.


Gall. And do you indeed think in conscience you are bound to do this?


Scholl. Yes without al doubt.


Gall. Then, by your good favor, I mean to ease you of your cloak and purse;
but first I will prove your patience. I must take my fist from your right
ear, then you vvil turn me the other. Why how now? will ye resist?


Scholl. Why not sit?


Gal. O, I did but prove whether you would stand to your doctrine or no: I meant
you no harm, but you see that you will speak a great deal more then you will
do.


Scho. Why say you so*


Gal. Because cven in your last words, you said you were bound in conscience,
not to resist evil, and that if any will take your cloak away, you must give
him your coat also; and that if one str^ke you on one cheek, you must turn
him also the other: yet you see, you observe none of all this.


Scholl. Sir you much mistake the matter, if you think that these speeches:
resist not evil: Aug. Epict. 5. ad Marcellinum. Peter Martyr locis comm.
class. 4 ca. 15. sect. 7* 8.
if any take your cloak away, give him your coat also: and, if any strike
you on the one cheek, turn also the other: it you think (I say) these
speeches are meant ab^olutely, and alvvaies to be done. For the only drift of
our Sav^or in these speeches is, to confute the false opinion of the Scribes
and Pharisees, who thought it no offense to do wrong for vvrong, so that their
requital were not greater then the vvrong done them; he tells them that they
may not resist evil, that is maliciously hurt again, if they be vvronged. As
for to resist evil (but not with evil, that is, revenge with malice and
wrong) it has been used always of the godly, Exodus 2.12.
opposing themselves against the wicked practices of the ungodly; yea our
Savior Christ not only reproved those that sold do^es in the temple, Mark
11.15
but also overthrew the tables of the mony-changers, and whipped them out of the
temple; Paul withstoode Peter to the face, Gal 2.11.14
when he went wrong. Again we are not always bound to give our cloak to
him that will take our coat away; Calvin. institut. lib. 4. cap. 20. sect. 20.
for this is spoken respectively and not absolutely, that is, rather yield our
cloak unto him, then maliciously vvithstand him; else why has God appointed
us judges and magistrates, if we may not use their help? Act. 22.1. and 24.12.
and 25.10
whe^as Paul was falsely accused he withstood his enemies, and used the help of
magistrates, appealing to Caesar; which no doubt he vvoulde not have done, if
it had bin unlawful. Lastly, if one strike you on the one cheek turn also
the other, these words must be understood as those words of our Savior
Christ, where he says, Luke 14 26. Mat 10 37
if any hate not father and mother, he is not worthy of me, where his meaning
is not that any should hate his Father and Mother, or not love and obey the^.
But he means, if it shall come to this rump, that they must either forsake
father and mother, or CHRIST, their love to their favior ought to be so great,
that they should hate father or mother, rather then forsake Christ. So
likewise, when we have received a blovv on the one cheek, we must turn also
the other, if it shall make for the glory of God so to do; or rather be
buffeted on both sides then to malice the party wronging us. Now, that we are
not bound simply to turn the other side, if any give us a blow on the cheek,
except it will make for the glory of God, it is most manifest by our Savior
christ himself, who is the best interpreter of himself, and the best
expou^der of his own meaning who when as he was stricken, turned not the
other side unto him that smote him, but reproved him for so doing: ^oh. 18.23.
if I have evil spoken, says he bear witness of the evil: but if I have
well spoken, why smitest thou me? where you may see that when he was stricken he
did not offer himself to be stroke^ again; so that you may see, these words,
if one strike you on the one cheek turn also the other to him, are not always
to be observed, but upon some circu^staunces. So likewise when Paul was
s^itte^, he does not offer himself to be smitten again but reprooveth the high
Priest for commanding him to be smitten, saying, god will smite thee, etc. Act
23.3
Hence may you see that I break not those commandementes in denying you my
purse and cloak, and in refusing to be beaten at your hands, since it maks not
for the glory of God for you either to rob me for beat me. And I may without
brech of charity deny you both.


Gall. If these places are so to be understood, I must confess your deeds
have not swarved from your doctrine. But I meant a little to be pleasant with
you. Now pray sit proceed in that which you were about to say, concerning the
necessity of works to salvation. If your doctrine be true, I must take an
other course, or else I shall never come to heaven.


Scho. For the proof of it, harken and then judge. Besides the place which I
have already named concerning the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
which was an external observation of the law, whose righteousness far
exceeded the righteousness, of many in these our days, who notwithstanding
vainly persuade themselves they shall be saved (I term it a vain persuasion,
because, if an external observation of the law, such as was the Pharisees, be
not sufficient, much less manifest breakers of the law, and such as continue
therein, can be saved) besides this place (I say) there are many, and most
plain to prove the necessity of goodworkes to salvation: as that of the
Apostle, Heb. 12.14
follow peace with all men, and holiness, without the which no man shall see
God; without a peaceable and holy conversation, then, no man can be saved. John
pronounces those only blessed, Rev. 20.6.13.
who have their part in the first resurrection for (says he) on such the
second death has no power. If they only are blessed, who have their part in
the first resurrection, which is holiness of life, then without good works no
man can be saved, and further in the same chapter he says (having the day
of judgment represented to him in a vision) that he saw that every one was
judged, according to his works, that is, such as had done good, to everlasting
life, and such as had done evil to everlasting fire: as it is also in the
Athanasian Creed: and our Savior Christ's words are most plain in this
point. Mat 7.21. L^ge Chrysostomum in haec verba tom. 2.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my fa her, he shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven. And further in the same chapter he does more illustrat the
point by the example of 2. builders: He that hears my words and does them, I
will liken him to a wise man which builded his house on a rock, and when the
rain fell, and the fluddes came, and the wind^ blew, and beat upon that
house, it fell not, for it was grounded on a rock. But who so hears my
words, and does them not shall be likened to a foolish man which builds his
house on the sands, so that when the rain, wind, and flowds came and beat
on it, it fell. Here he signifies that they which endeavor to do the will of
God shall never fall, no not in the day of judgment: Psalm. 1.5.
and contrariwise the wicked shall not be able to stand in judgment.


Gall. I grant, if a man will seek to get to heaven by his works he must
do this, but me thinks the Scripture teaches an easier way, namely by says
only, and sure I am fully persuaded, that if I come unto God with a strong
faith, he will not reject me.


Scholl. your strong faith will prove a strong presumption, if it be destitute
of good works, Calv in c. 18. ver. 17. Ezech. Mat. 22.
which point our Savior Christ does make most manifest by the parable of a
King who bid certain guestes to the wedding, but when some made excuses,
some set light by it when they were invited, he sent the second time and some
evil entreated his servants: Wherefore the King being vvorth destroyed those
murderers, and sent the third time, and commanded his servant to go into the
high ways, and as many as they could find, bid them to the m^^iage; then his
servants went, and brought all they could find both good and badde; so the
wedding was furnished with guestes, then the King.


Gall. Nay, nay, go no further, you have said enough, and as much as I can
wish for you say that the good and badde are received, and I am sure, if I be
not one of the good, I shall be one of the badde: believe me, it i^ a very
comfortable place.


Scho. Nay but deceive not your self, such catching at pieces of the Scripture
is the cause of many errors; you offend against principal rules of
interpreting the Scripture: we may not believe that the scripture teaches any
thing contrary to the nature of God, Ang de doctrina Christ. lib. 3. cap. 3.
and if any place seem to us so to do, we understand it not aright. Now
whereas out of this place you (misco^struing it) vvoulde conclude, that which is
contrary to the nature of GOD, namely that God receives the wicked into his
kingdom, God allows not of the wicked, Psa. 11.5.
nay he hates them, and has prepared everlasting torments for them. God
being good, yea goodness it self, cannot but abhor that which is badde.
Besides this, in interpreting the scripture, you must take heed, that you do
not make one place contrary to an other, as in this your interpretation you do,
and that against plain and evident places; as that in the 25.41. of Matthew,
and in the 21.27. of the Revelation. In the former whereof is plainly showed
that the wicked and merciless shall go into everlasting fire: In the latter,
that no unclean thing shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. Again, in
interpreting the Scripture, you may not single out words or sentences, without
having consideration of the principal drifte vvhither they tend, but consider
that which went before with that which follows after: Aug lib 3. cap 3.
which precept if you had observed in the place which I was about to speak of,
you would have made a contrary conclusion to that, that you have made, Suffer
me therefore to allege the whole place, and then if you will, reply.


Gall. I pray then go on.


Schol. The guestes being come, the King came to see his guest, and savv a man
not having a wedding garment (this wedding garment, by the consent of al
writers, is charity consisting of good works) the king co^mandes his servants
to take him, and bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness,
where shall be w^^^ing and gnashing of teeth* this man came to the Kings
Sons* wedding and took himself to be a bidden guest, supplied the room of
a guest, as many now a days supply a ro^me in the church of Christ and be^re
the name of Christians, as he the name of a guest, until the time often, the^
being found without a wedding garment, must look for the same doom. This
point is manifested also by the sentence of the fi^e foolish virgins, who came
also to the wedding, but were shut out because they had no oil in their lamp^:
all therefore that come, are not received, come they never so co^fidently,
except they be qualified with some measure of regeneration, Ioh 3. Mat. 19.28
without which no man can enter into the kingdom of God. And lest you might
imagine that this is done to some few for example sake, to cause the rest to be
more careful of their life and conversation, Rev. 3.17.
and so you notwithstanding may escape this severity, mark further what our
Savior says in another place; Many shall come unto me in that day, and say,
Lord, Mat. 7.21.
Lord, have not we pr^phecied in thy name; and by thy name cast out devils?
and by thy name done many, and great works? then will I profess to them (says
our Savior) I never knew you, depart from me ye that work iniquity. Mark well
these words, many shall come, yea, plead an interest in Christ, because in his
name they had prophesied, cast out devils, and done great and many works: Yet
for all ye they are cast of, because they were wicked men. A man may have the
the spirit of prophesying, power to cast out Devils by the help of God, power
to do great and many miracles, and yet be a castaway, if he have not the
spirit of regeneration, whereby only he loves God, and delights in doing his
will. wherefore flatter not your self with bare solitary faith destitut of good
works, which kind of faith is not a saving faith.


Gall. But I am sure I have heard it often read, and preached too, that if a
man have faith, it is sufficient.


Schol. It is true, being truly understood. So likewise it is said, Ioh. 17.3.
this is life everlasting to know thee the only living God, and whom thou have
sent Jesus Christ; if you do not expound this place by conferring it with
other places of the Scripture, you may as well conclude that a bare knowledge
of Christ, or God is sufficient to eternal life, without any faith in him, or
love toward him. Then may you conclude, that they who prophesied in Christ's
name, cast out devils, and did great and many works in his name, shall be saved,
though wicked men: contrary to the express words of our Savior; for they al
knew Christ. Nay then the very devils are more sure to be saved then any man,
for their knowledge of god is more perfect then the knowledge of men, Mark.
5.7.
yet the scripture is most plain that they shall not be saved. But confer this
place with others, and you shall prove that this is not generally to be
understood of every knowledge, but truly of one kind of knowledge, Ioh.
1.24.
which is specified by John, where he says, if any says I know God, and
keep not his commandments, he is a liar, and the truth is not in him, but he
that keeps his word, in him is the love of God indeed, and hereby we know
that we are in him. So the^, that knowledge which has the love of God joined
with it, which love is manifested by a desire and a delight of doing the will of
God, is the saving knowledge before mentioned, and no other knowledge: which
saving knowledge cannot possibly be in the wicked or in the devil. For they
only know God, but love him not, which is manifested in that they by love seek
not to do his will and please him. The like general speech you have of our
Savior where he says, Mat. 7.7.
to him that knocks it shall be opened, and to him that asks it shall be
given; which words if you simply understand without exception, many
absurdities will follow. The five foolish virgins knocked, yet were they not
admitted: they that cast our devils in Christ's name, and did great and many
works thereby, asked, but obtained not; wherefore we must go further, and
seek the true meaning of these words, by conference of them with other places
of the Scripture. Our Savior says, Mat. 6.14.15.
if you forgive other men their trespasses your heavenly father will forgive
you your trespasses, but if you forgive not other men, no more will your
heavenly father forgive you your trespasses, and David says, if I apply my
heart to wickedness, Ps. 65.18.
the Lord will not hear my prayer, and Solomon says, the prayer of the wicked
is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.8
and the Lord refuses the prayers of the Jews, because their hands were full
of blood, because they were oppresore of the poor, but wash you, Esaias. 1.16.
says the Lord, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed,
judge the fatherless, and defraud not the widows, then if thy sins were as
crimso^, they shall be as whit as snow, David says, Psalm. 33.18 19.
the eyes of the Lord are over those that fear him, and upon them that trust
in his mercy, to deliver their souls from death. And Peter says, the eyes of
the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open to their prayers; ^.
Pet. 3. i2
by these places now may you see, how those words are to be understood, to
every one that knocks it shall be opened, and to every one that asks it
shall be geven, that is, not every one without exception for you see other
places tell you that the prayer of the wicked is an abomination unto the Lord:
Ioh. 15.7.
but of them that love and fear the Lord, and endeavor to keep his
co^mandeme^ts, if they knock or ask, it shall be opened and granted, to every
one without exception. So in like manner, in your assertion, namely that if a
man has faith it is sufficient, if you absolutely understand any faith, many
absurdities will follovv* Iam. 2.19.
for there is a faith of Devils which if it were sufficient to salvation,
then the divils may be saved. For they acknowledge Christ to be the son of
God. There is an historical faith, Mark. 5.7.
and a faith of doing miracles which the wicked have; yet it cannot save them;
according to that of the Apostle, if I had all faith, 1. Cor. 10.2.
so that I could remove mountains, and had not love, it were nothing. It must
be then such a faith which has with it the love of God and our brethren, it
must be such a faith which works by charity, Gal. 5.6. Ephe. 6.6.
a working faith (I say) and not an idle faith, much less such a faith as is
spotted with ungodliness. Not any faith then is sufficient, but such a faith
which is accompanied with good works and newness of life,


Gall. Well be it that good works be required to salvation, yet say that I
live ungodly all the days of my life, until ^ see I must depart this world,
I think I have heard some words in the Scripture, which import thus much,
that it is not then too late to repent. I cannot repeat the words themselves,
but such words there are, the which (to tell you the truth) have made me take a
little the more liberty in my delights.


Scholl. I think you mean these words, at what time soever a sinner does
repent him of his iniquity I will put out all the remembrance of his sins
from me, Ezec. cap. 33.11.
says the Lord,


Gal. Yes the same, the^ you see it is sufficient for a man to salvation, even
when he dies to repent.


Scho. If these words have given you an occasion of greater liberty in your
delights, that is, in plain terms, an occasion of sinning more freely, you
are one of who^ the Apostle prophesied long since, saving that in the latter
times shall come certain men, Jude 4. 1. Pet. 1. 2. Tim. 3.4.
who will turn the grace of God into wantonness; yea, who will love their
pleasures more the^ God, Luke 1.74. Ephesians. 1.4 1. Pet. 2.24. and 2. Peter. 1.5.
you make a clean contrary use of the promises of the goodness and patience of
the Lord toward sinners, to that wherefore they are promised. For, says the
Apostle, the goo^nes, long suffering, and patience of God, To. 2.6.7.
is showed to lead men to repentance and amendment of life, the which who so
abuses, hea^eth up wrath to himself against the day of judgment, who will
reward every man according to his works, 2. Tim. 2.2^
and (expounding himself) says, that is, to them who by continuance, (mark
well what he says, even as if he plainly foresaw some would vainly flatter
themselves, that it will be sufficient to repent, as they falsely call it, at
the last cast and breath) therefore he adds to the^ that by continuance in
well doing seek^ life everlasting. But lest you should fl^^ter your self in
your sins and promise unto your self salvation without warrant of the word of
God, first know this, that these words, At what time soever, are not in any
text of the bible, yet are they agreeable to the word of God being rightly
understood; that is, whenever a sinner forsasaketh his ungodliness, and
does that which is right and good, craving pardon of God for his former ill
life, God will not impute his former sins unto him, but will pardon and remit
his sins for Christ's merits. But in that sense that you take them, neither
the words themselves, At what time soever, can be found in any place of the
scripture, neither are they consonant to any place of the scripture, namely,
that though a man live in ungodliness all the days of his life, and at the
very iump when he departs this life, then be sorry for that which is past,
he may be saved, notwithstanding he has passed his whole life in
ungodliness. I say such a man so living and so doing, Aug. tom 10 lib. 50.
homil. cap. 41. Chrisost. hom. 19 in 4 genesis. Calvin Zanch. Heming. et omnes
saniores interprat. in versum. 13. 2. Thessa. 2 et Ephesians. 2.10
can have no warrant in all the scripture, that he shall be saved. The
repentance which the scripture requires, is not a bare co^ceived grief for
that which is past, peruse you the words of the Prophet Ezech. 33. whence they
are taken, and you shall manifestly see, that there must be a doing of that
which is good and right. and an eschewing of that which is ill, which cannot be
done in an instaunte or moment. The wicked may repent and be sorry for that
which is past, yet shall they not be forgiven. For as the wicked may have some
kind of faith, 1. King. 2^ Mat. 27.3. Maca 2 9. Calvin. instit lib. 3. cap. 3
sect. 3. and 5. and sequent.
and yet be damned, so may they have some kind of repentance and yet be
damned. But that you may more clearly see you mistake the meaning of these
words, taking it as if it were general to all sorts of sinners, Fox de
Christo gratis iustificante lib. 2. fol. 323.
vvhe^as in deed it is meant but to one kind of sinners: if you will ^ightly
understand the meaning of these words, you must consider that there are two
sorts of sinners: The one kind are presu^ptuous sinners, in whom sin
reigns, who not only delight and continue in sin, Psalm. 11.2 Ioh 9.31. Rom
1.31 1. Tim. 1.9 1: Pet. 4 18
but also give them selves wholy over as slaves unto sin: The other kind of
sinners are such as sin of infirmity, who when they are overtaken with sin,
are grieved at it, and sorry for it, they continue not in it, Romans 7. 2. Ioh.
3.9.
they hate it, they allow not of it, they endeavor to resist it. Now when
it is said that at what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins,
Lege Bullingeru^ in 3. Apocal.
God will forgive him, it is to be understood only of that ki^de of sinners,
who sin of infirmity and weakness, and not of presumptuous sinners, for
these kind of sinners he does give over to a reprobate sense. Romans 1.24 Ephesians.
4. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. Heb. 6.4.
That all kind of sinners cannot claim the benefit of this promise, it is
manifest by diverse places of the Scripture. It is impossible (says the author
to the Hebrews) that they which were once lightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, if they fall away
should be received again by repentance. And again he says, Heb. 10.26
If we sin willingly after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins. Which two places, though
most me^ take it for the sin against the holy Ghost, who^ I gain* say not, yet
they prove thus much, that some cannot have the benefit of repentance, and
therefore that speech At what time soever a sinner does repent him, etc. is not
general without exception. Yet know further, that not only those who sin
against the holy Ghost, but also they who sin of presumption, and they in whom
sin reigns, cannot challendge the benefit of this promise. Consider what the
Lord himself says, He that blesses himself when he hears the curse
against such as transgress against the law, saying, I shall have peace, though
I walk after the stubbornness of mine own heart, I will not be merciful to
such an one (says the Lord) but all the curses written in the covenant shall
come upon him; Deu. 29.19
again in another place the Lord says unto sinners of this kind namely
against the daughters of Israel. Hos. 4.14.
When your daughters are harlots I will not visit them, signifying thereby, that
he will not give them the means of repentance, whereby they may be saved,
Prove. 1.28
and God by the mouth of Solomon says of these kind of sinners, they shall
call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not
find me, because they hated knowledge, and did not choose my fear, they would
none of my counsels, but despised my corrections. Thus dealt the Lord with
his chose^ city Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37.
which refusing the means, and neglecting the times of her salvation, was
rejected of the Lord: thus the Lord dealt with the Church of the Thyatireans,
wherein was Iezabel, Revel. 2, 21
he gave her a time to repent, and she did not, therefore was she destroyed.
As for the other sort of sinners, who offend of infirmity, though they fall many
times a day, yet they rise again, and turn unto the Lord, disallowing that
which they have done, hating it, 1. Ioh. 3.9, 14.
and striving against it: nether can they delight and like of sin, but strive
against it, no more then a loving child abide the disgrace of his father. The
reason hereof is, because they have the spirit of God dwelling in them, Romans
8.14
and they are led by the spirit of God, which causes them to live a godly, and
a sanctified life, with out the which there is no salvation.


Gall. A hard saying. Is it altogether impossible the^, that a man may be saved
except he have lived a godly life?


Scholl. As impossible as it is for a Cammell to go through the eye of a
needle, as to be cast into the fire, and not be burnt, as to be cast down a
high steep Tower and not be hurt. I grant that the Lord is above his law
given to men, and therefore can if he will dispense with his own law,
but whosoever will live an ungodly life, presuming to be saved, because God
can save him, does as foolishly as if he should cast himself into the fire, Dan
3.25. Ps 91.11, 12
presuming that God vvil preserve him from burning, because he can; or cast
himself from a high tower presuming that God will preserve him from hurting,
because he can. God can do many things that he will never do, among which
this is one, that he will not save the wicked that continue in ungodliness until
their lives end; which may be proved by many reasons. First rea- 1 Timothy 5.21
25. 1 Thessalonians 4.7. Mat 19.28 Romans 8.
As first those whom he has ordained to salvation, he not only calls, but
also sanctifies, but they that live continually in ungodliness have no part of
sanct^fication, and therefore no part of glorification. Now least you should
think that the Apostle means that sanctification only which is in Christ,
and is imputed to us by faith, and not also some measure of inherent
sanctification, mark well what he says in the same Chapter, showing what
kind of men they are that shall be saved. Verse 1.
there is no condemnation to those that are in Christ; Now least the wicked (as
many of them do should challendge a part in Christ, he shows who are in
Christ: saying, who live not after the flesh, but after the spirit, that
wholy yield not themselves as slaves to their carnal lusts, but such as
delighte in a spiritual life conformable to the word of God. They then that
shall be saved must have some inherent sanctification. And in an other place he
shows, that they, who are appointed to inherit the kingdom of God, are by
the goodness of God preordained, that they shall live a godly life before they
shall enter into the kingdom of God; saying we are the workmanship of God,
created in Jesus Christ unto good works, which God has ordained, Ephesians. 2.10.
that we should live in them. If God has preordained that they, who shall
inherit his kingdom, shall live a godly life, bringing forth good works, so
that as our Savior says, by their fruits you shall know them, Mat. 7.16.
how can any hope to be saved without good works? This point, that they
which shall be saved shall live a godly life, is so manifest in the scripture
as nothing more. The Lord himself protests concerning these. That he will
put his fear in their hearts, Ier. 32.4^ Ezec. 11.19.20. and cap. 36.26
that they shall never depart from him, and that he will put a new spirit in
their bowels, and take away their stony hearts out of their bodies, and will
give them a heart of flesh, that they may walk in his statuts. Yea the care of
observing the will of God, in the elect, shall be such and so eminent, that
whosoever sees them shall know them thereby. Esaias 61.
For as the earth brings forth her bud, and the garden causes that which is
sown in it, to grow, so will the Lord cause righteousness to grow in them,
says the Prophet. And our Savior says, Ioh. 14.2 24.
^f any love me he vvil keep my commandments, but he that loves me not,
keeps not my commandments. And again he says, ^oh. 13.35
by this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye keep my
commandement^s. A second reason Second reason.
may be give^ why God will not receive those, who defer their conversion to
God, by newness of life, until the last gasp, hoping that that will be
sufficient if they call for mercy then* Because our Savior does pronounce this
general proposition, Mat 10.33
that he that de^ieth him before men, he will deny him before his father in
heaven: now such as live ungodly, without a care of doing the will of the Lord
(though they profess him in their mouths, 1 Samuel 2.12 Tit 1.16. They profess
they know god, but by their work they deny him. 2. Tim. 3.^
yea though they believe and acknowledge all the Articles of the Creed, yea
have knowledge of the Scripturs) yet if they live ungodly, they deny God, and
therefore shall be denied, if you will be tried by the Scripture, who so
defines of them as denyers of God, A third reason why they shall not be
received, Third reason
who defer their conversion unto God until their departing out of this life,
is, because it is not possible that then they can have a true repentance. Mark
1.4. Calvinsti. lib 3 cap 3 sent. 3 5. and sequent.
For a true repentance cannot be without his essential parts, one essential
part whereof ^^ ^ewnes of life, and what newnes of life can they have who are
departing this life? That this newnes of life is an essential part of true
repentance, it is manifest by the doctrine of John the Baptist preaching
repentance, Mat 3.8. Act 26.1.19.20.
who when he saw the Pharisees resort to his baptism of repentance, men
reposing themselves wholly on the faith of their father Abraham, says unto
them, say not within your selves we have Abraham to our Father, but bring forth
fruits worthy amendment of life, for every tree that brings not forth good
fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire, it is not sufficient to fear
God, for so did Pharaoh. It is not sufficient to be sorry for that which is
past, for so was Caine, Esaw, and Judas, nay Judas went farther, he was not
only sorry for that which was past, but also confessed his sin, acknowledged
the Innocence of Christ, and restored his unlawful gotten goods (having
herein a better conscience the^ many cruel oppressors in these days, who
come short of him in this point) yet was it not a true repentance; so did the
Emperor Maximinus who tyra^nically dealt with the Christians, Eusebius. lib. 8.
c. 17. 18.
until he fell into a sore disease, as he thought, past recovery; then in his
sickness bethinking himself how cruelly he had handled the Christians, and
persuading himself that he was punished with that soar disease, for his
cruelty against them, presently he commanded edictes to be given out with all
expedition, that the Christians should be dealte with, in all courteous manner,
and their goods should be restored them, their Temples reaedified, and
desired them that they would pray for him; which being done he was
restored to his former health; being recovered to health, he falls as hotely
to persecute them as ever he did. So that you may see, though the wicked in
such cases of extremity, show some token of repentance, 1. Kings 21 27. Fourth
reason. Prove. 15 ^ Esaias 1.14 Psa 66.18. Psa. 62.^2. Mat. 16 17 Rom 2.6. Rev.
22.12
as also did Ahab: Yet it is but a bastard repentance, it proceeds only of
fear, and not of love, and therefore cannot be accepted as a true repentance.
A fourth reason why such shall not be received, is because their prayer is an
abomination unto the Lord, much less accepted of, as it has been proved
before. The fifth reason, The first reason Romans 2.
is because God wi^^ judge every man according to hi^ works. And lastly true
repentance is not in the power of man, but a special gift of God, The sixth
reason. James 1.
bestowed only on the elect, who always have his true fear in them, so that
they ^un not into such excess of si^ as the wicked do, 1. Ioh. 3.9.
because they are borne of God and have always his seed in th. m:


Gal. You say well, repentance is the gift of God, it is not in my power, it is
God (say you) that puts his spirit in his elect, which causes the^ to live
a godly life, far better then other me^. If the^ I live ^ot as they do, blame
me nor, when God sh^l put that holy spirit in me, which will make me willing
to keep his law, I shall then l^ue as honestly as they, but yet I have it not.


Scholl. It is said in the scripture, Prove. 19.3
the foolish ^erverteth his own ways, and his heart freeteth against the Lord,
when Adam had foolishly consented to his wife ^o eat the forbidden fruit, he
concealeth his own fault, and excuses himself, laying the fault, in a
manner, on God; saying, Genesis 3.12.
the woman that thou gave me, gave it me. Wicked men, who willingly and
wilfully break the commandments of God, being carried away with their own
lusts, James 1.24
lay the fault on God that they do not live as they should, as if God had put
such wickedness into their heart so to do, when as on the contrary God calls
them early and late, Deuteronomy. 28.
ezhorteth them with the blessings of this life, and of the life to come,
threatens the obstinate, and oftentimes lays punishments on them, that they
may know themselves, yet for all this they will not regard him, though he
uses long suffering, and give them time to repent, whose patience they misuse
and misconster, according to that testimonye which Solomon gives of them.
Eccl. 8.11. Esaias 26 10 Psa. 50.21
Because (says he) sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed,
therefore their heart is fu^ly set to do evil. Yea they imagine that God
regards not what is done here on earth. But to turn to your words, wherein
you would not be blamed though you live not according to the will of God,
ascribing the fault hereof to God. Pardon me if I flatter you not. I say the
fault is yours, and you are highly to be blamed. For he that will live godly,
must use such means to bring himself thereunto as GOD has appointed; he
that vvil prolong his natural life must use such means as God has appointed
thereunto, as meats and drinks, else he cannot, and if he refuse it, he is
guilty of his own death. In like manner, he that will live a spiritual life,
must use such means as God has appointed thereunto; as reading of his word,
freque^ting of sermons, prayers, frequenting of godly men's company, and by
having conference with the^. Which things it appears by your own confession,
you have not used, and therefore no marvel though you have no delight in a godly
life


Gall. Well, well no more I pray you. It is pity such doctrine should be
publicly preached, it would make many despair.


Scholl. The revealed word of God must be preached, though the wicked take
offense at it; predestination is an excellent doctrine, yet it is a stumbling
block to many, who carelessly say when they hear of it; if we be pred
stinated to eternal life, our ill life will not make us reprobates, if we be
rejected, our good life will not prevail, that we may be saved; and upon this
false collection, they run into al manner of lewdnes, not considering that
those whom he has ordained to everlasting life, not only must, but also will
live a holy life. If there be any that will take an offense at this doctrine
of repentance and good works, it will be such as are or have been desperately
wicked: as for those that are not gone to that hight of wickedness, they will
(when they hear this doctrine) become more zealous of good works and walk more
warily, redeeming their time, lest they overpasse the time of their repentance,
knowing that if they have not oil in their lamps, they shall be excluded the
wedding. And if this doctrine were not co^venie^t to be published so many not
able me^ of God would not have published it, De doctrina Christiana lib. 1.
cap. 19. ide^ lib. 20. ca 6 de civitate dei.
Augustine, he says, that there are two sorts of deaths of the soul, the one
in this life, which is a renouncing of his former ill manners and wickedness
which is done by a true repentance, the other in the world to come; and
concludes in the end of the same Chapter, that except the soul dies in this
world, and begin to be formed according to the image of God, Romans 8.29
she shall not come to the heavenly blessedness, but to eternal punishment,
alluding to those words in the Revelations, Blessed is be that has his part
in the first resurrection, Rev. 20.6.
for ^n such the second death has no power. And in an other place the same
Augustine shows this point proving it by the example of David, De doctrina
christiana. l. 3. c. 2^
who when his wicked son Absalom was caught between the cliftes of the tree,
by the neck, and was suddenly put to death. David lament^d him sore: But when
his young child died, as soon as he had notice of it, he reioiced; the cause
he lamented the one, was because he knew, he went into everlasting torments
because he dyed a wicked man, and had not time to repent, and yet he hung a
good while before he was dead, and might have cried Lord have mercy on me, if
that would have served: But the innocent child he lamented not, because he
had no cause to doubt of his salvation.


Gall. Stay pray; me thinks you have spoken that now, which overthrows all
that you have spoken, you say that David doubted not of the salvation of the
child, I pray sir what good works could the poor young infant have? he had
none and yet saved. Besides when you mention the hanging of Absalom, you put me
in mind of an objection which you will hardly answer, namely of the thief who
was crucified when our Savior was crucified; he was saved without good works,
and why not I?


Schol. When I say that no man can be saved without some measure of
sanctification and good works, I understand always, Fulke in his notes upon
lam. cap. 1 25. the marginal. note.
that ord^nary course which God uses in bringing his elect to the inioying of
his kingdom, even as Paul speaks of f^^h, that without faith is impossible
to please God, and faith comes by the hearing of God; word. Yet in young
children this kind of faith is not required, but in those only who at come to
years and discretion. So neither is that inhere^t sanctification which
consists in good works and holiness of life required in young children, but
they are saved after an extraordinary manner, namely because they are contained
in the covenant of God with Abraham and his seed. So that this overthrows
nothing of that which I have said. Concerning the other part of your objection
of the thief, who was saved with out good works, and therefore there is no
cause but you may be also, in these words you do, as if a robber on the high
way should thus reason though I know that to rob one on the high way, by the
ordinary course of the laws of this Realm, is death, and ordinarily such
offenders are executed, yet I know one that by the extraordinary favor of the
Prince, was spared, therefore I will rob too: for I see no cause why I
should not be saved as well as he. You would think such a fellow
notoriously foolish who should do thus. But whereas you say the thief had no
works, it is not so; For as soon as he came to the knowledge of Christ,
straighte way he shevved his faith by good works, and for his time, he had
after he came to the knowledge of Christ, no man did ever so much. The Apostles
forsook Christ, but he (though he knew to defend the innocence of Christ, was
to accuse Pilate, the high Priests, the Scribes, Pharisees, Elders, and the
people of extreme injustice) stood to the defense of our Savior, saying this
man has done nothing amiss; acknowledged his godhead, and reproved his
fellovv reviling Christ, fear thou not God, Luke 23.40
seeing thou art in the same damnation? confessed his sins we are justly
punished; And lastly prayed unto him, Lord remember me when thou come to
thy kingdom; and yet you say you see no reason why you should not be saved as
well as he. If you can show that you have bin as careful to set forth the
glory of God, ever since you came to the knowledge of Christ, as he was, you
say somevvhat, else your case is not alike with his. His sins were sins of
ignorance, but you cannot plead ignorance, for it cannot be, but you have often
heard, that every one that will call on the name of Christ, 2. Tim. 2.19.20.
must depart from iniquity, else shall he not be a fit vessel for the kingdom of
^^d.


Gall. Tush, what tell you me of this and that? That I must be careful to
learn the word of God, I must be diligent in frequenting Sermons, frequent the
company of those that are godly, and live a godly life. I pray answer me but
this* Is not every one already either ordained to everlasting life, or
everl^stinge damnation?


Scholl. Yes.


Gall. Can that which God has already decreed of the^ be altered?


Scholl. No,


Gall. Why the^, what talk you idly and absurdly? As if it any thing avails
what I now do, either good or badde; since the decree of God cannot be
altered, whatsoever I do.


Schol. It is true which you say, that the ordinance of God already decreed
cannot be altered. Yet your illatio^ hereof is very false and sophistical. The
which that you may the better see, I will illustrate it by the like sophisme.
S. Origin tells of a certain sophister who to persuade a sick man not to
send for a Physician, Lib. 2. contra Celsum
used this reason, if (said he) it be decreed by destiny that thou sh^lt
recover thy health, then in vain do thou send for a physician, but if it be
decreed by destiny, that thou shall not recover, then also in vain do thou
send for a physician, since he shall not help thee: the sick replied to the
sophister (being belike a new married man) in this manner. If God has decreed
that thou shall have no children, in vain do thou use the means of a woman,
but if God has decreed that thou shall have children, in vain have thou used
the means of a woman, for that which God has decreed, shall be done, though
thou had not used the means of a woman. The Sophister said true, that if
it were decreed by destiny that the sick man should not recover, in vain
should he send for a physitio^, but his illation hereon was false and absurd,
being ignorant of the event and what was decreed: that it was in vain to
send for a physitio^, since God has ordained physicians, as an ordinarye means
to cure diseases, and therefore not to be neglected, but used, except we vvil
willingly refuse the ordinance of god, to bring to pass that which God has
ordained to be done. It is true also which the sick man replied, in vain we
marry for procreation of children, if God has ordained we shall have no
children, but his illatio^ was false hereon, that the sophister used in vain
the ordinary means which God had ordained to be used to this purpose; So you
say true, that whatsoever you do now, you cannot alter that which God
already has decreed, but your illatio^ or inference hereon is very false,
that it makes no matter to salvation hovvesoever you live, since as God has
predestined me^ to salvation, so also has he ordained the means whereby they
shall come to everlasting life, the which means if they despise they despise
God, and fail of their salvation. 1 Thessalonians 4.7.8. 1. Pet. 2.24 Luke 1.74.75.
1. Cor. 10.9. Number. 21.6 Psalm. 106. Numb. 14.37.
Now the ordinary means, which God has ordained, to bring his elect to
salvation, as by many degrees and steps, are first an effectual vocation by
the external preaching of his word, and internal operation of his holy
spirit; from this knowledge of God by vocation, to justification by a true
faith; from justification proceeds sanctification, and then glorification of
eternal life.


Gall. Come, come, while you thus discourse we forget our pace, spur.


Scho. Alas it is pity to ride faster, you see how our horses sweat with
this pace which we have rid already.


Gall. What? come, never spare a ^ade, spur, spur.


Scholl. Nay we may not use cruelty toward dombe creatures, The scripture
says, Deuteronomy. 22.6.7.
if thou find a nea^^ of young birds, thou shall not kill the d^mme (...)
them, and least you should think this a light or small matter, God promises
to the^ that observe this light commandment, length of life and prosperity of
daie^. And it is said in an other place, Pro. 12.10
a righteous man uses mercy toward his beast, but the mercies of the wicked
are cruel.


Gall. Nay the^, if you are so precize, that I may not spur my horse, but by
scripture, fare you well, I am not for your company. I see one riding before, I
will overtake him, I hope he is a better fellow.


Scholl. Farewell sir.


Gall. You are well overtaken sir.


Papist. You are welcome,


Gal. I pray how far ride you this way.


Pap. To Oxford.


Gal. I am glad I have light in your company, I have bin so tired with a
scholar behind, that I was feign to gallop away from him


Pap. What Is the matter?


Gal. He is so full of reformation, and instruction, and reprehension, and
contradiction, all upon holiness and good works, that he puts me clean out of
my humor. 2. Pet. 2.3.



Pap. You have said enough I know by that which you have spoken, 2. Pet. 2.3.
of whose brood he is.


Gall. Whose?


Pap. Of Luthers.


Gall. Luthers? what was he?


Papist. A man that co^tradicted the whole world, whose spirit of
contradiction he has left to al h s brood, and if you think I falsely accuse
them, you shall see the proof of my speech; you say he is all for good works,
if your have be not the greater, let us a light and walk a little, and he will
quickly over take us. I will speak for good works, and I will lay a quart of
wine, he will be as hot against them, as he has bin for them.


Gall Content, let us alight, I will lay with you that quart, I have no have,
only I love not to ride a dreaming pace; I vvoulde gladly hear the scholar
recall all that he has said. But I pray you what was that Luther you speak
of.


Pap. He was once himself a Friar, had vowed chastity, acknowledged the
supremacy of the Pope, and for a time, as others, was devout, in fasting,
prayer and other devotions, but having the spirit of co^tradictio^, he cast off
all care of obedience to his superior, denied the supremacy of the Pope,
renounced his vow, married against his oath: left off al good devotion, moved
such sedition in the Catholic Church, that yet never could be ended, and
whatsoever impiety you see in the people, he was the first man that loosed the
raines unto it, and has bin the cause of all such licentiousnes which now you
see too common amongst us, preaching liberty and licentiousnes, and by his
pleasing doctrine, drew such a number after him, that he had not only many
followers, but also mighty defe^ders, so that the Pope was feign to call the
Counsel of Trent against him, and, Sleydan lib. 3.
had he not hid his head, he had bin punished according to his deserts: It is
pity he was ever born, he has done more hurt to the catholic church then
ever will be thoroughly well salved: such a deadly wound has he given the
church. But I leave to discourse further of his behavior and life, and refer
it till we come to our Inn in Oxforde: for it vvil require a whole days
discourse to set him out in his true colors. You see the scholar is now come
near unto us, and therefore we must leave this talk, and be th^nke us how
we may take occasion to enter into your former talk of good works, that our
wager may be tried.


Gal. Let me alone for that, I will give you occasion enough, if you will
take it when it is offered


Papist. Yes I warrant you, I will take it, if it be offered: but he is come.


Gal. Come sir, I did well hope, when I parted from you that this gentleman
would have rode faster, but he loves to spare his horse as well as you, and
besides he is iumpe of your opinion, all upon a godly life, and good works.


Papist. Indeed sir when this gentleman did imparte part of the good
communication that had past betvveene you, I was the willinger to stay til you
should overtake us, for I am very willing to have acquaintance and conference
with such men: and the rather, because you so h ghly esteem of good works,
when as the most part of preachers content themselves with that dry doctrine
of bare faith without works, little considering that they are the very causes
whereby we purchase the favor of God, and whereby we may merit heaven.


Schol. Those speeches are false and blasphemous speeches, I cannot endure to
hear the^; the best works that ever were done (except the works of Christ) f
you will stand to the vvorth of them, deserve eternal damnation, if God
judge the^ in rigor and not in mercy, because they answer not to the
perfection of love toward God, which is required in our duty. Much less are
they of any value, in that respect to purchase heaven. Paul was a man very
full of good works, yet he accounted his own righteousness but as dou^g, Phil.
3.8.
much differing from the conceit of good works, which you have.


Pap. St, St, my wine.


Gall. It is gone, I yield.


Papist. Pardon me sir. I spoke this, but only to see how you like their
opinion who so teach; therefore I pray take not these my words, as my opinion,
yet I must say this; I have bin in company with those, whom you call catholics,
who give shrewd reasons for their opinion, such as, I confess, I am not able
to answer.


Scholl. I pray what are they.


Pap. Upon this co^ditio^ I will relate what reasons I have heard, that you
shall not take that which I speak to be mine opinion.


Scholl. Be it so.


Pap. Well then, they prove that we can satisfy for our sins, and purchase the
favor of God by good works, Dan. 4 24.
out of Daniel where the Prophet advises king Nabuchadnezzar (having highly
displeased God for his wickedness) to break off, or redeem his sins by
righteousness, and his iniquity with mercy toward the poor: and again
Salomo^ says, love covers a multitude of sins, and again he says, by
mercy and truth iniquitye shall be forgiven, which me thinks are very
manifest places, to prove their assertion.


Scho. Sir you must understand that there are two sorts of sins, the one
directly against the Majesty of God himself, which is when we transgress
the commandment of the first table; the other sort when we sin against our
brother, which is the transgression of the second table, as when we wrong or
oppress the^, as Nabuchadnezzar did: who had violently destroyed and oppressed
many. As for the wrong we do to me^, Calvin instit. lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 36.
we may by righting the^ satisfy men, of which kind of satisfying men, and not
God, Daniell speaks, when he says to the King, let my counsel be
accepted, Dan 4.24.
break of thine iniquity by righteousness, and by mercy to the poor, as if
he had said, O King thou have heretofore oppressed, and injured many, now
right them, now deal mercifully with the poor, let thy true and serious
repentance be manifested by good works; now if you will here by conclude,
that good works and mercy to the poor do satisfy for our former sin, with
God, you not only wrest the words of the Prophet, further then they are meant,
but also derogate from the passion of our only Savior. For if we will
satisfy for our former trespasses, them must we do it by some thing of our
own, not due unto God; but all things we can do whatsoever, are due unto
God by the right of creation: so that not Adam, before his fall, could merit
any thing. For all the excellency in him, he had of God; much less can any of
his seed merit (Christ only excepted) any thing, seeing the best of them come
not near him in perfection before his fall. Hence is it that the Apostle says,
1. Cor. 4.7.
Ye have nothing, but that you have received, and if thou have received why
boastest thou as though thou had not received, the more thou have received,
the more is required at thy hands. Gal. 2.16, 17. Ephesians. 2.8.9
And in an other place, the same Apostle says, by grace are ye saved through
faith, and that not of your selves; it is the gift of God; not of works,
lest any man should boast, if any man can merit by good works, he has
wherein he may boast, in which words the Apostle utterly denies, that any
man may boast, or attribute any part of his salvation to his own desert.
Concerning your second place you allege to prove this, P^o. 10.12
love covers a multitude of sin, it is manifest, that you have taken this
place upon trust, but he that lent you this place deceaved you; if you had but
only looked upon the place your self, you would have perceived, that these
words are not pertinent to this point, whereunto you allege the^, no more
the^ a poke full of plumbs; the which, if you ^ome the words next going before,
you may evidently see. Where Solomon shows the nature of hatred, Pro. 10.12
and the nature of love; he says, hatred stirs up contention, but love
covers a multitude of sins, by which words, nothing else is meant, but
where me^ hate one an other, there they will go about to discredit those
they hate, and speak all the evil they know of their adversary, according to
that of the Apostle S James, Iam. 3.16.
where envying and strife is, there is sedition, and 'al manner of evil works,
but where love is, if they whom they love have committed any thing amiss, they
blase it not abroad, but conceal it, for the love they bear to the party so
offending, which we see verified in Joseph, who loving his espowsed wife
Mary, when he perceived she was with child, Mat. 1.19.
would not make her a public example, and draw her before the magistrate, but
was minded secretly to put her away. Now Salomo^ saying no more, but affirming
only that the nature of love is such, as that it will not defame those whom it
loves, you bring it, as though he said love meriteth the forgiveness of
sins in the sight of God, very wide from the meaning of Solomon. Now
concerning your third reason, Pro. 16.6.
by mercy and truth shall iniquity be forgiven, mark well the words; he
does not say for the merit of mercy and truth (which you are to prove) but
by, as by the means, and not for the merit of them. The like speech hi^ in the
Prophet Ezechiell, Ezech. 18.
where the Lord test^fieth, that if the wicked will forsake his wicked way, and
do that which is right and good, the Lord will not remember his former
wickedness. In which words he shows his mercy in forgiving them, and the
means, not the cause whereby they may obtain mercy, namely by a true
repentance, which consists in newness of life and in doing mercy and truth.


Pap. This is but your private opinion; the fathers had a higher opinion of
good works, they took them for merits of eternal life.


Scholl. If you read them you shall find the contrary. Bernard in Cant sermon. 22.
Bernard says of them all generally, sunt via ad regnum, non causa regnandi,
they are the way whereby we are brought to the kingdom of god, and not the
causes of our obtaining heaven. and Origin expou^ding these words, Origin. in
epist. ad Romans 4 4. Ambrose de vocatione gent l. 1. cap. 5. August de spirit
and lit ca 17. and epist. 105. ad Sixth.
to him that works, he reward is not counted for grace but of debt, says, I
cannot be persuaded that there is any work, that can crave recompense or
reward of God, as a due debt. It were too long to recite what Augustine, what
Ambrose, what Jerome and others of the Fathers say of this point. For the
Papist will not stand now to their expositions.


Pap. Nay slander the^ not, they always stood highly on them.


Sch^ll. It is but a vaunt before those that never read them, Reynolds in
Apologia Thesium sect. 24.
as it has bin proved by a reverend learned man, and if they saw that they
made not clearly against the^, they would never have dealte so irreligiously
with the^, not only to blotte out whatsoever they say against them, but also to
add unto them, and make them speak as themselves list, altering the sense of
their words, by interposing words or sentences.


Pap. I cannot believe this, this were to confess that they rely little on
them.


Scholl. I easily believe that you think there is no such matter, for none but
the sou^dest friends of the Pope, and late king Philip of Spain, are admitted
to the knowledge of this mystery, who are sworn not to reveile it. Howbeit,
it pleases God, this il practice of theirs should come to light, contrary to
their expectation, and I can show you the book which they call Index
expurgatorius, wherein, is namely set down, what they shall add, and what
they shall alter, and leave out, and in what Auctors; and that it is not lawful
fot any to have any book, but so corrected, nor lavvfull for any Printer to
print the^, but as he shall have direction from this Index before mentioned.


Pap. If it be so I cannot tell what to say to it; but be it the fathers say
nothing for their opinion, yet the scriptures are very plain, that as badde
works are causes of our damnation, so by good works we merit heaven. For the
merit of good works, it is evident by the words of Christ, who will call
some to his kingdom, and shows a cause why they shall enjoy it, saying, for,
or because, Matthew. 25.
when I was hungry, thirsty, and naked, ye fed me, gave me drink, and
clothed me. Now this I learned when I was a young scholar, that quia or
quoniam, for, or because, are always called causall words, because we never
use them, but when we show the cause of a thing, and so Christ uses it in this
place, come and inherit my kingdom, for you have done this, showing the cause
why they shall inherit it.


Scholl. Part of that which you have said is true, as when you say ill or
wicked works are causes of da^natio^; because ill works are perfectly ill,
but no good works, (no not of the best of the Saints in this world) are
perfectly good, and therefore cannot deserve eternal life. Whereas you say,
that we never use these words quia or quoniam, but when we show the
cause of a thing, it is not true. But stay, know you him that rode by us eve^
now?


Pap. No, I never saw him before, but you may see he is a serving man.


Scholl. Why say you he is a serving man?


Pap. Because he wears a blue coat.


Scholl. So, your own mouth, confuteth that which you affirmed before.


Pap. Why so?


Scholl. You said before, that these words, for, and because, are alvvaies
causall words, and never used, but when the cause of a thing is showed, and
hereupon you conclude, because our Savior Christ uses these words, for or
because I was hungry and thirsty and ye refreshed me, therefore those good
works must be causes of enjoying the kingdom of God: but it appears by your
own words that, (for or because) do not always signify the cause, but
oftentimes a probable, or a necessary co^sequution of a thing. You say he is a
serving man, because he wears a blue coat; this because, signifies here in
this speech a Probable co^sequution, because few wear a blue coat but serving
men. A blue coat makes not a serving man, no more the^ a hood a Monck. For if
it should be the cause of a serving man, then if a woman put it on, she were a
serving man: in like manner does our Savior use these words (for or because)
in the place you allege for the merit of good works, namely, he signifies the
necessary consequution of good works to abound in those that are predestined
to eternal life. Mat. 19.28 ^oh. 14.23
For as a badge or cogniza^s, point out the man that wears it, whose man he
is, or as a Friars weed, be it black or gray, causes men to take the^ that
wear them, to be a black or a gray Friar, because it is a vveede peculier to
their order: So are the charitable works of the elect so eminent in them, that
thereby as by badges they are distinguished from other men; for he will
glorify none, but whom he first sanctifies; Coloss 3.10. Ezech. 44.7.10. Romans
12.1 1 Thessalonians. 5.23 Ioh. 13.35. 1. Ioh. 3.9.10 Ephesians. 4.24. Ioh. 8.39.
by their fruits you shall know them. By this charitablenes one toward
another are the true Disciples of our Savior known from other men. By this
our Savior Christ disproveth the wicked Jews not to be the sons of
faithful Abraham. If (says he) ye were the sons of Abraham, you would do
the works of Abraham, and hereupon is it that our Savior says come inherit
the kingdom prepared for you, by your good works and charitable deeds, as by
badges you have shevved your selves to be those men for whom it was prepared.
Your deeds have showed that you are the right sons of Abraham; the right cause
why they enjoy it, our Savior sets down in the same chapter, namely, the
free mercy and goodness of God only, Mat. 25.34
saying come ye blessed of my father inherit the kingdom prepared for you
before the foundation of the world; this kingdom then was predestined unto
them before they were borne, before they had done good or badde, neither can
any man imagine that God chose out such as he foresaw would do good (as some
have vainly imagined) for in that one man lives better then another, it
proceeds of the special grace of God. Job would have bin as bad as Judas, or
Julian the Apostata, if the grace of God had not bettered him: For not only to
do well, Phil. 2.13
but also will well is of the Lords special grace. Yet further for your better
satisfaction in this point, that it may plainly appear, that we ca^ no way
meant any thing with god, much less eternal life, you must consider, that in a
merit there are these three things necessarily required. James 1.17
be a thing of our own, and not his with whom we would merit; but good works
are not our own, but the graces and gifts of God Luke 17.9.10.
Thirdly it is required, that the thing wherewith we would merit, be of equal
value, with that which we would merit, but there is no comparison between the
best works of any of the Saints in this life, Psalm. 16.2.
and the joys of the kingdom of heaven. Now if all these three are
necessaryly required in a merit, and not so much as one of these three can be
found in our good works, I may safelye conclude that it is impossible we
should merit any thing at Gods hands; especially seeing we are bound by the
right of creation, since we are his creatures, to observe and do his will, and
no man ever perfectly kept his commandments as he ought to do, but came short
of his duty, much less did more then was his duty, whereby he might merit.


Pap. No? Did never any man perfectly keep the law of God? This is plain
against the scripture which you make the only rule of truth. Job. 1.8.
God himself gave testimony of Job, that he was a righteous man, and it is
said that David was a man according to Gods own heart. Psalm. 7.
Yea David himself is not afraid to say unto God, try me, and examine me,
and if there be any fault found in me, then let mine enemy prevail against
me, and lay mine honor in the dust; surely if he were not very confident
that he had perfectly kept his law, he would never have spoken so boldly.
And is it not said of Zacharias and Elizabeth, Luke 1 6.
that they were just and without fault? The scripture is full of such
speeches, it is a shame for you to deny that which the scripture so plainly
affirms and yet pretend, that you hold nothing but that which the
Scripture teaches.


Scholl. Stay, be not too confident that the scripture is on your side, and
against us, and that you may ^ee you have small cause, hear your places
alleged answered, then vaunt if you have just occasion. First concerning your
first reason you say that God himself gave testimony of Job, that he was a
just man, and therefore he absolutely observed the law. In citing the
testimony of God, of Jobs righteousness or justice, you leave out half the
testimonye which God gives of him, which if you had recited al, it would
much have made for the understanding of that place. The whole testimony or title
which God gives of him is this. None is like Job in all the earth, Job. 1.8.
an upright man and just, one that fears God and escheweth evil. Now these
words import not so much as you would make them, for they are spoken
co^paratiuely, as if he had briefly said, none on the earth is so just, or so
up right a man as Job is. This does not import that either Job or any else was
perfectly just; yet was Job termed just and upright, not because there was
nothing amiss in him, Job 9 23. and 39.37.
but because, without hypocrisy, in sincerity he feared God and eschewed evil;
not because he had the perfect fear and love of God, but because he had the
true fear of Gods by reason of his true affection in godliness, not by reason of
the perfection of his inhere^t righteousness. A young infant is a perfect man,
because he has all the essential parts of a man, body, and soul, yet is he
far from the perfection of a man, but daily he increases in perfection: So
had Job true righteousness, but not the perfection of righteousness. Concerning
your second objection, that David appealed to the justice of God, if he found
any fault in him, the^ he desired no pardon, but punishmente: If you had read
it your self, you would have perceived these words were not spoken of his
whole life, but only of one falsely supposed action; for being falsely
accused, that he went about some conspiracy against the person of king Saul,
he pronounces these words, Lord try me, and examine me, if there be any fault
found in me (speaking of the false supposed conspiracy against king Saul, of
the which he was altogether guiltless) then let mine enemy take me, and
persecute me, and lay mine honor in the dust. That he was a sinner the
Scripture records, 2. Sam. 11 1. Chro, 1.2.
yet he was a man according to Gods own heart, because he delighted in the law
of God, and made it his study, and when he tripped and went wrong, he
acknowledged his own infirmity and craved pardon for it, God accepting in
Christ his endeavors, not exacting perfection in his deeds. Concerning your
last objection of Zachary and Elizabeth his wife, that they were both just
before God, and vvalked in all the commandments of the Lord without reproof:
indeed they were just before God, but it was by imputation of the justice of
Christ, for whose coming they daily expected, and they walked in all the
commandments of God without reproof before me^, but not perfectly before God.
For if they had not acknowledged themselves sinners, they needed not have
expected Christ their redeemer, Luke 1.68.69,
and albeit they be termed just, yet it does not follow that they were
without sin. The word just, does not always signify one without sin, but
one that delights, or endeavors to be just and holy, according to that
saying, the just falls seve^ times a day; though a man sin seven times, Pro.
24.16 1. Pet. 4.18
that is many times a day, yet the scripture terms him just, by reason of
his affection and his endeavor to be just; Zacharias and Elizabeth were just
before God, and man, that is, reputed, taken, and accepted just before GOD in
respect of the merits* of their redeemer, on whom they believed, and
exspected: their endeavors were accepted of as just, though not just
perfectly, for so no flesh is, or has been just (Christ only excepted) as it
is plainly set down in the scripture eve^ by Jobs own mouth, who^ you
alleged to be without sin; he says plainly, Job. 9.20. Ps. 51.9.7.
if I should justify my self, mine own mouth would condemn me: and again
Eliphas says generally, not only of all the holy and just men that ever were,
but of the Saints in heaven; what is man, that he should be clean, and he
that is borne of a woman, that he should be just? Job. 15.14 15. and cap. 14 4.
Behold God found not steadfastness in his Saints, yea the heavens, are not
clean in his sight, how much less a man. This do the Fathers also affirm.
Augustine says there is nether Saint nor righteous man that is without sin,
notwithstanding they cease not to be Saints and righteous, because they have
their affection still set upon holiness. Aug de fide orthod. cap. 40. and al
Jnnocens. Pap. ep^st. 95 and eachirid. cap 32. Hier adve. Pelag. and idem ad
Rustia. Ambros de vocatione gent. lib. 5. ^.
Others of the Fathers are of the same opinion whose words to repeat would be
tedious. Again Zacharian and Elizabeth his wife, were unreprovable before men,
because they so behaved the^s^lus, as that no man could justly complain of
any ill conversation in the^, this does not prove they were without infirmities
or sins. For external actions may have good shows, and yet they may be
heinous sins, yet commended as good so far as they are external actions:
yea further rewarded, as good external actions, with temporal blessings. As
for example whenas Iehu had destroyed the house of Ahab, the Lord says unto
him, 2 K ng. 10 30.
because thou have diligently exequ^ted all that which was right in mine eyes,
and have done unto the house of Ahab, according to all things that were in my
heart, therefore shall thy sons sit upon the throne of Israel unto the fourth
generation: if you look on the external action of Iehu in destroying Ahab and
his posterity, he did that which was according to Gods mind, who would have
him destroyed, because he persecuted his Prophets, and for his cruelty against
Naboth: But if you respect the mind of Iehu in the execution hereof, he highly
sinned; for he did not destroy Ahab, as to execute Gods judgments against
Ahab, but to settle himself in Ahabs kingdom, and therefore that he might make
the kingdom sure unto himself, went farther the^ his commission, he not only
destroyed Ahab and Iezabell and their children, but also with great cruelty put
to death those of his kindred, least they should rebel against him. Wherefore
though in this place his external action, in destroying Ahab and his children,
be here commended, and rewarded with a te^porall blessing, yet his sin,
namely his ambitious mind to vsurp the kingdom, and his cruelty against the
blood of Ahab, is not only reproved, but also he has a heavy judgment
denou^ced against him in the Prophet Hosea; Hose. 1.4. 2. King. 10 30.
he did that which God had determined to be done; but he did it not with that
mind as he should; God would have Ahab destroyed, the which Iehu effected,
but not because God would have it so done, but being a^bitious to serve his own
turn, that he might enjoy his kingdom. The like example you have of the king
of Assyria and Nabucadnezer, Esaias 10.5.6.7.12. Ezech. 29.19.
both which did that in theit external actio^, which God would have done, yet
grievously sinned; their external actions were allowed of, but their wicked
minds condemned, so that the commendations given to external actions, do not
necessarily import that the doers thereof do not sin. Howbeit when it is said
of Zacharias and Elizabeth that they were vnreproue able, no doubt it was
meant, that they were just and righteous because they did seriously endeavor so
to be, and were so in the estimation of men; they had that kind of justice or
righteousness which divines call iustitiam viatoris, the justice of those that
tend to heaven, wherein there is always imperfection; not that kind of
justice which they call iustitiam comprehensoru^, the justice of those that
already have obtained the everlasting kingdom, in which kind of justice there
is no imperfection.


Pap. I pray sir if there be no man perfectlye good, nor any works so good, as
that there is no imperfection in the^ by reason whereof no man can justly
challendge eternal life as due unto him by desert, why do the scriptures call
eternal life a reward of good works? As where it is said, Godliness has the
promises of this life and of the life to come. 1. Tim. 4 8 Math. 5.12 Mat 10.42
Mat. 19.29 2. Tim. 4.7.8.
Blessed are you, when men revile you, and persecute you for my name sake, and
speak al manner of evil of you falsely. Rejoice and be glad, for great is
your reward in heaven. He that gives a cup of cold water in my name, verily
he shall not loose his reward. He that forsakes house, father and mother,
brothers and sisters, etc shall receive life everlasting in the world to come.
And Paul says, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith, for henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous judge at tha^ day shall not only give me, but
also to al the^ that love his appearing. Surely he claymeth it as his tight for
that he had kept the faith, and he says not, the merciful judge will give
me, but the righteous; judge will give me, not as of mercy, but of right.


Scholl. True it is that life everlasting is promised as a reward of good
works, and as a due debt unto godliness, but no where is it said, that good
works do merit eternal life, the word merit cannot be found in all the
scriptures, eternal life is the reward for godlynes of life, not because good
works deserve it, but by the savor of God through Christ, life everlasting is
a due debt to those that keep Gods commandments perfectly, because God has
promised life everlasting to such as do keep it, but none ever absolutely
kept it, therefore of due without the grace of God by Christ (who only of right
has purchased it) no man can challendge it of due and right, yet are goods
works all rewarded, but not of desert (for what can we do unto God whereby we
may make God a debtor unto us) since all that we can do is but our duty to
him, nay not so much in duty as we ought. If then it pleases him to promise
good works a reward, it proceeds of his goodness so to do, and not our
desert; he does bind himself by his promise to reward good works, but good
works do not deserve either the promise or the reward: it is a debt of a
bountiful promise, not of a due desert. Concerning that of Paul who (as you
say) claymeth a crown of righteousness not as a gift, but as due unto him for
his desert, it may be you will accept of the answer to this, if I bring it out
of a father. Hear then what S. Augustine says, commenting upon these words of
Paul. Aug. homil 14. Aug de gratia and libero arbi^rio cap. 6 and 7.
He crowns thee (says S. Augustine) O Apostle, because he crowns his
gifts, and not thy merits, proving it out of the Psalm, where it is said, he
crowns them in mercy and co^passio^, and proceeding farther says, and not
thee only O man whatsoever thou art, but eve^ thy self o thou Apostle, how
great soever thou may be. I have fought a good fight, it remains I should
receive the crown of righteousness, that is, the wages, nay (says Augustine) for
the wages thou have no power to command the same at all, for in thee, thine
own work goes not alone, the crown belongs to God to give it to whom
he list, the work is of thee, but not without his aid and help. When as
therefore thou say he recompenceth good deeds: this is as if that he having
prevented himself, in giving of good things, should retribute and make
recompense for them, by giving fresh and new good things; he rewards them;
but unto such good things, as he already has given, For if he has not given
them wherefore say thou? 2. Tim. 4.
I have traveled more then they all, and yet not I, but the grace of God in
me, and if he have not given thee to finish thy race; wherefore say thou, it
is not in him that wills; nor in him that runs; but of God that shows
mercy? Bear with me O Apostle (says S. Augustine) I see not any thing of
thine own, but that which is evil and naught, pardon me Apostle: thus we
affirm and teach because thou have so taught, I hear thee confessing and
acknowledging GODS goodness, I do not hear thee unthankful, I do not see thee
to have any thing, that thou have prepared and gotten of thy self, but what is
evil, and therefore when God crowns thy merits, he crowns nothing but his
own gifts. You see now that Austen differs far from you, he plainly
affirms, Aug. de gra. and lib. ar. 6. 7. Aug. in 141 sermon. de tempo. Psa. 16.
de verbis Apost. sermon. 5 and in Psalm. 51. and Epist. 105.
that this crown of glory or righteousness is not of due desert, but a reward
given of grace, and he affirms, in many other places of his works, that no
man can merit of God, since all ^he goodness that is in men are the gifts of
God.


Pap. Well then, you will not have good works to satisfy for any sin, you
deny that they merit any thing at al, you deny also that any has or may
possibly observe the law of God, thus you make godliness not to be of any
worth, and therefore little to be set by or regarded, which is as if you should
dissuade men from it. But since now you have discovered your opinion of good
works, I will tell you what talk passed betweeen this gentleman and me, before
you overtook us; he told me, you stood highly upon good works; at which I
marveiled much, considering this age wherein all preach nothing but faith only
without good works, presuming that you should not much differ from other of
your religion, I was boulde to lay a small wager with him, that ere I had
done with you, you would speak as much against good works, as you have done
for them, the which you see you have done, making the^ of no value, my worse
then nothing, even doung.


Scholl. If you have laid any such wager, the^ you have lost. For unto him I
spoke so of good works, that according to the ordinary course that God uses
in saving men, no man shall be saved without them: but since I began to argue
with you, I have spoken no one word against good works, but only against that
false account you make of the^, placing them in too high a room, in the place
of christ, ascribing that unto them, which is due only unto Christ's merits,
robbing Christ of his due, ascribing that to us and our works, which is no way
due unto us without injury done unto our Savior.


Gall. As I am true gentleman, well said scholar. Sir he answers you
right. For he that says that silver, is not as good as gold, does not
disco^mende silver. He has denied that false estimation and too high rare you
make good works to be of: He has not denied them their due praise, therefore
you see I have vvonne.


Scholl. Sir you say I account good works worse then nothing, even doung;
blame not me for so tearming the^, S^. Paul so terms the^, Phil. 3.8.
not simply in themselves, but in the matter of justification before God,
which only I affirm, that to justify us before GOD they are of no greater
force the^ I have spoken. The which that you may the better understand, you
must consider that the Scripture makes but four causes Ps. 49.78.
by whose obedience and fulfilling of the law, perfect righteousness is
purchased for us; the third So God loved the world, Ioh 3.16. 1. Ioh 4.9*
that he seat his only begotten son, that who so believes in him should not
perish but have life everlasting. Where you see the efficient cause to be Gods
mercy, the material cause to be the incarnation of Christ redeeming us by his
satisfaction of the law and sustaining the punishment due to our sin, Romans
2.23 24.25.26.
and faith the isntrumental cause apprehending the righteousness of Christ. The
final cause, the fourth and last, is the glory of God, Ephesians. 2.7
that his goodness and kindness might be showed. Here you see the scripture
teaches that these four above mentioned are the only causes of our
justification, good works have no place among them. Now albeit we thus teach
being so taught by the word of God, Iuel. in apo. Par. 2. cap. 20. Calvin.
instit. libr. 3. cap. 14 sect. 21. Zanch. de attributis dei. Reinolds Apol. p.
263 Buchan. instit. theo. de bonis oper. p. 344. Pet: Mart. common plac. class
3 de conf. christ. sect. 8. c. 11. Romans 10.10 Fox de christo gratis iustifi.
lib. 2 page 398. Fulk. annot in 2. Iacobi 12. Remenses in annot ad Collos. cap.
1 24.
yet we do not as the Papists slander us, vilify good works, or make no
account of them; we ascribe unto them, as much as truth will permit us, we
hold they are secundary causes of our glorification, nay we stand more for the
necessity of them to salvation, then do the Papists, we hold that no man can
be saved without them, according to the ordinary dispensation of the graces of
God. We hold, he that delights and continues in sin shall be condemned,
according to that of the Prophet Ezechiel. 18.20. The soul that sins, that
soul shall die. But the Papists hold not this necessity of good works, but
if a man want good works he may be saved notwithstanding, (provided always
that he give sufficient money to the Pope for his general The more money you
give, the more sins shall be pa^doned. Grafto^ it the 6. yea of Richar^ the 2.
An^ Do. 1382 Froistart Fabian. Gall. 6.5. Ps. 49.7.
pardon) for they teach that all the works of supererogation are in the custody
of the Pope, at whose sole pleasure they may be disposed of, which works of
supererogation, such foolish virgins that want oil in their lamps, may buy of
the Pope. Thus teach the divines of Rhems contrary to the word of God, which
says, every one shall bear his own burden; and in another place, the
redemption of a man's soul is so precious a thing, that no man can redeem it
by any means, or give a ransom to god for it. This doctrine of the scripture,
which overthrows the Popes pardons and indulge^ces, they cannot bear with;
it brought Luther much trouble, yea danger of his life, because he was so
bold to discover this conicatching trick of pardoning malefactors with Popes
Bulls, and such trash: nay to increase the Popes gains they feign that he has
authority to free me^ from torments after they are departed this life, flat
against the word of God; and what else is the cause why they so impudentlye
affirm that many of their Saints have done many works of supererogation,
yea have sustained greater affliction, then their sins d^served, but only to
make the simple believe, that these works and these afflictions are laid up in
store with the Pope for those that have no works, and that he may make them
rich in good works, yea though they be dead already? Whereas if in deed they
stood so much for good works for zeal to good works, and not for filthy luker,
they would not secretly undermine the doctrine, of the necessity of good works
to salvation, as they do, seeking secretly to root out this necessary point of
doctrine to salvation, clean out of the minds of men. That they would not have
this doctrine taught, it is manifest (though they would not have their
practice known) in their Index expurg. in which they discover their mind:
where showing amongst other things what they would have blotted out in Froben.
Index to S. Austines works, they command that these words must be blotted
out, opera et si^con iustificent: sunt tamen ad salutem necessaria to 4. Col.
599. b. c. These words must be blotted out, for (say they) Augustinus hoc non
dicit, sed tantum excludit merita iustificationis. Where first you see they
like not this doctrine of the necessity of good works to salvation. Secondly you
may see that here secretly they acknoweledge, that S. Augustine is against
them in the matter of justification, excluding works to have any strok in it,
which publicly they will not confess.


Pap. What tell you me of a blind book? I never heard of any such book
before, neither can I believe that there is any such book.


Sc. If you doubt of it, if please you, I will let you see it. You might easily
disprooue me, if it were not true, but the book is common now in every
stationers-shop.


Pap. S'r, pray sir, hold the Scholar with some talk, whilst I slip
behind, for I am weary of him.


Gall. I will. I pray sir what pretense make they, thus to deal with ancient
writers. For I doubt not, but they will pretend some reason of their doing.


Scholl. So they do, they pretend that heretics corrupted the ancient
writers, and that they do now, but rectify them again, but under the name of
rectifying them, they make them speak as pleases the^. Out of some writers
they take out whole tracts, sometimes they alter their words, sometimes they
leave out words, sometimes they blot out words and sentences, lest forsooth
they might be a scand^ll to the weak. But where is the other gentleman?


Gall. He is behind.


Scholl What Is the matter? Is he not well? pray let us stay for him. Stay pray,
it may be he may need our help.


Gall. Come, come, he would not have us stay,


Scholl. Why? why?


Gall. Since you will needs know, you have put him out of his humor. He
stays of purpose.


Scholl. If that be the matter, I am not sorry for that I have done, and if he
never come again to his humor, he will never be the worse man: for albeit he
said he would but repeat that which he had heard amongst the Catholics (as
he termed them) yet me thought he spoke not without some passions, as if he
had spoken from his heart.


Gall. Well sir since we are now come to Oxford I thank you for your
company; when I first overtooke you, I thought I should have a tedious journey,
but now me thinks we have pleasantlye passed our way. And for this days
journey I will buy me a bible, that I may be able to talk when I meet with
the like company. For if I light in such company, as talk of the scripture, I
sit mute, or leave their company, because I have read nothing in it.


Scholl. I am very glad to hear you resolved to read the scriptures, and
although as yet, you mean to read it, to no other purpose, then to be able to
talk of it, yet if you read it, I doubt not but God will so bless your labor
therein, that it will work better effects in you, then only ability to talk
of it: for the reading of it, will bring you to the true knowledge of God, the
knowledge of God to the love of God, the love of God to a desire to live
according to his will: Wherefore David says, Ps. 19.7.11 Ps. 1119.9 Heb. 4.12.
the word of God converteth the soul, it gives wisdom to the simple, and
makes the readers thereof circumspect to avoid those things that are evil, it
causes men to be new men, it is mighty in operation. So that by one sermon of
Peter, three thousand were co^verted. Acts 2.41.
Felix though a bad man, yet he trembled when he hard Paul preach of
righteousness, te^perance, and the judgment to come. Wherefore I pray neglect
not the reading of it, Act. 24.26 Rom 1.16 1. Cor. 1.19
since it is the power of God to salvation, and above all conform your life
unto it, and think not that it is an easy thing to attain unto the kingdom
of heaven. They that will enter into the kingdom of heaven must use violence,
and constrain themselves to leave off carnal and worldly affections, the way
that leads to destruction is broad, Mat. 11.12. Luke 16.16.
and vvide, and many there are that enter therein, but the way that leads to
heaven is strait and narrow, and few there are that enter therein. The
offspring of Adam is divided into four sorts.
Consider the whole offspring of Adam, what a number never come unto the true
knowledge of God, but vanish a way in ignorance and idolatry; all Titu. 1.16.
Ioh. 5.44. Ioh 12.42.43.
yet deny God in their works, and these are also in the way of perdition. A
third sort pretend they know God, and pretend deny the force of it, 2. Tim.
3.5 Ioh. 12.42.43.
loving the praise of men more then God, and these also are in the broad way of
perdition. A fourth sort there is, who know Calvin. institut. lib. 3 cap 14.
sect. 1.
Wherefore as you tender your own salvation, have a care to understand the
word, not that you may be able to talk of it, but that you may know how to
rectify your faith and life. Gall. 6.7.8 Gall 5.21.23.
For be not deceived, God is not mocked, that which a man sows, that shall he
reap, he that lives aefter the flesh, that is, lives carnally, shall be
damned, but he that lives after the spirit, that is, endeavors to live
according to the will of God shall have life everlasting. And thus because we
are now entered into the city, I leave to talk further of this point.


Gall. Sir for your good advise, I thank you most heartily, and this I promise
you, that hereafter I will have a greater care of these matters (...) I have
had heretofore. Now sir if you will do me that favor, as to ride with me to my
June, I shall accept it for great kindness, and I will bestow the best wine
in Oxford on you, and as good a pipe of Tobacco as ever you tasted.


Schol. I am beholding to you for your good will, I pray pardon me at this
time, I must to my College, and thus I leave you to the almighty.


Gall. A due withal my heart.


FINIS.

