ANOTHER LETTER OF Mr. A. C. TO HIS DIS-IESVITED KINSEMAN, CONCERNING THE
APPEAL, STATE, IESVITES.

Also a third Letter of his, Apologeticall for himself against the calumnies
contained against him in a certain Jesuitical libell, entitled, A
manifestation of folly and bad spirit, etc.

Recta Securus.

Domine libera animam meam a labijs iniquis, and a lingua dolosa. Psalm. 119.
Newly imprinted. 1602.

ANOTHER LETTER of Mr A. C. to his dis-Iesuited kinsman, concerning the
Appeal, State, Jesuits.
GOod Cousin: To you who have done me the honor, and your self the right, as to
rest satisfied by my last Letter to you in answer of one of yours, concerning
the present schism in our Church here in England, between the Jesuits, and
our fathers the secular Clergy of the Seminaries; I shall not need either with
eloquence, or by protestation to persuade you how glad I am hereof, hoping you
will take my word for it; neither yet how unfeignedly I rest yours farther (if
farther may be) then for ever.

Now whereas you write, that our Clergies thus opposing and writing one against
the other, does greatly scandalize both Catholic and Protestant: it is very
true, but what remedy? Vae to the Treaty of Schism, and more then thrice vae
to the defense thereof so general and by authority (such as it is) both which
have been the ground of all this, and not to innocents who can do no less, nor
better then they have done. For will ye (for example) allow a fellon, and him
his Advocate with prodigal tongue in his behalf, and not a true man as much?
What justice, or what charity were this? yea, or what civil policy in a
common wealth? Greatly (I confess) it were to be wished that in a variance so
Ecclesiastical as this, and in a Church so under execution as ours is, more
temperance and modesty were observed of all hands, as well for our own honors,
who are Catholics; as for the edification of our common adversaries, who are
apt to be scandalized even in our best cariages. Howbeit on the other side it
is no marvel, considering the irascible nature of man, if in a matter so taken
to the heart on either party, and that upon opinion of Gods glory as this of
the present schism is, all men's pens be not alike sober, I mean of the
Jesuit party, whose writings are foul, and full both of intemperance and
untruth: namely and notably, their late Apology, as may appear to the civil
reader, although unanswered by the Appellants, howbeit (as I hear) their
answer is forth-comming. A shame that ink and paper and the Press should be
so abused, to the propagation rather then extenuation of a scandale: though so
much the less shame, by how much the Author seems ashamed to set so much as
two letters of his name unto it. And yet (forsooth) must it pass current as no
libell Cum priuilegio Prothonotarij Apostolici, and that in notable
disobedience to the supposed Brief of his Holiness, promulged of late by the
said Archpriest, in check and heavy censure of all writings and writers upon
this argument.

I say supposed, inasmuch as were there any such true Brief indeed, is it
likely (says every one) that Master Archpriest himself, and his to whom the
promulgation, and consequently the observance there of primerly appertains,
would be the first that would violate it? or that Master Archpriest would, or
durst defer the promulgation thereof a whole quarter of a year as he did;
namely until such time as the foresaid Apollogie were come out by and for his
party? considering that the disobedience is as great to conceal the Popes
Bull from due and mature promulgation, as to disobey it being once promulged;
specially such the Archpriests concealing it, being upon a cause, and to an
effect so merely in repugnance to the tenure and purport thereof; wherein he
has showed notable disobedience and impiety to the Brief, and consequently
to Christ's Vicar, and holy Church, as well aforehand as after. Again, were
there any such Brief, is it likely that the Archpriest would commit so gross
a fault against it, as to promulge it in so many different and repugnant copies
as be to be shown? Or that not any of so many coming daily from Rome can
report thereof from thence? Finally, admitting the Bull to be truly his
Holinesses and truly promulged without all manner of fault by the Archprist and
Jesuits; it therefore follows not but it may be and is surreptiuely procured
by them at his Holinesses hands, as well as the Archpriests Constitutiue was, by
the spite and sleight of father Cowbucke and his fellow fathers; who held it no
sacrilege to mis-informe the sacred sea by their (...) instrument M. Standish,
and consequently to scandalize it.

In consideration whereof, as well for the honor of that mother sea, as for our
own indempnities, who in this behalf, and for other important points of our
Church and country, do stand in present opposition to the Archpriest and
Jesuits, it were meet, and necessary (happily you would think) that as well we
of the Laity, as our Fathers of the secular clergy should for want of other
competent redress, appeal to his Holiness from the Archpriest, concerning
the said Bull, be it right or surrepted, whereby to be quit in the mean time
of the censures therein contained. This (cousin) I grant you, might seem a
right Catholic course and honorable (as ye say) for the Sea Apostolic, seeing
that by it what error the Popes Holiness may herein unwittingly, and by wrong
information have committed, he may right as well to the informers rebuke, as to
the Appellants relief. But on the other side, when the penal Statute of
Praemunire here at home against such appeals to Rome is considered; the
Archpriest and Jesuits themselves (I am sure) are not of so inhumane a nature,
but that they would be loath to see us take that course, the same being much
more in our prejudice one way, then it can profit us the other against them.
Nevertheless, because we will not be beholding to their Fatherhoods so fained
compassion and courtesy, as proceeding rather out of their own self-love and
fear to be so called in question at Rome touching the Bull (which we are sure
they are never able to make good) as we could willingly adventure upon that
course against them (I mean we of the Laity whom the same with the censures
concerns alike with our Clergy) and also would for any fear we have of the
Praemunire, yea or of death, in a case that may be to Gods glory, and the
Churches peace, as this such our Appeal might seem to be: yet because it is
seldom seen, that the Laity of any Catholic Realm, at leastwise of this
Realm (that ever I read) did appeal to the Sea Apostolic, in any cause, by
means whereof this example of ours might seem preposterous, and prejudicial
to the Lay Catholics hereafter, as well as be pernicious to our selves in the
mean time, for the reason of the Statute alleged: and likewise considering
that such Appeal by us were no whit needful, inasmuch as our clergy is
presently in an Appeal at Rome concerning all our aggriefes with them against
the Jesuits and Archpriest, and namely and in particular concerning this
pretended Brief from his Holiness, as by the copy of their Appeal, together
with their reasons for it, you may perceive at the end of this my Letter; we
hold it not fit, either ex debito, or ex congruo, that we of the Laity should
appeal to Rome concerning it, and not of any pusillanimitie toward the
Praemunire (as happily the Archpriest supposes) which made him the more
aduenturous upon the wrong doing. Besides, that neither is it true, that if we
did appeal in this case to Rome, the said Statute can any way touch us,
considering that it were no appealing from her Majesty, or any (...) civil
Magistrate in this Realm under her, to his Holiness, (which were the point of
offense:) but only from his Holiness substitute, and that but a supposed one
too, for more then supposed wrongs by him done unto us. Thus (good cousin) ought
our religion and allegiance to the Apostolic sea to be discreet, else (as
you see) may it be prejudicial to us, and no honor to it; and thus much in
answer to that supposed objection.

I touched unto you a little before, a book set out lately on the Jesuits
party, entitled their Apollogie, etc. which forasmuch as peradventure you
have not yet seen, it going as it does but in hugger mugger amongst their
purblind friends for all the world like a libel, as not daring to show her, or
her authors face; I will here briefly unfold unto you the contents thereof,
referring you for your farther satisfaction to a copious edition thereof,
together with an answer thereto, which is shortly forth coming (as I said) on
the Priests party.

First and foremost, the Jesuit begins me with a sly preposition, or rather
supposition of a continued emulation, or animositie (as he terms it) of the
Laity of this Realm time out of mind against the Clergy, and still between
(especially these later days) of the secular Clergy against the Religious;
whereupon (namely as touching the later) after having laid great blame for the
same upon the Devil, the eternal enemy of the Church of God. he then
descends to the particular mention of certain Spies and false brethren, both
of the Laity and Clergy, that have heretofore given scandales to Gods
manifest heavy hand and fearful judgments upon some of them for the same:
wherein he ever and anon twits and calumniates her Majesty and the State, as
fautors and abettors of such vile persons and their proceedings. Good God, how
the Author belabours this point, and is driven for a seeming ground hereof to
his own forgeries of flat falsehoods in the air as well against the State, as
against the Priests party, which for our more ignominy he thinks he has
quaintly coupled together all along his Discourse, weening it not full and
honorable enough unless so haughty, and against a Royal state, though
otherwise never so full of lies. This shift the good Sir is fallen unto, as
well to win credit to his Discourse by making it seem of and against State,
as also whereby to give the statelier flourish to his falsehoods, as though we
had not true imputations and those bad enough otherwise against our
persecutors, without charging them with untruths. Jesus! that a Jesuit should
be so vain and impious, or rather who but a Jesuit so vain and impious, as
to frame so foul and false a matter and a method thereunto, in hope (belike)
that doing it in the clouds (for no name, as I said, have ye to it) he and it
to pass without shame; although not so. For, though from the cloud downward to
this world, he and it may perhaps pass vndiscried for a time, (which I suppose
will not be past August next) by what time the confutation thereof will be come
forth; yet upward toward heaven, where is no cloud between his shame, and
reproof to such the foul conscience both of the man and matter, it is already
manifest to God and all his Angels to his farther condemnation in die irae.

But to return to the matter; after that the Apollog^ has raked all the
kennels of our country, and beyond sea for English scandals in our Church
(where who doubts but in four and forty years ye may easily find plenty in
particular persons that have lapsed) and lengthened out his leaves from some to
many upon that sweet argument, in the end he applies them all to his
presupposed ground aforesaid, namely of a hart-burning and haughtiness of the
Laity and secular Clergy against the Religious, whom he means the Jesuit
only: and so patcheth me up his Apollogie not as an Apollogeticall defense,
but as a Satirical inuectiue against the Appellant-party, especially against
some by name, whom (though most reverend persons) he together with the State
most leudly slandereth. This is the sum of the Jesuitical Apollogie, the
ground thereof being the Authors mere fantasy, and a Chymaera like to
Turkie-worke, without any Idea or representation that he ever absolutely saw
thereof in rerum natura; and the upper frame altogether falsehood. But to see
how Stoically he carries the Discourse along a termino ad terminum absque vllo
intermedio veritatis, fashioning (as it were) an alliance of falsehood to
falsehood with so cunning connexions, and a conclusion so according, that to the
unlearned Reader it bears a reverend show both of verity and prudence; to
see it (I assure ye cousin) you would say you never in all your life read a
work more Jesuitical. How many are there (I pray) that reading in like manner
(for example) Amadis de Gaul his chivalry and loves, Barnaby Rich his
Brusanus and Moderna, Sir Philip Sidneys Arcadia and the like, being all
Chymericall fictions, think them true nevertheless for the time, reading them
with as great feeling as if they were verities: such power has proper
counterfeit, and congruitie of feigned matter, with her circumstances of time,
place, person, etc. Howbeit to censure somewhat such the defect that is in this
Apollogie, whereby for want of not here and there but altogether the Aptum (vz.
verity to the Discourse) the Pulchrum thereof is blemished; I would ask the
Author, what (for example) had M. Gifford his scandale at Paris, or what
Terils, Tedders, Mondayes, Belles, Majors, Hardestayes and such like their
Apostasies here in England to do with the present Appellants and Appeal; the
scandales which it concerns growing not on their part, (or grant they did)
but on the (...) Jesuits who were the giuers: insomuch as if any affinity or
sympathy be at all betwixt those and these scandales, it is betwixt those
relapsed persons and the Jesuits, whose wills and dispositions seem so just to
iumpe, and simbolize, ex part dati scandali. Where on the other side the very
act of appealing, vz. in that it does appeal to the sea Apostolic for salve
of all those sores, and the Jesuits their earnest withstanding the course,
cleares as clear as the Sun the Priests party from all and every so
heinous imputations; as being a testimonial of a clear conscience: and much,
yea as much as may, be to the glory of S. Peter's chair. There wanted
therefore art in the Author, touching this so special point of the fiction,
as cunning Masters as the Jesuits are in Chymaeraes: likewise in that he so
slightly and pusillanimously ouerskips D. Fishers Treaty of Schism; which is
the ground of all the present Schism.

Besides this Chymaericall conceit of the Apolloger, he likewise here and
there taxes very ^rdly the Appellants books as temerarious and unsound in
Religion, wherein how temerarious and absurd he shows himself, all sincere
Catholic readers of those books may discern. On the other side, whosoever
shall read their treaty of Schism, and this their Apollogie with the
Appendix, may well say and swear, that there was a temerarious pen indeed, as
well for matter of faith as of fact, and so of all their other writings upon
this argument of the Appeal, and the estate of our country; and therefore let
not a Jesuit become a censor of other men's writings or doings as temerarious,
till he have amended and satisfied for his own temeritie, both in his doctrine
of prince-killing, and other disloyalty to ones Prince and Country, as also
in libelling against innocents, ambitioning rule in the Church of God, and
being Schismatickes therein. But what tell I them of temeritie, who are
impudent, and whose ground where they take (be it even against the holy sea) is
Dolus, not Virtus, and all manner of falsehood and coggerie that may be imagined?

As for the latter part of the book, true it is that the Author has shown
himself therein his arts, or rather his crafts-maister, the same consisting
wholly of defamations, whereof that society has the exactest school under
heaven. How orderly he fetches in the principal Appellants one by one, and
has his obloquie to them all: and how reverently he calumniates them, for all
is done upon color of Religion, and as their position is, though not so their
disposition, In ordine ad Deum. Of one he says that his becoming scandalous
(he means for being in the Appeal) is for having lost the Jesuitical spirit,
wherewith he defameth him to have been sometimes attainted; and so of the rest.
In effect all that part of the Appollogie tends to this, that by deprauing of
the persons of some of the principal Appellants, their matter may be thought
bad: whereas (in truth) they are and ever were in the eye of all our Church,
and even of Protestants, so excellent men, both for learning and all manner of
good edification, that I know not what Jesuit in the world is worthy, Soluere
corrigeam calciamenti eoru^, much less that may truly say, Black is their eye.
Wherefore (good Cousin) if the book chance to come to your hand, do it the
correction as to read it with judgment; in so doing, you shall find it no
whit worthy so much as an ordinary civil approbation, much less of the
Appellants answer. Which notwithstanding, they are in hand withal, in favor
of the rude and ignorant Catholic, whom such matter with the method
proceeding from such persons as ought, and are thought to be religious, and the
same supported by too many more worshipful then wise Catholics, is apt to
seduce: so homely offices do the Jesuits put these good men unto, who else
would I wisse be a great deal better occupied.

Well, the point of Schism cannot by all likelihood, be now long in
difference, it being at this instant in his Holiness handling, where how
little soever, and but bo-peeke-like, the Jesuit speaks of it by his
Appolloger, he must be forced to say therein what he can or dare, and that in
the audience of all the world, and so to his shame, I doubt not; so little doubt
I of his Holiness high prudence and providence in so important a matter as it
is, importing the peace both of our Church and Country: and the rather, for
that his Holiness can not choose but see the eyes of all Christendom upon him
in this behalf, besides the infinite prayers of zealous Catholics throughout
England concurring hereunto at Gods hands.

Great was the judgment and goodness of God, that whereas the Jesuits had
abused the Sea Apostolic, by their so surreptiue procurement of the
Archpriestship at his Holiness hands, they in the same irreligious spirit of
theirs, to administer that authority no less abusiuely, as by libell, and
unjust censures against innocent Priests, whereby to deserve to be cited (as
now they are) to the bar of Justice both concerning the one and the other,
which else (peradventure) had not come to pass; so much was their latter act,
not only Peccatum ex se, but also, Poena peccati, to the former, according to
that of S. Augustine in his confessions, Domine tu inssisti and sic est, vt
poena sua sibi sit omnis inordinatus appetitus. Which being so, what a folly
and shame is it, that the Jesuits not being here in our Church and Country, a
party able of themselves for all the power of Spain to make good the offense,
that our fathers of the Seminaries must thus abbet them one against another,
and so highly to their own injury and disgrace? Call ye it a meek spirit to
be so humble? or rather is it not baseness and treason to the Catholic
cause, as well as to themselves, as great as may be imagined? Call ye this John
Gersons imitation of Christ? or is this an autenticke carriage of his Cross?
This, if ever any, is mere dispersion and not aggregation, subversion, and not
edification, pusillanimitie, and not zeal and valor in the cause of God.
Which notwithstanding the Jesuits quail, and are rather retrograde then
onward in the quarrel, it being so very unjust as it is.

There is no question, and we know it well, that both with their teeth and
nails they still labor to hinder the business from the Apostolic Bar;
wherein they do but condemn themselves and their cause before hand; inasmuch as
stood they upon a good ground, they should rather rejoice to see their
innocenc^e so called in question, and examined to Gods honor and theirs in the
foil of the Appellants: who on the other side, were they not most innocent
from Schism, and all other their adversaries imputations, is it likely that
they would ever have engaged their existimations, their friends, yea and their
lives (as they have done) at so high and austere a Bar as that of S. Peter's?
Was it ever seen that the man of a guilty conscience would prosecute a
trial, and that with so many miles travel as from England to Rome, by sea and
by land, far from all friends, and against a professed and mighty enemy, who
seeks nothing more then his death, such as the Isuites are against these good
men? Or rather is it not ever seen, that the man of guilt draws back and
dies, to think of holding up his hand, still holding down his head before a
Judge? In few, what greater testimony of a secure soul and innocence, can the
Appellants give unto the world, then their present Appeal, and personal
proceeding therein? yea, how much honorable is it in them, over and above such
their innocence from schism (which no doubt they will make good) they to be
withal in this business of the Appeal, Muri pro domo Domini, and also for
their country against those fiery fathers?

In respect whereof, though as touching the first, viz. the point of Schism
his Holiness (happily) should inhibit and interdict all pens and tongues in
favor of the Jesuits and Archpriest, it seeming to be a mere ecclesiastical
matter, and so within the sphere of his Apostolic actiuitie and office to be
seen and obeyed in; yet for the other of our country, such his charge were
not of force, other then of courtesy; forasmuch as it is a mere Secular cause
and of State, and it an express charge of Christ to all subjects, Reddere quae
sunt Caesaris Caesari, as well as Quae sunt Dei Deo; as also the ingenerate law
of nature for all men to be loyal to their country. So as in this case there
is no law, either of grace, nature, or morality, that can tie us from
opposition both with pen and tongue, and howsoever, against these fathers as
touching this point, whom we know to be no less infest foes against our
Princess and country, then Spain it self is at this day, and such as labor
nothing more then to betray that sweet portion, this sweet plot, our country
to Spain, a mere foreign and Morisco nation.

Nay more, it is a point wherein happily his Holiness and his predecessors have
been (I will not say too blame) but ouerseene, inasmuch as what misery has
this latter age befallen our Church and country through new opinions in
Religion, nor he nor they have yet duly seen to forestall it, as still
mistaking the course for it; that is, not by lenity and ^yle toward our
Princess, which by all likelihood would more have prevailed, especially at the
first, yea or yet, but by the clean contrary, as by Bulls and censures of
excommunication and deprivation against her Majesty, through the instigation
(no doubt) of Spain and lesuits. Great pity it is that so little politic that
holy Sea has been and is in civil causes; namely, betwixt these two nations,
as also between others heretofore in the like iarres (as ye may copiously
read in histories) through her partialitic in affection: and yet no marvel
neither, considering that well we wot his Holinesse-infallibilitie is only
peremptory through the holy Ghost in matters merely of faith, and not of
fact. So as in the carriage of a matter ofstate, more easily may he err by
being a Priest in function, rather then a Secular Prince, whose kingdom is of
this world. Very prudently (we grant) did his Holiness interceed betwixt
France and Spain these last years, to the happy pass of peace that is as
yet between those two nations; and why might not his Holiness have the like
happy hand between England and Spain, using the like indifferency and zeal
to the same effect? Which with great reason (me thinks) his Holiness is to
do, considering that it is as equal good (for the honor of England I speak
it) to gain the Queen of Englands favor by his love and kindness, (if so it
please God) as to retain (...) the King of Spain, and the house of Austrich
by so doing firm (...) it. What though her Highness be a woman, is she
therefore the less worthy to be fair spoken by the Apostolic Pastor, whose
pipe ought to be all melody (if it might win her) or rather not the worthier
for that? Much more then, for being so eminent a monarch as Englands Queen,
and descended of Progenitors so^ singular Catholic and well deserving of that
Sea, by their extraordinary benevolence and bounty to it in former ages. At
least wise her commanding a nation, and a navy so mighty as Englands,
whereby she has hitherto made good her disgust and opposition to that sacred
Sea, to the notable prejudice thereof, as well throughout most parts of
Christendom, as here at home in her Highness own dominions, may in all
policy enforce so kind complement at his Holiness hands toward her Majesty.

This latter consideration although it have not so well prevailed with their
Holinesses toward her Highness, yet well we see that the example of a
Princess and her sovereign Father before her so by it disgusted, and
consequently their detriments done to that Sea, has inclined his Holiness
that now is (being withal of himself Clement both by name and nature in
octauo) to somewhat more then ordinary and meet indulgence toward other
Princes: as for example his, and his predecessors continual dispensations to
the Princes of the house of Austrich, to match so very near in blood as cousin
germans scarce once removed: and also this other day his Holiness dispensing
the French King to marry with his Florentine now his corregnant, his former
wife yet living, and the like: whereby in so yielding to their frail
affections, we see how some he gains, and other some he retains together with
their seigniories and estates in good terms and temper to the Catholic
Church. Whereas the clean contrary and rough hand having been, and yet being
holden by their Holinesses over her Majesty and her worthy Father, we see and
rue to this day what holy Church has lost by it, which otherwise in the one it
might have preserved, and gained in the other. Do not we the Catholic
subjects of this Realm endure at this hour under her Highnesses displeasure
with that Sea through her corasiues, in liew of lenitiues unto her, her very
heavy hand both over our liuelihoods and our lives, whereby we are driven to
great patience, as by our allegiance as well to her, as by our Religion to God
we are bound? This is all we have gotten these four and forty years, by the
seueirtie of the supreme-Pastors to our Sovereign, and this it he loses. No
no (cousin) these are not the days as heretofore, when Princes were willing as
well in secular as in spiritual causes to be for the most part S. Peter's
leegemen. This is the age of discession from S. Peter's chair, an age of
obdurance, and if ever Antichrists Antelope. Wherefore it behoues his Holiness
(in all modesty and under correction I (...) speak it) now another while to
shift the raines into his left hand, and benignely though somewhat sinisterly
to retain Christian Princes in the right Catholic way, and in particular so
to win our Sovereign, if it please God: and not to suffer himself to be
miscarried by Spain and Spaines implements the Jesuits against her. At
leastwise I could wish, and I pray God, that howsoever his Holiness may
continue to err herein, we the Catholic subjects of this Realm may still
remember our duties, and despise the pipe of Spain. Then would I not doubt but
Gods finger would come in between, and work her Majesty's Princely heart to
his glory and our ease, which now that Spain and the Jesuits would seem to
take this office out of Gods hand; they rather mar then make good.

The remedy against which mischief is in our power, it being in our wills
as well as in our duties, not to be worse then Turk or Painim, as in such
disloyalty and misnature to our Prince and country in the behalf of that
Gothicke and Barbarian nation Spain we should be. Well, are the Jesuits
Dijtitulares, as being so termed after Jesus, but (sure) no way Dijtutclares in
this their gospel. Far better gods in that kind were the Roman geese,
which with their cackle awaked the garrison of the Capitol in defense of that
mount against Brennus his Escalada by night; and more worthy a great deal
they to be held for goddesses therefore among those heathen people (as they
were a long time after) then these fathers for gods, amongst us that are
Christians, whom by this their so unnatural position they would transform to
worse then geese. For, what bird may be said so much to defile his own neast,
as a man to be so very a varlet to his own country? The Jesuits
nevertheless would have it so, and to this effect it is more then probably
suspected, that the King of Spain has by their disbursements his pensioners;
and feed men here amongst us; yea, and the Jesuits themselves stick not to
vaunt that they have a finger not only in the Catholic commons of this
Realm, but also in the State, wherein (but specially the latter) I dare swear
that Mentitur iniquitas sibi. God of his infinite goodness (I beseech) never
to suffer the Crown of England to have such a circle about it as any so bad
Statesmen, nor ever may English Nobility be so stained.

True it is, and we are not ignorant by the examples of Sicilie, Naples,
Lumbardie, and the low Countries, that highly does the Spaniard dig^ie the
natural Nobility of th^se Provinces, indowing them over and above their own
patrimony (though very ample) with double as much pension from Spain: but to
what end? Truly, to no other, then that by so retaining the affections of the
nobles loyal to him, he may by their hands (being naturals) the easier
tyrannize over the Commons to their utter bondage and beggarie, as in th^se
parts we see it. This kind of complement may perhaps allure a base minded
Statesman (as none such we trust belongs to the Crown of England) to hearken
to such the Jesuits suggestion in Spaines behalf, but never a true nobleman
indeed. For whosoever such he be, that values the honor of his a^mcestrie
derived to him in blood, and withal the honor of such his office ofstate,
whereby he is incorporate to the Queen, and sworn a father to his country,
it is not possible that he can be so Iesuited. Neither is it probable that any
Catholic or other commoner of but common sort, sense, and ciuility, can be
drawn thereunto, notwithstanding that in the point of a child's duty to his
parent, and also of a servants to his master; it is strange how Iesuitisine
has debaucht a great many Catholics that I know and have heard of. I know the
Catholic children of either sex, and those (some of them) in their ripest
sense, and of extraordinary religious show and reputation, who since their
becoming Iesuited, have very scandalously not only neglected their fillall
duty and reverence to their parents, but which worse is, clean set them at
naught; such swollen and puritane-spirits those fathers have put into them, upon
opinion (belike) of their being Gods dearlings, and assured of their salvation;
or else upon persuasion that they being their spiritual parents, they ought in
regard of them to misregard their carnal, by how much the spirit is more
honorable then the flesh. It is no marvel if men so impious against the law
of nature, do teach their pupils all foul manner toward the civil Magistrate,
as also if they dare to preach it for good religion, a man to be a traitor to
his Prince and Country. But very much it were a marvel if Englishmen,
especially Catholics, who (as such) ought to be the best and loyallest
subjects under heaven, and such as all Princes may be glad to reign over,
would be depraved by their so Morisco doctrine, as favoring so much of Spain,
and the bastard Sowbucke, Spaines so lewd Apostle.

For setting aside the infinite scandale and dishonor, for such a Realm as
this to veil bonnet to any foreign nation in the world; what may we probably
expect at Spaines hands were it under her aw, then tyranny in octauo, whose
way-makers being religious are men of so foul desert both to it and our
Church? All the good that we may be certain of, were Catholic Religion (which
I grant were the greatest good under heaven) but with it such oppression, and
that under the pall and pretext of Relgion, as what can be more irreligious? or
what Catholic may endure it? Yes, (you will say) we shall have Indie gold by
the means; I grant ye, but how? so dearly bought as we had better be pleased
with our English copper. The same when we have it, to be forth coming to the
Spanish magistrates extortion, and perhaps to every rascal Spanish soldiers
rapine; or happily in liew thereof, the horn to your forehead, or the rape of
your daughter, or the buggerie of your son, or the Sodomizing of your sow,
with thousands such like insolences and shames, as are (...) natural to that
torrid nation, and you had better be dead then endure. There would be such
wresting then of Reddite quae sunt Caesaris Caesari by the Jesuits, that all
that ever you are and have, should thereby come under the execution of Spanish
tyranny, even to the accises upon sallads, eggs, pudding-pies,
shooing-hornes, and the like plain and petty wares throughout the Realm:
whereas our Savior Christ gave that precept in reverence to true, lawful,
natural Sovereigns, and not to tyrants and usurpers, especially forreiners,
such as the Spaniards would be if it should come to that.

How much more comfortable construction may we that are Catholics at this day
in England make of th^se words of Christ, being both by his instant example
when he uttered them, and more fully afterward by his Passion, at what time
though he were God, and might (as he himself affirmed) have commanded legions
of Angels at his Fathers hands in his defense against Caesar and the civil
magistrate, yet would not so do, but contrariwise yielded himself like a most
meek Lamb to the shamble, and in particular at his apprehension rebuked S.
Peter for drawing his sword against Malchas, though in so good a quarrel as of
him his Lord and Master, being (I say) by all these his examples taught, that
we ought in Gods cause rather paeti then agere fortia against the civil sword;
passion rather the^ action seeming by all his presidents (as man and whose
kingdom he himself said was not of this world) to be the more honorable point
of fortitude. Non veni soluere legem, sed a^implere, said our Savior in another
place, and also by his Apostle elsewhere, Obedite Praepositis vostris. Besides,
that the Popes holiness has neither implicit nor explicit, as Christ's Vicar
other commission out of Christ's own words, then that which Christ said
himself to have, viz. no kingdom of this world but merely Pastoral, and for
which the Prophet forespelled of Christ, that he was to sit in David's throne
who was a shepherd: whereby his Holiness is also to use and delegate but
only pastoral arms by Christ's own appointment, that is Peram and baculum,
and as all shepherds do, to take his sheep-walkes as he finds them, down as
down, and dale as dale, and not to transfer the same as S. Gregory
Tha^maturgus did a mountain by miracle, and as to bring Spain into England,
and the like, according to this new gospel of the Jesuits were to do. No no
(cousin) Saint Peter had no keys commissioned him by Christ as a Caesar, but as
a Shepherd, as appears plain by the words of his commission: Pasce ones me
as, pasce ag^s men's: neither is his Holiness at this day a temporal Prince,
but only in little Romania, and that by the bounty (as ye may read) of our
countriman Constantine Caesar.

Lastly, neither is it safe policy in his Holiness, as he favors the Church
his charge, to attempt any such tradition of England over to Spain,
considering that our Sovereign is truly a Lioness that knows her strength
and how to use it as well as ever any her predecessor-Kings of this Realm did,
and as already more then partly the Catholic Church through Gods permission
has found it, and his Holiness sees it, and we yet feel it as aforesaid.

Wherefore (good Cousin) to conclude my opinion and conscience unto you upon
this point, let all English Catholics as well for that we are Catholics as
English, explode and prosecute this doctrine of the Jesuits here amongst us in
Spaines behalf as imposturall and disloyal, and flat against the grounds both
of grace and nature; and let us stick as well to our country like true
English, as to the holy Roman Church like true Catholics to the death. Let
us be still armed with passive fortitude, viz. patience toward our own true,
lawful, and natural Princess though never so heavy handed over us, rather
then in our impatience to call in a stranger, and a demi- Moore upon us whose
language we understand not, and whose humors and fashions we shall never be
able to abide. In so doing though it should be the will of God her Majesty
still to continue harsh toward us, we shall give God and our consciences
honor both now present and in the latter day, as by the testimonial of our
true allegiance and Religion, bark the Puritanes never so currishly against
us as they daily do.

You have seen (I am sure) their late Memorial exhibited to her Majesty, and
the two LL. Archbishops, persuading farther vexations and grieuances to us
Catholics then hitherto have been accustomed, even to the pass of occluding
unto us all hope of her Highness grace and clemenie for ever, which sounds as
much as to drive us to despair; a point which they very unchristianly and no
less vnpolitickly define to be the only securing of her Princely person and
estate against all both foraine and domesticke hazards, as though we were the
only disloyal subjects unto her Highness in either of those kinds. But such
their malignant reasons and imputations leave we (Cousin) to her Majesty's
examination, who in her high Prudence cannot be but satisfied of our loyalty
(setting Jesuits aside) by the proof of these four and forty years, as
also see how dangerous a thing it is to a State, to drive so great a part of
subjects as Catholics are in this her Highness Realm to desperation were we
not Catholics, who by the grounds of our Religion would (God willing) be as
little disloyal to her Majesty in such our despaires (would her Highness drive
us thereto) as we have hitherto been in our longanimitie and hopes for her
favor: whereas what Puritanes would prove in the like case unto her Highness,
it is greatly to be doubted, considering their frantike spirit, and what
bellows blows them. But (we thank God) that not they, but Protestants steare
the present state, who being less forgone from God and us then they (how
foolishly soever this memorialist would make their Religion all one) is withal
so wise as to judge of that their memorial as it is, remembering how little
Queen Marie profited this Realm in Catholic Religion by her severity
against Protestants; it being the nature of persecution, rather to pullulate
more and more spiritual errors, then to retrench them: much more verity it
self according to that of the Psalmist, Fluminis impetus laetificat ciuitatem
Dei. Besides that, neither would such the Puritanes course ere a whit prevail
(I presume) so much as in State (setting Religion aside) with the Jesuit
party, which indeed is the Spanish, and that whereof they make least State;
for so much as (we are sure) howsoever the memorialist pleases to term them
Catholics of Religion and not of State, that they would collogue with any
such course, by either oath or other external sign whatsoever should be
required at their hands, according to the laws of their mental euasions and
equivocations grounded upon their Ordo ad Deum, which permits them any
dissimulation; and also according to the examples they have hereof given in
Scotland, by allowing and auowing it lawful for Catholics there to
communicate with Heretics in their external service, which any true child of
the Catholic Church would rather die then do, as holding it flat Apostacy. I
am sorry to say thus much of them going as they do for Catholics; as also that
grossly is the memorialist mistake^, to affirm our variance with them but
dissembled to the State, and by dispensation from his Holiness; which if it
were so at the beginning (as what wise man would cuer imagine it, considering
we are both one Church, and that under persecution, and the scandal it would
give) yet now both the State and all England sees, that if (as such) we entered
at the first like two friends into a fenceschoole to practice with one another
in jest, and to deceive the beholder; such our jest is now turned into
earnest, our foyles to edge, our vennies to wounds.

But leaving this point of State, wherein the Puritanes and Jesuits both do
thus wrong us to the world-ward though not to God, I have no more to say unto
you concerning the same at this time, then what in my former letter I largely
wished, and in this a little before I began to say, that is, that howsoever the
world goes, we show our selves (as hitherto we have done) loyal to her
Majesty, and respectfull to her law, and the civil magistrate under her in
whatsoever trial of our faith; and not malapert, saucie, and peremptory, like
as many Iesuited Catholics have done, as though a good matter needed not
also good manner. Constant it behooues us to be, Usque ad aras, to our
conscience if it come to that, but not currish, and surly, as in scorn of the
law and magistrate we live under, whom such carriage does no whit edify, but
rather more and more exasperate to our harms. Besides, that it sounds a man in
so doing to be guilty of his own death, and to die not so much for Religion,
as for an uncivil fellow. So died one of the 14 gentlemen, who being
questioned of his Religion by a high Commissioner, thought it not zeal enough
to avouch it Catholic (which he did) unless with this addition, that he
thanked God he was not a sheep of the scabbed flock of Geneua. Brief, our
obedience and service ought (according to the Apostle) to be discreet, and as
much as may be to edification, as well by our moral good deportment, as by our
religious. The Protestants that suffered in Queen Mary's time for their
errors in Religion, were in this point many of them to be commended, they
fashioning their terms very reverently to the civil Magistrate: and shall we
then that are Catholics be to learn of them? No, let us remember that we are
subjects to a Princess, no more an usurper, yea, more applauded to the Crown
by all England, and in especial, the same set upon her royal head, and she
anointed by a Catholic Bishop, then ever that good Queen was, who attained
to it through the pikes of a competitor. Let us withal hope that (seeing blood
will have blood) the Protestants hand which we are now under, will one day be
satisfied for the Protestant blond, in my opinion, too profusely shed, and
other their vexations in the aforesaid good Queeens days, and so perhaps
appeased. But specially in so singular a good cause as this of our Catholic
Religion, if no assuage or courtesy should ever befall us from the Protestant,
let this be our rest, not to be ashamed to be torn members under so thornie a
head as our Lord and Master Jesus. Which the better we may do and be, if we
will harken like good sheep to the pipe of our true Pastors of the secular
Clergy, namely, the Seminaries yet another while, leaving the Jesuits as
false ones, and who in their singularity and worldly wealth (wherein they
settle like Bettles in soil) have clean forfeited and forsaken the spirit
both of their Founder and of the Catholic Church, and so are given over by God
to themselves, and ad insanias falsas, as yet a little more I will show you and
so make an end.

First then to begin with what I now last touched of their singularity and
commonwealth, it is not to be doubted but amid all their Evangelical labors
in India, they have a special eye to their Bonum societatis as they term it;
but whether truly In ordine ad Deum that is the question. Not that I would have
you conster this Item unto them as in detraction by way of extenuation of their
wel-doings for Christ's Church in those parts, but truly as it is, that more
then somewhat or competent they respect their temporal boot in that
spiritual traffic. Which to do in a religious mediocritie might well (I
grant) beseem them, forasmuch as Dignus est operarius mercede sua, especially
if they would use their gettings as they ought and would have it thought
sincerely In ordine ad Deum, as the Benedictines did their riches heretofore in
England, in almes-hospitalitie and all good edification, I mean the gold, and
pearl, and spice, and such like Indian-wares wherewith they so copiously
every year enrich their society here in Europe from thence. But if it do
appear (as too plain it does) that by reason of such their riches from thence
and what they no less secularly gather here in Europe, they neglect Gods honor
by preferring their own before it; then (lo) must we needs condemn both such
their gatherings in India and here, and much more their said Ordo ad Deum as
falsely and hypocritically by them pretended; and consequently think, that Qui
cum ijs colligunt, spergunt. If it appear to all Europe that by means of such
their wealth they trouble all Europe by setting Kings and kingdoms at odds;
by sowing of factions wheresoever they come; by ambitioning above all religious
orders in holy Church In ordine ad daemonem, Aemulantes still Charisma^
pessima, and dominion even over the secular Clergy on which for their
greatest honors they depend; if they busy themselves in disposing and deposing
of Crowns and Scepters betraying one nation over to the hand of another, yea,
their own dear country, and all this in Jesus name; brief, if they be
scarce good lay men in their cariages, and but in bare title religious; if all
this or but half do appear true, how then (I pray) is their riches to be said
In ordine ad Deum? or how are they the men they vaunt and would be taken for?
Who that has but one eye sees not how that by so abusing their wealth, they
abuse God and his glorious name, after which in their singularity they have
chosen to be called? Who sees not that by being so unworthy stewards of
worldly talent, they are much more unworthy of the spiritual favors,
faculties, and prerogatives indulged unto them by holy Church more then to any
other order of Religion whatsoever; insomuch as in regard of the same (being
spiritual and holy talents) they may truly say to God if they were so humble
and penitent, or since they are not, any other for them, Domine quinque talenta
dedisti mihi, ecce alia quinque super furatus sum: for what has a religious
person to do with the fat of the earth, albeit he would use it never so well?
much less when abuse it as these do. Such fat does but infatuate them from
heaven, making them look toward it with fat cheeks which they should do with
lean. Who sees not how that their neastling in pallace-tops by means of such
their wealth, is not therefore their being true and kind storkes; insomuch as
they from such their tops and towers, pay not like the thankful storke tribute
to the place, neither kill they up all the frogs and other vermin in the
country about; but contrariwise would destroy the best things there, as here
in England we see the lamentable proof at this hour in their libel against
the honors of our best fathers the Seminaries who brought them over hither, as
also in the Catholic Church of Holland which they have likewise so foully
disordered with their schism and faction at this day, that it is at this
present in an Appeal against them under her Apostolic Vicar before the Popes
Legate a latere in those parts, who to his infinite grief to see it, is now in
redressing the same.

So haughty that society is grown by reason of her wealth, and the
countenance of the house of Austrich (whose coat and cognizance it has worn
from an egg, as aiming to rise and fall by and with the greatest) that
wheresoever in all Christendom it sets footing, it straight seeks to innouate
all, and to captiuate as well the Laity as the Clergy to her homage. Here
hence it is that all men's faculties must veil bonnet to it, and their good
names be under her praise or reproof. It is not enough where a College of
these fathers is, a Citizen to be noble either in blood, by office, or rare
manners, no nor to be never so honest, innocent, and of a safe conscience to
God and the world-ward, without their superscription or letters patents, which
sounds as though a man should be more beholding to them then to God, to a
Icsuit then to Jesus: whereas, bearing the print of their praise, it skils not
how very a fool, or knave, or both a man be. All men's honors and abilities
must depend on them, and their republicke, or else be reputed reprobate. Yea,
the secular Priest (as I a little before touched) which is the supremest dignity
in the Church of God, and it whereby a Jesuit Priest is more reverend, then for
being a bare Jesuit and no Priest, (which he can never be but by the
imposition of the Seculars hand, vz. the Bishops over him) such a one (I say)
not to rise up to him, and give him the conge and upper place in all meetings,
is to be esteemed an unmannerly puppie, and proclaimed by their drum^e for a
scandalous person over all the face of a country; so exorbitant is their pride
or ingratitude, choose ye whether. Examples hereof are so many, and so daily
here in our country and in our Church notwithstanding the affliction it is
under, that to recount ye them, were more tedious then a wonder. Was it not
(for example) notable pride and peevishness in a certain Iesuited priest
Northward now an assistant to the Archpriest, who being there in a worshipful
woman's house, where were also a secular Priests residing for the most part, he
upon some general terms of hers to him in confession, sounding as though she
were scandalized in the too peremptory carriage of one of the three in her
house, to refuse to absolve her, unless she would there at his feet declare,
whether she meant it by him (as indeed she did) a point which she refusing to
satisfy him in, as mere impertinent, nay vnallowable in that Sacrament; was
feign to stay his inordinate leisure and pleasure for an absolution: besides
the pride, was not this notable sacrilege to so high a Sacrament?

In like manner this other day, a parcel of alms coming to a certain prison
in London, and delivered to a Iesuited Priest of the last years condemnation,
to be by him distributed amongst the Catholics his fellow prisoners; a Jesuit
who was likewise a prisoner in that place, demanded that money of him as in
way of exception, that he being a professed Jesuit was the worthier man to
distribute it. The other on the other side stood upon the honor of his
condemnation, alleging that in that respect (though no Jesuit he, other then
in Voto) he was the more worthy. Thus stood they upon Puntoes so quarellously,
and so long in this high affair, that they could take no rest a nights, and
that all the prisoners there were very much scandalized thereat, who being for
the most part Jesuitical, and the brabble referred in the end to their
disciding, awarded for the substantive Jesuit against the adjective,
notwithstanding his dissigned martyrdom, which I am greatly deceived if ever
God suffer to take effect, as long as he continues Jesuitical. Out of this
spirit it is that father Cowbucke for all the disparage of his birth (which not
his basptisme could wash away) and other his scandalous cariages as well since
his Iesuitisme, as formerly when he was an heretic in Oxford, ambitioneth the
Cardinalate, forgetting how that to be a bare Priest (though no such peer) he
being a known bastard is against the Canons of the Church; although to be a
Jesuit (being such) well and good he may. A proper person (surely) to be a
Cardinal, or to carry so great a tail after him as he does at this day in
England: howbeit (insooth) as good he to be such a ringleader for Spanish
faction here, the matter being so lewd as it is, and he (setting his priesthood
aside) so base, as for his General or other outlandish Jesuit to be the same,
who are no whit English. Well, the man is a Jesuit, and therefore to be
esteemed whatsoever his birth or behavior be, and they worthy the Stropado,
^ay the Garotto that dare to censure him. See what a thing it is to be a
Jesuit, and what an Ordo ad Deum (as they use it) in disorder to the Church and
of a common wealth.

This is that society of Fathers of which it must be said, that by Gods
special providence it came up with Luther, as a curb to his and from him all
the ensuing heresies of this age, by which it has morched along like a
mattocke cheek by ioule, rooting them up instantly every where. A fond
foundation of a praise, as though Beer did not also come in much about that
time, which notwithstanding immoderatly taken and so abused, though good and
wholesome drink of it self, is as the Jesuits are at this day pernicious,
intoxicating the brain. This is that society that must be termed of Fathers
in Gods Church, they being no whit her good sons, and which would rule, not
knowing yet how to obey. This is that society that thinks it becomes it well
in Jesus name to grace her Generals, and other her inferior members to the
worlds eye, with most curious and costly pictures and statues amongst the
greatest Lords and Heroes of Christendom, which is a monstrous vainglory,
and which all other religious in the Church, are in their humility ashamed of.
But their kingdom being (it seems) wholly of this world, let not such their
vanity seem strange unto you, neither yet strange a many other their like
vainglorious fopperies. In few, this is that society that must be thought
most holy and perfect of all other orders, yea or then a general Council,
because (forsooth) they say, it is the most hated corporation, and the most
persecuted of Heretics and the devil of them all: which argument we might
well grant them for good, were it not that the society is also no less
disliked of the Catholic church itself. Moreover if that reason might hold,
as well may we infer that Lutheranisme was truest Religion in Queen Mary's
time, because the most persecuted then: but Causa, not Poena facit Martyrem
says S. Augustine; and our Savior, Ex fructubus eorum cognoscetis eos. These
be the true rules that Heretics and Jesuits are to be known by of all
Catholics, namely, as enemies the one, scandals the other to the Catholic
Church, the one without, the other within the same. And yet these others sway
mightily (we see) with ignorant Catholics in their good acceptance and
commendation, according to that, Stultorum plena sunt omnia. At a word it is
such a society, that were S. Augustine now alive and to write anew his City
of God, he would pen it down, and make it known for the most imposturall
corporation that ever was within the same, and as pernicious to it (if it
should hold on unreformed) as any malignant limme that ever has been
thereunto. For which ye may see what great reason the French King had to
expulse them out of his most Christian kingdom, and how little reason the
Catholic King has to give them the countenance he does, whereas the rude
Indians if they but understood the French Kings reasons for his expelling them,
would (I persuade me) do as much amongst them.

Another querke this society has wherewith to win to be admired, and that
is her prophecies. Great Propheciers the Jesuits are and fortune tellers, to
wit, not of trifles, as of stolen or lost neckerchers, handkerchers,
crosse-clothes, pin-pillowes and the like, like Gypsies or Witches, but of the
changes and deaths of States and Statists, though for the most part most
foolish and false, whereby you may see from whence their illuminations come,
and with what holy ghost their familiarity and correspondence is whereof they
so much boast. For example, they one while prophesied of the last Lord
Treasurer of England the Lord Burleigh, that for being not so much a persecutor
of the Catholic Church in general, as in particular of their society, by
Gods angry doom he should die Herod's pedicular death: another while that he
should be executed at the Court-gate in her Majesty's displeasure and to the
infinite contentment both of Court and Country, who notwithstanding (as he
lived a great Councellor) so to the eye of the world died a fair death, and
was laid out a fair coarse, and buried with great honor. So likewise of her
Majesty's end how disasterously they have prophesied, and do expect, I am sure
you have heard and do disgust as much as I. But what talk I of Protestants,
seeing that also upon very religious Catholics they have augured no less
fatally, for being their known or but suspected distasters? If but a pin prick
such a one, or his tooth ache never so little, it must be straight thought Gods
anger to the party, and that all the Angels of heaven have a finger therein in
revenge of his odious soul to God. Whereas what mischief soever happens to
any child or dearling of theirs (though never so prodigious, and the party
never so lewd) must be reputed but ordinary and natural, yea and Gods
blessing unto him as in probate of his virtues, and not in plague to his
sins. Thus rarifie they (as it were) all adverse persons to their doctrine
and proceedings, either to the devil or to nothing, and blub up their own
impes in presumption like rice or pease in piss.

I know the Gentlewoman my allie, who in this strange ballowne-like spirit
(being extreme Iesuitical) vaunted these vain ascensions of her soul to
heauen-ward. Imprimis, that her first ghostly father, being but a bare Secular
Priest, brought her but on her way to heaven; the second a Iesuited Secular,
brought her to heavens gate; but the third a professed Jesuit, he, oh he of all
the good men that ever lived, she was beholding unto for heaven it self.

Was it not as puritan a spirit in another Iesuitesse sometimes my good
acquaintance, who in the case of her daughters preferment in marriage, refused
to hold parley with a very worshipful gentleman in a motion made by a Secular
Priest concerning a match between his son and her said daughter, for no
other reason in the world, then because such a Priest, and not a Jesuit was
the means: which Iesuitisme of hers the Gentleman scorning as well for his own
honor, as for the honor of the Secular Clergy, gave her over with an
affrent as she deserved.

The like puffed spirit, or rather a fortiore was that of a Jesuitical Priest
now in Framlingham, who in a letter of his to a kinswoman of mine, persuading
her to Iesuitisme in the present schism, has these Pharisaicall terms unto
her, or the like (as I perfectly remember) in his own commendation: O my good
God, how much have thou honored me above thousands of my brethren in thy
service, how may I not hope for my long sufferances for thy sake, my watchings,
prayers, fastings, to be thine for ever in thy glory; Oh see what virtue is,
and how boldly it may bespeake Gods justice. All which nevertheless I would
have you think I attribute to Gods goodness and not to my own deserts, etc. How
like ye (I pray) this spirit of a man? Do ye think it tastes any whit of the
holy Ghost, or of his spouse the Catholic Church? Have ye ever read of the
like in any Saint of God, Confes^or or Martyr? believe me I have not. A Jesuit
so to commend himself, how is it not to condemn others? and to be too
peremptory a Prophet of disasters, especially to his distasters, though
commonly as false in the one, as Pharisaical in the other? How is it that they
condemn not only other men's bad, but even their best actions, not proceeding
from the instinct of their spirit, but farther, dare (as I say) to prophecy
Gods dread doomes thereunto, and to them, Oh monstrous singularity to presume
so high, or if not monstrous but meet, why may not (I pray) by the same reason
a Secular Priest or his friend as well not censure that society for most
impious, unfortunate, yea and reprobate for the paucitie of Martyrs that have
been of it in England all this time of affliction, neither any Saint of it as
yet so much as their Founder canonized in the Catholic church since their
institution to this day? Why may not we as well by the same reason calumniate
even those three or 4. Martyrs (which are all that have bin of their society
here in England) to have died rather to their shames for their sins, then to
gods glory, which (though vnconfirmed as yet by miracles for Saints) God
defend that absolutely we should. Yea God desend we should so much as censure
M. Atkinson the late Apostata priest, their renouned dearling both before and
since his Apostasy, for a reprobate, seeing that Non est abbreuiata manus Dei
at any time toward a repentant sinner. Howbeit, not that withal we are bound
in conscience to extenuate his lapse and scandale as but a trifle, which some
Jesuits lately have done, and that by their express letters in his
commendation into Ireland, which are forthcomming. But all their crows must be
white, which whether black or white (being but crows) much good (I pray God)
may it do them. In effect, there is nothing so religious, so honorable, and to
Gods honor, but impiety may deprave, nor any thing so criminal and
abominable, but it may be-honest at least in show, especially upon pretext of
Religion and holiness as Jesuits use to do all their evils.

But those fathers must not be repaid with their own measure, nor is it meet,
it being so much out of measure as ye see. If the Seminary or Secular Priest
should so render unto them, the example would be too scandalous and domageable
to Gods Church here amongst us, they being (as it were) the very brow of it,
and as a beacon upon mount Sion. So should not our Church be without continual
Schism, nor the State civil without imminent hazards from abroad and
corruption at home; so very foul for the most part are all their examples,
which to expiate how many of these good men have lost their lives as in equal
condemnation with the Jesuits from the State? And in particular so should
detraction be the greatest Lady in this land, it being the most Jesuitical
vice of all other, and of the most variety and facility to be practiced; for
ye may do it by supposals. Suppose ye (for example) that one of the Appellant
priests do resort to my Lord of London, it is just thereupon to report and
swear, that he has already recanted at Paul's Cross and is turned
Protestant, or married to a wench and become a cuckold, and so of the like
whatsoeuerye list, so the rule and standart in your conscience be Ordo ad Deum.

And for I speak of detraction, I will here relate and condemn unto you,
hoping you will do the like with me, one of the foulest presidents that ever
you heard or read of in this kind of Iesuitisme. The Authors whereof in
general are all the whole Jesuitical faction at this day in England as for
labiall slander of the party detracted; but in especial, and in way oflibell
but three or four. One is father Cowbucke in his late infamous Appollogie, or
what other Jesuit is thereof the Author; another the Manifester of folly and
bad spirit, etc. the third, the aforesaid Cowbucke, or the Archpriest (as some
think) in the Latin Appendix; and the fourth and last is one Versteghen, alias
Rowland a Coopers son, and a binominous fellow, worthily so marked and known
to the world were it for no other spot orstaine of his life then this one
alone. Of this fourth libell and libeller only I here mean to certify you,
letting the other three pass as thoroughly already either answered or in
answering to M. Watsons lasting credit (who is the man thus Iesuitically
infamed) by those of his own reverend coat and company.

This Versteghen then, alias Rowland (the honest Coopers son here at S.
Katherins in London) rising up only by brocage and spierie for the Hispanished
Jesuits, living now as though he were an Hidalgo in Antwerpe (as who may not be
a gentleman so far from home) having read or heard of a certain passage in M.
Watsons Quodlibets, where he feels himself touched rather for a very fopperie
indeed, then any enormous crime (as may appear to the Reader) takes the matter
so highly in blemish to his Iesuitical reputation, and withal pepper so in the
nose as ye shall hear. He writes me hereupon his letter, or rather his libel
over into England coppie upon coppie, in which (omitting how by the way he
calumniates the party of the Appellants in general) he most sacrilegiously
terms the said good man M. Watson, an Apostata unworthy of Priesthood, one who
has made shipwreck of his soul, a bussard, a dissard, a lier, a base
companion, an outcast of the world, hateful to God and man, a contemptible,
base, obscure, and ridiculous creature, a rauer, a railer, a slaunderer,
detestable, abhorrible, perfidious, malicious, venomous, shameless, wicked,
false, vile, a scholar of women and fools, a notorious lying knave, a Judas,
and no ways to be balanced for worthiness and credit to father Parsons; a
fit cadence (believe me) to such a strain.

Good cousin, before I proceed any farther in reproof of this wretch, do not
(I pray) your ears glow already (being so very Catholic as you are) to
read these terms against an anointed Priest? Do ye not already condemn and
spit at so Jesuitical a spirit? The fellow I have known a long time, and
withal to have been ever an impe of the Jesuits; else how is it possible that
professing himself a Catholic and a Gentleman, nay and to suffer for the ca
se, he to be so impious to holy Priesthood as these terms import him? Could
any Heretic, Turk, Painim, Atheist, Witch, Devil have been more
sacrilegious? or any scauinger more uncleanly? or could any though never so
enormous a Caitife have been more abiectly taunted then with these terms? What
think you when such a vermin as this, shall dare offer such indignity to holy
Priesthood, then which what higher dignity have ye in the Church of God? A man
would have thought that had M. Watson been never so guilty, and deserving
those Epithetes, yet the sacred Order of Priesthood, whereby he abides
nevertheless medicinable to all that sacramentally apply unto his salve, by
virtue of that Character which still remains indeleble upon him unto his
grave, would have had so much privilege with a Catholic man as to have
forborne him those terms; especially the dissard (for I will render him but his
own measure) vouchsafing in his said libel upon one Digs a rank Puritan, and
persecutor of Catholics the title of Master. But oh God, oh infinite
corruption in holy Church, when such spirits are suffered, nay nurtured
therein: when a religious Society, and that of Jesus can beget such brats! How
may we not fear, yea and in a manner swear that Cecidit ciuitas sancta, when
whereas heretofore the lay did therein now and then debauch the religious, now
the relgious do debauch the lay, and that as bad as bad may be; namely to the
outraging of what is most holy, to wit, Priest and Prince; the later as we
lately enough saw in the murder of the last French King, and latelier might
have seen in the now regnant; and also in our own dear Sovereign sundry
times by the Jesuitical hand had not Gods hand been the stronger: and the
other (not to go far for examples) thus in M. Watson.

Cousin, let me with your patience chide this bussard a little, though a great
deal he deserves, in zeal and honor of Catholic Religion, which no whit
warranteth such a scandale; as also in humbe love and reverence of the party
depraved, whose virtues I have long tasted of to my much spiritual
edification, and therefore may justly challenge to be admitted a witness in
his behalf against this libeller. Were Sir Thomas Moore alive, I am sure he
would herein take my part, who so Catholickly reuerberated Luthers gross
terms against the anointed person of King Henry upon the Apostata himself;
howbeit an office he took no pleasure in, and much more (no doubt) would he
have been rough with the outrager of a Priest. And why not I the same, who (I
thank God) auow my self no less Catholic, though nothing near so good a
Catholic as that good Knight? why (I say) should not I by his example have
also a pen to employ in a Priests defense, as well as he?

Why how sirrah Versteghen or Rowland, or (as thou dare to term an anointed
Priest) thou notorious lying knave, whether has Iesuitisme thus carried thee
against thy true spiritual father a secular Priest? whether from Catholic,
duty, yea and all humanity? Are not these terms of thine Percussio Cleri in
the highest degree? for which thou have deserved the ce^sure of the Canon and a
great deal worse to be inflicted upon thee. Have thou (thou base and obscure
creature) forgotten our Sauiors saying, that wherein thou misdoest to any one of
these, thou mis-doest to me, and that who says to his brother; Racha; is re^
g^ennae ignis, much more who says it to his father? Would thou thy self
were thou an Apostata, a bussard, a dissard, a lier, a base companion, an
outcast of the world, hateful to God and man, a notorius lying knave, a
Judas, yea a dog, and no ways to be balanced for worthiness and credit to
father Parsons, etc. be patient to be thus called, thou being much part of all
these, and but a lay mechanical Gana-pan which is a Spanish Epithet that full
well thou understand, and in English an earne-bread or bread-earner, and yet
dare thou to give a sacred Priest such atributes? Art thou not ashamed (thou
outcast of the world, and no ways to be balanced, etc.) after having thus
wounded thy father, to vaunt thy gentry in the end and blazon thy
coate-armour, who had thou been a gentleman aforetime, have herein forfaited
not only all that vain honor, but even the name and honor of a Catholic,
and deseruest to be hissed and exploded both out of all civil company and the
Catholic Church? How is it that holy Church has not incharged the Ostiarius
to whip out of it so impious a vermin as thou against Priesthood, as well as the
Jew, the usurer, and the dog? How is it that by this thy foul president all
Catholics may not judge thee for a man that wilt as little stick to defloure
thine own sister, murder thy mother, prostitute thy daughter, or do and be
worse if worse may be? How is it that the Jesuits themselves whose impe and
instrument thou art thus to massacre thy true spiritual father, do not for
their credits sake (at least in show to the Catholic Church) tear thee in
pieces? Wretch that thou art so far forth to forget thy self and the
Catholic Church thy mother, as to contemn thy father. Wretch that thou art,
whom God almighties curse upon Chams issue for deriding his fathers frailty,
could not terrify from thus doing the like. Wretch that thou art, whose heart,
whose head, whose hand could be so wicked. Wretched goldsmith that thou art,
never hereafter grave thou any holy figure, having been herein so highly
unholy. Wretched Painter, never paint thou but Owls and Asses, after having
been so scurrilous. Wretched Coopers son as Versteghen, or (perhaps) a
Tinkars as Rowland, never assist thou more at holy altar, nor to be partaker of
any Sacrament at a Priests hand, having set Priesthood so at naught. Wretch
that thou art, shun thou henceforward the Communion of Saints, having thus spet
on a Challice which is the cup of life. Are these the ty^es thou payest unto
the altar? Is this thy kiss unto the spouse of Christ? or weenest thou (happily)
that Honora patrem and matrem is not meant spiritually by a Priest and the
church, but only carnally by the Cooper thy father and his wife? or rather art
thou (happily) ashamed of thy Baptism, and of all the absolutions and holy Ostes
that thou ever receiuedst at a Priests hands, why thus thou should abuse a
Priest like one that were turned worse then Turk? Fie on thee wretched
Catholic, wretched Gentleman, wretched Englishman, wretched Painter, wretched
Coopers son, and all for being so Jesuitical. Think thou not (thou vile
and venomous companion) that as well as I and with me all good Catholics here
on earth, the very Angels of heaven do not cry shame and vengeance to light on
thee? Fear thou not that either thunderboltes from heaven should pash thee,
or stones in the earth rise up against thee? Fear thou not that thy name
(whether of the two or what other I wot not) is already written in hell, and a
place there prepared for thee, for having thus scandalized all the Catholic
Church on earth, and the Court of heaven, unless thou repent and notably
satisfy them both? Which how can thou less do or better, then like the
Scorpion whose blood rubbed upon the body it has stung, cures the wound; so
thou with the pen wherewith thou have transgressed against holy Priesthood,
make the eternal Priest of the order of Melchizedecke (who is to judge thee
another day) and Master Watson the same under him present amends? Else be thou
still as thou art a contemptible, detestable, abhorrible fellow, and one every
way to be balanced for unworthiness and discredit to any worse then father
Parsons, especially to him for base birth binominisme. And over and above all
this, omitting what plague hangs over thy head in heaven, and is at thy foot
in hell, receive in steed of the coat thou boastest of, this other from me,
more fitly (I wisse) agreeing to thy bellows and painting stuff, and to thy
fathers tubs and hoops, though he good man never dreamed (I dare swear) of any
gold-barres in a scutchion in all his life, but rather of halfe-penie silver in
his purse.

Versteghen alias Rowland, etc. his Coat.
HE bears a dunghill fumant proper of two parts; on the first a Tub-hoope
poudered-scabs, nittie; on the second a Pensill between two Kearne- crickets
rampant, mordant; the first Capital, the latter Pectorall, proper. Upon a Tub
on a Torce of his colors a dasie-Picker, crouchant, lowsant, and coughing
backward through his posteriour rags upon a Gyrisole. This Gyrisole is a
Plant that still waits on the Sun.

And this in liew that I was not at thine elbow when thou wrotest that impious
libell, whereby I might have rasht the pen out of thy fist and pricked out thine
eyes therewith, be mine and with me all good Catholics easy censure unto thee
till thou cry Peccaui, which we will expect. Indge ye (cousin) what shame we
can do him less, who has done so high scorn to our father: howbeit (I assure
ye) it is shame pretty competent to the fellow considering his vain glorious
humor, and the gentilitiall Puntoes he stands on being but a Coopers son,
and likewise for all his horns, which for his wifes honor (whom I never noted
but virtuous) transial, I am not apt to believe.

Now to satisfy you somewhat or rather to the full of M. Watson, whom
Uersteghen, alias Rowland, etc. has thus abused; for the credit of what I am
to say, I give you first to understand, that I have known this reverend Priest
these fifteen years, namely from the time of that his slip, which this wretch
so injuriously vpbraideth unto him as a flat Apostaticall fall, such (for
example) as Judas, Julian, Luther, yea and many Jesuits (which were too long
to name) with infinite Archheretikes and others have fallen into, from which
kind of enormous lapse he is and ever was in heart most free, and not as S.
Peter's, S. Marcellines, and thousand others now glorious Saints in heaven, and
nere a whit the less honored therefore in holy Church; in which latter kind
this slip and frailty of M. Watsons was; since which how priestly his carriage
has ever been, as also before, all that then and now knew and know him can and
will witness. To the utter shame then and confusion of the devil and all his
Versteghens, Rowlands, etc. that dare so gracelessely presume to vpbraid him,
whom in all show God has pardoned, and his sweet spouse accepted of again to
the setting forth of both their glories, as is apparent in the many souls
converted, altars erected, and other charitable works done by him since that
time, I will here set ye down the true narration of all that accident.

He the said M. Watson was apprehended in Sussex, traveling on the way to a
certain worshipful Gentlewomans house (as was supposed but not proved) and so
brought up to London, and committed close prisoner in Bridewell; where to the
end to secure from hazard by his own personal cautions and caueats (for
means of message he had none in that place) certain dear Catholic friends
of his then in the city, who by a secret note (he understood) were called in
question about him* to make way hereunto, he yielded in his ouertender love to
them, to go to the Protestant-seruice there in the prison; which such his
frailty (for frailty I must needs term it, seeing it was so, and often have
I heard the good man himself with tears and extreme remorse so term and
acknowledge it) took this effect, that presently upon this his yielding he was
permitted the liberty of the city, yet that but with his keeper neither, by
means whereof he was able to instruct his said friends how the better, and
with the more congruence to his deposition already taken concerning them, they
might answer for themselves, and be secured as they were. This (sweet Cousin)
was the quality and quantity of his fault, and not any misfaith he ever bore
to Catholic Religion, or a mind to hurt any Catholic, or yet to remain one
minute of an hour in that dangerous estate longer then he could get out of it;
but only a frail love (as ye have heard) toward the temporal, and partly
also the spiritual good of his Catholic friends, whom (he feared) might by
this temptation of trouble for his sake have failed. Which turn to them
as soon as he had served, see here God again: the goodman using the benefit of
his said liberty comes in place of other Priests his brethren* and there
before them al acknowledges his frailty, and according to his humble and
penitent heart was by one of them (now a blessed Martyr in heaven) eftsoons
confessed, and again reduced from whence he was slidden. After which his
happy resurrection, being wished by his ghostly father and the rest to escape
away (as well he might without danger of any at that time) yet would he not,
neither was it the will of God. For, what advantage (think ye) would these
malignant Satyrs have had against him if he had flipt away (as few in that
case but would) seeing that notwithstanding his constant resolution then, and
perseverance in the same to this present hour, they still bark against him
envying at his happiness. But God whose judgments are Abissus multa, would
(it seems) have it so, to the end he to be a curb to the Jesuits as (sure)
he has been after innumerable wrongs and slanders patiently put up at their
hands. And whether it boded some such matter in father Garnes his storming at
Master Watsons return into England (as afterward he went over but s^aid not)
or what other glory to God and to himself in time to come, I leave to define;
being verily persuaded, and so I am sure would you if you knew as much as I,
that Digitus Dei erat hic, he to be in England at this day. And thereupon no
persuasion prevailing with him for his escape, voluntarily returning again to
prison, he there the very next Sunday solemnly in the midst of seruice-time
came into the Chapel, and publicly before all the Protestant-congregation
calling out aloud unto the Minister to hold his peace, with great Emphasis and
fe^our of spirit recalled himself from death to life, utterly abiuring his
aforesaid submission as a most lewd equivocation and dissembling with his Lord
God, professing and confessing withal our holy Catholic Religion in every
part and parcel thereof, and himself (how unworthy soever) an anointed
Catholic Priest. All which he did with so good grace (as having tongue,
voice, and action at command,) that the devil was highly confused, and he
thereupon committed closer prisoner then before. What would ye more? what
gained the Protestant or Jesuit now hereby, or rather what not God? After which
his most Catholic confession made, a man would have thought that in respect
of the extremer usage he was thereby to expect in that prison, he would now at
least (fearing his frailty by former proof) have inclined to an escape,
namely having private means wrought for it, and he instantly persuaded
thereunto; yet would he not until the Assizes were past, alleging for
himself that the devil and his adversaries should never have that advantage
to vpbraid him with running away, so long as there was any likelihood of his
public arraignement and open death. So as he remained there in that loathsome
prison till the summer Assizes were come and past, to wit, the space of two and
twenty weeks, expecting with the greatest alacrity in the world what God
would award; in which space having no comfort but from him, what unusual
sufferance he was put unto above all that ever I heard of any English Jesuit, I
here omit to show you, both for the honor of the State with whose priuitie (I
am sure) such indignity could never have been offered to a freeborn subject,
(as by her heavy censure upon the honorable Lady Lattimers two Aldermen,
Skinner and Catcher is evident) as also in religious regard to the good man
himself, who in his priestly modesty can be content the same to be concealed
from the world, suffising that the Angels of heaven and his own conscience can
witness it to Gods honor; and lastly for that according to the heathen Poet;
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera foelix. Notwithstanding, partly you may
guess how great it was by the Jesuits their extreme reproching him ever since,
who in their voluptuous pusillanimitie can neither abide themselves to suffer
the least affliction for Christ and the Catholic cause; but abhor those that
do: the examples both of the one and the other are too manifest and too many
here in our Church and country what so ere they are elsewhere. A shame that a
religious corporation should so join hands with the Devil against the
virtuous; as on the other side oh eminent glory to M. Watson to be so maliced,
especially considering the laudable use he makes thereof, as in the
demonstration of an inuicted mind; his opposing against their present Schism
in our Church, and Spanish faction within our country; his detection of their
impostures; and every where his meeting their evils with good; as for example
his furthering an annual Alms to be bestowed on father Cowbucks mother and
sister toward their sustenance, who else had gone a begging.

At a word, as touching the point of the Appeal, and of Spanish state against
these fathers, he has been and is a very ecclesiastical Machabie at this day,
and so much the more forward herein, by how much he with not passing some three
or four more, far before any of his brethren foresaw the Jesuits proiects
concerning the one and the other, to wit, the Spaniard to rule the civil roast
of this Realm, and they the Ecclesiastical. It is very true that whiles
Cardinal Allan lived, neither he nor other his grave brethren whom he had made
of his mind (for I think not any besides M. Doctor Bagshaw, M. Bluet, and M.
Mush he found so with him foresighted) would in modesty and for reverence they
bore unto him their so worthy father intermeddle herein, referring it all to
his prudence, whom they knew disgusted with these fathers, and as they gest
upon the same grounds. But so soon as God had taken him away whom our English
Jesuits stood in awe of, whereby they were now become (as they thought) their
own men to ward the execution of those their two plots, which till then they
carried but only in dissigne, and but preparatiuely as far as they durst for
fear of him: then (lo) the said reverend Doctor, and the others with him
forenamed, with one or two more unnamed, thought it high time to be seen as at
this day they are in opposition against their fatherhoods, like true Catholic
Priests and Patriots, assuming unto them in especial this reverend brother of
theirs M. Watson, both in regard of his perspicuous judgment in so important a
business, and the integrity and confidence of his heart where once he takes,
which was never yet seen but with the right. And so bravely have they
undergone the present Appeal to the sea Apostolic touching the premises of
our Church and Country, but specially of the former against these Spanish
fathers; God prospering their ongate with accrue of Associates daily more and
more of their Seminarie-brethren, like to a little current which g^ding along
the (...) but shallow and narrow at the first, is by (...) and little augmente
by confluence of unexpected brooks to a great river, so as it is able at last
to make it self way through all opposition to the attaining of the Ocean. In
process whereof had not M. Watson alone of late showed himself a very
complete man both in head and heart against the tepiditie or rather timiditie
of some, who aforetime were thought no small Atlasses in this business, by
means whereof they were wel-nigh Iesuitically ouer-wrought, or rather
undermined (take ye whether) to the ieoparding of the cause; I do not see what
the Appellants need to have done at this hour in Rome, nor yet how the Jesuits
with their Archpriest had mist (I will not say) a Gudgion, but an Olympiade.
But hereof (cousin) you may (happily) he are more hereafter, whereby you may see
what M. Watson is, and how well worthy for his virtues, of the Jesuits
obloquie. Were he a virtuous Priest (as he is) and not their Opponent, they
(perhaps) would be at peace with his virtues, as weening with their silence to
smoother them from the world; but now that he is such even his virtues must be
reproched for vices most inormous. I, I, hinc illae lachrimae or rather (...)
Iesuitic^ against him euer^ but especially at this instant more the^ against
all his other Appellant brethren in England; herehence their sly suborned
missi^es and messages unto him under color of frienship, warning him of danger
to his life whereby he to fly away; herehence their plotting to make ielousies
betwixt his brethren and him; herehence their imputing to him all spiritual
and temporal either miscariage or misfortune to whatsoever private Catholic;
herehence their forging matters of his overthrow with his honorable and most
especial friends: brief, herehence their unchristian defaming him both by
tongue and pen and their ^uting his Quodlibets to be generally condemned by the
Appellant party and namely by the Appellants at Rome* who it is very likely
that not having themselves seen them other then by the corru^pt relation of
the aduerse-Iesuite there, they may (happily) with an (if) have disa^owed them;
howbeit their Appellant brethren here in England* and also in France and
Flanders (whose authority and credit as touching the Appeal is and ought to
be reputed equal with theirs) do no ways distaste them save only here and
there somewhat an ouer-cough and harsh term, but contrariwise approve them for
sound and Catholic. Let it not therefore skill what the malignitie of that
party do impose either upon M. Watsons person or his pen, which seems to
consort wholly with the Puritan not only in all spleen against him and his
brethren of the Appeal, but even against the Catholic church itself to the
ruin of her Hierarchi^al (...) (for example) whether the Puritanes wish not M.
Watsons (...) of (...) Jesuits; whether likewise they (...) of his (...) they,
then which what can be more for M. Watsons Catholic and priestly credit, and
the credit of that (...) wherein can the Jesuits more (...) themselves to the
Catholic Church then in seeming so much ^he Puritanes, who (...) the most
in^st enemies thereunto of all the Se^ in this (...) as ^f (I will (...)) (...)
less the (...) (...) both English, (...) whatsoever (...) that have bin from
^he beginning and (...) condemned by them as well as by (...) (...), (...),
(...), (...), (...), (...) and the like, may in some sort be said Mala bona to
the Church of God, in that their (...) and ^diction does (...) refine and purge
it from (...), for which our Savior in his (...) (...); the Jesuits on the
other side may we be^ Bona mala thereunto: (...), as in regard of their
institution^ and for ^ing ye^ reputed ^mbers of the Church though (...) (...)
here in England* (...) (...) of (...)wealths, not only in political (...) in
moral (...), for which our Savior expressly said, (...) without any (...) in
the behalf as to (...) In effect (...) is an evil which does (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) Catholic (...) both in (...) it is abuse^ (...) a mischief
the^unto (...) for matter of faith, yet of fac^. Now what difference is
between such (...) (...) and a (...) judge you (...) that I can (...) that
generally all (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) to the (...), whereby ^it (...)
(...) (...) it the ot^ (...) Iesuitisme (...) (...). The examination of which
difference more in particular would (...) v^ both into a dumpe, seeing that
thereby w^ should perceive the ground of all heresy to be first the abusiue
life of the religious in Gods Church, which both gives the No^ller such (as for
(...)) (...) and (...) of Pra^ the (...) religion and also ^n ^esse to the
Laity b^ing like^se scanda^ed and depraved thereby to embrace and entertain
the same. So as I se^ up, (...) to the ^cliffist vpbraiding us with the
enormous (...) religious (...) Gods Church, we should be so straight laced as
not to acknowledge him as much, seeing that even at this day in our (...) Church
(...) have Jesuits such ^ that withal it makes nere a whit the more in app^on
of his erroneous doctrine, no more then a bettle or share (...) to be said the
^est be^ because bred eue^ore in cow-shards etc. and li^dse (...) which re^ts
of ^ng thoroughly co^ed and (...) of heart, to be said for the same cause the
delicater soyld. To co^ the, (...) Ma^ster Watson to be thus wronged and ^ted
of (...) Jesuit as the Puritan and be thus Verstegh^ upon; though unhappy
they herein a^es day; but that (they think) is but one day, and great while to
come, without thinking that when it ^th come it is a day (...) and (...) home.

(...) other side Versteghen ^, and to his Du^h M^s (...), whom (...) any (...)
gentleman of our nation in those parts, though he appeal to them all in his
commendation, he is feign to cite in particular and by name (being a stranger)
to make good unto him that complement: suffizing that M. Watson is neither base
borne, nor yet the son of a Cooper, much less a notorius (...), a bussard,
(...), (...) companion, (...) any way to be balanced for ^ to Fa. Parsons; but
the clean contrary, that is a gentleman, an honest man, and which is most of
ala reverend Catholic Priest; and hitherto a blessed Confessor and a good
Patriot, as ye have heard: suffizing also that you attribute this prodigy of a
temerarious spirit against holy Priesthood, not so much to Versteghens (...)
and diaboli^ nature, as to Iesuitisine, which in her Pharisaicall Ordine ad
Deum, would bring all magistracy both spiritual and temporal either under it
or in contempt.

This same Ordo ad Deum, and ^ with a Jesuit, that it makes them all ^ and not
so (...), as Robi^ Good sollow, For herehence are all his equivocations, where
in his tongue (...) way and (...) meaning another, that ye know not where to
find him; herehence his periuries and perfidiousnesse, and herehence his ^ney
catching and gilb^rting of his foole-friends for wordly wealth, and therehence
his upper evils. Therehence his will, and abili^ to make (...) Princes as
private persons, not only to the corruption but to the ^struction of
commonwealths, and therehence his game to ^gh them all to scorn when he has
so done. A shame that Bonum societatic Ies^ should subsist upon so vile support
as (...) Ordo ad Deum, which was never (...) on by their (...) Igna^ in their
institution. A shame that a religious person should so (...) his eye against
his vow upon the world, and so ^ip his soul in her suds, so irreligiously
gather wealth together and spend it worse, that better a great deal it were
all in the bottom of the s^; ^pended upon the vanity of Alcun^e? or the
Tobacco lease. Such (...) of worldlings were those Em^ and vende^es which our
Savior whipped out of the Temple, or rather worser of the two are these for being
such even in the Chancell of Gods Church, by being (as they say) religious. It
is no marvel if such manner of merchant^ have made many a prodigal child,
distraying them from their true fathers, and bankerouting them ^eane both of
their temporal and spiritual patrimonies. It is (...) maruel^ if in materi^ll
poi^ts of Catholic faith they oppose against the Angeli^ll (...) and be
therefore at this present indi^ed before his Holiness by the Dominic^ in
Spain for (...) and sundr^e other kind^ of heretics, and also for Impost^rs
by the Sor^ of P^ and all the French Clergy* as we credibly (...) it (...)
maru^ll tha^ our Sa^iour has not by his Vicar the Popes holiness all this w^e
whip^ them out of the Church, as it is to be hoped he will ^re long at least out
of our Church and Country here, the aggriefes of each against them depending
at this instant before his Holiness so ^ustly and ^aturely as they do. In the
menage whereof if any defect should be in his Holiness (which is no whit f^d)
it i^ well (...) at least our Secular clergy in the behalf of the one* and
ou^ State of the other, have yet be^es (thanks be to God) di^ed their hazards
and disposed them to the redress which redress how and in what manner it is,
or may be advised upon by the State (...) the point of State* I am (...) of the
Council that ca^ tell. ^lesse hereof I rest^ persuaded, that if it should be
(...) to be wrought by (...) heavy hand (as by all likelihood it is like to
be, if (...) Holiness redress it not (...) Rome by his excellent discretion.
I mean as well the point of State against Spain, as of our Chu^ (...) b^th
which the App^ale contains,) there will be a difference (...) by the S^
between the de^ites and ^he Seculars, and the^ (...) of each (though all one
in Religion) how ere the Iesuit^ say no. For^ that reason (I pray) even mor^ay
the State have, to (...) us who ^e afflicted with and for it against a common
enemy, and who, even with our lives would make it good to have our (...) the
world. Howsoever, hap what hap may, thus happy (...) the App^ ^e, that if the
afflict^ should p^e alike, we to end^re it (...) conscience, and at friends
before God and the world to our (...), and the Jesuits as they are: we to
suffer what we should suffer merely for the Catholic cause and for ^o
disloyalty to the S^e, at hitherto we have and over will make show; and they
(...) Catholics (...) but yet Spanish, and disloyal. So as the State shall
be sure to gain no honor by our destruction under her edge; but God shall, and
we (we doubt not) at Gods hand.

As for the point of our Church, to wit, the Jesuitical schism and scandals
therein which is (...) point (we wot well) the State esteems not a point being
Protestant, but could wish us in that respect hanged one against another; the
redress thereof (as I say) is at this instant sub Iudice, the impostume of the
imposture being now a year broken, and so long a running to Rome, where (by
Gods grace) it will find perfect cure. No other means in the world was for it
then this Appeal to his Holiness, who (as appears by the last letters from
Rome) has already given the Appellants benign audience, partly by the French
Ambassadors means there, who stands stiffely for them to his Holiness
against the Spanish; but chiefly of his own godly and Apostolic nature who
is wholly Clement. True it is, that he has withal committed the examination
and report of all the matter to two Cardinals, who be both the King of Spaines
Pensioners, and the one his subject, that is, the Cardinals Burghese and
Arragon; which you are not to marvel at greatly, considering that what
Cardinal almost have ye in that court who is not that Kings Pensioner. Great
hope notwithstanding the Appellants write they have of indifferent dealing, the
rather because certain Romans are joined in commission with those Cardinals.
And as for Rome it self which is now thoroughly and throughout possessed with
these our English occurrents, it has already discovered her affection on
Englands behalf against Spain, and her implements the Jesuits as concerning
the point of State; wherein neither Rome, nor any other Province of Italy,
save only Spaines own part, and that perforce wishes Spain to prosper.
Insomuch as we must think her Majesty is not altogether vn-well wished in
those parts, but has had, and (I suppose) has still some friends even in the
Popes consi^torie. Oh how much more might her Highness be beloved and friended
there, and of all the Catholic countries of Christendom, were she but half
the Catholic her Predecessors were. Also how much may we presume to show our
selves grateful to her Highness, for any grace she would please to daigne us,
so great a portion of Christendom being Catholic as is, and likewise all the
Saints of heaven have been such. Cousin, we must pray God heartily for such her
Highness disposition toward us, but specially for her conversion to our holy
Catholic Religion. What pity is it that a Princess, otherwise so full of
all princely indowments as her Highness is, and of so excellent an
apprehension, should mistake or be misled in so principal a point of
Princelinesse as Catholic Religion, varying therein from her so worthy
Progenitors. Verily it cannot be but if her Highness had been at the first
mildly proceeded withal by the holy Sea, and submissiuely by her Catholic
subjects, who a many of us were too soon turned Iesuiters and so Spanish, to
the attempting of disloyal plots against her State and person, whereby her
Highness was driven to trust wholly to her Protestants holding us all suspect;
but by this time God would have opened her royal eyes to have seen into the
grounds of our holy Religion, and not opposed (as she has done) against the
same. All the world but Jesuits and the house of Austrich admire her honors
and her reign nevertheless, the one so princely the other so prosperous: yea
her very enemies do it, as for example I my self did see in Anno 88. a Spanish
Alferez of the garrison of Newport, executed with the Garotto in Bruges, for no
other matter objected against him, then a certain poem which (being a fine
Poet) he had penned in commendation of her Majesty amongst and before all the
rare Heroines of Christendom. Also I have often heard my father tell how Don
Julian Romero a Spaniard likewise, sometimes Castilian of Antwerpe, admired and
commended her for the most rare Paragon of Princelinesse, since the time he
once beheld her Highness and her Court here in England. Then for strangers and
no foes; my uncle Sir Richard Shelley sometimes Lord Prior of the Knights of
Malta whiles he lived, was a loud witness how highly the Signiorie of Venice
respected her and her amity, being himself as loyal a subject to her
Majesty, and as respectfull of her honor and safety to his dying day as any
subject in this land; for the Jesuits disgusted him and he them, and enforced
him from Rome. Likewise in 86. I saw one Fabio a Venecian Abbot, Secretary (as
I remember) to the Cardinal d'Est of Ferrara, burned in Rome for
intelligencing matter of State unto her Highness from thence. In like manner,
in the Prince of Leeges Court and Council her Highness had, and (I think)
yet has her especial friends of State. In effect, all the world but the house
of Austrich and Jesuits (as I say) is her friend, whose malice God (I doubt
not) will still from time to time make frustrate against her, as hitherto he
has done the almighty Armadoes of Spain, and the big-boned menaces of the
Poland-King now some two years old. And so (as I was a saying) does Rome at
this instant apprehend, and applaud that part of the Appeal which concerns
her Majesty and her State against Spain in favor of England, though
otherwise like a good mother-citie greatly disliking and lamenting the misfaith
of England: in so much as one night a certain Romaine-gentleman affixed a
breife libell upon Pasquines buttocke, in derision and scorn of father
Cowbucke his treacherous agencie for Spain so against his country, which in
plain English is as follows.

If there be any Citizen here in Rome, that is minded to purchase the Realm of
England; let him repair to the Rector of the English College here within the
City, and he in Jesus name will afford him a good pennie-worth.

Whereby (cousin) you may also gather and be glad, how vain the Jesuits vaunts
hitherto have proved of the Appellants their commitment to either the
inquisition, or the galleys, or both, upon their arrival at Rome, whom that
holy City so kindly entreats, and his Holiness too. I told you in my former
letter what Braggadochioes they were, whereby you might guess the goodness of
their cause, considering that Bonum vinum non aget haedera.

To this pass the Appellants have brought their business as yet, not doubting
but to effect it ere long to their full desires, now that sub indice lis est
who together with their cause is so very just. Insomuch as the Archpriest and
Jesuits pottage begins already to cool here at home, and they become more
mild, laboring now another while praece and praecio to draw as many as they
can unto them both of the Laity and Clergy, and to that end have offered and
daily do offer to restore to the one their pensions again, to the other their
faculties which by the Archpriests hand they had withdrawn; yea, they have in
a manner wide opened their Mammonian-Exchecker in prodigality to each, it being
(they see) now their best arms; like as the old Romans did their Temple of
Ianus, which they never opened but in time of war. Ah, ah, (cousin) have
English Innocents found this in Rome (as it was never otherwise likely) and is
also the Spaniard eiected by English arms out of Ireland, the Rebel likely
ere long to follow after? wherein how forward our party is to serve her
Majesty, and my self in particular to lead the Iesuited that loyal march
against her enemies, (were I thought fit and worthy to be employed,) it is not
unknown to some of the State, if not to her Majesty's own self. And thus ye
see, how neither Rome the Sea Apostolic is under the Jesuits cinct (as they
presume) nor yet God at all under the Spaniards girdle. And likewise thus you
see, and so may her Majesty and the State that our fathers the Seminaries are
not altogether, yea, or ere a whit traitors (as the Jesuits with them have
made them be thought) but the clean contrary, that is, altogether loyal; who
thus of their own pure English nature and allegiance, and at their own
charges have passed the Jesuitical and Spanish pikes hitherto (unwitting to
them, yea and in their displeasure, as whom they have banished the land, to
wit, the Appellants who are a part of them) and undergone this service for the
same, and their country. What penie-worths (trow ye) might the Jesuits and
Iesuited here expect at her Highness hands if she knew of these occurrents,
who thus by their disloyalties urge her other honest Catholic subjects to such
hazards to show their loyalties unto her? Not that her Majesty weyes the
business or the success thereof a button, whose Royal estate (as hitherto) she
still means (by Gods help) to make good, and to subsist of it self secure
and English against Jesuits, Spain, and all the world, without being beholding
to Rome; though (please God) she would. Nevertheless it may be that casting
down by chance her Queenely eye upon these our Appellant fathers, and us their
childrens thus loyal carriage to her State, she will in time be pleased to be
less heavy Princess unto us, if not indulgent, how ere she still distaste our
Religion and the Sea Apostolic. Which whether it be the will of God or not,
ever let us that are true Catholics persevere as we are and ought no less true
English; and pray that long and happy may her Majesty's reign still lengthen
over us.

In particular still do you (Cousin) for your part your endeavor amongst other
good Catholics, to reclaim your Iesuited friends from that their imposture
(as some you write you have already done) wherein you have done both very
like your self, and greatly to Gods honor. I, for my part have likewise (I
thank God) performed herein some larger portion of my poor and lay talent,
since my reducing you; which (I thank you) you please to attribute to me, and
I take it as an honor, forasmuch as most (we see) have hitherto run with the
dog, and but very few with the hare. The more part of the Clergy is now
come into the Appeal, having subscribed thereunto, and to their Appellant
brothers, so as now daily more and more the Iesuitical party loses ground and
shrinkes in the wetting, and we may take comfort in it. Also we may take
comfort and thank God, that our party as well the Laity as the Clergy, in
all this time of Jesuitical persecution has stood thus firm in our faith and
so free from scandals, the temptation having been so much the greater and more
dangerous, as being within our own bowels: whereas that party has and daily
does Apostate too too much, and both at Framlingham and elsewhere agrees like
cat and dog within it self. Nay more, to note the providence and blessing of
God on our behalf, there daily comes in unto us of the Protestants full many,
in approbation as well of our loyalty to the State (which they heretofore
generally held suspect) as of sundry points of our Religion. Who would not be
a party in so good a cause, and for so good fathers as these of the
Seminaries, whom we may worthily esteem and reverence as a notable portion of
the Catholic Church against whatsoever imposturall malignitie of Jesuit and
Archpriest? as for my own I do, and so do ye (good cousin) seeing that as well
the gentleman and soldier, is to expect and atchieue his part and portion in
heaven by his services to Gods Church, as even the Popes holiness by his high
and pastoral offices thereunto. Fare ye thrice heartily well, this last of
June 1602. and (I pray) put not this letter in print as you did my former,
which only I acknowledge to be mine, and naught else upon this argument of the
Appeal, howbeit you seem to say that one or two more of the printed books
are supposed abroad to be mine.

Postscript.
AS I had finished this Letter, see where a packet is come from the Appellants
at Rome, containing a confirmation of his Holiness disc^ssion and censure of
M. Listers schism against him, and the Archpriests maintaining it, which ere
long you may read reported in the end of M. Colletons book forthcoming upon
that question, verbatim out of the original from Rome; which notwithstanding,
for that it is come vnexemplified by his Holiness Breue sub anulo piscatoris,
or rather from S. Peter himself to the Archpriest, most of that peevish party
hold off to believe: though who can tell whether his Agents have not certified
him thereof from Rome (at least if to tell truths be in their commission) and
he in his proud melancholy (the news being no gratefuller nor more glorious on
his part) will not give it passage. This is the reason why in this packet, the
Appellants in Rome hearing as much, promise us his Holiness Breue in
confirmation of his said censure, and likewise for the abrogation of his latter
Breue, which I toldye of in the beginning of this Letter, promising you a copy
of the Priests appeal from hence to his Holiness touching the same, and their
reasons for it, which now shall not need. But is it not strange that the
Jesuitical will not receive these satisfactions without a Breue from his
Holiness concerning the schism, as though the case were all one as the
Appellants was in their holding off to acknowledge the Arch-presbiterate
without that high instrument, it being a case expressly within the Canon to be
so notified for autenticke, and no otherwise; and this such, as any moral
certainty may suffice for it, being but a moral matter. But this is all the
spite and revenge that the Archpriest and Jesuits in this their extreme
disgrace can do the Appellants, to put them to the charge of a Breue, which
(truly) were I of their counsel, I would wish them to spare, to see how far
the Jesuitical presumption would wage against the Sea-Apostolicke, and wrangle
with it. As for the point of Schism discided, you may see by it how erroneous
a society these Loyolians are, and how no assurance it has at all of the holy
Ghost, wherein it vaunts it self so equal with the Pope and a general
Council, seeing the holy Ghost has herin so iudicially condemned it. Also you
may see by this, how corrupt a man the Archpriest is, who in so gross an
error bringing schism with it, could let himself be so instrumentally led by
those fathers against his own dear brethren of the Seminaries, and the famous
university of Paris, all for a little fopperie of Prelature, and how in this
respect he is most unworthy of the same. Lastly, you may see herby that Brag is
not always a good dog, nor yet the inquisition nor the galleys of force
against innocence (as the Jesuits presumed) especially where the holy Ghost
sits in judgment. Be this (good Cousin) all our comfort till we see farther of
the Appeal, toward which take ye this piece of a letter from a gentleman in
Rome, as a handsil or in part of good speed in the mean time, against the
still flying falsheads of the Jesuitical, in the earth, in the sea, in the
air.



A piece of a Letter of an English Gentleman in Rome to a friend of his in
France of the same Date.
FVrthermore, whereas the Priests in consideration that father Parsons had
spread so many foul speeches of them abroad, demanded of his Holiness that
the said father Parsons should set down in writing all he had to say against
them, to the end they might in like sort answer and clear themselves; and that
in thirty days respite he had given up what he could say: the Pope
understanding all, said, that he was already satisfied touching al those points
by that which he had heard before, and so not suffering these accusations to
come unto the Priests hands, imposed there an end of such calumnies. By this
you may see the Priests matter goes forward with honor and just reputation,
and I hope shall have no worse end; their demands being reasonable, the
Cardinals just, and the Ambassadors countenance and favor so singular that
they fear no oppression, nor doubt but that justice will prevail, etc.

M. Bluet is expected shortly at Paris with his Holiness Breue aforesaid for
England, and M. Doctor Bagshaw goes to Rome in his place, where (I fear me) he
shall not find father Cowbucke forthcomming; he being (as it is credibly
reported) imbezelled away from thence by his General, or rather flat run away
upon a notable check lately given him by his Holiness. The Apollogie is
answered in Lorraine by M. Doctor Elie, and there are some of the books ready
bound and pressed for England by the next Post. To conclude, all our news being
hitherto so good and so autenticke verities as they are, and the rest that
follow after like to prove no less, let us believe and applaud them, and as
for those that will not, as being Bettle-blinded with the Jesuitical and
Archipresbyteriall-mist, away with them (Cousin) to the next market.

God save the Catholic Church, the Queen and her Estates, and grant us his
peace. Amen.
A THIRD LETTER OF Mr. A. C. Appologeticall for himself, against the calumnies
contained against him in a certain Jesuitical libell, entitled, A
manifestation of folly and bad spirit, etc.
MY very good Cousin: I ever thought that your diuulging my former Letter to you
in print, would bring me into the sphere of Iesuitical obloquie; insomuch as I
have hourly since the edition thereof looked and listened for their
contumelies against me; which now at last they have from a full gorge
discharged, but withal against so full innocence and secure a conscience (I
thank God) as the shame shall return unto themselves. Not that I rest clear
nevertheless from condemnation in the eye of God and mine own conscience for
a misdemeaned and sinful life otherwise, then whereof this Jesuit impeacheth
me, for which I may justly say with the royal Prophet, Peccatum meum contra me
est semper; Ecce enim in iniquitatibus conceptus sum, etc. And again: Delicta
iuuentutis meae ne memineris Domine. Yet, as touching these his imputations, I
boldly may and do give him the lie to the honor of God and your satisfaction,
and that by protestation, except what shall be excepted: being exceeding glad,
and that (as I hope in the holy Ghost) to be thus onerated and consequently
honored with Jesuitical slander with and for so many holy Seminaries and
Saints as they have so served, and daily do; nay, with and for my most holy
mother the Catholic Church, whose sacred Hierarchy they no less
contumeliously impugn. Oh (Cousin) how highly am I bound to God who has thus
respected and exalted the indignity of these my younger years and lay vocation
to deserve ill at the hands of so inward enemies to his eternal spouse, and
her best members? Why may I not hope in this respect, that were I (as I am) the
vilest sinner in the world, much amends is made therefore unto my heavenly
father. And so I take it, knowing them to be for the most part (at leastwise
here in our Church) flat schismatickes and seducers; and for such already
partly condemned by the holy Ghost as by my last to you, you understood; and
also express Spanish enemies to our Princess and Country: in regard whereof
how little credit they deserve to have in any matter, especially matter of
reproach (which is the subject whereupon they are reproved at Rome on the
behalf of our Appellants) I leave to your consideration. Which advantage
notwithstanding I for my part will not take against them in this my Appollogie
to you, having innocence enough on my side, which has notably laid them open
to my reproof and execution otherwise, as now ensuingly you may read and
perceive. Thus then he begins.

There follows in the number of these libels one set forth by A. C.
entitled, (An answer to a letter of a Iesuited Gentleman, etc.)

See you not (Cousin) how this fellow even in the front of his reproaches,
contradicts himself in affirming me for a Libeller, notwithstanding that he
acknowledges my name to the book, vz. A. C. which two letters was enough for
a Catholic writing upon an argument so little pleasing to the present state
and time, whereby to be exempt from the note of a Libeller; unless I would by
setting down my name at large have wilfully braued the ciuil-power and penal
laws, and said thereto (as it were) Lo I the man, come, attach me, and do the
worst ye can. It suffices that in my original to you my name was at large, as
you, and it yet extant (I suppose) in your hands can both witness; so as your
doing it as you have done (...) in the printed edition (seeing you would needs
publish it) with only two letters for my name, I therein agnize both your love
and discretion. Moreover your adding my mot to the title, does likewise quit
the edition from libellious, as well as my (Fig for fortune) which heretofore
came forth with no other face, and yet was never taken up for a rogue, no not
by any Jesuitical Bedle that ever I heard of. Whereas if you look into
sundry books of theirs which from time to time have come forth without any
name or known liuerie at all, as the contents thereof are wholly infamatorie
or traitorous, so in that respect are they to be reputed inormous libels: for
example, Greene-coate, Philopater, etc. which are all or the most of them
attributed to father Cowbuck. Then as for the present author, this Jesuit,
what name of his or but two letters of his name (I pray) find ye to this his
(Manifestation of folly and bad spirit,) whereby he not to deserve to be burned
in the hand for a vagabond? Notany. No nor any durst he show, manifesting so
bad spirit and so much folly in that Censure of his as he has done for fear
of the infamy that might attach him, which notwithstanding he has not escaped
at Gods hands who knows both his name and his nature. Were he not a most lewd
companion, and of a most guilty conscience, he would (no doubt) not have
shamed somewhat to have shown his face as well as I, who had I feared the worst
of any Jesuits spite, or the badnesse of the matter in that my letter handled,
would have made it a quarrel to you for that A. C. and wished my self as
little in sight, as he has shown him. Wherein he has shown himself not so
honest a man as Uersteghen, who like a right Coopers son stuck not to set one
of his names to his infamatorie letter against M. Watson, as in my last letter
I discoursed unto you; but more to brag of his gentry. Sure this Jesuit
carries with him cauteriatam conscientiam that he dares not pluck off his
vizard for fear of showing to the world a face more ill-favored then it. Which
notwithstanding, partly he is discovered for such as he is, at leastwise if he
be the man I take him for, vz. a man, who being the mis-begotten of a ploughman
and he a Cuckold too upon the body of a plough-woman, has accordingly demeaned
himself; fust in begetting two bastards male and female upon the body of his
own sister, between his age of seventeen and three and twenty, which was
the cause he ran away (as fearing the sheet, etc.) and so became a Jesuit:
secondly or rather formerly and continually, by being a common alehousesquire,
and the drunkennest sponge in all the parish where he lived; thirdly, for being
an heretic of the family of love all his life till he became a Jesuit, which
was the leaf he turned. Into which society (it seems) he was the sooner
received, for having been of that family, and also for the behoouefull use
those fathers saw they were likely to make of his seditious and libellious
spirit in their commonwealth, which subsists much upon that kind of prop.
Well, what he wanted hereof at the first, their fatherhoods have perfected in
him so fully now, that beshrew me if I know a more accomplished detractor in
the world. Add hereunto their Ordo ad Deum whereby all a Jesuits evils must
be reputed from the holy Ghost; and the very name of a Jesuit to import
infallibility in faith and charity, so far forth that what he believes,
says, or does, be it never so much to the blemish of any person, yea to the
prejudice of a whole commonwealth, must not be thought to need any collateral
credit; and that is the reason why (for example) this Jesuit scorns to set
his name to his book like an honest man, as though it were no libell without
it, being of a Jesuits doing. It follows.

Who if he be the man that we do guess, we do not greatly marvel, etc.

He does well (believe me) in saying (that we do guess) for that being a
bastard, he is (as you know) filius populi, and consequently a plural creature
and of more names then one, and therefore (we); or else that knowing the points
he means to affirm to be mere false and slanderous, he would by his (we)
draw partners into his shame, amongst whom the holy Ghost being always
pretended to be one, judge you what blasphemy this his (we) is. Poor praise
and comfort it is to have copartners in evil though real and not forged
evil; even as poor as a man to think to purchase himself a good name by
deprauing of others; in both which kinds this Jesuit has transgressed propter
bonum societatis. For, as for the first, howsoever he pretends some Iesuited
secular Priests to have their pens in this his libell; yet that rests at the
Readers courtesy to believe; knowing the Jesuits slight, how still they seek
to set Seminary against Seminary by laboring to have their mischiefs
jointly against them all, to seem the ones against the others: whereas (in
very truth) it is but the Jesuits sole act together with his particular
Paraclete; except (happily) there be here and there a Seminary so corrupt,
unhappy, and foolish against his own and his brothers honors or any others,
as to be so Iesuited in malediction.

That after so great variety of state and former life as some of us have
known him in, etc.

As for the variety of my state and former life, I am (I thank my God) not
ashamed of it, the same not having been variable in Jesuitical gross scandals
of schism or mis-faith in the Church of God; as God, my conscience, and all
that know me can witness, nor ever shall by Gods help. Neither was the
variety he taxes me of, other then suitable to my years from time to time:
for your satisfaction wherein, I must here (the libeller so urging) rip up my
whole life unto you, as follows. First, at my age of thirteen I was taken
from school, and sent up by my good Aunt (whom you knew) to an Inn of
Chancerie, from whence I was shortly after by my cousin T. S. to whose care I
was committed, admitted of Lincolnes Inn; where I continued no longer then
whiles I could steal over into France to my father. Where being arrived he
within some few months after took me along with him into Flanders, where in
the Duke of Parma his Court lying then at Tornay, the Lady Franc^lina the
Dukes reputed mistress taking contentment in my English daunces, which at that
age did not ill beseem me, she at my fathers request procured me a Pages place
about his Alteze. In the nick whereof came letters from my Cousin R. S. at Rome,
who hearing that I was come over, and desirous to see and enjoy me there with
him for the near kindred that was betwixt us, and the love he formerly bore me
in his mothers house my Aunt aforesaid, had procured me a pension of ten
ducats a month of his Holiness if I would come and live in Italy; and to
this effect were both his letters, the one to my father, the other to me. To be
short, my father leaving the election of these two concurring courses to my
own will, commending unto me both the one and the other, with proffer if I
chose the latter to make his Holiness ten ducats a month fifteen of his
own exhibition; I stood not long upon the choice* but for having already seen
enough of the Dukes Court, and being curious to see renowned Rome, the Popes
holiness, and generally brave Italy, easily made that my choice. Whereupon my
father by the way of Rhemes from whence there was then a mission ready for
Rome, and I to have that good company, sent me away toward Rome with crowns
in my purse, whether I arrived upon a horse which I bought of father Cowbuckes
brother. To Rome then when I came, Rome I saw and Romes holy things; two Popes,
the one dead the other alive, and whatsoever else sacred or profane was to be
seen in that vaste city; of all which (I give God thanks) I made me that
Catholic edification which I could being but sixteen years old, and but a
year and a half Catholic; still urging my aforesaid Cousin when I should see
Naples and the rest of Italy, and enjoy my pension. But neither Naples nor any
rest of Italy might I see, nor yet S. Peter's penny, which the fathers
(understanding that my father was then dead in the Duke of Parmaes camp before
Antwerpe) put into their own purse, forcing me to continue a scholar in the
English College; which I did the space of a year and a half, or thereabouts,
till I got away as ye shall hear. And this was hitherto all the Jesuits
favors unto me, having both put me besides my Page-ship to the Duke of Parma
(which was a preferment for the best subjects son in Flanders, and none had it
but such) and also cosined me and the Pope both of his pension. Judge ye then
how truly he faith, that the Jesuits were his best friends for many years
beyond the seas, where he needed their friendship, and never wanted it.

For some of us knew him first, a little wanton idle-headed boy in the English
Roman College, so light-witted, as once (if we remember well) he went up
into the pulpit with a rose in his mouth to make the tones (as there they call
them) before all the College.

A little wanton idle headed boy and light witted (as he remembers) I promise ye
(Cousin) an important point to be remembered, which (surely) had not this
charitable Jesuit and his (wees) remembered for me, I my self do, and do
acknowledge it, beshrewing the age of sixteen years that I was no stayeder,
and not him for being so very a fool at six and forty or upward, as to
vpbrayde me of so venial imperfections; who himself at but a year older, to
wit, at seventeen was so much a more wanton and idler headed then I, as to get
his sister with child as before is shown: wherein he seems to be of that
fathers spirit, who being himself a monstous blasphemer, derided and checked
his little son for swearing by Gods nigs. If to go up into the pulpit to make
the tones with a rose in my mouth were such a fault, what I pray had it been if
I had gone up with a thistle, especially the business I went about being so
very very important.

After that he fell to such devotion, as he not only took the oath of the
College to be a Priest;

My falling to devotion especially in Rome and in the English College, was
such a fault (I trust) as might easily deserve pardon at Gods hands, and partly
satisfy for my former wanton, idle head, howsoever this father reprocheth it;
and as for my taking the oath of the College to be a Priest, that (Cousin) is a
lie as broad as an acre of land. For neither was I an Alumnus of the College,
being the Popes pensioner (as ye have heard) why I should be put to any such
oath; neither yet my years and inclination then suting to so high and holy a
vocation, being by the libellers own saying but a little wanton idle headed
boy, and light witted; which their fatherhoods perceiving me to be, as also how
still earnest I was to come away, is it likely that they in their holy-ghostly
wisdom would administer such an oath unto me without saying twice at least
Vtquid perditio haec? By this you may see that were there any such oath tendered
unto me at those years, what discreet fathers the Jesuits are, and how
slightly they set by holy priesthood (which is the greatest dignity on earth)
as to impose it upon boys, I had been a child of the Church not passing two
years before this supposed oath, and little account was I able to make (God
wot) of my faith, or to judge of an oath, and yet (forsooth) did take the oath
to be a Priest. But the truth is, this is a flat lie, inasmuch as I perfectly
well remember that when that oath was proposed to others (being all of good
years, and all Alumni of the College) my Cousin R. S. aforesaid took me with
him out of the Church, and only tendered me the ordinary oath of the
inquisition, that is to continue Catholic, and in subjection to holy Church
and the sea Apostolic, which oath I took, and do maintain, and will (by Gods
holy grace) unto my death. For, as touching the other oath my Cousin knew very
well by my continual discontent how ill I brooked the pains of the College,
and how hourly I laid at him for my pension to live at large, for which he was
the man that never moved me any such question as to be a Priest.

But also pretended to be an Augustine Friar.
The former and this are two lies with one breath, but on he is a Jesuit. All
the shift he has to save his credit in this latter is his saying, that he has
a fearful conscience to avouch things he knows not for certain. The man is
willing enough, yea feign he would have this reproach to pass upon me, (though
to be a Friar I hold it an honor, and my self unworthy thereof) and to that
end has penned it down; and yet (forsooth) he has a timorous conscience,
like the clown who was not ashamed to fill his paunch with pease-pottage so
full that it almost cracked again, and yet made dainty to cough downward for
fear to show what windy stuff he had eaten. Now as touching his said
supposall of my becoming an Augustine, a very fool may discern therein his
too manifest folly and bad spirit: for is it likely that having first taken the
oath of the College, I would so soon, that is, in one half years space have
been forsworn as to become a Friar, the whole time of my continuance in Rome
being but one year and a half or thereabouts, and the first year little
enough (by all intendment) to settle my wanton idle light witted head* before I
could be fit for either the one or the other so high vocation. To show you then
how false either of these imputations are, you must understand that in my
coffeehouse to be so made a schoole-boy, and cosined both of the Popes
pension and my liberty; I taking a devotion to S. Monacha, S. Augustines
mother went often to the Augustines Church in Rome where her body lay, and
there falling acquainted with a Venetian Friar of the Monastery, I understood
that he knew my Uncle Sir Richard Shelley in Venice; by whose means I
afterward often writ unto him, informing him of my coffeehouse with the
Jesuits for their so abusing his Holiness and me, but especially after my
Cousin R. S. his departure for England. To which my aggriefe in the end after
sundry letters that passed betwixt us, the Lord Prior of Malta (for such was
his title) most lovingly complied; sending me by this Friars means three and
fifty ducats where with to get me from Rome into France, with request that I
would make Venice my way, affirming that forasmuch as he had no other kinsman
in those parts, he would leave me when he died if I liked to live with him all
that he had. With these three and fifty ducats I departed the College, Rome,
and Italy* where at parting, father Cowbucke being come thither but a little
before, and also D. Allan who within a while after was created Cardinal; the
one gave me his malediction, the other a thousand blessings. And this (I
protest) was all the leave and Uiaticum the fathers gave me at my departure
from Rome, this their paternall charity where with the libeller more in
particular underneath vpbraideth me. Yea over and above all this, father
Cowbucke was the man who perceiving D. Allan his credit to be more with me then
his, wrought him to be thus far forth his instrument as to dissuade me my
going to Venice to my Uncle which he understood I intended, and my said Uncle
expected, so ill the father brooked either that good Knight or my good
fortunes, or both. I was too blame in that respect to the good Doctor, both for
my duties sake to my Uncle, and also for my profit, though minding to have
returned of purpose unto him out of France the next year after, before which
time the good Knight died, leaving all his riches to a mere servant; so
unfortunate was I, or rather so unfortunate a Jesuit to me, whom this Jesuit
terms my friends who never failed me. And this was all my becoming, either
College, Priest, or Augustine Friar, and thus much can M. Duke sometimes my
entire friend in earth, now a Saint in heaven witness of my going to the
Augustines, to whose priuitie I imparted all that my proceeding. Insomuch as at
a word as well might the libeller have affirmed that I would have become a Nun
for S. Monacha^s sake, or a Jesuit for father Cowbuckes, as an Augustine,
especially if withal he knew what law reigned in my loins, and what spirit
colophized me at those years with S. Paul. In vain therefore does this
manifester of his folly and bad spirit, stroke (as it were) his beard after so
gross a slander, and advise yonkers to beware by me how they slip back, and
contemn when they are in their sister; even as vainly as I have noted the
vaineglorious Spaniard to do the like to his beard, pick his teeth, pat and
stretch forth his paunch, and stroke off crummes from his clothes after an
egg, as if he had dined with a Lord Mayor of London. But most of all vain and
malicious he is, after two so express lies to commend himself for (a timorous
conscience as to affirm things that he knows not for certain) which neither
could his fatherhood vainegloriously enough do, unless withal he condemned me
of a lavish conscience in the contrary. Ah poor father and poor praise, so
to borrow or rather steal grace by the disgrace of others. Were there no
greater faults in a Jesuit then this, please God I had but so much of S.
Augustines spirit as to discover it to the full to the Churches caution and
edification. But of the two orders the likelihood that was, was rather of my
becoming Jesuit, especially if I had been as forward in accepting as some
were in proffering me that scandal. For very well I remember that whiles I
lived in the College, father Agazarius (who was then Rector till toward the
latter end at what time father Cowbucke came in his place) the fat father
Minister, whose name I have forgotten, and my Cousin R. S. Prefect of the
studies all three most fauningly wooed me to like of their Society, to which
end they did me the favor (for so they reputed it) as to admit me into their
spiritual exercises, whereof (God I thank) I made much better use unto my
soul then so, noting (as young as I was) the strange spirit of some youths in
the College their chief dearlings; as namely Anth. Mayor whom they made
Consiliarius primus or secundus of the congregation of our Lady in the
College (which was a favor) who since is Apostated even wilfully, and
beneficed here in England. Likewise young as I was, I could well see what foul
use they made of the said good exercise of our Ladies congregation for the
maintaining offaction amongst both the scholars and Priests, and for the
Iesuiting of the best wits and best bred youths from the true intent and
institution of the College. Also I saw how vilely (for example) they abused M.
Doctor Bagshaw and Doctor Cicill, putting them to all the boyish exercises of
the house, and in the end expulsing the former of them with others from thence.
In few, young though I were, I noted by other in cautelam to my self from
becoming either Jesuit or Jesuitical, that what talent they saw in me apt for
their turns if (being such) I should not happen to employ it religiously, and
so to the reputation of their Society, that it would stead them as well to be
employed in dishonestie, so the dishonestie were exquisite and extraordinary,
as their instructions could help to make it; so much that Society is the
refuse of religiousnesse, and therefore worthily the last religious order in
holy Church, and their founder not likely to be canonized for a Saint till it
be cassie^ed. As then it is but a work of supererogation a man to confine
himself to any order of Religion, so is it but a bonum inculpate omissum to be
of any whosoever have any such devotion, as (I protest) I never had; howbeit to
be a Jesuit, I do not see how that consideratis considerandis, vz. the evils
of it as Jesuits are now a days for the most part, it is not a Malum
realissime commissum.

From this spirit of religious and ecclesiastical life he fellbacke soon
after to the spirit of Poetry, forsaking the ordinary study of the house.

Alas poor Poetry, what il have thou deserved at this Jesuits hands, who so
many of his coat are Poets at this day, though sorry ones (God wot;) but
chiefly, how false a lie is it that I betook me to that study in the
College. True it is that the ordinary study of the house I as little
professed all the while I was there, as I did the course and institution
thereof as is before shown, and as all the house could witness: whereas had I
(as this libeller lied before) sworn the one, it is likely that I would have
applied me to the other, which is an argument against his said assertion, or
was Poesy (happily) astudie fit for an Augustine? Neither is it true (as I was a
saying) that I betook me to Poetry in that place, but to history. Since my
return into England I have indeed set out a Poem, entitled, A fig for
fortune, in attestation to the world of my Catholic soul to God and his
Church, and of my resolution against the Iesuitical obloquie which heretofore
attached me for no other fault in the world then refusing to concur with a
Iesuitical instrument in firing the Queens Navy throughout the South and West
of England. If this be the Poem he glaunceth at, belike it is for that in
describing therein somewhat the dignity of the Catholic Church in the
religious orders thereof and those by the term of discolored vest, which
sounds for the most part Munkes and Friars, the Jesuit seems excluded thereby
as going all in black: or else (perhaps) for that by the way I give in that
Poem her Majesty some praise and honor as for temporal state, which a
Jesuit cannot endu^e in the behalf of the house of Austrich. Well, this Poem
(Cousin) was as your self may very well remember called in by the Protestant
for the Catholic matter thereof, howsoever the method was not (I confess) so
schollerly as might answer a good Poets expectation; howbeit scholerly enough
as from a soldier and no professed Poet, and for one of my years then, and also
such as might beseem as great a Clarke as he to whom it was directed, though
otherwise a noble personage, and whom I am apt to honor for his worthy
grand-sires sake, whose name I wear. But Basto non placuit Iesuitis nor
Puritanes; which (me thinks) were those fathers not religious so much, as but
reasonable good Catholics it might in regard of the matter though not of the
method; and were it but for that it was a soldiers work such as sometimes
their good founder was; as also in regard of (the herrings tail) which what
stuff it is the title shows, and yet they highly esteem and give it
countenance for being penned by a lay disciple of theirs.

For which he was dismissed and sent by the Charity of the fathers to the
College of Rhemes, thinking thereby to save him from further falling.

This dismission and charity of the fathers is a fourth lie, and confuted
before in their retaining me in the College at Rome against my will; detaining
the Popes pension from me; the curses father Cowbucke gave me at parting in
stead of a Uiaticum, and his frustrating my fortunes at Venice; all which the
good fathers did for the love they bore to S. Peter's pence, which by my
departure from thence found their way home again to his Exchecker. Besides,
how call ye it a saving a man from falling, to let him travel all that way
alone and without company where he presaged he should break his neck; both
which charities in one father Parsons performed to me.

But being arrived there, he presently became an inam^rate, and fell in love
with one of Cardinal Allans neeces* and proceeded so far therein, as he
presumed to write a letter to the said Cardinal to request his consent that he
might marry her, but the Cardinal took it in high disdain, etc.

The premises of my fortunes overthrown by the Jesuits considered, was it a
fault in me to seek to raise it by matching with the Cardinals niece, who was
both fair and virtuous, and all manner of ways lovely, as well for her own
sake as for her uncles? or was I too old, or not old enough at seuenteen and
upward to love? or by the same reason that I could not brook a scholars life,
much less an Ecclesiastical, was (...) not likely that I might love? or was I
so base and ignoble of birth or education, that I was more too bold and too
blame to love the Cardinals niece, the^ either M. Thomas Throckmorton, or he
that now enioys her? or was my love unto her lawful whiles her uncle was yet
but D. Allan, and unlawful afterward when he was a Cardinal? or is love so
gross an affection that it deserves reproach? or finally was the gentlewoman a
Iesuitesse whereby unworthy to be beloved? Truly (Cousin) no: had you known
her, or but seen her, you would not only have excused me against this
calumniator, but commended my fancy. Absurdly therefore does he twit me as
faulty herein, and as reprochfully tax the good Cardinal of disdain, who
knew and loved my father too well, as to disdain any son of his, or think
him a disparage for his niece; yea, who was so humble a man as that he
disdained not a worm. But this is not the first calumny by hundreds of a
Jesuit against the honor and goodness of that excellent Cardinal, who was
ever an eyesore unto them, because he di^tasted them, and was of worth to make
them fear him. If then my presuming to write to the Cardinal for his good
will to the match were such a fault, how heinous a fault had it been (trow ye)
in this Jesuits eye if I had enjoyed her without his assent, or rather how not
worthy his approbation I in her stead to have loved my own sister? No, no,
the good Cardinal was not the man so altered by his honor, as that he could so
soon know how to disdain a Gentleman and an honest suit, though what a
Jesuit so exalted might do in the like case, it may very well be made a
question. Also it may be a question, upon what new good will to the Cardinal,
this Jesuit seems to be thus careful of his neete, as to be angry with a
Gentleman for loving her in way of honesty, who was so dishonestly careless
of his own and his sisters honor as ye have heard. I am sure any man that
loved my Lord Cardinal better the^ I persuade me this Jesuit does, if he but
knew M. Gabriel Allan his graces brother as well since as before his Cardinalate,
would at lest not have thought me unworthy to have been his nephew; neither
yet son in law to the gentlewomans good mother whosoever knows her: who for my
own part have sped as well, and better in this respect, as not being my wifes
kinsman whereby I to need any Bull of leave and dispensation for my matching
with her as I have heard her husband had. And as for his liuelihood, I do not
hear that it is for the more part other then what the ability and love of his
uncle D. W. in those parts can afford him. But being (as he is) a Gentleman,
much good cheer may his wife do him, and I no whit envy his fortune.

As he gave order that he should be put from Rhemes.
The truth hereof I never tasted, as departing from Rhemes of my own accord,
and not put from thence by any order of the Cardinals; and therefore do give it
the lie; so as this is the libellers fifth lie. Besides, what authority had
the good Cardinal to put me from thence living there at my own charges, and
loving his niece in good manner; which to do, was (I trust) no misdemeanure, and
whether otherwise I misdemeaned my self, I appeal to all the English there
then. The truth is, my abiding in Rhemes was no other nor no longer then till I
might either win the Cardinals niece, or get a pension in the low Countries,
which latter very shortly by my loving brother in law M. R. S. his means to
the Duke of Parma, and not by any Jesuits I obtained. Whereupon I departed from
Rhemes in the love and good will of M. Bailey then President, and also of all
the reverend fathers and scholars there, after having lived and loved some five
months in that town. From thence I went to Paris, and so to Rome, upon
occasion of business which I had there; and from thence back again into
Flanders.

From whence he went into Flanders, and became a soldier, first amongst the
English under Sir William Standley, where his inconstant head suffering him not
to stay, he went to serve amongst the Spaniards, and had besides by father
Holts help a pension of five and twenty a month.

That I went immediately from Rhemes into Flanders is a lie also as ye next
before heard; so as this is a sixth lie, though venial, which may pass for a
virtue in a Jesuit. Well, to Flanders I went, be it so; and had the Duke of
Parma his pension, it is true; but neither the five and twenty crowns a
month he mentions (for it was but twenty) nor yet that by father Holts
means, but by my kind brother in laws before named. Wherein to make amends for
the last venial lie you may note a cabbadged lie of his one within another, as
almost what error or evil of a Jesuit ever goes alone. How I demeaned my
self in this course of life, you may guess by the Libeller his not impeaching
me, howbeit I confess that I lived there somewhat less scrupulously then
before time; and that through father Holt his help-lesse hand to gentlemen in
the place he was in; who could see their pensions rust before his face without
scouring them with one good word to the Duke in their behalfes, which daily he
did for lackes and vpstarts. If my unconstant head were too blame for carrying
me from an Irish regiment to a Spanish, it must needs follow that the Spaniard
is a less worthy soldier then the Irish, which assertion of the Jesuit how
his founder being sometimes a Spanish soldier whiles he was on earth, would
take at his hands if he were in place, and generally the Spanish nation you may
imagine. At a word (Cousin) it deserves the Stropado in the Infantaes Court and
camp, but I Will be no blab: only I wonder if this were such a fault, what
manner fault he would have made of it if I had shifted me out of a Spanish
regiment into an Irish. Thus may ye see how nothing comes amiss to a
Iesuit-calumniator, who thus can tax me of a light and unconstant head, for
going to gravity it self, the Spanish nation.

And so having eaten of the King of Spaines bread for diverse years, he comes
now to pay him and the Jesuits with this infamous inuectiue, which he has
printed.

If I have been ungrateful to the Jesuits, you have seen for what benefits
of theirs unto me, even such as were I not a Catholic and knowing the law of
Charity, they might rather expect my revenge. But God defend that in my own
case I should be so little charitable; as also on the other side if in honor of
my two dear mothers the Catholic Church and my Country against both which
they have committed treason, and daily do, I should not show my self doubly
aggrieued and angry with them as grace and nature binds me, I were much to
blame. This then and no private grudge (I protest) is all my ingratitude and
vncharitie against these fathers. Correct they them selves in these my
imputations, that is, cease they their schism in our Church by submitting them
to their true Superiors and ours the secular Clergy without ambitioning
above them and slaundering them by libell any more; cease they their setting
brother against brother, friend against friend, etc. with their zizaniaes of
faction; cease they their making boot and havoc of Catholics estates by
the abuse of their spiritual exercises unto them, and as executors; cease they
their querkes and quiddits, as mental euasions, equivocations,
tergiuersations, and the like, but especially cease they their Pharisaicall
hypocrisy, and detractious tongues and pens: thus much for the Church. Then
for my country; cease they their Spanish faction against it; cease they their
persuasions and swetie endeavors of a conquest of it from Spain; cease they
their murderous treacheries against the anointed person of our Sovereign, and
consequently the heaping coals on all our heads at her hands for their sakes
which hitherto they have done; in few, become they good Catholics and good
English as they ought, and then if I be ungrateful or uncharitable unto them,
the blame and shame be mine; whereas continuing to be these manner of men, I
also continue this manner of man in their reproof, giving their fatherhoods
leave to take me as they find me: also giving this father the lie in terming my
book an infamous inuectiue; the contents thereof being but against their
schism and Spanish treasons. So as this is a ninth or tenth lie and that a
traitorous lie, as being in reprehension of my loyalty to Gods Church, my
Prince and Country, which is all the purport of that my treaty, wherein also
he lies in saying that I printed it. Again, I give his fatherhood the lie in
taxing me of ingratitude to the King of Spain, whose bread I acknowledge I
have eaten, but how? in the sweat of my brow, which was no very dainty
bruesse you may think. Howbeit as gratefully I eat of it as if it had bin an
Oleo podrido of the concoction of the Phoenix, Pelican, bird of Paradise,
Larkes, Quails, Venison, Sturgeon, Anchouaes and Tobacco, the Bezar and
Philosophers stone; and well worthy I was of his bread, serving him (as I did)
in a quarrel wherein my own Princess was interested against him. But let that
pass, and let it suffize that I take it as a slander to be reputed ungrateful
to the King of Spain, seeing that gratitude is a great moral virtue, and much
commended in Catholic Religion. For setting my loyal duty to my own
Sovereign and Country aside, and as far as this respect will give me leave,
I acknowledge the King of Spaines bounty unto me, and do highly honor him as
the most Catholic King of the world, neither whiles I live, will I ever draw
sword or serve against him or his estates; only to my own Princess and her
estates he must give me leave to be loyal. Greatly in the honor of a gentleman
I scorn the imputatio^ of ungrateful, but specially of disloyal in so high a
kind. When so the case stands that of necessity I must be the one or the
other, I trust the choice is not to be stood upon. That such is the state of my
Prince and Country at this instant with Spain, that I must needs be
ungrateful or disloyal to the one or the other, my discourse unto you (which
this Libeller terms an inuectiue) auoweth. At a word, it would ill beseem me
to be herein other then my fathers son, who as little liked that England
should be Spanish as I do, which was the cause he was committed to the Fleet
in Queen Mary's days, for having too bold a voice in the Parliament against
her Spanish match, and who likewise some two years before he died noting the
iarres to grow hot betwixt England and Spain, became a loyal suitor to her
Majesty for his return home from Spaines pension to her grace and favor his
Catholic conscience reserved; but her Highness did not so daigne it, but gave
him leave to die where he did. Brief, if you will see ingratitude indeed, and
that not in picture but in proper person, behold it in the Jesuits against the
good Seminaries and all the Church of God at this present, and also against our
Country, (at least if they repute themselves English) all which their
ingratitude you may see without spectacles were ye a hundred years old. Now
comes he to my letter.

He deuideth his whole discourse into three points in his first page, to wit,
Appeal, State, Jesuits; adding thereunto this sentence, Recta securus, which
if Recta be understood in the Ablative case, it agrees not improperly to his
case, who seems to run securely and without fear in the right way to
perdition.

If he had as rightly construed my Mot, as he has reported the title of my
book, he had not seemed the Jesuit, but as such he must be still catching and
running upon the Ablative Recta from the right: but on.

Whereunto do lead him on, not only the vanity and inanitie of the young man's
head, but his poverty also, in respect whereof (it seems) he would gladly
get in with some of them that be in authority, whereunto he thought good to
make this Prologue, and his brothers living is a great allurement.

The vanity and inanitie of the young man's head has not been such that it ever
led him with the Jesuits into Schism against the Church of God, or into
treason against his Prince and Country, nor (by Gods assistance) ever shall;
but contrariwise was ever able to discern them, and willing to deserve ill at
their hands in these respects; and that merely for Gods sake and my souls,
and not for the worlds as this Libeller calumniates me. As little is it the
tenuitie of my estate that could lead me into temptation so far forth as to
comply with authority for the bettring thereof against honor and conscience.
What a Jesuits school might profit her scholar in that kind I may easily
guess, but sure I am the Catholic Church dispenses no such spirit. Better
profit (I hope) I have made of Catholic Religion to my soul, then so to slide
from my promise in Baptism to the world and the devil: yea more stand I upon
the honor of my ancestors and of a gentleman (setting Catholic duty aside)
then to transport me in so foul brocage to the preiudicing of any person, even
for a Princes favor. How ungodly then the Jesuit reprocheth me herein, both
my conscience and my life hitherto do attest to the world; but chiefly his
saying that (my brothers living is a great allurement). Oh monstrous vncharitie
thus to sow ielousies between brethren, as though there were not privy vipers
enough that daily do it and easily may in respect of the far distance
between us, unless a religious Jesuit should do it in print. Of which
enormous imputation (for so I take it) to purge me unto you (good Cousin) and by
your means to as many as by the same may be scandalized in their opinions of
me, here by protestation I except thereunto and asseuer even as I am and hope
to die a Catholic and believe no otherwise to be saved: by my Savior in the
Eucharist: and by all the Saints in heaven, that never in all my life have I
gone about directly or indirectly to supplant my brother and his issue of his
inheritance in all this time of his absence, but contrariwise have as far as he
ever entrusted me done my brotherly best to work him home again, as bearing
the mind to be beholding rather to God then to my self for my fortunes. No no,
my brothers religion to God, and his loyalty to his Prince and Country I too
well know, why I should so wrong him, and therein my own conscience more. A
blanke importing treason to this State he when as it was most loyally rejected,
refusing to subscribe thereunto, whereupon good father Cowbuck within a while
after threatened to sit on his skirts, and partly has made it good since (as I
heard) in detaining from him a legacy which sir Francis Englefield in his
death bestowed upon his wife, so very a traitor was this Cowbucke in the one,
and so lewd an executor in the other. Judge you now with what honesty I may go
about to supplant so good a brother, so good a subject, and in few, so good a
Catholic as has left together with his country all his fair fortunes
therein merely for the Catholic cause; in which respect I acknowledge him
the wel-worthie head of our house, and worthy to continue so, and consequently
judge you then whether this libelling Jesuit be an honest or civil man thus
to traduce me to the world and in paticular to him by the parsimonie of my
fortunes, as though it were not easier by Christ's own parable for a poor man
to be honest and so to enter into the kingdom of heaven, then a rich Camel.
True it is that my father out of his ample estate might in his loving care and
providence have left us his younger sons more liberally provided then he did;
but he did not, as minding to leave us partly to our own makings. Neither was
it ever yet my hap to be made a rich man's executor whereby to better my estate
that way, and to brave it in girdle and hangers of thirty pound price as a
Jesuit has done; neither bear I so Jesuitical a conscience. Moreover (I
trust) that four score pound and upward a year is not altogether a miserable
estate for a younger brother living single wherewith to live an honest man;
less then which I never yet spent any year, and yet (I thank God) my debts
are not great, and since my marriage my dear mothers love has bettered it.
Besides, you know (Cousin) by what executor I am yet the worse by five hundred
pounds.

The first point concerning Appeal and matter of Schism is already
determined by his Holiness especial Breue, to wit, the Appeal rejected, and
the controversy of Schism prohibited from further dispute under pain of
excommunication ipso facto, into which this man must needs have incurred if he
knew of the said Breue when he wrote his book, and if not, then at leastwise
the book it self remains forbidden under the same pain and punishment.

As he has belied me hitherto, so see how he here slaundereth the Appeal
touching the matter of schism with a lie also, affirming that it is determined
by his Holiness, but how? to wit, the Appeal rejected, which how this
assertion hangs together, I pray ye judge. Judge how if it be determined (as
indeed it is on the Appellants behalf against the Libellers) it can be said to
be rejected, all reiection being properly of a bil not inquirable in Court, oh
gross and inconsiderate equivocation. As for his Holiness inhibiting the
question to be further disputed on under pain, etc. how gross reproach were it
also to his Holiness if he had not first defined it, namely to have it said of
him, that to priests appealing unto his Chair for judgment in the behalf of
their infinite innocence against Calumniators, in the behalf of the liberty of
the Church, and also of his Holiness own honor, he after so many miles travel,
and that at so great charges and hazards of theirs unto him in this respect, to
reject their bill, without doing them the equity as to read it. On the other
side if it be true that since his Holiness award on the Priests side (which is
most certain true as in M. Colletons late book you may read the order) he
has withal inhibited (as this Jesuit suggests) all further dispute upon the
question, under, etc. it is well and good; but here of I will inform me more
then of a Jesuits bare word which deserves no more credit then ye have heard.
Howsoever, (I am sure) he lies broadly in affirming that any such Bull of
prohibition was out, or at leastwise promulgated before the edition of my
letter by you, whereby I to have incurred the censure therein contained if I
knew thereof, for that if his said Assumpsit be true, it is also true that he
himself and his faction have a fortiori incur^ed the same, forasmuch as this
libell of his is come forth (as ye see) since my said letter, and also their
Appollogie, Appendix, etc. all containing matter of the Appeal prohibited; and
yet he and they (at least wise as he here for himself and them suggesteth)
taking notice of such a Breue: whereas I for my part do take no other notice of
any such matter, then all the party of the Appeal has or does either now or
then, and do submit me accordingly. In the mean time why my book should be by
any such pretended Breue, more censured and forbidden under penalty then this
of his or the rest on his side coming forth since mine upon the same argument
(as is said) especially mine being for the Appeal on which behalf his
Holiness has ordered it, and theirs on the contrary, judge you (Cousin) how
likely this sounds.

Albeit this were not so, yet were it lost time to answer this quareller, who
not understanding the substance of the controversy, tatleth without any
purpose at all, saying therein much less and worse then others of his crew
have said or written before him.

Bonaverba quaeso, be not angry (good Jesuit) but bear your rebukes
patiently at a soldiers hands, both for that your founder was sometime such,
and likewise for that your misdemeanures are rather military then
Ecclesiastical or religious, and consequently within the sphere of military
discipline. You are a society that would shake off the yoke of your true
masters the secular Clergy, and impose it upon them, which is preposterous and
must not be as long as there is ere an honest soldier alive that will defend
them, and herein the hierarchy and liberty of holy Church. Now (Cousin)
whereas he says that I understand not the substance of the controversy, and
have ta^led without any purpose at all, his Holiness censure so conformable
to my discourse, or rather my discourse to his censure gives herein his
fatherhood the lie, which is a kind of lie against the holy Ghost; as thus by
military scholership I prove it. He that speaks or writes according to S.
Peter, speaks and writes according to the holy Ghost; and he that affirms
that so spoken or written is to no purpose, lies against the holy Ghost. But
what I have written and said in my letter concerning the point of schism, has
been according to S. Peter (vz. his Successor) and consequently according to
the holy Ghost; ergo this Libeller in saying that I have written and spoken to
no purpose in my said letter concerning the point of Schism, has lied against
the holy Ghost. The Minor I prove, for what I there writ concerning that point,
was, that the Appellants were no schismatickes, rebels, nor disobedient in
forbearing to accept of the Archpriests authority upon the Cardinals bare
letter before the coming of the Apostolic Breue, and this is verbatim his
Holiness censure touching the same point. Sanctissimus visis and consider at is
rationibus vestris (vz. of the Appella^ts) declarat vos neque schismaticos,
neque rebels, neque inobedientes fuisse ante aduentum Breuis Apostolici, etc.
Furthermore, the libellers alleging one of my reasons for the schism to be on
their side, with his cutting off with an, etc. the most material words of the
same, shows his sincerity what it is; but his reproof thereof is much more
absurd, for this is all he says: And hereby the discreet Reader will see how
wise an vn-Iesuited Gentleman this is to instruct his Cousin the Iesuited
Gentleman in matter of schism. If in my said discourse I have said less and
worse touching that point then any other, I am glad that the case was so good
on the Appellants side that both the least of my pen was enough, and her best
not good enough to be seen therein.

Another of my reasons touching the point of State he cites, whereby I
inferred that if Christ expressly rebuked S. Peter for cutting off Malchas his
ear, the quarrel being so good: a fortiori, S. Peter and his Successors have
no authority Trade^di gentem in gentem by conquest for Religion: which
proposition under correction of holy Church, I rest farther ready to
maintain, and that for the honor of the sea Apostolic, vz. that P^non habet
a Christo potestatem tradendi gentem in gentem armis and in foedum propter
Religionem. If this be hacking (as he terms it) at the Popes authority; judge
you then what a hacker thereat that Spanish Jesuit is, who openly and for
sound, doctrine maintained it first to his auditors in the school, and at this
instant obstinatly in the inquisition does (vz.) that Non est de fide credere
hunc Romanum Pontifice^ esse Christi Uicarium. This (I trust) is more then
hacking at the Pope; this is a flat cutting off his head. But mark (I pray)
how learnedly the Libeller refutes my aforesaid reason: these are his words.
And do you not see by this reason that this young gentleman soldier, is fitter
to cut off boys ears, then to reason of State matters; or to back at the
Popes authority by such arguments as these are. These are the vennies this
hacking father gives me, which he thinks are deep wounds, and which to do he
so stretches forth his arm that (as ye see) he strains it, the reproach
lighting on himself. But let us see what follows.

But what says he of the third point about Jesuits? Oh here is his vein
indeed to rail, and revel against them, who (good men) have been always
careful, so far forth as in them has layne to stay his shittle brains, and
to make him careful of some Christian constancy, but all in vain as it
seems.

Still the father urges the societies favors unto me, their care to stay my
shittle brains, and make me careful of some Christian constancy; ah stale
hypocrisy, gross extortion, and proud beggarie of good desert where none ever
was, but the clean contrary; ah humor of all humors, and ceremony of all
ceremonies the most extrauagant and ridiculous that ever I heard of Sure, this
is a gullerie new brought over by the fathers from beyond the straights of
Magellane, and as yet not thorough christened here in Europe. I wonder how they
brought it so far by sea, and under so torrid zones without tainting, or what
po^dring or p^boiling (happily) they gave it aforehand. No no ^sin) it has taken
wind and ^kes; powder or spice it they never so art^lly, you and all may smell
the sleight of it: which is noise other th^n by such their arrogated goodness
toward me, they to seem (good men) and consequently my auersion from them to
seem ungrateful, and as from God; but chiefly my verities to you of them
thereby to be disabled and reputed inuectiues as from an ungrateful person,
they having in truth no just disproofe of them at all as for example ye shall
^eare: Ye read in my former letter unto you (which this fellow terms a
libell) of a certain familiar Jesuit who erected a kind of family of love by
his might-lectures to his fair fema^e auditors, and what became of it; now
hear (I pray) his disproofe; these are his words (...) you hear this
lascivious companion going about to discredit good and virtuous men, and in
them the whole Catholic cause? as though I or any man else ever lay with his
sister besides himself, why thus he should term me lascivious; or as though a
Jesuits bare negative (as these words of his sound not so much) could be
autenticke against a positive assertion, and an affirmative so peremptory as
this of (...) is, without further proof; or as though the honor of the whole
Catholic cause consisted on a few pelting Jesuits; oh proud and peevish pen!
And so of some other my allegations, which being in the affirmative he would
have either his bare denial, or else his (How is it likely?) or, Do you think
this is a Catholic? or such like surly euasions to ouer-beare: which must not
be, a Jesuit being now pretily discovered amongst us what quiddit he is and of
what mould. He must not think to bear it hence forward amongst Catholics in
England with his bare Ipse dixit as heretofore, but must as well as other honest
and plain meaning men be content to come down from the bench, and yield
reason for what he says or does. It is neither his Pharisaicall hypocrisy,
his title of religious, nor yet the favor of Spain and all the house of
Austrich that can give him credit against honesty, honesty being the staff
which will never warp, but still abide straight and stiff against a world of
adversaries. So thought they to tread down the Appellants first from their
Appeal, next in their Appeal touching the point of Schism, but you see now
the contrary, and therein their shame so great, as not all the Austrich feathers
in the world can swagger out. So good is God and ever was to his servants, to
his little David against Go^as. In which respect how happy may I think my
self in having thus risen on the Appellants side, and served them (whom this
mate still terms seditious) to the poor power of my pen, and in them all the
Church of God. In the libellers exceptions whereunto I marvel here by the way
why he answers me nothing concerning the point of Spanish faction whereof I
so really impeach his society, and namely his fellow father Cowbuck, and the
same with me all the party of the Appeal. Oh oh, it is his guilty
conscience, and that so much the more guilty and treacherous, by how much he
would feign smother this article rather by silence then by blushing. Likewise
it is a point which they have concluded to let sleep till a change, at what
time (all being then likely to be in uproar) they will awake it again with
some new Spanish Doleman, suffizing that they retain their Spanish faction
sure in the mean time against that day, to which day for the delay of it, they
give the daily pox, and that plainly and without all manner of mental
evasion; and so likewise to all those that have already detected such their
disloyal project. It follows.

Do you think this is a Catholic, but only in the very rine and paring?
No no, this is a copes-mate shrouded in a Catholics coat, an Apost^ in his
heart from God and all piety, etc.
How say you (Cousin) by this gallant, by this (I will not say) Deus Deorum in
Sion, but Demon daemoniorum in Aegypto, who thus presumptuously takes upon him
to define the conscience of any man like God himself, who only is Scrutator
renum and cordis. His saying that I am not a Catholic other then in rine and
paring; that I am a copesmate shrouded in a Catholics coat (if he mean
copes-mate in disgrace) and that I am an Apostata in my heart from God and all
piety, are all most gross, inormous, and diabolical slanders, such as my
conscience, and in the behalf of it all the Angels and Saints of heaven, yea
God himself gives the lie unto. For since the time of my union to the
Catholic Church, which was in Anno 1583. by the hand of old and good M.
Woodward in Rone in Normandy, I never either in schismatic or heretical
word, deed, or assent, scandalized the same, but have ever held and reputed
such my Religion as the apple of my eye, and as a brooch, pledge, pillar and
seal of salvation to my soul. Yea, rather then I will ever upon temptation of
the flesh, the world or the devil, disparage my self herein to the Catholic
Church, I trust in God to endure a thousand deaths. In testimony of which my
Catholic conscience, I here by these presents auow the same unto you (good
cousin) and to as many as may happen to read this letter, praying you and them
to bear me record hereof at the latter day when all flesh shall arise to
judgment. If the actuals of my life have not bin so conformable to this my
professed faith as they ought, it has been my extreme frailty I confess, for
which God I thank that he has left medicinable Sacraments in the Church
whereby I may rise and renew me from time to time; yet, sure I am that to
dislike of so schismatic and treacherous preuaricators as Jesuits are at
this day both to our Church and country, and to oppose against them as such
with all my ability with and for the sacred Seminaries my true spiritual
fathers, is no ways an act of ill life so much as venial, much less
Apostacy from God and all piety, but the clean contrary, that is,
Catholic and bounden duty in the highest degree. Let therefore this libelling
Jesuit look into his own conscience, and check these his slanderous
imputations to me, first there, and then to the world-ward, and as for his
satisfaction to me, he shall find it easy at my hands, who do daily pray God
to forgive me my trespasses, as I forgive all trespasses against me. Till when
let him not vaunt (as above ye have read) of atimorous conscience, to affirm
things that he knows not for certain, especially if tending to the reproach of
any; and in religious humility think himself (as all men ought) the veriest
sinner of all others.

And finally his deadly and devilish hatred to Jesuits in general and to
father Parsons in especial, to whom notwithstanding he was wont to profess
great obligation for his spiritual good, as he is not ashamed to conclude thus
of him: In brief, if he have been a Judas to Gods Church and his country to
the disparage of the Seminaries, etc.

That I being so very Catholic as you have heard, do hate Jesuits as
Jesuits, that is, as they ought to be good religious men according to their
institution, and their founders rules confirmed and privileged so indulgently
by holy Church is another falsitie, and I repute it as a slander. Marie, that I
hate them as men generally debaucht and digressed from their principles, and
consequently as most scandalous transgressors, this I acknowledge to be very
true, and my duty as I am a Catholic, being withal sorry even in my soul and
with my heart for the honor of my holy mother the Church, that there can be a
religious society in it so scandalous as this as well to all her children and
friends, as to her foes; but specially in a Church so much under execution as
this our English is. Yea so far forth I am sorry herefore, as that to redeem
the same, I take God to witness, I would willingly endure a many Anathemaes
both temporal and corporal in this world Gods grace and love reserved. And as
for father Cowbucke I deny and malign him not the credit of his book called
the Resolution; but do agnize his pains therein taken, whether as a collector,
or but as a translator, to be meritorious and fruitful, and in particular my
self to have been more then somewhat profited thereby in spirit in the time
of my catecumenage; and so also have many been by Buchanans seven Psalms, who
notwithstanding became himself an Apostata in the end. Other, either
spiritual or temporal debt to him or his society I acknowledge none, but the
clean contrary, that is, disgusts and injuries, both to my self as A. C. and
also as I am a member of the Catholic Church and my country, either of which
that Society, but especially this man have notoriously scandalized and
prejudiced. In which respect I might justly distaste and impeach them in my
former letter to you, as I did in manner of an Appollogie for the Seminaries, to
whom in all duties both to our Church and country we are chiefly indebted. And
if (happily) they have erred in any thing to the hurt of either of them, it has
been in bringing in of Jesuits, and giving them here the countenance they have
to the discountenancing of themselves, and generally of the Catholic cause
through their ingratitude, singularity, and avarice. Being which manner of men
and therefore justly banished out of France, and distasted of the most part of
Christendom; how is it that their reproach may be a blemish to any, or rather
not their praise a reproach? Truly (Cousin) if they hold on as they have begun,
and that withal the world by their means grow not worse then it is already,
I do not doubt but we shall see it so ere long; if they be not cassierd the
sooner, so much is their corruption exorbitant and ready to run over. Good
God that such a society of men after so many scandals and foul deserts of
theirs in France and elsewhere for Prince-killing, sedition, etc. can be thus
of credit in England, where also they have assayed no less and daily do before
our eyes, besides their present schism in our Church: whereas the
Seminariesouer and above the high honor of their secular and pastoral
priesthood, and their instiution thus for the shamble in Gods cause and for our
souls like vowed good shepherds, are truly good men and our good fathers, in
all as well moral as spiritual practice, gatherers and not dispersers, with
whom to be afflicted by the Jesuits and our common adversaries, highly we ought
to hold it a glory to God and us; and as for my own part I do, reputing this
Libellers contumelies against me for their sakes for such, being glad that you
amongst other my good kinsemen and friends are so open eyed (standing upon
your honor to be wise and virtuous) as to discern not only a Jesuits gross
and goutie faults, as (for example) a lie, but also his finer and quintessenced
gulleries as daily now you do. You may see and be glad to see it, how far
these fathers are already chased by ours, that like a fox almost spent in the
hunting, they have now no other shift for the life of their schism, then to
bepisse their tails and besprinkle therewith the hounds that are ready to
fasten on them in the eyes, wherewith (if it may be) to put them off. Such
foxe-like pissing-shift is this Manifester his quil-full oflice, vz. express
lies blown not only upon me (being a lay man) in this said Libell, but also
upon sundry good Seminaries who have likewise hunted their foxe-ship, and yet
do with their sedule pen. It was other with these foxes in the beginning of the
day, when being fresh a foot, and the hunt but scarce up, they had many a
witty wile, many a pretty frisk, and many a sly subterfuge, as mental
euasions, equivocations, tergiuersations, hypocrisy, and the like, wherewith
to deceive the hound and save themselves, whereas now they are come to their
pissing-shifts of lie and libell as is said. Courage (good Cousin) and think
their death that is their final check and shame for all their schism and sins
at the Apostolic Pastors hands now at hand, seeing that to so gross and
beastly shifts they are fallen as express lying against their pursuers. It was
my chance this other day riding upon the way to overtake a Jesuitical ally of
mine, a gentleman well descended, and who had suffered much for the Catholic
cause at the hands of our common adversary, first in sundry prisons, and
lastly at the Bar; and falling into communication with him upon these matters
of the Appeal, I found him the man who in little more then two miles riding did
blunder out and that most ass^uerently seven as gross lies as gross might be,
and that to my certain knowledge whom they all concerned. Now because for many
respects I love the Gentleman, I heartily wish him dis-lesuited for altogether,
but especially of this vein which is too gross, and so likewise his fat
sister I wish she would hang her picture of the Jesuit in the gray gown now
another while in the garret, seeing that the presence and sight thereof has
heretofore given her leave to Ass and befoole too many Seminaries Priests
far more reverend and good men (I wisse) then he; who though they were bad,
yet better terms might beseem a modest Catholic gentlewoman on men of their
coat. Thus much to her because I likewise love and wish her well, and in
particular to be rid of her old corn wheresoever she be; for it is a shreud
pain and makes the foot go much awrie.

By this you may see what a proper Cato this Manifester is to be either taskt
by his superior Jesuit, or to take upon himself to censure others, who is
himself so censurable a companion as well for the inormities of his censure, as
of the whole course of his life. In effect you see that the sum of his said
censure is a manifestation of his own and his societies folly and bad spirit
most immense upon the subject of detraction and defamation, which is the
grossest and drossiest argument that my pen can handle, and most properly and
essentially libellious: whereby it appears that a Jesuit at this day is not
only digressed from the finenesse of his institution and primitiall honors as
religious Ignatians; but also from fine and vertue-like vices, wherewith they
first of all began to be naught, to too too course and scandalous, which ere
long will bring them to as gross contempt. Not but that this Manifester seems
for his part to continue even as he first began, that is, no better nor no
worse; you having heard before somewhat of his foul birth and life, and now
seen somewhat of his libell, at least if (as in the beginning I said) he be
the man. I was once almost of opinion and so were others with me that this
Libeller had been one Garnet the prouincial-father over these schismatikes here
in England; for that I sometimes knew him by the name of Patre Robert^ a great
chalker upon a wall in the Gregorian-Colledge at Rome* and consequently (being
a Jesuit) was likely (I thought) to be the man thus libelliously to score up
other men's vices or rather their virtues for vices, and not his own, which
mostly every religious man ought. But by reason that his charactering was
always with chalk, and this authors seems to be with a cole: therefore I quit
him of this sca^dal; though not of many others as gross, which gladly also I
would for my cousin R. S. his sake sometime his fellow-father in earth, with whom
he came over into England (if I mistake not) and which kinsman of mine I
presume is by this time a Saint in heaven notwithstanding some soul faults of
his as from his Iesuitisme. All the finenesse that may be so called in this
libellious Manifestation is that the author thereof being a mere Jesuit, would
have it thought by his (wees) to be of some secular Priests doing, and
consequently of Seminary against Seminary, or at least ways by this slight
to work it so, or if not, yet thereby to inuolue the Seminaries in their
blames and scandals in the opinion of the vulgar, which forasmuch as Stultorum
plena sunt omnia, they hold for the better boot, because the greater. But as
they have their forged (wees) wherewith thus to gull the world; so (assure your
self) there will not want true (wees) on the Appellant-side to detect from
time to time such their gulleries to their shame: which to do, is so far from
being Chams manner of fault toward his father Noe, (they being no ways such
good fathers) as that those (wees) need not to fear Gods like curse upon them
therefore, much less those fathers own curses; yea, not to discover them I
hold rather a matter of irreligion, and to deserve Gods anger, whom of his
great goodness we are to beseech rather he to frustrate such their sleights,
then we to discover them, the notice whereof can no whit edify our common
adversaries. Also we are to beeseech God in the behalf of such Jesuitical
(wees) and the like sleights to the disunion of our brethren farther then
already they are, he to inspire the Seminaries animam vna^ and cor vnu^
against their common foe, as already we plentifully and gladly may see it,
considering quam bonum and quam i^cundunt est habitare fratres in vnum. Well,
you may see by this (as I was a saying) how all honest supports begin to fail
the Jesuits in their schism, and they forced to trust now daily to lies,
Mammon, and fools. Blessed be God for it (sweet Cousin) and a fair
encouragement may it be to us to expect hereupon their farther foil then what
they have already received at our fathers hands and the holy Ghosts, as
touching the decided point of schism* namely all their other aggriefes against
them being now (as we hear) committed by his Holiness to his high court of
Inquisition, to be examined according to the humble sure of the Appellants by
their two Latin books, the one to his Holiness, the other to that Court it
self, both which (I suppose) you have seen? This commitment of the cause by
his Holiness, the Iesuit-partie here swaggers upon mightily at this present,
as upon a point in the Appellants disgrace and to their glory, which (God
knows) is but with a weeping inward, considering that our party has brought
it to this pass, full ill against their wills: howbeit, they have their
ruffians to face it, and their too too many sots to believe it in their praise.

And now where you find such ungrateful, traitorous, and Iudas-like nature,
etc. what disputing is there with him?

A conclusion very suitable to the premises, and such as no Catholic or
charitable person may with a safe conscience answer Amen unto: for that thereby
he should incur the guilt of all his libell, which not all the countenance of
Spain and Austrich can ever make good against me, at least in the eye of God.
So as, true and undoubted is my triumph over it in this my answer, it being so
full of verity as God sees it is, wherein if I have been so bold as to give
the Jesuit the lie as I have lineally met with the same, I trust it has been
with charity enough; though with the less courtesy; charity being that Adam
which can give every thing her proper notion. And as for scandalum magnatum I
am sure it is none neither; for that a Jesuits greatness (at least this
Libellers whom I suppose) is none at all, unless in scandalgiuing.

Thirdly, Percussor Cleri I am likewise none in so doing, for that if it be
any percussion at all, it is Percussio percussoris cleri, such as this Jesuit
has been in all this libell of his, except only in this part of it which has
touched me who am lay, and it has been me defendendo. Wherein how justly I
have exonerated my self unto you, of all his imputations by these my answers.
I refer to your exactest examination. Examine (I pray) whether with Jacob I
have all this while contended with a good Angel or a bad; yea be ye a Jesuit
the while to make the worst construction you can of these my lines. Let the
libeller who ere he be, or any, or all the Jesuits in the world for him, that
find themselves aggrieued with either the many lies I have in this my
Appollogie given him, or otherways impeached him in my defense; accuse me by
an Appeal to the Apostolic bar, and see whether I fear either the
inquisition or the galley to answer him. Let him try whether I cannot better
defend both this and my former letter to you concerning their scandals, then
either M. Lister his treaty of schism, or this Jesuit his Libel were he
called in coram thither for it. Eighteen capital lies and one venial have I
given this Manifester, as the apparent proofs and my protestations, besides
God and my conscience can witness, which is pretty competent for not passing
two leaves of his book concerning me, and more then so many vennies to him
from me. Guess you may how many then he has written in the whole of others
being all Priests, and consequently by all likelihood men of less exceptions
unto, then I who am a soldier. His lies are these.

Imprimis, that my letter to you which is imprinted is a libell. 2 That I stand
for the seditious. 3 That I took the College oath to be a Priest. 4 That I
pretended to be an Augustine Friar. 5 That I betook me to Poetry in the
College. 6 That I was dismissed from thence by the Jesuits. 7 Item by their
charity (vz.) Uiaticu^. 8 That I was put from Rhemes by order from Cardinal
Allan. 9 That I went from Rhemes to Flanders. 10 That I had there a pension of
five and twenty crowns a month. 11 That I obtained it by father Holts
means. 12 That I am ungrateful to the King of Spain. 13 That I printed an
infamous inuectiue against him. 14 That the Appeal is rejected. 15 That my
imprinted letter to you was prohibited by his Holiness Breue so as he assumes.
16 That I understand not the substance of the controversy touching the
schism. 17 That I am a copesmate shrouded in a Catholic coat, and an
Apostata in my heart from God and all piety. 18 That I hate Jesuits in
general if he mean as Jesuits; or father Parsons in particular as a Jesuit.
19 That the Jesuits have been my best friends many years.
His other calumniations of me, and o^ of Cardinal Allan.
Imprimis, that I went up into the pulpit to make the tones with a rose in my
mouth. 2 That the Jesuits sent me to Rhemes to save me from farther falling. 3
His reproach to the Cardinal that he disdained my suit to his niece. 4 That I
showed an unconstant head in going from the Irish to a Spanish regiment. 5 His
gross comment upon my Mot Recta securus. 6 That I made that imprinted letter
to you as a Prologue, whereby to get in with some in authority for the
bettering of my estate. 7 That my brothers living was allurement unto me
thereunto. 8 That I am a Catholic but only in the rine and paring. 9 His
cauils upon certain passages in my said letter unto you, and his no disproofes
of them, but sly cuasions. 10 That I took occasion by my said letter to ^aile
at the Jesuits and Archpriest. 11 His leaving me to Gods judgment.
Other gulleries wherein he has shamed himself.
Imprimis, his not setting his name to his Manifestation, etc. whereby it is a
flat libell. 2 His (wees) as though not he alone wrote the libell, but would
have it thought written by Seninaries. 3 His affirming his (wees) to be of a
fearful conscience, as to avouch things that they knew not for certain after
his express lies foretold. 4 His hypocritical and detractious advise to
yonkers to beware by me of sliding back upon his surmised and premised lies. 5
His hypocrisy and detraction in praying God that I trespass not ere long in
matter of faith, having failed as he pretends in the point of Charity. 6 His
contradicting himself in affirming that the Appeal concerning the schism is
determined and yet rejected. 7 His affirming that my foresaid letter to you is
prohibited by his Holiness Breue, and yet his insinuating that his and other
books of his faction which are come forth since it upon the same argument,
are not.
His uncivil and scurrilous terms of me.
That I am a libeller, a scold for the seditious, a little wanton idleheaded
boy, and light witted; a lad, unconstant, spleenatiue, spiteful, malicious,
vain, inane, a quareller, a tatler, ^it to cut off boys ears, a hacker at
the Popes authority, a railer, a reuiler, shittle brained, a lascivious
companion, a discreditor of virtuous men and the Catholic cause, beastly,
sensual, a Catholic but in the rine and paring, a copesmate shrouded in a
Catholic coat, an Apostata, impudent, a deadly and devilish hater of
Jesuits, ungrateful, traitorous; Iudas-like, etc.

Now tell me (Cousin) whether ever ye read two such leaves in all your life, and
whether you think this fellow have not passing well profited in Iesuitrie,
alias Scaningerie, who notwithstanding is not ashamed to prate of modesty, and
(perhaps) expects to be so answered. This is the fruit of that singularity
wherein a Jesuit will be called (forsooth) a father, albeit his society be
the purest order in the Church of God; fie on such fatherhood so rooted, so
fruited. Were I not a Catholic, I should be proud (I promise ye) of such a
fathers reproach and malediction, which in the integrity of my Catholic
conscience I as much scorn at their hands, as I scorn to be any whit depending
of their good word for my reputation, they being such prodigious schismatickes
as they are to our Church, traitors to our Country, and (as it seems) most
professed liers, at whose hands how can a praise but stink, and a reproach but
resent most sweetly?

Brief, will you know why thus this father lies?
His father was a plough-lob full of lice,
And be a groom who at every ale-pot lies;
He eke did lie with his own sister twice,
Whereby he did become his nephews Sire,
And therewithal a famous father-lyre,
At least if I do dot mistake the Squire.
See what it is to be a mis-begotten,
It mis-begets again, forgetting clean
All manner of measure save the only pott^,
And makes a very sister* a very queen,
Fie on that pen, as also on that other*
That can defloure the honor of a brother,
Weening with bastard-wees the shame to smother.
Having thus Apollogetically, and plainly as you see, and withal as briefly
as I can exonerated my self unto you of this Jesuits libellious imputations, I
here promise you upon occasion thereof to present you and all the world ere
long with a Manifestation of the Jesuitical commonwealth, whereby you shall
plainly see upon what manner of props it subsists. God defend that my conscience
and my pen should not therein merely intend Gods glory, the good of his
Church and of my Country: so as I may and will boldly show my face without any
manner of wees, or namelesse vizard, and be known to be of Sion by my voice
against such inward Babylonians as they are My Ordo ad Deum in that Treaty
shall be such, and my face so manifest, doing it propter bonum societatis* vz,
for her reformation (if it please God) that scratch it what Jesuit soever list
my conscience, and the approbation of all good men will heal it as fast. For
there are Stapletons and Wrights enough in the world who have gone in amongst
them, and come forth again noting their pollution. My style shall be (as you
see) plain, but civil and honest, and better crossed and blessed of God (I
trust) then to blunder out a falsehood for a world. There will not want truths
enough and too many in their reproof, though I pray not a lie in aid. The
contents of the book I send you herewith as a fore-tast or ante-past or
Antelope thereunto.

We leave him to Gods judgment and so an end of that.
Shall we still take a Jesuit for an honest or civil man withal his faults?
Might he not as well and better and more Catholickely have left me to Gods
mercies, at least if he think himself a sinner too, and needing the same
as well as I? or did I ever lie with my sister? drink my self drunk in his
cup? or write nineteen lies against any man's good name in but two leaves of
paper, why he should thus leave me to Gods judgment? or if I had why not
rather to his mercies? Call ye it charity so to leave a man to God, knowing
Quam horribile est incidere in manus Dei viuentis and videntis? or is his own
innocence such that he is able to answer God in his accusations vnum pro mill?
In few, is this wished like a good father? or is this diliges proximum tuum
tanquam teipsum, firsty your selfto condemn your brother for an Apostata from
God and all piety, etc. and then also to leave him to Gods judgment? unless
(happily) you acknowledge your said judgment rash and unjust, and therefore
would refer him to God to judge him better. No, no, this is Jesuitical
vncharitie, and agreeable to that of father Cowbucke his presaging my neck to
be broken adowne the Alps many years ago (as before is touched) who live yet
notwithstanding, and (as I hope) in Gods blessings, for all I dislike a Jesuit:
which (to conclude) I do not see how I am not bound to do in the behalf of our
true spiritual fathers the secular Priests, whom (having been ever stagers in
Gods Church) these vpstarts would supplant, by robbing them of their Pastoral
and paternal honors, which must not be; neither yet they to betray our
country to Spain. In either of which quarrels I for my part do hold it (as
twice before I said) an honor to be with our said fathers afflicted by these
false fathers; and do mean (by Gods help) like a true Catholic soldier to
maintain my stand in the one, and like a true English in the other on their
behalf. Do you the like (good Cousin) and every good English Catholic
besides; considering the foes we deal withal are brazen-faced, and all their
brave is in the Austrich feather. Fare ye well.

Postscript.
Master D. Elyes answer which in my former letter I foretold ye was
forthcomming to the Iesuitical Apollogie is now come over, entitled, His notes
upon the same, wherein he has shown himself the excellent good man he is,
and ever was in zeal of Gods Church, and the Seminaries honor, of which letter
he is a baze or fundamental stone. Which notwithstanding, a larger answer to
the said Appollogie is in hand by the Priests here at home, and very shortly
forthcomming. With these notes of M. D. Elies is combined M. D. Bagshaw his
Appollogie for his good name; as also D. Bishops, and M. Pagets, whereunto the
Jesuitical lies and libels have driven them there, as well as me and others
here at home: the book I send ye herewith. The Appendix is likewise in
answering; and as for the Manifestation, the answer thereto is already
finished, and ready for the press. The news from Rome is as by this piece of
a letter from a special gentleman in Paris of instant date, and in answer to a
letter of M. Watsons unto him you may perceive. M. Bluet is on the way
hitherward, from whom we have had no letters these two last Posts. Only it is
assured us from Rome that Parsons is condemned; the manner and particularities
thereof we have not as yet. M. Bluets arrival will afford it us all, and give
us all cause to rejoice. The rest of the^ stay (as I think) there still, for so
it is held expedient for the farther state ofthe business. I am glad to hear
that the book lately printed here is so well accepted of among you there at
home, as I see no reason why it should not, considering who they were that
penned it: and this is as much as is to be written from hence at this time
touching common affairs. Now for the rest, etc. By this (Cousin) you may see
what a monstrous gull or foist that of the Jesuits was which of late, yea yet
possesses both the court and country against the Appellants: but what will
ye? Mentitur iniquitas sibi; and according to the Prophet, Omnis homo mendax,
that is, as I may here conster it, quatenus a Jesuit or Jesuitical.

Both these letters are submitted to the censure of holy Church, and the
mis-printing to the courtesy and discretion of the Reader.



The Table of my forthcomming Manifestation of the Jesuits Commonwealth.
CHap. 1. Of the Founder and Institution of the Society of Jesus, and the
approbation thereof by the Sea-Apostolicke. Chap. 2. Of the fruitful services
the Society has done to the Sea-Apostolicke till the time of her declination,
and of some rare men of it at this day. Chap. 3. Of the many faculties,
privileges, and prerogatives indulged from time to time to the Society by the
Sea-Apostolicke. Chap. 4. How and wherein the Society differs from all other
religious orders in holy Church, and consequently how unlikely to continue any
long time perfect. Chap. 5. Of the Societies retaining to the house of Austrich
and Spain. Chap. 6. Of the Societies first stayre downward, to wit, her
singularity and ouer-weening. Chap. 7. Of the Societies two Poles, to wit, her
Pharisaicall Ordo ad Deum, and her fiscall or ingrossall Bonum societatis,
about which all her other evils do reuolue and gire. Chap. 8. Of the lucre the
Society makes of the education of youth and free school. Chap. 9. Of the
lucre the Society makes as Executrix to Camels, and her form of complying
with them. Chap. 10. Of the Societies art and lucre in sowing of Factions.
Chap. 11. Of the Societies art in brutes and reports, and the use it makes
thereof. Chap. 12. Of the Societies art of defamation, and the use it makes
thereof. Chap. 13. Of the Societies sleights of equivocation, mental evasion,
tergiuersation, vulpecular-fawne, and the like. Chap. 14. Of the Societies
hypocrisy, and abuse of the Sacraments, and other spiritual exercises, and
the lucratiue use it makes thereof. Chap. 15. Of the Societies interdealing in
Court and State, and her opposing commonly against the State it lives under,
and to what end, though (as it has been seen) to her hazard in the end. Chap.
16. Of the Societies treasons, murders, and perfidiousnesse in State, and her
Doctrine according. Chap. 17. Of the Societies Magical art of Auguri^; and her
use thereof. Chap. 18. Of the prodigious spirits the Society puts into her
ghostly children. Chap. 19. Of the Societies variety of Appendants and
seruitors, and their several offices throughout Christendom, together with
their Pensions and entertainements. Chap. 20. Of the Societistes their shifts
and cautions to color any evil member or matter of theirs both a priore and
a posteriore. Chap. 21. Of the Societies schisms, heresies, and other
impostures within and against the Catholic Church. Chap. 22. Of the likelihood
of the Societies bringing in of Antichrist. Chap. 23. Of certain excellent men
who having bin Probationors in the Society, and noting the corruption thereof
have left the same. Chap. 24. How Cardinal Tollet a Jesuit, Cardinal Borhomeo,
Cardinal Allan and others disliked the Society, and namely Borhomeo his
expulsing it out of all his Arch-Diocesse of Millan, and her eiection out of
France, together with many religious men's pens against it at this day. Chap.
25. Of the peril of the Societies continuance over our English Seminaries,
both to our Church and Country, with a brief narration of her mischiefs
hitherto to either of them. Chap. 26. Of the means to exterpe the Society out
of England, namely by the Seminaries continual Appeals to the Sea-Apostolicke
against it, and otherwise by civil course.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in printing.
Page 8. line 24. D. Fishers, read, M. Listers. p. 15. l. 19. Sowbucke, read,
Cowbucke. p. 19. l. 8. I behooues, read, it behooues. p. 29. l. 13 humbe love,
read humble love. p 45. l. 15. own I, read, own part I. p. 54. l. 11.
Apostolic which, read, Apostolic as for matter of religion, which. p. 56.
l. 38. other in, read, others in p. 60. l 26. five and twenty a, read, five
and twenty crowns a. p. 69. l. 10. yet favor, read, yet the favor. p. 73.
l. 20. old corn, read, Old-corne. p. 80. l. 27. letter ^e, read, latter he.


