THE COLD SPRING OF KINGHORNE CRAIG, HIS ADMIRABLE AND NEW TRIED PROPERTIES,
SO FAR forth as yet are found true by Experience.

Written BY PATRIK ANDERSON D. of Physic.

Disco Orbi, quod quisque sibi. EDINBURGH, Printed by THOMAS FINLASON, Printer
to the Kings most excellent Majesty. 1618.

Psalm 78. verse. 15 and 16. The Lord claue the Rocks in the wilderness, and
gave the people to drinck, as of the great deepes.

16. He brought floodes also out of the stony Rock, so that he made the
waters to descend like the rivers.

17. Yet they sinned still against him, and provoked the highest in the
wilderness.

Kinghorn crag

Wisdom of Solom. Cap. 11. When they were thristie they called upon thee, and
thou gave them water out of the high Rock, and their thirst was quenched out of
the hard stone.

AA


TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND ILLUSTRIOUS LORD, IOHNE EARL OF MAR, LORD ERSKINE AND
GARIOCH, etc. Lord high Thesaurer of SCOTLAND, Knight of the most noble ordor
of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Counsel, of both
Kingdoms.
My singular good Lord, and Patron.
Right noble Lord,
THought Water be but a wairsh and taistles subject, whereof many like little
to hear, far less to taist; yet is it of great worth and so necessare an
element, that without it the most eminent could not Well consist. The great
Emperor of Persia welcomed hairtlie one of his mean subjects, who in his
progress propyned him with a drinck of cold water, having no other riches
whereby he might acknowledge his Prince. And I hope your L. as willingly will
accept from your own servand not a drinck, but a discourse of that rare water,
which long hide, has been of lait discovered for the good of many. But
perhaps I have undertaken a war when I this way adventured to thrust my self
into a Printers press, ad praelum quasi ad praelium, a plain discovery,
perchance, of my own ignorance. For to speak in Print is to undergo a
public censure. Yet I hope that such as mislyke it, shall either judge
favorably, or produce a better as speedily, Why may not mean wits in their
folies have equal pains with learned Clerks in their fancies? Apollo yielded
Oracles as well to poor men for prayers, as to Princes for their propynes*
stars have their lights and Heirs their shadows; And mean scholars have
even high mynds, although low fortunes. But being loath to weary your L. with
a long letter, I am thus emboldned to recomend this unworthy pamphlete to your
Honors patronage. For that a greater motive then that you are your self,
needs not to encourage me to this dedicatioun, so far is my love engaged to
your L. most honorable and ancient house. If it appear presumptioun in me
to show my love, my duty urges me to it. But setting a part neidlesse
fear, and resolving courageously upon your wounted and undeserved favor, I
would even but request your L. to receive that which is not, for that which I
would it were, letting my insufficiency be measured be my goodwill: that so
weghing the mind and not the matter, my simple abilities may thryue under your
L. protectioun, and happily lead me on to some worthier attempt. Take it then
my noble Lord, in good pairt; it being from one who honors your worth, owes
you his love, and has altogidder so resolved, and vowed him self to do your
L. and all yours, true service all the days of his life. And thus from my heart
wishing your L. and your most noble Lady a great portion of Methusalems years
for this life, and after it, eternal life. I humbly rest

From my house at Edinb. the 8. of October 1618. Your L. most willing
Physician, and obedient Servitour* P. Anderson D.

THE CAVLD SPRING OF KINGHORNE CRAIG HIS ADMIRABLE AND NEW tried properties, so
far as yet are found true by experience.
HARD by the shore side of Kinghorne, within a bow-draught or more to the
heaven of Prettie-cur where the Botes arrive, direct west the Sands, is a great
round steip Rock, whose forefront lying so oppen to the Sea, and opposite to
the weather, is so beatten therewith, as that his superficial parts are become
so friable, and as it were rotten to every light twitching of ones hand.

All this whole craig from the top to the foundation, is so seamed, and as it
were embroydered with a number of white veins much resembling a soft and
bruckle Alabast, and in many places glau^cing in the night, not vnlyk to
Cristall or some bastard Diama^t.

This white spar is accompanied (although but poor) with some mixture of
sundry starnie metalls, whereof the greatest pieces aboundes of a certain
glauncing, cleir, and skelflie stone called Gypsum, well known of the
Apothecareis, yea and is very ponderous and weghtie.

Upon the east side of the same Rock, in a hollow corner is perceived a
certain white cleir congealed water snotting through the moist clifts of the
Craig* much resembling the geile of fish, or representing the stryne of ane
evil roasted egg, called of those who are skillful in metalles, Sperma, seu
matter Metallorum.

Out of the broad face of this foresaid Rock, springs most plesandly a very
cleir, and delicate cauld Water, which being drunk in great measure is never
for all that, felt in the belly.

This fair Spring (albeit but laitlie known) is approved by the people which
drink thereof, to be one of the most rare remedies for the Stomach in the
world, gives a good appetit to meat, makes one that loathes of his meat to be
hungry, and is the only remedy for Chronick, and lingering disseases,
specialie in those who having spoilled their stomach by superfluous drying of
Cups.

It is a most confortable and refreshing drink in all hot fevers, pestilential
agues, and where drouth most abounds.

It refreshes and cools a hott distemper of ye Lever, helps all disseases
proceeding therethrough, dries up the Youk, and universal Skab, purges and
corrects all salt phlegm, abaiteth and tempereth the heat of the Reins, a
great cause of confirmed stones: and is a most sovereign remedy for the pains
of the Back, proceeding of Gravel or sand, causing the patient to piss out
many small stones, and making them to descend without pain.

To some it louseth the belly very freely, but not at the first. Others
thinks it binds them. Yet it seems to louse more then it binds.

I have known some vomit therewith, but that I suspect proceeds of surfeit:
for that the people do as yet use it, without rule or praescription.

It helps many that have a dim Sight, for being well put in the eyes, it is
more sharp and biting the^ commoun water; and is a singular remedy for those
which are molested with Lippitudo or bleir-eyed, and stays itching and heat.

No liquor has been tried more excellent for itching, and heat of the face
with plouks, and pustuls then this water, it being both drunck and put
thereupon. And is also good for singing of the ears.

It is powerful in helping extenuat and lean persons who are troubled with
difficulty of drawing their Brath: gives vigor and strength to vithered and
debilitat members; and is the only last remedy for all debilities which have
long vexed the body through a hot distemper of the Lever, such as a hot
Gutte; it allayeth all Inflammations inward and outward.

Guarisce encora il cancaro, i caruoli, i porri fighi della verga, and la
scolatione virolenta di rene, Ambasciatori certi del mal Francese, ma non val
niente a i tenconi, overo panochie nell inguinaglia.

The geallie water, that sweateth out of the craig coolleth and dries being
gathered at times when it falls, and the hands and face rubbed therewith, does
procure a very fair and beautiefull skin.

These be the Physical properties of this fair Spring, so far forth as the
disseased have as yet tried by experience, and in whose company I was sometimes
present my self.

Now, what should be the Physical and natural cause of those wonderful
effects, diverse of the learned are of diverse judgments. For my own part,
because I was the first of my profession that crossed the Forh to that Spring,
being moved partly to satisfy the desire of my friends and acquaintence, and
partly to content my own curiosity in natural things, whereunto from my
youth I have ever bein bent, as weell at home as abroad: I will only write my
opinioun without contentioun, reserving the resolution thereof to my most
learned colleagues, much more judicious than my self.

I, at the first, as also many others, thought it but ane idle toy, and a
conceit of the people, and as some think it yet. Others, thought it a trick
devysed by the Ferriers only for gain. But seeing the fame thereof incresse
and that not by the meanest, but even of those of best credit, who long
disseased, wonderfully recovered their unexpected health in their own
persons. At length I begoud to think that albeit it was no uncouth thing in
others countries to have such mineral waters, yet rare and but of laite
known amongst us. And although I call this a mineral water: yet my meaning is
not to conclude that it proceeds of metal alone: for that as appears is
very poor in this craige: Notwithstanding that al those riches of goulde and
silver which are come into Spain since the west Indies were discovered, have
beine drawn out of such barrane places which are full bear and fruitles, as
this rotten rock seims to be. Yea all the ponderous spar inclyneth rather
toward the bottom, a sign doutles which argues no rich metal. Joseph
Acesta Hist. nature. and Moral. Lib. 3. Cap. 3.
For it is found be experience that where minerals are most ryfe, the higher
the veins be to the superfice of the earth, the more rich they find it, and
the deiper it goes, the poorer it is.

Further, if this water produce such Physical properties be reason of metals,
Then all springs taking their course through the richest metals should far
excel this, which runs but through a very poor metal by appearence: yea
that wholesome and cauld spring of the brayes of Arthrey, perteining to the
right honorable The Earl of Montrose should far excel this of Kinghorne. I
have drunk of both waters, and in my opinion the one, might by the like trial
prove as good as the other, and perhaps better.

For there, (no doubt) is a rich metal whose seame and great body reaches
directly upward to the superfice of the mountain, and there visiblie vncovers
it self toward the South, the seame whereof is near a foot and ane half in
breadth, and consists in my judgment of Iron, Copper, and Vitrioll, and no
doubt of some Silver, accompanied also with abundance of a weghtie white spar,
togidder with that glancing and emplastie stone called Gypsum, very usual
amongst the learned for external ruptures: which mineral spring (for no doubt
it is one amongst diverse others in this land) if it ran as pleasandlie from
the Rock as that of Kinghorne, would be in as great request ere it were long.

I must confess that all springs having their course through sto^nie grounds
and rocks, minerals and privy veins of the earth, cannot but contract and
participat of one Physical quality or other, resembling the nature of the
metal through which it runs.

Neither needs any man of solid judgment to doubt, but that all springs of
water taking their ishue and race through a hard rock, are to be preferred to
any other water, taking way through a muddie earth: so consequently all springs
passing through a mineral Rock, (by reason) must far excel that of no
mineral, I mean for curing of disseases: for such waters are no ways fit for
dressing of meats, much less to be mixed with wine, because no mineral
water feeds the body.

Now that metals have been of old used for physic, and yet are wonderful in
curing disseases, is no new thing, as likewise the infinite works of learned
Physicians yet extant do testify.

For Iron, or Steell rightly prepared, then mixed either in liquid or solid
form, and given at convenient hours, and times, after due preparation of the
body, opneth all obstructions, opilations, and stoppings of the noble parts,
specially when the meseraick veins, betwix the Lever, gall and splen, are
stuffed with a tuich, gla^^use and vilccus phlegm: and is a most sovereign
medecin, recomended of all the learned by long experience, for the vnplesand
peale colors in virgins, and other such like whatsomever, either in widows
or married wyfes. Iron, or Steell have also power to stop the Lask or Dysenterie
and to heal inward Apostumes. And what I have said of Iron or Steel, the like
effects are to be understood of all springing waters running through the same.

Springes of Vitrioll, helps too great moisture of the Stomach, being
moderatlie used stays Nausea a continual preasse to vomit, and vomiting it
self: but being used in larger measure, provokes vomit, and cleingeth the
Stomach of whatsomever noisome humors. It heals Stranguria, a painful and
faschious dissease, when one cannot pish but by drope and drope.

Springes of Silver, do cool and dry.

Springs of Bruntstone are hot and whytish, smelling thereof, and the water
boyleth hot. They ease cold disseases, heats the sinews, consume humors
betwix the skin and the flesh. They cure the host. Help those who have the
falling sickness, Heal scabbes, resist venom, awaik men of the sleeping
evil, and do help the Gutt and Palsy. They cure inveterat ulcers, the
hardness of the Melt, Lever, and Matrice. But Springs of Bruntstone be not good
for the Stomach.

Brassie Springs are not so wholesome, but they are good for disseases of the
eyes, ulcers of the mouth, palate, or rufe thereof.

Copper Springs are good for dolors of the Gutte, short Braith, doloures of the
Reins, and do heal Ulcers.

Alume Springs, do stay the spitting of Blood, stay Vomiting, stoppes
immoderat flowing of the Hemorrhoides, and hinders weomen to part with Child.

Springs of Tin or Lead, do heal all cancerous Ulcers, Schirrs or hard
Tumoures, and are most proper for all disseases of the Skin.

That Tin or Lead be in this craig I greatly dout, because Tin nor Lead
work no such effects as this water does, neither are they so wholesome taken
inwardly as are any of the other, notwithstanding their cooling and detersive
qualities externalie used, wherein verily they wonderfully excel. And although
it has been ane old custom to make springes of water run through spoutes
of Lead, and that Tin be less hurtful, yea, nearer the quality of Silver,
Yet neither Tin nor Lead are usually taken at the mouth, as most of other
metals be, granting that it participat somewhat of Mercury, whereof it is
never a grain the better, but rather the more pernicious for this purpose.

Heurnius a man of great experience, Institut. Med.
thought never much of water whose course was through Lead, and speaking De potu
communi these be his words, At quae per tubulos plumbeos invehuntur pessimae
habentur nam plumbi vim perniciosam corpori invehunt, vnde viscerum gravitates
and dysenteria: etiam Columella prohibet Gallinas potari ex plumbeis vasis. And
citing Galen who componing a medicine ex capitibus papaveris, aquam pluvialem
commendat quae non per plumbeos tubulos fluxit: quod recrementa quaedam plumbi
illi immittantur, vnde inquit, eo utentibus dysenteriam adfert, cerussam enim
habet. Hinc male medici eliquant remedia per plumbea vasa: etenim Galenus
stannea vasa vitat ad conservationem remediorum. Thus far Heurnius.

And Fallopius ane Italian Physician who very skillful of metals in his time,
Cap. 11. de there. Met.
in his most learned and Philosophical discourses of Mineral waters, says
cleirlie that Leaden springs ar no ways wholesome taken inwardly: Dicimus,
(inquit) in vniversum omnes illas aquas, quae habent in se metallicum aliquid
noxium, esse omnino ineptas in potu, cujusmodi sunt quae habent plumbum, quales
sunt Thermales aquae in Germania plumbeae vel plumbares vocatae, quae in potum
nullo modo sunt exhibendae, quia periculum est ne naturae plumbi conversa vel
in Lithargyrum, vel in aliud simile, vt solet, hominem enecet, and ideo
caveatis a potu talium aquarum, quae habent in se plumbum, and quae tamen ad
purgandos morbos exteriores and insanabiles sunt praestantissimae, ita vt nihil
reperiatur praestantius. and Cap. 7. Si velletis cognoscere quae sit substantia
aquae plumbeae, and stanni, qui sapor, quique odor, and reliqua, possetis
gustare, and videre, aquam illam frigidam and non medicatam. Sed nuncquid and
aqua medicata reperiatur, quae haec in se contineat, equidem prorsus ignoro.

But least I digress too far, I say that this water cannot but participat of
mo metalles than one: Ios. Acosta Lib* 4 cap. 5
For where ever one metal is found, there is also some other with it. And
although it seem poor to our eyes without due trial: yet the whole craige
being of a strange and uncouth mixture, and the sparre so ponderous and
weghtie, might perchance after exquisit trial, prove more heirin then is
looked for.

We read these words in the book of that holy man Job, Chap. 28.
That stone being molten with heat, is turned into Copper. Idem lib 4. ^. 9
Finalie metals ar of diverse colors which seem to such as know them not, to
be stones of no value. But the Miners do presently know his quality and
perfection, by certain signs and small veins they find into them.

Now because (as I said before) the scaircetie of this metal (as appears) is
not liklie to communicate such Physical faculties to this water alone, without
some more help than the metal. What then? I take it to be rather a kind of
doulce Nitruse and semi-minerall mixture, wherewith these Crystalline and
glauncing stones are obscurelie possessed, naturalie inherent and engendered, by
long protract of time, within the whole bowels of the craige, from the top to
the bottom.

This Nitre in substance, Nitre
differs but little from our Salpeter, and oftymes used in Physic the one for
the other, the proof whereof I have often had. And it is of sundry kynds,
whereof one is mineral, one other artificial, Pars est nitri Opt. natura
producta and non at te parata (...) falso putavit Mes.
Aphronitrum or spuma Nitri, Flos parietis and flos Salis: Galen makes mention
of Nitru^ Bernicum, used of old in Bathes, which has great power to extenuat
thick and viscous humors, Auicenn.
and so does our refined Salpeter. He speaks also of a red Nitrum, whereof
if any such be in this Rock, I dar not affirm: only I see in a great hollow
cave near to the Spring, a red moist tincture wherewith the vault within is all
colored, which appearantly cannot proceed from Tin. Antidotar.
Luminare majus speaking of the kynds of Nitrum calls them species Baurach,
Arab. Bau^ach absolute dicitur.
and minerae ipsius sunt sicut minerae salis: Nam ex eo est admodum aquae
fluens, deinde petrificatur, Borax non excoct. nitri genus est fossile.
and ex eo est quod est in minera sua sicut lapis, and ex eo est rubeum, and ex
eo est album, and pulverulentu^, and multorum colorum.

This Craig is also endued but with a soft Crystal. The reason hereof I
conjecture to be the low situation thereof lying too warm, and often opposite
to the Sun, the special cause of the same. Hist. Simp. apud Indos nascent.
48.
Garcias ab Orta a curious and learned Spainyard, speaking of the true
Crystal, writes thus: Amat inquit Crystallus loca frigida qualia sunt Alps,
Germaniam ab Italia separantes. And as another of the learned says: Andern.
Gignitur ex humore omnium purissimo in terrae visceribus condito; necnon
marinorum metallorum fodinis Germaniae etc. So that Crystal is made of water
materiallie, and that water of it self is fleeting: but by vehement cold is
made steadfast Crystal. For so it is written in Ecclesiasticus. Cap. 44. The
north wind blew and made Crystal to frize. The experience whereof, we may
often see in water dropped from a Rock or other high place, which turns into
stones of diverse colors, caused by virtue of the ure and cold in that place,
frizing the water the material substance of such stones. A number of visible
proofs heirof we have at home amongst our selfs; Rattray cave.
Such as in Rattray cave in the Barrnie of Slains perteining to the right
Honorable the Earl of Erroll, high L. Constable of SCOTLAND.

The like also I remember this present year, by accident, Roslin chap.
visiting that rare piece of Architecture, the old Chapel of Rosline, nothing
inferior to the old Roman work, it was my good luck there, to meet with that
honorable and ancient Baron, who (although vnacquented) amongst other
courtesies, Roslin castle
showed me the double vaults of his Castle most curiously hewed out of a
solid Rock; where admiring the work, I beheld the water by dropping congealed
into hard stones; a thing no less commone than true, as weel at home as abroad.

Also in Peru where the mines of quicksilver be, Acosta Hist. natr. and mor.
Lib. 3. cap. 17
their is a fountain that casts forth hot water, which presently turns
into a Rock, wherewith the people of that land do build their houses. This
stone is soft, and is cut as wode with Iron. And if either men or beasts
drinck thereof, they die, because it congealeth in their intralls and turns
into a stone. In a Farm near Cusco, springs a fou^tane of Salt, which as it
runs, turns into salt very white and exceeding good. The waters which
run in Guajaquell in Peru, almost under the equinoctial line, are wholesome for
the frensh pocks and such like, by reason of the abundance of Sarsa-parilla
growing in that place, and the people come thither a far off to be cured. At
the Bathes of Ingua is a course of water which runs forth all boylling, and
joining to it is ane other as cold as ye. They use to temper the one with the
other. At Dunbritone Dunbritone.
Castle upon that monstrous steep Rock, there be two fountains, distant two
or three fute the one from the other. The uppermost course whereof springing
from North to South, is a very salt water. The other springing from south to
north as appears, is a fair fresch water: A straung thing to see Springes of
contrary qualities so near others. Morouer betwix the two great Rocks within
the said Castle, is a Lake or standing pond of water, distant near 50. fadoms
from the Sea, yet no man sees from whence it comes. A wonderful thing in
nature, Ma^g. Philos.
although weel known amongst us.

And in Boetia are two springes, the one helps the memory, the other
ingenders forgetfulness.

In Cicilia are two springs, the one makes weomen barren, the other able to
conceive. In Idumea is a spring which changes color four tyms a year: for
three months it seems troubled: three months red as blood: three months
green: and three months bluish. The cuntrye-men there call it Jobs Well. And
have we not here near by our chief City of Edinburgh, the oily Well,
called S: Margarits well, the fat whereof is almost equal to natural
Baulme, and whose power heals all aching of the bones, and all kinds of
outbreaking of the skin. one of the rarest things in this Island. Also in
Siloa at the foot of mont Syon, is a Well, which runs not always, but
certain days and hours. And many more Springes drawing their medicinal and
diverse qualities from the veins of minerals, or semi-minerals wherethrough
they tak their course: now hot, now cold, some binding, some lowsing, others
smelling of Bruntstone, some troubled, some cleir, some sharp, some sweet, or
of no taist the most wholesome water of all

These waters are not lyk the superstitious or mudearth Wells of Menteith, or
Lady Well of Strath-Erne, and our Lady Well of Ruthven, with a number of
others in this cuntrie, all tapestried about with old rags, as certain signs
and sacraments wherewith they arle the devil with ane arls-pennie of their
health; so subtle is that false knave, making them believe, that it is only
the virtue of the water, and no thing else. Such people can not say with David,
The Lord is my helper, but the D.

Now after this long digression, having first examined the material substance
of this Rock: nixt declared the tried power of this water. And thirdly as I
promest given my opinion of the Metal, or semi-minerall wherewith this Rock
seems to be spirituallie tempered.

No thing rests now, but to show by probable conjctures, how this sweet
saltish Nitrositie, may agrie with the late effects of this cold spring.

To cleir this then, our disccurse shallbe upon Crystal, Gypsum, and Nitrum:
Because in this Rock little more is seen, and I fear the Italian proverb be
true, Tutto quell' che luce non e oro, It Is not all goulde that glisters. The
Crystal and Gypsum is visible. The Nitre is occult and not seen: yet all
three concurring and most sensibly felt in operation: But somewhat different
in their particular qualities, yet little or nothing by their mutual
communication to this water; Crystal.
And so this way mixed, turns all to one effect.

1 Crystal after the learned is naturally cold, with a drying and binding
faculty, almost like unto Gypsum, (but more wholesome) and does all what cold
thing may do. It helps against thrist and burning heat in fevers. Matheol.
and Andern.
A button of Crystal holden in the mouth when the tongue is hask and dry in
fevers, presently cools and moystneth the same, the experience whereof is
tried in this water. w^^ker. antid. de Lap. ^^g. Ca. 6.
It helps the Dysenterie or bloody Flux, given with old red vine. It
stops and dries up the faschious Q. F. in weomen a great let to
conception. The like does this water skilfullie used. It engenders milk in
nurses breasts* and tempereth the hot quality thereof, chaiffed by toomuch
drincking of unnecessary licour which is a nurses co^moun fault, and the death
of many young infants.

2 Gypsum is a skelfie, Gypsum*
cleir, and white emplasticke stone, very commonly found in mineral rocks of
Copper, and Iron, and is of a very binding and drying quality only for
external things. It helps the Rupture of the Bowels when they fall down,
Hernel. meth. med. Lib. 6 cap. 12.
it stays great sweatings, and all defluxions falling down upon the eyes in
Opthalmia.

Nitre after the ancients, has been a warsh and sweetish salt, Dioscorides.
differing little or nothing from our most refined Salpeter. And howbeit some of
our Tag^^t. and VVe^ker. etc.
Neotericks have been somewhat scrupulous to use the one for the other: Yet by
co^moun experience in our days we have observed neither danger nor
difference, but that Salpeter most exquisitlie refined, Mes. Lib. 2. cap* 12.
may weel serve for the same. It is of a detersiue, scouring, and drying
quality, inclined somewhat to heat, which notheles mixed with cooling and
refreshing things, works many cold effects. It extenuateth and cutteth
phlegm, Dioscorides Lib. 5. cap 78.
purges gross and cla^mie humors, even some time by vomit, evacuateth crude
and raw humors cleeving fast to the entrals, and is very good to give for the
Colic, and grinding of the belly through wind.

Penotus a Portu, a learned and famous Chemist, Lib. de vera prepar. Nitri.
amongst his other Philosophical extractiouns, so uses this Nitre, as that
he makes it a salve for all sores. He calcineth it, prepares it, draws the
oil of it, and fixes it. Jn end, he concludes with these words. Nitrum
inquit ad haec omnia praestantissimum remedium esse experimento constat, sive
fumatur interne, sive adhibeatur in fomentationibus, balneis, seu emplastris
dividit, discutit, subtiliat, laxat, rarificat, ampliat, extenuat, aperit,
lubricat. And beside all this, so far does he extol it for procuring of a
good appetite, (a power proclaimed peculiarly to this water) that he is not
aschamed to prescryue it for this same purpose, to be given to a horse.

To be short, there is no property which the ancients has attribute to
Nitre, which with the help and cooling qualities of Crystal, and Gypsum, may
not be appropriat to this cold Spring: for what can this water do as yet,
which is not in them; or what can these simples do, which in some measure this
water does not perform.

Is Niter, Penotus de viribus Nitri.
deulie prepared, good to expel gravel and sand both from the reins and
blader? so is this water. Is it good being disolved to apply outwardly and for
heat in those parts? This water does even the same. Has not N^tre a
Diaphoretick power, and makes some to breck out? so also proves this water
but in some. And does Niter composed and applied to the stones, stay their
inflammation? No less power has this water. Dioscorides Lib. 5. cap, 78.
Is it not good for the Hydropsie, the Colik and Iliack passion? Is it not
good, I say, for the duretie of the Splen or Milt given with steiled water, for
oppilations or obstructions of the Lever, pains of the Stomach, and
suffocations of the lungs or lights? So no doubt may this water be found.

I hear also this cold Spring has helped paralytick members, the stupiditie,
and inhabilitie of the sinews, contractions of the nerves in the fingers, and
such like, by bathing and drinking thereof. And that it has a coroboratiue
power to strenthen all the nervall and ligamentall parts of the body, moving
also a gentle Diaphoretick and evaporatiue sweat, which (makes me yet suspect
that the Rock is possessed with some silver, although but little to our eyes; for
silver even Philosophicallie prepared, is likwayes Diaphoretick,) confirms
also weried and feeble members, yea and has ane occult property to stay much
sweating in tabide and consumed bodies, and that because of his mixed qualities
with Gypsum, both cooling and drying, and which two qualities to this effect
are very requisite.

Further, has it not unstopped the Lunges to many persons, and helped a short
braith? How many people have been helped this same last year there with, and
oppenlie affirmed against all those who say the contrary? P(...)
Now why may not Niter do all this? and what simple or miner all does so much
agree with these properties as Niter? And who doubts what refreshing power
this cold Spring has in hot fevers, in thirst, and in all internal and
external inflammations? Fallo^. VV^^ker.
and may not water taking his course through cold Crystalline stones, have more
cooling and refreshing qualities than commoune water, may it not cool, I say,
all inflammations and heat of the Lever? And does not common water even cool
and ease inward pains? ^^nsil. med. ex Schol.141.
then let us see if the words of that Imperial Physician Crato be true,
speaking De doloribus renum: Multi (inquit) post primum somnum, jam perfecta
coctione, hauriunt aquam frigidam, and in sign juvamentum percipiunt. Ze^chil
conf. Med. cap. 13.
And ane Italian Physician says by his common practick in Nephretick dolours,
Illud nunquam e memoria excidat, nihil praestantius pro arcendis renum calculis
esse, quam aqua tepida quinque vel sex vnciarum mensura, immediate ante cibum
mane, and vesperi modice calidum potatum. And a little after speaking of thirst,
he says A pastu ventriculo valde sitiente and astuante gelide modice binas
tantum vel ternas ad summum vncias bibere licebit.

Morover, common water tempereth great heat, and conserveth the natural
humiditie of the body: for which cause Hippocrates calls water, the bodies
temper. And ancient histories sufficiently testify, that water was the first
drinck that men vniuersalie used of old, and wherewith they contented them
selves a long time, to use it only for quenshing of their thirst* but
afterward when voluptuousnes seized upon men's appetites, they invented and set
before them diverse sorts of drincks, because they thought water but a taistles
and unsavory thing. And yet if we will give credit to experience and hear
but what the writes of the learned do say, Ro^e^. a Fon^ Lusitan. de tuend.
valetu. Cap. 12.
That water not only grows the body, but even makes men to live longer,
and in better health, yea, and to have a quicker fight, than wine. But now a
days our queasie stomaches are become so tender, and so kitle, that if we but
ones in a year taiste water, we are in danger to catch the Colic; no, we
must have a little Seck and Sugger, or else our stomach is gone; let Manoahs
wife drinck what she pleases, I^dg. cap. 13.
the belly now a days has no ears for such grammar rules. And yet to speak
the truth; cold water is as unfit for a woman with child and for such as are
accustomed with frequent birth, as strong wine is unmixed.

Then seeing that co^moun water, either cold or hot, has such evident, and
anodine properties: what shall we thinck of the best sort of these waters
correspondent in all respects to the true nottes which Dioscorides has left
unto us? and what account shall we make of this crystalline or semiminerall
water, Lib. 5. cap. 9.
which not only is answerable omni-modo to the best? but also excels so far
footth as the qualities of these forsaid mixtures may make it.

But to return to our purpose concerning Niter. Who then thincks that these
Nitrous qualities, for the most part do not agree competentli with this fair
Spring; has not well remarcked the observations of the disseased: for how
oppenlie is it known to expel sand, and bring down small stones both from the
reins and bladder, to cool the heat of the back, burning of the urine, and
to aswage all pains thereabout? experience of the people can testify, and
which aperitiue and diuretic power belongs both to Crystal, and Niter. I
have known it to help Sciatick dolours given warm in a Clyster with Salt. To
help sore eyes, clenge a dim sight, to aswage the pains and singing of the
ears, and to scour them from filth: all which do well aggree with Niter. It
helps the dolor of the head drawn up as an Errhin at the nose, and clengeth
the teeth more then co^moun water, makes the hair fair and cleene, heals a
reiffie and leprouse skine, and in a word, makes even Ladies fair.

Why may not then, I say, such detersiue and scouring qualities appear rather
to proceed of a drying and saltish Nitrositie, than of any apparent metal in
that place; in respect it not only purges, and clengeth the body, as well
inward as outward, but also clengeth and purges tasches and spots, both from
linning and woollen, and which detersive power does more agree with the use of
Niter, than with any metal that can be found in a Rock.

Monavius ane expert and learned Physician writing of the qualities of Salt,
Epist. med. Craton. 215.
says thus: Salem (in quit) detergere, and salsa nitrosa omnia, non solum
intra corpus sumpta, sed and extra admota, praeter experientiam quotidianam in
eluendis sordium strigmentis, etia^ vnanimis medicorum consensus testatur. The
which also the holy Scripture approves by the mouth of the Prophet saying,
Etiamsi laveris te nitro, and multiplicaueris tibi herbam Borith, tamen signata
est iniquitas tua etc. I^^^^. cap. 2. Saponaria.


But which is worse of all, I hear it has swelled the belly of Cacochymick
and unwholesome people, and stopped their water: So does Niter taken before the
body be well prepared and purged. And has it done good to one, and evil to
another? So will any good thing do, (although good in it self) if it be not
used with rule and moderation* yea and to some also, one man's meat is another
man's poison, a proverb co^moun amongst us.

And has it constipat some, and loosed others? No wonder, for the Spring is
possessed with contrary qualities, a virtue proper to best medecines: for if
it did not bind, it could not help the lask and Dysenterie: And if it did not
loose, it could not remove their causes. Has it not cured some without
preparation, and others which Physicians could not cure? let them thank GOD and
sing, Te Deum laudamus: Vna enim Hyrundo non facit ver: Then bless the Spring
with a famous report, and say, Beatus medicus qui venit in fine morbi.

Then to conclude, I perceive my very learned friend and old Parisien
acquentance Mr William Barclay, would have all the effects of this water to
proceed from Tin: Fallop. de fosse. atque metal. cap. 22.
which effects, says he, the Paracelsians ascryue to Saturn, and so
concludes, Sacharum Saturni to be the Salt of Tin, confounding two metalls
in one, as if Jupiter were Saturn, and Saturn Jupiter: Stannnm Plumbum, and
plumbum stannum. Tin to be Lead, and Lead to be Tin, Which oversight I can
not think to have proceided of ignorance, because I know him to be more learned
than my self. I suspect it may be imputed to his haist (as he writes to the
Printer) in making for the tide. Or else it may be that he thinks the
difference betwix stannum and plumbum to be so little, that propter
similitudinem in ardore scribendi, he might use the name of the one for the
other without scruple, because of their affinity; which if so be, as it is
liklie, I think there is no oversight at all.

Finalie amongst all the wholsum qualities where with this water seems to be
so secreitlie endued, the corroboration of the Stomach is not the least: a
great aid in curing of all disseases, and a power so oppenlie known in this
water to steir up lust to meat, that few or none have as yet returned with
out the proof heirof.

But that Springs taking their course through Tin or Lead, can give appetite to
the Stomach, I cannot believe: nether has any of the learned ever as yet
remarked such a thing. For Fuschius the most learned German Physician in his
days, De co^po^^. Med cap. 20
recompting the Physical properties of mineral waters both into France and
Germany, writes thus of the Plumbiers or leaden Baines of Loraine. Baignes of
Loraine.
In Lotharingiae, inquit montanis, Balnea sunt quae plumbiers, quasi plumbea,
ob nimirum copiosam plumbi mixturam, vocantur. Constant ex plumbi, Sulphuris
and Aluminis commixtione.

Auxiliatur malignis and curatu difficilibus vlceribus cancro, phaged^nis,
fistulis, elephantiae recens caeptae, and omnibus cutis vitiis. Heir is no
mention made of the stomach, much less of other inward infirmities this way
cured, either by Tin or Lead.

How then can it be any thing, but a detersiue and drying semi-minerall
Nitrositie, which this water seems to have spirituallie contracted, whose
natural and sweetish scharpnes is so tempered by communication of the
refreshing qualities of Crystal and Gypsum, and whose qualities are also
detersiue and drying. The effects whereof bewrays it self more in
bellifying, and skouring the superficial deformities of the skin, (then in
curing of ulcers proper to Tin or Lead) such as are pustules, red plowks of
the face, ytching, and roughnes of the skin, proceeding of a dry
melancholious and salt blood, Tetters, Ring worms, and that sort which the
Frensh men call les Dartres de Naples, the Graecians (...), the Latins
Impetigines, and with our selfs is a dry ytching scruffe, or hot fla, oftymes
chancing on the face, or on the back of ones hand, which (as Paulus, Aegineta
testifies) turns to those of an ill diet, into a scabbe or leprosy. Lib. 6.
meth. med. cap. 20.
The which also that most eloquent and learned Physician Fernel, has well
remarked in the properties of Niter, in these words Nitrum, inquit, quanquam
vehementer tergit, non tamen vlceribus, sed lepris, alphis, impetiginibus,
aliisque cutis vitiis expurgandis aptum.

And old Plinius who was so curious in natural things, says, it heateth,
biteth, and vlcerateth. Which affects, say our Chyrugions, are no way fit for
ulcers: and therefore may be the cause, perchance, why Tabide or consumed
people by an ulcer of the lungs, after the immoderat use of this water, became
daily worse and worse by too much loosing of thee belly (a power proper in
this water to some, Hippocrates.
albeit improper for Tabides) Phthisici enim per alvum raro aut nuncquam
purgandi.

Now because that some may object: if this water had any Nitrous quality, it
would (no dout) bewray it self, either in taist, color, or savor? to which I
answer, that Physical waters possess either spiritual qualities, or
substantial quantities, and as there be diverse kynds of Salt, so are they
diverse kynds of saltish waters, which differ in their qualities by degreis.
For some be stronger, others mylder, some sharper, and some sweeter, and others
so insipide that skairslie are they felt on the tongue. And least I should seem
to be alone of this opinion without warrant of the learned, Cap. 9. de Therm.
atque Metallis.
Hear what Fallopius says of this same subject: Nitrum quidem ipsum, gustu
cognoscitur: difficile tamen est ex gustu discernere, an aqua habeat in se
Nitrum, quia Nitri sapor in ejusmodi aquis frigidis, non discernitur. Item visu
nec olfactu vllo modo cognoscitur aquam habere Nitrum. Tactu autem aliquo modo,
quia aquae Nitrosae detergunt nec relinquunt aliquam asperitatem.

Again he says in an other place: Idem.
Saepe enim Sal and Alumen sunt cum aquis ita commixta vt impossile sit per
dissolutionem naturalem ipsa cognoscere. Item Nitrum non cognscimus in aliqua
aqua esse, nisi insit ipsamet Nitri substantia. Idem.


To be short then let none think, but Springs of waters may be endued with
diverse Physical properties, mineral or semi-minerall qualities, although they
nether bewray them selfs in taist, color, nor savor.

But how the, say others, can waters possessed with saltish and Nitrous
faculties, refresh, moysten, and cool? I answer that a thousand effects in
natural causes, may also proceed of contrary qualities: for there be many
exceptions even in natural rules, so that sometimes we see by experience
subtle nature so to ouerreach and surpass the skill of art in these kynds of
mixtures, that simples, natuallie hot and dry of them selfs, by the company
of others which cool and refresh, are sensibly felt to excute cold ffects.

Josephus Acosta a worthy and judicious Spanyard in his natural and moral
history which he writes of the East and West Indies, Cap. 11, Nature Hist.
discoursing upon the natural quality of the Sea, writteth in these terms:
Although, says he, the water be salt, yet it is always water, whose nature
is ever to cool, and it is a remarkable thing in nature, that in the midst of
the deep of the Oceane, the water is not made hot, by the violent heat of the
Sun, as in rivers: even as Salpeter (says he) although it be naturally
salt) has a property to cool water, even so we see by experience, that in
some ports and heavens, the salt water refreshes, which we have observed in
that of Callao in Peru, whereas they put the water or wine which they drinck
into the Sea in flaggons to be refreshed, whereby we may undoubtedly
believe, that the Ocean has this property, to temper and moderat the
excessive heat: for this cause we find greater heat at land then at sea, (
caeteris paribus) and co^monlie countries lying near the Sea, ar colder the^
those that are foorther off.

But to illustrat this by many examples, were no less needless then endless:
for the matter is clear of it self: and therefore I will end this cold
discourse, contenting me only with the experience of that famous and learned
Empyrick Rulandus in his tract at which he writes de curatione luis
Hungaricoe, whose words are these: Inflamationi inquit, Cap. 6.
scabritieique faucium and confinium parcium extinguendae, tum aestui
restinguendo nullum efficatius remedium nostrates putant insequenti.

Cape Nitri puri albiss. q. v. pila munda in tenuem pulv. Trochis. de Nitro
^ord^.
comminuito: adsit sartago aenea fundi crassiss. hanc prunis impone, donec
incanduerit tota: injice Nitri tusi M. vnum. Ilico liquatur aquae limpidiss.
instar, and dum ita bullit, injice sulphuris puri and triti, zs. elicies
flamma^. caerulei coloris: quae vbi evanuerit, and tertio bullire Nitrum
videris, repete Sulphuris adjectionem, and hoc ter tium reiterato. Demum pilae
mundae, aut vasi figulino pedetentim infundito, exsurgent albi trochisci seu
rotulae coagulatae. Has denno terito in pulvere^ tenuiss. vsus Conserv. Rosar.
cochleari pulveris add triplum ejus quanto satis ovo satiendo adhibetur.

Praebeatur aegro aestu fere enecto, quoties voluerit. Nostratum quidam multis
in aqua fontana frigid. dissoluti hujus ex Nitro remedii portiunculam, iterum
atque iterum exhibendo, multos se sanitati restituisse pristinae gloriantur,
parantes idem remedium and secretum sibi imaginantes. Minime aspernandum est
remedium nobis nec aliis esse debet, nisi Nitri qualitates ignorantibus: modo
rite administretur and curandi methodus potior non susque deque habeatur.

Go then with boldness, and drinck of this wholesome and Physical water, and
say not to your selfs, the Physicians envyeth it, speaks against it, they
approve it not, and it hinders their gain. Only but carry with you these
few directions following. and so fair ye well.

What we shoud observe, before we go to drinck of such Waters.
THat none drinck of such waters, who have their back and reins very hot,
Fallopi^s de Th(...) c. 31.
and the stomach and whole habit of the body cold. For that were even as much
to destroy a whole ludging, for the gain only of one commodious chamber.

2 That no disseased person drinck thereof, before his body be well prepared
and purged, for by this means no man shall have harm thereby, and it is the
counsel of the learned. But above all things, Idem.
and which most imports, that none drinck of the same with a bund belly: for
I have not observed it as yet, to do harm to any so much as to those. To
he^pe this then, and for such as can take no Physic, no thing is more
excellent or more reddie for this purpose, then to carry with you a box of
Grana Angelica, and to swellou viij* or ix. of them hid in a vere or potched
egg, which you may do without harm at any time a day, but especially at
meat in the beg^nning or mids of dinner or supper: for then they work best the
next day thereafter, and make not the body seike, and is a most familiare and
sovereign remedy for all disseases proceeding of constipation.

3 It is not good to take it cupe, Idem.
for cupe, without intermission but to walk moderatlie up and down, betwix
each draucht, and that ye grow nether hot nor sweat.

4 It would be only taken in the morning fasting, Idem.
and not at mea^es, as many er^oniouslie do, for it is diuretic.

5 It is not so good being carried a far of, Idem.
as taken from the Rok although it be tried to keep longer vncorrupt then other
water.

6 The seike should drinck it seven days togidder at least, and some longer
as the di^^ease requires, eating in the mean time meat o^ easy digest^on.

7 It would be only taken (as the learned do prescriue) in the hotest months,
Idem.
specialie in June, Iulie, and August: Yea even in the very time of our
dogg-dayes, so much regairded of amongst us without cause. The reason of this
is not only because the water is best then: but also for that it is requisite,
the whole habit of the body be patent and oppen, that such cold springes may
have the more fry passage without stop, which opning and free Ishue in our
bodies (as the learned say) is not but in hotest months and seasons, and which
heat with us is but a temperat heat in regaird of that of other nations.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
GEntle Reader, this Discourse has been the birth of my Idle hours this last
vacance, which I penned more for your particular use, then for any gain to my
self. If you have found any thing herein to your content, think well of the
Author for his pains. If nothing which you have red has lyked you, my luck
has been naught: for in nothing, there can be no great thing. An other
before me has written his opinion, and so have I. if I have erred and said
amiss, I am but a man. If not well enough, I wish it were better. But if well
and truly, GOD be praised, I deserve no blame. I have done offense to none,
but shown my mind, for the which I crave no man pardon, nor further freindship
then I deserve, nor greater thanks then may requyte goodwill, who wishes well
to you all that are well minded, craving only your courtesy to comend what
ye think worthy, and not to disdain without desert. So if I have offended in
any thing that the wise can mislyke, I am reddie to make a mends accordingly,
and shall Godwilling drinck to you at the Well the nixt Somer, with a promise
also to do you greater service heir after, and so I end.


